CURIUM Curium is a transuranic radioactive chemical element with symbol Cm and atomic number 96 .
This element of the actinide series was named after Marie and Pierre Curie – both were known for their research on radioactivity .
Curium was first intentionally produced and identified in July 1944 by the group of Glenn T. Seaborg at the University of California , Berkeley .
The discovery was kept secret and only released to the public in November 1947 .
Most curium is produced by bombarding uranium or plutonium with neutrons in nuclear reactors – one tonne of spent nuclear fuel contains about 20 grams of curium .
Curium is a hard , dense , silvery metal with a relatively high melting point and boiling point for an actinide .
Whereas it is paramagnetic at ambient conditions , it becomes antiferromagnetic upon cooling , and other magnetic transitions are also observed for many curium compounds .
In compounds , curium usually exhibits valence +3 and sometimes +4 , and the +3 valence is predominant in solutions .
Curium readily oxidizes , and its oxides are a dominant form of this element .
It forms strongly fluorescent complexes with various organic compounds , but there is no evidence of its incorporation into bacteria and archaea .
When introduced into the human body , curium accumulates in the bones , lungs and liver , where it promotes cancer .
All known isotopes of curium are radioactive and have a small critical mass for a sustained nuclear chain reaction .
They predominantly emit α - particles , and the heat released in this process can serve as a heat source in radioisotope thermoelectric generators , but this application is hindered by the scarcity and high cost of curium isotopes .
Curium is used in production of heavier actinides and of the Pu radionuclide for power sources in artificial pacemakers .
It served as the α - source in the alpha particle X - ray spectrometers installed on several space probes , including the Sojourner , Spirit , Opportunity and Curiosity Mars rovers and the Philae lander on comet 67P / Churyumov – Gerasimenko , to analyze the composition and structure of the surface .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Although curium had likely been produced in previous nuclear experiments , it was first intentionally synthesized , isolated and identified in 1944 , at the University of California , Berkeley , by Glenn T. Seaborg , Ralph A. James , and Albert Ghiorso .
In their experiments , they used a cyclotron .
Curium was chemically identified at the Metallurgical Laboratory ( now Argonne National Laboratory ) at the University of Chicago .
It was the third transuranium element to be discovered even though it is the fourth in the series –
the lighter element americium was unknown at the time .
The sample was prepared as follows : first plutonium nitrate solution was coated on a platinum foil of about 0.5 cm area , the solution was evaporated and the residue was converted into plutonium(IV ) oxide ( PuO ) by annealing .
Following cyclotron irradiation of the oxide , the coating was dissolved with nitric acid and then precipitated as the hydroxide using concentrated aqueous ammonia solution .
The residue was dissolved in perchloric acid , and further separation was carried out by ion exchange to yield a certain isotope of curium .
The separation of curium and americium was so painstaking that the Berkeley group initially called those elements pandemonium ( from Greek for all demons or hell ) and delirium ( from Latin for madness ) .
The curium-242 isotope was produced in July – August 1944 by bombarding Pu with α - particles to produce curium with the release of a neutron :
Curium-242 was unambiguously identified by the characteristic energy of the α - particles emitted during the decay : The half - life of this alpha decay was first measured as 150 days and then corrected to 162.8 days .
Another isotope Cm was produced in a similar reaction in March 1945 : The half - life of the Cm α - decay was correctly determined as 26.7 days .
The discovery of curium , as well as americium , in 1944 was closely related to the Manhattan Project , so the results were confidential and declassified only in 1945 .
Seaborg leaked the synthesis of the elements 95 and 96 on the U.S. radio show for children , the Quiz Kids , five days before the official presentation at an American Chemical Society meeting on November 11 , 1945 , when one of the listeners asked whether any new transuranium element beside plutonium and neptunium had been discovered during the war .
The discovery of curium ( Cm and Cm ) , their production and compounds were later patented listing only Seaborg as the inventor .
The new element was named after Marie Skłodowska - Curie and her husband Pierre Curie who are noted for discovering radium and for their work in radioactivity .
It followed the example of gadolinium , a lanthanide element above curium in the periodic table , which was named after the explorer of the rare earth elements Johan Gadolin :
The first curium samples were barely visible , and were identified by their radioactivity .
Louis Werner and Isadore Perlman created the first substantial sample of 30 µg curium-242 hydroxide at the University of California in 1947 by bombarding americium-241 with neutrons .
Macroscopic amounts of curium(III ) fluoride were obtained in 1950 by W. W. T. Crane , J. C. Wallmann and B. B. Cunningham .
Its magnetic susceptibility was very close to that of GdF providing the first experimental evidence for the +3 valence of curium in its compounds .
Curium metal was produced only in 1951 by reduction of CmF with barium .
CHARACTERISTICS
PHYSICAL Section::::Characteristics .
Section::::Physical .
A synthetic , radioactive element , curium is a hard , dense metal with a silvery - white appearance and physical and chemical properties resembling those of gadolinium .
Its melting point of 1340 ° C is significantly higher than that of the previous transuranic elements neptunium ( 637 ° C ) , plutonium ( 639 ° C ) and americium
( 1173 ° C ) .
In comparison , gadolinium melts at 1312 ° C .
The boiling point of curium is 3110 ° C .
With a density of 13.52 g / cm , curium is significantly lighter than neptunium ( 20.45 g / cm ) and plutonium ( 19.8 g / cm ) , but is heavier than most other metals .
Between two crystalline forms of curium , the α - Cm is more stable at ambient conditions .
It has a hexagonal symmetry , space group P6 / mmc , lattice parameters a = 365 pm and c
= 1182 pm , and four formula units per unit cell .
The crystal consists of a double - hexagonal close packing with the layer sequence ABAC and so is isotypic with α - lanthanum .
At pressures above 23 GPa , at room temperature , α - Cm transforms into β - Cm , which has a face - centered cubic symmetry , space group
Fmm and the lattice constant a = 493 pm .
Upon further compression to 43 GPa , curium transforms to an orthorhombic γ - Cm structure similar to that of α - uranium , with no further transitions observed up to 52 GPa .
These three curium phases are also referred to as Cm I , II and III .
Curium has peculiar magnetic properties .
Whereas its neighbor element americium shows no deviation from Curie - Weiss paramagnetism in the entire temperature range , α - Cm transforms to an antiferromagnetic state upon cooling to 65–52 K , and β - Cm exhibits a ferrimagnetic transition at about 205 K. Meanwhile , curium pnictides show ferromagnetic transitions upon cooling : CmN and CmAs at 109 K , CmP at 73 K and CmSb at
162 K. The lanthanide analogue of curium , gadolinium , as well as its pnictides , also show magnetic transitions upon cooling , but the transition character is somewhat different : Gd and GdN become ferromagnetic , and GdP , GdAs and GdSb show antiferromagnetic ordering .
In accordance with magnetic data , electrical resistivity of curium increases with temperature – about twice between 4 and 60 K – and then remains nearly constant up to room temperature .
There is a significant increase in resistivity over time ( about 10 µΩ·cm / h ) due to self - damage of the crystal lattice by alpha radiation .
This makes uncertain the absolute resistivity value for curium ( about 125 µΩ·cm ) .
The resistivity of curium is similar to that of gadolinium and of the actinides plutonium and neptunium , but is significantly higher than that of americium , uranium , polonium and thorium .
Under ultraviolet illumination , curium(III ) ions exhibit strong and stable yellow - orange fluorescence with a maximum in the range about 590–640 nm depending on their environment .
The fluorescence originates from the transitions from the first excited state D and the ground state S. Analysis of this fluorescence allows monitoring interactions between Cm(III ) ions in organic and inorganic complexes .
CHEMICAL
Section::::Chemical .
Curium ions in solution almost exclusively assume the oxidation state of +3 , which is the most stable oxidation state for curium .
The +4 oxidation state is observed mainly in a few solid phases , such as CmO and CmF. Aqueous curium(IV ) is only known in the presence of strong oxidizers such as potassium persulfate , and is easily reduced to curium(III ) by radiolysis and even by water itself .
The chemical behavior of curium is different from the actinides thorium and uranium , and is similar to that of americium and many lanthanides .
In aqueous solution , the Cm ion is colorless to pale green , and Cm ion is pale yellow .
The optical absorption of Cm ions contains three sharp peaks at 375.4 , 381.2 and 396.5 nanometers and their strength can be directly converted into the concentration of the ions .
The +6 oxidation state has only been reported once in solution in 1978 , as the curyl ion ( ): this was prepared from the beta decay of americium-242 in the americium(V ) ion .
Failure to obtain Cm(VI ) from oxidation of Cm(III ) and Cm(IV ) may be due to the high Cm / Cm ionization potential and the instability of Cm(V ) .
Curium ions are hard Lewis acids and thus form most stable complexes with hard bases .
The bonding is mostly ionic , with a small covalent component .
Curium in its complexes commonly exhibits a 9-fold coordination environment , within a tricapped trigonal prismatic geometry .
ISOTOPES Section::::Isotopes .
About 20 radioisotopes and 7 nuclear isomers between Cm and Cm are known for curium , and no stable isotopes .
The longest half - lives have been reported for Cm ( 15.6 million years ) and Cm ( 348,000 years ) .
Other long - lived isotopes are Cm ( half - life 8500 years ) , Cm ( 8,300 years ) and Cm ( 4,760 years ) .
Curium-250 is unusual in that it predominantly ( about 86 % ) decays via spontaneous fission .
The most commonly used curium isotopes are Cm and Cm with the half - lives of 162.8 days and 18.1 years , respectively .
All isotopes between Cm and Cm , as well as Cm , undergo a self - sustaining nuclear chain reaction and thus in principle can act as a nuclear fuel in a reactor .
As in most transuranic elements , the nuclear fission cross section is especially high for the odd - mass curium isotopes Cm , Cm and Cm .
These can be used in thermal - neutron reactors , whereas a mixture of curium isotopes is only suitable for fast breeder reactors since the even - mass isotopes are not fissile in a thermal reactor and accumulate as burn - up increases .
The mixed - oxide ( MOX ) fuel , which is to be used in power reactors , should contain little or no curium because the neutron activation of Cm will create californium .
Californium is a strong neutron emitter , and would pollute the back end of the fuel cycle and increase the dose to reactor personnel .
Hence , if the minor actinides are to be used as fuel in a thermal neutron reactor , the curium should be excluded from the fuel or placed in special fuel rods where it is the only actinide present .
The adjacent table lists the critical masses for curium isotopes for a sphere , without a moderator and reflector .
With a metal reflector ( 30 cm of steel ) , the critical masses of the odd isotopes are about 3–4 kg .
When using water ( thickness ~20–30 cm ) as the reflector , the critical mass can be as small as 59 gram for Cm , 155 gram for Cm and 1550 gram for Cm .
There is a significant uncertainty in these critical mass values .
Whereas it is usually on the order of 20 % , the values for Cm and Cm were listed as large as 371 kg and 70.1 kg , respectively , by some research groups .
Currently , curium is not used as a nuclear fuel owing to its low availability and high price .
Cm and Cm have a very small critical mass and therefore could be used in portable nuclear weapons , but none have been reported thus far .
Curium-243 is not suitable for this purpose because of its short half - life and strong α emission which would result in excessive heat .
Curium-247 would be highly suitable , having a half - life 647 times that of plutonium-239 .
OCCURRENCE Section::::Occurrence .
The longest - lived isotope of curium , Cm , has a half - life of 15.6 million years .
Therefore , any primordial curium , that is curium present on the Earth during its formation , should have decayed by now , although some of it would be detectable as an extinct radionuclide as an excess of its nearly stable daughter
U. Curium is produced artificially , in small quantities for research purposes .
Furthermore , it occurs in spent nuclear fuel .
Curium is present in nature in certain areas used for the atmospheric nuclear weapons tests , which were conducted between 1945 and 1980 .
So the analysis of the debris at the testing site of the first U.S. hydrogen bomb , Ivy Mike , ( 1 November 1952 , Enewetak Atoll ) , beside einsteinium , fermium , plutonium and americium also revealed isotopes of berkelium , californium and curium , in particular Cm , Cm and smaller quantities of Cm , Cm and Cm .
For reasons of military secrecy , this result was published only in 1956 .
Atmospheric curium compounds are poorly soluble in common solvents and mostly adhere to soil particles .
Soil analysis revealed about 4,000 times higher concentration of curium at the sandy soil particles than in water present in the soil pores .
An even higher ratio of about 18,000 was measured in loam soils .
The transuranic elements from americium to fermium , including curium , occurred naturally in the natural nuclear fission reactor at Oklo , but no longer do so .
SYNTHESIS ISOTOPE PREPARATION
Section::::Synthesis .
Section::::Isotope preparation .
Curium is produced in small quantities in nuclear reactors , and by now only kilograms of it have been accumulated for the Cm and Cm and grams or even milligrams for heavier isotopes .
This explains the high price of curium , which has been quoted at 160–185 USD per milligram , with a more recent estimate at 2,000 USD / g for Cm and 170 USD / g for Cm .
In nuclear reactors , curium is formed from U in a series of nuclear reactions .
In the first chain , U captures a neutron and converts into U , which via β decay transforms into Np and Pu .
Further neutron capture followed by β - decay produces the Am isotope of americium which further converts into Cm : For research purposes , curium is obtained by irradiating not uranium but plutonium , which is available in large amounts from spent nuclear fuel .
A much higher neutron flux is used for the irradiation that results in a different reaction chain and formation of Cm :
Curium-244 decays into Pu by emission of alpha particle , but it also absorbs neutrons resulting in a small amount of heavier curium isotopes .
Among those , Cm and Cm are popular in scientific research because of their long half - lives .
However , the production rate of Cm in thermal neutron reactors is relatively low because of it is prone to undergo fission induced by thermal neutrons .
Synthesis of Cm via neutron absorption is also rather unlikely because of the short half - life of the intermediate product Cm ( 64 min ) , which converts by β decay to the berkelium isotope Bk .
The above cascade of ( \ce n , γ ) reactions produces a mixture of different curium isotopes .
Their post - synthesis separation is cumbersome , and therefore a selective synthesis is desired .
Curium-248 is favored for research purposes because of its long half - life .
The most efficient preparation method of this isotope is via α - decay of the californium isotope Cf , which is available in relatively large quantities due to its long half - life ( 2.65 years ) .
About 35–50 mg of Cm is being produced by this method every year .
The associated reaction produces Cm with isotopic purity of 97 % .
Another interesting for research isotope
Cm can be obtained from the α - decay of Cf , and the latter isotope is produced in minute quantities from the β - decay of the berkelium isotope Bk .
METAL PREPARATION Section::::Metal preparation .
Most synthesis routines yield a mixture of different actinide isotopes as oxides , from which a certain isotope of curium needs to be separated .
An example procedure could be to dissolve spent reactor fuel ( e.g. MOX fuel ) in nitric acid , and remove the bulk of the uranium and plutonium using a PUREX ( Plutonium – URanium EXtraction ) type extraction with tributyl phosphate in a hydrocarbon .
The lanthanides and the remaining actinides are then separated from the aqueous residue ( raffinate ) by a diamide - based extraction to give , after stripping , a mixture of trivalent actinides and lanthanides .
A curium compound is then selectively extracted using multi - step chromatographic and centrifugation techniques with an appropriate reagent .
Bis - triazinyl bipyridine complex has been recently proposed as such reagent which is highly selective to curium .
Separation of curium from a very similar americium can also be achieved by treating a slurry of their hydroxides in aqueous sodium bicarbonate with ozone at elevated temperature .
Both americium and curium are present in solutions mostly in the +3 valence state ; whereas americium oxidizes to soluble Am(IV )
complexes , curium remains unchanged and can thus be isolated by repeated centrifugation .
Metallic curium is obtained by reduction of its compounds .
Initially , curium(III ) fluoride was used for this purpose .
The reaction was conducted in the environment free from water and oxygen , in the apparatus made of tantalum and tungsten , using elemental barium or lithium as reducing agents .
Another possibility is the reduction of curium(IV )
oxide using a magnesium - zinc alloy in a melt of magnesium chloride and magnesium fluoride .
COMPOUNDS AND REACTIONS OXIDES Section::::Compounds and reactions .
Section::::Oxides .
Curium readily reacts with oxygen forming mostly CmO and CmO oxides , but the divalent oxide CmO is also known .
Black CmO can be obtained by burning curium oxalate ( Cm(CO ) ) , nitrate ( Cm(NO ) ) or hydroxide in pure oxygen .
Upon heating to 600–650 ° C in vacuum ( about 0.01 Pa ) , it transforms into the whitish CmO :
Alternatively , CmO can be obtained by reducing CmO with molecular hydrogen :
Furthermore , a number of ternary oxides of the type M(II)CmO are known , where M stands for a divalent metal , such as barium .
Thermal oxidation of trace quantities of curium hydride ( CmH ) has been reported to produce a volatile form of CmO and the volatile trioxide CmO , one of the two known examples of the very rare +6 state for curium .
Another observed species was reported to behave similarly to a supposed plutonium tetroxide and was tentatively characterized as CmO , with curium in the extremely rare +8 state ; however , new experiments seem to indicate that CmO does not exist , and have cast doubt on the existence of PuO as well .
HALIDES Section::::Halides .
The colorless curium(III ) fluoride ( CmF ) can be produced by introducing fluoride ions into curium(III)-containing solutions .
The brown tetravalent curium(IV ) fluoride ( CmF ) on the other hand is only obtained by reacting curium(III ) fluoride with molecular fluorine :
A series of ternary fluorides are known of the form ACmF , where A stands for alkali metal .
The colorless curium(III )
chloride ( CmCl ) is produced in the reaction of curium(III ) hydroxide ( Cm(OH ) ) with anhydrous hydrogen chloride gas .
It can further be converted into other halides , such as curium(III ) bromide ( colorless to light green ) and curium(III )
iodide ( colorless ) , by reacting it with the ammonia salt of the corresponding halide at elevated temperature of about 400–450 ° C :
An alternative procedure is heating curium oxide to about 600 ° C with the corresponding acid ( such as hydrobromic for curium bromide ) .
Vapor phase hydrolysis of curium(III )
chloride results in curium oxychloride : CHALCOGENIDES AND PNICTIDES Section::::Chalcogenides and pnictides .
Sulfides , selenides and tellurides of curium have been obtained by treating curium with gaseous sulfur , selenium or tellurium in vacuum at elevated temperature .
The pnictides of curium of the type CmX are known for the elements nitrogen , phosphorus , arsenic and antimony .
They can be prepared by reacting either curium(III )
hydride ( CmH ) or metallic curium with these elements at elevated temperatures .
ORGANOCURIUM COMPOUNDS AND BIOLOGICAL ASPECTS
Section::::Organocurium compounds and biological aspects .
Organometallic complexes analogous to uranocene are known also for other actinides , such as thorium , protactinium , neptunium , plutonium and americium .
Molecular orbital theory predicts a stable " curocene " complex ( η - CH)Cm , but it has not been reported experimentally yet .
Formation of the complexes of the type Cm(n - CH - BTP ) , where BTP stands for 2,6-di(1,2,4-triazin-3-yl)pyridine , in solutions containing n - CH - BTP and Cm ions has been confirmed by EXAFS .
Some of these BTP - type complexes selectively interact with curium and therefore are useful in its selective separation from lanthanides and another actinides .
Dissolved Cm ions bind with many organic compounds , such as hydroxamic acid , urea , fluorescein and adenosine triphosphate .
Many of these compounds are related to biological activity of various microorganisms .
The resulting complexes exhibit strong yellow - orange emission under UV light excitation , which is convenient not only for their detection , but also for studying the interactions between the Cm ion and the ligands via changes in the half - life ( of the order
~0.1
ms ) and spectrum of the fluorescence .
Curium has no biological significance .
There are a few reports on biosorption of Cm by bacteria and archaea , however no evidence for incorporation of curium into them .
APPLICATIONS
RADIONUCLIDES
Section::::Applications .
Section::::Radionuclides .
Curium is one of the most radioactive isolable elements .
Its two most common isotopes Cm and Cm are strong alpha emitters ( energy 6 MeV ) ; they have relatively short half - lives of 162.8 days and 18.1 years , and produce as much as 120 W / g and 3 W / g of thermal energy , respectively .
Therefore , curium can be used in its common oxide form in radioisotope thermoelectric generators like those in spacecraft .
This application has been studied for the Cm isotope , while Cm was abandoned due to its prohibitive price of around 2000 USD / g .
Cm with a ~30 year half - life and good energy yield of ~1.6
W / g could make a suitable fuel , but it produces significant amounts of harmful gamma and beta radiation from radioactive decay products .
Though as an α - emitter , Cm requires a much thinner radiation protection shielding , it has a high spontaneous fission rate , and thus the neutron and gamma radiation rate are relatively strong .
As compared to a competing thermoelectric generator isotope such as Pu , Cm emits a 500-fold greater fluence of neutrons , and its higher gamma emission requires a shield that is 20 times thicker — about 2 inches of lead for a 1 kW source , as compared to 0.1 in for Pu .
Therefore , this application of curium is currently considered impractical .
A more promising application of Cm is to produce Pu , a more suitable radioisotope for thermoelectric generators such as in cardiac pacemakers .
The alternative routes to Pu use the ( n , γ ) reaction of Np , or the deuteron bombardment of uranium , which both always produce Pu as an undesired by - product — since the latter decays to U with strong gamma emission .
Curium is also a common starting material for the production of higher transuranic elements and transactinides .
Thus , bombardment of Cm with neon ( Ne ) , magnesium ( Mg ) , or calcium ( Ca ) yielded certain isotopes of seaborgium ( Sg ) , hassium ( Hs and Hs ) , and livermorium ( Lv , Lv , and possibly Lv ) .
Californium was discovered when a microgram - sized target of curium-242 was irradiated with 35 MeV alpha particles using the cyclotron at Berkeley : Only about 5,000 atoms of californium were produced in this experiment .
X - RAY SPECTROMETER Section::::X - ray spectrometer .
The most practical application of Cm — though rather limited in total volume — is as α - particle source in the alpha particle X - ray spectrometers ( APXS ) .
These instruments were installed on the Sojourner , Mars , Mars 96 , Mars Exploration Rovers and Philae comet lander , as well as the Mars Science Laboratory to analyze the composition and structure of the rocks on the surface of planet Mars .
APXS was also used in the Surveyor 5–7 moon probes but with a Cm source .
An elaborated APXS setup is equipped with a sensor head containing six curium sources having the total radioactive decay rate of several tens of millicuries ( roughly a gigabecquerel ) .
The sources are collimated on the sample , and the energy spectra of the alpha particles and protons scattered from the sample are analyzed ( the proton analysis is implemented only in some spectrometers ) .
These spectra contain quantitative information on all major elements in the samples except for hydrogen , helium and lithium .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Owing to its high radioactivity , curium and its compounds must be handled in appropriate laboratories under special arrangements .
Whereas curium itself mostly emits α - particles which are absorbed by thin layers of common materials , some of its decay products emit significant fractions of beta and gamma radiation , which require a more elaborate protection .
If consumed , curium is excreted within a few days and only 0.05 % is absorbed in the blood .
From there , about 45 % goes to the liver , 45 % to the bones , and the remaining 10 % is excreted .
In the bone , curium accumulates on the inside of the interfaces to the bone marrow and does not significantly redistribute with time ; its radiation destroys bone marrow and thus stops red blood cell creation .
The biological half - life of curium is about 20 years in the liver and 50 years in the bones .
Curium is absorbed in the body much more strongly via inhalation , and the allowed total dose of Cm in soluble form is 0.3 μC. Intravenous injection of Cm and Cm containing solutions to rats increased the incidence of bone tumor , and inhalation promoted pulmonary and liver cancer .
Curium isotopes are inevitably present in spent nuclear fuel with a concentration of about 20 g / tonne .
Among them , the Cm – Cm isotopes have decay times of thousands of years and need to be removed to neutralize the fuel for disposal .
The associated procedure involves several steps , where curium is first separated and then converted by neutron bombardment in special reactors to short - lived nuclides .
This procedure , nuclear transmutation , while well documented for other elements , is still being developed for curium .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Holleman , Arnold F. and Wiberg , Nils Lehrbuch der Anorganischen Chemie , 102 Edition , de Gruyter , Berlin 2007 , .
* Penneman , R. A. and Keenan T. K.
The radiochemistry of americium and curium , University of California , Los Alamos , California , 1960 EXTERNAL LINKS
* Curium at The Periodic Table of Videos ( University of Nottingham )
* NLM Hazardous Substances Databank – Curium , Radioactive