COYOTE
The coyote ( Canis latrans ; from Nahuatl ) is a canine native to North America .
It is smaller than its close relative , the gray wolf , and slightly smaller than the closely related eastern wolf and red wolf .
It fills much of the same ecological niche as the golden jackal does in Eurasia , though it is larger and more predatory , and is sometimes called the American jackal by zoologists .
The coyote is listed as least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature due to its wide distribution and abundance throughout North America , southwards through Mexico , and into Central America .
The species is versatile , able to adapt to and expand into environments modified by humans .
It is enlarging its range , with coyotes moving into urban areas in the Eastern U.S. , and was sighted in eastern Panama ( across the Panama Canal from their home range ) for the first time in 2013 .
, 19 coyote subspecies are recognized .
The average male weighs and the average female .
Their fur color is predominantly light gray and red or fulvous interspersed with black and white , though it varies somewhat with geography .
It is highly flexible in social organization , living either in a family unit or in loosely knit packs of unrelated individuals .
It has a varied diet consisting primarily of animal meat , including deer , rabbits , hares , rodents , birds , reptiles , amphibians , fish , and invertebrates , though it may also eat fruits and vegetables on occasion .
Its characteristic vocalization is a howl made by solitary individuals .
Humans are the coyote 's greatest threat , followed by cougars and gray wolves .
In spite of this , coyotes sometimes mate with gray , eastern , or red wolves , producing " coywolf " hybrids .
In the northeastern United States and eastern Canada , the eastern coyote ( a larger subspecies , though still smaller than wolves ) is the result of various historical and recent matings with various types of wolves .
Genetic studies show that most North American wolves contain some level of coyote DNA .
The coyote is a prominent character in Native American folklore , mainly in the Southwestern United States and Mexico , usually depicted as a trickster that alternately assumes the form of an actual coyote or a man .
As with other trickster figures , the coyote uses deception and humor to rebel against social conventions .
The animal was especially respected in Mesoamerican cosmology as a symbol of military might .
After the European colonization of the Americas , it was reviled in Anglo - American culture as a cowardly and untrustworthy animal .
Unlike wolves ( gray , eastern , or red ) , which have undergone an improvement of their public image , attitudes towards the coyote remain largely negative .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Coyote males average in weight , while females average , though size varies geographically .
Northern subspecies , which average , tend to grow larger than the southern subspecies of Mexico , which average .
Body length ranges on average from , and tail length , with females being shorter in both body length and height .
The largest coyote on record was a male killed near Afton , Wyoming , on November19 , 1937 , which measured from nose to tail , and weighed .
Scent glands are located at the upper side of the base of the tail and are a bluish - black color .
The color and texture of the coyote 's fur varies somewhat geographically .
The hair 's predominant color is light gray and red or fulvous , interspersed around the body with black and white .
Coyotes living at high elevations tend to have more black and gray shades than their desert - dwelling counterparts , which are more fulvous or whitish - gray .
The coyote 's fur consists of short , soft underfur and long , coarse guard hairs .
The fur of northern subspecies is longer and denser than in southern forms , with the fur of some Mexican and Central American forms being almost hispid ( bristly ) .
Generally , adult coyotes ( including coywolf hybrids ) have a sable coat color , dark neonatal coat color , bushy tail with an active supracaudal gland , and a white facial mask .
Albinism is extremely rare in coyotes ; out of a total of 750,000 coyotes killed by federal and cooperative hunters between March22 , 1938 , and June30 , 1945 , only two were albinos .
The coyote is typically smaller than the gray wolf , but has longer ears and a relatively larger braincase , as well as a thinner frame , face , and muzzle .
The scent glands are smaller than the gray wolf 's , but are the same color .
Its fur color variation is much less varied than that of a wolf .
The coyote also carries its tail downwards when running or walking , rather than horizontally as the wolf does .
Coyote tracks can be distinguished from those of dogs by their more elongated , less rounded shape .
Unlike dogs , the upper canines of coyotes extend past the mental foramina .
TAXONOMY AND EVOLUTION HISTORY Section::::Taxonomy and evolution .
Section::::History .
At the time of the European colonization of the Americas , coyotes were largely confined to open plains and arid regions of the western half of the continent .
In early post - Columbian historical records , distinguishing between coyotes and wolves is often difficult .
One record from 1750 in Kaskaskia , Illinois , written by a local priest , noted that the " wolves " encountered there were smaller and less daring than European wolves .
Another account from the early 1800s in Edwards County mentioned wolves howling at night , though these were likely coyotes .
This species was encountered several times during the Lewis and Clark Expedition ( 1804–1806 ) , though it was already well known to European traders on the upper Missouri .
Lewis , writing on 5 May 1805 , in northeastern Montana , described the coyote in these terms : The coyote was first scientifically described by naturalist Thomas Say in September 1819 , on the site of Lewis and Clark 's Council Bluffs , fifteen miles up the Missouri River from the mouth of the Platte during a government - sponsored expedition with Major Stephen Long .
He had the first edition of the Lewis and Clark journals in hand , which contained Biddle 's edited version of Lewis 's observations dated 5 May 1805 .
His account was published in 1823 .
Say was the first person to document the difference between a " prairie wolf " ( coyote ) and on the next page of his journal a wolf which he named Canis nubilus ( Great Plains wolf ) .
Say described the coyote as : NAMING AND ETYMOLOGY Section::::Naming and etymology .
The earliest written reference to the species comes from the naturalist Francisco Hernández 's Plantas y Animales de la Nueva España ( 1651 ) , where it is described as a " Spanish fox " or " jackal " .
The first published usage of the word " coyote " ( which is a Spanish borrowing of its Nahuatl name coyōtl ) comes from the historian Francisco Javier Clavijero 's Historia de México in 1780 .
The first time it was used in English occurred in William Bullock 's Six months ' residence and travels in Mexico ( 1824 ) , where it is variously transcribed as cayjotte and cocyotie .
The word 's spelling was standardized as " coyote " by the 1880s .
Alternative English names for the coyote include " prairie wolf " , " brush wolf " , " cased wolf " , " little wolf " and " American jackal " .
Its binomial name Canis latrans translates to " barking dog " , a reference to the many vocalizations they produce .
Local and indigenous names for Canis latrans { class="wikitable sortable mw - collapsible mw - collapsed collapsed " !
Linguistic group or area !
Indigenous name EVOLUTION
FOSSIL RECORD Section::::Evolution .
Section::::Fossil record .
Xiaoming Wang and Richard H. Tedford , one of the foremost authorities on carnivore evolution , proposed that the genus Canis was the descendant of the coyote - like Eucyon davisi and its remains first appeared in the Miocene 6million years ago ( Mya ) in the southwestern USA and Mexico .
By the Pliocene ( 5Mya ) , the larger Canis lepophagus appeared in the same region and by the early Pleistocene ( 1Mya ) C.latrans ( the coyote ) was in existence .
They proposed that the progression from Eucyon davisi to Clepophagus to the coyote was linear evolution .
Additionally , C.latrans and C. aureus are closely related to C.edwardii , a species that appeared earliest spanning the mid - Blancan ( late Pliocene ) to the close of the Irvingtonian ( late Pleistocene ) , and coyote remains indistinguishable from C.latrans
were contemporaneous with C.edwardii in North America .
Johnston describes C.lepophagus as having a more slender skull and skeleton than the modern coyote .
Ronald Nowak found that the early populations had small , delicate , narrowly proportioned skulls that resemble small coyotes and appear to be ancestral to C.latrans .
C. lepophagus was similar in weight to modern coyotes , but had shorter limb bones that indicates a less cursorial lifestyle .
The coyote represents a more primitive form of Canis than the gray wolf , as shown by its relatively small size and its comparatively narrow skull and jaws , which lack the grasping power necessary to hold the large prey in which wolves specialize .
This is further corroborated by the coyote 's sagittal crest , which is low or totally flattened , thus indicating a weaker bite than the wolf 's .
The coyote is not a specialized carnivore as the wolf is , as shown by the larger chewing surfaces on the molars , reflecting the species ' relative dependence on vegetable matter .
In these respects , the coyote resembles the fox - like progenitors of the genus more so than the wolf .
The oldest fossils that fall within the range of the modern coyote date to 0.74–0.85 Ma ( million years ) in Hamilton Cave , West Virginia ; 0.73 Ma in Irvington , California ; 0.35–0.48 Ma in Porcupine Cave , Colorado and in Cumberland Cave , Pennsylvania .
Modern coyotes arose 1,000 years after the Quaternary extinction event .
Compared to their modern Holocene counterparts , Pleistocene coyotes ( C.l . orcutti ) were larger and more robust , likely in response to larger competitors and prey .
Pleistocene coyotes were likely more specialized carnivores than their descendants , as their teeth were more adapted to shearing meat , showing fewer grinding surfaces suited for processing vegetation .
Their reduction in size occurred within 1000 years of the Quaternary extinction event , when their large prey died out .
Furthermore , Pleistocene coyotes were unable to exploit the big - game hunting niche left vacant after the extinction of the dire wolf ( C.dirus ) , as it was rapidly filled by gray wolves , which likely actively killed off the large coyotes , with natural selection favoring the modern gracile morph .
DNA EVIDENCE Section::::DNA evidence .
In 1993 , a study proposed that the wolves of North America display skull traits more similar to the coyote than wolves from Eurasia .
In 2010 , a study found that the coyote was a basal member of the clade that included the Tibetan wolf , the dog , the Mongolian wolf and the Eurasian wolf , with the Tibetan wolf diverging early from wolves and domestic dogs .
In 2016 , a whole - genome DNA study proposed , based on the assumptions made , that all of the North American wolves and coyotes diverged from a common ancestor less than 6,000–117,000 years ago .
The study also indicated that all North American wolves have a significant amount of coyote ancestry and all coyotes some degree of wolf ancestry , and that the red wolf and eastern wolf are highly admixed with different proportions of gray wolf and coyote ancestry .
The proposed timing of the wolf / coyote divergence conflicts with the finding of a coyote - like specimen in strata dated to 1 Mya .
Genetic studies relating to wolves or dogs have inferred phylogenetic relationships based on the only reference genome available , that of the Boxer dog .
In 2017 , the first reference genome of the wolf Canis lupus lupus was mapped to aid future research .
In 2018 , a study looked at the genomic structure and admixture of North American wolves , wolf - like canids , and coyotes using specimens from across their entire range that mapped the largest dataset of nuclear genome sequences against the wolf reference genome .
The study supports the findings of previous studies that North American gray wolves and wolf - like canids were the result of complex gray wolf and coyote mixing .
A polar wolf from Greenland and a coyote from Mexico represented the purest specimens .
The coyotes from Alaska , California , Alabama , and Quebec show almost no wolf ancestry .
Coyotes from Missouri , Illinois , and Florida exhibit 5–10 % wolf ancestry .
There was 40%:60 % wolf to coyote ancestry in red wolves , 60%:40 % in Eastern timber wolves , and 75%:25 % in the Great Lakes wolves .
There was 10 % coyote ancestry in Mexican wolves and the Atlantic Coast wolves , 5 % in Pacific Coast and Yellowstone wolves , and less than 3 % in Canadian archipelago wolves .
If a third canid had been involved in the admixture of the North American wolf - like canids then its genetic signature would have been found in coyotes and wolves , which it has not .
In 2018 , whole genome sequencing was used to compare members of genus Canis .
The study indicates that the common ancestor of the coyote and gray wolf has genetically admixed with a ghost population of an extinct unidentified canid .
The canid is genetically close to the dhole and has evolved after the divergence of the African wild dog from the other canid species .
The basal position of the coyote compared to the wolf is proposed to be due to the coyote retaining more of the mitochondrial genome of this unknown canid .
SUBSPECIES Section::::Subspecies .
, 19 subspecies are recognized .
Geographic variation in coyotes is not great , though taken as a whole , the eastern subspecies ( C. l. thamnos and C. l. frustor ) are large , dark - colored animals , with a gradual paling in color and reduction in size westward and northward
( C. l. texensis , C. l. latrans , C. l. lestes , and C. l. incolatus ) , a brightening of ochraceous tones – deep orange or brown – towards the Pacific coast
( C. l. ochropus , C. l. umpquensis ) , a reduction in size in the Southwestern United States ( C. l. microdon , C. l. mearnsi ) and a general trend towards dark reddish colors and short muzzles in Mexican and Central American populations . !
Subspecies !
Trinomial authority !
Description !
Range !
Synonyms !
Image Plains coyoteC. l. latransnominate subspecies Say , 1823
The largest subspecies , it has rather pale fur and bears large molars and carnassials .
Great Plains from Alberta , Manitoba , and Saskatchewan south to New Mexico and the Texas Panhandle Mexican coyoteC. l. cagottis C. E. H. Smith , 1839
Similar to C. l. peninsulae , but larger and redder in color , it has shorter ears , larger teeth , and a broader muzzle .
States of Oaxaca , San Luis Potosi , Puebla , and Veracruz in Mexico San Pedro
Martir coyoteC. l. clepticus Elliot , 1903 A small subspecies , it has reddish summer fur and a short , broad skull .
Northern Baja California and southwestern California Salvador coyoteC.
l. dickeyi Nelson , 1932
A large subspecies , it equals C. l. lestes in size , but has smaller teeth and darker fur .
Originally only known from Cerro Mogote , west of the Goascorán River in La Unión , El Salvador , in January 2013 , it expanded its range southward to southern Panama .
Southeastern coyoteC. l. frustor Woodhouse , 1851
This subspecies is similar to C. l. peninsulae , but larger and paler , with shorter ears and a longer muzzle .
Southeastern and extreme eastern Kansas , Oklahoma , Texas , Missouri , and Arkansas Belize
coyoteC. l. goldmani Merriam , 1904
The largest of the Mexican coyotes , it approaches C. l. latrans in size , but has a shorter muzzle .
Known only from San Vicente , Chiapas , Mexico , near the Guatemalan border , though it could be the coyote of western Guatemala .
Honduras coyoteC. l. hondurensis Goldman , 1936
A small , rufous - colored subspecies , it has coarse , thin fur and a broad skull .
Known only from the open country northeast of Archaga , north of Tegucigalpa Durango coyoteC. l. impavidus
Allen , 1903
This canid is similar to C. l. cagottis in color , but much larger .
Southern Sonora , extreme southwestern Chihuahua , western Durango , western Zacatecas , and Sinaloa Northern coyoteC. l. incolatus Hall , 1934
A medium - sized subspecies , it has cinnamon - colored fur and a more concave skull than C. l. latrans .
Alaska , Yukon , Northwest Territories , northern British Columbia , and northern Alberta
Tiburón Island coyoteC. l. jamesi Townsend , 1912 Much paler than C. l. mearnsi , it has heavier teeth , a large skull , and long ears .
Tiburón Island Mountain coyoteC.
l. lestes Merriam , 1897 Similar in size and color to C. l. latrans , this subspecies has a large tail and ears .
southern British Columbia and southeastern Alberta , Washington east of the Cascade Range , Oregon , northern California , western Montana , Wyoming , Colorado ( except the southeastern corner ) , north - central Nevada , and north - central Utah
Mearns ' coyoteC. l. mearnsi Merriam , 1897
A small subspecies with medium - sized ears , a small skull and small teeth , its fur is richly and brightly colored .
The fulvous tints are exceedingly bright , and cover the hind and fore feet .
southwestern Colorado , extreme southern Utah and Nevada , southeastern California , northeastern Baja California , Arizona , west of the Rio Grande in New Mexico , northern Sonora and Chihuahua
Lower Rio Grande coyoteC.
l. microdon Merriam , 1897
A small subspecies , it has small teeth and rather dark fur .
The upper surface of the hind foot is whitish , while the belly is sprinkled with black - tipped hairs .
Southern Texas and northern Tamaulipas
California Valley coyoteC. l. ochropus von Eschscholtz , 1829 Similar to C. l. latrans and C. l.
lestes , but smaller , darker , more brightly colored , it has larger ears and smaller skull and teeth .
California west of the Sierra Nevada Peninsula coyoteC. l. peninsulae Merriam , 1897
It is similar to C. l. ochropus in size and features , but has darker , redder fur .
The underside of the tail is blacker than that of C. l. ochropus , and the belly has more black - tipped hairs .
Baja California Eastern coyoteC. l. var .
Lawrence and Bossert , 1969
It is a hybrid of C. lupus , but smaller than the eastern wolf and holds smaller territories , but is larger and holds more extensive home ranges than the typical western coyote .
It ranges in New England , New York , New Jersey , Massachusetts , Pennsylvania , Ohio , West Virginia , Maryland , Delaware , and Virginia .
They also range in the eastern Canadian provinces of Ontario , Quebec , New Brunswick , Nova Scotia , Prince Edward Island , and Newfoundland and Labrador .
Texas
Plains coyoteC. l. texensis Bailey , 1905 Smaller than C. l. latrans
, it has brighter , more fulvous fur closely approaching the richness found in C. l. ochropus , though C. l. texensis lacks that subspecies ' large ears .
most of Texas , eastern New Mexico , and northeastern Mexico Northeastern coyoteC.
l. thamnos Jackson , 1949
About the same size as C. l. latrans , or larger , but darker in color , it has a broader skull .
north - central Saskatchewan , Manitoba ( except the extreme southwestern corner ) , east to southern Quebec , south to eastern North Dakota , Minnesota , Iowa , Missouri ( north of the Missouri River ) , Michigan , Wisconsin , Illinois ( except the extreme southern portion ) , and northern Indiana
Northwest Coast coyoteC. l. umpquensis Jackson , 1949 A small subspecies , it has dark , rufous - tinged fur , a comparatively small skull , and weak dentition .
Coast of Washington and Oregon Colima coyoteC. l. vigilis Merriam , 1897
Similar to C. l. peninsulae , but darker and more extensively colored , it has more black on the forearm , and no black on the underside of the tail ( excepting the tip ) .
Pacific coast of Mexico from Jalisco south to Guerrero
HYBRIDIZATION
Section::::Hybridization .
Coyotes have occasionally mated with dogs , sometimes producing crosses colloquially known as " coydogs " .
Such matings are rare in the wild , as the mating cycles of dogs and coyotes do not coincide , and coyotes are usually antagonistic towards dogs .
Hybridization usually only occurs when coyotes are expanding into areas where conspecifics are few , and dogs are the only alternatives .
Even then , pup survival rates are lower than normal , as dogs do not form pair bonds with coyotes , thus making the rearing of pups more difficult .
In captivity , F hybrids ( first generation ) tend to be more mischievous and less manageable as pups than dogs , and are less trustworthy on maturity than wolf - dog hybrids .
Hybrids vary in appearance , but generally retain the coyote 's usual characteristics .
F hybrids tend to be intermediate in form between dogs and coyotes , while F hybrids ( second generation ) are more varied .
Both F and F hybrids resemble their coyote parents in terms of shyness and intrasexual aggression .
Hybrids are fertile and can be successfully bred through four generations .
Melanistic coyotes owe their black pelts to a mutation that first arose in domestic dogs .
A population of nonalbino white coyotes in Newfoundland owe their coloration to a melanocortin 1 receptor mutation inherited from Golden Retrievers .
Coyotes have hybridized with wolves to varying degrees , particularly in the Eastern United States and Canada .
The so - called " eastern coyote " of northeastern North America probably originated in the aftermath of the extermination of gray and eastern wolves in the northeast , thus allowing coyotes to colonize former wolf ranges and mix with remnant wolf populations .
This hybrid is smaller than either the gray or eastern wolf , and holds smaller territories , but is in turn larger and holds more extensive home ranges than the typical western coyote .
, the eastern coyote 's genetic makeup is fairly uniform , with minimal influence from eastern wolves or western coyotes .
Adult eastern coyotes are larger than western coyotes , with female eastern coyotes weighing 21 % more than male western coyotes .
Physical differences become more apparent by the age of 35 days , with eastern coyote pups having longer legs than their western counterparts .
Differences in dental development also occurs , with tooth eruption being later , and in a different order in the eastern coyote .
Aside from its size , the eastern coyote is physically similar to the western coyote .
The four color phases range from dark brown to blond or reddish blond , though the most common phase is gray - brown , with reddish legs , ears , and flanks .
No significant differences exist between eastern and western coyotes in aggression and fighting , though eastern coyotes tend to fight less , and are more playful .
Unlike western coyote pups , in which fighting precedes play behavior , fighting among eastern coyote pups occurs after the onset of play .
Eastern coyotes tend to reach sexual maturity at two years of age , much later than in western coyotes .
Eastern and red wolves are also products of varying degrees of wolf - coyote hybridization .
The eastern wolf probably was a result of a wolf - coyote admixture , combined with extensive backcrossing with parent gray wolf populations .
The red wolf may have originated during a time of declining wolf populations in the southeastern United States , forcing a wolf - coyote hybridization as well as backcrossing with local parent coyote populations to the extent that about 75–80 % of the modern red wolf 's genome is of coyote derivation .
BEHAVIOR SOCIAL AND REPRODUCTIVE BEHAVIORS Section::::Behavior .
Section::::Social and reproductive behaviors .
Like the golden jackal , the coyote is gregarious , but not as dependent on conspecifics as more social canid species like wolves are .
This is likely because the coyote is not a specialized hunter of large prey as the latter species is .
The basic social unit of a coyote pack is a family containing a reproductive female .
However , unrelated coyotes may join forces for companionship , or to bring down prey too large to attack singly .
Such " nonfamily " packs are only temporary , and may consist of bachelor males , nonreproductive females and subadult young .
Families are formed in midwinter , when females enter estrus .
Pair bonding can occur 2–3 months before actual copulation takes place .
The copulatory tie can last 5–45 minutes .
A female entering estrus attracts males by scent marking and howling with increasing frequency .
A single female in heat can attract up to seven reproductive males , which can follow her for as long as a month .
Although some squabbling may occur among the males , once the female has selected a mate and copulates , the rejected males do not intervene , and move on once they detect other estrous females .
Unlike the wolf , which has been known to practice both monogamous and bigamous matings , the coyote is strictly monogamous , even in areas with high coyote densities and abundant food .
Females that fail to mate sometimes assist their sisters or mothers in raising their pups , or join their siblings until the next time they can mate .
The newly mated pair then establishes a territory and either constructs their own den or cleans out abandoned badger , marmot , or skunk earths .
During the pregnancy , the male frequently hunts alone and brings back food for the female .
The female may line the den with dried grass or with fur pulled from her belly .
The gestation period is 63 days , with an average litter size of six , though the number fluctuates depending on coyote population density and the abundance of food .
Coyote pups are born in dens , hollow trees , or under ledges , and weigh at birth .
They are altricial , and are completely dependent on milk for their first 10 days .
The incisors erupt at about 12 days , the canines at 16 , and the second premolars at 21 .
Their eyes open after 10 days , by which point the pups become increasingly more mobile , walking by 20 days , and running at the age of six weeks .
The parents begin supplementing the pup 's diet with regurgitated solid food after 12–15 days .
By the age of four to six weeks , when their milk teeth are fully functional , the pups are given small food items such as mice , rabbits , or pieces of ungulate carcasses , with lactation steadily decreasing after two months .
Unlike wolf pups , coyote pups begin seriously fighting ( as opposed to play fighting ) prior to engaging in play behavior .
A common play behavior includes the coyote " hip - slam " .
By three weeks of age , coyote pups bite each other with less inhibition than wolf pups .
By the age of four to five weeks , pups have established dominance hierarchies , and are by then more likely to play rather than fight .
The male plays an active role in feeding , grooming , and guarding the pups , but abandons them if the female goes missing before the pups are completely weaned .
The den is abandoned by June to July , and the pups follow their parents in patrolling their territory and hunting .
Pups may leave their families in August , though can remain for much longer .
The pups attain adult dimensions at eight months , and gain adult weight a month later .
TERRITORIAL AND SHELTERING BEHAVIORS Section::::Territorial and sheltering behaviors .
Individual feeding territories vary in size from , with the general concentration of coyotes in a given area depending on food abundance , adequate denning sites , and competition with conspecifics and other predators .
The coyote generally does not defend its territory outside of the denning season , and is much less aggressive towards intruders than the wolf is , typically chasing and sparring with them , but rarely killing them .
Conflicts between coyotes can arise during times of food shortage .
Coyotes mark their territories by raised - leg urination and ground - scratching .
Like wolves , coyotes use a den ( usually the deserted holes of other species ) when gestating and rearing young , though they may occasionally give birth under sagebrushes in the open .
Coyote dens can be located in canyons , washouts , coulees , banks , rock bluffs , or level ground .
Some dens have been found under abandoned homestead shacks , grain bins , drainage pipes , railroad tracks , hollow logs , thickets , and thistles .
The den is continuously dug and cleaned out by the female until the pups are born .
Should the den be disturbed or infested with fleas , the pups are moved into another den .
A coyote den can have several entrances and passages branching out from the main chamber .
A single den can be used year after year .
HUNTING AND FEEDING BEHAVIORS Section::::Hunting and feeding behaviors .
While the popular consensus is that olfaction is very important for hunting , two studies that experimentally investigated the role of olfactory , auditory , and visual cues found that visual cues are the most important ones for hunting in red foxes and coyotes .
When hunting large prey , the coyote often works in pairs or small groups .
Success in killing large ungulates depends on factors such as snow depth and crust density .
Younger animals usually avoid participating in such hunts , with the breeding pair typically doing most of the work .
Unlike the wolf , which attacks large prey from the rear , the coyote approaches from the front , lacerating its prey 's head and throat .
Like other canids , the coyote caches excess food .
Coyotes catch mouse - sized rodents by pouncing , whereas ground squirrels are chased .
Although coyotes can live in large groups , small prey is typically caught singly .
Coyotes have been observed to kill porcupines in pairs , using their paws to flip the rodents on their backs , then attacking the soft underbelly .
Only old and experienced coyotes can successfully prey on porcupines , with many predation attempts by young coyotes resulting in them being injured by their prey 's quills .
Coyotes sometimes urinate on their food , possibly to claim ownership over it .
Recent evidence demonstrates that at least some coyotes have become more nocturnal in hunting , presumably to avoid humans .
Coyotes may occasionally form mutualistic hunting relationships with American badgers , assisting each other in digging up rodent prey .
The relationship between the two species may occasionally border on apparent " friendship " , as some coyotes have been observed laying their heads on their badger companions or licking their faces without protest .
The amicable interactions between coyotes and badgers were known to pre - Columbian civilizations , as shown on a Mexican jar dated to 1250–1300 CE depicting the relationship between the two .
COMMUNICATION BODY
LANGUAGE Section::::Communication .
Section::::Body language .
Being both a gregarious and solitary animal , the variability of the coyote 's visual and vocal repertoire is intermediate between that of the solitary foxes and the highly social wolf .
The aggressive behavior of the coyote bears more similarities to that of foxes than it does that of wolves and dogs .
An aggressive coyote arches its back and lowers its tail .
Unlike dogs , which solicit playful behavior by performing a " play - bow " followed by a " play - leap " , play in coyotes consists of a bow , followed by side - to - side head flexions and a series of " spins " and " dives " .
Although coyotes will sometimes bite their playmates ' scruff as dogs do , they typically approach low , and make upward - directed bites .
Pups fight each other regardless of sex , while among adults , aggression is typically reserved for members of the same sex .
Combatants approach each other waving their tails and snarling with their jaws open , though fights are typically silent .
Males tend to fight in a vertical stance , while females fight on all four paws .
Fights among females tend to be more serious than ones among males , as females seize their opponents ' forelegs , throat , and shoulders .
VOCALIZATIONS Section::::Vocalizations .
The coyote has been described as " the most vocal of all [ wild ] North American mammals " .
Its loudness and range of vocalizations was the cause for its binomial name Canis latrans , meaning " barking dog " .
At least 11 different vocalizations are known in adult coyotes .
These sounds are divided into three categories : agonistic and alarm , greeting , and contact .
Vocalizations of the first category include woofs , growls , huffs , barks , bark howls , yelps , and high - frequency whines .
Woofs are used as low - intensity threats or alarms , and are usually heard near den sites , prompting the pups to immediately retreat into their burrows .
Growls are used as threats at short distances , but have also been heard among pups playing and copulating males .
Huffs are high - intensity threat vocalizations produced by rapid expiration of air .
Barks can be classed as both long - distance threat vocalizations and as alarm calls .
Bark howls may serve similar functions .
Yelps are emitted as a sign of submission , while high - frequency whines are produced by dominant animals acknowledging the submission of subordinates .
Greeting vocalizations include low - frequency whines , ' wow - oo - wows ' , and group yip howls .
Low - frequency whines are emitted by submissive animals , and are usually accompanied by tail wagging and muzzle nibbling .
The sound known as ' wow - oo - wow ' has been described as a " greeting song " .
The group yip howl is emitted when two or more pack members reunite , and may be the final act of a complex greeting ceremony .
Contact calls include lone howls and group howls , as well as the previously mentioned group yip howls .
The lone howl is the most iconic sound of the coyote , and may serve the purpose of announcing the presence of a lone individual separated from its pack .
Group howls are used as both substitute group yip howls and as responses to either lone howls , group howls , or group yip howls .
ECOLOGY HABITAT Section::::Ecology .
Section::::Habitat .
Prior to the near extermination of wolves and cougars , the coyote was most numerous in grasslands inhabited by bison , pronghorn , elk , and other deer , doing particularly well in short - grass areas with prairie dogs , though it was just as much at home in semiarid areas with sagebrush and jackrabbits or in deserts inhabited by cactus , kangaroo rats , and rattlesnakes .
As long as it was not in direct competition with the wolf , the coyote ranged from the Sonoran Desert to the alpine regions of adjoining mountains or the plains and mountainous areas of Alberta .
With the extermination of the wolf , the coyote 's range expanded to encompass broken forests from the tropics of Guatemala and the northern slope of Alaska .
Coyotes walk around per day , often along trails such as logging roads and paths ; they may use iced - over rivers as travel routes in winter .
They are often crepuscular , being more active around evening and the beginning of the night than during the day .
Like many canids , coyotes are competent swimmers , reported to be able to travel at least across water .
DIET Section::::Diet .
The coyote is roughly the North American equivalent to the Eurasian golden jackal .
Likewise , the coyote is highly versatile in its choice of food , but is primarily carnivorous , with 90 % of its diet consisting of meat .
Prey species include bison , deer , sheep , rabbits , rodents , birds , amphibians ( except toads ) , lizards , snakes , fish , crustaceans , and insects .
Coyotes may be picky over the prey they target , as animals such as shrews , moles , and brown rats do not occur in their diet in proportion to their numbers .
More unusual prey include fishers , young black bear cubs , harp seals and rattlesnakes .
Coyotes kill rattlesnakes mostly for food ( but also to protect their pups at their dens ) by teasing the snakes until they stretch out and then biting their heads and snapping and shaking the snakes .
Although coyotes prefer fresh meat , they will scavenge when the opportunity presents itself .
Excluding the insects , fruit , and grass eaten , the coyote requires an estimated of food daily , or annually .
The coyote readily cannibalizes the carcasses of conspecifics , with coyote fat having been successfully used by coyote hunters as a lure or poisoned bait .
The coyote 's winter diet consists mainly of large ungulate carcasses , with very little plant matter .
Rodent prey increases in importance during the spring , summer , and fall .
The coyote feeds on a variety of different produce , including blackberries , blueberries , peaches , pears , apples , prickly pears , chapotes , persimmons , peanuts , watermelons , cantaloupes , and carrots .
During the winter and early spring , the coyote eats large quantities of grass , such as green wheat blades .
It sometimes eats unusual items such as cotton cake , soybean meal , domestic animal droppings , beans , and cultivated grain such as corn , wheat , and sorghum .
In coastal California , coyotes now consume a higher percentage of marine - based food than their ancestors , which is thought to be due to the extirpation of the grizzly bear from this region .
In Death Valley , coyotes may consume great quantities of hawkmoth caterpillars or beetles in the spring flowering months .
ENEMIES AND COMPETITORS Section::::Enemies and competitors .
In areas where the ranges of coyotes and gray wolves overlap , interference competition and predation by wolves has been hypothesized to limit local coyote densities .
Coyote ranges expanded during the 19th and 20th centuries following the extirpation of wolves , while coyotes were driven to extinction on Isle Royale after wolves colonized the island in the 1940s .
One study conducted in Yellowstone National Park , where both species coexist , concluded that the coyote population in the Lamar River Valley declined by 39 % following the reintroduction of wolves in the 1990s , while coyote populations in wolf inhabited areas of the Grand Teton National Park are 33 % lower than in areas where they are absent .
Wolves have been observed to not tolerate coyotes in their vicinity , though coyotes have been known to trail wolves to feed on their kills .
Coyotes rarely kill healthy adult red foxes , and have been observed to feed or den alongside them , though they often kill foxes caught in traps .
Coyotes may kill fox kits , but this is not a major source of mortality .
In southern California , coyotes frequently kill gray foxes , and these smaller canids tend to avoid areas with high coyote densities .
Coyotes may compete with cougars in some areas .
In the eastern Sierra Nevadas , coyotes compete with cougars over mule deer .
Cougars usually outcompete coyotes , and may kill them occasionally , thus reducing coyote predation pressure on smaller carnivores such as foxes and bobcats .
In some areas , coyotes share their ranges with bobcats .
These two similarly sized species rarely physically confront one another , though bobcat populations tend to diminish in areas with high coyote densities .
However , several studies have demonstrated interference competition between coyotes and bobcats , and in all cases coyotes dominated the interaction .
Multiple researchers reported instances of coyotes killing bobcats , whereas bobcats killing coyotes is more rare .
Coyotes attack bobcats using a bite - and - shake method similar to what is used on medium - sized prey .
Coyotes ( both single individuals and groups ) have been known to occasionally kill bobcats –
in most cases , the bobcats were relatively small specimens , such as adult females and juveniles .
However , coyote attacks ( by an unknown number of coyotes ) on adult male bobcats have occurred .
In California , coyote and bobcat populations are not negatively correlated across different habitat types , but predation by coyotes is an important source of mortality in bobcats .
Biologist Stanley Paul Young noted that in his entire trapping career , he had never successfully saved a captured bobcat from being killed by coyotes , and wrote of two incidents wherein coyotes chased bobcats up trees .
Coyotes have been documented to directly kill Canadian lynx on occasion , and compete with them for prey , especially snowshoe hares .
In some areas , including central Alberta , lynx are more abundant where coyotes are few , thus interactions with coyotes appears to influence lynx populations more than the availability of snowshoe hares .
RANGE Section::::Range .
Due to the coyote 's wide range and abundance throughout North America , it is listed as least concern by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) .
The coyote 's pre - Columbian range was limited to the Southwest and Plains regions of the United States and Canada , and northern and central Mexico .
By the 19th century , the species expanded north and east , expanding further after 1900 , coinciding with land conversion and the extirpation of wolves .
By this time , its range encompassed all of the United States and Mexico , southward into Central America , and northward into most of Canada and Alaska .
This expansion is ongoing , and the species now occupies the majority of areas between 8 °
N ( Panama ) and 70 ° N ( northern Alaska ) .
Although it was once widely believed that coyotes are recent immigrants to southern Mexico and Central America , aided in their expansion by deforestation , Pleistocene and Early Holocene records , as well as records from the pre - Columbian period and early European colonization show that the animal was present in the area long before modern times .
Nevertheless , range expansion did occur south of Costa Rica during the late 1970s and northern Panama in the early 1980s , following the expansion of cattle - grazing lands into tropical rainforests .
The coyote is predicted to appear in northern Belize in the near future , as the habitat there is favorable to the species .
Concerns have been raised of a possible expansion into South America through the Panamanian Isthmus , should the Darién Gap ever be closed by the Pan - American Highway .
This fear was partially confirmed in January 2013 , when the species was recorded in eastern Panama 's Chepo District , beyond the Panama Canal .
A recent genetic study proposes that coyotes were originally not found in the eastern United States .
From the 1890s , dense forests were transformed into agricultural land and wolf control implemented on a large scale , leaving a niche for coyotes to disperse into .
There were two major dispersals from two populations of genetically distinct coyotes .
The first major dispersal to the northeast came in the early twentieth century from those coyotes living in the northern Great Plains .
These came to New England via northern Great Lakes region and southern Canada , and to Pennsylvania via the southern Great Lakes region , meeting together in the 1940s in New York and Pennsylvania .
These coyotes have hybridized with the remnant gray wolf and Eastern wolf populations , which has added to coyote genetic diversity and may have assisted adaptation to the new niche .
The second major dispersal to the southeast came in the mid-20th century from Texas and reached the Carolinas in the 1980s .
These coyotes have hybridized with the remnant red wolf populations before the 1970s when the red wolf was extirpated in the wild , which has also added to coyote genetic diversity and may have assisted adaptation to the new niche .
Both of these two major coyote dispersals have experienced rapid population growth and are forecast to meet along the mid - Atlantic coast .
The study concludes that for coyotes the long range dispersal , gene flow from local populations , and rapid population growth may be inter - related .
DISEASES AND PARASITES Section::::Diseases and parasites .
Among large North American carnivores , the coyote probably carries the largest number of diseases and parasites , likely due to its wide range and varied diet .
Viral diseases known to infect coyotes include rabies , canine distemper , infectious canine hepatitis , four strains of equine encephalitis , and oral papillomatosis .
By the late 1970s , serious rabies outbreaks in coyotes had ceased to be a problem for over 60 years , though sporadic cases every 1–5 years did occur .
Distemper causes the deaths of many pups in the wild , though some specimens can survive infection .
Tularemia , a bacterial disease , infects coyotes through their rodent and lagomorph prey , and can be deadly for pups .
Coyotes can be infected by both demodectic and sarcoptic mange , the latter being the most common .
Mite infestations are rare and incidental in coyotes , while tick infestations are more common , with seasonal peaks depending on locality ( May – August in the Northwest , March – November in Arkansas ) .
Coyotes are only rarely infested with lice , while fleas infest coyotes from puphood , though they may be more a source of irritation than serious illness .
Pulex simulans is the most common species to infest coyotes , while Ctenocephalides canis tends to occur only in places where coyotes and dogs ( its primary host ) inhabit the same area .
Although coyotes are rarely host to flukes , they can nevertheless have serious effects on coyotes , particularly Nanophyetus salmincola , which can infect them with salmon poisoning disease , a disease with a 90 % mortality rate .
Trematode Metorchis conjunctus can also infect coyotes .
Tapeworms have been recorded to infest 60–95 % of all coyotes examined .
The most common species to infest coyotes are Taenia pisiformis and Taenia crassiceps , which uses cottontail rabbits as intermediate hosts .
The largest species known in coyotes is T. hydatigena , which enters coyotes through infected ungulates , and can grow to lengths of .
Although once largely limited to wolves , Echinococcus granulosus has expanded to coyotes since the latter began colonizing former wolf ranges .
The most frequent ascaroid roundworm in coyotes is Toxascaris leonina , which dwells in the coyote 's small intestine and has no ill effects , except for causing the host to eat more frequently .
Hookworms of the genus Ancylostoma infest coyotes throughout their range , being particularly prevalent in humid areas .
In areas of high moisture , such as coastal Texas , coyotes can carry up to 250 hookworms each .
The blood - drinking A. caninum is particularly dangerous , as it damages the coyote through blood loss and lung congestion .
A 10-day - old pup can die from being host to as few as 25 A. caninum worms .
RELATIONSHIPS WITH HUMANS IN FOLKLORE AND MYTHOLOGY Section::::Relationships with humans .
Section::::In folklore and mythology .
Coyote features as a trickster figure and skin - walker in the folktales of some Native Americans in the United States , notably several nations in the Southwestern and Plains regions , where he alternately assumes the form of an actual coyote or that of a man .
As with other trickster figures , Coyote acts as a picaresque hero who rebels against social convention through deception and humor .
Folklorists such as Harris believe coyotes came to be seen as tricksters due to the animal 's intelligence and adaptability .
After the European colonization of the Americas , Anglo - American depictions of Coyote are of a cowardly and untrustworthy animal .
Unlike the gray wolf , which has undergone a radical improvement of its public image , Anglo - American cultural attitudes towards the coyote remain largely negative .
In the Maidu creation story , Coyote introduces work , suffering , and death to the world .
Zuni lore has Coyote bringing winter into the world by stealing light from the kachinas .
The Chinook , Maidu , Pawnee , Tohono O'odham , and Ute portray the coyote as the companion of The Creator .
A Tohono O'odham flood story has Coyote helping Montezuma survive a global deluge that destroys humanity .
After The Creator creates humanity , Coyote and Montezuma teach people how to live .
The Crow creation story portrays Old Man Coyote as The Creator .
In The Dineh creation story , Coyote was present in the First World with First Man and First Woman , though a different version has it being created in the Fourth World .
The Navajo Coyote brings death into the world , explaining that without death , too many people would exist , thus no room to plant corn .
Prior to the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire , Coyote played a significant role in Mesoamerican cosmology .
The coyote symbolized military might in Classic era Teotihuacan , with warriors dressing up in coyote costumes to call upon its predatory power .
The species continued to be linked to Central Mexican warrior cults in the centuries leading up to the post - Classic Aztec rule .
In Aztec mythology , Huehuecóyotl ( meaning " old coyote " ) , the god of dance , music and carnality , is depicted in several codices as a man with a coyote 's head .
He is sometimes depicted as a womanizer , responsible for bringing war into the world by seducing Xochiquetzal , the goddess of love .
Epigrapher David H. Kelley argued that the god Quetzalcoatl owed its origins to pre - Aztec Uto - Aztecan mythological depictions of the coyote , which is portrayed as mankind 's " Elder Brother " , a creator , seducer , trickster , and culture hero linked to the morning star .
ATTACKS ON HUMANS Section::::Attacks on humans .
Coyote attacks on humans are uncommon and rarely cause serious injuries , due to the relatively small size of the coyote , but have been increasingly frequent , especially in California .
There have been only two confirmed fatal attacks : one on a three - year - old named Kelly Keen in Glendale , California and another on a nineteen - year - old named Taylor Mitchell in Nova Scotia , Canada .
In the 30 years leading up to March 2006 , at least 160 attacks occurred in the United States , mostly in the Los Angeles County area .
Data from United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA )
Wildlife Services , the California Department of Fish and Game , and other sources show that while 41 attacks occurred during the period of 1988–1997 , 48 attacks were verified from 1998 through 2003 .
The majority of these incidents occurred in Southern California near the suburban - wildland interface .
In the absence of the harassment of coyotes practiced by rural people , urban coyotes are losing their fear of humans , which is further worsened by people intentionally or unintentionally feeding coyotes .
In such situations , some coyotes have begun to act aggressively toward humans , chasing joggers and bicyclists , confronting people walking their dogs , and stalking small children .
Non - rabid coyotes in these areas sometimes target small children , mostly under the age of 10 , though some adults have been bitten .
Although media reports of such attacks generally identify the animals in question as simply " coyotes " , research into the genetics of the eastern coyote indicates those involved in attacks in northeast North America , including Pennsylvania , New York , New England , and eastern Canada , may have actually been coywolves , hybrids of Canis latrans and C. lupus , not fully coyotes .
LIVESTOCK AND PET PREDATION
Section::::Livestock and pet predation .
Coyotes are presently the most abundant livestock predators in western North America , causing the majority of sheep , goat , and cattle losses .
For example , according to the National Agricultural Statistics Service , coyotes were responsible for 60.5 % of the 224,000 sheep deaths attributed to predation in 2004 .
The total number of sheep deaths in 2004 comprised 2.22 % of the total sheep and lamb population in the United States , which , according to the National Agricultural Statistics Service USDA report , totaled 4.66 million and 7.80 million heads respectively as of July 1 , 2005 .
Because coyote populations are typically many times greater and more widely distributed than those of wolves , coyotes cause more overall predation losses .
The United States government agents routinely shoot , poison , trap , and kill about 90,000 coyotes each year to protect livestock .
An Idaho census taken in 2005 showed that individual coyotes were 5 % as likely to attack livestock as individual wolves .
In Utah , more than 11,000 coyotes were killed for bounties totaling over $ 500,000 in the fiscal year ending June 30 , 2017 .
Livestock guardian dogs are commonly used to aggressively repel predators and have worked well in both fenced pasture and range operations .
A 1986 survey of sheep producers in the USA found that 82 % reported the use of dogs represented an economic asset .
Re - wilding cattle , which involves increasing the natural protective tendencies of cattle , is a method for controlling coyotes discussed by Temple Grandin of Colorado State University .
This method is gaining popularity among producers who allow their herds to calve on the range and whose cattle graze open pastures throughout the year .
Coyotes typically bite the throat just behind the jaw and below the ear when attacking adult sheep or goats , with death commonly resulting from suffocation .
Blood loss is usually a secondary cause of death .
Calves and heavily fleeced sheep are killed by attacking the flanks or hindquarters , causing shock and blood loss .
When attacking smaller prey , such as young lambs , the kill is made by biting the skull and spinal regions , causing massive tissue and bone damage .
Small or young prey may be completely carried off , leaving only blood as evidence of a kill .
Coyotes usually leave the hide and most of the skeleton of larger animals relatively intact , unless food is scarce , in which case they may leave only the largest bones .
Scattered bits of wool , skin , and other parts are characteristic where coyotes feed extensively on larger carcasses .
Tracks are an important factor in distinguishing coyote from dog predation .
Coyote tracks tend to be more oval - shaped and compact than those of domestic dogs , and their claw marks are less prominent and the tracks tend to follow a straight line more closely than those of dogs .
With the exception of sighthounds , most dogs of similar weight to coyotes have a slightly shorter stride .
Coyote kills can be distinguished from wolf kills by less damage to the underlying tissues in the former .
Also , coyote scat tends to be smaller than wolf scat .
Coyotes are often attracted to dog food and animals that are small enough to appear as prey .
Items such as garbage , pet food , and sometimes feeding stations for birds and squirrels attract coyotes into backyards .
About three to five pets attacked by coyotes are brought into the Animal Urgent Care hospital of South Orange County ( California ) each week , the majority of which are dogs , since cats typically do not survive the attacks .
Scat analysis collected near Claremont , California , revealed that coyotes relied heavily on pets as a food source in winter and spring .
At one location in Southern California , coyotes began relying on a colony of feral cats as a food source .
Over time , the coyotes killed most of the cats , and then continued to eat the cat food placed daily at the colony site by people who were maintaining the cat colony .
Coyotes usually attack smaller - sized dogs , but they have been known to attack even large , powerful breeds such as the Rottweiler in exceptional cases .
Dogs larger than coyotes , such as greyhounds , are generally able to drive them off , and have been known to kill coyotes .
Smaller breeds are more likely to suffer injury or death .
USES Section::::Uses .
Prior to the mid-19th century , coyote fur was considered worthless .
This changed with the diminution of beavers , and by 1860 , the hunting of coyotes for their fur became a great source of income ( 75 cents to $ 1.50 per skin ) for wolfers in the Great Plains .
Coyote pelts were of significant economic importance during the early 1950s , ranging in price from $ 5 to $ 25 per pelt , depending on locality .
The coyote 's fur is not durable enough to make rugs , but can be used for coats and jackets , scarves , or muffs .
The majority of pelts are used for making trimmings , such as coat collars and sleeves for women 's clothing .
Coyote fur is sometimes dyed black as imitation silver fox .
Coyotes were occasionally eaten by trappers and mountain men during the western expansion .
Coyotes sometimes featured in the feasts of the Plains Indians , and coyote pups were eaten by the indigenous people of San Gabriel , California .
The taste of coyote meat has been likened to that of the wolf , and is more tender than pork when boiled .
Coyote fat , when taken in the fall , has been used on occasion to grease leather or eaten as a spread .
TAMEABILITY Section::::Tameability .
Coyotes were probably semidomesticated by various pre - Columbian cultures .
Some 19th - century writers wrote of coyotes being kept in native villages in the Great Plains .
The coyote is easily tamed as a pup , but can become destructive as an adult .
Both full - blooded and hybrid coyotes can be playful and confiding with their owners , but are suspicious and shy of strangers , though coyotes being tractable enough to be used for practical purposes like retrieving and pointing have been recorded .
A tame coyote named " Butch " , caught in the summer of 1945 , had a short - lived career in cinema , appearing in Smoky and Ramrod before being shot while raiding a henhouse .
NOTES
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
FURTHER READING Books
* Dixon , J. S. ( 1920 ) .
Control of the coyote in California .
Berkeley , Cal . :
Agricultural Experiment Station
* Flores , D. ( 2016 ) .
Coyote America : A Natural and Supernatural History .
Basic Books .
* Harding , A. R. ( 1909 ) .
Wolf and coyote trapping ; an up - to - date wolf hunter 's guide , giving the most successful methods of experienced " wolfers " for hunting and trapping these animals , also gives their habits in detail .
Columbus , Ohio , A. R. Harding
pub .
co.
* Murie , A. ( 1940 ) .
Ecology of the coyote in the Yellowstone .
Washington , D.C. :
U.S. G.P.O.
* Parker , Gerry . ( 1995 ) .
"
Eastern Coyote : Story of Its Success " , Nimbus Publishing , Halifax , Nova Scotia , Canada .
* Van Nuys , Frank ( 2015 ) .
Varmints and Victims : Predator Control in the American West .
Lawrence , KS : University Press of Kansas .
* Wagner , M. M. ( c. 1920 ) .
The autobiography of a tame coyote .
San Francisco , Harr Wagner pub .
co. Video
* Shelly , Priya ( June 2016 ) .
Living with Coyote ( 18 minutes ) .
Aeon ( digital magazine ) .
Audiobook
* Olson , Jack ( May 2015 ) . "
The Last Coyote " ( 8 hours ) .
Narrated by Gary MacFadden .
Originally published as Slaughter The Animals , Poison The Earth , Simon & Schuster , Oct. 11 , 1971 .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Arizona Game & Fish Department , " Living with Coyotes " * Western coyote , Wolf and Coyote DNA Bank @
Trent University
* View occurrences of " Canis latrans " in the Biodiversity Heritage Library .