BATMAN ( 1989 FILM )
Batman is a 1989 American superhero film directed by Tim Burton and produced by Jon Peters and Peter Guber , based on the DC Comics character of the same name .
It is the first installment of Warner Bros. ' initial Batman film series .
The film stars Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman and Jack Nicholson as the Joker , alongside Kim Basinger , Robert Wuhl , Pat Hingle , Billy Dee Williams , Michael Gough and Jack Palance .
The film takes place early in the title character 's war on crime , and depicts a battle with his nemesis the Joker .
After Burton was hired as director in 1986 , Steve Englehart and Julie Hickson wrote film treatments before Sam Hamm wrote the first screenplay .
Batman was not greenlit until after the success of Burton 's Beetlejuice ( 1988 ) .
Numerous A - list actors were considered for the role of Batman before Keaton was cast .
Keaton 's casting caused a controversy since , by 1988 , he had become typecast as a comedic actor and many observers doubted he could portray a serious role .
Nicholson accepted the role of the Joker under strict conditions that dictated top billing , a high salary , a portion of the box office profits and his shooting schedule .
The tone and themes of the film were influenced in part by Alan Moore and Brian Bolland 's and Frank Miller 's The Dark Knight Returns .
The film primarily adapts the " Red Hood " origin story for the Joker , in which Batman creates the Joker by dropping him into Axis Chemical acid , resulting in his transformation into a psychopath , but it adds a unique twist in presenting him specifically as a gangster named Jack Napier .
Filming took place at Pinewood Studios from October 1988 to January 1989 .
The budget escalated from $ 30 million to $ 48 million , while the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike forced Hamm to drop out .
Warren Skaaren did rewrites .
Additional uncredited drafts were done by Charles McKeown and Jonathan Gems .
Batman was a critical and financial success , earning over $ 400 million in box office totals .
It was the fifth - highest - grossing film in history at the time of its release .
The film received several Saturn Award nominations and a Golden Globe nomination , and won an Academy Award .
It also inspired the equally successful , paving the way for the DC animated universe , and has influenced Hollywood 's modern marketing and development techniques of the superhero film genre .
Three sequels , Batman Returns , Batman Forever and Batman & Robin , were released on June 19 , 1992 , June 16 , 1995 , and June 20 , 1997 , respectively .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
As Gotham City approaches its bicentennial , Mayor Borg orders district attorney Harvey Dent and police commissioner James Gordon to make the city safer .
Meanwhile , reporter Alexander Knox and photojournalist Vicki Vale begin to investigate rumors of a vigilante nicknamed " Batman " who is targeting the city 's criminals .
Batman 's alter - ego is Bruce Wayne , a billionaire industrialist who , as a child , witnessed his parents ' murder at the hands of a psychotic mugger .
At a fundraiser for the bicentennial in Wayne Manor , Bruce meets and falls for Vale , and the two begin a romantic relationship .
However , the evening is cut short as Bruce is alerted to Commissioner Gordon 's sudden departure due to police business and leaves to investigate as Batman .
Mob boss Carl Grissom , who has already been targeted by Dent and Gordon , discovers his mistress Alicia is involved with his second - in - command Jack Napier .
With the help of corrupt police lieutenant Max Eckhardt , Grissom engineers Napier 's death in a raid at Axis Chemicals .
However , Grissom 's plan is foiled with the sudden arrival of Commissioner Gordon , who wants Napier captured alive .
In the ensuing shootout , Napier , who has realized he was set up , kills Eckhardt .
Batman arrives and , in a struggle , Napier is knocked into a vat of chemicals .
Batman escapes and Napier is presumed dead .
Napier emerges from the vat , but is left disfigured with chalk white skin , emerald green hair , and a rictus grin .
The sociopathic Napier is driven insane by the incident and begins calling himself " the Joker " .
He kills Grissom and usurps authority over his criminal empire , and scars Alicia 's face to equal his disfigurement .
The Joker terrorizes Gotham City by lacing hygiene products with " Smylex " , a deadly chemical which causes victims to die laughing with the same maniacal grin as the Joker .
As he searches for information on Batman ( whom he blames for his disfigurement ) , the Joker also becomes obsessed with Vale .
He lures her to the Gotham Museum of Art and his henchmen destroy the works of art .
Batman arrives and rescues her .
They escape in the Batmobile , pursued by the Joker 's men .
Batman takes Vicki to the Batcave , where he gives her information from his research on Smylex that will allow the city 's residents to avoid exposure to the toxin .
Bruce visits Vicki at her apartment , prepared to tell her about his alter - ego .
The Joker interrupts their meeting , asking Bruce , " You ever danced with the devil by the pale moonlight ? " before shooting him .
Bruce uses a bended serving tray as body armor and plays dead .
He remembers that the mugger who killed his parents asked the same question , and realizes that Napier was his parents ' killer .
Vicki is brought to the Batcave by Bruce 's butler , Alfred Pennyworth , who has been coaxing their relationship because Vicki brings out Bruce 's human side .
After telling her that he can not focus on their relationship with the Joker terrorizing Gotham , Bruce departs as Batman to destroy the Axis plant .
Meanwhile , the Joker lures the citizens of Gotham to a parade with the promise of free money , but while throwing cash at the crowd as promised , also attacks them with Smylex gas released from his giant parade balloons .
Batman arrives and tows the balloons above the clouds with the Batwing .
The Joker shoots the Batwing using a long - barreled gun , causing it to crash , and takes Vicki to the top of a cathedral .
Batman , who survived the crash , fends off the Joker 's remaining men despite his injuries , and confronts the Joker .
The two struggle , with Joker eventually gaining the upper hand , leaving Batman and Vicki clinging onto an outcropping .
The Joker tries to escape by helicopter , but Batman attaches a heavy granite gargoyle to the Joker 's leg with his grappling hook , causing him to lose his grip and fall to his death after it breaks off .
Commissioner Gordon announces that the police have arrested the Joker 's men and unveils the Bat - Signal .
Harvey Dent reads a note from Batman , promising that he will defend Gotham whenever crime strikes again .
Vicki is taken to Wayne Manor by Alfred , who tells her that Bruce will be a little late .
She responds that she is not surprised , as Batman looks at the signal 's projection from a rooftop , standing watch over the city .
CAST * Michael Keaton as Bruce Wayne / Batman * Jack Nicholson as Jack Napier /
The Joker * Kim Basinger as Vicki Vale
* Robert Wuhl as Alexander Knox
* Pat Hingle as Commissioner James Gordon
*
Billy Dee Williams as Harvey Dent * Michael Gough as Alfred Pennyworth
* Jack Palance as Carl Grissom * Jerry Hall as Alicia Hunt * Tracey Walter as Bob the Goon * Lee Wallace as Mayor Borg
* William Hootkins as Lt .
Max Eckhardt * John Dair as Vinnie Ricorso * Christopher Fairbank as Nic * George Roth as Eddie
* Hugo E. Blick as Young Jack Napier
*
Charles Roskilly as Young Bruce Wayne * David Baxt as Thomas Wayne * Sharon Holm as Martha Wayne
* Garrick Hagon as Tourist Dad * Liza Ross as Tourist Mom * Adrian Meyers as Jimmy , Tourist Son PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
In the late 1970s , Batman 's popularity was waning .
CBS was interested in producing a Batman in Outer Space film .
Producers Benjamin Melniker and Michael E. Uslan purchased the film rights of Batman from DC Comics on October 3 , 1979 .
It was Uslan 's wish " to make the definitive , dark , serious version of Batman , the way Bob Kane and Bill Finger had envisioned him in 1939 .
A creature of the night ; stalking criminals in the shadows . "
Richard Maibaum was approached to write a script with Guy Hamilton to direct , but the two turned down the offer .
Uslan was unsuccessful with pitching Batman to various movie studios because they wanted the film to be similar to the campy 1960s TV series .
Columbia Pictures and United Artists were among those to turn down the film .
A disappointed Uslan then wrote a script titled Return of the Batman to give the film industry a better idea of his vision for the film .
Uslan later compared its dark tone to that of The Dark Knight Returns , which his script pre - dated by six years .
In November 1979 , producers Jon Peters and Peter Guber joined the project .
Melniker and Uslan became executive producers .
The four felt it was best to pattern the film 's development after that of Superman ( 1978 ) .
Uslan , Melniker and Guber pitched Batman to Universal Pictures , but the studio turned it down .
Though no movie studios were yet involved , the project was publicly announced with a budget of $ 15 million in July 1980 at the Comic Art Convention in New York .
Warner Bros. , the studio behind the successful Superman film franchise , decided to also accept and produce Batman .
Tom Mankiewicz completed a script titled The Batman in June 1983 , focusing on Batman and Dick Grayson 's origins , with the Joker and Rupert Thorne as villains , and Silver St. Cloud as the romantic interest .
Mankiewicz took inspiration from the limited series Batman : Strange Apparitions , written by Steve Englehart .
Comic book artist Marshall Rogers , who worked with Englehart on Strange Apparitions , was hired for concept art .
The Batman was then announced in late 1983 for a mid-1985 release date on a budget of $ 20 million .
Originally , Mankiewicz had wanted an unknown actor for Batman , William Holden for James Gordon , David Niven as Alfred Pennyworth , and Peter O'Toole as the Penguin , whom Mankiewicz wanted to portray as a mobster with low body temperature .
Holden died in 1981 and Niven in 1983 , so this would never come to pass .
A number of filmmakers were attached to Mankiewicz ' script , including Ivan Reitman and Joe Dante .
Reitman wanted to cast Bill Murray as Batman and Eddie Murphy as Robin .
Nine rewrites were performed by nine separate writers .
Most of them were based on Strange Apparitions .
However , it was Mankiewicz 's script that was still being used to guide the project .
After the financial success of Pee - wee 's Big Adventure ( 1985 ) , Warner Bros. hired Tim Burton to direct Batman .
Burton had then - girlfriend Julie Hickson write a new 30-page film treatment , feeling the previous script by Mankiewicz was campy .
The success of The Dark Knight Returns and rekindled Warner Bros. ' interest in a film adaptation .
Burton was initially not a comic book fan , but he was impressed by the dark and serious tone found in both The Dark Knight Returns and The Killing Joke .
Warner Bros. enlisted the aid of Englehart to write a new treatment in March 1986 .
Like Mankiewicz 's script , it was based on his own Strange Apparitions , and included Silver St. Cloud , Dick Grayson , the Joker and Rupert Thorne , as well as a cameo appearance by the Penguin .
Warner Bros. was impressed , but Englehart felt there were too many characters .
He removed the Penguin and Dick Grayson in his second treatment , finishing in May 1986 .
Burton approached Sam Hamm , a comic book fan , to write the screenplay .
Hamm decided not to use an origin story , feeling that flashbacks would be more suitable and that " unlocking the mystery " would become part of the storyline .
He reasoned , " You totally destroy your credibility if you show the literal process by which Bruce Wayne becomes Batman . "
Hamm replaced Silver St. Cloud with Vicki Vale and Rupert Thorne with his own creation , Carl Grissom .
He completed his script in October 1986 , which demoted Dick Grayson to a cameo rather than a supporting character .
One scene in Hamm 's script had a young James Gordon on duty the night of the murder of Bruce Wayne 's parents .
When Hamm 's script was rewritten , the scene was deleted , reducing it to a photo in the Gotham Globe newspaper seen in the film .
Warner Bros. was less willing to move forward on development , despite their enthusiasm for Hamm 's script , which Batman co - creator Bob Kane greeted with positive feedback .
Hamm 's script was then bootlegged at various comic book stores in the United States .
Batman was finally given the greenlight to commence pre - production in April 1988 , after the success of Burton 's Beetlejuice ( 1988 ) .
When comic book fans found out about Burton directing the film with Michael Keaton starring in the lead role , controversy arose over the tone and direction Batman was going in .
Hamm explained , " They hear Tim Burton 's name
and they think of Pee - wee 's Big Adventure .
They hear Keaton 's name and they think of any number of Michael Keaton comedies .
You think of the 1960s version of Batman , and it was the complete opposite of our film .
We tried to market it with a typical dark and serious tone , but the fans did n't believe us . "
To combat negative reports on the film 's production , Kane was hired as creative consultant .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Parallel to the Superman casting , a who 's who of Hollywood top stars were considered for the role of Batman , including Mel Gibson , Kevin Costner , Charlie Sheen , Tom Selleck , Bill Murray , Harrison Ford and Dennis Quaid .
Burton was pressured by Warner Bros. to cast an obvious action movie star , and had approached Pierce Brosnan , but he had no interest in playing a comic book character .
Burton was originally interested in casting an unknown actor , and offered Ray Liotta a chance to audition after having completed Something Wild , but Liotta declined , a decision he regrets .
Willem Dafoe , who was falsely reported to be considered for the Joker , had actually been considered for Batman early in development .
Producer Jon Peters suggested Michael Keaton , arguing he had the right " edgy , tormented quality " after having seen his dramatic performance in Clean and Sober .
Having directed Keaton in Beetlejuice , Burton agreed .
Keaton 's casting caused a controversy among comic book fans , with 50,000 protest letters sent to Warner Bros. offices .
Bob Kane , Sam Hamm and Michael Uslan also heavily questioned the casting .
" Obviously there was a negative response from the comic book people .
I think they thought we were going to make it like the 1960s TV series , and make it campy , because they thought of Michael Keaton from Mr. Mom and Night Shift and stuff like that .
"
Keaton studied The Dark Knight Returns for inspiration .
Brad Dourif , Tim Curry , David Bowie , John Lithgow and James Woods were considered for the Joker .
Lithgow , during his audition , attempted to talk Burton out of casting him , a decision he would later publicly regret , stating , " I did n't realize it was such a big deal " .
Burton wanted to cast Brad Dourif , but the studio refused .
Robin Williams lobbied hard for the part .
Jack Nicholson had been producer Michael Uslan 's and Bob Kane 's choice since 1980 .
Peters approached Nicholson as far back as 1986 , during filming of The Witches of Eastwick .
Nicholson had what was known as an " off - the - clock " agreement .
His contract specified the number of hours he was entitled to have off each day , from the time he left the set to the time he reported back for filming , as well as being off for Los Angeles Lakers home games .
Nicholson demanded to have all of his scenes shot in a three - week block , but the schedule lapsed into 106 days .
He received a $ 6 million salary , as well as a large percentage of the box office gross estimated between $ 60 million to $ 90 million .
Sean Young was originally cast as Vicki Vale , but was injured in a horse - riding accident prior to commencement of filming .
Young 's departure necessitated an urgent search for an actress who , besides being right for the part , could commit to the film at very short notice .
Peters suggested Kim Basinger : she was able to join the production immediately and was cast .
As a fan of Michael Gough 's work in various Hammer Film Productions , Burton cast Gough as Bruce Wayne 's butler , Alfred Pennyworth .
Robert Wuhl was cast as reporter Alexander Knox .
His character was originally supposed to die by the Joker 's poison gas in the climax , but the filmmakers " liked [ my ] character so much , "
Wuhl said , " that they decided to let me live . "
Burton chose Billy Dee Williams as Harvey Dent because he wanted to include the villain Two - Face in a future film using the concept of an African - American Two - Face for the black and white concept , but Tommy Lee Jones was later cast in the role for Batman Forever , which disappointed Williams .
Nicholson convinced the filmmakers to cast his close friend Tracey Walter as the Joker 's henchman , Bob .
Kiefer Sutherland was considered as Robin before the character was deleted from the shooting script .
The rest of the cast included Pat Hingle as Commissioner Gordon , Jerry Hall as Alicia Hunt , Lee Wallace as Mayor Borg , William Hootkins as Lt .
Max Eckhardt , and Jack Palance as crime boss Carl Grissom .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The filmmakers considered filming Batman entirely on the Warner Bros. backlot in Burbank , California , but media interest in the film made them change the location .
It was shot at Pinewood Studios in England from October 1988 to January 1989 .
18 sound stages were used , almost the entirety of Pinewood 's 95-acre backlot .
Locations included Knebworth House and Hatfield House doubling for Wayne Manor , plus Acton Lane Power Station and Little Barford Power Station .
The original production budget escalated from $ 30 million to $ 48 million .
Filming was highly secretive .
The unit publicist was offered and refused £ 10,000 for the first pictures of Jack Nicholson as the Joker .
The police were later called in when two reels of footage ( about 20 minutes ' worth ) were stolen .
With various problems during filming , Burton called it " Torture .
The worst period of my life ! "
Hamm was not allowed to perform rewrites during the 1988 Writers Guild of America strike .
Warren Skaaren , who had also worked on Burton 's Beetlejuice , did rewrites .
Jonathan Gems and Charles McKeown rewrote the script during filming .
Only Skaaren received screenplay credit with Hamm .
Hamm criticized the rewrites , but blamed the changes on Warner Bros. Burton explained , " I do n't understand why that became such a problem .
We started out with a script that everyone liked , although we recognized it needed a little work . "
Dick Grayson appeared in the shooting script but was deleted , as the filmmakers felt he was irrelevant to the plot .
Bob Kane supported this decision .
Keaton , who called himself a " logic freak " , was concerned that Batman 's secret identity would in reality be fairly easy to uncover , and discussed ideas with Burton to better disguise the character , including the use of contact lenses .
Ultimately , Keaton decided to perform Batman 's voice at a lower register than when he was portraying Bruce Wayne , which became a hallmark of the film version of the character , with Christian Bale later using the same technique .
Originally in the climax , the Joker was to kill Vicki Vale , sending Batman into a vengeful fury .
Jon Peters reworked the climax without telling Burton and commissioned production designer Anton Furst to create a model of the cathedral .
This cost $ 100,000 when the film was already well over budget .
Burton disliked the idea , having no clue how the scene would end : " Here were Jack Nicholson and Kim Basinger walking up this cathedral , and halfway up Jack turns around and says , ' Why am I walking up all these stairs ?
Where am I going ? '
' We 'll talk about it when you get to the top ! '
I had to tell him that I did n't know . "
DESIGN Section::::Design .
Burton was impressed with Anton Furst 's designs in The Company of Wolves , and previously failed to hire Furst as production designer for Beetlejuice .
Furst had been too committed on High Spirits , a choice he later regretted .
Furst enjoyed working with Burton .
" I do n't think I 've ever felt so naturally in tune with a director " , he said .
" Conceptually , spiritually , visually , or artistically .
There was never any problem because we never fought over anything .
Texture , attitude and feelings are what Burton is a master at . "
Furst and the art department deliberately mixed clashing architectural styles to " make Gotham City the ugliest and bleakest metropolis imaginable " .
Furst continued , " [ W]e imagined what New York City might have become without a planning commission .
A city run by crime , with a riot of architectural styles .
An essay in ugliness .
As if hell erupted through the pavement and kept on going " .
The 1985 film Brazil by Terry Gilliam was also a notable influence upon the film 's production design , as both Burton and Furst studied it as a reference .
Derek Meddings served as the visual effects supervisor , while Keith Short helped construct the newly created 1989 Batmobile , adding two Browning machine guns .
On designing the Batmobile , Furst explained , " We looked at jet aircraft components , we looked at war machines , we looked at all sorts of things .
In the end , we went into pure expressionism , taking the Salt Flat Racers of the 30s and the Sting Ray macho machines of the 50s " .
The car was built upon a Chevrolet Impala when previous development with a Jaguar and Ford Mustang failed .
Costume designer Bob Ringwood turned down the chance to work on Licence to Kill in favor of Batman .
Ringwood found it difficult designing the Batsuit because " the image of Batman in the comics is this huge , big six - foot - four hunk with a dimpled chin .
Michael Keaton is a guy with average build " , he stated .
" The problem was to make somebody who was average - sized and ordinary - looking into this bigger - than - life creature . "
Burton commented , " Michael is a bit claustrophobic , which made it worse for him .
The costume put him in a dark , Batman - like mood though , so he was able to use it to his advantage " .
Burton 's idea was to use an all - black suit , and was met with positive feedback by Bob Kane .
Jon Peters wanted to use a Nike product placement with the Batsuit .
Ringwood studied over 200 comic book issues for inspiration .
28 sculpted latex designs were created ; 25 different cape looks and 6 different heads were made , accumulating a total cost of $ 250,000 .
Comic book fans initially expressed negative feedback against the Batsuit .
Burton opted not to use tights , spandex , or underpants as seen in the comic book , feeling it was not intimidating .
Prosthetic makeup designer Nick Dudman used acrylic - based makeup paint called PAX for Nicholson 's chalk - white face .
Part of Nicholson 's contract was approval over the makeup designer .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Burton hired Danny Elfman of Oingo Boingo , his collaborator on Pee - wee 's Big Adventure and Beetlejuice , to compose the music score .
For inspiration , Elfman was given The Dark Knight Returns .
Elfman was worried , as he had never worked on a production this large in budget and scale .
In addition , producer Jon Peters was skeptical of hiring Elfman , but was later convinced when he heard the opening number .
Peters and Peter Guber wanted Prince to write music for the Joker and Michael Jackson to do the romance songs .
Elfman would then combine the style of Prince and Jackson 's songs together for the entire film score .
Burton protested the ideas , citing " my movies are n't commercial like Top Gun .
"
Elfman enlisted the help of Oingo Boingo lead guitarist Steve Bartek and Shirley Walker to arrange the compositions for the orchestra .
Elfman was later displeased with the audio mixing of his film score . "
Batman was done in England by technicians who did n't care , and the non - caring showed , " he stated .
" I 'm not putting down England because they 've done gorgeous dubs there , but this particular crew elected not to . "
Batman was one of the first films to spawn two soundtracks .
One of them featured songs written by Prince while the other showcased Elfman 's score .
Both were successful , and compilations of Elfman 's opening credits were used in the title sequence theme for , also composed by Shirley Walker .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
When discussing the central theme of Batman , director Tim Burton explained , " the whole film and mythology of the character is a complete duel of the freaks .
It 's a fight between two disturbed people " , adding that " The Joker is such a great character because there 's a complete freedom to him .
Any character who operates on the outside of society and is deemed a freak and an outcast then has the freedom to do what they want ...
They are the darker sides of freedom .
Insanity is in some scary way the most freedom you can have , because you 're not bound by the laws of society " .
Burton saw Bruce Wayne as the bearer of a double identity , exposing one while hiding the reality from the world .
Burton biographer Ken Hanke wrote that Bruce Wayne , struggling with his alter - ego as Batman , is depicted as an antihero .
Hanke felt that Batman has to push the boundaries of civil justice to deal with certain criminals , such as the Joker .
Kim Newman theorized that " Burton and the writers saw Batman and the Joker as a dramatic antithesis , and the film deals with their intertwined origins and fates to an even greater extent " .
Batman conveys trademarks found in 1930s pulp magazines , notably the design of Gotham City stylized with Art Deco design .
Richard Corliss , writing for Time , observed that Gotham 's design was a reference to films such as The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari ( 1920 ) and Metropolis ( 1927 ) .
" Gotham City , despite being shot on a studio backlot " , he continued , " is literally another character in the script .
It has the demeaning presence of German Expressionism and fascist architecture , staring down at the citizens . "
Hanke further addressed the notions of Batman being a period piece , in that " The citizens , cops , people and the black - and - white television looks like it takes place in 1939 " ; but later said : " Had the filmmakers made Vicki Vale a femme fatale rather than a damsel in distress , this could have made Batman as a homage and tribute to classic film noir .
"
Portions of the climax pay homage to Vertigo ( 1958 ) . MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Production designer Anton Furst designed the poster , which he called " evocative but ubiquitous .
Only featuring the Bat - Symbol .
Not too much and not too little " .
Earlier designs " had the word ' Batman ' spelled in RoboCop or Conan the Barbarian - type font " .
Jon Peters unified all the film 's tie - ins , even turning down $ 6 million from General Motors to build the Batmobile because the car company would not relinquish creative control .
During production , Peters read in The Wall Street Journal that comic book fans were unsatisfied with the casting of Michael Keaton .
In response , Peters rushed the first film trailer that played in thousands of theaters during Christmas .
It was simply an assemblage of scenes without music , but create enormous anticipation for the film .
DC Comics allowed screenwriter Sam Hamm to write his own comic book miniseries .
Hamm 's stories were collected in the graphic novel Batman : Blind Justice ( ) .
Denys Cowan and Dick Giordano illustrated the artwork .
Blind Justice tells the story of Bruce Wayne trying to solve a series of murders connected to Wayne Enterprises .
It also marks the first appearance of Henri Ducard , who was later used in the rebooted Batman Begins , albeit as an alias for the more notable Ra 's al Ghul .
In the months before Batmans release in June 1989 , a popular culture phenomenon known as " Batmania " began .
Over $ 750 million worth of merchandise was sold .
Cult filmmaker and comic book writer Kevin Smith remembered : " That summer was huge .
You could n't turn around without seeing the Bat - Signal somewhere .
People were cutting it into their fucking heads .
It was just the summer of Batman and if you were a comic book fan it was pretty hot . "
Hachette Book Group USA published a novelization , Batman , written by Craig Shaw Gardner .
It remained on the New York Times Best Seller list throughout June 1989 .
Burton admitted he was annoyed by the publicity .
David Handelman of The New York Observer categorized Batman as a high concept film .
He believed " it is less movie than a corporate behemoth " .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Batman grossed $ 2.2 million in late night previews on June 22 , 1989 on 1,215 screens and grossed $ 40.49 million in 2,194 theaters during its opening weekend .
This broke the opening weekend record , set by Ghostbusters II one week earlier , with $ 29.4 million .
Batman became the fastest film to earn $ 100 million , reaching it in 11 days ( 10 days plus late night previews ) , The film closed on December 14 , 1989 , with a final gross $ 251.2 million in North America and $ 160.15 million internationally , totaling $ 411.35 million .
and was the highest grossing film based on a DC comic book until 2008 's The Dark Knight .
The film 's gross is the 66th highest ever in North American ranks .
Although Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade made the most money worldwide in 1989 , Batman was able to beat The Last Crusade in North America , and made a further $ 150 million in home video sales .
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold more than 60 million tickets in the US .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Batman was criticized by some for being too dark , but nonetheless received positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 72 % based on 68 reviews , with an average rating of 6.6/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " An eerie , haunting spectacle , Batman succeeds as dark entertainment , even if Jack Nicholson 's Joker too often overshadows the title character .
" Metacritic gives an aggregated score of 66 out of 100 , based on 17 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
Many observed that Burton was more interested in the Joker and the art and set production design than Batman or anything else in terms of characterization and screentime .
Comic book fans reacted negatively over the Joker murdering Thomas and Martha Wayne ; in the comic book , Joe Chill is responsible .
Writer Sam Hamm said it was Burton 's idea to have the Joker murder Wayne 's parents .
" The Writer 's Strike was going on , and Tim had the other writers do that .
I also hold innocent to Alfred letting Vicki Vale into the Batcave .
Fans were ticked off with that , and I agree .
That would have been Alfred 's last day of employment at Wayne Manor , " Hamm said .
The songs written by Prince were criticized for being " too out of place " .
While Burton has stated he had no problem with the Prince songs , he was less enthusiastic with their use in the film .
On the film , Burton remarked , " I liked parts of it , but the whole movie is mainly boring to me .
It 's OK , but it was more of a cultural phenomenon than a great movie . "
Despite initial negative reactions from comics fans prior to the film 's release , Keaton 's portrayal of Batman was generally praised .
James Berardinelli called the film entertaining , with the highlight being the production design .
However , he concluded , " the best thing that can be said about Batman is that it led to Batman Returns , which was a far superior effort .
" Variety felt " Jack Nicholson stole every scene " but still greeted the film with positive feedback .
Roger Ebert was highly impressed with the production design , but claimed " Batman is a triumph of design over story , style over substance , a great - looking movie with a plot you ca n't care much about . "
He also called the film " a depressing experience " .
His reviewing partner Gene Siskel disagreed , describing the film as having a ' refreshingly adult ' approach with performances , direction and set design that ' draws you into a psychological world ' .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Anton Furst and Peter Young won the Academy Award for Best Art Direction , while Nicholson was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor ( Musical or Comedy ) .
The British Academy of Film and Television Arts nominated Batman in six categories ( Production Design , Visual Effects , Costume Design , Makeup , Sound and Actor in a Supporting Role for Nicholson ) , but it won none of the categories .
Nicholson , Basinger , the makeup department , and costume designer Bob Ringwood all received nominations at the Saturn Awards .
The film was also nominated for the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation .
The success of Batman prompted Warner Bros. Animation to create the acclaimed , as a result beginning the long - running DC animated universe and helped establish the modern day superhero film genre .
Series co - creator Bruce Timm stated the television show 's Art Deco design was inspired from the film .
Timm commented , " our show would never have gotten made if it had n't been for that first Batman movie . "
Burton joked , " ever since I did Batman , it was like the first dark comic book movie .
Now everyone wants to do a dark and serious superhero movie .
I guess I 'm the one responsible for that trend . "
Batman initiated the original Batman film series and spawned three sequels : Batman Returns ( 1992 ) , Batman Forever ( 1995 ) and Batman & Robin ( 1997 ) ; the latter two of which were directed by Joel Schumacher instead of Burton , and replaced Keaton as Batman with Val Kilmer and George Clooney , respectively .
Executive producers Benjamin Melniker and Michael E. Uslan filed a breach of contract lawsuit in Los Angeles County Superior Court on March 26 , 1992 .
Melniker and Uslan claimed to be " the victims of a sinister campaign of fraud and coercion that has cheated them out of continuing involvement in the production of Batman and its sequels .
We were denied proper credits , and deprived of any financial rewards for our indispensable creative contribution to the success of Batman .
" A superior court judge rejected the lawsuit .
Total revenues of Batman have topped $ 2 billion , with Uslan claiming to have " not seen a penny more than that since our net profit participation has proved worthless . "
Warner Bros. offered the pair an out - of - court pay - off , a sum described by Melniker and Uslan 's attorney as " two popcorns and two Cokes " .
Reflecting on the twentieth anniversary of its release in a retrospective article on Salon.com , film commentator Scott Mendelson noted the continuing impact that Batman has had on the motion film industry , including the increasing importance of opening weekend box office receipts ; the narrowing window between a film 's debut and its video release that caused the demise of second - run movie theaters ; the accelerated acquisition of pre - existing , pre - sold properties for film adaptations that can be readily leveraged for merchandizing tie - ins ; the primacy of the MPAA PG-13 as the target rating for film producers ; and more off - beat , non - traditional casting opportunities for genre films .
The American Film Institute anointed Batman the 46th greatest movie hero and the Joker the 45th greatest movie villain on AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Heroes and Villains .
American Film Institute lists
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies – Nominated
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100
Thrills – Nominated
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Heroes and Villains :
* The Joker –
# 45 Villain
* Batman – # 46 Hero
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movie Quotes : *
" Have you ever danced with the Devil in the pale moonlight ? " –
Nominated
* AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated
* AFI 's 10 Top 10 – Nominated Fantasy Film
HOME VIDEO Section::::Home video .
Batman has been released on various formats , including VHS , Laserdisc , DVD and Blu - ray .
In an unprecedented move at the time , it was made available to buy on VHS in the US on November 15 , less than six months after its theatrical release , at a suggested retail price of only $ 24.95 although most sellers sold it for less .
The 2005 Batman : The Motion Picture Anthology 1989 - 1997 included 2-disc special edition DVDs of the film and all three of its sequels .
The anthology was also released as a 4-disc Blu - ray set in 2009 , with each film and its previous extras contained on a single disc .
Other Blu - ray reissues include a " 30th Anniversary " Digibook with 50-page booklet , and a steelcase edition ; both also include a Digital Copy .
Most recently the " 35th Anniversary " reissue contained the same disc as before and on a second disc , a new 25-minute featurette : " Batman : The Birth of the Modern Blockbuster " .
The film was also included in The Tim Burton Collection DVD and Blu - ray set in 2012 , alongside its first sequel , Batman Returns .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL
LINKS *
Official Warner Bros. Page * Script review of The Batman IGN reviews Tom Mankiewicz 's unproduced script * Behind - the - scenes
photos
* Screenshots