BLUE ANGELS
The Blue Angels is the United States Navy 's flight demonstration squadron , with aviators from the Navy and Marines .
The Blue Angels team was formed in 1946 , making it the second oldest formal flying aerobatic team ( under the same name ) in the world , after the French Patrouille de France formed in 1931 .
The Blue Angels ' six demonstration pilots currently fly the McDonnell Douglas F / A-18 Hornet , typically in more than 70 shows at 34 locations throughout the United States each year , where they still employ many of the same practices and techniques used in their aerial displays in their inaugural 1946 season .
An estimated 11 million spectators view the squadron during air shows each full year .
The Blue Angels also visit more than 50,000 people in a standard show season ( March through November ) in schools and hospitals .
Since 1946 , the Blue Angels have flown for more than 260 million spectators .
As of November 2011 , the Blue Angels received $ 37 million annually out of the annual DoD budget .
MISSION Section::::Mission .
The mission of the United States Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron is " To showcase the pride and professionalism of the United States Navy and Marine Corps by inspiring a culture of excellence and service to country through flight demonstrations and community outreach . "
SHOWS Section::::Shows .
The Blue Angels ' show season runs each year from March until November .
They perform at both military and civilian airfields , and often perform directly over major cities such as San Francisco 's " Fleet Week " maritime festival , Cleveland 's annual Labor Day Air Show , the Chicago Air and Water Show , Jacksonville 's Sea and Sky Spectacular , Milwaukee Air and Water Show , and Seattle 's annual Seafair festival .
A show is also performed for the United States Naval Academy including a flyover of graduation ceremonies .
During their aerobatic demonstration , the Blues fly six F / A-18 Hornet aircraft , split into the Diamond Formation ( Blue Angels 1 through 4 ) and the Lead and Opposing Solos ( Blue Angels 5 and 6 ) .
Most of the show alternates between maneuvers performed by the Diamond Formation and those performed by the Solos .
The Diamond , in tight formation and usually at lower speeds ( 400 mph ) , performs maneuvers such as formation loops , rolls , and transitions from one formation to another .
The Solos showcase the high performance capabilities of their individual aircraft through the execution of high - speed passes , slow passes , fast rolls , slow rolls , and very tight turns .
The highest speed flown during an air show is 700 mph ( just under Mach 1 ) and the lowest speed is 120 mph .
Some of the maneuvers include both solo aircraft performing at once , such as opposing passes ( toward each other in what appears to be a collision course ) and mirror formations ( back - to - back .
belly - to - belly , or wingtip - to - wingtip , with one jet flying inverted ) .
The Solos join the Diamond Formation near the end of the show for a number of maneuvers in the Delta Formation .
The parameters of each show must be tailored in accordance with local weather conditions at showtime : in clear weather the high show is performed ; in overcast conditions a low show is performed , and in limited visibility ( weather permitting )
the flat show is presented .
The high show requires at least an ceiling and visibility of at least from the show 's centerpoint .
The minimum ceilings allowed for low and flat shows are 3,500 feet ( ~1 km ) and , respectively .
AIRCRAFT Section::::Aircraft .
The team flies fighter aircraft which have formerly served in the fleet and are maintained to nearly combat - ready status .
Modifications to each aircraft include removal of the weapons and replacement with the tank that contains smoke - oil used in demonstrations , and outfitting with the control stick spring system for more precise aircraft control input .
Control sticks are tensioned with of force installed on the control stick as to allow the pilot minimal room for uncommanded movement .
The show 's narrator flies Blue Angel 7 , a two - seat F / A-18D Hornet , to show sites .
The Blues use this jet for backup , and to give demonstration rides to VIP civilians .
Three backseats at each show are available ; one of them goes to members of the press , the other two to " Key Influencers " .
The No . 4 slot pilot often flies the No . 7 aircraft in Friday 's " practice " shows .
The Blue Angels use a United States Marine Corps Lockheed C-130 T Hercules , nicknamed " Fat Albert " , for their logistics , carrying spare parts , equipment , and to carry support personnel between shows .
Beginning in 1975 , " Bert " was used for
Jet Assisted Take Off ( JATO ) and short aerial demonstrations just prior to the main event at selected venues , but the JATO demonstration ended in 2009 due to dwindling supplies of rockets . "
Fat Albert Airlines " flies with an all - Marine crew of three officers and five enlisted personnel .
In August 2018 Boeing was awarded a contract to convert nine single - seat F / A-18E Super Hornets and two F / A-18F two - seaters for Blue Angels use , the converted aircraft are due to be completed 2021 .
TEAM MEMBERS Section::::Team members .
All team members , both officer and enlisted , pilots and staff officers , come from the ranks of regular Navy and United States Marine Corps units .
The demonstration pilots and narrator are made up of Navy and USMC Naval Aviators .
Pilots serve two to three years , and position assignments are made according to team needs , pilot experience levels , and career considerations for members .
Other officers in the squadron , including a Naval Flight Officer who serves as the Events Coordinator , three USMC C-130 pilots , an Executive Officer , a Maintenance Officer , a Supply Officer , a Public Affairs Officer , an Administrative Officer , and a Flight Surgeon .
Enlisted members range from E-4 to E-9 and perform all maintenance , administrative , and support functions .
They serve three to four years in the squadron .
After serving with the squadron , members return to fleet assignments .
The officer selection process requires pilots and support officers ( flight surgeon , events coordinator , maintenance officer , supply officer , and public affairs officer ) wishing to become Blue Angels to apply formally via their chain - of - command , with a personal statement , letters of recommendation , and flight records .
Navy and Marine Corps F / A-18 demonstration pilots and naval flight officers are required to have a minimum of 1,250 tactical jet hours and be carrier - qualified .
Marine Corps C-130 demonstration pilots are required to have 1,200 flight hours and be an aircraft commander .
Applicants " rush " the team at one or more airshows , paid out of their own finances , and sit in on team briefs , post - show activities , and social events .
Rushes are asked to tell a joke prior to the brief and are graded by the team as part of the rigorous selection process .
Team members vote in secret on the next year 's members , with no accountability to the higher Navy authority why an applicant was or was not selected .
Selections must be unanimous .
There have been female and racial minority staff officers as Blue Angel members , including minority Blue Angel pilot
Lt .
Andre Webb on the 2018 team .
Flight surgeons serve a two - year term .
They act as the team recorder during air shows and help oversee emergency response planning with the various air show planners .
The first female Blue Angel flight surgeon was Lt .
Tamara Schnurr , who was a member of the 2001 team .
The team leader ( # 1 ) is the Commanding Officer and is always a Navy Commander , who may be promoted to Captain mid - tour if approved for Captain by the selection board .
Pilots of numbers 2–7 are Navy Lieutenants or Lieutenant Commanders , or Marine Corps Captains or Majors .
The number 7 pilot narrates for a year , and then typically flies Opposing and then Lead Solo the following two years , respectively .
The number 3 pilot moves to the number 4 ( slot ) position for his second year .
Blue Angel No .
4 serves as the demonstration safety officer , due largely to the perspective he is afforded from the slot position within the formation , as well as his status as a second - year demonstration pilot .
COMMANDING OFFICER
Section::::Commanding officer .
Commander Eric C. Doyle is from League City , Texas and graduated from Texas A&M with a Bachelor of Science in Civil Engineering in 1996 .
After college , Eric went to Officer Candidate School in Pensacola , Florida , where he was commissioned as an Ensign in the U.S. Navy in December 1996 .
Doyle has accumulated more than 3,000 flight hours and has 600 carrier - arrested landings .
His decorations include the Meritorious Service Medal , seven Strike / Flight Air Medal , five Navy Commendation Medal , a Navy Achievement Medal and various personal , unit and service awards .
He joined the Blue Angels in September 2017 .
TRAINING AND WEEKLY
ROUTINE
Section::::Training and weekly routine .
Annual winter training takes place at NAF El Centro , California , where new and returning pilots hone skills learned in the fleet .
During winter training , the pilots fly two practice sessions per day , six days a week , in order to fly the 120 training missions needed to perform the demonstration safely .
Separation between the formation of aircraft and their maneuver altitude is gradually reduced over the course of about two months in January and February .
The team then returns to their home base in Pensacola , Florida , in March , and continues to practice throughout the show season .
A typical week during the season has practices at NAS Pensacola on Tuesday and Wednesday mornings .
The team then flies to its show venue for the upcoming weekend on Thursday , conducting " circle and arrival " orientation maneuvers upon arrival .
The team flies a " practice " airshow at the show site on Friday .
This show is attended by invited guests but is often open to the general public .
The main airshows are conducted on Saturdays and Sundays , with the team returning home to NAS Pensacola on Sunday evenings after the show .
Monday is the Blues ' day off .
Pilots maneuver the flight stick with their right hand and operate the throttle with their left .
They do not wear G - suits because the air bladders inside repeatedly deflate and inflate , interfering with that stability .
To prevent blood from pooling in their legs , Blue Angel pilots have developed a method for tensing their muscles to prevent blood from pooling in their lower extremities , possibly rendering them unconscious .
HISTORY ORIGINS Section::::History .
Section::::Origins .
Formed as the Flight Exhibition Team in March 1946 at Naval Air Station ( NAS )
Jacksonville , Florida by Chief of Naval Operations , Admiral Chester Nimitz , in an effort to raise awareness of naval aviation and boost morale .
The team performed their first flight demonstration on June 15 , 1946 in Grumman F6F-5 Hellcat aircraft .
The squadron was officially redesignated as the United States Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron in December 1974 .
The Blue Angels name was suggested by Right Wing Pilot Lt . Maurice " Wick " Wickendoll after reading about the Blue Angel nightclub in The New Yorker magazine .
The first official Blue Angels team insignia or " crest " was designed in 1949 by Flight Leader Lt . Cmdr .
Raleigh " Dusty " Rhodes .
The aircraft silhouettes change as the team changes aircraft .
Originally , demonstration aircraft were navy blue ( nearly black ) with gold lettering .
The current shades of blue and yellow were adopted when the team transitioned to the Bearcat in 1946 .
For a single year , in 1949 , the team performed in an all - yellow scheme with blue markings .
1940S Section::::1940s .
On 24 April 1946 , Chief of Naval Operations Admiral Chester Nimitz issued a directive ordering the formation of a flight exhibition team to boost Navy morale , demonstrate naval air power , and maintain public interest in naval aviation .
However , an underlying mission was to help the Navy generate public and political support for a larger allocation of the shrinking defense budget .
In April of that year , Rear Admiral Ralph Davison personally selected Lieutenant Commander Roy Marlin " Butch " Voris , a World War II fighter ace , to assemble and train a flight demonstration team , naming him Officer - in - Charge and Flight Leader .
Voris selected three fellow instructors to join him ( Lt . Maurice " Wick " Wickendoll , Lt . Mel Cassidy , and Lt . Cmdr .
Lloyd Barnard , veterans of the War in the Pacific ) , and they spent countless hours developing the show .
The group perfected its initial maneuvers in secret over the Florida Everglades so that , in Voris ' words , " if anything happened , just the alligators would know " .
The team 's first demonstration before Navy officials took place on 10 May 1946 and was met with enthusiastic approval .
On 15 June Voris led a trio of Grumman F6F-5 Hellcats , specially modified to reduce weight and painted sea blue with gold leaf trim , through their inaugural 15-minute - long performance at their Florida home base , Naval Air Station Jacksonville .
The team employed a North American SNJ Texan , painted and configured to simulate a Japanese Zero , to simulate aerial combat .
This aircraft was later painted yellow and dubbed the " Beetle Bomb " .
This aircraft is said to have been inspired by one of the Spike Jones ' Murdering the Classics series of musical satires , set to the tune ( in part ) of the William Tell Overture as a thoroughbred horse race scene , with " Beetle Bomb " being the " trailing horse " in the lyrics .
The team thrilled spectators with low - flying maneuvers performed in tight formations , and ( according to Voris ) by " keeping something in front of the crowds at all times .
My objective was to beat the Army Air Corps .
If we did that , we 'd get all the other side issues .
I felt that if we were n't the best , it would be my naval career . "
The Blue Angels ' first public demonstration also netted the team its first trophy , which sits on display at the team 's current home at NAS Pensacola .
On 25 August 1946 the squadron upgraded their aircraft to the Grumman F8F-1 Bearcat .
In May 1947 , flight leader Lt . Cmdr .
Bob Clarke replaced Butch Voris as the leader of the team and introduced the famous Diamond Formation , now considered the Blue Angels ' trademark .
In 1949 , the team acquired a Douglas R4D Skytrain for logistics to and from show sites .
The team 's SNJ was also replaced by a F8F-1 " Bearcat " , painted yellow for the air combat routine , inheriting the " Beetle Bomb " nickname .
The Blues transitioned to the straight - wing Grumman Grumman F9F-2 Panther on 13 July 1949 , wherein the F8F-1 " Beetle Bomb " was relegated to solo aerobatics before the main show , until it crashed on takeoff at a training show in Pensacola in 1950 .
Team headquarters shifted from NAS Corpus Christi , Texas , to NAAS Whiting Field , Florida , in the fall of 1949 , announced 14 July 1949 .
1950S
Section::::1950s .
The " Blues " continued to perform nationwide until the start of the Korean War in 1950 , when ( due to a shortage of pilots , and no planes were available ) the team was disbanded and its members were ordered to combat duty .
Once aboard the aircraft carrier the group formed the core of VF-191 , Satan 's Kittens .
The Blue Angels were officially recommissioned on 25 October 1951 , and reported to NAS Corpus Christi , Texas .
Lt .
Cdr .
Voris was again tasked with assembling the team ( he was the first of only two commanding officers to lead them twice ) .
In 1953 the team traded its Sky Train for a Curtiss R5C Commando .
In August 1953 , " Blues " leader LCDR Ray Hawkins became the first naval aviator to survive an ejection at supersonic speeds when his F9F-6 became uncontrollable on a cross - country flight .
The first Marine Corps pilot , Capt Chuck Hiett , joined the team and they relocated to their current home of NAS Pensacola in the winter of 1954 .
It was here they progressed to the swept - wing Grumman F9F-8 Cougar .
In September 1956 , the team added a sixth aircraft to the flight demonstration in the Opposing Solo position , and gave its first performance outside the United States at the International Air Exposition in Toronto , Ontario , Canada .
It also upgraded its logistics aircraft to the Douglas R5D Skymaster .
In January 1957 , the team left its winter training facility at Naval Air Facility El Centro , California for a ten - year period .
For the next ten years , the team would winter at NAS Key West , Florida .
For the 1957 show season , the Blue Angels transitioned to the supersonic Grumman F11F-1 Tiger , first flying the short - nosed , and then the long - nosed versions .
The first Six - Plane Delta Maneuvers were added in the 1958 season .
1960S
Section::::1960s .
In July 1964 , the Blue Angels participated in the Aeronaves de Mexico Anniversary Air Show over Mexico City , Mexico , before an estimated crowd of 1.5 million people .
In 1965 , the Blue Angels conducted a Caribbean island tour , flying at five sites .
Later that year , they embarked on a European tour to a dozen sites , including the Paris Air Show , where they were the only team to receive a standing ovation .
The Blues toured Europe again in 1967 touring six sites .
In 1968 the C-54 Skymaster transport aircraft was replaced with a Lockheed VC-121J Constellation .
The Blues transitioned to the two - seat McDonnell Douglas F-4J Phantom II in 1969 , nearly always keeping the back seat empty for flight demonstrations .
The Phantom was the only plane to be flown by both the " Blues " and the United States Air Force Thunderbirds .
That year they also upgraded to the Lockheed C-121 Super Constellation for logistics .
1970S Section::::1970s .
The Blues received their first U.S. Marine Corps Lockheed KC-130F Hercules in 1970 .
An all - Marine crew manned it .
That year , they went on their first South American tour .
In 1971 , the team conducted its first Far East Tour , performing at a dozen locations in Korea , Japan , Taiwan , Guam , and the Philippines .
In 1972 , the Blue Angels were awarded the Navy 's Meritorious Unit Commendation for the two - year period from 1 March 1970 – 31 December 1971 .
Another European tour followed in 1973 , including air shows in Tehran , Iran , England , France , Spain , Turkey , Greece , and Italy .
In December 1974 the Navy Flight Demonstration Team downsized to the subsonic Douglas A-4F Skyhawk II and was reorganized into the Navy Flight Demonstration Squadron .
This reorganization permitted the establishment of a commanding officer ( the flight leader ) , added support officers , and further redefined the squadron 's mission emphasizing the support of recruiting efforts .
Commander Tony Less was the squadron 's first official commanding officer .
1980S
Section::::1980s .
On 8 November 1986
the Blue Angels completed their 40th anniversary year during ceremonies unveiling their present aircraft , the McDonnell Douglas F / A-18 Hornet .
The power and aerodynamics of the Hornet allows them to perform a slow , high angle of attack " tail sitting " maneuver , and to fly a " dirty " ( landing gear down ) formation loop .
Also in 1986 , LCDR Donnie Cochran , joined the Blue Angels as the first African - American Naval Aviator to be selected .
He would return to lead the team in 1993 .
1990S Section::::1990s .
In 1992 the Blue Angels deployed for a month - long European tour , their first in 19 years , conducting shows in Sweden , Finland , Russia ( first foreign flight demonstration team to perform there ) , Romania , Bulgaria , Italy , the United Kingdom , and Spain .
In 1998 , CDR Patrick Driscoll made the first " Blue Jet " landing on a " haze gray and underway " aircraft carrier , USS Harry S. Truman ( CVN-75 ) .
2000S
Section::::2000s .
In 2006 , the Blue Angels marked their 60th year of performing .
On 30 October 2008 a spokesman for the team announced that the team would complete its last three performances of the year with five jets instead of six .
The change was because one pilot and another officer in the organization had been removed from duty for engaging in an " inappropriate relationship " .
The Navy stated that one of the individuals was a man and the other a woman , one a Marine and the other from the Navy , and that Rear Admiral Mark Guadagnini , chief of Naval air training , was reviewing the situation .
At the next performance at Lackland Air Force Base following the announcement the No . 4 or slot pilot , was absent from the formation .
A spokesman for the team would not confirm the identity of the pilot removed from the team .
On 6 November 2008 both officers were found guilty at an admiral 's mast on unspecified charges but the resulting punishment was not disclosed .
The names of the two members involved were later released on the Pensacola News Journal website / forum as pilot No .
4 USMC Maj .
Clint Harris and the administrative officer , Navy Lt .
Gretchen Doane .
The Fat Albert performed its final JATO demonstration at the 2009 Pensacola Homecoming show , expending their 8 remaining JATO bottles .
This demonstration not only was the last JATO performance of the squadron , but also the final JATO use of the U.S. Marine Corps .
In 2009 , the Blue Angels were inducted into the International Air & Space Hall of Fame at the San Diego Air & Space Museum .
2010S Section::::2010s .
On 22 May 2011 , the Blue Angels were performing at the Lynchburg Regional Airshow in Lynchburg , Virginia , when the Diamond formation flew the Barrel Roll Break maneuver at an altitude that was lower than the required minimum altitude .
The maneuver was aborted , the remainder of the demonstration canceled and all aircraft landed safely .
The next day , the Blue Angels announced that they were initiating a safety stand - down , canceling their upcoming Naval Academy Airshow and returning to their home base in Pensacola , Florida , for additional training and airshow practice .
On 26 May , the Blue Angels announced they would not be flying their traditional fly - over of the Naval Academy Graduation Ceremony and that they were canceling their 28–29 May 2011 performances at the Millville Wings and Wheels Airshow in Millville , New Jersey .
On 27 May 2011 , the Blue Angels announced that Commander Dave Koss , the squadron 's Commanding Officer , would be stepping down .
He was replaced by Captain Greg McWherter , the team 's previous Commanding Officer .
The squadron canceled performances at the Rockford , Illinois Airfest 4–5 June and the Evansville , Indiana Freedom Festival Air Show 11–12 June to allow additional practice and demonstration training under McWherter 's leadership .
Between 2 and 4 September 2011 on Labor Day weekend , the Blue Angels flew for the first time with a 50–50 blend of conventional JP-5 jet fuel and a camelina - based biofuel at Naval Air Station Patuxent River airshow at Patuxent River , Maryland .
McWherter flew an F / A-18 test flight on 17 August and stated there were no noticeable differences in performance from inside the cockpit .
On 1 March 2013 , the U.S. Navy announced that it was cancelling remaining 2013 performances after 1 April 2013 due to sequestration budget constraints .
In October 2013 , Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel , stating that " community and public outreach is a crucial Departmental activity " , announced that the Blue Angels ( along with the U.S. Air Force 's Thunderbirds ) would resume appearing at air shows starting in 2014 , although the number of flyovers will continue to be severely reduced .
In June 2014 , Captain Greg McWherter , flight leader of the Blue Angels for 2008 - 2010 and 2011 - 2012 , received letter of reprimand from Adm. Harry Harris after an admiral 's mast for " failing to stop obvious and repeated instances of sexual harassment , condoning widespread lewd practices within the squadron and engaging in inappropriate and unprofessional discussions with his junior officers " during his second tour with the team .
In July 2014 , Marine Corps Capt .
Katie Higgins , 27 , became the first female pilot to join the Blue Angels .
In July 2015 , Cmdr Bob Flynn became the Blue Angels ' first Executive Officer .
In July 2016 , Boeing was awarded a $ 12 million contract to begin an engineering proposal for converting the Boeing F / A-18E / F Super Hornet for Blue Angels use , with the proposal to be completed by September 2017 .
AIRCRAFT TIMELINE
Section::::Aircraft timeline .
The " Blues " have flown eight different demonstration aircraft and five support aircraft models :
Demonstration aircraft
* Grumman F6F-5 Hellcat : June – August 1946 *
* Grumman F8F-1 Bearcat : August 1946 – 1949 * * Grumman F9F-2 Panther : 1949 – June 1950 ( first jet ) ; F9F-5 Panther : 1951 - Winter 1954/55
* * Grumman F9F-8 Cougar : Winter 1954/55 - mid - season 1957 ( swept - wing )
* * Grumman F11F-1
( F-11 ) Tiger : mid - season 1957 – 1968 ( first supersonic jet )
* * McDonnell Douglas F-4J Phantom II : 1969 – December 1974 * * Douglas A-4F Skyhawk : December 1974 – November 1986 * * McDonnell Douglas F / A-18A / B / C / D Hornet ( F / A-18B / D are # 7 aircraft ) :
November 1986 – present * Support aircraft * Douglas R4D Skytrain : 1949–1955 * *
Curtiss R5C Commando : 1953
* * Douglas R5D Skymaster :
1956–1968 * * Lockheed C-121 Super Constellation : 1969–1973 * * Lockheed C-130 Hercules " Fat Albert " :
1970–present *
Miscellaneous aircraft * North American SNJ Texan " Beetle Bomb " ( used to simulate a Japanese A6 M Zero aircraft in demonstrations during the late 1940s )
* * Lockheed T-33 Shooting Star ( Used during the 1950s as a VIP transport aircraft for the team )
*
* Vought F7U Cutlass ( two of the unusual F7Us were received in late 1952 and flown as a side demonstration during the 1953 season but they were not a part of their regular formations which at the time used the F9F Panther .
Pilots and ground crew found it unsatisfactory and plans to use it as the team 's primary aircraft were cancelled ) .
* SHOW ROUTINE Section::::Show routine .
This show routine was used in 2017 .
* Fat Albert ( C-130 ) – high - performance takeoff ( Low Transition ) * Fat Albert – Parade Pass ( Photo Pass .
The plane banks around the front of the crowd )
* Fat Albert – Flat Pass * Fat Albert – Head on Pass * Fat Albert – Short - Field Assault Landing
* FA-18 Engine Start - Up and Taxi Out
* Diamond Take - off ( Either a low transition with turn , loop on takeoff , a half - Cuban 8 takeoff , or a Half Squirrel Cage )
* Solos Take - off ( Blue Angel # 5 :
Dirty Roll on Take - Off ; Blue Angel # 6 : Low Transition to High Performance Climb )
* Diamond 360 : Aircraft 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 are in their signature 18 " wingtip - to - canopy diamond formation .
* Opposing Knife - Edge Pass * Diamond Roll : The whole diamond formation rolls as a single entity .
* Opposing Inverted to Inverted Rolls
* Diamond Aileron Roll : All 4 diamond jets perform simultaneous aileron rolls .
* Fortus : Solos flying in carrier landing configuration with No.5 inverted , establishing a " mirror image " effect .
* Diamond Dirty Loop : The diamond flies a loop with all 4 jets in the carrier landing configuration .
* Minimum Radius Turn ( Highest G maneuver .
No.5 flies a " horizontal loop " pulling 7 Gs to maintain a tight radius ) *
Double Farvel : Diamond formation flat pass with aircraft 1 and 4 inverted .
*
Opposing Minimum Radius Turn
* Echelon Parade * Opposing Horizontal Rolls * Left Echelon Roll : The roll is made into the Echelon , which is somewhat difficult for the outside aircraft .
* Sneak Pass : the fastest speed of the show is about 700 mph ( just under Mach 1 at sea level )
Video * Line - Abreast Loop – the most difficult formation maneuver to do well .
No.5 joins the diamond as the 5 jets fly a loop in a straight line
* Opposing Four - Point Hesitation Roll * Vertical Break
* Opposing Vertical Pitch * Barrel Roll Break
* Tuck Over Roll * Low Break Cross
* Section High - Alpha Pass : ( tail sitting ) , the show 's slowest maneuver * Diamond Burner 270 *
Delta Roll
* Fleur de Lis * Solos Pass to Rejoin , Diamond flies a loop * Loop Break Cross ( Delta Break ) :
After the break the aircraft separate in six different directions , perform half Cuban Eights then cross in the center of the performance area .
* Delta Breakout
* Delta Pitch Up Carrier Break to Land ACCIDENTS Section::::Accidents .
During its history , 27 Blue Angels pilots have been killed in air show or training accidents .
Through the 2017 season there have been 261 pilots in the squadron 's history , giving the job a roughly 10 % fatality rate .
* 29 September 1946 –
Lt .
Ross " Robby " Robinson was killed during a performance when a wingtip broke off his Bearcat , sending him into an unrecoverable spin .
* 1952 – Two Panthers collided during a demonstration in Corpus Christi , Texas and one pilot was killed .
The team resumed performances two weeks later .
* 2 August 1958 -
Lt .
John R. Dewenter landed , wheels up at Buffalo Niagara International Airport after experiencing engine troubles during a show in Clarence , NY .
The Grumman F-11 Tiger landed on Runway 23 but exited airport property coming to rest in the intersection of Genesee Street and Dick Road , nearly hitting a gas station .
Lt .
Dewenter was uninjured , but the plane was a total loss .
* 14 October 1958 – Cmdr .
Robert Nicholls Glasgow died during an orientation flight just days after reporting for duty as the new Blue Angels leader .
* 15 March 1964 –
Lt .
George L. Neale , 29 , was killed during an attempted emergency landing at Apalach Airport near Apalachicola , Florida .
Lt .
Neale 's F-11A Tiger had experienced mechanical difficulties during a flight from West Palm Beach , Florida to NAS Pensacola , causing him to attempt the emergency landing .
Failing to reach the airport , he ejected from the aircraft on final approach , but his parachute did not have sufficient time to fully deploy .
* 2 September 1966 –
Lt . Cmdr .
Dick Oliver crashed his Tiger and was killed at the Canadian International Air Show in Toronto .
* 1 February 1967 –
Lt Frank Gallagher was killed when his Tiger stalled during a practice Half Cuban 8 maneuver and spun into the ground .
* 18 February 1967 – Capt .
Ronald Thompson was killed when his Tiger struck the ground during a practice formation loop .
* 14 January 1968 – Opposing solo
Lt .
Bill Worley was killed when his Tiger crashed during a practice double immelman .
* 30 August 1970 –
Lt .
Ernie Christensen
belly - landed his F-4J Phantom at the Eastern Iowa Airport in Cedar Rapids when he inadvertently left the landing gear in the up position .
He ejected safely , while the aircraft slid off the runway .
* 4 June 1971 – CDR Harley Hall safely ejected after his Phantom caught fire and crashed during practice over Narragansett Bay near the ex - NAS Quonset Point in Rhode Island .
* 14 February 1972 –
Lt .
Larry Watters was killed when his F-4J Phantom II struck the ground , upright , while practicing inverted flight , during winter training at NAF El Centro .
* 8 March 1973 –
Capt .
John Fogg , Lt .
Marlin Wiita and LCDR Don Bentley survived a multi - aircraft mid - air collision during practice over the Superstition Mountains in California .
* 26 July 1973 – 2 pilots and a crew chief were killed in a mid - air collision between 2 Phantoms over Lakehurst , NJ during an arrival practice .
Team Leader LCDR Skip Umstead , Capt .
Mike Murphy and ADJ1 Ron Thomas perished .
The rest of the season was cancelled after this incident .
* 22 February 1977 – Opposing solo
Lt .
Nile Kraft was killed when his Skyhawk struck the ground during practice .
* 8 November 1978 – One of the solo Skyhawks struck the ground after low roll during arrival maneuvers at NAS Miramar .
Navy Lieutenant Michael Curtin was killed .
* April 1980 – Lead Solo Lt .
Jim Ross was unhurt when his Skyhawk suffered a fuel line fire during a show at NS Roosevelt Roads , Puerto Rico .
LT Ross stayed with and landed the plane which left the end of the runway and taxied into the woods after a total hydraulic failure upon landing .
* 22 February 1982 –
Lt .
Cmdr Stu Powrie , Lead Solo was killed when his Skyhawk struck the ground during winter training at Naval Air Facility El Centro , California just after a dirty loop .
* 13 July 1985 – Lead and Opposing Solo Skyhawks collided during a show at Niagara Falls , killing opposing solo Lt . Cmdr .
Mike Gershon .
Lt .
Andy Caputi ejected and parachuted to safety .
* 12 February 1987 – Lead solo Lt .
Dave Anderson ejected from his Hornet after a dual engine flameout during practice near El Centro , CA .
* 23 January 1990 – Two Blue Angel Hornets suffered a mid - air collision during a practice at El Centro .
Marine Corps Maj .
Charles Moseley ejected safely .
Cmdr .
Pat Moneymaker was able to land his airplane , which then required a complete right wing replacement .
* 28 October 1999 –
Lt . Cmdr .
Kieron O'Connor , flying in the front seat of a two - seat Hornet , and recently selected demonstration pilot Lt .
Kevin Colling ( in the back seat ) struck the ground during circle and arrival maneuvers in Valdosta , Georgia .
Neither pilot survived .
* 1 December 2004 –
Lt .
Ted Steelman ejected from his F / A-18 approximately one mile off Perdido Key after his aircraft struck the water , suffering catastrophic engine and structural damage .
He suffered minor injuries .
* 21 April 2007 –
Lt . Cmdr .
Kevin J. Davis crashed his Hornet near the end of the Marine Corps Air Station Beaufort airshow in Beaufort , South Carolina , and was killed .
* 2 June 2016 –
Capt .
Jeff " Kooch " Kuss , ( Opposing Solo , Blue Angel No . 6 ) , died just after takeoff while performing the Split - S maneuver in his F / A-18 Hornet during a practice run for The Great Tennessee Air Show in Smyrna , Tennessee .
The Navy investigation found that Capt . Kuss performed the maneuver at too low of an altitude while failing to retard the throttle out of afterburner , causing him to fall too fast and recover at too low of an altitude .
Capt .
Kuss ejected , but his parachute was immediately engulfed in flames , causing him to fall to his death .
Kuss ' body was recovered multiple yards away from the crash site .
The cause of death was blunt force trauma to the head .
The investigation also cites weather and pilot fatigue as additional causes to the crash .
In a strange twist , Captain Kuss ' fatal crash happened hours after the Blue Angels ' fellow pilots in the United States Air Force Thunderbirds suffered a crash of their own following the United States Air Force Academy graduation ceremony earlier that day .
OTHER INCIDENTS INVOLVING FORMER BLUE ANGELS * 8 March 1951 – LCDR Johnny Magda , while flying in Korea , was the first former Blue Angel killed in combat .
* 27 January 1973 – CDR Harley Hall ( 1970 team leader ) was shot down flying an F-4J over Vietnam , and was officially listed as missing in action .
IN THE MEDIA
* The Blue Angels was a dramatic television series , starring Dennis Cross and Don Gordon , inspired by the team 's exploits and filmed with the cooperation of the Navy .
It aired in syndication from 26 September 1960 to 3 July 1961 .
*
The Blue Angels were the subject of " Flying Blue Angels " , a pop song recorded by George , Johnny and the Pilots ( Coed Co 555 ) , that debuted on Billboard Magazine 's " Bubbling Under the Hot 100 " chart on 11 September 1961 .
* is a 1975 documentary film , written by Dune author Frank Herbert , featuring the team in practice and performance during their F-4J Phantom era ; many of the aerial photography techniques pioneered in Threshold were later used in the film Top Gun .
* " To Fly ! , a short IMAX film featured at the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum since its 1976 opening features footage from a camera on a Blue Angels A4 Skyhawk tail as the pilot performs in a show .
https://www.si.edu/imax/movie/fly
*
In 2005 , the Discovery Channel aired a documentary miniseries , Blue Angels : A Year in the Life , focusing on the intricate day - to - day details of that year 's training and performance schedule .
*
The video for the American rock band Van Halen 's 1986 release " Dreams " consists of Blue Angels performance footage .
The video was originally shot featuring the Blues in the A-4 Skyhawk .
A later video features the F / A-18 Hornet .
*
The Blue Angels appeared in the episodes " Death Begins at Forty " and " Insult to Injury " of Tim Allen 's television sitcom Home Improvement as themselves .
*
The Blue Angels made a brief appearance on I Love Toy Trains part 3 .
*
The Blue Angels were featured in the IMAX film Magic of Flight .
*
In 2009 , the MythBusters enlisted the aid of Blue Angels to help test the myth that a sonic boom could shatter glass .
*
The Blue Angels are a major part of the novel Shadows of Power by James W. Huston .
* Blue Angels and the Thunderbirds is a 4 disc SkyTrax DVD set © 2012
TOPICS Entertainment ,
Inc. It features highlights from airshows performed in the United States shot from inside and outside the cockpit including interviews of squadron aviators , plus aerial combat footage taken during Desert Storm , histories of the two flying squadrons from 1947 through 2008 including on - screen notes on changes in Congressional budgeting and research program funding , photo gallery slide shows , and two " forward - looking " sequences Into the 21st Century detailing developments of the F / A-18 Hornet 's C and E and F models ( 10 min . ) and footage of the F-22 with commentary ( 20 min . ) .
*
In the television micro - series , Anakin Skywalker 's starfighter is named Azure Angel , after the Blue Angels team .
*
In , the Wonderbolts are based on the Blue Angels .
NOTABLE ALUMNI * Chuck Brady – Astronaut * Donnie Cochran – first African - American Blue Angels aviator and commander * Edward L. Feightner – World War II fighter ace and Lead Solo
* Anthony A. Less - First Commanding Officer of Blue Angels squadron , numerous other commands including Naval Air Forces Atlantic Fleet * Robert L. Rasmussen – Aviation Artist * Raleigh Rhodes — World War II veteran and third leader of the Blue Angels * Roy Marlin Voris –
First Blue Angel leader * Patrick M. Walsh – Left Wingman and Slot Pilot , 1985–1987 ; Commander of the U.S. Pacific Fleet , Former Vice Chief of Naval Operations and White House
Fellow
SEE ALSO
* List of United States Navy aircraft squadrons
* United States Air Force Thunderbirds * United States Marine Corps Aviation
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* ( 2012 ) .
" My incredible flight aboard the Blue Angels " By Charles Atkeison * Blue Angels Timeline ( 1946–1980 ) accessed 10 November 2005 .
* " Grumman and the Blue Angels " article by William C. Barto at the Grumman Memorial Park official website – accessed 15 October 2005 .
* " First Blue : The story of World War II Ace Butch Voris and the Creation of the Blue Angels " by Robert K. Wilcox , Thomas Dunne Books
/ St .
Martins Press , 2004 , robertkwilcox.com EXTERNAL LINKS * Blue Angels , official U.S. Navy web site
* Complete Blue Angels History