CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) is the leading national public health institute of the United States .
The CDC is a United States federal agency under the Department of Health and Human Services and is headquartered in Atlanta , Georgia .
Its main goal is to protect public health and safety through the control and prevention of disease , injury , and disability in the US and internationally .
The CDC focuses national attention on developing and applying disease control and prevention .
It especially focuses its attention on infectious disease , food borne pathogens , environmental health , occupational safety and health , health promotion , injury prevention and educational activities designed to improve the health of United States citizens .
In addition , the CDC researches and provides information on non - infectious diseases such as obesity and diabetes and is a founding member of the International Association of National Public Health Institutes .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Communicable Disease Center was founded July 1 , 1946 , as the successor to the World War II Malaria Control in War Areas program of the Office of National Defense Malaria Control Activities .
Preceding its founding , organizations with global influence in malaria control were the Malaria Commission of the League of Nations and the Rockefeller Foundation .
The Rockefeller Foundation greatly supported malaria control , sought to have the governments take over some of its efforts , and collaborated with the agency .
The new agency was a branch of the U.S. Public Health Service and Atlanta was chosen as the location because malaria was endemic in the Southern United States .
The agency changed names ( see infobox on top ) before adopting the name Communicable Disease Center in 1946 .
Offices were located on the sixth floor of the Volunteer Building on Peachtree Street .
With a budget at the time of about $ 1 million , 59 percent of its personnel were engaged in mosquito abatement and habitat control with the objective of control and eradication of malaria in the United States ( see National Malaria Eradication Program ) .
Among its 369 employees , the main jobs at CDC were originally entomology and engineering .
In CDC 's initial years , more than six and a half million homes were sprayed , mostly with DDT .
In 1946 , there were only seven medical officers on duty and an early organization chart was drawn , somewhat fancifully , in the shape of a mosquito .
Under Joseph Walter Mountin , the CDC continued to advocate for public health issues and pushed to extend its responsibilities to many other communicable diseases .
In 1947 , the CDC made a token payment of $ 10 to Emory University for of land on Clifton Road in DeKalb County , still the home of CDC headquarters today .
CDC employees collected the money to make the purchase .
The benefactor behind the " gift " was Robert W. Woodruff , chairman of the board of The Coca - Cola Company .
Woodruff had a long - time interest in malaria control , which had been a problem in areas where he went hunting .
The same year , the PHS transferred its San Francisco based plague laboratory into the CDC as the Epidemiology Division , and a new Veterinary Diseases Division was established .
An Epidemic Intelligence Service ( EIS ) was established in 1951 , originally due to biological warfare concerns arising from the Korean War ; it evolved into two - year postgraduate training program in epidemiology , and a prototype for Field Epidemiology Training Programs ( FETP ) , now found in numerous countries , reflecting CDC 's influence in promoting this model internationally .
The mission of CDC expanded beyond its original focus on malaria to include sexually transmitted diseases when the Venereal Disease Division of the U.S. Public Health Service ( PHS ) was transferred to the CDC in 1957 .
Shortly thereafter , Tuberculosis Control was transferred ( in 1960 ) to the CDC from PHS , and then in 1963 the Immunization program was established .
It became the National Communicable Disease Center ( NCDC ) effective July 1 , 1967 .
The organization was renamed the Center for Disease Control ( CDC ) on June 24 , 1970 , and Centers for Disease Control effective October 14 , 1980 .
An act of the United States Congress appended the words " and Prevention " to the name effective October 27 , 1992 .
However , Congress directed that the initialism CDC be retained because of its name recognition .
Currently the CDC focus has broadened to include chronic diseases , disabilities , injury control , workplace hazards , environmental health threats , and terrorism preparedness .
CDC combats emerging diseases and other health risks , including birth defects , West Nile virus , obesity , avian , swine , and pandemic flu , E. coli , and bioterrorism , to name a few .
The organization would also prove to be an important factor in preventing the abuse of penicillin .
In May 1994 the CDC admitted having sent several biological warfare agents to the Iraqi government from 1984 through 1989 , including Botulinum toxin , West Nile virus , Yersinia pestis and Dengue fever virus .
On April 21 , 2005 , then – CDC Director Julie Gerberding formally announced the reorganization of CDC to " confront the challenges of 21st - century health threats " .
The four Coordinating Centers — established under the G. W. Bush Administration and Gerberding—"diminished the influence of national centers under [ their ] umbrella " , and were ordered cut under the Obama Administration in 2009 .
Today , the CDC 's Biosafety Level 4 laboratories are among the few that exist in the world , and serve as one of only two official repositories of smallpox in the world .
The second smallpox store resides at the State Research Center of Virology and Biotechnology VECTOR in the Russian Federation .
The CDC revealed in 2014 that it had discovered several misplaced smallpox samples and also that lab workers had potentially been infected with anthrax .
ORGANIZATION Section::::Organization .
The CDC is organized into " Centers , Institutes , and Offices " ( CIOs ) , with each organizational unit implementing the agency 's activities in a particular area of expertise while also providing intra - agency support and resource - sharing for cross - cutting issues and specific health threats .
Generally , CDC " Offices " are subdivided into Centers , which in turn are composed of Divisions and Branches .
However , the Center for Global Health and the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health are freestanding organizational units and do not belong to a parent Office .
The current CIOs are : * CDC Washington Office * Center for Global Health * National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health * Office for State , Tribal , Local and Territorial Support * Office of Equal Employment Opportunity * Office of Infectious Diseases
* National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases
* National Center for HIV / AIDS , Viral Hepatitis , STD , and TB Prevention
* National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases
* Office of Minority Health and Health Equity * Office of Noncommunicable Diseases , Injury and Environmental Health
* National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion
* National Center for Environmental Health / Agency for Toxic Substances and
Disease Registry * National Center for Injury Prevention and Control * National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities * Office of Public Health Preparedness and Response * Office of Public Health Scientific Services
* Center for Surveillance , Epidemiology and Laboratory Services
* National Center for Health Statistics * Office of the Associate Director for Communication * Office of the Associate Director for Laboratory Science and Safety * Office of the Associate Director for Policy * Office of the Associate Director for Science * Office of the Chief of Staff * Office of the Chief Operating Officer
The Office of Public Health Preparedness was created during the 2001 anthrax attacks shortly after the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 .
Its purpose was to coordinate among the government the response to a range of biological terrorism threats .
BUDGET AND OPERATIONS Section::::Budget and operations .
CDC 's budget for fiscal year 2018 is $ 11.9 billion .
In addition to its Atlanta headquarters , the CDC has other locations in the United States and Puerto Rico .
Those locations include Anchorage ; Cleveland ; Cincinnati ; Detroit ; Fort Collins ; Hyattsville ; Morgantown ; Pittsburgh ; Research Triangle Park ; San Juan , Puerto Rico ; Spokane , Washington ; and Washington ,
D.C. The CDC offers grants that help many organizations each year advance health , safety and awareness at the community level throughout the United States .
The CDC awards over 85 percent of its annual budget through these grants .
WORKFORCE Section::::Workforce .
As of 2008 , CDC staff numbered approximately 15,000 ( including 6,000 contractors and 840 Commissioned Corps officers ) in 170 occupations .
Eighty percent held bachelor 's degrees or higher ; almost half had advanced degrees ( a master 's degree or a doctorate such as a PhD , D.O. , or M.D. ) .
Common CDC job titles include engineer , entomologist , epidemiologist , biologist , physician , veterinarian , behavioral scientist , nurse , medical technologist , economist , public health advisor , health communicator , toxicologist , chemist , computer scientist , and statistician .
The CDC also operates a number of notable training and fellowship programs , including those indicated below .
EPIDEMIC INTELLIGENCE SERVICE ( EIS ) Section::::Epidemic Intelligence Service ( EIS ) .
The Epidemic Intelligence Service ( EIS ) is composed of " boots - on - the - ground disease detectives " who investigate public health problems domestically and globally .
When called upon by a governmental body , EIS officers may embark on short - term epidemiological assistance assignments , or " Epi - Aids " , to provide technical expertise in containing and investigating disease outbreaks .
The EIS program is a model for the international Field Epidemiology Training Program .
PUBLIC HEALTH ASSOCIATES PROGRAM
Section::::Public Health Associates Program .
The CDC also operates the Public Health Associate Program ( PHAP ) , a two - year paid fellowship for recent college graduates to work in public health agencies all over the United States .
PHAP was founded in 2007 and currently has 159 associates in 34 states .
LEADERSHIP Section::::Leadership .
The Director of CDC is a Senior Executive Service position that may be filled either by a career employee , or as a political appointment that does not require Senate confirmation , with the latter method typically being used .
The director serves at the pleasure of the President and may be fired at any time .
The CDC director concurrently serves as the Administrator of the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry .
Sixteen directors have served the CDC or its predecessor agencies .
* Louis L. Williams Jr. , MD ( 1942–1943 )
* Mark D. Hollis , ScD ( 1944–1946 ) * Raymond A. Vonderlehr , MD ( 1947–1951 )
* Justin M. Andrews , ScD ( 1952–1953 )
* Theodore J. Bauer , MD ( 1953–1956 )
* Robert J. Anderson , MD , MPH ( 1956–1960 )
* Clarence A. Smith , MD , MPH ( 1960–1962 )
* James L. Goddard , MD , MPH ( 1962–1966 )
* David J. Sencer , MD , MPH ( 1966–1977 )
* William H. Foege , MD , MPH ( 1977–1983 ) * James O. Mason , MD , MPH ,
Ph . D ( 1983–1989 )
* William L. Roper , MD , MPH ( 1990–1993 )
* David Satcher , MD , PhD ( 1993–1998 )
* Jeffrey P. Koplan , MD , MPH ( 1998–2002 )
* Julie Gerberding , MD , MPH ( 2002–2008 )
* Thomas R. Frieden , MD , MPH ( 2009–Jan 2017 )
* Anne Schuchat , MD , RADM USPHS
( Jan – July 2017 , acting )
* Brenda Fitzgerald , MD ( July 2017–Jan 2018 )
* Anne Schuchat , MD ( Jan – Mar 2018 , acting )
* Robert R. Redfield , MD ( March 2018–present ) DATASETS AND SURVEY SYSTEMS
* CDC Scientific Data , Surveillance , Health Statistics , and Laboratory Information .
* Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System ( BRFSS ) , the world 's largest , ongoing telephone health - survey system .
* Mortality Medical Data System .
* Abortion statistics in the United States AREAS OF FOCUS COMMUNICABLE DISEASES Section::::Areas of focus .
Section::::Communicable diseases .
The CDC 's programs address more than 400 diseases , health threats , and conditions that are major causes of death , disease , and disability .
The CDC 's website has information on various infectious ( and noninfectious ) diseases , including smallpox , measles , and others .
INFLUENZA Section::::Influenza .
The CDC has launched campaigns targeting the transmission of influenza , including the H1N1 swine flu , and launched websites to educate people in proper hygiene .
DIVISION OF SELECT AGENTS AND TOXINS Section::::Division of Select Agents and Toxins .
Within the division are two programs : the Federal Select Agent Program ( FSAP ) and the Import Permit Program .
The FSAP is run jointly with an office within the U.S. Department of Agriculture , regulating agents that can cause disease in humans , animals , and plants .
The Import Permit Program regulates the importation of " infectious biological materials . "
The CDC runs a program that protects the public from rare and dangerous substances such as anthrax and the Ebola virus .
The program , called the Federal Select Agent Program , calls for inspections of labs in the U.S. that work with dangerous pathogens .
During the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa , the CDC helped coordinate the return of two infected American aid workers for treatment at Emory University Hospital , the home of a special unit to handle highly infectious diseases .
As a response to the 2014 Ebola outbreak , Congress passed a Continuing Appropriations Resolution allocating $ 30,000,000 towards CDC 's efforts to fight the virus .
NON - COMMUNICABLE
DISEASES Section::::Non - communicable diseases .
The CDC also works on non - communicable diseases , including chronic diseases caused by obesity , physical inactivity and tobacco - use .
ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE Section::::Antibiotic resistance .
The CDC implemented their National Action Plan for Combating Antibiotic Resistant Bacteria as a measure against the spread of antibiotic resistance in the United States .
This initiative has a budget of $ 161 million and includes the development of the Antibiotic Resistance Lab Network .
GLOBAL HEALTH Section::::Global health .
The CDC works with other organizations around the world to address global health challenges and contain disease threats at their source .
It works closely with many international organizations such as the World Health Organization ( WHO ) as well as ministries of health and other groups on the front lines of outbreaks .
The agency maintains staff in more than 60 countries , including some from the U.S. but even more from the countries in which it operates .
The agency 's global divisions include the Division of Global HIV and TB ( DGHT ) , the Division of Parasitic Diseases and Malaria ( DPDM ) , the Division of Global Health Protection ( DGHP ) , and the Global Immunization Division ( GID ) .
The CDC is integral in working with the WHO to implement the International Health Regulations ( IHR ) , a legally binding agreement between 196 countries to prevent , control , and report on the international spread of disease , through initiatives including the Global Disease Detection Program ( GDD ) .
The CDC is also a lead implementer of key U.S. global health initiatives such as the President 's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief ( PEPFAR ) and the President 's Malaria Initiative .
TRAVELERS ' HEALTH
Section::::Travelers ' health .
The CDC collects and publishes health information for travelers in a comprehensive book , CDC Health Information for International Travel , which is commonly known as the " yellow book .
" The book is available online and in print as a new edition every other year and includes current travel health guidelines , vaccine recommendations , and information on specific travel destinations .
The CDC also issues travel health notices on its website , consisting of three levels : " Watch " :
Level 1 ( practice usual precautions ) " Alert " : Level 2 ( practice enhanced precautions )
" Warning " :
Level 3 ( avoid nonessential travel ) FOUNDATION Section::::Foundation .
The CDC Foundation operates independently from CDC as a private , nonprofit 501(c)(3 ) organization incorporated in the State of Georgia .
The creation of the Foundation was authorized by section 399F of the Public Health Service Act to support the mission of CDC in partnership with the private sector , including organizations , foundations , businesses , educational groups , and individuals .
POPULAR CULTURE AND CONTROVERSIES Section::::Popular culture and controversies .
Historically , the CDC has been relatively free of political manipulation .
TUSKEGEE STUDY OF UNTREATED SYPHILIS IN THE NEGRO MALE Section::::Tuskegee Study of Untreated Syphilis in the Negro Male .
For 15 years , the CDC had direct oversight over the Tuskegee syphilis experiment .
In the study , which lasted from 1932 to 1972 , a group of African American men ( nearly 400 of whom had syphilis ) were studied to learn more about the disease .
Notably , the disease was left untreated in the research subjects and they never gave their informed consent to serve as research subjects .
The Tuskegee Study was initiated in 1932 by the Public Health Service .
The CDC took over the study in 1957 .
The CDC 's response to the AIDS crisis in the 1980s has been criticized for promoting some public health policies that harmed HIV+ people and for providing ineffective public education .
The agency 's response to the 2001 anthrax attacks was also criticized for ineffective communication with other public health agencies and with the public .
CDC ZOMBIE
APOCALYPSE
OUTREACH
CAMPAIGN Section::::CDC zombie apocalypse outreach campaign .
On May 16 , 2011 , the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 's blog what to do to prepare for a zombie invasion .
While the article did not claim that such a scenario was possible , it did use the popular culture appeal as a means of urging citizens to prepare for all potential hazards , such as earthquakes , tornadoes , and floods .
According to David Daigle , the Associate Director for Communications , Public Health Preparedness and Response , the idea arose when his team was discussing their upcoming hurricane - information campaign and Daigle mused that " we say pretty much the same things every year , in the same way , and I just wonder how many people are paying attention .
"
A social - media employee mentioned that the subject of zombies had come up a lot on Twitter when she had been tweeting about the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster and radiation .
The team realized that a campaign like this would most likely reach a different audience from the one that normally pays attention to hurricane - preparedness warnings and went to work on the zombie campaign , launching it right before hurricane season began .
" The whole idea was , if you 're prepared for a zombie apocalypse , you 're prepared for pretty much anything , " said Daigle .
Once the blog article became popular , the CDC announced an open contest for YouTube submissions of the most creative and effective videos covering preparedness for a zombie apocalypse ( or apocalypse of any kind ) , to be judged by the " CDC Zombie Task Force " .
Submissions were open until October 11 , 2011 .
They also released a zombie - themed graphic novella available on their website .
Zombie - themed educational materials for teachers are available on the site .
GUN VIOLENCE Section::::Gun violence .
One area of current partisan dispute related to CDC funding is studying gun violence .
The 1996 Dickey Amendment states " none of the funds made available for injury prevention and control at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention may be used to advocate or promote gun control " .
Advocates for gun control oppose the amendment and have tried to overturn it .
In 1992 , Mark L. Rosenberg and five CDC colleagues founded the CDC 's National Center for Injury Prevention and Control , with an annual budget of c. $ 260,000 that focused on " identifying the root causes of firearm deaths and the best methods to prevent them " .
Their first report which was published in the New England Journal of Medicine in 1993 , entitled " Gun Ownership as a Risk Factor for Homicide in the Home " reported that the " mere presence of a gun in a home increased the risk of a firearm - related death by 2.7 percent , and suicide fivefold — a " huge " increase . "
In response , the NRA launched a " campaign to shut down the Injury Center .
" Doctors for Responsible Gun Ownership and Doctors for Integrity and Policy Research joined the pro - gun effort and by 1995 , politicians also supported the pro - gun initiative .
In 1996 , Jay Dickey ( R ) Arkansas introduced the Dickey Amendment statement " which stated " none of the funds made available for injury prevention and control at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention may be used to advocate or promote gun control " as a rider in the 1996 appropriations bill . "
In 1997 , " Congress redirected all of the money previously earmarked for gun violence research to the study of traumatic brain injury . "
David Satcher , who was the CDC head from 1993 to 1998 advocated for gun violence research until he left in 1998 .
In 1999 Rosenberg was fired .
Over a dozen " public health insiders , including current and former CDC senior leaders " told The Trace interviewers that CDC senior leaders took an overly cautious stance in their interpretation of the Dickey amendment .
They could have done much more .
Rosenberg told The Trace in 2016 , " Right now , there is nothing stopping them from addressing this life - and - death national problem . "
The American Medical Association , the American Psychological Association and the American Academy of Pediatrics sent a letter to the leaders of the Senate Appropriations Committee in 2013 asking them " to support at least $ 10 million within the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) in FY 2014 along with sufficient new funding at the National Institutes of Health to support research into the causes and prevention of gun violence .
Furthermore , we urge Members to oppose any efforts to reduce , eliminate , or condition CDC funding related to gun violence prevention research .
" Congress maintained the ban in subsequent budgets .
LANGUAGE GUIDELINES Section::::Language guidelines .
In December 2017 , The Washington Post reported that the Trump administration had issued a list of seven words that were forbidden in official CDC documentation .
Yuval Levin , after contacting HHS officials , wrote in National Review that the Post story was not accurate .
PUBLICATIONS
* CDC publications
* State of CDC report * CDC Programs in Brief * Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
* Emerging Infectious Diseases ( monthly journal )
* Preventing Chronic Disease *
Vital statistics SEE ALSO * U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission * Haddon Matrix * Home Safety Council * National Highway Traffic Safety Administration * National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
REFERENCES CITATIONS SOURCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* CDC official website
* CDC in the Federal Register
* CDC
Online Newsroom
* CDC Public Health Image Library
* CDC Global Communications Center * CDC Emerging Infectious Diseases LaboratoryAtlanta , Georgia