ADIABATIC PROCESS
In thermodynamics , an adiabatic process is one that occurs without transfer of heat or mass of substances between a thermodynamic system and its surroundings .
In an adiabatic process , energy is transferred to the surroundings only as work .
The adiabatic process provides a rigorous conceptual basis for the theory used to expound the first law of thermodynamics , and as such it is a key concept in thermodynamics .
Some chemical and physical processes occur so rapidly that they may be conveniently described by the term " adiabatic approximation " , meaning that there is not enough time for the transfer of energy as heat to take place to or from the system .
By way of example , the adiabatic flame temperature is an idealization that uses the " adiabatic approximation " so as to provide an upper limit calculation of temperatures produced by combustion of a fuel .
The adiabatic flame temperature is the temperature that would be achieved by a flame if the process of combustion took place in the absence of heat loss to the surroundings .
In meteorology and oceanography , the adiabatic cooling process produces condensation of moisture or salinity and the parcel becomes oversaturated .
Therefore , it is necessary to take away the excess .
There the process becomes a pseudo - adiabatic process in which the liquid water / salt that condenses is assumed to be removed as soon as it is formed , by idealized instantaneous precipitation .
The pseudoadiabatic process is only defined for expansion , since a parcel that is compressed become warmer and remains undersaturated .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
A process that does not involve the transfer of heat or matter into or out of a system , so that , is called an adiabatic process , and such a system is said to be adiabatically isolated .
The assumption that a process is adiabatic is a frequently made simplifying assumption .
For example , the compression of a gas within a cylinder of an engine is assumed to occur so rapidly that on the time scale of the compression process , little of the system 's energy can be transferred out as heat to the surroundings .
Even though the cylinders are not insulated and are quite conductive , that process is idealized to be adiabatic .
The same can be said to be true for the expansion process of such a system .
The assumption of adiabatic isolation of a system is a useful one , and is often combined with others so as to make the calculation of the system 's behaviour possible .
Such assumptions are idealizations .
The behaviour of actual machines deviates from these idealizations , but the assumption of such " perfect " behaviour provide a useful first approximation of how the real world works .
According to Laplace , when sound travels in a gas , there is no time for heat conduction in the medium and so the propagation of sound is adiabatic .
For such an adiabatic process , the modulus of elasticity ( Young 's modulus ) can be expressed as , where is the ratio of specific heats at constant pressure and at constant volume ( ) and is the pressure of the gas .
VARIOUS APPLICATIONS OF THE ADIABATIC ASSUMPTION Section::::Various applications of the adiabatic assumption .
For a closed system , one may write the first law of thermodynamics as : , where denotes the change of the system 's internal energy , the quantity of energy added to it as heat , and the work done on it by its surroundings .
*
If the system has rigid walls such that work can not be transferred in or out ( ) , and the walls of the system are not adiabatic and energy is added in the form of heat ( ) , and there is no phase change , the temperature of the system will rise .
*
If the system has rigid walls such that pressure – volume work can not be done , and the system walls are adiabatic ( ) , but energy is added as isochoric work in the form of friction or the stirring of a viscous fluid within the system ( ) , and there is no phase change , the temperature of the system will rise .
*
If the system walls are adiabatic ( ) , but not rigid ( ) , and , in a fictive idealized process , energy is added to the system in the form of frictionless , non - viscous pressure – volume work , and there is no phase change , the temperature of the system will rise .
Such a process is called an isentropic process and is said to be " reversible " .
Fictively , if the process is reversed , the energy added as work can be recovered entirely as work done by the system .
If the system contains a compressible gas and is reduced in volume , the uncertainty of the position of the gas is reduced , and seemingly would reduce the entropy of the system , but the temperature of the system will rise as the process is isentropic ( ) .
Should the work be added in such a way that friction or viscous forces are operating within the system , then the process is not isentropic , and if there is no phase change , then the temperature of the system will rise , the process is said to be " irreversible " , and the work added to the system is not entirely recoverable in the form of work .
*
If the walls of a system are not adiabatic , and energy is transferred in as heat , entropy is transferred into the system with the heat .
Such a process is neither adiabatic nor isentropic , having , and according to the second law of thermodynamics .
Naturally occurring adiabatic processes are irreversible ( entropy is produced ) .
The transfer of energy as work into an adiabatically isolated system can be imagined as being of two idealized extreme kinds .
In one such kind , there is no entropy produced within the system ( no friction , viscous dissipation , etc . ) , and the work is only pressure - volume work ( denoted by ) .
In nature , this ideal kind occurs only approximately , because it demands an infinitely slow process and no sources of dissipation .
The other extreme kind of work is isochoric work ( ) , for which energy is added as work solely through friction or viscous dissipation within the system .
A stirrer that transfers energy to a viscous fluid of an adiabatically isolated system with rigid walls , without phase change , will cause a rise in temperature of the fluid , but that work is not recoverable .
Isochoric work is irreversible .
The second law of thermodynamics observes that a natural process , of transfer of energy as work , always consists at least of isochoric work and often both of these extreme kinds of work .
Every natural process , adiabatic or not , is irreversible , with , as friction or viscosity are always present to some extent .
ADIABATIC HEATING AND COOLING Section::::Adiabatic heating and cooling .
The adiabatic compression of a gas causes a rise in temperature of the gas .
Adiabatic expansion against pressure , or a spring , causes a drop in temperature .
In contrast , free expansion is an isothermal process for an ideal gas .
Adiabatic heating occurs when the pressure of a gas is increased from work done on it by its surroundings , e.g. , a piston compressing a gas contained within a cylinder and raising the temperature where in many practical situations heat conduction through walls can be slow compared with the compression time .
This finds practical application in diesel engines which rely on the lack of heat dissipation during the compression stroke to elevate the fuel vapor temperature sufficiently to ignite it .
Adiabatic heating occurs in the Earth 's atmosphere when an air mass descends , for example , in a katabatic wind , Foehn wind , or chinook wind flowing downhill over a mountain range .
When a parcel of air descends , the pressure on the parcel increases .
Due to this increase in pressure , the parcel 's volume decreases and its temperature increases as work is done on the parcel of air , thus increasing its internal energy , which manifests itself by a rise in the temperature of that mass of air .
The parcel of air can only slowly dissipate the energy by conduction or radiation ( heat ) , and to a first approximation it can be considered adiabatically isolated and the process an adiabatic process .
Adiabatic cooling occurs when the pressure on an adiabatically isolated system is decreased , allowing it to expand , thus causing it to do work on its surroundings .
When the pressure applied on a parcel of air is reduced , the air in the parcel is allowed to expand ; as the volume increases , the temperature falls as its internal energy decreases .
Adiabatic cooling occurs in the Earth 's atmosphere with orographic lifting and lee waves , and this can form pileus or lenticular clouds .
Adiabatic cooling does not have to involve a fluid .
One technique used to reach very low temperatures ( thousandths and even millionths of a degree above absolute zero ) is via adiabatic demagnetisation , where the change in magnetic field on a magnetic material is used to provide adiabatic cooling .
Also , the contents of an expanding universe can be described ( to first order ) as an adiabatically cooling fluid .
( See heat death of the universe . )
Rising magma also undergoes adiabatic cooling before eruption , particularly significant in the case of magmas that rise quickly from great depths such as kimberlites .
Such temperature changes can be quantified using the ideal gas law , or the hydrostatic equation for atmospheric processes .
In practice , no process is truly adiabatic .
Many processes rely on a large difference in time scales of the process of interest and the rate of heat dissipation across a system boundary , and thus are approximated by using an adiabatic assumption .
There is always some heat loss , as no perfect insulators exist .
IDEAL GAS ( REVERSIBLE PROCESS )
Section::::Ideal gas ( reversible process ) .
The mathematical equation for an ideal gas undergoing a reversible ( i.e. , no entropy generation )
adiabatic process can be represented by the polytropic process equation where is pressure , is volume , and for this case , where For a monatomic ideal gas , , and for a diatomic gas ( such as nitrogen and oxygen , the main components of air ) .
Note that the above formula is only applicable to classical ideal gases and not Bose – Einstein or Fermi gases .
For reversible adiabatic processes , it is also true that where T is an absolute temperature .
This can also be written as EXAMPLE OF ADIABATIC COMPRESSION Section::::Example of adiabatic compression .
The compression stroke in a gasoline engine can be used as an example of adiabatic compression .
The model assumptions are : the uncompressed volume of the cylinder is one litre ( 1 L =
1000 cm = 0.001 m ) ; the gas within is the air consisting of molecular nitrogen and oxygen only ( thus a diatomic gas with 5 degrees of freedom , and so ) ; the compression ratio of the engine is 10:1 ( that is , the 1 L volume of uncompressed gas is reduced to 0.1 L by the piston ) ; and the uncompressed gas is at approximately room temperature and pressure ( a warm room temperature of ~27 ° C , or 300 K , and a pressure of 1 bar =
100 kPa , i.e. typical sea - level atmospheric pressure ) .
so our adiabatic constant for this example is about 6.31 Pa m.
The gas is now compressed to a 0.1 L ( 0.0001 m ) volume ( we will assume this happens quickly enough that no heat can enter or leave the gas through the walls ) .
The adiabatic constant remains the same , but with the resulting pressure unknown so solving for P : or 25.1 bar .
Note that this pressure increase is more than a simple 10:1 compression ratio would indicate ; this is because the gas is not only compressed , but the work done to compress the gas also increases its internal energy , which manifests itself by a rise in the gas temperature and an additional rise in pressure above what would result from a simplistic calculation of 10 times the original pressure .
We can solve for the temperature of the compressed gas in the engine cylinder as well , using the ideal gas law , PV = nRT ( n is amount of gas in moles and R the gas constant for that gas ) .
Our initial conditions being 100 kPa of pressure , 1 L volume , and 300 K of temperature , our experimental constant ( nR ) is : We know the compressed gas has = 0.1 L and = , so we can solve for temperature :
That is a final temperature of 753 K , or 479 ° C , or 896 ° F , well above the ignition point of many fuels .
This is why a high - compression engine requires fuels specially formulated to not self - ignite ( which would cause engine knocking when operated under these conditions of temperature and pressure ) , or that a supercharger with an intercooler to provide a pressure boost but with a lower temperature rise would be advantageous .
A diesel engine operates under even more extreme conditions , with compression ratios of 20:1 or more being typical , in order to provide a very high gas temperature , which ensures immediate ignition of the injected fuel .
ADIABATIC FREE EXPANSION OF A GAS Section::::Adiabatic free expansion of a gas .
For an adiabatic free expansion of an ideal gas , the gas is contained in an insulated container and then allowed to expand in a vacuum .
Because there is no external pressure for the gas to expand against , the work done by or on the system is zero .
Since this process does not involve any heat transfer or work , the first law of thermodynamics then implies that the net internal energy change of the system is zero .
For an ideal gas , the temperature remains constant because the internal energy only depends on temperature in that case .
Since at constant temperature , the entropy is proportional to the volume , the entropy increases in this case , therefore this process is irreversible .
DERIVATION OF P – V RELATION FOR ADIABATIC HEATING AND COOLING Section::::Derivation of P –
V relation for adiabatic heating and cooling .
The definition of an adiabatic process is that heat transfer to the system is zero , .
Then , according to the first law of thermodynamics , where is the change in the internal energy of the system and is work done by the system .
Any work ( ) done must be done at the expense of internal energy , since no heat is being supplied from the surroundings .
Pressure – volume work done by the system is defined as However , does not remain constant during an adiabatic process but instead changes along with .
It is desired to know how the values of and relate to each other as the adiabatic process proceeds .
For an ideal gas the internal energy is given by where is the number of degrees of freedom divided by two , is the universal gas constant and is the number of moles in the system ( a constant ) .
Differentiating equation ( 3 ) and use of the ideal gas law , , yields Equation ( 4 ) is often expressed as because .
Now substitute equations ( 2 ) and ( 4 ) into equation ( 1 ) to obtain factorize : and divide both sides by :
After integrating the left and right sides from to and from to and changing the sides respectively , Exponentiate both sides , substitute with , the heat capacity ratio and eliminate the negative sign to obtain
Therefore , and DERIVATION OF P – T RELATION FOR ADIABATIC HEATING AND COOLING Section::::Derivation of P –
T relation for adiabatic heating and cooling .
Substituting the ideal gas law into the above , we obtain which simplifies to DERIVATION OF DISCRETE FORMULA Section::::Derivation of discrete formula .
The change in internal energy of a system , measured from state 1 to state 2 , is equal to At the same time , the work done by the pressure – volume changes as a result from this process , is equal to Since we require the process to be adiabatic , the following equation needs to be true By the previous derivation , Rearranging ( 4 ) gives Substituting this into ( 2 ) gives Integrating , Substituting , Rearranging , Using the ideal gas law and assuming a constant molar quantity ( as often happens in practical cases ) ,
By the continuous formula , or Substituting into the previous expression for , Substituting this expression and ( 1 ) in ( 3 ) gives Simplifying , GRAPHING ADIABATS
Section::::Graphing adiabats .
An adiabat is a curve of constant entropy in a diagram .
Some properties of adiabats on a P – V diagram are indicated .
These properties may be read from the classical behaviour of ideal gases , except in the region where PV becomes small ( low temperature ) , where quantum effects become important .
*
Every adiabat asymptotically approaches both the V axis and the P axis ( just like isotherms ) .
*
* Each adiabat intersects each isotherm exactly once .
*
* An adiabat looks similar to an isotherm , except that during an expansion , an adiabat loses more pressure than an isotherm , so it has a steeper inclination ( more vertical ) .
*
*
If isotherms are concave towards the north - east direction ( 45 ° ) , then adiabats are concave towards the east north - east ( 31 ° ) .
*
*
If adiabats and isotherms are graphed at regular intervals of entropy and temperature , respectively ( like altitude on a contour map ) , then as the eye moves towards the axes ( towards the south - west ) , it sees the density of isotherms stay constant , but it sees the density of adiabats grow .
The exception is very near absolute zero , where the density of adiabats drops sharply and they become rare ( see Nernst 's theorem ) .
* The following diagram is a P – V diagram with a superposition of adiabats and isotherms :
The isotherms are the red curves and the adiabats are the black curves .
The adiabats are isentropic .
Volume is the horizontal axis and pressure is the vertical axis .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term adiabatic ( ) is an anglicization of the Greek term ἀδιάβατος " impassable " ( used by Xenophon of rivers ) .
It is used in the thermodynamic sense by Rankine ( 1866 ) , and adopted by Maxwell in 1871 ( explicitly attributing the term to Rankine ) .
The etymological origin corresponds here to an impossibility of transfer of energy as heat and of transfer of matter across the wall .
The Greek word ἀδιάβατος is formed from privative ἀ- ( " not " ) and διαβατός , " passable " , in turn deriving from διά ( " through " ) , and βαῖνειν ( " to walk , go , come " ) .
CONCEPTUAL SIGNIFICANCE IN THERMODYNAMIC THEORY Section::::Conceptual significance in thermodynamic theory .
The adiabatic process has been important for thermodynamics since its early days .
It was important in the work of Joule , because it provided a way of nearly directly relating quantities of heat and work .
For a thermodynamic system that is enclosed by walls that do not allow mass transfer , energy can pass in and out only as heat or work .
Thus a quantity of work can be related almost directly to an equivalent quantity of heat in a cycle of two limbs .
The first is an isochoric adiabatic work process that adds to the system 's internal energy .
Then an isochoric and workless heat transfer returns the system to its original state .
The first limb adds a definite amount of energy and the second removes it .
Accordingly , Rankine measured quantity of heat in units of work , rather than as a calorimetric quantity .
In 1854 , Rankine used a quantity that he called " the thermodynamic function " that later was called entropy , and at that time he wrote also of the " curve of no transmission of heat " , which he later called an adiabatic curve .
Besides it two isothermal limbs , Carnot 's cycle has two adiabatic limbs .
For the foundations of thermodynamics , the conceptual importance of this was emphasized by Bryan , by Carathéodory , and by Born .
The reason is that calorimetry presupposes a type of temperature as already defined before the statement of the first law of thermodynamics , such as one based on empirical scales .
Such a presupposition involves making the distinction between empirical temperature and absolute temperature .
Rather , the definition of absolute thermodynamic temperature is best left till the second law is available as a conceptual basis .
In the eighteenth century , the law of conservation of energy was yet to be fully formulated or established , and the nature of heat was debated .
One approach to these problems was to regard heat , measured by calorimetry , as a primary substance that is conserved in quantity .
By the middle of the nineteenth century , it was recognized as a form of energy , and the law of conservation of energy was thereby also recognized .
The view that eventually established itself , and is currently regarded as right , is that the law of conservation of energy is a primary axiom , and that heat is to be analyzed as consequential .
In this light , heat can not be a component of the total energy of a single body because it is not a state variable , but , rather , is a variable that describes a process of transfer between two bodies .
The adiabatic process is important because it is a logical ingredient of this current view .
DIVERGENT USAGES OF THE WORD
ADIABATIC Section::::Divergent usages of the word adiabatic .
This present article is written from the viewpoint of macroscopic thermodynamics , and the word adiabatic is used in this article in the traditional way of thermodynamics , introduced by Rankine .
It is pointed out in the present article that , for example , if a compression of a gas is rapid , then there is little time for heat transfer to occur , even when the gas is not adiabatically isolated by a definite wall .
In this sense , a rapid compression of a gas is sometimes approximately or loosely said to be adiabatic , though often far from isentropic , even when the gas is not adiabatically isolated by a definite wall .
Quantum mechanics and quantum statistical mechanics , however , use the word adiabatic in a very different sense , one that can at times seem almost opposite to the classical thermodynamic sense .
In quantum theory , the word adiabatic can mean something perhaps near isentropic , or perhaps near quasi - static , but the usage of the word is very different between the two disciplines .
On the one hand , in quantum theory , if a perturbative element of compressive work is done almost infinitely slowly ( that is to say quasi - statically ) , it is said to have been done adiabatically .
The idea is that the shapes of the eigenfunctions change slowly and continuously , so that no quantum jump is triggered , and the change is virtually reversible .
While the occupation numbers are unchanged , nevertheless there is change in the energy levels of one - to - one corresponding , pre- and post - compression , eigenstates .
Thus a perturbative element of work has been done without heat transfer and without introduction of random change within the system .
For example , Max Born writes " Actually , it is usually the ' adiabatic ' case with which we have to do : i.e. the limiting case where the external force ( or the reaction of the parts of the system on each other ) acts very slowly .
In this case , to a very high approximation that is , there is no probability for a transition , and the system is in the initial state after cessation of the perturbation .
Such a slow perturbation is therefore reversible , as it is classically . "
On the other hand , in quantum theory , if a perturbative element of compressive work is done rapidly , it randomly changes the occupation numbers of the eigenstates , as well as changing their shapes .
In that theory , such a rapid change is said not to be adiabatic , and the contrary word diabatic is applied to it .
One might guess that perhaps Clausius , if he were confronted with this , in the now - obsolete language he used in his day , would have said that " internal work " was done and that ' heat was generated though not transferred ' .
In classical thermodynamics , such a rapid change would still be called adiabatic because the system is adiabatically isolated , and there is no transfer of energy as heat .
The strong irreversibility of the change , due to viscosity or other entropy production , does not impinge on this classical usage .
Thus for a mass of gas , in macroscopic thermodynamics , words are so used that a compression is sometimes loosely or approximately said to be adiabatic if it is rapid enough to avoid heat transfer , even if the system is not adiabatically isolated .
But in quantum statistical theory , a compression is not called adiabatic if it is rapid , even if the system is adiabatically isolated in the classical thermodynamic sense of the term .
The words are used differently in the two disciplines , as stated just above .
SEE ALSO * Adiabatic conductivity * Cyclic process
* First law of thermodynamics * Heat burst * Isobaric process * Isenthalpic process
* Isentropic process
* Isochoric process
* Isothermal process
* Polytropic process * Entropy ( classical thermodynamics ) * Quasistatic process * Total air temperature
* Magnetic refrigeration
REFERENCES
General
* Broholm , Collin . "
Adiabatic free expansion " .
Physics & Astronomy @ Johns Hopkins University .
N.p . , 26 Nov. 1997 .
Web .
14 Apr.
* Nave , Carl Rod . "
Adiabatic Processes " .
HyperPhysics .
N.p . , n.d . Web .
14 Apr. 2011 . .
* Thorngren , Dr. Jane R .. " Adiabatic Processes " .
Daphne – A Palomar College Web Server .
N.p . , 21 July 1995 .
Web .
14 Apr. 2011 . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Article in HyperPhysics Encyclopaedia