BOOK OF EZRA
The Book of Ezra is a book of the Hebrew Bible ; which formerly included the Book of Nehemiah in a single book , commonly distinguished in scholarship as Ezra – Nehemiah .
The two became separated with the first printed rabbinic bibles of the early 16th century , following late medieval Latin Christian tradition .
Its subject is the Return to Zion following the close of the Babylonian captivity , and it is divided into two parts , the first telling the story of the first return of exiles in the first year of Cyrus the Great ( 538 BC ) and the completion and dedication of the new Temple in Jerusalem in the sixth year of Darius I ( 515 BC ) , the second telling of the subsequent mission of Ezra to Jerusalem and his struggle to purify the Jews from marriage with non - Jews .
Together with the Book of Nehemiah , it represents the final chapter in the historical narrative of the Hebrew Bible .
Ezra is written to fit a schematic pattern in which the God of Israel inspires a king of Persia to commission a leader from the Jewish community to carry out a mission ; three successive leaders carry out three such missions , the first rebuilding the Temple , the second purifying the Jewish community , and the third sealing the holy city itself behind a wall .
( This last mission , that of Nehemiah , is not part of the Book of Ezra . )
The theological program of the book explains the many problems its chronological structure presents .
It probably appeared in its earliest version around 399 BC , and continued to be revised and edited for several centuries before being accepted as scriptural in the early Christian era .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
The Book of Ezra consists of ten chapters : chapters 1–6 , covering the period from the Cyrus the Great to the dedication of the Second Temple , are told in the third person ;
chapters 7–10 , dealing with the mission of Ezra , are told largely in the first person .
The book contains several documents presented as historical inclusions , written in Aramaic while the surrounding text is in Hebrew ( 1:2 - 4 , 4:8 - 16 , 4:17 - 22 , 5:7 - 17 , 6:3 - 5 , 6:6 - 12 , 7:12 - 26 ) Chapters 1–6 ( documents included in the text in italics ) * 1 .
Decree of Cyrus , first version : Cyrus , inspired by God , returns the Temple vessels to Sheshbazzar , " prince of Judah " , and directs the Israelites to return to Jerusalem with him and rebuild the Temple .
* 2 .
42,360 exiles , with men servants , women servants and " singing men and women " , return from Babylon to Jerusalem and Judah under the leadership of Zerubbabel and Jeshua the High Priest .
* 3 .
Jeshua the High Priest and Zerubbabel build the altar and celebrate the Feast of Tabernacles .
In the second year the foundations of the Temple are laid and the dedication takes place with great rejoicing .
* 4 .
Letter of the Samaritans to Artaxerxes , and reply of Artaxerxes : The " enemies of Judah and Benjamin " offer to help with the rebuilding , but are rebuffed ; they then work to frustrate the builders " down to the reign of Darius .
" The officials of Samaria write to king Artaxerxes warning him that Jerusalem is being rebuilt , and the king orders the work to stop . "
Thus the work on the house of God in Jerusalem came to a standstill until the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia . "
* 5 .
Tattenai 's letter to Darius : Through the exhortations of the prophets Haggai and Zechariah , Zerubbabel and Joshua recommence the building of the Temple .
Tattenai , satrap over both Judah and Samaria , writes to Darius warning him that Jerusalem is being rebuilt and advising that the archives be searched to discover the decree of Cyrus .
* 6 .
Decree of Cyrus , second version , and decree of Darius : Darius finds the decree , directs Tattenai not to disturb the Jews in their work , and exempts them from tribute and supplies everything necessary for the offerings .
The Temple is finished in the month of Adar in the sixth year of Darius , and the Israelites assemble to celebrate its completion .
Chapters 7–10
* 7 .
Letter of Artaxerxes to Ezra ( Artaxerxes ' rescript ) : King Artaxerxes is moved by God to commission Ezra " to inquire about Judah and Jerusalem with regard to the Law of your God " and to " appoint magistrates and judges to administer justice to all the people of Trans - Euphrates — all who know the laws of your God . "
Artaxerxes gives Ezra much gold and directs all Persian officials to aid him .
* 8 .
Ezra gathers a large body of returnees and much gold and silver and precious vessels for the Temple and camps by a canal outside Babylon .
There he discovers he has no Levites , and so sends messengers to gather some .
The exiles then return to Jerusalem , where they distribute the gold and silver and offer sacrifices to God .
* 9 .
Ezra is informed that some of the Jews already in Jerusalem have married non - Jewish women .
Ezra is appalled at this proof of sin , and prays to God : " O God of Israel , you are righteous !
We are left this day as a remnant .
Here we are before you in our guilt , though because of it not one of us can stand in your presence . "
* 10 .
Despite the opposition of some of their number , the Israelites assemble and send away their foreign wives and children .
HISTORICAL BACKGROUND Section::::Historical background .
In the early 6th century BC , the Kingdom of Judah rebelled against the Neo - Babylonian Empire and was destroyed .
As a result , the royal court , the priests , the prophets and scribes were taken into captivity in the city of Babylon .
There a profound intellectual revolution took place , the exiles blaming their fate on disobedience to their God and looking forward to a future when he would allow a purified people to return to Jerusalem and rebuild the Temple in Jerusalem .
The same period saw the rapid rise of Persia , previously an unimportant kingdom in present - day southern Iran , to a position of great power , and in 539 BC Cyrus II , the Persian ruler , conquered Babylon .
It is difficult to describe the parties and politics of Judea in this period because of the lack of historical sources , but there seem to have been three important groups involved : the returnees from the exile who claimed the reconstruction with the support of Cyrus I ; " the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin " ; and a third group , " people of the land " , who seem to be local opposition against the returnees building the Temple in Jerusalem .
The following table is a guide to major events in the region during the period covered by the Book of Ezra : !
Reign !
Main events !
Correlation with Ezra – Nehemiah
TEXTS EZRA –
NEHEMIAH
Section::::Texts .
Section::::Ezra – Nehemiah .
The single Hebrew book Ezra – Nehemiah , with title " Ezra " , was translated into Greek around the middle of the 2nd century BC .
It was first proposed to be divided into separate books ( I Ezra and II Ezra ) by the early Christian scholar Origen in the 3rd century AD ; and Jerome , writing in the early 5th century , noted that this division had since been adopted by Greek and Latin Christian commentators ; although in all surviving Christian Greek and Old Latin manuscripts Ezra - Nehemiah is one book denoted as ' Esdras β ' .
Jerome himself rejected the division in his Vulgate translation of the Bible into Latin from the Hebrew ; and consequently no early Vulgate manuscripts separate the two books , and they remained undivided as a single book in the 8th century commentary of Bede , and in the 9th century bibles of Alcuin and Theodulf of Orleans .
However , from the 9th century onwards , Latin bibles are found that reintroduce Origen 's division ; and this becomes standard in the Paris Bibles of the 13th century .
It was not until 1516/17 , in the first printed Rabbinic Bible of Daniel Bomberg that the separation was introduced generally in Hebrew Bibles .
FIRST ESDRAS Section::::First Esdras . 1 Esdras , also known as " Esdras α " , is an alternate Greek - language version of Ezra .
This text has one additional section , the ' Tale of the Three Guardsmen ' in the middle of Ezra 4 .
Almost all early Christian references to the ' Book of Ezra ' are citations of 1 Esdras not ' Ezra - Nehemiah ' ; while the ' Ezra ' portions of Ezra - Nehemiah are never cited in patristic writings before the 6th century , and appear never to have been read in church .
DATE , STRUCTURE AND COMPOSITION DATE Section::::Date , structure and composition .
Section::::Date .
Koresh of Ezra 1:1 is called " king of Persia " , which title was introduced not by Cyrus the Great but by his grandson and probable namesake Xerxes ( 486–465 BC ) .
Scholars are divided over the chronological sequence of the activities of Ezra and Nehemiah .
Ezra 7:8 says that Ezra arrived in Jerusalem in the seventh year of king Artaxerxes , while Nehemiah 2:1–9 has Nehemiah arriving in Artaxerxes ' twentieth year .
If this was Artaxerxes
I ( 465–424 BC ) , then Ezra arrived in 458 and Nehemiah in 445 BC .
Nehemiah 8–9 , in which the two ( possibly by editorial error ) appear together , supports this scenario .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The contents of Ezra – Nehemiah are structured in a theological rather than chronological order : " The Temple must come first , then the purifying of the community , then the building of the outer walls of the city , and so finally all could reach a grand climax in the reading of the law . "
The narrative follows a repeating pattern in which the God of Israel " stirs up " the king of Persia to commission a Jewish leader ( Zerubbabel , Ezra , Nehemiah ) to undertake a mission ; the leader completes his mission in the face of opposition ; and success is marked by a great assembly .
The tasks of the three leaders are progressive : first the Temple is restored ( Zerubabbel ) , then the community of Israel ( Ezra ) , and finally the walls which will separate the purified community and Temple from the outside world ( Nehemiah ) .
The pattern is completed with a final coda in which Nehemiah restores the belief of Yahweh .
This concern with a schematic pattern - making , rather than with history in the modern sense of a factual account of events in the order in which they occurred , explains the origin of the many problems which surround both Ezra and Nehemiah as historical sources .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Twentieth - century views on the composition of Ezra revolved around whether the author was Ezra himself ( and who may have also authored the Books of Chronicles ) or was another author or authors ( who also wrote the Chronicles ) .
More recently it has been increasingly recognised that Ezra , Nehemiah and Chronicles all have extremely complex histories stretching over many stages of editing , and most scholars now are cautious of assuming a unified composition with a single theology and point of view .
As an indication of the many layers of editing which Ezra has undergone , one recent study finds that Ezra 1–6 and Ezra 9–10 were originally separate documents , that they were spliced together at a later stage by the authors of Ezra 7–8 , and that all have undergone extensive later editing .
PERSIAN DOCUMENTS Section::::Persian documents .
Seven purported Persian decrees of kings or letters to and from high officials are quoted in Ezra .
Their authenticity has been contentious ; while some scholars accept them in their current form , most accept only part of them as genuine , while still others reject them entirely .
L.L. Grabbe surveys six tests against which the documents can be measured ( comparative known Persian material , linguistic details , contents , presence of Jewish theology , the Persian attitude to local religions , and Persian letter - writing formulas ) and concludes that all the documents are late post - Persian works and probable forgeries , but that some features suggest a genuine Persian correspondence behind some of them .
SEE ALSO
* Esdras REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
Commentaries
* Blenkinsopp , Joseph , " Ezra - Nehemiah : A Commentary " ( Eerdmans , 1988 ) * Blenkinsopp , Joseph , " Judaism , the first phase " ( Eerdmans , 2009 )
* Coggins , R.J. , " The Books of Ezra and Nehemiah " ( Cambridge University Press , 1976 )
* Ecker , Ronald L. , " Ezra and Nehemiah " , Ecker 's Biblical Web Pages , 2007 .
* Fensham , F. Charles , " The books of Ezra and Nehemiah " ( Eerdmans , 1982 )
* Grabbe , L.L. , " Ezra - Nehemiah "
( Routledge , 1998 )
* Grabbe , L.L. , " A history of the Jews and Judaism in the Second Temple Period , Volume 1 "
( T&T Clark , 2004 )
* Pakkala , Juha , " Ezra the scribe : the development of Ezra 7–10 and Nehemiah 8 " ( Walter de Gryter , 2004 )
* Throntveit , Mark A. , " Ezra - Nehemiah " ( John Knox Press , 1992 )
Translations
* Ezra ( Judaica Press ) – translation [ with Rashi 's commentary ] at Chabad.org * Bible Gateway ( opens at NIV version ) * Ezra – King James Version