BOOK OF AMOS
The Book of Amos is the third of the Twelve Minor Prophets in the Tanakh / Old Testament and the second in the Greek Septuagint tradition .
Amos , an older contemporary of Hosea and Isaiah , was active c. 750 BC during the reign of Jeroboam II ( 788–747 BC ) , making the Book of Amos the first biblical book in the section of the prophets written .
Amos lived in the kingdom of Judah but preached in the northern kingdom of Israel .
His major themes of social justice , God 's omnipotence , and divine judgment became staples of prophecy .
STRUCTURE
* Oracles against the nations ( 1.3–2.6 )
* Addresses to groups in Israel
* Women of Samaria ( 4.1–3 )
* Rich persons in Samaria ( 6.1–7 )
* Rich persons in Jerusalem ( 8.4–8 ) * Five symbolic visions of God 's judgment on Israel , interrupted by a confrontation between Amos and his listeners at Bethel ( 7.10–17 ) :
* Locusts ( 7.1–3 )
* Fire ( 7.4–6 ) * A plumb line ( 7.7–9 ) * A basket of fruit ( 8.1–3 ) * God beside the altar ( 9.1–8a )
* Epilogue 9:8b–15 SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
The book opens with a historical note about the prophet , then a short oracle announcing Yahweh 's judgment ( repeated in the Book of Joel ) .
The prophet denounces the crimes against humanity committed by the gentile nations , tells Israel that even they have sinned and are guilty of the same crimes , and report five symbolic visions prophesying the destruction of Israel .
Included in this , with no apparent order , are an oracle on the nature of prophecy , snippets of hymns , oracles of woe , a third - person prose narrative concerning the prophet , and an oracle promising restoration of the House of David , which had not yet fallen in Amos 's lifetime .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Amos prophesied during the reign of Jeroboam II , King of Israel , and of Uzziah of Judah , which places him in the first half of the 8th century BC .
According to the book 's superscription ( Amos 1:1 )
he was from Tekoa , a town in Judah south of Jerusalem , but his prophetic mission was in the northern kingdom .
He is called a " shepherd " and a " dresser of sycamore trees " , but the book 's literary qualities suggest a man of education rather than a poor farmer .
Scholars have long recognized that Amos utilized an ancient hymn within his prophecy , verses of which are found at 4.13 ; 5.8–9 ; 8.8 ; 9.5–6 .
This hymn is best understood as praising YHWH for His judgment , demonstrated in His destructive power , rather than praise for creation .
Scholarship has also identified ' Sumerian City Lament '
( SCL ) motifs within Amos and particularly the hymn , offering the possibility that Amos used SCL as a literary template for his prophecy of Jerusalem 's destruction .
The Amos hymn has also been discussed in terms of a ' covenant curse ' which was used to warn Israel of the consequences of breaking the covenant , and in particular a ' Flood covenant - curse ' motif , first identified by D.R. Hillers .
Recent scholarship has shown Amos 's hymn is an ancient narrative text , has identified a new verse at 7.4 ; and has compared the hymn to the Genesis Flood account and Job 9:5–10 .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
The central idea of the book of Amos is that God puts his people on the same level as the surrounding nations – God expects the same purity of them all .
As it is with all nations that rise up against the kingdom of God , even Israel and Judah will not be exempt from the judgment of God because of their idolatry and unjust ways .
The nation that represents YHWH must be made pure of anything or anyone that profanes the name of God .
God 's name must be exalted .
Amos is the first prophet to use the term " the Day of the Lord .
This phrase becomes important within future prophetic and apocalyptic literature .
For the people of Israel " the day of the " is the day when God will fight against his and their enemies , and it will be a day of victory for Israel .
However , Amos and other prophets include Israel as an enemy of God , as Israel is guilty of injustice toward the innocent , poor , and young women .
To Amos " the day of the Lord " will be a day of doom .
Other major ideas in the book of Amos include : social justice and concern for the disadvantaged ; the idea that Israel 's covenant with God did not exempt them from accountability for sin ; God is God of all nations ; God is judge of all nations ; God is God of moral righteousness ; God made all people ; God elected Israel and then liberated Israel so that He would be known throughout the world ; election by God means that those elected are responsible to live according to the purposes clearly outlined to them in the covenant ; if God destroys the unjust , a remnant will remain ; and God is free to judge whether to redeem Israel .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Bulkeley , Tim Amos : Hypertext Bible Commentary .
Auckland :
Hypertext Bible , 2005 .
Amos :
Hypertext Bible Commentary * , focus on historiography
EXTERNAL
LINKS Section::::External links .
Online translations of Book of Amos :
* Jewish translations : * Amos ( Judaica Press ) translation [ with Rashi 's commentary ] at Chabad.org * Christian translations : * Online Bible at GospelHall.org ( English Standard Version ) *
( Authorised King James Version )
* Nicholas Whyte on Amos
* New Advent Catholic Encyclopedia , Amos * Forward Movement ,
Amos
an Introduction *
( American Standard Version , Young 's Literal Translation )