ALPHABET SONG
An alphabet song is any of various songs used to teach children the alphabet .
Alphabet songs typically recite the names of all letters of the alphabet of a given language in order .
THE A.B.C. ( VERSE 1 ) Section::::The
A.B.C. ( Verse 1 ) .
" The A.B.C. " or " A.B.Cs " is one of the best - known English language alphabet songs , and perhaps the one most frequently referred to as " the alphabet song " , especially in the United States .
The song was first copyrighted in 1835 by the Boston - based music publisher Charles Bradlee , and given the title " The A.B.C. , a German air with variations for the flute with an easy accompaniment for the piano forte " .
The musical arrangement was attributed to Louis Le Maire ( sometimes Lemaire ) , an 18th - century composer .
This was " Entered according to act of Congress , in the year 1835 , by C. Bradlee , in the clerk 's office of the District Court of Massachusetts " , according to the Newberry Library , which also says , " The theme is that used by Mozart for his piano variations , Ah , vous dirai - je , maman .
" This tune is the same as the tune for " Twinkle , Twinkle , Little Star " and " Baa , Baa , Black Sheep " .
Lyrics : ( each line represents two measures , or eight beats ) BACKWARDS ALPHABET Section::::Backwards Alphabet .
This is a version that goes Z to A instead of A to Z.
The e - d - c - b part is as fast as the l - m - n - o part in the normal alphabet song .
ZED FOR ZEE Section::::Zed for Zee .
In the United States , Z is pronounced zee ; in most other English - speaking countries ( such as the UK , Canada and Australia )
it is pronounced zed .
Generally , the absent zee - rhyme is not missed , although some children use a zee pronunciation in the rhyme which they would not use elsewhere .
Variants of the song exist to accommodate the zed pronunciation .
One variation shortens the second line and lengthens the last , to form a near - rhyme between N and zed :
Alternate Zed Version : { \time 4/4 c'4 c ' g ' g ' a ' a ' g'2 f'4 f ' e ' e ' d ' d ' c'2 g'4
g ' f ' f ' e ' e ' d'2 g'4 \times 2/3 { f'8 f ' f ' } e'4 d ' c ' r r2 \bar " .
" } \addlyrics { A B C D E F G H
I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V dub-
a-
U X Y " Z(ed )
" } Another alternate Zed version : DUTCH VERSION Section::::Dutch version .
Note that the third line is lengthened and the fourth line is shortened , to compensate for the Dutch pronunciations .
FRENCH
CANADIAN
VERSION Section::::French Canadian version .
A French - language version of the song is also taught in Canada , with generally no alterations to the melody except in the final line that requires adjustment to accommodate the two - syllable pronunciation of the French y. PHONICS SONGS Section::::Phonics songs .
Because the English language has 40 sounds and only 26 letters , children and beginning readers also need to learn the different sounds ( phonemes ) associated with each letter .
Many songs have been written to teach phonemic awareness and they are usually referred to as alphabet songs .
ACROSTIC SONGS Section::::Acrostic songs .
There are also songs that go through the alphabet , making some of the letters stand for something in the process .
An example , A , You 're Adorable ( also known as " The Alphabet Love Song " ) , was recorded in 1948 , by Buddy Kaye , Fred Wise , Sidney Lippman , and later Perry Como .
A newer example of this is from the musical Matilda . "
School Song " is an acrostic that spells out the alphabet phonetically .
BACKWARDS SONG ( VERSE 2 )
Section::::Backwards song ( Verse 2 ) .
The group Wee Sing released an alphabet song with the letters in reverse order , called " ZYXs " .
The Canadian children 's TV series
The Big Comfy Couch used a version of the song in the first episode of Season 4 , " Backwards " .
Comedian Soupy Sales released a song in 1966 called " Backwards Alphabet " which contained the reverse alphabet in lyrical style .
The original version of the song was performed by actress Judi Rolin with the Smothers Brothers in the 1966 teleplay adaptation of Alice Through the Looking Glass .
SEE ALSO
RELATED ENGLISH LANGUAGE SONGS
* " ABC – DEF – GHI " , an alphabet song sung by Big Bird of Sesame Street * " ABC Kids " , an alternate song sung by The Wiggles who promoted ABC for Kids ( 2006 ) * " Al'z A - B - Cee'z " , an alphabet song by hip hop group 3rd Bass , on their album Derelicts of Dialect ( 1991 ) * " Crazy ABCs " , an alphabet rap song that combines pronunciation and phonetics for each letter by Every Child Wins *
" Crazy ABC 's " , an acrostic song listing words beginning with each letter used as a silent letter , by the Barenaked Ladies on their album Snacktime !
( 2008 )
* " Do - Re - Mi " , a show tune from The Sound of Music ( 1959 ) , used to teach the order of the notes in the Solfege scale *
" Swinging the Alphabet " , a phonetically based novelty song , popularized by The Three Stooges in the film
Violent Is the Word for Curly ( 1938 ) * " ZYX " , a backwards alphabet song by
They Might Be Giants , on their second children 's album Here
Come the ABCs ( 2005 ) * " The Elements " , a mnemonic song of the periodic table by Tom Lehrer ( 1959 ) * " A.B.C. Rock " , written by members of Bill Haley and His Comets and recorded by children 's entertainer Sally Starr for her 1958 album Our Gal Sal .
Aimed at young listeners , the song incorporates a recitation of the alphabet .
Haley and the Comets recorded their own version for Decca Records in 1959 .
TRADITIONAL ALPHABET SONGS IN OTHER LANGUAGES
* " Ahaka mana " , Māori * " Alef - Bet " by Debbie Friedman , a song commonly used in American Hebrew school classrooms to teach the letters of the Hebrew Alphabet * " Iroha " , Japanese * " Shiva Sutra " , Sanskrit * " Thousand Character Classic " , Chinese and Korean * " Zengő ABC " by Ferenc Móra , Hungarian * " Алфавит мы уже знаем " , Russian REFERENCES