BLACK SEA
The Black Sea is a body of water and marginal sea of the Atlantic Ocean between the Balkans , Eastern Europe , the Caucasus , and Western Asia .
It is supplied by a number of major rivers , such as the Danube , Dnieper , Southern Bug , Dniester , Don , and the Rioni .
About a third of Europe drains into the Black Sea , including the countries of Austria , Belarus , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bulgaria , Croatia , Czech Republic , Georgia , Germany , Hungary , Moldova , Poland , Romania , Russia , Serbia , Slovakia , Slovenia , Turkey and Ukraine .
The Black Sea has an area of ( not including the Sea of Azov ) , a maximum depth of , and a volume of .
It is constrained by the Pontic Mountains to the south , Caucasus Mountains to the east , Crimean Mountains to the north , Strandzha to the southwest , Dobrogea Plateau to the northwest , and features a wide shelf to the northwest .
The longest East - West extent is about .
Important cities along the coast include Batumi , Burgas , Constanța , Giresun , Istanbul , Kerch , Novorossiysk , Odessa , Ordu , Poti , Rize , Samsun , Sevastopol , Sochi , Sukhumi , Trabzon , Varna , Yalta , and Zonguldak .
The Black Sea has a positive water balance ; that is , a net outflow of water per year through the Bosphorus and the Dardanelles into the Aegean Sea .
Mediterranean water flows into the Black Sea as part of a two - way hydrological exchange .
The Black Sea outflow is cooler and less saline , and floats over the warm , more saline Mediterranean inflow – as a result of differences in density caused by differences in salinity – leading to a significant anoxic layer well below the surface waters .
The Black Sea drains into the Mediterranean Sea , via the Aegean Sea and various straits , and is navigable to the Atlantic Ocean .
The Bosphorus Strait connects it to the Sea of Marmara , and the Strait of the Dardanelles connects that sea to the Aegean Sea region of the Mediterranean .
These waters separate Eastern Europe , the Caucasus and Western Asia .
The Black Sea is also connected , to the North , to the Sea of Azov by the Strait of Kerch .
The water level has varied significantly .
Due to these variations in the water level in the basin , the surrounding shelf and associated aprons have sometimes been land .
At certain critical water levels it is possible for connections with surrounding water bodies to become established .
It is through the most active of these connective routes , the Turkish Straits , that the Black Sea joins the world ocean .
When this hydrological link is not present , the Black Sea is an endorheic basin , operating independently of the global ocean system , like the Caspian Sea for example .
Currently the Black Sea water level is relatively high , thus water is being exchanged with the Mediterranean .
The Turkish Straits connect the Black Sea with the Aegean Sea , and comprise the Bosphorus , the Sea of Marmara and the Dardanelles .
EXTENT Section::::Extent .
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Black Sea as follows : POPULATION NAME MODERN NAMES Section::::Name .
Section::::Modern names .
Current names of the sea are usually equivalents of the English name " Black Sea " , including these given in the countries bordering the sea : * , * , * Laz and , , or simply , , " Sea " * , * , Such names have not yet been shown conclusively to predate the 13th century , but there are indications that they may be considerably older .
In Greece , the historical name " Euxine Sea " , which holds a different meaning ( see below ) , is still widely used :
* Greek : ( ) ;
the literal ( ) is less common The Black Sea is one of four seas named in English after common colour terms — the others being the Red Sea , the White Sea and the Yellow Sea .
HISTORICAL NAMES AND ETYMOLOGY Section::::Historical names and etymology .
The principal Greek name " Póntos Áxeinos " is generally accepted to be a rendering of Iranian word ( " dark colored " ) , compare Avestan ( " dark colored " ) , Old Persian ( color of turquoise ) , Middle Persian / ( " blue " ) , and New Persian ( " blue " ) , as well as Ossetic ( " dark gray " ) .
The ancient Greeks , most likely those living to the north of the Black Sea , subsequently adopted the name and altered it to .
Thereafter , Greek tradition refers to the Black Sea as the " Inhospitable Sea " , , which is first attested in Pindar ( ) .
The name was considered to be " ominous " and was later changed into the euphemistic name " Hospitable sea " , , which was also for the first time attested in Pindar .
This became the commonly used designation for the sea in Greek .
In contexts related to mythology , the older form remained favored .
It has been erroneously suggested that the name was derived from the color of the water , or was at least related to climatic conditions .
Black or dark in this context , however , referred to a system in which colors represent the cardinal points of the known world .
Black or dark represented the north ; red the south ; white the west ; and green or light blue for the east .
The symbolism based on cardinal points was used in multiple occasions and is therefore widely attested .
For example , the " Red Sea " , a body of water reported since the time of Herodotus ( – ) in fact designated the Indian Ocean , together with bodies of water now known as the Persian Gulf and the Red Sea .
According to the same explanation and reasoning , it is therefore considered to be impossible for the Scythians , who principally roamed in present - day Ukraine and Russia , to have given the designation because they lived to the north of the sea , which would be therefore be a southern body of water for them .
The name could have only been given by people who were aware of both the northern " black / dark " and southern " red " seas ; it is therefore considered probable it was given its name by the Achaemenids ( 550–330 BC ) .
Strabo 's Geographica ( 1.2.10 ) reports that in antiquity , the Black Sea was often simply called " the Sea " ( ) .
He also thought the Black Sea was called " inhospitable " before Greek colonization because it was difficult to navigate and because its shores were inhabited by savage tribes.(7.3.6 )
The name was changed to " hospitable " after the Milesians had colonized the Pontus region of the southern shoreline , making it part of Greek civilization .
In Greater Bundahishn , a sacred Zoroastrian text written in Middle Persian , the Black Sea is called .
A 1570 map of Asia titled from Abraham Ortelius 's labels the sea ( " Great Sea " , compare Latin ) .
English - language writers of the 18th century often used the name Euxine Sea ( or ) to refer to the Black Sea .
Edward Gibbon , for instance , calls the sea by this name throughout The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire .
During the Ottoman Empire period , the Black Sea was called either or , both meaning " the Black Sea " in the Ottoman Turkish .
In the tenth - century geography book , which was written in Persian by an unknown author , the Black Sea is called Georgian Sea , Sea of Georgians ( ) .
Old Georgian sources of the 9th to 14th centuries , The Georgian Chronicles , used the name ( ) , which means " The Sea of Speri " , after the name of Kartvelian tribe Speris or Saspers , now in Turkey .
The modern names of the Black Sea ( , , etc . ) , originated in the 13th century .
GEOLOGY AND BATHYMETRY Section::::Geology and bathymetry .
The geological origins of the basin can be traced back to two distinct relict back - arc basins which were initiated by the splitting of an Albian volcanic arc and the subduction of both the Paleo- and Neo - Tethys Oceans , but the timings of these events remain controversial .
Since its initiation , compressional tectonic environments led to subsidence in the basin , interspersed with extensional phases resulting in large - scale volcanism and numerous orogenies , causing the uplift of the Greater Caucasus , Pontides , Southern Crimean Peninsula and Balkanides mountain ranges .
The ongoing collision between the Eurasian and African plates and westward escape of the Anatolian block along the North Anatolian Fault and East Anatolian Faults dictates the current tectonic regime , which features enhanced subsidence in the Black Sea basin and significant volcanic activity in the Anatolian region .
It is these geological mechanisms which , in the long term , have caused the periodic isolations of the Black Sea from the rest of the global ocean system .
The modern basin is divided into two sub - basins by a convexity extending south from the Crimean Peninsula .
The large shelf to the north of the basin is up to wide , and features a shallow apron with gradients between 1:40 and 1:1000 .
The southern edge around Turkey and the eastern edge around Georgia , however , are typified by a narrow shelf that rarely exceeds in width and a steep apron that is typically 1:40 gradient with numerous submarine canyons and channel extensions .
The Euxine abyssal plain in the centre of the Black Sea reaches a maximum depth of just south of Yalta on the Crimean Peninsula .
The littoral zone of the Black Sea is often referred to as the Pontic littoral or Pontic zone .
The area surrounding the Black Sea is commonly referred to as the Black Sea Region .
Its northern part lies within the Chernozem belt ( black soil belt ) which goes from eastern Croatia ( Slavonia ) , along the Danube ( northern Serbia , northern Bulgaria ( Danubian Plain ) and southern Romania ( Wallachian Plain ) ) to northeast Ukraine and further across the Central Black Earth Region and southern Russia into Siberia .
HYDROLOGY Section::::Hydrology .
The Black Sea is a marginal sea and is the world 's largest body of water with a meromictic basin .
The deep waters do not mix with the upper layers of water that receive oxygen from the atmosphere .
As a result , over 90 % of the deeper Black Sea volume is anoxic water .
The Black Sea 's circulation patterns are primarily controlled by basin topography and fluvial inputs , which result in a strongly stratified vertical structure .
Because of the extreme stratification , it is classified as a salt wedge estuary .
The Black Sea only experiences water transfer with the Mediterranean Sea , so all inflow and outflow occurs in the Bosphorus and Dardanelles .
Inflow from the Mediterranean has a higher salinity and density than the outflow , creating the classical estuarine circulation .
This means that inflow of dense water from the Mediterranean occurs at the bottom of the basin while outflow of fresher Black Sea surface - water into the Marmara Sea occurs near the surface .
Fresher surface water is the product of the fluvial inputs , and this makes the Black Sea a positive sea .
The net input of freshwater creates an outflow volume about twice that of the inflow .
Evaporation and precipitation are roughly equal at about .
Because of the narrowness and shallowness of the Bosphorus and Dardanelles ( their respective depths are only 33 and 70 meters ) , inflow and outflow current speeds are high and there is significant vertical shear .
This allows for turbulent mixing of the two layers .
Surface water leaves the Black Sea with a salinity of 17 psu and reaches the Mediterranean with a salinity of 34 psu .
Likewise , inflow of the Mediterranean with salinity 38.5 psu experiences a decrease to about 34 psu .
Mean surface circulation is cyclonic and waters around the perimeter of the Black Sea circulate in a basin - wide shelfbreak gyre known as the Rim Current .
The Rim Current has a maximum velocity of about 50–100 cm / s .
Within this feature , two smaller cyclonic gyres operate , occupying the eastern and western sectors of the basin .
The Eastern and Western Gyres are well - organized systems in the winter but dissipate into a series of interconnected eddies in the summer and autumn .
Mesoscale activity in the peripheral flow becomes more pronounced during these warmer seasons and is subject to interannual variability .
Outside of the Rim Current , numerous quasi - permanent coastal eddies are formed as a result of upwelling around the coastal apron and " wind curl " mechanisms .
The intra - annual strength of these features is controlled by seasonal atmospheric and fluvial variations .
During the spring , the Batumi eddy forms in the southeastern corner of the sea .
Beneath the surface waters — from about 50–100 meters
— there exists a halocline that stops at the Cold Intermediate Layer ( CIL ) .
This layer is composed of cool , salty surface waters , which are the result of localized atmospheric cooling and decreased fluvial input during the winter months .
It is the remnant of the winter surface mixed layer .
The base of the CIL is marked by a major pycnocline at about and this density disparity is the major mechanism for isolation of the deep water .
Below the pycnocline is the Deep Water mass , where salinity increases to 22.3 psu and temperatures rise to around 8.9 ° C .
The hydrochemical environment shifts from oxygenated to anoxic , as bacterial decomposition of sunken biomass utilizes all of the free oxygen .
Weak geothermal heating and long residence time create a very thick convective bottom layer .
HYDROCHEMISTRY Section::::Hydrochemistry .
Because of the anoxic water at depth , organic matter , including anthropogenic artifacts such as boat hulls , are well preserved .
During periods of high surface productivity , short - lived algal blooms form organic rich layers known as sapropels .
Scientists have reported an annual phytoplankton bloom that can be seen in many NASA images of the region .
As a result of these characteristics the Black Sea has gained interest from the field of marine archaeology as ancient shipwrecks in excellent states of preservation have been discovered , such as the Byzantine wreck Sinop D , located in the anoxic layer off the coast of Sinop , Turkey .
Modelling shows the release of the hydrogen sulfide clouds in the event of an asteroid impact into the Black Sea would pose a threat to health — or even life — for people living on the Black Sea coast .
There have been isolated reports of flares on the Black Sea occurring during thunderstorms , possibly caused by lightning igniting combustible gas seeping up from the sea depths .
ECOLOGY
MARINE Section::::Ecology .
Section::::Marine .
The Black Sea supports an active and dynamic marine ecosystem , dominated by species suited to the brackish , nutrient - rich , conditions .
As with all marine food webs , the Black Sea features a range of trophic groups , with autotrophic algae , including diatoms and dinoflagellates , acting as primary producers .
The fluvial systems draining Eurasia and central Europe introduce large volumes of sediment and dissolved nutrients into the Black Sea , but distribution of these nutrients is controlled by the degree of physiochemical stratification , which is , in turn , dictated by seasonal physiographic development .
During winter , strong wind promotes convective overturning and upwelling of nutrients , while high summer temperatures result in a marked vertical stratification and a warm , shallow mixed layer .
Day length and insolation intensity also controls the extent of the photic zone .
Subsurface productivity is limited by nutrient availability , as the anoxic bottom waters act as a sink for reduced nitrate , in the form of ammonia .
The benthic zone also plays an important role in Black Sea nutrient cycling , as chemosynthetic organisms and anoxic geochemical pathways recycle nutrients which can be upwelled to the photic zone , enhancing productivity .
In total , Black Sea 's biodiversity contains around one - third of Mediterranean 's , and is experiencing natural and artificial invasions or Mediterranizations .
PHYTOPLANKTON
Section::::Phytoplankton .
The main phytoplankton groups present in the Black Sea are dinoflagellates , diatoms , coccolithophores and cyanobacteria .
Generally , the annual cycle of phytoplankton development comprises significant diatom and dinoflagellate - dominated spring production , followed by a weaker mixed assemblage of community development below the seasonal thermocline during summer months and a surface - intensified autumn production .
This pattern of productivity is also augmented by an Emiliania huxleyi bloom during the late spring and summer months .
* Dinoflagellates
* Diatoms
* Coccolithophores *
Cyanobacteria ANIMAL SPECIES * Zebra mussel * Common Carp * Round Goby * Marine Mammals and marine megafaunas ECOLOGICAL EFFECTS OF POLLUTION Section::::Ecological effects of pollution .
Since the 1960s , rapid industrial expansion along the Black Sea coast line and the construction of a major dam has significantly increased annual variability in the N : P : Si ratio in the basin .
In coastal areas , the biological effect of these changes has been an increase in the frequency of monospecific phytoplankton blooms , with diatom bloom frequency increasing by a factor of 2.5 and non - diatom bloom frequency increasing by a factor of 6 .
The non - diatoms , such as the prymnesiophytes ( coccolithophore ) , sp . , and the Euglenophyte are able to out - compete diatom species because of the limited availability of Si , a necessary constituent of diatom frustules .
As a consequence of these blooms , benthic macrophyte populations were deprived of light , while anoxia caused mass mortality in marine animals .
The decline in macrophytes was further compounded by overfishing during the 1970s , while the invasive ctenophore Mnemiopsis reduced the biomass of copepods and other zooplankton in the late 1980s .
Additionally , an alien species — the warty comb jelly ( ) — was able to establish itself in the basin , exploding from a few individuals to an estimated biomass of one billion metric tons .
The change in species composition in Black Sea waters also has consequences for hydrochemistry , as Ca - producing coccolithophores influence salinity and pH , although these ramifications have yet to be fully quantified .
In central Black Sea waters , Si levels were also significantly reduced , due to a decrease in the flux of Si associated with advection across isopycnal surfaces .
This phenomenon demonstrates the potential for localised alterations in Black Sea nutrient input to have basin - wide effects .
Pollution reduction and regulation efforts have led to a partial recovery of the Black Sea ecosystem during the 1990s , and an EU monitoring exercise , ' EROS21 ' , revealed decreased N and P values , relative to the 1989 peak .
Recently , scientists have noted signs of ecological recovery , in part due to the construction of new sewage treatment plants in Slovakia , Hungary , Romania , and Bulgaria in connection with membership in the European Union .
populations have been checked with the arrival of another alien species which feeds on them .
TERRESTRIAL
Section::::Terrestrial .
In the past , the range of the Asiatic lion extended from South Asia to the Balkans , possibly up to the Danube .
Places like Turkey and the Trans - Caucasus were in this range .
The Caspian tiger occurred in eastern Turkey and the Caucasus , at least .
The lyuti zver ( Old East Slavic for " fierce animal " ) that was encountered by Vladimir II Monomakh , Velikiy Kniaz of Kievan Rus ' ( which ranged to the Black Sea in the south ) , may have been a tiger or leopard , rather than a wolf or lynx , due to the way it behaved towards him and his horse .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Short - term climatic variation in the Black Sea region is significantly influenced by the operation of the North Atlantic oscillation , the climatic mechanisms resulting from the interaction between the north Atlantic and mid - latitude air masses .
While the exact mechanisms causing the North Atlantic Oscillation remain unclear , it is thought the climate conditions established in western Europe mediate the heat and precipitation fluxes reaching Central Europe and Eurasia , regulating the formation of winter cyclones , which are largely responsible for regional precipitation inputs and influence Mediterranean Sea Surface Temperatures ( SST 's ) .
The relative strength of these systems also limits the amount of cold air arriving from northern regions during winter .
Other influencing factors include the regional topography , as depressions and storms systems arriving from the Mediterranean are funneled through the low land around the Bosphorus , Pontic and Caucasus mountain ranges acting as wave guides , limiting the speed and paths of cyclones passing through the region .
ISLANDS Section::::Islands .
There are some islands in the Black sea that belong to Bulgaria , Romania , Turkey , and Ukraine :
* St. Thomas Island – Bulgaria * St. Anastasia Island – Bulgaria * St. Cyricus Island – Bulgaria
* St. Ivan Island – Bulgaria * St. Peter Island – Bulgaria * Sacalinu Mare Island – Romania * Sacalinu Mic Island – Romania
* Musura / Novaya Zemliya – Romania and Ukraine * Utrish Island
* Krupinin Island
* Sudiuk Island * Kefken Island * Oreke Island * Giresun Island * Dzharylgach Island – Ukraine * Zmiinyi ( Snake ) Island – Ukraine HISTORY MEDITERRANEAN CONNECTION DURING THE HOLOCENE Section::::History .
Section::::Mediterranean connection during the Holocene .
The Black Sea is connected to the World Ocean by a chain of two shallow straits , the Dardanelles and the Bosphorus .
The Dardanelles is deep and the Bosphorus is as shallow as .
By comparison , at the height of the last ice age , sea levels were more than lower than they are now .
There is also evidence that water levels in the Black Sea were considerably lower at some point during the post - glacial period .
Some researchers theorize that the Black Sea had been a landlocked freshwater lake ( at least in upper layers ) during the last glaciation and for some time after .
In the aftermath of the last glacial period , water levels in the Black Sea and the Aegean Sea rose independently until they were high enough to exchange water .
The exact timeline of this development is still subject to debate .
One possibility is that the Black Sea filled first , with excess fresh water flowing over the Bosphorus sill and eventually into the Mediterranean Sea .
There are also catastrophic scenarios , such as the " Black Sea deluge theory " put forward by William Ryan , Walter Pitman and .
DELUGE HYPOTHESIS Section::::Deluge hypothesis .
The Black Sea deluge is a hypothesized catastrophic rise in the level of the Black Sea circa 5600 BC due to waters from the Mediterranean Sea breaching a sill in the Bosporus Strait .
The hypothesis was headlined when The New York Times published it in December 1996 , shortly before it was published in an academic journal .
While it is agreed that the sequence of events described did occur , there is debate over the suddenness , dating and magnitude of the events .
Relevant to the hypothesis is that its description has led some to connect this catastrophe with prehistoric flood myths .
RECORDED HISTORY Section::::Recorded history .
The Black Sea was a busy waterway on the crossroads of the ancient world : the Balkans to the west , the Eurasian steppes to the north , Caucasus and Central Asia to the east , Asia Minor and Mesopotamia to the south , and Greece to the south - west .
The oldest processed gold in the world was found in Varna , Bulgaria , and the Black Sea was supposedly sailed by the Argonauts .
The land at the eastern end of the Black Sea , Colchis , ( now Georgia ) , marked for the Greeks the edge of the known world .
The steppes to the north of the Black Sea have been suggested as the original homeland ( ) of the speakers of the Proto - Indo - European language , ( PIE )
the progenitor of the Indo - European language family , by some scholars such as Marija Gimbutas ; others move the heartland further east towards the Caspian Sea , yet others to Anatolia .
The Black Sea became an Ottoman Navy lake within five years of Genoa losing the Crimea in 1479 , after which the only Western merchant vessels to sail its waters were those of Venice 's old rival Ragusa .
This restriction was gradually changed by the Russian Navy from 1783 until the relaxation of export controls in 1789 because of the French Revolution .
The Black Sea was a significant naval theatre of World War I and saw both naval and land battles during World War II .
ARCHAEOLOGY Section::::Archaeology .
Ancient trade routes in the region are currently being extensively studied by scientists , as the Black Sea was sailed by Hittites , Carians , Colchians , Thracians , Greeks , Persians , Cimmerians , Scythians , Romans , Byzantines , Goths , Huns , Avars , Slavs , Varangians , Crusaders , Venetians , Genoese , Georgians , Tatars and Ottomans .
Perhaps the most promising areas in deepwater archaeology are the quest for submerged prehistoric settlements in the continental shelf and for ancient shipwrecks in the anoxic zone , which are expected to be exceptionally well preserved due to the absence of oxygen .
This concentration of historical powers , combined with the preservative qualities of the deep anoxic waters of the Black Sea , has attracted increased interest from marine archaeologists who have begun to discover a large number of ancient ships and organic remains in a high state of preservation .
MODERN USE COMMERCIAL AND CIVIC USE Section::::Modern use .
Section::::Commercial and civic use .
According to NATO , the Black sea is a strategic corridor that provides smuggling channels for moving legal and illegal goods including drugs , radioactive materials , and counterfeit goods that can be used to finance terrorism .
NAVIGATION PORTS AND FERRY TERMINALS Section::::Navigation .
Section::::Ports and ferry terminals .
According to the International Transport Workers ' Federation 2013 study , there were at least 30 operating merchant seaports in the Black Sea ( including at least 12 in Ukraine ) .
MERCHANT FLEET AND TRAFFIC Section::::Merchant fleet and traffic .
According to the International Transport Workers ' Federation 2013 study , there were around 2,400 commercial vessels operating in the Black Sea .
FISHING Section::::Fishing .
Anchovy : the Turkish commercial fishing fleet catches around 300,000 tons per year on average , and fishery carried out mainly in winter and the highest portion of the stock is caught between November and December .
HYDROCARBONS EXPLORATION Section::::Hydrocarbons exploration .
Since the 1980s , the Soviet Union started offshore drilling for petroleum in the sea 's western portion ( adjoining Ukraine 's coast ) .
The independent Ukraine continued and intensified that effort within its exclusive economic zone , inviting major international oil companies for exploration .
Discovery of the new , massive oilfields in the area stimulated an influx of foreign investments .
It also provoked a short - term peaceful territorial dispute with Romania which was resolved in 2011 by an international court redefining the exclusive economic zones between the two countries .
HOLIDAY RESORTS AND SPAS Section::::Holiday resorts and spas .
In the years following the end of the Cold War , the popularity of the Black Sea as a tourist destination steadily increased .
Tourism at Black Sea resorts became one of the region 's growth industries .
The following is a list of notable Black Sea resort towns :
* 2 Mai ( Romania )
*
Agigea ( Romania )
* Ahtopol ( Bulgaria )
* Amasra ( Turkey )
* Anaklia ( Georgia ) * Anapa ( Russia ) * Albena ( Bulgaria ) *
Alupka ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Alushta ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Balchik ( Bulgaria ) * Batumi ( Georgia ) * Burgas ( Bulgaria ) * Byala ( Bulgaria ) * Cap Aurora ( Romania )
* Chakvi ( Georgia ) * Constantine and Helena ( Bulgaria )
* Constanța ( Romania )
* Corbu ( Romania )
* Costineşti ( Romania )
* Eforie ( Romania )
* Emona ( Bulgaria )
* Eupatoria ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Foros ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Feodosiya ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Giresun ( Turkey )
* Gagra ( Abkhazia , Georgia )
* Gelendzhik ( Russia ) * Golden Sands ( Bulgaria )
* Gonio ( Georgia ) * Gurzuf ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Hopa ( Artvin , Turkey ) * Istanbul ( Turkey ) * Jupiter ( Romania ) * Kamchia ( Bulgaria )
* Kavarna ( Bulgaria ) * Kiten ( Bulgaria )
* Kobuleti ( Georgia ) * Koktebel ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Lozenetz ( Bulgaria )
* Mamaia ( Romania )
* Mangalia ( Romania ) * Năvodari ( Romania )
* Neptun ( Romania ) * Nesebar ( Bulgaria )
* Novorossiysk ( Russia ) * Ordu ( Turkey ) * Obzor ( Bulgaria )
* Odessa ( Ukraine ) * Olimp ( Romania )
* Pitsunda ( Abkhazia , Georgia ) * Pomorie ( Bulgaria )
* Primorsko ( Bulgaria )
* Rize ( Turkey ) * Rusalka ( Bulgaria ) * Samsun ( Turkey )
* Saturn ( Romania ) * Sinop ( Turkey ) * Sochi ( Russia ) * Sozopol ( Bulgaria ) * Sudak ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Skadovsk ( Ukraine ) * Sulina ( Romania ) * Sunny Beach ( Bulgaria )
* Şile ( Turkey )
* Sveti Vlas ( Bulgaria )
* Trabzon ( Turkey )
* Tsikhisdziri ( Georgia ) * Tuapse ( Russia ) * Ureki ( Georgia )
* Vama Veche ( Romania )
* Varna ( Bulgaria )
* Venus ( Romania )
* Yalta ( Crimea , Russia / Ukraine )
* Zonguldak ( Turkey ) MODERN MILITARY USE INTERNATIONAL AND MILITARY USE OF THE STRAITS Section::::Modern military use .
Section::::International and military use of the Straits .
The 1936 Montreux Convention provides for a free passage of civilian ships between the international waters of the Black and the Mediterranean Seas .
However , a single country ( Turkey ) has a complete control over the straits connecting the two seas .
The 1982 amendments to the Montreux Convention allow Turkey to close the Straits at its discretion in both wartime and peacetime .
The 1936 Montreux Convention governs the passage of vessels between the Black and the Mediterranean Seas and the presence of military vessels belonging to non - littoral states in the Black Sea waters .
In December 2018 , the Kerch Strait incident took place .
The Russian Navy and Coast guard took control of three ships belonging to their counterparts .
The ships were trying to enter the Black Sea TRANS - SEA COOPERATION SEE ALSO * 1927 Crimean earthquakes
* Ancient Black Sea shipwrecks *
Anoxic event * Bulgarian Black Sea Coast * Caucasian Riviera
* Internationalization of the Danube River
* Karadeniz Technical University
* Kuma – Manych Depression
* Mount Akhun
* Romanian Black Sea resorts
REFERENCES
INFORMATIONAL NOTES
CITATIONS BIBLIOGRAPHY * Stella Ghervas , " Odessa et les confins
de
l'Europe : un éclairage historique " , in Stella Ghervas et François Rosset ( ed ) , Lieux d'Europe .
Mythes et limites
( Paris : Editions de la Maison des sciences de l'homme , 2008 ) , pp .
107–124 .
* Charles King , The Black Sea : A History , 2004 , * William Ryan and Walter Pitman , Noah 's Flood , 1999 , * Neal Ascherson , Black Sea ( Vintage 1996 ) , * Rüdiger Schmitt , " Considerations on the Name of the Black Sea " , in : Hellas und der griechische Osten ( Saarbrücken 1996 ) , pp .
219–224
* Dimitrov , D. 2010 .
Geology and Non - traditional resources of the Black Sea .
LAP Lambert Academic Publishing . .
244p .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Space Monitoring of the Black Sea Coastline and Waters * Pictures of the Black sea coast all along the Crimean peninsula * Black Sea Environmental Internet Node
* Black Sea - Mediterranean Corridor during the last 30 ky : UNESCO IGCP 521
WG12