BUBBLE TEA Bubble tea ( also known as pearl milk tea , bubble milk tea , or simply boba )
( , with tapioca balls it is ) is a Taiwanese tea - based drink invented in Tainan and Taichung in the 1980s .
Recipes contain tea of some kind , flavors of milk , as well as sugar ( optional ) .
Toppings , such as chewy tapioca balls ( also known as pearls , or boba ) , popping boba , fruit jelly , grass jelly , agar jelly , and puddings are often added .
Ice - blended versions are frozen and put into a blender , resulting in a slushy consistency .
There are many varieties of the drink with a wide range of flavors .
The two most popular varieties are black pearl milk tea and green pearl milk tea .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Boba teas fall under two categories : teas ( without milk ) and milk teas .
Both varieties come with a choice of black , green , or oolong tea , and come in many flavors ( both fruit and non - fruit ) .
Milk teas include either condensed milk , powdered milk , or fresh milk .
Some shops offer non - dairy creamer options as well .
In addition , many boba shops sell Asian style smoothies , which include a dairy base and either fresh fruit or fruit - flavored powder ( but no tea ) .
Now , there are hot versions available at most shops as well .
The oldest known bubble tea consisted of a mixture of hot Taiwanese black tea , small tapioca pearls ( 粉圓 ) , condensed milk , and syrup ( 糖漿 ) or honey .
Many variations followed ; the most common are served cold rather than hot .
The most prevalent varieties of tea have changed frequently .
Bubble tea first became popular in Taiwan in the 1980s , but the original inventor is unknown .
Larger tapioca pearls ( 波霸/黑珍珠 ) were adapted and quickly replaced the small pearls .
Soon after , different flavors , especially fruit flavors , became popular .
Flavors may be added in the form of powder , pulp , or syrup to oolong , black or green tea , which is then shaken with ice in a cocktail shaker .
The tea mixture is then poured into a cup with the toppings in it .
Today , there are stores that specialize in bubble tea .
Some cafés use plastic lids , but more authentic bubble tea shops serve drinks using a machine to seal the top of the cup with plastic cellophane .
The latter method allows the tea to be shaken in the serving cup and makes it spill - free until one is ready to drink it .
The cellophane is then pierced with an oversize straw large enough to allow the toppings to pass through .
Today , in Taiwan , it is most common for people to refer to the drink as pearl milk tea ( zhēn zhū nǎi chá , or zhēn nǎi for short ) .
Pearl milk tea may be used by English speakers and overseas Chinese and Taiwanese speakers , but it is usually called " bubble tea " or " boba tea " by English speakers , with the former seemingly more common in locations with less Chinese influence .
In parts of California and other areas with a relatively large Asian population , the drink is often referred to simply as " boba " for short .
VARIANTS
Section::::Variants .
Each of the ingredients of bubble tea can have many variations depending on the tea store .
Typically , different types of black tea , green tea , and sometimes white tea are used .
Another variation called yuenyeung ( 鴛鴦 , named after the Mandarin duck ) originated in Hong Kong and consists of black tea , coffee , and milk .
Decaffeinated versions of teas are sometimes available when the tea house freshly brews the tea base .
Other varieties of the drink can include blended tea drinks .
Some may be blended with ice cream .
There are also smoothies that contain both tea and fruit .
Although bubble tea originated in Taiwan , some bubble tea shops are starting to add in flavors which originate from other countries .
For example , hibiscus flowers , saffron , cardamom , and rosewater are becoming popular .
Tapioca balls ( boba ) are the prevailing chewy spheres in bubble tea , but a wide range of other options can be used to add similar texture to the drink .
These are usually black due to the brown sugar mixed in with the tapioca .
Green pearls have a small hint of green tea flavor and are chewier than the traditional tapioca balls .
Jelly comes different shapes : small cubes , stars , or rectangular strips , and flavors such as coconut jelly , konjac , lychee , grass jelly , mango , coffee and green tea available at some shops .
Azuki bean or mung bean paste , typical toppings for Taiwanese shaved ice desserts , give the drinks an added subtle flavor as well as texture .
Aloe , egg pudding ( custard ) , and sago can be found in most tea houses .
Popping Boba are spheres and have fruit juices or syrups inside of them .
They are also popular toppings .
The many flavors include mango , lychee , strawberry , green apple , passion fruit , pomegranate , orange , cantaloupe , blueberry , coffee , chocolate , yogurt , kiwi , peach , banana , lime , cherry , pineapple , red guava , etc .
Some shops offer milk or cheese foam top off the drink too , which has a thicker consistency similar to that of whipped cream .
Bubble tea cafés will frequently offer drinks without coffee or tea in them .
The dairy base for these drinks is flavoring blended with ice , often called snow bubble .
All mix - ins that can be added to the bubble tea can be added to these slushie - like drinks .
One drawback is that the coldness of the iced drink may cause the tapioca balls to harden , making them difficult to suck up through a straw and chew .
To prevent this from happening , these slushies must be consumed more quickly than bubble tea .
Bubble tea stores often give customers the option of choosing the amount of ice or sugar .
Bubble tea is also offered in some restaurants .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The most widely accepted story for the origin of bubble tea comes from the Hanlin teahouse in Tainan , Taiwan .
In 1986 , in the Ya Mu Liao market , teahouse owner Tu Tsong - he got the inspiration when he saw white tapioca balls .
He then made tea using the traditional white tapioca balls , which have the appearance of pearls , supposedly resulting in the so - called " pearl tea " .
Shortly after , Hanlin changed the white tapioca balls to the black version , mixed with brown sugar or honey , that is seen today .
At many locations , one can purchase both black tapioca balls and white tapioca balls .
An alternative origin story is the Chun Shui Tang Teahouse in Taichung , Taiwan .
Its founder , Liu Han - Chieh , observed how the Japanese served cold coffee ( while on a visit in the 1980s ) and applied this method to tea .
The new style of serving tea propelled his business , and multiple chains were established .
This expansion began the rapid expansion of bubble tea .
The creator of bubble tea is Lin Hsiu Hui , the teahouse 's product development manager , who randomly poured her fen yuan into the iced tea drink during a boring meeting in 1988 .
The beverage was well received at the meeting , leading to its inclusion on the menu .
It ultimately became the franchise 's top - selling product .
The drink became popular in most parts of East and Southeast Asia during the 1990s .
The drink is well received by foreign consumers in North America , specifically around areas with high populations of Overseas Chinese and Taiwanese .
In contemporary times , bubble tea has achieved cultural significance outside of Taiwan in some areas for major East Asian diaspora populations .
TYPES
* 泡沫紅茶 ( ):
" Foam red tea " , by direct translation , is the drink that is more appropriate for the more literal name of " bubble tea " ; the English name , foam tea , is not used much in Asia .
Consequently , in non - Chinese - speaking Asian countries , " bubble tea " is commonly used to refer to this drink .
There is no tapioca in this drink .
To create it , vendors mix hot or warm tea ( in this case , black tea ) with syrup or sugar and ice cubes into a cocktail shaker .
Then they shake the mix either by hand or by machine before it is served .
The resulting tea is be covered by a layer of foam or froth and the tea has a light foamy feel .
* 泡沫奶茶 ( ):
" Foam milk tea : " One of the many variants that is prepared the same way as the " foam red tea " , well - shaken before serving .
* 珍珠奶茶 or 珍奶 for short )
( ): " Pearl milk tea " or more commonly referred to as bubble tea by most English speakers and overseas Chinese speakers .
The " pearl " name originally referred to the small tapioca pearls added to the drink .
Though most modern vendors serve only the bigger 7 mm pearls , they still use " pearl tea " as the name .
* 波霸奶茶 ( ): " Bubble milk tea " is commonly referred to as boba tea by English speakers and Asian Americans .
The name refers to the variant with the bigger , 7 mm tapioca pearls .
* 黑珍珠奶茶 ( ):
" Black pearl milk tea : " Since the bigger 7 mm tapioca pearls are separately sold as " black pearls " ( 黑珍珠 ) in markets , this name was the logical first choice and is more popular with consumers .
" Boba " ( 波霸 ) is an alternative name that is less commonly used these days .
*
( 奶)茶珍珠 ( ): " ( milk ) tea pearl " ( less common ) .
* 泡泡茶 ( ): used interchangeably with 珍珠奶茶 to refer to " bubble tea " in Singapore .
* 奶蓋茶 ( pinyin : nǎi gài chá ) : " milk cap tea " : A layered tea drink with a frothy top layer of cream ( hence the name milk cap ) made from milk , salt or cheese , giving it a slightly salty taste .
The base tea is usually served without milk .
It is often recommended one takes a sip of the tea and milk cap layers first before mixing them together .
It is sometimes called " milk foam tea " but should not be confused with 泡沫奶茶. HEALTH CONCERNS
Section::::Health concerns .
In May 2011 , a food scandal broke out in Taiwan where DEHP ( a chemical plasticizer and potential carcinogen used to make plastic ) was found as a stabilizer in drinks and juice syrups .
Some of these products may have been exported and used in bubble tea shops around the world .
DEHP can affect hormone balances .
In June 2011 , the Health Minister of Malaysia , Liow Tiong Lai , instructed companies selling " Strawberry Syrup " , a material used in some bubble teas , to stop selling them after chemical tests showed they were tainted with DEHP .
In August 2012 , scientists from the Technical University of Aachen ( RWTH ) in Germany analyzed bubble tea samples in a research project to look for allergenic substances .
The result indicated that the products contain styrene , acetophenone , and brominated substances , which can negatively affect health .
The report was published by German newspaper Rheinische Post and caused Taiwan 's representative office in Germany to issue a statement , saying food items in Taiwan are monitored .
Taiwan 's Food and Drug Administration confirmed in September that , in a second round of tests conducted by German authorities , Taiwanese bubble tea was found to be free of cancer - causing chemicals .
The products were also found to contain no excessive levels of heavy - metal contaminants or other health - threatening agents .
In May 2013 , the Taiwan Food and Drug Administration issued an alert on the detection of maleic acid , an unapproved food additive , in some food products , including tapioca pearls .
The Agri - Food & Veterinary Authority of Singapore conducted its own tests and found additional brands of tapioca pearls and some other starch - based products sold in Singapore were similarly affected .
SEE ALSO
* Cuisine of Taiwan
* Hong Kong tea culture
* List of Taiwanese inventions and discoveries * Taiwanese tea culture REFERENCES