ALLENE
An allene is a compound in which one carbon atom has double bonds with each of its two adjacent carbon centres .
Allenes are classified as polyenes with cumulated dienes .
The parent compound of allene is propadiene .
Compounds with an allene - type structure but with more than three carbon atoms are called cumulenes .
Allenes are much more reactive than most other alkenes .
For example , their reactivity with gaseous chlorine is more like the reactivity of alkynes than that of alkenes .
STRUCTURE AND BONDING GEOMETRY Section::::Structure and bonding .
Section::::Geometry .
The central carbon atom of allene forms two sigma bonds and two pi bonds .
The central carbon is sp - hybridized , and the two terminal carbon atoms are sp - hybridized .
The bond angle formed by the three carbon atoms is 180 ° , indicating linear geometry for the carbon atoms of allene .
It can also be viewed as an " extended tetrahedral " with a similar shape to methane .
SYMMETRY Section::::Symmetry .
The symmetry and isomerism of allenes has long fascinated organic chemists .
For allenes with four identical substituents , there exist two twofold axes of rotation through the center carbon , inclined at 45 ° to the CH planes at either end of the molecule .
The molecule can thus be thought of as a two - bladed propeller .
A third twofold axis of rotation passes through the C = C = C bonds , and there is a mirror plane passing through both CH planes .
Thus this class of molecules belong to the D point group .
Because of the symmetry , an unsubstituted allene has no net dipole moment .
An allene with two different substituents on each of the two carbon atoms will be chiral because there will no longer be any mirror planes .
Where A has a greater priority than B according to the Cahn - Ingold - Prelog priority rule , the configuration of the axial chirality can be determined by considering the substituents on the front atom followed by the back atom when viewed along the allene axis .
For the bottom , only the group of higher priority need be considered .
Chiral allenes have been recently used as building blocks in the construction of organic materials with exceptional chiroptical properties .
SYNTHESIS Section::::Synthesis .
Although allenes often require specialized syntheses , the parent , propadiene is produced on a large scale as an equilibrium mixture with methylacetylene :
This mixture , known as MAPP gas , is commercially available .
Laboratory methods for the formation of allenes include : * from geminal dihalocyclopropanes and organolithium compounds in the Skattebøl rearrangement * from reaction of certain terminal alkynes with formaldehyde , copper(I ) bromide , and added base * from dehydrohalogenation of certain dihalides
* from reaction of a triphenylphosphinyl ester with an acid halide , a Wittig reaction accompanied by dehydrohalogenation AS A LIGAND AND SUBSTRATE IN HOMOGENEOUS CATALYSIS Section::::As a ligand and substrate in homogeneous catalysis .
Allenes function as ligands , not unlike alkenes .
A typical complex is Pt(η - allene)(PPh ) .
Ni(0 ) reagents catalyze the cyclooligomerization of allene .
Using a suitable catalyst ( e.g. Wilkinson 's catalyst ) , it is possible to reduce just one of the double bonds of an allene .
DELTA CONVENTION Section::::Delta convention .
Many rings or ring systems are known by semisystematic names that assume a maximum number of noncumulative bonds .
To unambiguously specify derivatives that include cumulated bonds ( and hence fewer hydrogens than would be expected from the skeleton ) , a lowercase delta may be used with a subscript indicating the number of cumulated double bonds from that atom , e.g. 8δ - Benzocyclononene .
This may be combined with the λ - convention for specifying nonstandard valency states , e.g. 2λδ,5λδ
- Thieno[3,4-c]thiophene .
SEE ALSO
* Compounds with three or more adjacent carbon – carbon double bonds are called cumulenes .
*
The allene motif is encountered in carbo - mers .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING *
Allene chemistry Kay M. Brummond ( Editor ) Thematic Series in the open - access Beilstein Journal of Organic Chemistry EXTERNAL LINKS
* Stereochemistry study guide *
Synthesis of allenes