ASSOCIATIVE PROPERTY
In mathematics , the associative property is a property of some binary operations .
In propositional logic , associativity is a valid rule of replacement for expressions in logical proofs .
Within an expression containing two or more occurrences in a row of the same associative operator , the order in which the operations are performed does not matter as long as the sequence of the operands is not changed .
That is , rearranging the parentheses in such an expression will not change its value .
Consider the following equations : Even though the parentheses were rearranged on each line , the values of the expressions were not altered .
Since this holds true when performing addition and multiplication on any real numbers , it can be said that " addition and multiplication of real numbers are associative operations " .
Associativity is not the same as commutativity , which addresses whether or not the order of two operands changes the result .
For example , the order does not matter in the multiplication of real numbers , that is , , so we say that the multiplication of real numbers is a commutative operation .
Associative operations are abundant in mathematics ; in fact , many algebraic structures ( such as semigroups and categories ) explicitly require their binary operations to be associative .
However , many important and interesting operations are non - associative ; some examples include subtraction , exponentiation , and the vector cross product .
In contrast to the theoretical properties of real numbers , the addition of floating point numbers in computer science is not associative , and the choice of how to associate an expression can have a significant effect on rounding error .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
Formally , a binary operation ∗ on a set S is called associative if it satisfies the associative law : Here , ∗ is used to replace the symbol of the operation , which may be any symbol , and even the absence of symbol ( juxtaposition ) as for multiplication .
The associative law can also be expressed in functional notation thus : .
GENERALIZED ASSOCIATIVE
LAW Section::::Generalized associative law .
If a binary operation is associative , repeated application of the operation produces the same result regardless how valid pairs of parenthesis are inserted in the expression .
This is called the generalized associative law .
For instance , a product of four elements may be written in five possible ways : * ( ( ab)c)d * * ( ab)(cd )
* *
( a(bc))d * * a((bc)d )
* * a(b(cd ) )
* If the product operation is associative , the generalized associative law says that all these formulas will yield the same result , making the parenthesis unnecessary .
Thus " the " product can be written unambiguously as As the number of elements increases , the number of possible ways to insert parentheses grows quickly , but they remain unnecessary for disambiguation .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Some examples of associative operations include the following .
*
The concatenation of the three strings codice_1 , codice_2 , codice_3 can be computed by concatenating the first two strings ( giving codice_4 ) and appending the third string ( codice_3 ) , or by joining the second and third string ( giving codice_6 ) and concatenating the first string ( codice_1 ) with the result .
The two methods produce the same result ; string concatenation is associative ( but not commutative ) .
*
In arithmetic , addition and multiplication of real numbers are associative ; i.e. , * The trivial operation ( that is , the result is the first argument , no matter what the second argument is ) is associative but not commutative .
Likewise , the trivial operation ( that is , the result is the second argument , no matter what the first argument is ) is associative but not commutative .
* Addition and multiplication of complex numbers and quaternions are associative .
Addition of octonions is also associative , but multiplication of octonions is non - associative .
*
The greatest common divisor and least common multiple functions act associatively .
* Taking the intersection or the union of sets :
* If M is some set and S denotes the set of all functions from M to M , then the operation of function composition on S is associative :
* Slightly more generally , given four sets M , N , P and Q , with h :
M to N , g :
N to P , and f : P to Q , then * Consider a set with three elements , A , B , and C.
The following operation : ! × ! !
A ! !
B ! !
C !
A !
B !
C
* Because matrices represent linear functions , and matrix multiplication represents function composition , one can immediately conclude that matrix multiplication is associative .
PROPOSITIONAL LOGIC RULE OF REPLACEMENT Section::::Propositional logic .
Section::::Rule of replacement .
In standard truth - functional propositional logic , association , or associativity are two valid rules of replacement .
The rules allow one to move parentheses in logical expressions in logical proofs .
The rules ( using logical connectives notation ) are : and where " formula_10 " is a metalogical symbol representing " can be replaced in a proof with . "
TRUTH FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVES Section::::Truth functional connectives .
Associativity is a property of some logical connectives of truth - functional propositional logic .
The following logical equivalences demonstrate that associativity is a property of particular connectives .
The following are truth - functional tautologies .
Associativity of disjunction : Associativity of conjunction : Associativity of equivalence :
Joint denial is an example of a truth functional connective that is not associative .
NON - ASSOCIATIVE OPERATION Section::::Non - associative operation .
A binary operation
formula_17 on a set S
that does not satisfy the associative law is called non - associative .
Symbolically , For such an operation the order of evaluation does matter .
For example :
* Subtraction * Division * Exponentiation Also note that infinite sums are not generally associative , for example : whereas The study of non - associative structures arises from reasons somewhat different from the mainstream of classical algebra .
One area within non - associative algebra that has grown very large is that of Lie algebras .
There the associative law is replaced by the Jacobi identity .
Lie algebras abstract the essential nature of infinitesimal transformations , and have become ubiquitous in mathematics .
There are other specific types of non - associative structures that have been studied in depth ; these tend to come from some specific applications or areas such as combinatorial mathematics .
Other examples are Quasigroup , Quasifield , Non - associative ring , Non - associative algebra and Commutative non - associative magmas .
NONASSOCIATIVITY OF FLOATING POINT CALCULATION Section::::Nonassociativity of floating point calculation .
In mathematics , addition and multiplication of real numbers is associative .
By contrast , in computer science , the addition and multiplication of floating point numbers is not associative , as rounding errors are introduced when dissimilar - sized values are joined together .
To illustrate this , consider a floating point representation with a 4-bit mantissa : ( 1.000×2 + 1.000×2 ) + 1.000×2 = 1.000×2 + 1.000×2 = 1.00×2 1.000×2
+ ( 1.000×2 + 1.000×2 ) = 1.000×2 + 1.00×2 = 1.00×2
Even though most computers compute with a 24 or 53 bits of mantissa , this is an important source of rounding error , and approaches such as the Kahan summation algorithm are ways to minimise the errors .
It can be especially problematic in parallel computing .
NOTATION FOR NON - ASSOCIATIVE OPERATIONS Section::::Notation for non - associative operations .
In general , parentheses must be used to indicate the order of evaluation if a non - associative operation appears more than once in an expression .
However , mathematicians agree on a particular order of evaluation for several common non - associative operations .
This is simply a notational convention to avoid parentheses .
A left - associative operation is a non - associative operation that is conventionally evaluated from left to right , i.e. , while a right - associative operation is conventionally evaluated from right to left : Both left - associative and right - associative operations occur .
Left - associative operations include the following : * Subtraction and division of real numbers : * Function application : Right - associative operations include the following : * Exponentiation of real numbers : * Tetration via the up - arrow operator : * Function definition Non - associative operations for which no conventional evaluation order is defined include the following .
* Taking the cross product of three vectors :
* Taking the pairwise average of real numbers :
* Taking the relative complement of sets formula_41 is not the same as formula_42 .
( Compare material nonimplication in logic . )
SEE ALSO
* Light 's associativity test * A semigroup is a set with a closed associative binary operation .
* Commutativity and distributivity are two other frequently discussed properties of binary operations .
* Power associativity , alternativity , flexibility and N - ary associativity are weak forms of associativity .
* Moufang identities also provide a weak form of associativity .
REFERENCES