ACID
An acid is a molecule or ion capable of donating a hydron ( proton or hydrogen ion H ) , or , alternatively , capable of forming a covalent bond with an electron pair ( a Lewis acid ) .
The first category of acids is the proton donors or Brønsted acids .
In the special case of aqueous solutions , proton donors form the hydronium ion HO and are known as Arrhenius acids .
Brønsted and Lowry generalized the Arrhenius theory to include non - aqueous solvents .
A Brønsted or Arrhenius acid usually contains a hydrogen atom bonded to a chemical structure that is still energetically favorable after loss of H. Aqueous Arrhenius acids have characteristic properties which provide a practical description of an acid .
Acids form aqueous solutions with a sour taste , can turn blue litmus red , and react with bases and certain metals ( like calcium ) to form salts .
The word acid is derived from the Latin acidus /
acēre meaning sour .
An aqueous solution of an acid has a pH less than 7 and is colloquially also referred to as ' acid ' ( as in ' dissolved in acid ' ) , while the strict definition refers only to the solute .
A lower pH means a higher acidity , and thus a higher concentration of positive hydrogen ions in the solution .
Chemicals or substances having the property of an acid are said to be acidic .
Common aqueous acids include hydrochloric acid ( a solution of hydrogen chloride which is found in gastric acid in the stomach and activates digestive enzymes ) , acetic acid ( vinegar is a dilute aqueous solution of this liquid ) , sulfuric acid ( used in car batteries ) , and citric acid ( found in citrus fruits ) .
As these examples show , acids ( in the colloquial sense ) can be solutions or pure substances , and can be derived from acids ( in the strict sense )
that are solids , liquids , or gases .
Strong acids and some concentrated weak acids are corrosive , but there are exceptions such as carboranes and boric acid .
The second category of acids are Lewis acids , which form a covalent bond with an electron pair .
An example is boron trifluoride ( BF ) , whose boron atom has a vacant orbital which can form a covalent bond by sharing a lone pair of electrons on an atom in a base , for example the nitrogen atom in ammonia ( NH ) .
Lewis considered this as a generalization of the Brønsted definition , so that an acid is a chemical species that accepts electron pairs either directly or by releasing protons ( H ) into the solution , which then accept electron pairs .
However , hydrogen chloride , acetic acid , and most other Brønsted - Lowry acids can not form a covalent bond with an electron pair and are therefore not Lewis acids .
Conversely , many Lewis acids are not Arrhenius or Brønsted - Lowry acids .
In modern terminology , an acid is implicitly a Brønsted acid and not a Lewis acid , since chemists almost always refer to a Lewis acid explicitly as a Lewis acid .
DEFINITIONS AND CONCEPTS Section::::Definitions and concepts .
Modern definitions are concerned with the fundamental chemical reactions common to all acids .
Most acids encountered in everyday life are aqueous solutions , or can be dissolved in water , so the Arrhenius and Brønsted - Lowry definitions are the most relevant .
The Brønsted - Lowry definition is the most widely used definition ; unless otherwise specified , acid - base reactions are assumed to involve the transfer of a proton ( H ) from an acid to a base .
Hydronium ions are acids according to all three definitions .
Although alcohols and amines can be Brønsted - Lowry acids , they can also function as Lewis bases due to the lone pairs of electrons on their oxygen and nitrogen atoms .
ARRHENIUS ACIDS Section::::Arrhenius acids .
The Swedish chemist Svante Arrhenius attributed the properties of acidity to hydrogen ions ( H ) or protons in 1884 .
An Arrhenius acid is a substance that , when added to water , increases the concentration of H ions in the water .
Note that chemists often write H(aq ) and refer to the hydrogen ion when describing acid - base reactions but the free hydrogen nucleus , a proton , does not exist alone in water , it exists as the hydronium ion , HO .
Thus , an Arrhenius acid can also be described as a substance that increases the concentration of hydronium ions when added to water .
Examples include molecular substances such as HCl and acetic acid .
An Arrhenius base , on the other hand , is a substance which increases the concentration of hydroxide ( OH ) ions when dissolved in water .
This decreases the concentration of hydronium because the ions react to form HO molecules : HO + OH ⇌ HO +
HO
Due to this equilibrium , any increase in the concentration of hydronium is accompanied by a decrease in the concentration of hydroxide .
Thus , an Arrhenius acid could also be said to be one that decreases hydroxide concentration , while an Arrhenius base increases it .
In an acidic solution , the concentration of hydronium ions is greater than 10 moles per liter .
Since pH is defined as the negative logarithm of the concentration of hydronium ions , acidic solutions thus have a pH of less than 7 .
BRØNSTED –
LOWRY ACIDS
Section::::Brønsted – Lowry acids .
While the Arrhenius concept is useful for describing many reactions , it is also quite limited in its scope .
In 1923 chemists Johannes Nicolaus Brønsted and Thomas Martin Lowry independently recognized that acid - base reactions involve the transfer of a proton .
A Brønsted - Lowry acid ( or simply Brønsted acid ) is a species that donates a proton to a Brønsted - Lowry base .
Brønsted - Lowry acid - base theory has several advantages over Arrhenius theory .
Consider the following reactions of acetic acid ( CHCOOH ) , the organic acid that gives vinegar its characteristic taste :
Both theories easily describe the first reaction : CHCOOH acts as an Arrhenius acid because it acts as a source of HO when dissolved in water , and it acts as a Brønsted acid by donating a proton to water .
In the second example CHCOOH undergoes the same transformation , in this case donating a proton to ammonia ( NH ) , but does not relate to the Arrhenius definition of an acid because the reaction does not produce hydronium .
Nevertheless , CHCOOH is both an Arrhenius and a Brønsted - Lowry acid .
Brønsted - Lowry theory can be used to describe reactions of molecular compounds in nonaqueous solution or the gas phase .
Hydrogen chloride ( HCl ) and ammonia combine under several different conditions to form ammonium chloride , NHCl .
In aqueous solution HCl behaves as hydrochloric acid and exists as hydronium and chloride ions .
The following reactions illustrate the limitations of Arrhenius 's definition :
* HO + Cl + NH →
Cl + NH + HO
* * HCl + NH → NHCl * * HCl + NH → NHCl *
As with the acetic acid reactions , both definitions work for the first example , where water is
the solvent and hydronium ion is formed by the HCl solute .
The next two reactions do not involve the formation of ions but are still proton - transfer reactions .
In the second reaction hydrogen chloride and ammonia ( dissolved in benzene ) react to form solid ammonium chloride in a benzene solvent and in the third gaseous HCl and NH combine to form the solid .
LEWIS ACIDS Section::::Lewis acids .
A third , only marginally related concept was proposed in 1923 by Gilbert N. Lewis , which includes reactions with acid - base characteristics that do not involve a proton transfer .
A Lewis acid is a species that accepts a pair of electrons from another species ; in other words , it is an electron pair acceptor .
Brønsted acid - base reactions are proton transfer reactions while Lewis acid - base reactions are electron pair transfers .
Many Lewis acids are not Brønsted - Lowry acids .
Contrast how the following reactions are described in terms of acid - base chemistry :
In the first reaction a fluoride ion , F , gives up an electron pair to boron trifluoride to form the product tetrafluoroborate .
Fluoride " loses " a pair of valence electrons because the electrons shared in the B — F bond are located in the region of space between the two atomic nuclei and are therefore more distant from the fluoride nucleus than they are in the lone fluoride ion .
BF is a Lewis acid because it accepts the electron pair from fluoride .
This reaction can not be described in terms of Brønsted theory because there is no proton transfer .
The second reaction can be described using either theory .
A proton is transferred from an unspecified Brønsted acid to ammonia , a Brønsted base ; alternatively , ammonia acts as a Lewis base and transfers a lone pair of electrons to form a bond with a hydrogen ion .
The species that gains the electron pair is the Lewis acid ; for example , the oxygen atom in HO gains a pair of electrons when one of the H — O bonds is broken and the electrons shared in the bond become localized on oxygen .
Depending on the context , a Lewis acid may also be described as an oxidizer or an electrophile .
Organic Brønsted acids , such as acetic , citric , or oxalic acid , are not Lewis acids .
They dissociate in water to produce a Lewis acid , H , but at the same time also yield an equal amount of a Lewis base ( acetate , citrate , or oxalate , respectively , for the acids mentioned ) .
Few , if any , of the acids discussed in the following are Lewis acids .
DISSOCIATION AND EQUILIBRIUM Section::::Dissociation and equilibrium .
Reactions of acids are often generalized in the form HA H +
A , where HA represents the acid and A is the conjugate base .
This reaction is referred to as protolysis .
The protonated form ( HA ) of an acid is also sometimes referred to as the free acid .
Acid - base conjugate pairs differ by one proton , and can be interconverted by the addition or removal of a proton ( protonation and deprotonation , respectively ) .
Note that the acid can be the charged species and the conjugate base can be neutral in which case the generalized reaction scheme could be written as HA H + A.
In solution there exists an equilibrium between the acid and its conjugate base .
The equilibrium constant K is an expression of the equilibrium concentrations of the molecules or the ions in solution .
Brackets indicate concentration , such that [ HO ] means the concentration of HO .
The acid dissociation constant K is generally used in the context of acid - base reactions .
The numerical value of K is equal to the product of the concentrations of the products divided by the concentration of the reactants , where the reactant is the acid ( HA ) and the products are the conjugate base and H.
The stronger of two acids will have a higher K than the weaker acid ; the ratio of hydrogen ions to acid will be higher for the stronger acid as the stronger acid has a greater tendency to lose its proton .
Because the range of possible values for K spans many orders of magnitude , a more manageable constant , pK is more frequently used , where pK = −log K. Stronger acids have a smaller pK than weaker acids .
Experimentally determined pK at 25 ° C in aqueous solution are often quoted in textbooks and reference material .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
In the classical naming system , acids are named according to their anions .
That ionic suffix is dropped and replaced with a new suffix ( and sometimes prefix ) , according to the table below .
For example , HCl has chloride as its anion , so the -ide suffix makes it take the form hydrochloric acid .
In the IUPAC naming system , " aqueous " is simply added to the name of the ionic compound .
Thus , for hydrogen chloride , the IUPAC name would be aqueous hydrogen chloride .
The prefix " hydro- " is added only if the acid is made up of just hydrogen and one other element .
Classical naming system : !
Anion prefix !
Anion suffix !
Acid prefix !
Acid suffix !
Example per ate per ic acid perchloric acid ( HClO ) ate ic acid chloric acid ( HClO )
ite ous acid chlorous acid ( HClO )
hypo
ite
hypo ous acid hypochlorous acid ( HClO )
ide
hydro ic acid hydrochloric acid ( HCl )
ACID STRENGTH Section::::Acid strength .
The strength of an acid refers to its ability or tendency to lose a proton .
A strong acid is one that completely dissociates in water ; in other words , one mole of a strong acid HA dissolves in water yielding one mole of H and one mole of the conjugate base , A , and none of the protonated acid HA .
In contrast , a weak acid only partially dissociates and at equilibrium both the acid and the conjugate base are in solution .
Examples of strong acids are hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) , hydroiodic acid ( HI ) , hydrobromic acid ( HBr ) , perchloric acid ( HClO ) , nitric acid ( HNO ) and sulfuric acid ( HSO ) .
In water each of these essentially ionizes 100 % .
The stronger an acid is , the more easily it loses a proton , H. Two key factors that contribute to the ease of deprotonation are the polarity of the H — A bond and the size of atom A , which determines the strength of the H — A bond .
Acid strengths are also often discussed in terms of the stability of the conjugate base .
Stronger acids have a larger K and a more negative pK than weaker acids .
Sulfonic acids , which are organic oxyacids , are a class of strong acids .
A common example is toluenesulfonic acid ( tosylic acid ) .
Unlike sulfuric acid itself , sulfonic acids can be solids .
In fact , polystyrene functionalized into polystyrene sulfonate is a solid strongly acidic plastic that is filterable .
Superacids are acids stronger than 100 % sulfuric acid .
Examples of superacids are fluoroantimonic acid , magic acid and perchloric acid .
Superacids can permanently protonate water to give ionic , crystalline hydronium " salts " .
They can also quantitatively stabilize carbocations .
While K measures the strength of an acid compound , the strength of an aqueous acid solution is measured by pH , which is an indication of the concentration of hydronium in the solution .
The pH of a simple solution of an acid compound in water is determined by the dilution of the compound and the compound 's K. CHEMICAL CHARACTERISTICS MONOPROTIC ACIDS
Section::::Chemical characteristics .
Section::::Monoprotic acids .
Monoprotic acids , also known as monobasic acids , are those acids that are able to donate one proton per molecule during the process of dissociation ( sometimes called ionization ) as shown below ( symbolized by HA ) :
Common examples of monoprotic acids in mineral acids include hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) and nitric acid ( HNO ) .
On the other hand , for organic acids the term mainly indicates the presence of one carboxylic acid group and sometimes these acids are known as monocarboxylic acid .
Examples in organic acids include formic acid ( HCOOH ) , acetic acid ( CHCOOH ) and benzoic acid ( CHCOOH ) .
POLYPROTIC ACIDS Section::::Polyprotic acids .
Polyprotic acids , also known as polybasic acids , are able to donate more than one proton per acid molecule , in contrast to monoprotic acids that only donate one proton per molecule .
Specific types of polyprotic acids have more specific names , such as diprotic ( or dibasic ) acid ( two potential protons to donate ) , and triprotic ( or tribasic ) acid ( three potential protons to donate ) .
A diprotic acid ( here symbolized by HA ) can undergo one or two dissociations depending on the pH.
Each dissociation has its own dissociation constant , K and K.
The first dissociation constant is typically greater than the second ;
i.e. , K > K.
For example , sulfuric acid ( HSO ) can donate one proton to form the bisulfate anion ( HSO ) , for which K is very large ; then it can donate a second proton to form the sulfate anion ( SO ) , wherein the K is intermediate strength .
The large K for the first dissociation makes sulfuric a strong acid .
In a similar manner , the weak unstable carbonic acid can lose one proton to form bicarbonate anion and lose a second to form carbonate anion ( CO ) .
Both K values are small , but K > K .
A triprotic acid ( HA ) can undergo one , two , or three dissociations and has three dissociation constants , where K >
K > K.
An inorganic example of a triprotic acid is orthophosphoric acid ( HPO ) , usually just called phosphoric acid .
All three protons can be successively lost to yield HPO , then HPO , and finally PO , the orthophosphate ion , usually just called phosphate .
Even though the positions of the three protons on the original phosphoric acid molecule are equivalent , the successive K values differ since it is energetically less favorable to lose a proton if the conjugate base is more negatively charged .
An organic example of a triprotic acid is citric acid , which can successively lose three protons to finally form the citrate ion .
Although the subsequent loss of each hydrogen ion is less favorable , all of the conjugate bases are present in solution .
The fractional concentration , α ( alpha ) , for each species can be calculated .
For example , a generic diprotic acid will generate 3 species in solution : HA , HA , and A.
The fractional concentrations can be calculated as below when given either the pH ( which can be converted to the [ H ] ) or the concentrations of the acid with all its conjugate bases : A plot of these fractional concentrations against pH , for given K and K , is known as a Bjerrum plot .
A pattern is observed in the above equations and can be expanded to the general n -protic acid that has been deprotonated i
-times : where K = 1 and the other K - terms are the dissociation constants for the acid . NEUTRALIZATION Section::::Neutralization .
Neutralization is the reaction between an acid and a base , producing a salt and neutralized base ; for example , hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide form sodium chloride and water : Neutralization is the basis of titration , where a pH indicator shows equivalence point when the equivalent number of moles of a base have been added to an acid .
It is often wrongly assumed that neutralization should result in a solution with pH 7.0 , which is only the case with similar acid and base strengths during a reaction .
Neutralization with a base weaker than the acid results in a weakly acidic salt .
An example is the weakly acidic ammonium chloride , which is produced from the strong acid hydrogen chloride and the weak base ammonia .
Conversely , neutralizing a weak acid with a strong base gives a weakly basic salt , e.g. sodium fluoride from hydrogen fluoride and sodium hydroxide .
WEAK ACID – WEAK BASE EQUILIBRIUM Section::::Weak acid – weak base equilibrium .
In order for a protonated acid to lose a proton , the pH of the system must rise above the pK of the acid .
The decreased concentration of H in that basic solution shifts the equilibrium towards the conjugate base form ( the deprotonated form of the acid ) .
In lower - pH ( more acidic ) solutions , there is a high enough H concentration in the solution to cause the acid to remain in its protonated form .
Solutions of weak acids and salts of their conjugate bases form buffer solutions .
TITRATION Section::::Titration .
To determine the concentration of an acid in an aqueous solution , an acid - base titration is commonly performed .
A strong base solution with a known concentration , usually NaOH or KOH , is added to neutralize the acid solution according to the color change of the indicator with the amount of base added .
The titration curve of an acid titrated by a base has two axes , with the base volume on the x - axis and the solution 's pH value on the y - axis .
The pH of the solution always goes up as the base is added to the solution .
EXAMPLE :
DIPROTIC ACID
Section::::Example : Diprotic acid .
For each diprotic acid titration curve , from left to right , there are two midpoints , two equivalence points , and two buffer regions .
EQUIVALENCE POINTS Section::::Equivalence points .
Due to the successive dissociation processes , there are two equivalence points in the titration curve of a diprotic acid .
The first equivalence point occurs when all first hydrogen ions from the first ionization are titrated .
In other words , the amount of OH added equals the original amount of HA at the first equivalence point .
The second equivalence point occurs when all hydrogen ions are titrated .
Therefore , the amount of OH added equals twice the amount of HA at this time .
For a weak diprotic acid titrated by a strong base , the second equivalence point must occur at pH above 7 due to the hydrolysis of the resulted salts in the solution .
At either equivalence point , adding a drop of base will cause the steepest rise of the pH value in the system .
BUFFER REGIONS AND MID POINTS Section::::Buffer regions and mid points .
A titration curve for a diprotic acid contains two midpoints where pH = pK. Since there are two different K values , the first midpoint occurs at pH = pK and the second one occurs at
pH = pK.
Each segment of the curve which contains a midpoint at its center is called the buffer region .
Because the buffer regions consist of the acid and its conjugate base , it can resist pH changes when base is added until the next equivalent points .
APPLICATIONS OF ACIDS Section::::Applications of acids .
Acids exist universally in our life .
There are both numerous kinds of natural acid compounds with biological functions and massive synthesized acids which are used in many ways .
IN INDUSTRY Section::::In industry .
Acids are fundamental reagents in treating almost all processes in today 's industry .
Sulfuric acid , a diprotic acid , is the most widely used acid in industry , which is also the most - produced industrial chemical in the world .
It is mainly used in producing fertilizer , detergent , batteries and dyes , as well as used in processing many products such like removing impurities .
According to the statistics data in 2011 , the annual production of sulfuric acid was around 200 million tonnes in the world .
For example , phosphate minerals react with sulfuric acid to produce phosphoric acid for the production of phosphate fertilizers , and zinc is produced by dissolving zinc oxide into sulfuric acid , purifying the solution and electrowinning .
In the chemical industry , acids react in neutralization reactions to produce salts .
For example , nitric acid reacts with ammonia to produce ammonium nitrate , a fertilizer .
Additionally , carboxylic acids can be esterified with alcohols , to produce esters .
Acids are often used to remove rust and other corrosion from metals in a process known as pickling .
They may be used as an electrolyte in a wet cell battery , such as sulfuric acid in a car battery .
IN
FOOD Section::::In food .
Tartaric acid is an important component of some commonly used foods like unripened mangoes and tamarind .
Natural fruits and vegetables also contain acids .
Citric acid is present in oranges , lemon and other citrus fruits .
Oxalic acid is present in tomatoes , spinach , and especially in carambola and rhubarb ; rhubarb leaves and unripe carambolas are toxic because of high concentrations of oxalic acid .
Ascorbic acid ( Vitamin C ) is an essential vitamin for the human body and is present in such foods as amla ( Indian gooseberry ) , lemon , citrus fruits , and guava .
Many acids can be found in various kinds of food as additives , as they alter their taste and serve as preservatives .
Phosphoric acid , for example , is a component of cola drinks .
Acetic acid is used in day - to - day life as vinegar .
Citric acid is used as a preservative in sauces and pickles .
Carbonic acid is one of the most common acid additive that is widely added in soft drinks , such as Coca - Cola .
During the manufacturing process of soft drinks , CO is usually pressurized to dissolve in these drinks to generate carbonic acid .
Carbonic acid is very unstable and tend to decompose into water and CO in normal temperature and pressure .
Therefore , when we open the bottles or cans of these kinds of soft drinks , CO bubbles come out and thus we feel ' sparks ' .
Certain acids are used as drugs .
Acetylsalicylic acid ( Aspirin ) is used as a pain killer and for bringing down fevers .
IN HUMAN BODIES Section::::In human bodies .
Acids play important roles in the human body .
The hydrochloric acid present in the stomach aids digestion by breaking down large and complex food molecules .
Amino acids are required for synthesis of proteins required for growth and repair of body tissues .
Fatty acids are also required for growth and repair of body tissues .
Nucleic acids are important for the manufacturing of DNA and RNA and transmitting of traits to offspring through genes .
Carbonic acid is important for maintenance of pH equilibrium in the body .
Human bodies contain a variety of organic and inorganic compounds , among those dicarboxylic acids play an essential role in many biological behaviors .
Many of those acids are amino acids which mainly serve as materials for the synthesis of proteins .
Other weak acids serve as buffers with their conjugate bases to keep the body 's pH from undergoing large scale changes which would be harmful to cells .
The rest of the dicarboxylic acids also participate in the synthesis of various biologically important compounds in human bodies .
ACID CATALYSIS Section::::Acid catalysis .
Acids are used as catalysts in industrial and organic chemistry ; for example , sulfuric acid is used in very large quantities in the alkylation process to produce gasoline .
Some acids , such as sulfuric , phosphoric , and hydrochloric acids , also effect dehydration and condensation reactions .
In biochemistry , many enzymes employ acid catalysis .
BIOLOGICAL OCCURRENCE
Section::::Biological occurrence .
Many biologically important molecules are acids .
Nucleic acids , which contain acidic phosphate groups , include DNA and RNA .
Nucleic acids contain the genetic code that determines many of an organism 's characteristics , and is passed from parents to offspring .
DNA contains the chemical blueprint for the synthesis of proteins which are made up of amino acid subunits .
Cell membranes contain fatty acid esters such as phospholipids .
An α - amino acid has a central carbon ( the α or alpha carbon ) which is covalently bonded to a carboxyl group ( thus they are carboxylic acids ) , an amino group , a hydrogen atom and a variable group .
The variable group , also called the R group or side chain , determines the identity and many of the properties of a specific amino acid .
In glycine , the simplest amino acid , the R group is a hydrogen atom , but in all other amino acids it is contains one or more carbon atoms bonded to hydrogens , and may contain other elements such as sulfur , oxygen or nitrogen .
With the exception of glycine , naturally occurring amino acids are chiral and almost invariably occur in the .
Peptidoglycan , found in some bacterial cell walls contains some -amino acids .
At physiological pH , typically around 7 , free amino acids exist in a charged form , where the acidic carboxyl group ( -COOH ) loses a proton ( -COO ) and the basic amine group ( -NH ) gains a proton ( -NH{{sub=3p=+ } } ) .
The entire molecule has a net neutral charge and is a zwitterion , with the exception of amino acids with basic or acidic side chains .
Aspartic acid , for example , possesses one protonated amine and two deprotonated carboxyl groups , for a net charge of −1 at physiological pH.
Fatty acids and fatty acid derivatives are another group of carboxylic acids that play a significant role in biology .
These contain long hydrocarbon chains and a carboxylic acid group on one end .
The cell membrane of nearly all organisms is primarily made up of a phospholipid bilayer , a micelle of hydrophobic fatty acid esters with polar , hydrophilic phosphate " head " groups .
Membranes contain additional components , some of which can participate in acid - base reactions .
In humans and many other animals , hydrochloric acid is a part of the gastric acid secreted within the stomach to help hydrolyze proteins and polysaccharides , as well as converting the inactive pro - enzyme , pepsinogen into the enzyme , pepsin .
Some organisms produce acids for defense ; for example , ants produce formic acid .
Acid - base equilibrium plays a critical role in regulating mammalian breathing .
Oxygen gas
( O ) drives cellular respiration , the process by which animals release the chemical potential energy stored in food , producing carbon dioxide ( CO ) as a byproduct .
Oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged in the lungs , and the body responds to changing energy demands by adjusting the rate of ventilation .
For example , during periods of exertion the body rapidly breaks down stored carbohydrates and fat , releasing CO into the blood stream .
In aqueous solutions such as blood CO exists in equilibrium with carbonic acid and bicarbonate ion .
It is the decrease in pH that signals the brain to breathe faster and deeper , expelling the excess CO and resupplying the cells with O. COMMON ACIDS MINERAL ACIDS ( INORGANIC ACIDS ) * Hydrogen halides and their solutions : hydrofluoric acid ( HF ) , hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) , hydrobromic acid ( HBr ) , hydroiodic acid ( HI )
* Halogen oxoacids : hypochlorous acid ( HClO ) , chlorous acid ( HClO ) , chloric acid ( HClO ) , perchloric acid ( HClO ) , and corresponding analogs for bromine and iodine
* Hypofluorous acid ( HFO ) , the only known oxoacid for fluorine .
* Sulfuric acid ( HSO ) * Fluorosulfuric acid ( HSOF ) * Nitric acid ( HNO ) * Phosphoric acid ( HPO ) * Fluoroantimonic acid ( HSbF ) * Fluoroboric acid ( HBF ) * Hexafluorophosphoric acid ( HPF ) * Chromic acid ( HCrO ) * Boric acid ( HBO ) SULFONIC ACIDS Section::::Common acids .
Section::::Sulfonic acids .
A sulfonic acid has the general formula RS(=O)–OH , where R is an organic radical .
* Methanesulfonic acid ( or mesylic acid , CHSOH ) * Ethanesulfonic acid ( or esylic acid , CHCHSOH )
* Benzenesulfonic acid ( or besylic acid , CHSOH )
* p - Toluenesulfonic acid ( or tosylic acid , CHCHSOH )
* Trifluoromethanesulfonic acid ( or triflic acid , CFSOH ) * Polystyrene sulfonic acid ( sulfonated polystyrene , [ CHCH(CH)SOH ] )
CARBOXYLIC ACIDS Section::::Carboxylic acids .
A carboxylic acid has the general formula R - C(O)OH , where R is an organic radical .
The carboxyl group -C(O)OH contains a carbonyl group , C = O , and a hydroxyl group ,
O - H. * Acetic acid ( CHCOOH ) * Citric acid ( CHO ) * Formic acid ( HCOOH ) * Gluconic acid HOCH-(CHOH)-COOH * Lactic acid ( CH - CHOH - COOH ) * Oxalic acid ( HOOC - COOH ) * Tartaric acid ( HOOC - CHOH - CHOH - COOH ) HALOGENATED CARBOXYLIC ACIDS Section::::Halogenated carboxylic acids .
Halogenation at alpha position increases acid strength , so that the following acids are all stronger than acetic acid .
* Fluoroacetic acid * Trifluoroacetic acid * Chloroacetic acid * Dichloroacetic acid * Trichloroacetic acid
VINYLOGOUS CARBOXYLIC ACIDS Section::::Vinylogous carboxylic acids .
Normal carboxylic acids are the direct union of a carbonyl group and a hydroxyl group .
In vinylogous carboxylic acids , a carbon - carbon double bond separates the carbonyl and hydroxyl groups .
* Ascorbic acid NUCLEIC ACIDS * Deoxyribonucleic acid ( DNA )
* Ribonucleic acid ( RNA )
REFERENCES
* Listing of strengths of common acids and bases * IUPAC Gold Book - acid * Zumdahl , Chemistry , 4th Edition .
* Ebbing , D.D. , & Gammon , S. D. ( 2005 ) .
General chemistry ( 8th ed . ) .
Boston , MA :
Houghton Mifflin . { { ISBN0 - 618 - 51177 - 6 } } * Pavia , D.L. , Lampman , G.M. , & Kriz , G.S. ( 2004 ) .
Organic chemistry volume 1 :
Organic chemistry 351 .
Mason , OH : Cenage Learning .
{ { ISBN0 - 7593 - 4727 - 1 } } EXTERNAL LINKS
* Curtipot : Acid - Base equilibria diagrams , pH calculation and titration curves simulation and analysis – freeware