ACTIVE DIRECTORY Active Directory ( AD ) is a directory service that Microsoft developed for the Windows domain networks .
It is included in most Windows Server operating systems as a set of processes and services .
Initially , Active Directory was only in charge of centralized domain management .
Starting with Windows Server 2008 , however , Active Directory became an umbrella title for a broad range of directory - based identity - related services .
A server running Active Directory Domain Services ( AD DS ) is called a domain controller .
It authenticates and authorizes all users and computers in a Windows domain type network — assigning and enforcing security policies for all computers and installing or updating software .
For example , when a user logs into a computer that is part of a Windows domain , Active Directory checks the submitted password and determines whether the user is a system administrator or normal user .
Also , it allows management and storage of information , provides authentication and authorization mechanisms , and establishes a framework to deploy other related services : Certificate Services , Active Directory Federation Services , Lightweight Directory Services and Rights Management Services .
Active Directory uses Lightweight Directory Access Protocol ( LDAP ) versions 2 and 3 , Microsoft 's version of Kerberos , and DNS .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Active Directory , like many information - technology efforts , originated out of a democratization of design using Request for Comments or RFCs .
The Internet Engineering Task Force ( IETF ) , which oversees the RFC process , has accepted numerous RFCs initiated by widespread participants .
Active Directory incorporates decades of communication technologies into the overarching Active Directory concept then makes improvements upon them .
For example , LDAP underpins Active Directory .
Also X.500 directories and the Organizational Unit preceded the Active Directory concept that makes use of those methods .
The LDAP concept began to emerge even before the founding of Microsoft in April 1975 , with RFCs as early as 1971 .
RFCs contributing to LDAP include RFC 1823 ( on the LDAP API , August 1995),RFC 2307 , RFC 3062 , and RFC 4533 .
Microsoft previewed Active Directory in 1999 , released it first with Windows 2000 Server edition , and revised it to extend functionality and improve administration in Windows Server 2003 .
Additional improvements came with subsequent versions of Windows Server .
In Windows Server 2008 , additional services were added to Active Directory , such as Active Directory Federation Services .
The part of the directory in charge of management of domains , which was previously a core part of the operating system , was renamed Active Directory Domain Services ( ADDS ) and became a server role like others . "
Active Directory " became the umbrella title of a broader range of directory - based services .
According to Bryon Hynes , everything related to identity was brought under Active Directory 's banner .
ACTIVE DIRECTORY SERVICES Section::::Active Directory Services .
Active Directory Services consist of multiple directory services .
The best known is Active Directory Domain Services , commonly abbreviated as AD DS or simply AD .
DOMAIN SERVICES Section::::Domain Services .
Active Directory Domain Services ( AD DS ) is the cornerstone of every Windows domain network .
It stores information about members of the domain , including devices and users , verifies their credentials and defines their access rights .
The server ( or the cluster of servers ) running this service is called a domain controller .
A domain controller is contacted when a user logs into a device , accesses another device across the network , or runs a line - of - business Metro - style app sideloaded into a device .
Other Active Directory services ( excluding LDS , as described below ) as well as most of Microsoft server technologies rely on or use Domain Services ; examples include Group Policy , Encrypting File System , BitLocker , Domain Name Services , Remote Desktop Services , Exchange Server and SharePoint Server .
LIGHTWEIGHT DIRECTORY SERVICES Section::::Lightweight Directory Services .
Active Directory Lightweight Directory Services ( AD LDS ) , formerly known as Active Directory Application Mode ( ADAM ) , is a light - weight implementation of AD DS .
AD LDS runs as a service on Windows Server .
AD LDS shares the code base with AD DS and provides the same functionality , including an identical API , but does not require the creation of domains or domain controllers .
It provides a Data Store for storage of directory data and a Directory Service with an LDAP Directory Service Interface .
Unlike AD DS , however , multiple AD LDS instances can run on the same server .
CERTIFICATE SERVICES Section::::Certificate Services .
Active Directory Certificate Services ( AD CS ) establishes an on - premises public key infrastructure .
It can create , validate and revoke public key certificates for internal uses of an organization .
These certificates can be used to encrypt files ( when used with Encrypting File System ) , emails ( per S / MIME standard ) , and network traffic ( when used by virtual private networks , Transport Layer Security protocol or IPSec protocol ) .
AD CS predates Windows Server 2008 , but its name was simply Certificate Services .
AD CS requires an AD DS infrastructure .
FEDERATION SERVICES Section::::Federation Services .
Active Directory Federation Services ( AD FS ) is a single sign - on service .
With an AD FS infrastructure in place , users may use several web - based services ( e.g. internet forum , blog , online shopping , webmail ) or network resources using only one set of credentials stored at a central location , as opposed to having to be granted a dedicated set of credentials for each service .
AD FS 's purpose is an extension of that of AD DS :
The latter enables users to authenticate with and use the devices that are part of the same network , using one set of credentials .
The former enables them to use the same set of credentials in a different network .
As the name suggests , AD FS works based on the concept of federated identity .
AD FS requires an AD DS infrastructure , although its federation partner may not .
RIGHTS MANAGEMENT SERVICES Section::::Rights Management Services .
Active Directory Rights Management Services ( AD RMS , known as Rights Management Services or RMS before Windows Server 2008 ) is a server software for information rights management shipped with Windows Server .
It uses encryption and a form of selective functionality denial for limiting access to documents such as corporate e - mails , Microsoft Word documents , and web pages , and the operations authorized users can perform on them .
LOGICAL STRUCTURE
Section::::Logical structure .
As a directory service , an Active Directory instance consists of a database and corresponding executable code responsible for servicing requests and maintaining the database .
The executable part , known as Directory System Agent , is a collection of Windows services and processes that run on Windows 2000 and later .
Objects in Active Directory databases can be accessed via LDAP , ADSI ( a component object model interface ) , messaging API and Security Accounts Manager services .
OBJECTS Section::::Objects .
Active Directory structures are arrangements of information about objects .
The objects fall into two broad categories : resources ( e.g. , printers ) and security principals ( user or computer accounts and groups ) .
Security principals are assigned unique security identifiers ( SIDs ) .
Each object represents a single entity — whether a user , a computer , a printer , or a group — and its attributes .
Certain objects can contain other objects .
An object is uniquely identified by its name and has a set of attributes — the characteristics and information that the object represents — defined by a schema , which also determines the kinds of objects that can be stored in Active Directory .
The schema object lets administrators extend or modify the schema when necessary .
However , because each schema object is integral to the definition of Active Directory objects , deactivating or changing these objects can fundamentally change or disrupt a deployment .
Schema changes automatically propagate throughout the system .
Once created , an object can only be deactivated — not deleted .
Changing the schema usually requires planning .
FORESTS , TREES AND DOMAINS Section::::Forests , trees and domains .
The Active Directory framework that holds the objects can be viewed at a number of levels .
The forest , tree , and domain are the logical divisions in an Active Directory network .
Within a deployment , objects are grouped into domains .
The objects for a single domain are stored in a single database ( which can be replicated ) .
Domains are identified by their DNS name structure , the namespace .
A domain is defined as a logical group of network objects ( computers , users , devices ) that share the same Active Directory database .
A tree is a collection of one or more domains and domain trees in a contiguous namespace , and is linked in a transitive trust hierarchy .
At the top of the structure is the forest .
A forest is a collection of trees that share a common global catalog , directory schema , logical structure , and directory configuration .
The forest represents the security boundary within which users , computers , groups , and other objects are accessible .
ORGANIZATIONAL UNITS Section::::Organizational units .
The objects held within a domain can be grouped into Organizational Units ( OUs ) .
OUs can provide hierarchy to a domain , ease its administration , and can resemble the organization 's structure in managerial or geographical terms .
OUs can contain other OUs — domains are containers in this sense .
Microsoft recommends using OUs rather than domains for structure and to simplify the implementation of policies and administration .
The OU is the recommended level at which to apply group policies , which are Active Directory objects formally named Group Policy Objects ( GPOs ) , although policies can also be applied to domains or sites ( see below ) .
The OU is the level at which administrative powers are commonly delegated , but delegation can be performed on individual objects or attributes as well .
Organizational units do not each have a separate namespace ; e.g. user accounts with an identical username ( sAMAccountName ) in separate OUs within a domain are not allowed , such as " fred.staff-ou.domain " and " fred.student-ou.domain " , where " staff - ou " and " student - ou " are the OUs .
This is because sAMAccountName , a user object attribute , must be unique within the domain .
However , two users in different OUs can have the same Common Name ( CN ) , the name under which they are stored in the directory itself .
In general the reason for this lack of allowance for duplicate names through hierarchical directory placement , is that Microsoft primarily relies on the principles of NetBIOS , which is a flat - file method of network object management that for Microsoft software , goes all the way back to Windows NT 3.1 and MS - DOS LAN Manager .
Allowing for duplication of object names in the directory , or completely removing the use of NetBIOS names , would prevent backward compatibility with legacy software and equipment .
However , disallowing duplicate object names in this way is a violation of the LDAP RFCs on which Active Directory is supposedly based .
As the number of users in a domain increases , conventions such as " first initial , middle initial , last name " ( Western order ) or the reverse ( Eastern order ) fail for common family names like Li ( 李 ) , Smith or Garcia .
Workarounds include adding a digit to the end of the username .
Alternatives include creating a separate ID system of unique employee / student i d numbers to use as account names in place of actual user 's names , and allowing users to nominate their preferred word sequence within an acceptable use policy .
Because duplicate usernames can not exist within a domain , account name generation poses a significant challenge for large organizations that can not be easily subdivided into separate domains , such as students in a public school system or university who must be able to use any computer across the network .
SHADOW GROUPS Section::::Shadow groups .
In Microsoft 's Active Directory , OUs do not confer access permissions , and objects placed within OUs are not automatically assigned access privileges based on their containing OU .
This is a design limitation specific to Active Directory .
Other competing directories such as Novell NDS are able to assign access privileges through object placement within an OU .
Active Directory requires a separate step for an administrator to assign an object in an OU as a member of a group also within that OU .
Relying on OU location alone to determine access permissions is unreliable , because the object may not have been assigned to the group object for that OU .
A common workaround for an Active Directory administrator is to write a custom PowerShell or Visual Basic script to automatically create and maintain a user group for each OU in their directory .
The scripts are run periodically to update the group to match the OU 's account membership , but are unable to instantly update the security groups anytime the directory changes , as occurs in competing directories where security is directly implemented into the directory itself .
Such groups are known as Shadow Groups .
Once created , these shadow groups are selectable in place of the OU in the administrative tools .
Microsoft refers to shadow groups in the Server 2008 Reference documentation , but does not explain how to create them .
There are no built - in server methods or console snap - ins for managing shadow groups .
The division of an organization 's information infrastructure into a hierarchy of one or more domains and top - level OUs is a key decision .
Common models are by business unit , by geographical location , by IT Service , or by object type and hybrids of these .
OUs should be structured primarily to facilitate administrative delegation , and secondarily , to facilitate group policy application .
Although OUs form an administrative boundary , the only true security boundary is the forest itself and an administrator of any domain in the forest must be trusted across all domains in the forest .
PARTITIONS Section::::Partitions .
The Active Directory database is organized in partitions , each holding specific object types and following a specific replication pattern .
Microsoft often refers to these partitions as ' naming contexts ' .
The ' Schema ' partition contains the definition of object classes and attributes within the Forest .
The ' Configuration ' partition contains information on the physical structure and configuration of the forest ( such as the site topology ) .
Both replicate to all domains in the Forest .
The ' Domain ' partition holds all objects created in that domain and replicates only within its domain .
PHYSICAL STRUCTURE Section::::Physical structure .
Sites are physical ( rather than logical ) groupings defined by one or more IP subnets .
AD also holds the definitions of connections , distinguishing low - speed ( e.g. , WAN , VPN ) from high - speed ( e.g. , LAN ) links .
Site definitions are independent of the domain and OU structure and are common across the forest .
Sites are used to control network traffic generated by replication and also to refer clients to the nearest domain controllers ( DCs ) .
Microsoft Exchange Server 2007 uses the site topology for mail routing .
Policies can also be defined at the site level .
Physically , the Active Directory information is held on one or more peer domain controllers , replacing the NT PDC / BDC model .
Each DC has a copy of the Active Directory .
Servers joined to Active Directory that are not domain controllers are called Member Servers .
A subset of objects in the domain partition replicate to domain controllers that are configured as global catalogs .
Global catalog ( GC ) servers provide a global listing of all objects in the Forest .
Global Catalog servers replicate to themselves all objects from all domains and hence , provide a global listing of objects in the forest .
However , to minimize replication traffic and keep the GC 's database small , only selected attributes of each object are replicated .
This is called the partial attribute set ( PAS ) .
The PAS can be modified by modifying the schema and marking attributes for replication to the GC .
Earlier versions of Windows used NetBIOS to communicate .
Active Directory is fully integrated with DNS and requires TCP / IP — DNS .
To be fully functional , the DNS server must support SRV resource records , also known as service records .
REPLICATION Section::::Replication .
Active Directory synchronizes changes using multi - master replication .
Replication by default is ' pull ' rather than ' push ' , meaning that replicas pull changes from the server where the change was effected .
The Knowledge Consistency Checker ( KCC ) creates a replication topology of site links using the defined sites to manage traffic .
Intrasite replication is frequent and automatic as a result of change notification , which triggers peers to begin a pull replication cycle .
Intersite replication intervals are typically less frequent and do not use change notification by default , although this is configurable and can be made identical to intrasite replication .
Each link can have a ' cost ' ( e.g. , DS3 , T1 , ISDN etc . ) and the KCC alters the site link topology accordingly .
Replication may occur transitively through several site links on same - protocol site link bridges , if the cost is low , although KCC automatically costs a direct site - to - site link lower than transitive connections .
Site - to - site replication can be configured to occur between a bridgehead server in each site , which then replicates the changes to other DCs within the site .
Replication for Active Directory zones is automatically configured when DNS is activated in the domain based by site .
Replication of Active Directory uses Remote Procedure Calls ( RPC ) over IP ( RPC / IP ) .
Between Sites SMTP can be used for replication , but only for changes in the Schema , Configuration , or Partial Attribute Set ( Global Catalog ) GCs .
SMTP can not be used for replicating the default Domain partition .
IMPLEMENTATION Section::::Implementation .
In general , a network utilizing Active Directory has more than one licensed Windows server computer .
Backup and restore of Active Directory is possible for a network with a single domain controller , but Microsoft recommends more than one domain controller to provide automatic failover protection of the directory .
Domain controllers are also ideally single - purpose for directory operations only , and should not run any other software or role .
Certain Microsoft products such as SQL Server and Exchange can interfere with the operation of a domain controller , necessitating isolation of these products on additional Windows servers .
Combining them can make configuration or troubleshooting of either the domain controller or the other installed software more difficult .
A business intending to implement Active Directory is therefore recommended to purchase a number of Windows server licenses , to provide for at least two separate domain controllers , and optionally , additional domain controllers for performance or redundancy , a separate file server , a separate Exchange server , a separate SQL Server , and so forth to support the various server roles .
Physical hardware costs for the many separate servers can be reduced through the use of virtualization , although for proper failover protection , Microsoft recommends not running multiple virtualized domain controllers on the same physical hardware .
DATABASE Section::::Database .
The Active - Directory database , the directory store , in Windows 2000 Server uses the JET Blue - based Extensible Storage Engine ( ESE98 ) and is limited to 16 terabytes and 2 billion objects ( but only 1 billion security principals ) in each domain controller 's database .
Microsoft has created NTDS databases with more than 2 billion objects .
( NT4 's Security Account Manager could support no more than 40,000 objects ) .
Called NTDS.DIT , it has two main tables : the data table and the link table .
Windows Server 2003 added a third main table for security descriptor single instancing .
Programs may access the features of Active Directory via the COM interfaces provided by Active Directory Service Interfaces .
SINGLE SERVER OPERATIONS Section::::Single server operations .
Flexible Single Master Operations Roles ( FSMO , pronounced " fizz - mo " ) operations are also known as operations master roles .
Although domain controllers allow simultaneous updates in multiple places , certain operations are supported only on a single server .
These operations are performed using the roles listed below : !
width="140px
" Role name !
width="140px
" Scope !
Description
The Infrastructure Master role as described above is only for the domain partition ( default naming context ) , netdom query fsmo and ntdsutil will only query the domain partition .
However , every application partition , including Forest and Domain - level DNS domain zones has its own Infrastructure Master .
The holder of this role is stored in the fSMORoleOwner attribute of the Infrastructure object in the root of the partition , it can be modified with ADSIEdit , for example one can modify the fSMORoleOwner attribute of the CN = Infrastructure , DC = DomainDnsZones , DC
= yourdomain , DC
= tld object to CN = NTDSSettings , CN = Name_of_DC , CN = Servers , CN
= DRSite ,
CN = Sites , CN = Configuration , DC =
Yourdomain , DC = TLD .
TRUSTING Section::::Trusting .
To allow users in one domain to access resources in another , Active Directory uses trusts .
Trusts inside a forest are automatically created when domains are created .
The forest sets the default boundaries of trust , and implicit , transitive trust is automatic for all domains within a forest .
TERMINOLOGY
One - way trust Two - way trust
Trusted domain Transitive trust
Intransitive trust
Explicit trust Cross - link trust
Shortcut Forest trust
Realm
External
PAM trust FOREST TRUSTS Section::::Terminology .
Section::::Forest trusts .
Windows Server 2003 introduced the forest root trust .
This trust can be used to connect Windows Server 2003 forests if they are operating at the 2003 forest functional level .
Authentication across this type of trust is Kerberos - based ( as opposed to NTLM ) .
Forest trusts are transitive for all the domains the trusted forests .
However , forest trusts are not transitive between forests .
Example
: Suppose that a two - way transitive forest trust exists between the forest root domains in Forest A and Forest B , and another two - way transitive forest trust exists between the forest root domains in Forest B and Forest C.
Such a configuration lets users in Forest B access resources in any domain in either Forest A or Forest C , and users in Forest A or C can access resources in any domain in
Forest B. However , it does not let users in Forest A access resources in Forest C , or vice versa .
To let users in Forest A and Forest C share resources , a two - way transitive trust must exist between both forests .
MANAGEMENT SOLUTIONS Section::::Management solutions .
Microsoft Active Directory management tools include : * Active Directory Users and Computers , * Active Directory Domains and Trusts , * Active Directory Sites and Services , * ADSI Edit , * Local Users and Groups ,
* Active Directory Schema snap - ins for Microsoft Management Console ( MMC ) ,
These management tools may not provide enough functionality for efficient workflow in large environments .
Some third - party solutions extend the administration and management capabilities .
They provide essential features for a more convenient administration processes , such as automation , reports , integration with other services , etc .
UNIX INTEGRATION Section::::Unix integration .
Varying levels of interoperability with Active Directory can be achieved on most Unix - like operating systems ( including Unix , Linux , Mac OS X or Java and Unix - based programs ) through standards - compliant LDAP clients , but these systems usually do not interpret many attributes associated with Windows components , such as Group Policy and support for one - way trusts .
Third parties offer Active Directory integration for Unix - like platforms , including :
* PowerBroker Identity Services , formerly Likewise ( BeyondTrust , formerly Likewise Software ) – Allows a non - Windows client to join Active Directory
*
ADmitMac ( Thursby Software Systems )
* Samba – Can act as a domain controller
The schema additions shipped with Windows Server 2003 R2 include attributes that map closely enough to RFC 2307 to be generally usable .
The reference implementation of RFC 2307 , nss_ldap and pam_ldap provided by PADL.com , support these attributes directly .
The default schema for group membership complies with RFC 2307bis ( proposed ) .
Windows Server 2003 R2 includes a Microsoft Management Console snap - in that creates and edits the attributes .
An alternative option is to use another directory service as non - Windows clients authenticate to this while Windows Clients authenticate to AD .
Non - Windows clients include 389 Directory Server ( formerly Fedora Directory Server , FDS ) , ViewDS Identity Solutions - ViewDS v7.2 XML Enabled Directory and Sun Microsystems Sun Java System Directory Server .
The latter two both being able to perform two - way synchronization with AD and thus provide a " deflected " integration .
Another option is to use OpenLDAP with its translucent overlay , which can extend entries in any remote LDAP server with additional attributes stored in a local database .
Clients pointed at the local database see entries containing both the remote and local attributes , while the remote database remains completely untouched .
Administration ( querying , modifying , and monitoring ) of Active Directory can be achieved via many scripting languages , including PowerShell , VBScript , JScript / JavaScript , Perl , Python , and Ruby .
Free and non - free AD administration tools can help to simplify and possibly automate AD management tasks .
Also since October 2017 Amazon AWS offers integration with Microsoft Active Directory .
SEE ALSO
* Active Directory Explorer
* AGDLP ( implementing role based access controls using nested groups )
* Flexible single master operation * Apple Open Directory * FreeIPA * List of LDAP software
* Univention Corporate Server
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Microsoft Technet :
White paper : Active Directory Architecture ( Single technical document that gives an overview about Active Directory . )
* Microsoft Technet :
Detailed description of Active Directory on Windows Server 2003
* Microsoft MSDN Library :
[ http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc223122.aspx [ MS - ADTS ] :
Active Directory Technical Specification ] ( part of the Microsoft Open Specification Promise )
* Active Directory Application Mode ( ADAM )
* Microsoft MSDN : [ https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb897400.aspx [ AD - LDS ] :
Active Directory Lightweight Directory Services ] * Microsoft TechNet : [ https://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc754361%28v=ws.10%29.aspx
[ AD - LDS ] :
Active Directory Lightweight Directory Services ]
* Microsoft MSDN :
Active Directory Schema
* Microsoft TechNet :
Understanding Schema
* Microsoft TechNet Magazine :
Extending the Active Directory Schema
* Microsoft MSDN :
Active Directory Certificate Services * Microsoft TechNet : Active Directory Certificate Services