BLU TACK
Blu Tack is a reusable putty - like pressure - sensitive adhesive produced by Bostik , commonly used to attach lightweight objects ( such as posters or sheets of paper ) to walls , doors or other dry surfaces .
Traditionally blue , it is also available in other colours .
Generic versions of the product are also available from other manufacturers .
The spelling now used is without the hyphen .
The composition of Blu Tack is a manufacturing secret but is described as a synthetic rubber compound without hazardous properties under normal conditions .
It can be swallowed without harm and is noncarcinogenic .
It is non - soluble and is denser than water .
The material is not flammable , but emits carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide when exposed to fire or high temperatures .
As of 2015 , Bostik was manufacturing around 100 tonnes of Blu Tack weekly at its Leicester factory .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Blu Tack was originally developed in 1969 as an accidental by - product of an attempt to develop a new sealant using chalk powder , rubber and oil .
The name of the inventor is unknown .
Originally Blu Tack was white , but consumer research showed fears that children may mistake it for chewing gum , and a blue colouring was added .
In the United Kingdom in March 2008 , 20,000 numbered packs of pink Blu Tack were made available , to help raise money for Breast Cancer Campaign , with 10 pence from each pack going to the charity .
The formulation was slightly altered to retain complete consistency with its blue counterpart .
Since then , many coloured variations have been made , including red and white , yellow and a green Halloween pack .
SIMILAR PRODUCTS Section::::Similar products .
Similar products of various colours are made by many manufacturers , including Faber - Castell 's " Tack - it " , Henkel 's " Fun - Tak " , UHU 's " Poster Putty " and " Sticky Tack","Gummy Sticker " Pritt 's " Sticky Stuff " , Bostik 's " Prestik " and Elmer 's " Poster Tack " .
Versions of the product are also sold under the generic names " adhesive putty " and " mounting putty " .
The generic trademark or common name for mounting putty varies by region .
It is known as " Patafix " in France , Italy , and Portugal , ' ( " teacher 's chewing gum " ) in Iceland , ' ( " attachment mass " ) or ' in Sweden , and ' in South Africa ( an Afrikaans word , literally translated as " wonder glue " ) .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
Like all poster putties , Blu Tack provides an alternative to the artist 's traditional kneaded eraser , having a superior grip and plasticity .
Blu Tack can be finely shaped and worked into even very small areas .
Like kneaded erasers , it can be stretched and kneaded to freshen its working surfaces .
Some scale model hobbyists use Blu Tack as a masking medium for painting camouflage schemes , as it can be easily molded to any shape and will not react with or lift the underlying paint .
Blu Tack is also used for sculpture .
In 2007 artist Elizabeth Thompson created a sculpture of a house spider using Blu Tack over a wire frame .
It took around 4000 packs and was exhibited at London Zoo .
Other artists have created works from the material including stop - motion animation .
Blu Tack can be used as a damping agent for sound and vibration applications , due to its low amplitude response properties .
A small amount of Blu Tack can be placed on the head of a screw to hold it onto a screwdriver .
Blu Tack can also be used to clean in - ear headphones by gently pressing putty into mesh of headphones .
Blu Tack can be regarded as a comfortable alternative to over - the - counter ear plugs for the attenuation of everyday sound .
SEE ALSO
* Glue stick
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Blu - Tack site , UK * Official Blu Tack site , Australia