EMPTY SET
In mathematics , and more specifically set theory , the empty set or null set is the unique set having no elements ; its size or cardinality ( count of elements in a set ) is zero .
Some axiomatic set theories ensure that the empty set exists by including an axiom of empty set ; in other theories , its existence can be deduced .
Many possible properties of sets are vacuously true for the empty set .
Null set is a distinct notion within the context of measure theory .
In that setting , it describes a set of measure zero ; such a set is not necessarily empty .
The empty set may also be called the void set .
NOTATION Section::::Notation .
Common notations for the empty set include " { } " , " formula_1 " , and " ∅ " .
The latter two symbols were introduced by the Bourbaki group ( specifically André Weil ) in 1939 , inspired by the letter Ø in the Norwegian and Danish alphabets ( and not related in any way to the Greek letter Φ ) .
In the past , " 0 " was occasionally used as a symbol for the empty set , but this is now considered to be an improper use of notation .
The symbol ∅ is available at Unicode point U+2205 .
It can be coded in HTML as ∅ and as ∅. It can be coded in LaTeX as \varnothing .
The symbol formula_1 is coded in LaTeX as \emptyset .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
In standard axiomatic set theory , by the principle of extensionality , two sets are equal if they have the same elements ; therefore there can be only one set with no elements .
Hence there is but one empty set , and we speak of " the empty set " rather than " an empty set " .
The mathematical symbols employed below are explained here .
For any set A :
* The empty set is a subset of A :
formula_3 * The union of A with the empty set is A :
formula_4
* The intersection of A with the empty set is the empty set :
formula_5 * The Cartesian product of A and the empty set is the empty set :
formula_6
The empty set has the following properties :
*
Its only subset is the empty set itself :
formula_7
* The power set of the empty set is the set containing only the empty set :
formula_8
*
Its number of elements ( that is , its cardinality ) is zero : formula_9
The connection between the empty set and zero goes further , however : in the standard set - theoretic definition of natural numbers , sets are used to model the natural numbers .
In this context , zero is modelled by the empty set .
For any property :
*
For every element of formula_10 the property holds ( vacuous truth ) ; * There is no element of formula_10 for which the property holds .
Conversely , if for some property and some set V , the following two statements hold : *
For every element of V the property holds ; * There is no element of V for which the property holds ,
By the definition of subset , the empty set is a subset of any set A. That is , every element x of formula_10 belongs to A. Indeed , if it were not true that every element of formula_10 is in A then there would be at least one element of formula_10 that is not present in A. Since there are no elements of formula_10 at all , there is no element of formula_10 that is not in
A. Any statement that begins " for every element of formula_10 " is not making any substantive claim ; it is a vacuous truth .
This is often paraphrased as " everything is true of the elements of the empty set . "
OPERATIONS ON THE EMPTY SET Section::::Operations on the empty set .
When speaking of the sum of the elements of a finite set , one is inevitably led to the convention that the sum of the elements of the empty set is zero .
The reason for this is that zero is the identity element for addition .
Similarly , the product of the elements of the empty set should be considered to be one ( see empty product ) , since one is the identity element for multiplication .
A derangement is a permutation of a set without fixed points .
The empty set can be considered a derangement of itself , because it has only one permutation ( formula_19 ) , and it is vacuously true that no element ( of the empty set ) can be found that retains its original position .
IN OTHER AREAS OF MATHEMATICS EXTENDED
REAL NUMBERS Section::::In other areas of mathematics .
Section::::Extended real numbers .
Since the empty set has no members , when it is considered as a subset of any ordered set , then every member of that set will be an upper bound and lower bound for the empty set .
For example , when considered as a subset of the real numbers , with its usual ordering , represented by the real number line , every real number is both an upper and lower bound for the empty set .
When considered as a subset of the extended reals formed by adding two " numbers " or " points " to the real numbers , namely negative infinity , denoted formula_20 which is defined to be less than every other extended real number , and positive infinity , denoted formula_21 which is defined to be greater than every other extended real number , then : and That is , the least upper bound ( sup or supremum ) of the empty set is negative infinity , while the greatest lower bound ( inf or infimum ) is positive infinity .
By analogy with the above , in the domain of the extended reals , negative infinity is the identity element for the maximum and supremum operators , while positive infinity is the identity element for minimum and infimum .
TOPOLOGY Section::::Topology .
In any topological space X , the empty set is open by definition , as is X.
Since the complement of an open set is closed and the empty set and X are complements of each other , the empty set is also closed , making it a clopen set .
Moreover , the empty set is compact by the fact that every finite set is compact .
The closure of the empty set is empty .
This is known as " preservation of nullary unions . " CATEGORY THEORY Section::::Category theory .
If A is a set , then there exists precisely one function f from { } to A , the empty function .
As a result , the empty set is the unique initial object of the category of sets and functions .
The empty set can be turned into a topological space , called the empty space , in just one way : by defining the empty set to be open .
This empty topological space is the unique initial object in the category of topological spaces with continuous maps .
In fact , it is a strict initial object : only the empty set has a function to the empty set .
SET THEORY Section::::Set theory .
In the von Neumann construction of the ordinals , 0 is defined as the empty set , and the successor of an ordinal is defined as formula_24 .
Thus , we have formula_25 , formula_26 , formula_27 , and so on .
The von Neumann construction , along with the axiom of infinity , which guarantees the existence of at least one infinite set , can be used to construct the set of natural numbers , formula_28 , such that the Peano axioms of arithmetic are satisfied .
QUESTIONED EXISTENCE
AXIOMATIC SET THEORY
Section::::Questioned existence .
Section::::Axiomatic set theory .
In Zermelo set theory , the existence of the empty set is assured by the axiom of empty set , and its uniqueness follows from the axiom of extensionality .
However , the axiom of empty set can be shown redundant in either of two ways : *
There is already an axiom implying the existence of at least one set .
Given such an axiom together with the axiom of separation , the existence of the empty set is easily proved .
*
In the presence of urelements , it is easy to prove that at least one set exists , viz .
the set of all urelements ( assuming there is not a proper class of them ) .
Again , given the axiom of separation , the empty set is easily proved .
PHILOSOPHICAL ISSUES Section::::Philosophical issues .
While the empty set is a standard and widely accepted mathematical concept , it remains an ontological curiosity , whose meaning and usefulness are debated by philosophers and logicians .
The empty set is not the same thing as nothing ; rather , it is a set with nothing inside it and a set is always something .
This issue can be overcome by viewing a set as a bag — an empty bag undoubtedly still exists .
Darling ( 2004 ) explains that the empty set is not nothing , but rather " the set of all triangles with four sides , the set of all numbers that are bigger than nine but smaller than eight , and the set of all opening moves in chess that involve a king . "
The popular syllogism is often used to demonstrate the philosophical relation between the concept of nothing and the empty set .
Darling writes that the contrast can be seen by rewriting the statements
" Nothing is better than eternal happiness " and " [ A ] ham sandwich is better than nothing " in a mathematical tone .
According to Darling , the former is equivalent to " The set of all things that are better than eternal happiness is formula_10 " and the latter to " The set { ham sandwich } is better than the set formula_10 " .
It is noted that the first compares elements of sets , while the second compares the sets themselves .
Jonathan Lowe argues that while the empty set : it is also the case that : George Boolos argued that much of what has been heretofore obtained by set theory can just as easily be obtained by plural quantification over individuals , without reifying sets as singular entities having other entities as members .
SEE ALSO
*
Inhabited set *
Nothing
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING *
Halmos , Paul , Naive Set Theory .
Princeton , NJ : D. Van Nostrand Company , 1960 .
Reprinted by Springer - Verlag , New York , 1974 .
( Springer - Verlag edition ) .
Reprinted by Martino Fine Books , 2011 .
( Paperback edition ) .
EXTERNAL LINKS