FULL MOON
The full moon is the lunar phase when the Moon appears fully illuminated from Earth 's perspective .
This occurs when Earth is located between the Sun and the Moon ( more exactly , when the ecliptic longitudes of the Sun and Moon differ by 180 ° ) .
This means that the lunar hemisphere facing Earth – the near side – is completely sunlit and appears as a circular disk , while the far side is dark .
The full moon occurs once roughly every month .
When the Moon moves into Earth 's shadow , a lunar eclipse occurs , during which all or part of the Moon 's face may appear reddish due to the Rayleigh scattering of blue wavelengths and the refraction of sunlight through Earth 's atmosphere .
Lunar eclipses happen only during full moon and around points on its orbit where the satellite may pass through the planet 's shadow .
A lunar eclipse does not occur every month because the Moon 's orbit is inclined 5.14 ° with respect to the ecliptic plane of Earth ; thus , the Moon usually passes north or south of Earth 's shadow , which is mostly restricted to this plane of reference .
Lunar eclipses happen only when the full moon occurs around either node of its orbit ( ascending or descending ) .
Therefore , a lunar eclipse occurs approximately every 6 months and often 2 weeks before or after a solar eclipse , which occurs during new moon around the opposite node .
The interval period between a new or full moon and the next same phase , a synodic month , averages about 29.53 days .
Therefore , in those lunar calendars in which each month begins on the day of the new moon , the full moon falls on either the 14th or 15th day of the lunar month .
Because a calendar month consists of a whole number of days , a lunar month may be either 29 or 30 days long .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
A full moon is often thought of as an event of a full night 's duration .
This is somewhat misleading because its phase seen from Earth continuously waxes or wanes ( though much too slowly to notice in real time with the naked eye ) .
Its maximum illumination occurs at the moment waxing has stopped .
For any given location , about half of these maximum full moons may be visible , while the other half occurs during the day , when the full moon is below the horizon .
Many almanacs list full moons not only by date , but also by their exact time , usually in Coordinated Universal Time ( UTC ) .
Typical monthly calendars that include lunar phases may be offset by one day when used in a different time zone .
Full moon is generally a suboptimal time for astronomical observation of the Moon because shadows vanish .
It is a poor time for other observations because the bright sunlight reflected by the Moon , amplified by the opposition surge , then outshines many stars .
On 12 December 2008 , the full moon occurred closer to the Earth than it had been at any time for the previous 15 years , called a supermoon .
On 19 March 2011 , another full supermoon occurred , closer to the Earth than at any time for the previous 18 years .
On 14 November 2016 , a full supermoon occurred closer to the Earth than at any time for the previous 68 years .
FORMULA Section::::Formula .
The date and approximate time of a specific full moon ( assuming a circular orbit ) can be calculated from the following equation : where d is the number of days since 1 January 2000 00:00:00 in the Terrestrial Time scale used in astronomical ephemerides ; for Universal Time ( UT ) add the following approximate correction to d : where N is the number of full moons since the first full moon of 2000 .
The true time of a full moon may differ from this approximation by up to about 14.5 hours as a result of the non - circularity of the moon 's orbit .
See New moon for an explanation of the formula and its parameters .
The age and apparent size of the full moon vary in a cycle of just under 14 synodic months , which has been referred to as a full moon cycle .
IN FOLKLORE AND TRADITION Section::::In folklore and tradition .
Full moons are traditionally associated with temporal insomnia ( inability to sleep ) , insanity ( hence the terms lunacy and lunatic ) and various " magical phenomena " such as lycanthropy .
Psychologists , however , have found that there is no strong evidence for effects on human behavior around the time of a full moon .
They find that studies are generally not consistent , with some showing a positive effect and others showing a negative effect .
In one instance , the 23 December 2000 issue of the British Medical Journal published two studies on dog bite admission to hospitals in England and Australia .
The study of the Bradford Royal Infirmary found that dog bites were twice as common during a full moon , whereas the study conducted by the public hospitals in Australia found that they were less likely .
All this is relevant to canine rather than human behavior .
FULL MOON NAMES Section::::Full moon names .
Historically , month names are names of moons ( lunations , not necessarily full moons ) in lunisolar calendars .
Since the introduction of the solar Julian calendar in the Roman Empire , and later the Gregorian calendar worldwide , people no longer perceive month names as " moon " names .
The traditional Old English month names were equated with the names of the Julian calendar from an early time ( soon after Christianization , according to the testimony of Bede ca .
AD 700 ) .
Some full moons have developed new names in modern times , e.g. , the blue moon , and the names " harvest moon " and " hunter 's moon " for the full moons of autumn .
HARVEST AND HUNTER 'S
MOONS
Section::::Harvest and hunter 's moons .
The " harvest moon " and " hunter 's moon " are traditional terms for the full moons occurring during late summer and in the autumn , in the northern hemisphere usually in September and October respectively .
The " harvest moon " is the full moon closest to the autumnal equinox ( 22 or 23 September ) , coming anywhere from two weeks before to two weeks after that date .
The " hunter 's moon " is the full moon following it .
The names are recorded from the early 18th century .
The Oxford English Dictionary entry for " harvest moon " cites a 1706 reference , and for " hunter 's moon " a 1710 edition of The British Apollo , where the term is attributed to " the country people " ( The Country People call this the Hunters - Moon . ) .
The names became traditional in American folklore , where they are now often popularly attributed to the Native Americans .
The Feast of the Hunters ' Moon is a yearly festival in West Lafayette , Indiana , held in late September or early October each year since 1968 .
In 2010 , the Harvest moon occurred on the night of equinox itself ( some 5 hours after the point of equinox ) for the first time since 1991 .
All full moons rise around the time of sunset .
Because the moon moves eastward among the stars faster than the sun its meridian passage is delayed , causing it to rise later each day – on average by about 50.47 minutes .
The harvest moon and hunter 's moon are unique because the time difference between moonrises on successive evenings is much shorter than average .
The moon rises approximately 30 minutes later from one night to the next , as seen from about 40 degrees N or S latitude .
( This is because a full moon in September appears to move not straight east but north - east in the sky . )
Thus , there is no long period of darkness between sunset and moonrise for several days after the full moon , thus lengthening the time in the evening when there is enough light for men to see to work to get the harvest in .
FARMERS '
ALMANACS
Section::::Farmers ' Almanacs .
The Maine Farmers ' Almanac from c.
the 1930s began to publish Native American " Indian " full moon names .
The Farmers ' Almanac ( since 1955 published in Maine , but not the same publication as the Maine Farmers ' Almanac ) continues to do so .
An early list of " Indian month names " was published in 1918 by Daniel Carter Beard in
his The American Boy 's Book of Signs , Signals and Symbols for use by the boy scouts .
Beard 's " Indian " month names were : * January : Difficulty , Black Smoke
* February : Raccoon , Bare Spots on the Ground
* March : Wind , Little Grass , Sore - Eye
* April :
Ducks ,
Goose - Eggs * May :
Green Grass , Root - Food
* June : Corn - Planting , Strawberry
* July : Buffalo ( Bull ) , Hot Sun
* August : Harvest , Cow Buffalo
* September :
Wild Rice , Red Plum
* October : Leaf - Falling , Nuts
* November : Deer - Mating , Fur - Pelts
* December : Wolves , Big Moon
Such names have gained currency in American folklore .
They appear in print more widely outside of the almanac tradition from the 1990s in popular publications about the Moon .
Mysteries of the Moon by Patricia Haddock ( " Great Mysteries Series " , Greenhaven Press , 1992 ) gave an extensive list of such names along with the individual tribal groups they were supposedly associated with .
Haddock supposes that certain " Colonial American " moon names were adopted from Algonquian languages ( which were formerly spoken in the territory of New England ) , while others are based in European tradition ( e.g. , the Colonial American names for the May moon , " Milk Moon " , " Mother 's Moon " , " Hare Moon " have no parallels in the supposed native names , while the name of November , " Beaver Moon " is supposedly based in the Algonquin ) .
The individual names given in Farmers ' Almanac include : * January : " Wolf Moon " ( this is the name of December in Beard 1918 ) also " Old Moon " * February : " Snow Moon " , also " Hunger Moon " * March : " Worm Moon " , " Crow Moon " , " Sap Moon " , " Lenten Moon " * April : " Seed Moon " , " Pink Moon " , " Sprouting Grass Moon " , " Egg Moon " ( c.f . " Goose - Egg " in Beard 1918 ) , " Fish Moon " * May : " Milk Moon " , " Flower Moon " , " Corn Planting Moon " * June : " Mead Moon " , " Strawberry Moon " ( c.f . Beard 1918 ) , " Rose Moon " , " Thunder Moon " * July : " Hay Moon " , " Buck Moon " , " Elk Moon " , " Thunder Moon " * August : " Corn Moon " , " Sturgeon Moon " , " Red Moon " , " Green Corn Moon " , " Grain Moon "
* September : " Harvest Moon " , " Full Corn Moon " , * October : " Hunter 's moon " , " Blood Moon"/"Sanguine Moon "
* November : " Beaver Moon " , " Frosty Moon " * December : " Oak Moon " , " Cold Moon " , " Long Night 's Moon " The Long Night 's Moon is the last of the year and the closest to the winter solstice .
" Ice moon " is also used to refer to the first full moon of January or February .
HINDU FULL MOON FESTIVALS
Section::::Hindu full moon festivals .
In Hinduism , most festivals are celebrated on auspicious days .
Many of the Hindu festivals are celebrated on days with a full moon at night .
Different parts of India celebrate the same day with different names , as listed below : * Chaitra Purnima - Gudi Padua , Yugadi , Ugadi , Hanuman Jayanti ( April 15 , 2014 )
*
* Vaishakh Purnima - Narasimh Jayanti , Buddha Jayanthi ( May 14 , 2014 )
* * Jyeshtha Purnima - Vat Savitri Vrat Vat Purnima ( June 8 , 2014 )
* * Guru Purnima - the full moon of the Ashadh month * * Vyas Purnima - important day for starting education and honoring teachers
*
* Shravan Purnima - good day for starting Upanayan day , Avani Avittam , Raksha Bandhan-
conceptually Onam also comes on this day .
* * Bhadrapad Purnima - start of Pitrupaksha , Madhu Purnima * * Ashvin Purnima - Sharad Purnima * * Kartik Poornima - Thrukkarthika * * Margasirsha Purnima - Thiruvathira , Dathatreya Jayanthi *
* Pushya Purnima - Thaipusam , Shakambharee Purnima * * Magha Purnima * * Phalguna Purnima - Holi * LUNAR AND LUNISOLAR CALENDARS Section::::Lunar and lunisolar calendars .
Most pre - modern calendars the world over were lunisolar , combining the solar year with the lunation by means of intercalary months .
The Julian calendar abandoned this method in favour of a purely solar reckoning while conversely the 7th - century Islamic calendar opted for a purely lunar one .
A continuing lunisolar calendar is in the Hebrew calendar .
Evidence of this is noted in the dates of Passover and Easter in Judaism and Christianity , respectively .
Passover falls on the full moon on 15 Nisan of the Hebrew calendar .
The date of the Jewish Rosh Hashana and Sukkot festivals along with all other Jewish holidays are dependent on the dates of the new moons .
INTERCALARY MONTHS Section::::Intercalary months .
In lunisolar calendars , an intercalary month occurs seven times in the 19 years of the Metonic cycle , or on average every 2.7 years ( 19/7 ) .
In the Hebrew Calendar this is noted with a periodic extra month of Adar in the early spring .
BLUE MOON Section::::Blue moon .
In the modern system of " traditional " full moon names tied to the solstice and equinox points , a supernumerary full moon in such a period is called a blue moon .
The term " blue moon " used in this sense may date to as early as the 16th century , but it became well known in the United States due to the Farmers ' Almanac ( published since 1818 ) .
According to the Farmers ' Almanac , a " blue moon " is the third full moon in any period between either solstice and equinox , or between equinox and solstice , ( calculated using the mean tropical year ) , which contains four full moons .
These seasons are equal in length , unlike the astronomical ones , which vary in length depending on the Earth 's speed in its elliptical orbit round the sun .
To compare , in 1983 the equal length seasons began at 1.48 AM on 23 March , 9.15 AM on 22 June , 4.42 PM on 21 September and 12.10 AM on 22 December , while the astronomical seasons began at 4.39 AM on 21 March , 11.09 PM on 21 June , 2.42 PM on 23 September and 10.30 AM on 22 December ( all times GMT ) .
Due to a misinterpretation of this definition in the March 1946 Sky & Telescope magazine , " blue moon " has also been used in the sense of " the second full moon in any month which contains two full moons ( this usage has been noted as " erroneous " by Sky & Telescope in 1999 ) .
According to either definition , " blue moons " occur with the average frequency of intercalary months , seven times in 19 years , the Farmers ' Almanac system of " full moon names " effectively defining a lunisolar calendar .
SEE ALSO
* Lunar eclipse
* Lunar phase
* Month * Near side of the Moon * New moon
* Orbit of the Moon REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Moon phase calculator