COLOR BLINDNESS
Color blindness , also known as color vision deficiency , is the decreased ability to see color or differences in color .
Simple tasks such as selecting ripe fruit , choosing clothing , and reading traffic lights can be more challenging .
Color blindness may also make some educational activities more difficult .
However , problems are generally minor , and most people find that they can adapt .
People with total color blindness ( achromatopsia ) may also have decreased visual acuity and be uncomfortable in bright environments .
The most common cause of color blindness is an inherited problem in the development of one or more of the three sets of color sensing cones in the eye .
Males are more likely to be color blind than females , as the genes responsible for the most common forms of color blindness are on the X chromosome .
As females have two X chromosomes , a defect in one is typically compensated for by the other , while males only have one X chromosome .
Color blindness can also result from physical or chemical damage to the eye , optic nerve or parts of the brain .
Diagnosis is typically with the Ishihara color test ; however , a number of other testing methods also exist .
There is no cure for color blindness .
Diagnosis may allow a person 's teacher to change their method of teaching to accommodate the decreased ability to recognize colors .
Special lenses may help people with red - green color blindness when under bright conditions .
There are also mobile apps that can help people identify colors .
Red - green color blindness is the most common form , followed by blue - yellow color blindness and total color blindness .
Red - green color blindness affects up to 8 % of males and 0.5 % of females of Northern European descent .
The ability to see color also decreases in old age .
Being color blind may make people ineligible for certain jobs in certain countries .
This may include being a pilot , train driver and working in the armed forces .
The effect of color blindness on artistic ability , however , is controversial .
The ability to draw appears to be unchanged , and a number of famous artists are believed to have been color blind .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
In almost all cases , color blind people retain blue - yellow discrimination , and most color - blind individuals are anomalous trichromats rather than complete dichromats .
In practice , this means that they often retain a limited discrimination along the red - green axis of color space , although their ability to separate colors in this dimension is reduced .
Color blindness very rarely refers to complete monochromatism .
Dichromats often confuse red and green items .
For example , they may find it difficult to distinguish a Braeburn apple from a Granny Smith or red from green of traffic lights without other clues — for example , shape or position .
Dichromats tend to learn to use texture and shape clues and so may be able to penetrate camouflage that has been designed to deceive individuals with normal color vision .
Colors of traffic lights are confusing to some dichromats as there is insufficient apparent difference between the red / amber traffic lights and sodium street lamps ; also , the green can be confused with a grubby white lamp .
This is a risk on high - speed undulating roads where angular cues can not be used .
British Rail color lamp signals use more easily identifiable colors : The red is blood red , the amber is yellow and the green is a bluish color .
Most British road traffic lights are mounted vertically on a black rectangle with a white border ( forming a " sighting board " ) and so dichromats can more easily look for the position of the light within the rectangle — top , middle or bottom .
In the eastern provinces of Canada horizontally mounted traffic lights are generally differentiated by shape to facilitate identification for those with color blindness .
In the United States , this is not done by shape but by position , as the red light is always on the left if the light is horizontal , or on top if the light is vertical .
However , a lone flashing light ( e.g. red for stop , yellow for caution ) is still problematic .
TYPES dichromacy results .
The most frequent forms of human color blindness result from problems with either the middle ( green ) or long ( red ) wavelength sensitive cone systems , and make it hard to discriminate reds , yellows , and greens from one another .
They are collectively referred to as " red - green color blindness " , though the term is an over - simplification and is somewhat misleading .
Other forms of color blindness are much more rare .
They include problems in discriminating blues from greens and yellows from reds / pinks , and the rarest form of all , complete color blindness or monochromacy , where one can not distinguish any color from grey , as in a black - and - white movie or photograph .
Protanopes , deuteranopes , and tritanopes are dichromats ; that is , they can match any color they see with some mixture of just two primary colors ( in contrast to those with normal sight ( trichromats ) who can distinguish three primary colors ) .
Dichromats usually know they have a color vision problem , and it can affect their daily lives .
Out of the male population , 2 % have severe difficulties distinguishing between red , orange , yellow , and green .
( Orange and yellow are different combinations of red and green light . )
Colors in this range , which appear very different to a normal viewer , appear to a dichromat to be the same or a similar color .
The terms protanopia , deuteranopia , and tritanopia come from Greek , and respectively mean " inability to see ( anopia ) with the first ( prot- ) , second ( deuter- ) , or third ( trit- ) [ cone ] " .
Anomalous trichromacy is the least serious type of color deficiency .
People with protanomaly , deuteranomaly , or tritanomaly are trichromats , but the color matches they make differ from the normal .
They are called anomalous trichromats .
In order to match a given spectral yellow light , protanomalous observers need more red light in a red / green mixture than a normal observer , and deuteranomalous observers need more green .
From a practical standpoint though , many protanomalous and deuteranomalous people have very little difficulty carrying out tasks that require normal color vision .
Some may not even be aware that their color perception is in any way different from normal .
Protanomaly and deuteranomaly can be diagnosed using an instrument called an anomaloscope , which mixes spectral red and green lights in variable proportions , for comparison with a fixed spectral yellow .
If this is done in front of a large audience of males , as the proportion of red is increased from a low value , first a small proportion of the audience will declare a match , while most will see the mixed light as greenish ; these are the deuteranomalous observers .
Next , as more red is added the majority will say that a match has been achieved .
Finally , as yet more red is added , the remaining , protanomalous , observers will declare a match at a point where normal observers will see the mixed light as definitely reddish .
RED - GREEN COLOR BLINDNESS Section::::Red - green color blindness .
Protanopia , deuteranopia , protanomaly , and deuteranomaly are commonly inherited forms of red - green color blindness which affect a substantial portion of the human population .
Those affected have difficulty with discriminating red and green hues due to the absence or mutation of the red or green retinal photoreceptors .
It is sex - linked : genetic red - green color blindness affects males much more often than females , because the genes for the red and green color receptors are located on the X chromosome , of which males have only one and females have two .
Females ( XX ) are red - green color blind only if both their X chromosomes are defective with a similar deficiency , whereas males ( XY ) are color blind if their single X chromosome is defective .
The gene for red - green color blindness is transmitted from a color blind male to all his daughters , who are usually heterozygote carriers and are thus unaffected .
In turn , a carrier woman has a 50 % chance of passing on a mutated X chromosome region to each of her male offspring .
The sons of an affected male will not inherit the trait from him , since they receive his Y chromosome and not his ( defective ) X chromosome .
Should an affected male have children with a carrier or colorblind woman , their daughters may be colorblind by inheriting an affected X chromosome from each parent .
Because one X chromosome is inactivated at random in each cell during a woman 's development , deuteranomalous heterozygotes ( i.e. female carriers of deuteranomaly ) may be tetrachromats , because they will have the normal long wave ( red ) receptors , the normal medium wave ( green ) receptors , the abnormal medium wave ( deuteranomalous ) receptors and the normal autosomal short wave ( blue ) receptors in their retinas .
The same applies to the carriers of protanomaly ( who have two types of long wave receptors , normal medium wave receptors , and normal autosomal short wave receptors in their retinas ) .
If , by rare chance , a woman is heterozygous for both protanomaly and deuteranomaly , she could be pentachromatic .
This situation could arise if , for instance , she inherited the X chromosome with the abnormal long wave gene ( but normal medium wave gene ) from her mother who is a carrier of protanomaly , and her other X chromosome from a deuteranomalous father .
Such a woman would have a normal and an abnormal long wave receptor , a normal and abnormal medium wave receptor , and a normal autosomal short wave receptor—5 different types of color receptors in all .
The degree to which women who are carriers of either protanomaly or deuteranomaly are demonstrably tetrachromatic and require a mixture of four spectral lights to match an arbitrary light is very variable .
In many cases it is almost unnoticeable , but in a minority the tetrachromacy is very pronounced .
However , Jameson et al . have shown that with appropriate and sufficiently sensitive equipment it can be demonstrated that any female carrier of red - green color blindness ( i.e. heterozygous protanomaly , or heterozygous deuteranomaly ) is a tetrachromat to a greater or lesser extent .
Since deuteranomaly is by far the most common form of red - green blindness among men of northwestern European descent ( with an incidence of 8 % )
it follows that the proportion of carriers ( and of potential deuteranomalous tetrachromats ) among the females of that genetic stock is 14.7 % ( i.e. 92 % × 8 % × 2 ) , based on the Hardy – Weinberg principle .
* Protanopia ( 1 % of males ) : Lacking the red cones for long - wavelength sensitive retinal cones , those with this condition are unable to distinguish between colors in the green - yellow - red section of the spectrum .
They have a neutral point at a cyan - like wavelength around 492 nm ( see spectral color for comparison)—that is , they can not discriminate light of this wavelength from white .
For a protanope , the brightness of red , orange , and yellow are much reduced compared to normal .
This dimming can be so pronounced that reds may be confused with black or dark gray , and red traffic lights may appear to be extinguished .
They may learn to distinguish reds from yellows primarily on the basis of their apparent brightness or lightness , not on any perceptible hue difference .
Violet , lavender , and purple are indistinguishable from various shades of blue because their reddish components are so dimmed as to be invisible .
For example , pink flowers , reflecting both red light and blue light , may appear just blue to the protanope .
A very few people have been found who have one normal eye and one protanopic eye .
These unilateral dichromats report that with only their protanopic eye open , they see wavelengths shorter than neutral point as blue and those longer than it as yellow .
This is a rare form of color blindness .
* Deuteranopia ( 1 % of males ) : Lacking the green cones for medium - wavelength cones , those affected are again unable to distinguish between colors in the green - yellow - red section of the spectrum .
Their neutral point is at a slightly longer wavelength , 498 nm , a more greenish hue of cyan .
A deuteranope suffers the same hue discrimination problems as protanopes , but without the abnormal dimming .
Purple colors are not perceived as something opposite to spectral colors ; all these appear similarly .
This form of colorblindness is also known as Daltonism after John Dalton ( his diagnosis was confirmed as deuteranopia in 1995 , some 150 years after his death , by DNA analysis of his preserved eyeball ) .
Equivalent terms for Daltonism in Romanic languages such as daltonismo ( Spanish , Portuguese and Italian ) , daltonisme ( French ) , daltonism ( Romanian ) and in Slavic languages such as daltonizam ( Croatian ) , daltonizam / далтонизам ( Serbian ) , далтонизам ( Macedonian ) , дальтонизм ( Russian ) , дальтонізм ( Ukrainian ) and дальтанізм ( Belarusian ) are still used to describe color blindess in a broad sense or deuteranopia in a more restricted sense .
Deuteranopic unilateral dichromats report that with only their deuteranopic eye open , they see wavelengths shorter than neutral point as blue and longer than it as yellow .
* Protanomaly ( 1 % of males , 0.01 % of females ) :
Having a mutated form of the long - wavelength ( red ) pigment , whose peak sensitivity is at a shorter wavelength than in the normal retina , protanomalous individuals are less sensitive to red light than normal .
This means that they are less able to discriminate colors , and they do not see mixed lights as having the same colors as normal observers .
They also suffer from a darkening of the red end of the spectrum .
This causes reds to reduce in intensity to the point where they can be mistaken for black .
Protanomaly is a fairly rare form of color blindness , making up about 1 % of the male population .
Both protanomaly and deuteranomaly are carried on the X chromosome .
* Deuteranomaly ( most common—6 % of males , 0.4 % of females )
: These individuals have a mutated form of the medium - wavelength ( green ) pigment .
The medium - wavelength pigment is shifted towards the red end of the spectrum resulting in a reduction in sensitivity to the green area of the spectrum .
Unlike in protanomaly , the intensity of colors is unchanged .
The deuteranomalous person is considered " green weak " .
For example , in the evening , dark green cars appear to be black to deuteranomalous people .
As with protanomates , deuteranomates are poor at discriminating small differences in hues in the red , orange , yellow , green region of the spectrum .
They make errors in the naming of hues in this region because the hues appear somewhat shifted towards green .
However , unlike protanomates , deuteranomalous people do not have the loss of " brightness " problem .
BLUE - YELLOW COLOR BLINDNESS Section::::Blue - yellow color blindness .
Those with tritanopia and tritanomaly have difficulty discerning between bluish and greenish hues , as well as yellowish and reddish hues .
Color blindness involving the inactivation of the short - wavelength sensitive cone system ( whose absorption spectrum peaks in the bluish - violet ) is called tritanopia or , loosely , blue - yellow color blindness .
The tritanope 's neutral point occurs near a yellowish 570 nm ; green is perceived at shorter wavelengths and red at longer wavelengths .
Mutation of the short - wavelength sensitive cones is called tritanomaly .
Tritanopia is equally distributed among males and females .
Jeremy H. Nathans ( with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute ) demonstrated that the gene coding for the blue receptor lies on chromosome 7 , which is shared equally by males and females .
Therefore , it is not sex - linked .
This gene does not have any neighbor whose DNA sequence is similar .
Blue color blindness is caused by a simple mutation in this gene .
* Tritanopia ( less than 1 % of males and females ) : Lacking the short - wavelength cones , those affected see short - wavelength colors ( blue , indigo and a spectral violet ) greenish and drastically dimmed , some of these colors even as black .
Yellow is indistinguishable from pink , and purple colors are perceived as various shades of red .
This form of color blindness is not sex - linked .
* Tritanomaly ( equally rare for males and females [ 0.01 % for both ] ) : Having a mutated form of the short - wavelength ( blue ) pigment .
The short - wavelength pigment is shifted towards the green area of the spectrum .
This is the rarest form of anomalous trichromacy color blindness .
Unlike the other anomalous trichromacy color deficiencies , the mutation for this color blindness is carried on chromosome 7 .
Therefore , it is equally prevalent in both male and female populations .
The OMIM gene code for this mutation is 304000 " Colorblindness , Partial Tritanomaly " .
TOTAL COLOR BLINDNESS
Section::::Total color blindness .
Total color blindness is defined as the inability to see color .
Although the term may refer to acquired disorders such as cerebral achromatopsia also known as color agnosia , it typically refers to congenital color vision disorders ( i.e. more frequently rod monochromacy and less frequently cone monochromacy ) .
In cerebral achromatopsia , a person can not perceive colors even though the eyes are capable of distinguishing them .
Some sources do not consider these to be true color blindness , because the failure is of perception , not of vision .
They are forms of visual agnosia .
Monochromacy is the condition of possessing only a single channel for conveying information about color .
Monochromats possess a complete inability to distinguish any colors and perceive only variations in brightness .
It occurs in two primary forms :
* Rod monochromacy , frequently called achromatopsia , where the retina contains no cone cells , so that in addition to the absence of color discrimination , vision in lights of normal intensity is difficult .
While normally rare , achromatopsia is very common on the island of Pingelap , a part of the Pohnpei state , Federated States of Micronesia , where it is called maskun : about 10 % of the population there has it , and 30 % are unaffected carriers .
The island was devastated by a storm in the 18th century ( an example of a genetic bottleneck ) and one of the few male survivors carried a gene for achromatopsia .
The population grew to several thousand before foreign troops introduced diseases to the island in the 1940s .
*
* Cone monochromacy is the condition of having both rods and cones , but only a single kind of cone .
A cone monochromat can have good pattern vision at normal daylight levels , but will not be able to distinguish hues .
Blue cone monochromacy ( X chromosome ) is caused by lack of functionality of L and M cones ( red and green ) .
It is encoded at the same place as red - green color blindness on the X chromosome .
Peak spectral sensitivities are in the blue region of the visible spectrum ( near 440 nm ) .
People with this condition generally show nystagmus ( " jiggling eyes " ) , photophobia ( light sensitivity ) , reduced visual acuity , and myopia ( nearsightedness ) .
Visual acuity usually falls to the 20/50 to 20/400 range .
* CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Color vision deficiencies can be classified as acquired or inherited .
* Acquired : Diseases , drugs ( e.g. , Plaquenil ) , and chemicals may cause color blindness .
* Inherited : There are three types of inherited or congenital color vision deficiencies : monochromacy , dichromacy , and anomalous trichromacy .
* Monochromacy , also known as " total color blindness " , is the lack of ability to distinguish colors ( and thus the person views everything as if it were on a black and white television ) ; caused by cone defect or absence .
Monochromacy occurs when two or all three of the cone pigments are missing and color and lightness vision is reduced to one dimension .
* Rod monochromacy ( achromatopsia ) is an exceedingly rare , nonprogressive inability to distinguish any colors as a result of absent or nonfunctioning retinal cones .
It is associated with light sensitivity ( photophobia ) , involuntary eye oscillations ( nystagmus ) , and poor vision .
* Cone monochromacy is a rare total color blindness that is accompanied by relatively normal vision , electroretinogram , and electrooculogram .
Cone monochromacy can also be a result of having more than one type of dichromatic color blindness .
People who have , for instance , both protanopia and tritanopia are considered to have cone monochromacy .
Since cone monochromacy is the lack of / damage of more than one cone in retinal environment , having two types of dichromacy would be an equivalent .
*
Dichromacy is hereditary .
Protanopia and deuteranopia are hereditary and sex - linked , affecting predominantly males .
*
Protanopia is caused by the complete absence of red retinal photoreceptors .
Protans have difficulties distinguishing between blue and green colors and also between red and green colors .
It is a form of dichromatism in which the subject can only perceive light wavelengths from 400 nm to 650 nm , instead of the usual 700 nm .
Pure reds can not be seen , instead appearing black ; purple colors can not be distinguished from blues ; more orange - tinted reds may appear as dim yellows , and all orange - yellow - green shades of too long a wavelength to stimulate the blue receptors appear as a similar yellow hue .
It is present in 1 % of males .
*
Deuteranopia affects hue discrimination in a similar way to protanopia , but without the dimming effect .
Again , it is found in about 1 % of the male population .
*
Tritanopia is a very rare color vision disturbance in which only the red and the green cone pigments are present , with a total absence of blue retinal receptors .
Blues appear greenish , yellows and oranges appear pinkish , and purple colors appear deep red .
It is related to chromosome 7 ; thus unlike protanopia and deuteranopia , tritanopia and tritanomaly are not sex - linked traits and can be acquired rather than inherited and can be reversed in some cases .
* Anomalous trichromacy is a common type of inherited color vision deficiency , occurring when one of the three cone pigments is altered in its spectral sensitivity .
*
Protanomaly is a mild color vision defect in which an altered spectral sensitivity of red retinal receptors ( closer to green receptor response ) results in poor red - green hue discrimination .
It is hereditary , sex - linked , and present in 1 % of males .
In contrast to other defects , in this case the L - cone is present but malfunctioning , whereas in protanopia the L - cone is completely missing .
* Deuteranomaly , caused by a similar shift in the green retinal receptors , is by far the most common type of color vision deficiency , mildly affecting red - green hue discrimination in 5 % of European males .
It is hereditary and sex - linked .
In contrast to deuteranopia , the green - sensitive cones are not missing but malfunctioning .
*
Tritanomaly is a rare , hereditary color vision deficiency affecting blue - green and yellow - red / pink hue discrimination .
It is related to chromosome 7 .
In contrast to tritanopia , the S - cone is malfunctioning but not missing .
GENETICS Section::::Genetics .
Color blindness is typically an inherited genetic disorder .
It is most commonly inherited from mutations on the X chromosome , but the mapping of the human genome has shown there are many causative mutations — mutations capable of causing color blindness originate from at least 19 different chromosomes and 56 different genes ( as shown online at the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man ( OMIM ) ) .
Two of the most common inherited forms of color blindness are protanomaly ( and , more rarely , protanopia – the two together often known as " protans " ) and deuteranomaly ( or , more rarely , deuteranopia — the two together often referred to as " deutans " ) .
Both " protans " and " deutans " ( of which the deutans are by far the most common ) are known as " red - green color - blind " .
They comprise about 8 % of human males and 0.6 % of females of Northern European ancestry .
Some of the inherited diseases known to cause color blindness are : * cone dystrophy * cone - rod dystrophy * achromatopsia ( also called rod monochromatism , stationary cone dystrophy or cone dysfunction syndrome ) * blue cone monochromatism ( also called blue cone monochromacy or X - linked achromatopsia )
* Leber 's congenital amaurosis
* retinitis pigmentosa ( initially affects rods but can later progress to cones and therefore color blindness ) .
Inherited color blindness can be congenital ( from birth ) , or it can commence in childhood or adulthood .
Depending on the mutation , it can be stationary , that is , remain the same throughout a person 's lifetime , or progressive .
As progressive phenotypes involve deterioration of the retina and other parts of the eye , certain forms of color blindness can progress to legal blindness , i.e. an acuity of 6/60 ( 20/200 ) or worse , and often leave a person with complete blindness .
Color blindness always pertains to the cone photoreceptors in retinas , as it is the cones that detect the color frequencies of light .
About 8 % of males , and 0.6 % of females , are red - green color blind in some way or another , whether it is one color , a color combination , or another mutation .
Males are at a greater risk of inheriting an X - linked mutation because males only have one X chromosome ( XY , with the Y chromosome carrying altogether different genes from the X chromosome ) , and females have two ( XX ) ; if a woman inherits a normal X chromosome in addition to the one that carries the mutation , she will not display the mutation .
Men do not have a second X chromosome to override the chromosome that carries the mutation .
If 8 % of variants of a given gene are defective , the probability of a single copy being defective is 8 % , but the probability that two copies are both defective is 0.08 , i.e. 0.64 % .
OTHER CAUSES
Section::::Other causes .
Other causes of color blindness include brain or retinal damage caused by accidents and other traumas which produce swelling of the brain in the occipital lobe , and damage to the retina caused by exposure to ultraviolet light ( wavelengths 10 to 300 nm ) .
Damage often presents itself later in life .
Color blindness may also present itself in the range of degenerative diseases of the eye , such as age - related macular degeneration , and as part of the retinal damage caused by diabetes .
Vitamin A deficiency may also cause color blindness .
Some subtle forms of color blindness may be associated with chronic solvent - induced encephalopathy ( CSE ) , caused by long - time exposure to solvent vapors .
Red –
green color blindness can be caused by ethambutol , a drug used in the treatment of tuberculosis .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
The typical human retina contains two kinds of light cells : the rod cells ( active in low light ) and the cone cells ( active in normal daylight ) .
Normally , there are three kinds of cone cells , each containing a different pigment , which are activated when the pigments absorb light .
The spectral sensitivities of the cones differ ; one is most sensitive to short wavelengths , one to medium wavelengths , and the third to medium - to - long wavelengths within the visible spectrum , with their peak sensitivities in the blue , green , and yellow - green regions of the spectrum , respectively .
The absorption spectra of the three systems overlap , and combine to cover the visible spectrum .
These receptors are known as short ( S ) , medium ( M ) , and long ( L ) wavelength cones , but are also often referred to as blue , green , and red cones , although this terminology is inaccurate .
The receptors are each responsive to a wide range of wavelengths .
For example , the long wavelength " red " receptor has its peak sensitivity in the yellow - green , some way from the red end ( longest wavelength ) of the visible spectrum .
The sensitivity of normal color vision actually depends on the overlap between the absorption ranges of the three systems : different colors are recognized when the different types of cone are stimulated to different degrees .
Red light , for example , stimulates the long wavelength cones much more than either of the others , and reducing the wavelength causes the other two cone systems to be increasingly stimulated , causing a gradual change in hue .
Many of the genes involved in color vision are on the X chromosome , making color blindness much more common in males than in females because males only have one X chromosome , while females have two .
Because this is an X - linked trait , an estimated 2–3 % of women have a 4th color cone and can be considered tetrachromats .
One such woman has been reported to be a true or functional tetrachromat , as she can discriminate colors most other people ca n't .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The Ishihara color test , which consists of a series of pictures of colored spots , is the test most often used to diagnose red - green color deficiencies .
A figure ( usually one or more Arabic digits ) is embedded in the picture as a number of spots in a slightly different color , and can be seen with normal color vision , but not with a particular color defect .
The full set of tests has a variety of figure / background color combinations , and enable diagnosis of which particular visual defect is present .
The anomaloscope , described above , is also used in diagnosing anomalous trichromacy .
Because the Ishihara color test contains only numerals , it may not be useful in diagnosing young children , who have not yet learned to use numbers .
In the interest of identifying these problems early on in life , alternative color vision tests were developed using only symbols ( square , circle , car ) .
Besides the Ishihara color test , the US Navy and US Army also allow testing with the Farnsworth Lantern Test .
This test allows 30 % of color deficient individuals , whose deficiency is not too severe , to pass .
Another test used by clinicians to measure chromatic discrimination is the Farnsworth - Munsell 100 hue test .
The patient is asked to arrange a set of colored caps or chips to form a gradual transition of color between two anchor caps .
The HRR color test ( developed by Hardy , Rand , and Rittler ) is a red - green color test that , unlike the Ishihara , also has plates for the detection of the tritan defects .
Most clinical tests are designed to be fast , simple , and effective at identifying broad categories of color blindness .
In academic studies of color blindness , on the other hand , there is more interest in developing flexible tests to collect thorough datasets , identify copunctal points , and measure just noticeable differences .
MANAGEMENT Section::::Management .
There is generally no treatment to cure color deficiencies .
″The American Optometric Association reports a contact lens on one eye can increase the ability to differentiate between colors , though nothing can make you truly see the deficient color.″ LENSES Section::::Lenses .
Optometrists can supply colored spectacle lenses or a single red - tint contact lens to wear on the non - dominant eye , but although this may improve discrimination of some colors , it can make other colors more difficult to distinguish .
A 1981 review of various studies to evaluate the effect of the X - chrom contact lens concluded that , while the lens may allow the wearer to achieve a better score on certain color vision tests , it did not correct color vision in the natural environment .
A case history using the X - Chrom lens for a rod monochromat is reported and an X - Chrom manual is online .
Lenses that filter certain wavelengths of light can allow people with a cone anomaly , but not dichromacy , to see better separation of colors , especially those with classic " red / green " color blindness .
They work by notching out wavelengths that strongly stimulate both red and green cones in a deuter- or protanomalous person , improving the distinction between the two cones ' signals .
As of 2012 , sunglasses that notch out color wavelengths are available commercially .
APPS Section::::Apps .
Many mobile applications have been developed to help colorblind people to view colors in a better way .
Many applications launch a simulation of colorblindness to allow people with normal vision to understand how people with color blindness see the world .
The GNOME desktop environment provides colorblind accessibility using the gnome - mag and the libcolorblind software .
Using a gnome applet , the user may switch a color filter on and off , choosing from a set of possible color transformations that will displace the colors in order to disambiguate them .
The software enables , for instance , a colorblind person to see the numbers in the Ishihara test .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
+ Rates of color blindness ! ! !
Males ! !
Females Color blindness affects a large number of individuals , with protanopia and deuteranopia being the most common types .
In individuals with Northern European ancestry , as many as 8 percent of men and 0.4 percent of women experience congenital color deficiency .
The number affected varies among groups .
Isolated communities with a restricted gene pool sometimes produce high proportions of color blindness , including the less usual types .
Examples include rural Finland , Hungary , and some of the Scottish islands .
In the United States , about 7 percent of the male population — or about 10.5 million men — and 0.4 percent of the female population either can not distinguish red from green , or see red and green differently from how others do ( Howard Hughes Medical Institute , 2006 ) .
More than 95 percent of all variations in human color vision involve the red and green receptors in male eyes .
It is very rare for males or females to be " blind " to the blue end of the spectrum .
+ Prevalence of red – green color blindness among males !
Population !
Numberstudied align="right
" 337 align="right " 10.0 align="right " 1.9 Dutch align="right
" 3,168 align="right " 8.0 align="right
" 1,243 align="right " 8.6 Germans Russians align="right
" 1,343 align="right " 9.2 align="right " 463 align="right " 7.8 align="right " 4,750 align="right " 7.4 HISTORY Section::::History .
The first scientific paper on the subject of color blindness , Extraordinary facts relating to the vision of colours , was published by the English chemist John Dalton in 1798 after the realization of his own color blindness .
Because of Dalton 's work , the general condition has been called daltonism , although in English this term is now used only for deuteranopia .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE DESIGN IMPLICATIONS Section::::Society and culture .
Section::::Design implications .
Color codes present particular problems for those with color deficiencies as they are often difficult or impossible for them to perceive .
Good graphic design avoids using color coding or using color contrasts alone to express information ; this not only helps color blind people , but also aids understanding by normally sighted people by providing them with multiple reinforcing cues .
Designers need to take into account that color - blindness is highly sensitive to differences in material .
For example , a red - green colorblind person who is incapable of distinguishing colors on a map printed on paper may have no such difficulty when viewing the map on a computer screen or television .
In addition , some color blind people find it easier to distinguish problem colors on artificial materials , such as plastic or in acrylic paints , than on natural materials , such as paper or wood .
Third , for some color blind people , color can only be distinguished if there is a sufficient " mass " of color : thin lines might appear black , while a thicker line of the same color can be perceived as having color .
Designers should also note that red - blue and yellow - blue color combinations are generally safe .
So instead of the ever - popular " red means bad and green means good " system , using these combinations can lead to a much higher ability to use color coding effectively .
This will still cause problems for those with monochromatic color blindness , but it is still something worth considering .
When the need to process visual information as rapidly as possible arises , for example in an emergency situation , the visual system may operate only in shades of gray , with the extra information load in adding color being dropped .
This is an important possibility to consider when designing , for example , emergency brake handles or emergency phones .
OCCUPATIONS
Section::::Occupations .
Color blindness may make it difficult or impossible for a person to engage in certain occupations .
Persons with color blindness may be legally or practically barred from occupations in which color perception is an essential part of the job ( e.g. , mixing paint colors ) , or in which color perception is important for safety ( e.g. , operating vehicles in response to color - coded signals ) .
This occupational safety principle originates from the Lagerlunda train crash of 1875 in Sweden .
Following the crash , Professor Alarik Frithiof Holmgren , a physiologist , investigated and concluded that the color blindness of the engineer ( who had died ) had caused the crash .
Professor Holmgren then created the first test using different - colored skeins to exclude people from jobs in the transportation industry on the basis of color blindness .
However , there is a claim that there is no firm evidence that color deficiency did cause the collision , or that it might have not been the sole cause .
Color vision is important for occupations using telephone or computer networking cabling , as the individual wires inside the cables are color - coded using green , orange , brown , blue and white colors .
Electronic wiring , transformers , resistors , and capacitors are color - coded as well , using black , brown , red , orange , yellow , green , blue , violet , gray , white , silver , gold .
DRIVING
Section::::Driving .
Some countries have refused to grant driving licenses to individuals with color blindness .
In Romania , there is an ongoing campaign to remove the legal restrictions that prohibit colorblind citizens from getting drivers ' licenses .
The usual justification for such restrictions is that drivers of motor vehicles must be able to recognize color - coded signals , such as traffic lights or warning lights .
PILOTING AIRCRAFT Section::::Piloting aircraft .
While many aspects of aviation depend on color coding , only a few of them are critical enough to be interfered with by some milder types of color blindness .
Some examples include color - gun signaling of aircraft that have lost radio communication , color - coded glide - path indications on runways , and the like .
Some jurisdictions restrict the issuance of pilot credentials to persons who suffer from color blindness for this reason .
Restrictions may be partial , allowing color - blind persons to obtain certification but with restrictions , or total , in which case color - blind persons are not permitted to obtain piloting credentials at all .
In the United States , the Federal Aviation Administration requires that pilots be tested for normal color vision as part of their medical clearance in order to obtain the required medical certificate , a prerequisite to obtaining a pilot 's certification .
If testing reveals color blindness , the applicant may be issued a license with restrictions , such as no night flying and no flying by color signals —
such a restriction effectively prevents a pilot from holding certain flying occupations , such as that of an airline pilot , although commercial pilot certification is still possible , and there are a few flying occupations that do not require night flight and thus are still available to those with restrictions due to color blindness ( e.g. , agricultural aviation ) .
The government allows several types of tests , including medical standard tests ( e.g. , the Ishihara , Dvorine , and others ) and specialized tests oriented specifically to the needs of aviation .
If an applicant fails the standard tests , they will receive a restriction on their medical certificate that states : " Not valid for night flying or by color signal control " .
They may apply to the FAA to take a specialized test , administered by the FAA .
Typically , this test is the " color vision light gun test " .
For this test an FAA inspector will meet the pilot at an airport with an operating control tower .
The color signal light gun will be shone at the pilot from the tower , and they must identify the color .
If they pass they may be issued a waiver , which states that the color vision test is no longer required during medical examinations .
They will then receive a new medical certificate with the restriction removed .
This was once a Statement of Demonstrated Ability ( SODA ) , but the SODA was dropped , and converted to a simple waiver ( letter ) early in the 2000s .
Research published in 2009 carried out by the City University of London 's Applied Vision Research Centre , sponsored by the UK 's Civil Aviation Authority and the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration , has established a more accurate assessment of color deficiencies in pilot applicants ' red / green and yellow - blue color range which could lead to a 35 % reduction in the number of prospective pilots who fail to meet the minimum medical threshold .
ART Section::::Art .
Inability to distinguish color does not necessarily preclude the ability to become a celebrated artist .
The 20th century expressionist painter Clifton Pugh , three - time winner of Australia 's Archibald Prize , on biographical , gene inheritance and other grounds has been identified as a protanope .
19th century
French artist Charles Méryon became successful by concentrating on etching rather than painting after he was diagnosed as having a red - green deficiency .
RIGHTS OF THE COLOR BLIND BRAZIL Section::::Rights of the color blind .
Section::::Brazil .
A Brazilian court ruled that people with color blindness are protected by the Inter - American Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Person with Disabilities .
At trial , it was decided that the carriers of color blindness have a right of access to wider knowledge , or the full enjoyment of their human condition .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , under federal anti - discrimination laws such as the Americans with Disabilities Act , color vision deficiencies have not been found to constitute a disability that triggers protection from workplace discrimination .
A famous traffic light on Tipperary Hill in Syracuse , New York , is upside - down due to the sentiments of its Irish American community , but has been criticized due to the potential hazard it poses for color - blind persons .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
Some tentative evidence finds that color blind people are better at penetrating certain color camouflages .
Such findings may give an evolutionary reason for the high rate of red – green color blindness .
There is also a study suggesting that people with some types of color blindness can distinguish colors that people with normal color vision are not able to distinguish .
In World War II , color blind observers were used to penetrate camouflage .
In September 2009 , the journal Nature reported that researchers at the University of Washington and University of Florida were able to give trichromatic vision to squirrel monkeys , which normally have only dichromatic vision , using gene therapy .
In 2003 , a cybernetic device called eyeborg was developed to allow the wearer to hear sounds representing different colors .
Achromatopsic artist Neil Harbisson was the first to use such a device in early 2004 ; the eyeborg allowed him to start painting in color by memorizing the sound corresponding to each color .
In 2012 , at a TED Conference , Harbisson explained how he could now perceive colors outside the ability of human vision .
SEE ALSO
* List of people with color blindness
* Motion blindness * Red - green color space
* Tetrachromacy REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " A Glossary of Color Science . "