HAIKU
* The essence of haiku is " cutting " ( kiru ) .
This is often represented by the juxtaposition of two images or ideas and a kireji ( " cutting word " ) between them , a kind of verbal punctuation mark which signals the moment of separation and colours the manner in which the juxtaposed elements are related .
*
* Traditional haiku often consist of 17 on ( also known as morae though often loosely translated as " syllables " ) , in three phrases of 5 , 7 , and 5 on , respectively .
( An alternative form of haiku consists of 11 on in three phrases of 3 , 5 , and 3 on , respectively . )
However , some authors are critical of the distribution of syllables , such as Vicente Haya or Jaime Lorente .
* * A kigo ( seasonal reference ) , usually drawn from a saijiki , an extensive but defined list of such terms .
*
In Japanese , haiku are traditionally printed in a single vertical line while haiku in English often appear in three lines to parallel the three phrases of Japanese haiku .
Previously called hokku , haiku was given its current name by the Japanese writer Masaoka Shiki at the end of the 19th century .
KIRU AND KIREJI Section::::Kiru and Kireji .
In Japanese haiku a kireji , or cutting word , typically appears at the end of one of the verse 's three phrases .
A kireji fills a role somewhat analogous to a caesura in classical western poetry or to a volta in sonnets .
Depending on which cutting word is chosen , and its position within the verse , it may briefly cut the stream of thought , suggesting a parallel between the preceding and following phrases , or it may provide a dignified ending , concluding the verse with a heightened sense of closure .
The fundamental aesthetic quality of both hokku and haiku is that it is internally sufficient , independent of context , and will bear consideration as a complete work .
The kireji lends the verse structural support , allowing it to stand as an independent poem .
The use of kireji distinguishes haiku and hokku from second and subsequent verses of renku ; which may employ semantic and syntactic disjuncture , even to the point of occasionally end - stopping a phrase with a .
However , renku typically employ kireji .
In English , since kireji have no direct equivalent , poets sometimes use punctuation such as a dash or ellipsis , or an implied break to create a juxtaposition intended to prompt the reader to reflect on the relationship between the two parts .
The kireji in the Bashō examples " old pond " and " the wind of Mt Fuji " are both " ya " ( ) .
Neither the remaining Bashō example nor the Issa example contain a kireji although they do both balance a fragment in the first five on against a phrase in the remaining 12 on ( it may not be apparent from the English translation of the Issa that the first five on mean " Edo 's rain " ) .
SYLLABLES OR ON IN HAIKU Section::::Syllables or on in haiku .
In comparison with English verse typically characterized by syllabic meter , Japanese verse counts sound units known as " on " or morae .
Traditional haiku consist of 17 on , in three phrases of five , seven and five on respectively .
Among contemporary poems teikei ( fixed form ) haiku continue to use the 5 - 7 - 5 pattern while jiyuritsu ( free form ) haiku do not .
One of the examples below illustrates that traditional haiku masters were not always constrained by the 5 - 7 - 5 pattern .
Although the word " on " is sometimes translated as " syllable " , one on is counted for a short syllable , two for an elongated vowel or doubled consonant , and one for an " n " at the end of a syllable .
Thus , the word " haibun " , though counted as two syllables in English , is counted as four on in Japanese ( ha - i - bu - n ) ; and the word " on " itself , which English - speakers would view as a single syllable , comprises two on :
the short vowel o and the .
This is illustrated by the Issa haiku below , which contains 17 on but only 15 syllables .
Conversely , some sounds , such as " kyo " ( ) may look like two syllables to English speakers but are in fact a single on ( as well as a single syllable ) in Japanese .
In 1973 , the Haiku Society of America noted that the norm for writers of haiku in English was to use 17 syllables , but they also noted a trend toward shorter haiku .
Shorter haiku are very much more common in 21st century English haiku writing .
Some translators of Japanese poetry have noted that about 12 syllables in English approximate the duration of 17 Japanese on .
Also in translations four lines is more appropriate for the colloquialism of the language and is closest to natural conversational rhythm , necessary to carry the weight of the hokku KIGO Section::::Kigo .
A haiku traditionally contains a kigo , a word or phrase that symbolizes or implies the season of the poem and which is drawn from a saijiki , an extensive but prescriptive list of such words .
Kigo are often in the form of metonyms and can be difficult for those who lack Japanese cultural references to spot .
The Bashō examples below include " kawazu " , " frog " implying spring , and " shigure " , a rain shower in late autumn or early winter .
Kigo are not always included in non - Japanese haiku or by modern writers of Japanese " free - form " haiku .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
The best - known Japanese haiku is Bashō 's " old pond " : This separates into on as :
Translated :
Another haiku by Bashō :
This separates into on as :
Translated :
This haiku by Bashō illustrates that he was not always constrained to a 5 - 7 - 5 on pattern .
It contains 18 on in the pattern 6 - 7 - 5 ( " ō " or is treated as two on . )
This separates into " on " as :
Translated :
This haiku by Issa illustrates that 17 Japanese on do not always equate to 17 English syllables ( " nan " counts as two on and " nonda " as three . )
This separates into " on " as ,
Translated :
ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT FROM RENGA TO RENKU TO HAIKU Section::::Origin and development .
Section::::From renga to renku to haiku .
Hokku is the opening stanza of an orthodox collaborative linked poem , or renga , and of its later derivative , renku ( or haikai no renga ) .
By the time of Matsuo Bashō ( 1644–1694 ) , the hokku had begun to appear as an independent poem , and was also incorporated in haibun ( a combination of prose and hokku ) , and haiga ( a combination of painting with hokku ) .
In the late 19th century , Masaoka Shiki ( 1867–1902 ) renamed the standalone hokku to haiku .
The latter term is now generally applied retrospectively to all hokku appearing independently of renku or renga , irrespective of when they were written , and the use of the term hokku to describe a stand - alone poem is considered obsolete .
BASHŌ Section::::Bashō .
In the 17th century , two masters arose who elevated haikai and gave it a new popularity .
They were Matsuo Bashō ( 1644–1694 ) and ( 1661–1738 ) .
Hokku is the first verse of the collaborative haikai or renku , but its position as the opening verse made it the most important , setting the tone for the whole composition .
Even though hokku had sometimes appeared individually , they were always understood in the context of renku .
The Bashō school promoted standalone hokku by including many in their anthologies , thus giving birth to what is now called " haiku " .
Bashō also used his hokku as torque points within his short prose sketches and longer travel diaries .
This subgenre of haikai is known as haibun .
His best - known work , Oku no Hosomichi , or Narrow Roads to the Interior , is counted as one of the classics of Japanese literature and has been translated into English extensively .
Bashō was deified by both the imperial government and Shinto religious headquarters one hundred years after his death because he raised the haikai genre from a playful game of wit to sublime poetry .
He continues to be revered as a saint of poetry in Japan , and is the one name from classical Japanese literature that is familiar throughout the world .
BUSON Section::::Buson .
The next famous style of haikai to arise was that of Yosa Buson ( 1716–1783 ) and others such as Kitō , called the Tenmei style after the Tenmei Era ( 1781–1789 ) in which it was created .
Buson is recognized as one of the greatest masters of haiga ( an art form where painting is combined with haiku or haikai prose ) .
His affection for painting can be seen in the painterly style of his haiku .
ISSA Section::::Issa .
No new popular style followed Buson .
However , a very individualistic , and at the same time humanistic , approach to writing haiku was demonstrated by the poet Kobayashi Issa ( 1763–1827 ) , whose miserable childhood , poverty , sad life , and devotion to the Pure Land sect of Buddhism are evident in his poetry .
Issa made the genre immediately accessible to wider audiences .
SHIKI Section::::Shiki .
Masaoka Shiki ( 1867–1902 ) was a reformer and modernizer .
A prolific writer , even though chronically ill during a significant part of his life , Shiki disliked the ' stereotype ' of haikai writers of the 19th century who were known by the deprecatory term tsukinami , meaning ' monthly ' , after the monthly or twice - monthly haikai gatherings of the end of the 18th century ( in regard to this period of haikai , it came to mean ' trite ' and ' hackneyed ' ) .
Shiki also criticized Bashō .
Like the Japanese intellectual world in general at that time , Shiki was strongly influenced by Western culture .
He favored the painterly style of Buson and particularly the European concept of plein - air painting , which he adapted to create a style of haiku as a kind of nature sketch in words , an approach called shasei ( , " sketching from life " ) .
He popularized his views by verse columns and essays in newspapers .
Hokku up to the time of Shiki , even when appearing independently , were written in the context of renku .
Shiki formally separated his new style of verse from the context of collaborative poetry .
Being agnostic , he also separated it from the influence of Buddhism .
Further , he discarded the term " hokku " and proposed the term haiku as an abbreviation of the phrase " haikai no ku " meaning a verse of haikai , although the term predates Shiki by some two centuries , when it was used to mean any verse of haikai .
Since then , " haiku " has been the term usually applied in both Japanese and English to all independent haiku , irrespective of their date of composition .
Shiki 's revisionism dealt a severe blow to renku and surviving haikai schools .
The term " hokku " is now used chiefly in its original sense of the opening verse of a renku , and rarely to distinguish haiku written before Shiki 's time .
HAIBUN
Section::::Haibun .
Haibun is a combination of prose and haiku , often autobiographical or written in the form of a travel journal .
HAIGA Section::::Haiga .
Haiga is a style of Japanese painting based on the aesthetics of haikai , and usually including a haiku .
Today , haiga artists combine haiku with paintings , photographs and other art .
KUHI Section::::Kuhi .
The carving of famous haiku on natural stone to make poem monuments known as kuhi ( ) has been a popular practice for many centuries .
The city of Matsuyama has more than two hundred kuhi .
HAIKU MOVEMENT IN THE WEST Section::::Haiku movement in the West .
The earliest westerner known to have written haiku was the Dutchman Hendrik Doeff ( 1764–1837 ) , who was the Dutch commissioner in the Dejima trading post in Nagasaki , during the first years of the 19th century .
One of his haiku :
Although there were further attempts outside Japan to imitate the " hokku " in the early 20th century , there was little understanding of its principles .
Early Western scholars such as Basil Hall Chamberlain ( 1850–1935 ) and William George Aston were mostly dismissive of hokku 's poetic value .
One of the first advocates of English - language hokku was the Japanese poet Yone Noguchi .
In " A Proposal to American Poets , " published in the Reader magazine in February 1904 , Noguchi gave a brief outline of the hokku and some of his own English efforts , ending with the exhortation , "
Pray , you try Japanese Hokku , my American poets ! "
At about the same time the poet Sadakichi Hartmann was publishing original English - language hokku , as well as other Japanese forms in both English and French .
In France , haiku was introduced by Paul - Louis Couchoud around 1906 .
Couchoud 's articles were read by early Imagist theoretician F. S. Flint , who passed on Couchoud 's ideas to other members of the proto - Imagist Poets ' Club such as Ezra Pound .
Amy Lowell made a trip to London to meet Pound and find out about haiku .
She returned to the United States where she worked to interest others in this " new " form .
Haiku subsequently had a considerable influence on Imagists in the 1910s , notably Pound 's "
In a Station of the Metro " of 1913 , but , notwithstanding several efforts by Yone Noguchi to explain " the hokku spirit " , there was as yet little understanding of the form and its history .
BLYTH
Section::::Blyth .
R. H. Blyth was an Englishman who lived in Japan .
He produced a series of works on Zen , haiku , senryū , and on other forms of Japanese and Asian literature .
In 1949 , with the publication in Japan of the first volume of Haiku , the four - volume work by Blyth , haiku were introduced to the post - war English - speaking world .
This four - volume series ( 1949–52 ) described haiku from the pre - modern period up to and including Shiki .
Blyth 's History of Haiku ( 1964 ) in two volumes is regarded as a classical study of haiku .
Today Blyth is best known as a major interpreter of haiku to English speakers .
His works have stimulated the writing of haiku in English .
YASUDA Section::::Yasuda .
The Japanese - American scholar and translator Kenneth Yasuda published The Japanese Haiku : Its Essential Nature , History , and Possibilities in English , with Selected Examples in 1957 .
The book includes both translations from Japanese and original poems of his own in English , which had previously appeared in his book titled A Pepper - Pod : Classic Japanese Poems together with Original Haiku .
In these books Yasuda presented a critical theory about haiku , to which he added comments on haiku poetry by early 20th - century poets and critics .
His translations apply a 5–7–5 syllable count in English , with the first and third lines end - rhymed .
Yasuda considered that haiku translated into English should utilize all of the poetic resources of the language .
Yasuda 's theory also includes the concept of a " haiku moment " based in personal experience , and provides the motive for writing a haiku ( ' an aesthestic moment ' of a timeless feeling of enlightened harmony as the poet 's nature and the environment are unified ' ) .
This notion of the haiku moment has resonated with haiku writers in English , even though the notion is not widely promoted in Japanese haiku.(See however , ' Shiki 's Haiku Moments for Us Today '
HENDERSON
Section::::Henderson .
In 1958 , An Introduction to Haiku : An Anthology of Poems and Poets from Bashô to Shiki by Harold G. Henderson was published by Doubleday Anchor Books .
This book was a revision of Henderson 's earlier book titled The Bamboo Broom ( Houghton Mifflin , 1934 ) .
After World War II , Henderson and Blyth worked for the American Occupation in Japan and for the Imperial Household , respectively , and their shared appreciation of haiku helped form a bond between the two .
Henderson translated every hokku and haiku into a rhymed tercet ( a - b - a ) , whereas the Japanese originals never used rhyme .
Unlike Yasuda , however , he recognized that 17 syllables in English are generally longer than the 17 on of a traditional Japanese haiku .
Because the normal modes of English poetry depend on accentual meter rather than on syllabics , Henderson chose to emphasize the order of events and images in the originals .
Nevertheless , many of Henderson 's translations were in the five - seven - five pattern .
ENGLISH - LANGUAGE HAIKU Section::::English - language haiku .
The first haiku written in English was arguably by Ezra Pound , In a Station of the Metro , published in 1913 .
Since then , the haiku has become a fairly popular form among English - speaking poets .
English haiku can follow the traditional Japanese rules , but are frequently less strict , particularly concerning the number of syllables and subject matter .
The loosening of traditional standards has resulted in the term " haiku " being applied to brief English - language poems such as " mathemaku " and other kinds of pseudohaiku .
Some sources claim that this is justified by the blurring of definitional boundaries in Japan .
THE BEGINNINGS OF ROMANCE - LANGUAGE HAIKU Section::::The beginnings of Romance - language haiku .
Subsequent to Paul - Louis Couchoud 's popularisation of the form in France through his essays and translations , the next major haiku collection to appear there was the sequence of war poems by , Cent visions de guerre ( 1916 ) .
Later haiku by him were included among the work of the twelve published together in the Nouvelle Revue Française ( No . 84 , September 1920 ) , among whom was the young Paul Éluard .
This was followed by the anthology Le Haïkaï Français in 1923 .
In Spain several prominent poets experimented with haiku , including Joan Alcover , Antonio Machado , Juan Ramón Jiménez and Luis Cernuda .
Federico García Lorca also experimented with and learned conciseness from the form while still a student in 1921 .
The most persistent , however , was Isaac del Vando , whose La Sombrilla Japonesa ( 1924 ) went through several editions .
The form was also used in Catalan by the avant - garde writers Josep Maria Junoy ( 1885–1955 ) and Joan Salvat - Papasseit , by the latter notably in his sequence Vibracions ( 1921 ) .
The Mexican poet José Juan Tablada is credited with popularising haiku in his country , reinforced by the publication of two collections composed entirely in that form :
Un dia ( 1919 ) , and El jarro de flores ( 1922 ) .
In the introduction to the latter , Tablada noted that two young Mexicans , Rafael Lozano and Carlos Gutiérrez Cruz , had also begun writing them .
They were followed soon after by Carlos Pellicer , Xavier Villaurrutia , and by Jaime Torres Bodet in his collection Biombo ( 1925 ) .
Much later , Octavio Paz included many haiku in Piedras Sueltas ( 1955 ) .
Elsewhere the Ecuadorian poet and diplomat Jorge Carrera Andrade included haiku among the 31 poems contained in Microgramas ( Tokio 1940 ) and the Argentine Jorge Luis Borges in the collection
La cifra ( 1981 ) .
In Lusophone ( Portuguese - speaking )
Brazil , after several early false starts , including a collection of 56 by Waldomiro Siqueira Jr. ( 1912 – ? )
in his Haikais ( São Paulo 1933 ) , the form was popularised by Guilherme de Almeida , first through his 1937 magazine article " Os Meus Haicais " and then in his collection Poesia Vária ( 1947 ) ..
Since Modernism , several anthologies of Brazilian haikai have been published .
WORLDWIDE
Section::::Worldwide .
In 1992 Nobel laureate Czesław Miłosz published the volume Haiku in which he translated from English to Polish haiku of Japanese masters and American and Canadian contemporary haiku authors .
The former president of the European Council , Herman Van Rompuy , is a haijin ( , haiku poets ) and known as " Haiku Herman . "
He published a book of haiku in April 2010 .
In the early 20th century , Nobel laureate Rabindranath Tagore composed haiku in Bengali .
He also translated some from Japanese .
In Gujarati , Jhinabhai Desai ' Sneharashmi ' popularized haiku and remained a popular haiku writer .
In February 2008 , the World Haiku Festival was held in Bangalore , gathering haijin from all over India and Bangladesh , as well as from Europe and the United States .
In South Asia , some other poets also write Haiku from time to time , most notably including the Pakistani poet Omer Tarin , who is also active in the movement for global nuclear disarmament and some of his ' Hiroshima Haiku ' have been read at various peace conferences in Japan and the UK .
FAMOUS WRITERS PRE - SHIKI PERIOD
* Arakida Moritake ( 1473–1549 ) * Matsuo Bashō ( 1644–1694 ) * Nozawa Bonchō ( c. 1640–1714 ) * Takarai Kikaku ( 1661–1707 ) * ( 1661–1738 ) * Yokoi Yayū ( 1702–1783 ) * Fukuda Chiyo - ni ( 1703–1775 ) * Yosa Buson ( 1716–1783 ) * Ryōkan Taigu ( 1758 - 1831 ) * Kobayashi Issa ( 1763–1827 ) SHIKI AND LATER * Masaoka Shiki ( 1867–1902 ) * ( 1873–1937 )
* Takahama Kyoshi ( 1874–1959 )
* Samukawa Sokotsu ( 1875–1954 )
* Shane Khublall ( 1994–1998 ) * Taneda Santōka ( 1882–1940 ) * Ozaki Kōyō ( 1882–1926 )
* Ogiwara Seisensui ( 1884–1976 )
* Natsume Sōseki ( 1867–1916 )
* Ryūnosuke Akutagawa ( 1892–1927 ) SEE ALSO
* Haiku in English
* Haiku in languages other than Japanese * Hokku ( predecessor to Haiku )
* Japanese language * Japanese poetry * Japanese phonology * Kigo ( season word ) * Kireji ( " cutting word " )
* List of Japanese language poets * List of kigo * Masaoka Shiki International Haiku Awards
* Matsuyama Declaration
*
Saijiki ( kigo list )
*
Senryū ( haiku - like verse form )
*
Tanaga
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Henderson , H G. An Introduction to Haiku .
Hokuseido Press , 1948 .
* Higginson , William J. and Harter , Penny .
The Haiku Handbook , How to Write , Share , and Teach Haiku .
Kodansha , 1989 .
* Blyth , R. H.
A History of Haiku .
Vol .
1 , From the Beginnings up to Issa .
Tokyo :
Hokuseido Press , 1963 .
* Haya Segovia , Vicente , Aware , Barcelona , Kairós , 2013 .
* Lorente , Jaime .
Shasei .
Introducción al haiku , Toledo , Lastura y Juglar , Colección " Punto de Mira " , 2018 .
* Sato , Hiroaki .
One Hundred Frogs , from renga to haiku to English .
Weatherhill , 1983 .
* Shirane , Haruo .
Traces of Dreams , Landscape , Cultural Memory , and the poetry of Bashō .
Stanford University Press , 1998 .
( pbk )
* Sieffert , René Bashô et son école Haïkaï .
Les éditions
Textuel , 2005 .
* Takahashi , Matsuo .
Haiku , The Poetic Key to Japan .
P.I.E BOOKS , 2003 .
, C0072
* Ueda , Makoto .
The Master Haiku Poet , Matsuo Bashō .
Kodansha , 1982 .
* Yasuda , Ken .
Japanese Haiku : Its Essential Nature , History , and Possibilities in English .
Tuttle , 1957 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Haiku for People in North America and beyond Online Haiku page curated by Kevin McLaughlin , Haiku Editor of " Better Than Starbucks - not your ordinary poetry magazine " * Shiki Haikusphere and NOBO list
* Haiku International Association
* Museum of Haiku Literature , Tokyo