HYDRA ( GENUS )
Hydra is a genus of small , fresh - water organisms of the phylum Cnidaria and class Hydrozoa .
They are native to the temperate and tropical regions .
Biologists are especially interested in Hydra because of their regenerative ability — they do not appear to die of old age , or indeed to age at all .
MORPHOLOGY Section::::Morphology .
Hydra has a tubular , radially symmetric body up to long when extended , secured by a simple adhesive foot called the basal disc .
Gland cells in the basal disc secrete a sticky fluid that accounts for its adhesive properties .
At the free end of the body is a mouth opening surrounded by one to twelve thin , mobile tentacles .
Each tentacle , or cnida ( plural : cnidae ) , is clothed with highly specialised stinging cells called cnidocytes .
Cnidocytes contain specialized structures called nematocysts , which look like miniature light bulbs with a coiled thread inside .
At the narrow outer edge of the cnidocyte is a short trigger hair called a cnidocil .
Upon contact with prey , the contents of the nematocyst are explosively discharged , firing a dart - like thread containing neurotoxins into whatever triggered the release which can paralyse the prey , especially if many hundreds of nematocysts are fired .
Hydra has two main body layers , which makes it " diploblastic " .
The layers are separated by mesoglea , a gel - like substance .
The outer layer is the epidermis , and the inner layer is called the gastrodermis , because it lines the stomach .
The cells making up these two body layers are relatively simple .
Hydramacin is a bactericide recently discovered in Hydra ; it protects the outer layer against infection .
The nervous system of Hydra is a nerve net , which is structurally simple compared to more derived animal nervous systems .
Hydra does not have a recognizable brain or true muscles .
Nerve nets connect sensory photoreceptors and touch - sensitive nerve cells located in the body wall and tentacles .
Respiration and excretion occur by diffusion everywhere through the epidermis .
MOTION AND LOCOMOTION Section::::Motion and locomotion .
If Hydra are alarmed or attacked , the tentacles can be retracted to small buds , and the body column itself can be retracted to a small gelatinous sphere .
Hydra generally react in the same way regardless of the direction of the stimulus , and this may be due to the simplicity of the nerve nets .
Hydra are generally or sessile , but do occasionally move quite readily , especially when hunting .
They have two distinct methods for moving – ' looping ' and ' somersaulting ' .
They do this by bending over and attaching themselves to the with the mouth and tentacles and then relocate the foot , which provides the usual attachment , this process is called looping .
In somersaulting , the body then bends over and makes a new place of attachment with the foot .
By this process of " looping " or " somersaulting " , a Hydra can move several inches ( c. 100 mm ) in a day .
Hydra may also move by amoeboid motion of their bases or by detaching from the substrate and floating away in the current .
REPRODUCTION AND LIFE CYCLE Section::::Reproduction and life cycle .
When food is plentiful , many Hydra reproduce asexually by producing buds in the body wall , which grow to be miniature adults and break away when they are mature .
When a hydra is well fed , a new bud can form every two days .
When conditions are harsh , often before winter or in poor feeding conditions , sexual reproduction occurs in some Hydra .
Swellings in the body wall develop into either ovaries or testes .
The testes release free - swimming gametes into the water , and these can fertilize the egg in the ovary of another individual .
The fertilized eggs secrete a tough outer coating , and , as the adult dies ( due to starvation and/or cold )
, these resting eggs fall to the bottom of the lake or pond to await better conditions , whereupon they hatch into nymph Hydra .
Some Hydra species , like H. circumcincta and H. viridissima , are hermaphrodites and may produce both testes and ovaries at the same time .
Many members of the Hydrozoa go through a body change from a polyp to an adult form called a medusa .
FEEDING
Section::::Feeding .
Hydra mainly feed on aquatic invertebrates such as Daphnia and Cyclops .
While feeding , Hydra extend their body to maximum length and then slowly extend their tentacles .
Despite their simple construction , the tentacles of Hydra are extraordinarily extensible and can be four to five times the length of the body .
Once fully extended , the tentacles are slowly manoeuvred around waiting for contact with a suitable prey animal .
Upon contact , nematocysts on the tentacle fire into the prey , and the tentacle itself coils around the prey .
Within 30 seconds , most of the remaining tentacles will have already joined in the attack to subdue the struggling prey .
Within two minutes , the tentacles will have surrounded the prey and moved it into the opened mouth aperture .
Within ten minutes , the prey will have been engulfed within the body cavity , and digestion will have started .
Hydra are able to stretch their body wall considerably in order to digest prey more than twice their size .
After two or three days , the indigestible remains of the prey will be discharged through the mouth aperture via contractions .
The feeding behaviour of Hydra demonstrates the sophistication of what appears to be a simple nervous system .
Some species of Hydra exist in a mutual relationship with various types of unicellular algae .
The algae are protected from predators by Hydra and , in return , photosynthetic products from the algae are beneficial as a food source to Hydra .
MEASURING THE FEEDING RESPONSE
Section::::Measuring the feeding response .
The feeding response in Hydra is induced by reduced glutathione released from injured prey .
There are several methods conventionally used for quantification of the feeding response .
In some , the duration for which the mouth remains open is measured .
Other methods rely on counting the number of Hydra among a small population showing the feeding response after addition of glutathione .
Recently , an assay for measuring the feeding response in hydra has been developed .
In this method , the linear two - dimensional distance between the tip of the tentacle and the mouth of hydra was shown to be a direct measure of the extent of the feeding response .
This method has been validated using a starvation model , as starvation is known to cause enhancement of the Hydra feeding response .
MORPHALLAXIS Section::::Morphallaxis .
Hydra undergoes morphallaxis ( tissue regeneration ) when injured or severed . NON - SENESCENCE Section::::Non - senescence .
Daniel Martinez claimed in a 1998 article in Experimental Gerontology that Hydra are biologically immortal .
This publication has been widely cited as evidence that Hydra do not senesce ( do not age ) , and that they are proof of the existence of non - senescing organisms generally .
In 2010 Preston Estep published ( also in Experimental Gerontology )
a letter to the editor arguing that the Martinez data refute the hypothesis that Hydra do not senesce .
The controversial unlimited life span of Hydra has attracted the attention of natural scientists for a long time .
Research today appears to confirm Martinez ' study .
Hydra stem cells have a capacity for indefinite self - renewal .
The transcription factor , " forkhead box
O " ( FoxO ) has been identified as a critical driver of the continuous self - renewal of Hydra .
A drastically reduced population growth resulted from FoxO down - regulation , so research findings do contribute to both a confirmation and an understanding of Hydra immortality .
While Hydra immortality is well - supported today , the implications for human aging are still controversial .
There is much optimism ; however , it appears that researchers still have a long way to go before they are able to understand how the results of their work might apply to the reduction or elimination of human senescence .
GENOMICS Section::::Genomics .
A draft of the genome of Hydra magnipapillata was reported in 2010 .
SEE ALSO
* Lernaean Hydra , a Greek mythological aquatic creature after which the genus is named .
* Turritopsis dohrnii , another cnidarian ( a jellyfish ) that scientists believe to be immortal REFERENCES