HOUSTON TEXANS
The Houston Texans are a professional American football team based in Houston , Texas .
The Texans compete in the National Football League ( NFL ) as a member club of the American Football Conference ( AFC ) South division .
The team plays its home games at NRG Stadium .
The club first played in as an expansion team , making them the youngest franchise currently competing in the NFL .
The Texans replaced the city 's previous NFL franchise , the Houston Oilers , which moved to Nashville , Tennessee and are now known as the Tennessee Titans .
The team was founded and owned by Bob McNair from 1999 to his death in 2018 .
Following McNair 's death , the majority ownership of the team went to his wife , Janice McNair , and his son , D. Cal McNair .
While the team mainly struggled in the 2000s , they would find success in the 2011 season , after clinching their first playoff berth and would go on to win their first division championship .
The Texans would go on to win three more AFC South championships in 2012 , 2015 , and 2016 .
To date , the Texans are the only NFL franchise to have never played in a conference championship game .
FRANCHISE HISTORY
Section::::Franchise history .
In 1997 , Houston entrepreneur Bob McNair had a failed bid to bring a National Hockey League ( NHL ) expansion team to the city , and Bud Adams relocated the city 's NFL team , the Houston Oilers , to Nashville where they were renamed the Tennessee Titans .
In 1996 , a year earlier , the Cleveland Browns had controversially relocated to become the Baltimore Ravens .
As part of the settlement between the NFL , the city of Cleveland , Ohio , and the team owned by Art Modell , the league promised to return football to Cleveland within the following three years .
In order to even out the franchises at 32 , the league also contemplated adding another expansion franchise .
As Houston was one of the favorites for the extra franchise along with Toronto and Los Angeles ( which had lost the Rams and the Raiders in 1995 ) , McNair then decided to join the football project and founded Houston NFL Holdings with partner Steve Patterson .
In association with Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo , they would push for a domed stadium as part of the bid to lure the NFL back to Houston .
On October 6 , 1999 the NFL awarded the 32nd team to Houston , at the cost of $ 700 million .
The Houston Texans joined the league at the 2002 NFL season , playing at the newly founded Reliant Stadium .
With their opening game victory over the Dallas Cowboys that season , the team became the first expansion team to win its opening game since the Minnesota Vikings beat the Chicago Bears in 1961 .
While the team struggled in early seasons , results began to improve once native Houstonian Gary Kubiak became the head coach in 2006 .
The Texans finished with a .500 season ( 8 - 8 ) in both 2007 and 2008 , and nearly qualified for the 2009–10 NFL playoffs with a 9–7 result in 2009 .
In 2010 , the team started the season on a 4–2 record going into a Week 7 bye week , but promptly collapsed 2–8 in the second part of the season , finishing 6–10 .
In the 2011 NFL Draft , the Texans acquired Wisconsin star defensive end
J.J. Watt eleventh overall .
The following season , former Cowboys head coach Wade Phillips was hired as the defensive coordinator of the Texans , and the improved defense led to the Texans finishing 10–6 , winning their first AFC South title .
The Texans then beat wild card Cincinnati Bengals 31–10 in the first round of the 2011–12 NFL playoffs , before a 20–13 defeat by the Ravens in the semifinals .
The Texans surged as the team to beat in the AFC South in , starting 5 - 0 and holding an 11–1 record by week 14 .
However , they lost three of their last four games to finish 12–4 ; beating the rival Indianapolis Colts in that four - game stretch allowing them to clinch their 2nd AFC South title .
The Texans beat the Bengals again in the wild - card round , but they lost in the second round to the New England Patriots .
In the 2013 NFL Draft , the Texans acquired Clemson wide receiver DeAndre Hopkins twenty seventh overall .
In 2013 , the Texans started 2–0 but went into a tailspin and lost every game afterwards .
Kubiak was fired as head coach after being swept by the rival Jacksonville Jaguars , who themselves started 0–8 .
Wade Phillips filled in as head coach , but the Texans ' poor form did not change , and they finished 2–14 , tying , with 2005 , their worst record in franchise history .
The 14-game losing streak is also the worst in franchise history .
The Texans entered the 2014 season with a 14-game losing streak .
Former Penn State head coach Bill O'Brien became the Texans ' new head coach , and the third in franchise history , during the offseason .
In 2014 , the Texans won three of their first four games , defeating the Redskins in the season opener , the Raiders , and the Bills , losing to the New York Giants .
They lost three of their next four games , losing to the Dallas Cowboys , the Indianapolis Colts , and the Pittsburgh Steelers , respectively .
The Texans went on to finish 9–7 in the 2014 season and barely missed the playoffs .
In the 2015 season , they were featured on HBO , on the show " Hard Knocks " .
That year , the Texans started with a 2–5 record .
Quarterback Ryan Mallett was released amidst controversy regarding his benching in favor of Brian Hoyer during a loss against the Indianapolis Colts .
After a poor start , the Texans finished with a 9–7 record and won their third AFC South title .
However , they were shut out by the Kansas City Chiefs in the Wild Card round 30–0 , ending their championship hopes for the year .
On March 9 , 2016 , the Texans signed former Denver Broncos quarterback Brock Osweiler to a 4-year , $ 72 million deal .
Despite Osweiler 's lucrative deal , he struggled significantly during the entire season .
After throwing two interceptions in Week 15 against the Jaguars , coach Bill O'Brien benched the offseason acquisition in favor of backup quarterback Tom Savage .
Savage led a comeback effort against the Jaguars , and was named the starter for the remainder of the season .
The Texans clinched their fourth AFC South division title in six years in Savage 's first career start against the Bengals in Week 16 .
They defeated the wildcard Oakland Raiders 27–14 in the opening round of the playoffs with Osweiler as the starting quarterback due to Savage being out with a concussion .
Osweiler started in the Divisional Playoffs game against the New England Patriots , throwing three interceptions in the second half .
The Texans lost 34–16 .
In the 2017 NFL Draft , the Texans traded up to the 12th overall selection to select Clemson star quarterback Deshaun Watson .
Watson started six games his rookie year , going 3 - 3 and having arguably the greatest and most decorated rookie season by a quarterback in NFL history , eventually rising up to become the Texans ' franchise quarterback .
However , his success would come up very short , following a Week 8 41 - 38 loss to the Seattle Seahawks , Watson tore his ACL in practice and was ruled out the remainder of the season , which would immediately cause the Texans to have one of their worst seasons yet .
Plagued by a series of unexpected injuries ( including a second consecutive season - ending injury to J.J. Watt ) and controversy involving the team 's suspected violation of the league 's concussion protocol , after backup quarterback Tom Savage suffered a seizure following a Week 14 game against the San Francisco 49ers , the Texans would go 1 - 9 the rest of the season and eventually finish 4 - 12 and last in the AFC South in 2017 , missing the playoffs for the first time since 2014 and giving Bill O'Brien his first losing season as Texans head coach .
In 2018 , the Texans would start the season 0 - 3 , losing by a combined 15 points to the New England Patriots , Tennessee Titans , and New York Giants , before winning a 37 - 34 overtime shootout on the road in Indianapolis .
This win sparked an nine - game winning streak for the Texans , their first since starting 5 - 0 in 2012 , which included a Week 8 Thursday Night win against the Miami Dolphins that included 5 touchdown passes from Deshaun Watson .
The Texans sit at 9 - 3 , holding first place in the AFC South .
On November 23 , 2018 , the owner of the Houston Texans , Bob McNair , died from skin cancer .
On November 26 , 2018 , Bob McNair 's son , D. Cal McNair , became the Chairman and Chief Operating Officer .
TEAM
IDENTITY NICKNAME Section::::Team identity .
Section::::Nickname .
On March 2 , 2000 , Houston NFL 2002 announced that the team name search had been narrowed down to five choices : Apollos , Bobcats , Stallions , Texans , and Wildcatters .
The list of names was determined after several months of research conducted jointly by Houston NFL 2002 and NFL Properties .
An online survey regarding the name generated more than 65,000 responses in just seven days .
On September 6 , 2000 , the NFL 's 32nd franchise was officially christened the Houston Texans before thousands at a downtown rally in Houston .
McNair explained that the name and logo " embody the pride , strength , independence and achievement that make the people of Houston and our area special .
"
The nickname " Texans " was more recently used by the now - defunct Canadian Football League franchise in San Antonio ; the Texans had previously been the name of a former World Football League franchise in Houston , which moved to Louisiana to become the Shreveport Steamer ; the Dallas Texans of the NFL which only played in the 1952 season ; and the nickname was also used by the precursor of the present - day Kansas City Chiefs , when they were the Dallas Texans of the American Football League ( AFL ) .
Owner Bob McNair received permission from Chiefs ' owner Lamar Hunt to use the Texans nickname for his new team .
LOGO AND UNIFORMS Section::::Logo and uniforms .
Along with the team name , McNair also unveiled the team logo , an abstract depiction of a bull 's head , split in such a way to resemble the flag of Texas and the state of Texas , including a lone star to stand for the eye , the five points of which representing pride , courage , strength , tradition and independence .
McNair described the colors as " Deep Steel Blue " , " Battle Red " and " Liberty White " .
A year later the Texans unveiled their uniforms during another downtown rally .
The Texans ' helmet is dark blue with the Texans bull logo .
The helmet was initially white when the team name and logo were unveiled , but was later changed to dark blue .
The uniform design consists of red trim and either dark blue or white jerseys .
The team typically wears white pants with its blue jerseys and blue pants with its white jerseys .
Starting with the 2006 season , the Texans wore all - white for their home opener , and the team began to wear an all - blue combination for home games vs. the Indianapolis Colts .
In 2003 , the Texans introduced an alternative red jersey with blue trim ; they wear this jersey at one home game each year , usually against a division rival .
In 2007 , the Texans introduced red pants for the first time , pairing them with the red jerseys for an all - red look .
( This uniform combination was not well - received and has since been retired ) .
In October 2008 the Texans paired blue socks ( instead of the traditional red ) with their blue pants and white jerseys .
In 2016 , the Texans unveiled a new uniform combo against the Jacksonville Jaguars , pairing the red jersey with blue pants and red socks .
In 2017 , the Texans wear the color rush uniform with all - navy blue .
In 2002 , the team wore a patch commemorating their inaugural season .
Also , they celebrated 10 years as a franchise by wearing an anniversary patch throughout 2012 .
MASCOTS AND CHEERLEADERS Section::::Mascots and cheerleaders .
The team 's official mascot is Toro .
The team also has a cheerleading squad simply named the Houston Texans Cheerleaders .
RIVALRIES Section::::Rivalries .
The Texans are the youngest franchise in the NFL , having only been competing in the NFL since 2002 .
For that reason , they have not had the history or the reputation on which to build classic rivalries like the ones that often exist between older franchises .
TENNESSEE TITANS
Section::::Tennessee Titans .
The Tennessee Titans , who were formerly the Houston Oilers before their relocation in the 1990s , are viewed by many Houston fans as the Texans ' chief rival and happen to be a team in the AFC South .
OTHER AFC SOUTH RIVALRIES
Section::::Other AFC South rivalries .
The Jacksonville Jaguars and the Indianapolis Colts , whom the Texans had never defeated in Indianapolis until the 2015 season , are the other two Texans rivals in the AFC South .
More recently , Houston has increased bitterness with the Indianapolis Colts due to their young Houston - native quarterback Andrew Luck having been drafted by the Colts in 2012 and the franchise 's first ever sweep of the Colts against Luck in 2016 .
DALLAS COWBOYS Section::::Dallas Cowboys .
The Texans also have an intrastate rivalry with the Dallas Cowboys , with whom they contest the so - called Governor 's Cup every year ( a tradition started between the cities prior to the Oilers relocating ) either in the preseason or the regular season for bragging rights in the state of Texas .
In 2017 , the destruction and flooding caused during Hurricane Harvey a few days before their Week 4 pre - season match up time scheduled caused the game to be relocated to AT&T Stadium in Arlington , Texas .
However , out of concern for the safety of the fans and the condition of the player 's families & communities , the game was cancelled .
STATISTICS WIN – LOSS RECORD Section::::Statistics .
Section::::Win – loss record .
As of the end of the 2017 season , the Texans ' overall regular season win - loss record is 110–146 ( .430 ) .
The Texans notched the 100th regular season win in their history when they defeated the Tennessee Titans on October 2 , 2016 .
The Texans posted their best - ever season record in 2012 , finishing at 12–4 .
The team 's worst - ever seasons on record are 2–14 , in both 2005 and 2013 .
Most recently the Texans finished 4–12 in 2017 , finishing fourth in the AFC South and ending their run of two straight division titles .
The Texans are 3–4 ( .429 ) all - time in playoff games .
All four of the Texans ' playoff berths were as a result of winning the AFC South division championship .
The Texans have a 3 - 1 record all - time in Wild Card Round games but have lost all three games they have played in the Divisional Round .
In 2016 this trend continued as the Texans defeated the Oakland Raiders 27 - 14 in a Wild Card game at home , but then were eliminated by the eventual Super Bowl LI champion New England Patriots 34 - 16 in the Divisional Round the following weekend .
NOTABLE RECORDS VS OPPONENTS Section::::Notable records vs opponents .
As members of the AFC South , the Texans play 6 of their 16 regular season games against other AFC South teams .
As of the end of the 2017 season , the Texans have a cumulative record of 41 - 55
( .427 ) against their three divisional rivals : 19–13 versus the Jacksonville Jaguars ; 15–17 versus the Tennessee Titans ; and 7–25 versus the Indianapolis Colts .
The Texans have fared slightly better against the rest of the AFC , posting a regular season record of 43 - 53 ( .448 ) against AFC teams from divisions other than the South , with a 14–17 record against AFC East teams , 16–18 against AFC North teams , and 13–18 against AFC West teams .
The Texans are 26–38 ( .406 ) against NFC teams , tallying a 4–12 record against NFC East teams , 8–8 against NFC North teams , 9 - 7 against NFC South teams , and 5–11 against NFC West teams .
As of the end of the 2017 season , there is one team against which the Texans have never lost : the Chicago Bears ( 4–0 ) .
There are also two teams which the Texans have never beaten : the Minnesota Vikings ( 0–4 ) and Philadelphia Eagles ( 0–4 ) .
According to the NFL 's scheduling formula , the Texans ' next regular - season game against the Eagles will be in 2018 , and their next regular season games against the Bears and Vikings will occur in 2020 .
PLAYERS OF NOTE
CURRENT ROSTER
NFL DRAFT
HISTORY FIRST - ROUND DRAFT PICKS
BY YEAR AWARDS AND HONORS RING OF HONOR COACHES OF NOTE
HEAD
COACHES
Dom Capers align = left January 21 , 2001–January 2 , 2006 4 18460 0 align = leftGary Kubiak align = left January 26 , 2006–December 6 , 2013 8 61640 2 align =
leftWade
Phillips align = left December 6 , 2013–January 1 , 2014
Interim 030 0 align =
leftBill O'Brien align = left January 2 , 2014–present 4 31330 2 OFFENSIVE COORDINATORS
DEFENSIVE COORDINATORS SPECIAL TEAMS COORDINATORS CURRENT STAFF TRADITIONS
* Battle Red Day – On Battle Red Day the team wears the red alternate jerseys and fans are encouraged to wear red to the game .
Starting in 2007 and including 2008 , this included the Texans wearing red pants along with the red jerseys .
* Bull Pen –
The sections behind the north end zone of NRG / Reliant Stadium are known as the Bull Pen .
Some of the most avid Texans fans attend games in the Bull Pen and regular members have helped create and implement fan traditions , songs and chants , such as : * -Holding up giant Texans jerseys while the visiting team 's players are announced * -Turning
their backs on the opposing team after they score
* -Gathering as a group for tailgating in the NW corner of the Platinum Lot of Reliant Stadium at the " Blue Crew " tailgate and conducting the Bull Pen Toast every game approximately an hour and a half prior to kickoff
* -Walking in the HEB Holiday Parade on Thanksgiving Day
* -Visiting the Bull Pen Pub for TORO Wraps , cheerleader autographs and to listen and dance with the Bull Pen Pep Band * Bull Pen Pep Band – 45-member musical group that performs at all Houston Texans home games .
* Pre - Kickoff Tradition – Before each kickoff at a home game , the Texans will run a short clip of a raging bull thrashing the opponent of the week .
The video is paired with the AC / DC song " Thunderstruck " .
* Player Introduction – When the players are introduced before the game , the announcer says the player 's first name and the crowd yells out the last name ( e.g. The announcer will say " Linebacker Brian ... " and the crowd will yell out " CUSHING ! ! ! " ) .
RADIO AND TELEVISION Section::::Radio and television . , the Texans ' flagship radio stations were KILT SportsRadio 610AM and KILT
100.3FM .
The AM station has an all - sports format , while the FM station plays contemporary country music .
Both are owned by CBS Radio .
Marc Vandermeer is the play - by - play announcer .
Heisman Trophy winner Andre Ware provides color commentary , and SportsRadio 610 host Rich Lord serves as the sideline reporter .
Preseason games are telecast by KTRK , an ABC owned and operated station .
Kevin Kugler calls the preseason games on TV , with former Oilers running back Spencer Tillman providing color commentary .
Regular season games are aired over CBS affiliate KHOU , FOX affiliate KRIV if the Texans host an NFC team , and NBC affiliate KPRC for Sunday night games .
Spanish - language radio broadcasts of the team 's games are aired on KGOL ESPN Deportes 1180AM .
Enrique Vásquez is the play - by - play announcer .
José Jojo Padrón provides color commentary , and Fernando Hernández serves as sideline reporter .
RADIO AFFILIATES
Section::::Radio affiliates .
Texans Radio Affiliates
THEME MUSIC Section::::Theme music .
Until 2017 , the theme song of the Texans was " It 's Football Time
In Houston " by Clay Walker , played after every Texans touchdown .
The Texans tried to introduce a new fight song in 2003 written by Chad Kroeger from Nickelback , but quickly returned to the original after a negative reception by fans .
The song was donated by Walker to the city of Houston .
As of 2017 , the touchdown theme song is " God Blessed Texas " by Little Texas .
The Texans ' defensive squad takes the field to the sound of " Bulls on Parade " by Rage Against the Machine .
The Texans started using the song after former linebacker Connor Barwin coined the nickname in a tweet in 2011 .
On January 5 , 2012 , local Houston rap artists Slim Thug , Paul Wall and ZRo released a song titled " HOUSTON " supporting the Houston Texans .
The YouTube video has amassed over a million views becoming unofficially the Texans ' most popular theme song .
" Hats Off to the Bull " by the hard rock band Chevelle has become another popular theme song of the entire team .
It is frequently played at home games .
WORK IN THE COMMUNITY Section::::Work in the community .
Community outreach by the Houston Texans is primarily operated by the Houston Texans Foundation , who works with multiple community partners .
The Houston Texans organization is also a supporter of the character education program , Heart of a Champion .
In 2017 , the 15th annual Houston Texans Charity Golf Classic raised more than $ 380,000 for the Foundation .
More than $ 27.2 million has been raised for the Foundation since its creation in 2002 .
SEE ALSO
* List of Houston Texans seasons NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS