GEOGRAPHY OF THE DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
The Dominican Republic ( Spanish : República Dominicana ) is a country in the West Indies that occupies the eastern five - eighths of Hispaniola .
It has an area of 48,670 km² , including offshore islands .
The land border shared with Haiti , which occupies the western three - eighths of the island , is 376 km long .
The maximum length , east to west , is 390 km from Punta de Agua to Las Lajas , on the border with Haiti .
The maximum width , north to south , is 265 km from Cape Isabela to Cape Beata .
The capital , Santo Domingo , is located on the south coast .
The Dominican Republic 's shores are washed by the Atlantic Ocean to the north and the Caribbean Sea to the south .
The Mona Passage , a channel about 130 km wide , separates the country ( and Hispaniola ) from Puerto Rico .
STATISTICS Location :
Geographic coordinates :
Map references : Area :
Area - comparative : Land boundaries : Coastline :
Maritime claims :
Climate :
Rivers : Terrain : Elevation extremes Natural resources :
Land use :
Irrigated land : Total renewable water resources : Freshwater withdrawal ( domestic / industrial / agricultural ) :
Natural hazards : Environment - current issues : Environment - international agreements : Geography - note : CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
The country is a tropical , maritime nation .
Conditions are ameliorated in many areas by elevation and by the northeast trade winds , which blow steadily from the Atlantic all year long .
The annual mean temperature is ; regional mean temperatures range from in the heart of the Cordillera Central ( Constanza ) to as high as in arid regions .
Temperatures rarely rise above , and freezing temperatures only occur in winter in the highest mountains .
The average temperature in Santo Domingo in January is , and in July .
The rain season for the northern coast is from November to January .
For the rest of the country , the rain season is from May to November .
The average annual rainfall is , with extremes of or more in the mountainous northeast ( the windward side of the island ) and in the southwestern valleys .
The western valleys , along the Haitian border , remain relatively dry , with less than of annual precipitation , due to the rain shadow effect caused by the central and northern mountain ranges .
The northwestern and southeastern extremes of the country are also arid .
The Dominican Republic is occasionally damaged by tropical storms and hurricanes , which originate in the mid - Atlantic and southeastern Caribbean from June until November ( mainly from August to October ) each year .
ISLANDS Section::::Islands .
There are several smaller islands and cays that are part of the Dominican territory .
The largest islands are :
* Saona , close to the southeastern coast of the Hispaniola , in the Caribbean Sea .
It has an area of 117 km² .
Its Taíno name was Iai or Adamanay .
Columbus named this island as Savona after the Italian city of the same name but
the use during years has eliminated the letter v.
* * Beata , in the southern coast of the Hispaniola , in the Caribbean Sea .
It has an area of 27 km² .
Its Taíno name is unknown .
Columbus named this island as Madama Beata .
*
* Catalina , very close to the southeastern coast of the Hispaniola , in the Caribbean Sea .
It has an area of 9.6 km² .
Its Taíno name was Iabanea but some writers , including poets , say that it was called Toeya or Toella .
It was discovered by Columbus who named it Santa Catalina .
* RELIEF Section::::Relief .
The Dominican Republic is a country with many mountains , and the highest peaks of the West Indies are found here .
The chains of mountains show a direction northwest - southeast , except in the Southern peninsula ( in Haiti ) where they have a direction west - east .
The mountains are separated by valleys with the same general direction .
From north to south , the mountain ranges and valleys are : * Cordillera Septentrional ( in English , " Northern Range " ) .
It runs parallel to the north coast , with extensions to the northwest , the Tortuga Island , and to the southeast , the Samaná Peninsula ( with its Sierra de Samaná ) .
Its highest mountain is Diego de Ocampo , close to Santiago , with 1,249 m.
There are several small plains between this range and the Atlantic Ocean .
Rivers are short and most of them flow to the north .
*
The Cibao Valley ( Dominican Republic ) is the largest and the most important valley of the country .
This long valley stretches from North Haiti , where is called Plaine du Nord , to Samaná Bay .
It can be divided in two sections : the northwestern part is the Yaque del Norte Valley ( or Línea Noroeste ) and the eastern Yuna Valley ( or Vega Real , English : Royal Valley ) .
The Vega Real is the most fertile area in the country , with a high population density .
*
The Cordillera Central ( also called Sierra del Cibao ) is the island 's most rugged and imposing feature and is known in Haiti as the Massif du Nord ( " Northern Massif " ) .
The highest mountains of the West Indies are in this range : Pico Duarte , 3,098 m , and others above 3,000 m. Near the center of the island , this range turns southward and is called Sierra de Ocoa , finishing near the city of Azua de Compostela , on the Caribbean coast .
Another branch , Cordillera Oriental or Sierra del Seibo , is separated from the main chain by a karstic region ( Los Haitises ) and with a west - east direction ; it is located south of Samaná Bay .
* The San Juan Valley and Plain of Azua are big valleys south of the Cordillera Central with altitude from 0 to 600 m. * The Sierra de Neiba , with Mount Neiba the highest mountain with 2,279 m.
An extension to the southeast of Sierra de Neiba is the Sierra Martín García ( Loma Busú , 1,350 m ) .
* The Hoya de Enriquillo or Neiba Valley is a remarkable valley , with a west - east direction , of low altitude ( on average 50 m with some points below sea level ) and with a great salt lake : the Enriquillo Lake .
* The Sierra de Bahoruco , called Massif de la Selle in Haiti .
This southern group of mountains have a geology very different from the rest of the island .
* Llano Costero del Caribe ( in English , " Caribbean Coastal Plain " ) is in the southeast of the island ( and of the Dominican Republic ) .
It is a large prairie east of Santo Domingo .
RIVERS AND LAKES Section::::Rivers and lakes .
The 8 longest rivers of the Dominican Republic are : * Yaque del Norte .
With 296 km , it is the longest river of the Dominican Republic .
Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the Atlantic Ocean .
Its watershed has an area of 7,044 km² .
*
* Yuna .
It is 209 km long .
Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the east into Samaná Bay .
Its watershed has an area of 5,498 km² .
* * Yaque del Sur .
It is 183 km long and its sources are in the Cordillera Central .
It flows to the south into the Caribbean Sea .
Its watershed has an area of 4,972 km² .
* * Ozama .
It is 148 km long .
Its sources are in Sierra de Yamasá ( a branch of the Cordillera Central ) .
It flows into the Caribbean Sea .
Its watershed has an area of 2,685 km² .
* * Camú .
It is 137 km long .
Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows into the Yuna River .
Its watershed has 2,655 km² .
* * Nizao .
It is 133 km long .
Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the south into the Caribbean Sea .
Its watershed has an area of 974 km² .
* * San Juan .
It is 121 km long .
Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the south into the Yaque del Sur River .
Its watershed has an area of 2,005 km² .
* * Mao .
It is 105 km long .
Its sources are in the Cordillera Central and flows to the north into the Yaque del Norte River .
Its watershed has an area of 864 km² .
*
The Artibonite River is the longest river of the island but only 68 km are in the Dominican Republic .
The largest lake of the Hispaniola , and of the West Indies , is the Lake Enriquillo .
It is located in the Hoya de Enriquillo with an area of 265 km² .
There are three small islands within the lake .
It is around 40 meters below sea level and is a saline lake with a higher concentration of salt than the sea water .
Others lakes are Rincón ( fresh water , area of 28.2 km² ) , Oviedo ( brackish water , area of 28 km² ) , Redonda , Limón .
REFERENCES