GOLDEN RULE
The Golden Rule is the principle of treating others as one 's self would wish to be treated .
It is a maxim that is found in many religions and cultures .
The Golden Rule can be considered an ethic of reciprocity in some religions , although other religions treat it differently .
The maxim may appear as either a positive or negative injunction governing conduct :
* One should treat others as one would like others to treat oneself ( positive or directive form ) .
* One should not treat others in ways that one would not like to be treated ( negative or prohibitive form ) .
* What you wish upon others , you wish upon yourself ( empathic or responsive form ) .
The idea dates at least to the early Confucian times ( 551–479 BC ) according to Rushworth Kidder , who identifies that this concept appears prominently in Buddhism , Christianity , Hinduism , Judaism , Taoism , Zoroastrianism , and " the rest of the world 's major religions " .
The concept of the Rule is codified in the Code of Hammurabi stele and tablets , 1754 - 1790 BC .
143 leaders encompassing the world 's major faiths endorsed the Golden Rule as part of the 1993 " Declaration Toward a Global Ethic " , including the Baha'i Faith , Brahmanism , Brahma Kumaris , Buddhism , Christianity , Hinduism , Indigenous , Interfaith , Islam , Jainism , Judaism , Native American , Neo - Pagan , Sikhism , Taoism , Theosophist , Unitarian Universalist and Zoroastrian .
According to Greg M. Epstein , " ' do unto others ' ... is a concept that essentially no religion misses entirely , " but belief in God is not necessary to endorse it .
Simon Blackburn also states that the Golden Rule can be " found in some form in almost every ethical tradition " .
Yet , as with any historically prominent maxim , the Golden Rule is not without its controversy ( as seen in the Criticism section below ) .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term " Golden Rule " , or " Golden law " , began to be used widely in the early 17th century in Britain by Anglican theologians and preachers ; the earliest known usage is that of Anglicans Charles Gibbon and Thomas Jackson in 1604 .
ANCIENT HISTORY
ANCIENT EGYPT
Section::::Ancient history .
Section::::Ancient Egypt .
Possibly the earliest affirmation of the maxim of reciprocity , reflecting the ancient Egyptian goddess Ma'at , appears in the story of The Eloquent Peasant , which dates to the Middle Kingdom ( c. 2040–1650 BC ) :
" Now this is the command :
Do to the doer to make him do .
"
This proverb embodies the do ut des principle .
A Late Period ( c. 664–323 BC ) papyrus contains an early negative affirmation of the Golden Rule : " That which you hate to be done to you , do not do to another . "
ANCIENT INDIA SANSKRIT TRADITION Section::::Ancient India .
Section::::Sanskrit tradition .
In Mahābhārata , the ancient epic of India , there is a discourse in which the wise minister Vidura advises the King Yuddhiśhṭhira TAMIL TRADITION Section::::Tamil tradition .
In Chapter 32 in the Part on Virtue of the Tirukkuṛaḷ
( c. 200 BC – c. 500
AD ) , Tiruvalluvar says : " Do not do to others what you know has hurt yourself " ( K. 316 . ) ; " Why does one hurt others knowing what it is to be hurt ? "
( K. 318 ) .
He furthermore opined that it is the determination of the spotless ( virtuous ) not to do evil , even in return , to those who have cherished enmity and done them evil .
( K. 312 )
The ( proper ) punishment to those who have done evil ( to you ) , is to put them to shame by showing them kindness , in return and to forget both the evil and the good done on both sides ( K. 314 )
ANCIENT GREECE Section::::Ancient Greece .
The Golden Rule in its prohibitive ( negative ) form was a common principle in ancient Greek philosophy .
Examples of the general concept include : *
" Avoid doing what you would blame others for doing . " – Thales ( c. 624 BC – c. 546 BC ) *
" What you do not want to happen to you , do not do it yourself either .
"
– Sextus the Pythagorean .
The oldest extant reference to Sextus is by Origen in the third century of the common era .
* " Do not do to others that which angers you when they do it to you . "
– Isocrates ( 436–338 BC ) ANCIENT PERSIA Section::::Ancient Persia .
The Pahlavi Texts of Zoroastrianism ( c. 300 BC–1000 AD ) were an early source for the Golden Rule : " That nature alone is good which refrains from doing to another whatsoever is not good for itself . "
Dadisten - I - dinik , 94,5 , and
" Whatever is disagreeable to yourself do not do unto others .
"
Shayast - na - Shayast 13:29 ANCIENT ROME
Section::::Ancient Rome .
Seneca the Younger ( c. 4 BC–65 AD ) , a practitioner of Stoicism ( c. 300 BC–200 AD ) expressed the Golden Rule in his essay regarding the treatment of slaves : " Treat your inferior as you would wish your superior to treat you . "
RELIGIOUS CONTEXT Section::::Religious context .
According to Simon Blackburn , the Golden Rule " can be found in some form in almost every ethical tradition " .
ABRAHAMIC RELIGIONS JUDAISM Section::::Abrahamic religions .
Section::::Judaism .
A rule of altruistic reciprocity was first stated positively in a well - known Torah verse ( Hebrew : ): Hillel
the Elder ( c. 110 BC – 10 AD ) , used this verse as a most important message of the Torah for his teachings .
Once , he was challenged by a gentile who asked to be converted under the condition that the Torah be explained to him while he stood on one foot .
Hillel accepted him as a candidate for conversion to Judaism but , drawing on , briefed the man :
Hillel recognized brotherly love as the fundamental principle of Jewish ethics .
Rabbi Akiva agreed and suggested that the principle of love must have its foundation in Genesis chapter 1 , which teaches that all men are the offspring of Adam , who was made in the image of God ( Sifra , Ḳedoshim , iv . ;
Yer .
Ned .
ix . 41c ; Genesis Rabba 24 ) .
According to Jewish rabbinic literature , the first man Adam represents the unity of mankind .
This is echoed in the modern preamble of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
And it is also taught , that Adam is last in order according to the evolutionary character of God 's creation :
Why was only a single specimen of man created first ?
To teach us that he who destroys a single soul destroys a whole world and that he who saves a single soul saves a whole world ; furthermore , so no race or class may claim a nobler ancestry , saying , ' Our father was born first ' ; and , finally , to give testimony to the greatness of the Lord , who caused the wonderful diversity of mankind to emanate from one type .
And why was Adam created last of all beings ?
To teach him humility ; for if he be overbearing , let him remember that the little fly preceded him in the order of creation .
The Jewish Publication Society 's edition of Leviticus states :
Thou shalt not hate thy brother .
in thy heart ; thou shalt surely rebuke thy neighbour , and not bear sin because of him .
18
Thou shalt not take vengeance , nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people , but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself
: I am
the LORD.This Torah verse represents one of several versions of the Golden Rule , which itself appears in various forms , positive and negative .
It is the earliest written version of that concept in a positive form .
At the turn of the eras , the Jewish rabbis were discussing the scope of the meaning of Leviticus 19:18 and 19:34 extensively :
Commentators summed up foreigners (= Samaritans ) , proselytes (= ' strangers who resides with you ' )
( Rabbi Akiva , bQuid 75b ) or Jews ( Rabbi Gamaliel , yKet 3 , 1 ; 27a ) to the scope of the meaning .
On the verse , " Love your fellow as yourself , " the classic commentator Rashi quotes from Torat Kohanim , an early Midrashic text regarding the famous dictum of Rabbi Akiva : " Love your fellow as yourself –
Rabbi Akiva says this is a great principle of the Torah . "
Israel 's postal service quoted from the previous Leviticus verse when it commemorated the Universal Declaration of Human Rights on a 1958 postage stamp .
CHRISTIANITY Section::::Christianity .
The " Golden Rule " was given by Jesus of Nazareth ( Matthew 7:12 NCV , see also ) .
The common English phrasing is " Do unto others as you would have them do unto you " .
A similar form of the phrase appeared in a Catholic catechism around 1567 ( certainly in the reprint of 1583 ) .
The Golden Rule is stated positively numerous times in the Old Testament : ( " Thou shalt not avenge , nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people , but thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself :
I am the LORD .
" ; see also Great Commandment ) and ( " But treat them just as you treat your own citizens .
Love foreigners as you love yourselves , because you were foreigners one time in Egypt .
I am the Lord your God . " ) .
The Old Testament Deuterocanonical books of Tobit and Sirach , accepted as part of the Scriptural canon by Catholic Church , Eastern Orthodoxy , and the Non - Chalcedonian Churches , express a negative form of the golden rule :
Two passages in the New Testament quote Jesus of Nazareth
espousing the positive form of the Golden rule :
A similar passage , a parallel to the Great Commandment , is The passage in the book of Luke then continues with Jesus answering the question , " Who is my neighbor ? " , by telling the parable of the Good Samaritan , indicating that " your neighbor " is anyone in need .
This extends to all , including those who are generally considered hostile .
Jesus ' teaching goes beyond the negative formulation of not doing what one would not like done to themselves , to the positive formulation of actively doing good to another that , if the situations were reversed , one would desire that the other would do for them .
This formulation , as indicated in the parable of the Good Samaritan , emphasizes the needs for positive action that brings benefit to another , not simply restraining oneself from negative activities that hurt another .
In one passage of the New Testament , Paul the Apostle refers to the golden rule : ISLAM Section::::Islam .
The Arabian peninsula was known to not practice the golden rule prior to the advent of Islam . "
Pre - Islamic Arabs regarded the survival of the tribe , as most essential and to be ensured by the ancient rite of blood vengeance "
However , this all changed when Muhammad came on the scene : From the hadith , the collected oral and written accounts of Muhammad and his teachings during his lifetime :
Ali ibn Abi Talib ( 4th Caliph in Sunni Islam , and first Imam in Shia Islam ) says : BAHÁ'Í FAITH
Section::::Bahá'í Faith .
The writings of the Bahá'í Faith encourages everyone to treat others as they would treat themselves and even prefer others over oneself :
INDIAN RELIGIONS
HINDUISM Section::::Indian religions .
Section::::Hinduism .
Also , BUDDHISM Section::::Buddhism .
Buddha ( Siddhartha Gautama , c. 623–543 BC ) made this principle one of the cornerstones of his ethics in the 6th century BC .
It occurs in many places and in many forms throughout the Tripitaka .
JAINISM
Section::::Jainism .
The Golden Rule is paramount in the Jainist philosophy and can be seen in the doctrines of Ahimsa and Karma .
As part of the prohibition of causing any living beings to suffer , Jainism forbids inflicting upon others what is harmful to oneself .
The following quotation from the Acaranga Sutra sums up the philosophy of Jainism :
Saman Suttam of Jinendra Varni gives further insight into this precept:-
SIKHISM EAST ASIAN RELIGIONS CONFUCIANISM
Section::::East Asian religions .
Section::::Confucianism .
The same idea is also presented in V.12 and VI.30 of the Analects ( c. 500 BC ) , which can be found in the online Chinese Text Project .
The phraseology differs from the Christian version of the Golden Rule .
It does not presume to do anything unto others , but merely to avoid doing what would be harmful .
It does not preclude doing good deeds and taking moral positions , but there is slim possibility for a Confucian missionary outlook , such as one can justify with the Christian Golden Rule .
TAOISM MOHISM Section::::Mohism .
Mozi regarded the golden rule as a corollary to the cardinal virtue of impartiality , and encouraged egalitarianism and selflessness in relationships .
IRANIAN RELIGIONS
ZOROASTRIANISM Section::::Iranian religions .
Section::::Zoroastrianism .
Do not do unto others whatever is injurious to yourself .
-- Shayast - na - Shayast 13.29 NEW RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS WICCA SCIENTOLOGY Section::::New religious movements .
Section::::Scientology .
The Way to Happiness expresses the Golden Rule both in its negative / prohibitive form and in its positive form .
The negative / prohibitive form is expressed in Precept 19 as : The positive form is expressed in Precept 20 as : TRADITIONAL AFRICAN RELIGIONS
YORUBA
ODINANI
SECULAR
CONTEXT GLOBAL ETHIC Section::::Secular context .
Section::::Global ethic .
The " Declaration Toward a Global Ethic " from the Parliament of the World 's Religions ( 1993 ) proclaimed the Golden Rule ( " We must treat others as we wish others to treat us " )
as the common principle for many religions .
The Initial Declaration was signed by 143 leaders from all of the world 's major faiths , including Baha'i Faith , Brahmanism , Brahma Kumaris , Buddhism , Christianity , Hinduism , Indigenous , Interfaith , Islam , Jainism , Judaism , Native American , Neo - Pagan , Sikhism , Taoism , Theosophist , Unitarian Universalist and Zoroastrian .
In the folklore of several cultures the Golden Rule is depicted by the allegory of the long spoons .
HUMANISM Section::::Humanism .
In the view of Greg M. Epstein , a Humanist chaplain at Harvard University , " ' do unto others ' ... is a concept that essentially no religion misses entirely .
But not a single one of these versions of the golden rule requires a God " .
Various sources identify the Golden Rule as a humanist principle : EXISTENTIALISM OTHER CONTEXTS HUMAN RIGHTS
Section::::Other contexts .
Section::::Human rights .
According to Marc H. Bornstein , and William E. Paden , the Golden Rule is arguably the most essential basis for the modern concept of human rights , in which each individual has a right to just treatment , and a reciprocal responsibility to ensure justice for others .
However Leo Damrosch argued that the notion that the Golden Rule pertains to " rights " per se is a contemporary interpretation and has nothing to do with its origin .
The development of human " rights " is a modern political ideal that began as a philosophical concept promulgated through the philosophy of Jean Jacques Rousseau in 18th century France , among others .
His writings influenced Thomas Jefferson , who then incorporated Rousseau 's reference to " inalienable rights " into the United States Declaration of Independence in 1776 .
Damrosch argued that to confuse the Golden Rule with human rights is to apply contemporary thinking to ancient concepts .
SCIENCE AND ECONOMICS Section::::Science and economics .
There has been research published arguing that some ' sense ' of fair play and the Golden Rule may be stated and rooted in terms of neuroscientific and neuroethical principles .
The Golden Rule can also be explained from the perspectives of psychology , philosophy , sociology , human evolution , and economics .
Psychologically , it involves a person empathizing with others .
Philosophically , it involves a person perceiving their neighbor also as " I " or " self " .
Sociologically , " love your neighbor as yourself " is applicable between individuals , between groups , and also between individuals and groups .
In evolution , " reciprocal altruism " is seen as a distinctive advance in the capacity of human groups to survive and reproduce , as their exceptional brains demanded exceptionally long childhoods and ongoing provision and protection even beyond that of the immediate family .
In economics , Richard Swift , referring to ideas from David Graeber , suggests that " without some kind of reciprocity society would no longer be able to exist . "
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Philosophers , such as Immanuel Kant and Friedrich Nietzsche , have objected to the rule on a variety of grounds .
The most serious among these is its application .
How does one know how others want to be treated ?
The obvious way is to ask them , but this can not be done if one assumes they have not reached a particular and relevant understanding .
DIFFERENCES IN VALUES OR INTERESTS Section::::Differences in values or interests .
George Bernard Shaw wrote , " Do not do unto others as you would that they should do unto you .
Their tastes may be different .
"
This suggests that if your values are not shared with others , the way you want to be treated will not be the way they want to be treated .
Hence , the Golden Rule of " do unto others " is " dangerous in the wrong hands , " according to philosopher Iain King , because " some fanatics have no aversion to death : the Golden Rule might inspire them to kill others in suicide missions . "
DIFFERENCES IN SITUATIONS Section::::Differences in situations .
Immanuel Kant famously criticized the golden rule for not being sensitive to differences of situation , noting that a prisoner duly convicted of a crime could appeal to the golden rule while asking the judge to release him , pointing out that the judge would not want anyone else to send him to prison , so he should not do so to others .
Kant 's Categorical Imperative , introduced in Groundwork of the Metaphysic of Morals , is often confused with the Golden Rule .
CANNOT BE A SOLE GUIDE TO ACTION
Section::::Cannot be a sole guide to action .
In his book
How to Make Good Decisions and Be Right All the Time , philosopher Iain King has argued that " ( although ) the idea of mirroring your treatment of others with their treatment of you is very widespread indeed … most ancient wisdoms express this negatively – advice on what you should not do , rather than what you should . "
He argues this creates a bias in favour of inertia which allows bad actions and states of affairs to persist .
The positive formulation , meanwhile , can be " incendiary " , since it " can lead to cycles of tit - for - tat reciprocity , " unless it is accompanied by a corrective mechanism , such as a concept of forgiveness .
Therefore , he concludes that there can be no viable formulation of the Golden Rule , unless it is heavily qualified by other maxims .
RESPONSES TO CRITICISMS Section::::Responses to criticisms .
Walter Terence Stace , in The Concept of Morals ( 1937 ) , wrote : Marcus George Singer observed that there are two importantly different ways of looking at the golden rule : as requiring ( 1 ) that you perform specific actions that you want others to do to you or ( 2 ) that you guide your behavior in the same general ways that you want others to .
Counter - examples to the golden rule typically are more forceful against the first than the second .
In his book on the golden rule , Jeffrey Wattles makes the similar observation that such objections typically arise while applying the golden rule in certain general ways ( namely , ignoring differences in taste , in situation , and so forth ) .
But if we apply the golden rule to our own method of using it , asking in effect if we would want other people to apply the golden rule in such ways , the answer would typically be no , since it is quite predictable that others ' ignoring of such factors will lead to behavior which we object to .
It follows that we should not do so ourselves — according to the golden rule .
In this way , the golden rule may be self - correcting .
An article by Jouni Reinikainen develops this suggestion in greater detail .
It is possible , then , that the golden rule can itself guide us in identifying which differences of situation are morally relevant .
We would often want other people to ignore any prejudice against our race or nationality when deciding how to act towards us , but would also want them to not ignore our differing preferences in food , desire for aggressiveness , and so on .
This principle of " doing unto others , wherever possible , as they would be done by ... " has sometimes been termed the platinum rule .
POPULAR
REFERENCES
Section::::Popular references .
Charles Kingsley 's The Water Babies ( 1863 ) includes a character named Mrs Do
- As - You
- Would - Be - Done
- By ( and another , Mrs Be - Done - By - As - You - Did ) .
SEE ALSO
* Norm of reciprocity , social norm of in - kind responses to the behavior of others
* Reciprocity ( cultural anthropology ) , way of defining people 's informal exchange of goods and labour * Reciprocity ( evolution ) , mechanisms for the evolution of cooperation * Reciprocity ( international relations ) , principle that favours , benefits , or penalties that are granted by one state to the citizens or legal entities of another , should be returned in kind * Reciprocity ( social and political philosophy ) , concept of reciprocity as in - kind positive or negative responses for the actions of others ; relation to justice ; related ideas such as gratitude , mutuality , and the Golden Rule * Reciprocity ( social psychology ) , in - kind positive or negative responses of individuals towards the actions of others * Serial reciprocity , where the benefactor of a gift or service will in turn provide benefits to a third party * Ubuntu ( philosophy ) , an ethical philosophy originating from Southern Africa , which has been summarised as ' A person is a person through other people ' REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS