ELLIS ISLAND Ellis Island , in Upper New York Bay , was the gateway for over 12 million immigrants to the U.S. as the United States ' busiest immigrant inspection station for over 60 years from 1892 until 1954 .
Ellis Island was opened January 1 , 1892 .
The island was greatly expanded with land reclamation between 1892 and 1934 .
Before that , the much smaller original island was the site of Fort Gibson and later a naval magazine .
The island was made part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument in 1965 and has hosted a museum of immigration since 1990 .
It was long considered part of New York , but a 1998 United States Supreme Court decision found that most of the island is in New Jersey .
The south side of the island , home to the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital , is closed to the general public and the object of restoration efforts spearheaded by Save Ellis Island .
GEOGRAPHY AND ACCESS Section::::Geography and access .
Ellis Island is in Upper New York Bay , east of Liberty State Park and north of Liberty Island , in Jersey City , New Jersey , with a small section that is part of New York City .
Largely created through land reclamation , the island has a land area of , most of which is part of New Jersey .
The natural island and contiguous areas comprise the that are part of New York .
The island has been owned and administered by the federal government of the United States since 1808 and operated by the National Park Service since 1965 .
Since the September 11 attacks in 2001 , the island is guarded by patrols of the United States Park Police Marine Patrol Unit .
Public access is by ferry from either Communipaw Terminal in Liberty State Park or from the Battery at the southern tip of Manhattan .
The ferry operator , Hornblower Cruises and Events , also provides service to the nearby Statue of Liberty .
A bridge built for transporting materials and personnel during restoration projects connects Ellis Island with Liberty State Park but is not open to the public .
The city of New York and the private ferry operator at the time opposed proposals to use it or replace it with a pedestrian bridge .
Much of the island , including the entire south side , has been closed to the public since 1954 .
The renovated area on the north side was again closed to the public after Hurricane Sandy in October 2012 .
The island was re - opened to the public and the museum partially re - opened on October 28 , 2013 , after major renovations .
EARLY HISTORY
Section::::Early history .
Originally much of the west shore of Upper New York Bay consisted of large tidal flats which hosted vast oyster banks , a major source of food for the Lenape population who lived in the area prior to the arrival of Dutch settlers .
There were several islands which were not completely submerged at high tide .
Three of them ( later to be known as Liberty Island , Black Tom Island and Ellis Island ) were given the name Oyster Islands by the settlers of New Netherland , the first European colony in the region .
The oyster beds remained a major source of food for nearly three centuries .
Landfilling to build the railyards of the Lehigh Valley Railroad and the Central Railroad of New Jersey eventually obliterated the oyster beds , engulfed one island , and brought the shoreline much closer to the others .
During the colonial period , Little Oyster Island was known as Dyre 's , then Bucking Island .
In the 1760s , after some pirates were hanged from one of the island 's scrubby trees , it became known as Gibbet Island .
It was acquired by Samuel Ellis , a colonial New Yorker and merchant possibly from Wales , around the time of the American Revolution .
In 1785 , he unsuccessfully attempted to sell the island :
The State of New York leased the island in 1794 and started to fortify it in 1795 .
Ownership was in question and legislation was passed for acquisition by condemnation in 1807 and then ceded to the United States in 1808 .
Shortly thereafter the War Department established a circular stone 14-gun battery , a mortar battery ( possibly of six mortars ) , magazine , and barracks .
This was part of what was later called the second system of U.S. fortifications .
From 1808 until 1814 it was a federal arsenal .
The fort was initially called Crown Fort , but by the end of the War of 1812 the battery was named Fort Gibson , after Colonel James Gibson of the 4th Regiment of Riflemen , killed in the Siege of Fort Erie during the war .
Parts of the wall foundations of the fort were uncovered while excavating for the Immigrant Wall of Honor , and they are preserved with an interpretive plaque .
The island remained a military post for nearly 80 years before it was selected to be a federal immigration station .
IMMIGRANT INSPECTION STATION Section::::Immigrant inspection station .
In the 35 years before Ellis Island opened , more than eight million immigrants arriving in New York City had been processed by officials at Castle Garden Immigration Depot in Lower Manhattan , just across the bay .
The federal government assumed control of immigration on April 18 , 1890 , and Congress appropriated $ 75,000 to construct America 's first federal immigration station on Ellis Island .
Artesian wells were dug , and fill material was hauled in from incoming ships ' ballast and from construction of New York City 's subway tunnels , which doubled the size of Ellis Island to over six acres .
While the building was under construction , the Barge Office nearby at the Battery was used for immigrant processing .
The first station was a three - story - tall structure with outbuildings , built of Georgia Pine , containing the amenities thought to be necessary .
It opened with fanfare on January 1 , 1892 .
Three large ships landed on the first day , and 700 immigrants passed over the docks .
Almost 450,000 immigrants were processed at the station during its first year .
On June 15 , 1897 , a fire of unknown origin , possibly caused by faulty wiring , turned the wooden structures on Ellis Island into ashes .
No loss of life was reported , but most of the immigration records dating back to 1855 were destroyed .
About 1.5 million immigrants had been processed at the first building during its five years of use .
Plans were immediately made to build a new , fireproof immigration station .
During the construction period , passenger arrivals were again processed at the Barge Office .
Edward Lippincott Tilton and William A. Boring won the 1897 competition to design the first phase , including the Main Building ( 1897–1900 ) , Kitchen and Laundry Building ( 1900–01 ) , Main Powerhouse ( 1900–01 ) , and the Main Hospital Building ( 1900–01 ) .
The present main structure was designed in French Renaissance Revival style and built of red brick with limestone trim .
After it opened on December 17 , 1900 , the facilities proved barely able to handle the flood of immigrants that arrived in the years before World War I.
In 1913 , writer Louis Adamic came to America from Slovenia , then part of the Austro - Hungarian Empire , and described the night he and many other immigrants slept on bunk beds in a huge hall .
Lacking a warm blanket , the young man " shivered , sleepless , all night , listening to snores " and dreams " in perhaps a dozen different languages " .
The facility was so large that the dining room could seat 1,000 people .
It is reported the island 's first immigrant to be processed through
was a teenager named Annie Moore from County Cork in Ireland .
After its opening , Ellis Island was again expanded , and additional structures were built .
By the time it closed on November 12 , 1954 , 12 million immigrants had been processed by the U.S. Bureau of Immigration .
It is estimated that 10.5 million immigrants departed for points across the United States from the Central Railroad of New Jersey Terminal , just across a narrow strait .
Others would have used one of the other terminals along the North River ( Hudson River ) at that time .
At first , the majority of immigrants arriving through the station were Northern and Western Europeans ( Germany , France , Switzerland , Belgium , The Netherlands , Great Britain , and the Scandinavian countries ) .
Eventually , these groups of peoples slowed in the rates that they were coming in , and immigrants came in from Southern and Eastern Europe , including Jews .
Many reasons these immigrants came to the United States included escaping political and economic oppression , as well as persecution , destitution , and violence .
Other groups of peoples being processed through the station were Poles , Hungarians , Czechs , Serbs , Slovaks , Greeks , Syrians , Turks , and Armenians .
PRIMARY INSPECTION Section::::Primary inspection .
Between 1905 and 1914 , an average of one million immigrants per year arrived in the United States .
Immigration officials reviewed about 5,000 immigrants per day during peak times at Ellis Island .
Two - thirds of those individuals emigrated from eastern , southern and central Europe .
The peak year for immigration at Ellis Island was 1907 , with 1,004,756 immigrants processed .
The all - time daily high occurred on April 17 , 1907 , when 11,747 immigrants arrived .
After the Immigration Act of 1924 was passed , which greatly restricted immigration and allowed processing at overseas embassies , the only immigrants to pass through the station were those who had problems with their immigration paperwork , displaced persons , and war refugees .
Today , over 100 million Americans — about one - third to 40 % of the population of the United States — can trace their ancestry to immigrants who arrived in America at Ellis Island before dispersing to points all over the country .
Generally , those immigrants who were approved spent from two to five hours at Ellis Island .
Arrivals were asked 29 questions including name , occupation , and the amount of money carried .
It was important to the American government the new arrivals could support themselves and have money to get started .
The average the government wanted the immigrants to have was between 18 and 25 dollars ( $ 600 in 2015 adjusted for inflation ) .
Those with visible health problems or diseases were sent home or held in the island 's hospital facilities for long periods of time .
More than 3,000 would - be immigrants died on Ellis Island while being held in the hospital facilities .
Some unskilled workers were rejected because they were considered " likely to become a public charge . "
About 2 % were denied admission to the U.S. and sent back to their countries of origin for reasons such as having a chronic contagious disease , criminal background , or insanity .
Ellis Island was sometimes known as " The Island of Tears " or " Heartbreak Island " because of those 2 % who were not admitted after the long transatlantic voyage .
The Kissing Post is a wooden column outside the Registry Room , where new arrivals were greeted by their relatives and friends , typically with tears , hugs , and kisses .
During World War I , the German sabotage of the Black Tom Wharf ammunition depot damaged buildings on Ellis Island .
The repairs included the Main Hall 's current barrel - vaulted ceiling .
MEDICAL INSPECTIONS Section::::Medical inspections .
To support the activities of the United States Bureau of Immigration , the United States Public Health Service operated an extensive medical service at the immigrant station , called U.S. Marine Hospital Number 43 , more widely known as the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital .
It was the nation 's largest marine hospital .
Uniformed military surgeons staffed the medical division , which was active in the hospital wards , the Barge Office at the Battery and the Main Building .
They are best known for the role they played during the line inspection , in which they employed unusual techniques such as the use of the buttonhook to examine immigrants for signs of eye diseases ( particularly , trachoma ) and the use of a chalk mark code .
Symbols were chalked on the clothing of potentially sick immigrants following the six - second medical examination .
The doctors would look at the immigrants as they climbed the stairs from the baggage area to the Great Hall .
Immigrants ' behavior would be studied for difficulties in getting up the staircase .
Some immigrants supposedly entered the country by surreptitiously wiping the chalk marks off , or by turning their clothes inside out .
The symbols used were : * B – Back * C – Conjunctivitis
* TC – Trachoma
* E – Eyes
* F – Face
* FT – Feet * G – Goiter * H – Heart
* K – Hernia
* L – Lameness
* N – Neck
* P – Physical and Lungs
* PG – Pregnancy * S – Senility * SC –
Scalp ( Favus )
*
X – Suspected Mental defect * ⓧ –
Definite signs of Mental defect U.S. Immigrant Inspectors used some other symbols or marks as they interrogated immigrants in the Registry Room to determine whether to admit or detain them , including : * SI – Special Inquiry * IV – Immigrant Visa * LPC – Likely or Liable to become a Public Charge
* Med .
Cert .
–
Medical certificate issued EUGENIC INFLUENCE Section::::Eugenic influence .
Many of the people immigrating to America hailed from Europe , with Eastern Europe and Southern European immigrants being the primary groups .
During this time period , eugenic ideals gained broad popularity and made heavy impact on immigration to the United States by way of exclusion of disabled and " morally defective " people .
Eugenicists of the late 19th and early 20th century believed reproductive selection should be carried out by the state as a collective decision .
For many eugenicists , this was considered a patriotic duty as they held an interest in creating a greater national race .
Henry Fairfield Osborn 's opening words to the New York Evening Journal in 1911 were , " As a biologist as well as a patriot ... , " on the subject on advocating for tighter inspections of immigrants of the United States .
Eugenic selection occurred on two distinguishable levels :
* State / Local levels which handles institutionalization and sterilization of those considered defective as well as the education of the public , marriage laws , and social pressures such as fitter family and better baby contests .
* Immigration control , the screening of immigrants for defects , was notably supported by Harry Laughlin , superintendent of the Eugenics Record Office from 1910 to 1939 , who stated that this was where the " federal government must cooperate . "
At the time , it was a broadly popular idea that immigration policies had ought to be based on eugenics principles in order to help create a " superior race " in America .
To do this , defective persons needed to be screened by immigration officials and denied entry on the basis of their disability .
Types of defects screened for included :
* Physical : people who had hereditary or acquired physical disability .
These included sickness and disease , deformity , lack of limbs , being abnormally tall or short , feminization , and so forth .
* Mental : people who showed signs or history of mental illness and intellectual disability .
These included " feeblemindedness " , " imbecility " , depression , and other illnesses that stemmed from the brain such as epilepsy and cerebral palsy .
* Moral : people who had moral defects at the time were , but not limited to : homosexuals and those of illicit sexuality , criminals , impoverished , and other groups associated with " degeneracy " that deviated from the considered norm or American society at the time .
The people with moral or mental disability were of higher concern to officials and under the law , mandatorily excluded from immigrating to the United States .
Persons with physical disability were under higher inspection and could be turned way on the basis of their disability .
Much of this came in part of the eugenicist belief that defects were hereditary , especially those of the moral and mental nature those these were often outwardly signified by physical deformity as well .
In 1898 , a Chicago surgeon named Eugene S. Talbot ( Eugene Solomon ) wrote " crime is hereditary , a tendency which is , in most cases , associated with bodily defects . "
Likewise , George Lydston , a medicine and criminal anthropology professor , argued further in 1906 that people with " defective physique " were not just criminally associated but that defectiveness was a primary factor " in the causation of crime . " Between 1891 and 1930 , Ellis Island reviewed over 25 million attempted immigrations .
Of this 25 million , 700,000 were given certificates of disability or disease and of these 79,000 were barred from entry .
Approximately 4.4 % of immigrants between 1909 and 1930 were classified as disabled or diseased per with 11 % being deported when this number spiked to 8.0 % in the years of 1918 - 1919 .
One percent of immigrants were deported yearly due to medical causes .
DETENTION AND DEPORTATION STATION Section::::Detention and deportation station .
With the passing of the Emergency Quota Act of 1921 , the number of immigrants being allowed into the United States declined greatly .
The passing of the bill ended the era of mass immigration .
After 1924 , Ellis Island became primarily a detention and deportation processing station .
During and immediately following World War II , Ellis Island was used to hold German merchant mariners and " enemy aliens"—Axis nationals detained for fear of spying , sabotage , and other fifth column activity .
In December 1941 , Ellis Island held 279 Japanese , 248 Germans , and 81 Italians removed from the East Coast .
Unlike other wartime immigration detention stations , Ellis Island was designated as a permanent holding facility and was used to hold foreign nationals throughout the war .
A total of 7,000 Germans , Italians and Japanese would be ultimately detained at Ellis Island .
It was also a processing center for returning sick or wounded U.S. soldiers , and a Coast Guard training base .
Ellis Island still managed to process tens of thousands of immigrants per year during this time , but many fewer than the hundreds of thousands per year who arrived before the war .
After the war , immigration rapidly returned to earlier levels .
The Internal Security Act of 1950 barred members of communist or fascist organizations from immigrating to the United States .
Ellis Island saw detention peak at 1,500 , but by 1952 , after changes to immigration laws and policies , only 30 detainees remained .
One of the last detainees was the Indonesian Aceh separatist Hasan di Tiro who , while a student in New York in 1953 , declared himself the " foreign minister " of the rebellious Darul Islam movement .
Due to this action , he was immediately stripped of his Indonesian citizenship , causing him to be imprisoned for a few months on Ellis Island as " an illegal alien . "
STAFF Section::::Staff .
The station 's commissioners were : * 1890–1893 Colonel John B. Weber ( Republican ) * * 1893–1897 Dr. Joseph H. Senner ( Democrat ) * * 1898–1902 Thomas Fitchie ( Republican ) * * 1902–1905 William Williams ( Republican ) * * 1905–1909 Robert Watchorn ( Republican ) * * 1909–1913 William Williams ( Republican ) , 2nd term * * 1914–1919 Dr. Frederic C. Howe ( Democrat )
* * 1920–1921 Frederick A. Wallis ( Democrat ) * *
1921–1923 Robert E. Tod ( Republican ) * * 1923–1926 Henry C. Curran ( Republican ) * * 1926–1931 Benjamin M. Day ( Republican )
* * 1931–1934 Edward Corsi ( Republican ) * * 1934–1940 Rudolph Reimer ( Democrat ) * *
1940–1942 Byron H. Uhl ( actual title : district director )
* * 1942–1949 W. Frank Watkins ( district director )
* * 1949–1954 Edward J. Shaughnessy ( district director )
*
Other notable officials at Ellis Island included James R. O'Beirne ( assistant commissioner , 1890–93 ) , Edward F. McSweeney ( assistant commissioner , 1893 - 1902 ) , Joseph E. Murray ( assistant commissioner , 1902–09 ) , Byron Uhl ( assistant commissioner , 1909 - 1940 ) , Dr. George W. Stoner ( chief surgeon ) , Augustus Frederick Sherman ( chief clerk ) , Dr. Victor Heiser ( surgeon ) ( surgeon ) , Dr. Thomas W. Salmon ( surgeon ) , Dr. Howard Knox ( surgeon ) , Antonio Frabasilis ( interpreter ) , Peter Mikolainis ( interpreter ) , Maud Mosher ( matron ) , Fiorello H. La Guardia ( interpreter ) , Samuel Hays , ( special immigrant inspector)Roman Dobler ( immigrant inspector ) , Philip Cowen ( immigrant inspector ) , Philip Forman ( immigrant inspector , 1930s ; chief of detention , deportation and parole , 1940s , 1950s ) and De Jalma West ( immigrant inspector ) .
Prominent amongst the missionaries and immigrant aid workers were Rev. Michael J. Henry and Rev. Anthony J. Grogan ( Irish Catholic ) , Rev. Gaspare Moretto ( Italian Catholic ) , Alma E. Mathews ( Methodist ) ,
Rev. Georg Doring ( German Lutheran ) , Rev. Joseph L'Etauche ( Polish Catholic ) ,
Rev. Reuben Breed ( Episcopal ) , Michael Lodsin ( Baptist ) , Brigadier Thomas Johnson ( Salvation Army ) , Ludmila K. Foxlee ( YWCA ) , Athena Marmaroff ( Woman 's Christian Temperance Union ) , Alexander Harkavy ( HIAS ) , and Cecilia Greenstone and Cecilia Razovsky ( National Council of Jewish Women ) . RECORDS Section::::Records .
A myth persists that government officials on Ellis Island compelled immigrants to take new names against their wishes .
In fact , no historical records bear this out .
Immigration inspectors used the passenger lists they received from the steamship companies to process each foreigner .
These were the sole immigration records for entering the country and were prepared not by the U.S. Bureau of Immigration but by steamship companies such as the Cunard Line , the White Star Line , the North German Lloyd Line , the Hamburg - Amerika Line , the Italian Steam Navigation Company , the Red Star Line , the Holland America Line , and the Austro - American Line .
The Americanization of many immigrant families ' surnames was for the most part adopted by the family after the immigration process , or by the second or third generation of the family after some assimilation into American culture .
However , many last names were altered slightly because of the disparity between English and other languages in the pronunciation of certain letters of the alphabet .
NOTABLE IMMIGRANTS Section::::Notable immigrants .
The first immigrant to pass through Ellis Island was Annie Moore , a 17-year - old girl from Cork , Ireland , who arrived on the ship Nevada on January 1 , 1892 .
She and her two brothers were coming to America to meet their parents , who had moved to New York two years earlier .
She received a greeting from officials and a $ 10 gold coin .
It was the largest sum of money she had ever owned .
The last person to pass through Ellis Island was Norwegian merchant seaman Arne Peterssen in 1954 .
IMMIGRATION MUSEUM Section::::Immigration museum .
The wooden structure built in 1892 to house the immigration station burned down after five years .
The station 's new Main Building , which now houses the Immigration Museum , was opened in 1900 .
Architects Edward Lippincott Tilton and William Alciphron Boring received a gold medal at the 1900 Paris Exposition for the building 's design and constructed the building at a cost of $ 1.5 million .
The architecture competition was the second under the Tarsney Act , which had permitted private architects rather than government architects in the Treasury Department 's Office of the Supervising Architect to design federal buildings .
After the immigration station closed in November 1954 , the buildings fell into disrepair and were abandoned .
Attempts at redeveloping the site were unsuccessful until its landmark status was established .
On October 15 , 1965 , Ellis Island was proclaimed a part of Statue of Liberty National Monument .
It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 15 , 1966 .
Boston - based architectural firm Finegold Alexander + Associates Inc , together with the New York architectural firm Beyer Blinder Belle , designed the restoration and adaptive use of the Beaux - Arts Main Building , one of the most symbolically important structures in American history .
A construction budget of $ 150 million was required for this significant restoration .
This money was raised by a campaign organized by the political fundraiser Wyatt A. Stewart .
The building reopened on September 10 , 1990 .
Exhibits include Hearing Room , Peak Immigration Years , the Peopling of America , Restoring a Landmark , Silent Voices , Treasures from Home , and Ellis Island Chronicles .
There are also three theaters used for film and live performances .
On May 20 , 2015 , the Ellis Island Immigration Museum was officially renamed the Ellis Island National Museum of Immigration , coinciding with the opening of the new Peopling of America galleries .
The expansion tells the entire story of American immigration , including before and after the Ellis Island era .
The Peopling of America Center was designed by ESI Design and fabricated by Hadley Exhibits ,
Inc. The architectural design was done by Highland Associates , with construction executed by Phelps Construction Group .
The Wall of Honor outside of the main building contains a partial list of immigrants processed on the island .
Inclusion on the list is made possible by a donation to support the facility .
In 2008 the museum 's library was officially named the Bob Hope Memorial Library in honor of one the station 's most famous immigrants .
The Ellis Island Medal of Honor is awarded annually at ceremonies on the island .
SOUTH SIDE OF THE ISLAND Section::::South side of the island .
The south side of the island , home to the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital , is closed to the general public and the object of restoration efforts spearheaded by Save Ellis Island .
Many of the facilities at Ellis Island were abandoned and remain unrenovated .
The entire south side , called by some the " sad side " of the island , is off limits to the general public .
The Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital operated here from early 1902 to 1930 .
The foundation Save Ellis Island is spearheading preservation efforts .
The New Ferry Building , built in the Art Deco style to replace an earlier one , was renovated in 2008 , but remains only partially accessible to the general public .
As part of the National Park Service 's Centennial Initiative , the south side of the island was to be the target of a project to restore the 28 buildings that have not yet been rehabilitated .
STATE SOVEREIGNTY DISPUTE Section::::State sovereignty dispute .
The circumstances which led to an exclave of New York being located within New Jersey began in the colonial era , after the British takeover of New Netherland in 1664 .
An unusual clause in the colonial land grant outlined the territory that the proprietors of New Jersey would receive as being " westward of Long Island , and Manhitas Island and bounded on the east part by the main sea , and part by Hudson 's river " , rather than at the river 's midpoint , as was common in other colonial charters .
Attempts were made as early as 1804 to resolve the status of the state line .
The City of New York claimed the right to regulate trade on all the waters .
This was contested in Gibbons v. Ogden , which decided that the regulation of interstate commerce fell under the authority of the federal government , thus influencing competition in the newly developing steam ferry service in New York Harbor .
In 1830 , New Jersey planned to bring suit to clarify the border , but the case was never heard .
The matter was resolved with a compact between the states , ratified by U.S. Congress in 1834 , which set the boundary line between them as the middle of the Hudson River and New York Harbor , but granted all the islands in the channel to New York .
This was later confirmed by the U.S. Supreme Court in other cases which also expounded on the compact .
The federal government , which had bought the island in 1808 , began expanding the island by land fill , to accommodate the immigration station opened in 1892 .
Land filling continued in stages until 1934 .
Nine - tenths of the current area is artificial island that did not exist at the time of the interstate compact .
New Jersey contended that the new extensions were part of New Jersey , since they were outside New York 's border and were in fact within New Jersey 's border .
In 1956 , after the 1954 closing of the U.S. immigration station , the then Mayor of Jersey City , Bernard J. Berry , commandeered a U.S. Coast Guard cutter and led a contingent of New Jersey officials on an expedition to claim the island .
In 1997 , the state filed suit to establish its jurisdiction , leading New York City Mayor Rudolph Giuliani to remark dramatically that his father , an Italian who immigrated through Ellis Island , never intended to go to New Jersey .
The border was redrawn using information based on studies using geographic information science .
The dispute eventually reached the Supreme Court of the United States , which ruled in New Jersey v. New York , that New Jersey had jurisdiction over all portions of the island created after the original compact was approved ( effectively , more than 80 % of the island 's present land ) .
This caused several immediate instances of confusion : some buildings , for instance , fell into the territory of both states .
New Jersey and New York soon agreed to share jurisdiction of the island .
It remains wholly a federal property , however , and these legal decisions do not result in either state taking any fiscal or physical responsibility for the maintenance , preservation , or improvement of any of the historic properties .
The ruling had no effect on the status of Liberty Island , of which was created by land reclamation .
For New York State tax purposes , it is assessed as Manhattan Block 1 , Lot 201 .
Since 1998 , the 22.8 acre portion of the island in New Jersey has been assessed in Jersey City as Block 21603 , Lot 1 . RENOVATIONS AND PLANS Section::::Renovations and plans .
Frank Lloyd Wright designed a key plan for the island that included housing , hotels , and large domes along the edges .
The co - curator of the traveling exhibit , " Never Built New York " in which it is included told AM New York , " It 's pretty remarkable but at the same time it 's a little bit horrifying that they could have gotten rid of Ellis Island . "
In 1982 the National Park Service embarked on an 8-year renovation .
During that time , David Simonton was part of The Ellis Island Project : Documentation / Interpretation and captured stunning , black and white photos giving insight into immigrant 's lives .
Photographer Stephen Wilkes 's series Ellis Island : Ghosts of Freedom ( 2006 ) captured the abandoned south side of Ellis Island .
EMERGENCY SERVICES Section::::Emergency services .
Emergency services on Ellis Island are provided by the following emergency divisions of the National Park Service : * Police services and security are provided for the island by the United States Park Police .
* Fire suppression / protection is provided by the National Park Service 's Statue of Liberty / Ellis Island Division of Safety and Emergency Management Statue of Liberty Fire Brigade which consists of a crew of federal NPS firefighters who are trained and certified as Structural Firefighter I , Structural Firefighter II or Wildland Firefighters .
The crew also provides fire suppression response to nearby Liberty Island .
Since the nearest other National Park Service Engine Company is located in Fort Hancock in Sandy Hook , New Jersey , the Statue of Liberty Fire Brigade maintains a mutual aid agreement with the Jersey City Fire Department and the New York City Fire Department for mutual aid assistance on Ellis Island should it be required .
The Statue of Liberty/ Ellis Island Division of Safety & Emergency Management staffs the fire brigade .
The fire brigade is led by a Fire Captain ( crew leader ) and two Lieutenants , and has six collateral duty firefighters .
* Emergency medical services are provided by National Park Services Statue of Liberty / Ellis Island Division of Safety and Emergency Management , which consists of a team of full - time NPS Emergency Medical Technicians and Certified First Responders .
Patient transportation is coordinated with Jersey City Medical Center ambulances , but emergency response and patient care falls solely upon the National Park Service Emergency Medical Technicians .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Ellis Island has been a source of inspiration or used as a subject in popular culture .
Its imagery or representation has been employed in literature ( including novels , short stories and poetry ) , in song , musical composition , dance , theatre , including vaudeville , burlesque , musical comedy , revue , legitimate theatre , motion pictures ( silent and sound ) , newsreels , and in radio and television .
Early films , including those from the silent era , which feature the station include Traffic in Souls ( 1913 ) , How The Jews Care for Their Poor ( educational film , 1914 )
The Yellow Passport ( 1916 ) ,
My Boy ( 1921 ) , Frank Capra 's The Strong Man ( 1926 ) , We Americans ( 1928 ) , The Mating Call ( 1928 )
, This is Heaven ( 1929 ) , Paddy O'Day ( 1935 ) , Ellis Island ( 1936 ) , Gateway ( 1938 ) , Exile Express ( 1939 ) , I , Jane Doe ( 1948 ) , and Gambling House ( 1951 ) .
In The Godfather Part II , Vito Corleone immigrates via Ellis Island as a boy .
The opening scene of The Brother From Another Planet is set there .
The island is visited by the characters in the 2005 romantic comedy , Hitch , and is the setting for the climactic battle in X - Men .
Over the decades , Ellis Island was also widely referenced or remarked on in books , such as Mrs ' Arris Goes to New York ( 1960 ) by Paul Gallico , and in popular films such as Cafe Metropole ( 1937 ) and With a Song in My Heart ( 1952 ) .
Some films have focused on the immigrant experience , such as the 1984 TV miniseries Ellis Island .
The IMAX 3D movie Across the Sea of Time incorporates both modern footage and historical photographs of Ellis Island .
The 2006 Italian movie The Golden Door , directed by Emanuele Crialese , takes place largely on Ellis Island .
Forgotten Ellis Island , a film and book , focuses on the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital .
The Immigrant is a 2013 American drama film directed by James Gray , starring Marion Cotillard , Joaquin Phoenix , and Jeremy Renner .
Ellis , a short , premiered in November 2015 .
Ellis Island as a port of entry is described in detail in Mottel the Cantor 's Son by Sholom Aleichem .
The USPS issued a 32¢ stamp on February 3 , 1998 as part of the Celebrate the Century stamp sheet series .
SEE ALSO * Angel Island , California
*
Castle Clinton
* Deer Island , Massachusetts * Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital
* Geography of New York - New Jersey Harbor Estuary
* German Emigration Center
* Grosse Isle , Quebec
* Hoffman Island
* Immigration to the United States * List of New York City Designated Landmarks in Manhattan on Islands
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Hudson County , New Jersey * National Register of Historic Places listings in New York County , New York * Philadelphia Lazaretto
* Pier 21
* Port of New York and New Jersey *
Save Ellis Island
* Sullivan 's Island , South Carolina
* Swinburne Island
* United States Immigration Station , Angel Island
REFERENCES
NOTES
SOURCES
* Baur , J. " Commemorating Immigration in the Immigrant Society .
Narratives of Transformation at Ellis Island and the Lower East Side Tenement Museum " , in M. König , and R. Ohliger , eds . , Enlarging European Memory .
Migration Movements in Historical Perspective ( 2006 )
pp .
137–146 .
* Baur , J. " Ellis Island , Inc. : The Making of an American Site of Memory " , in : H. J. Grabbe and S. Schindler , ( eds . ) , The Merits of Memory .
Concepts , Contexts , Debates ( 2008 ) , pp .
185–196 .
* Bayor , Ronald H. Encountering Ellis Island : How European Immigrants Entered America
( Johns Hopkins University Press , 2014 )
168 pp .
* Bolino , A.
The Ellis Island Source Book , ( 1985 )
* Cannato , V. J. , American passage : the history of Ellis Island , New York : Harper , 2009 .
* Coan , P. M. Ellis Island Interviews :
In Their Own Words , 1998 .
* Corsi , E. In the Shadow of Liberty : The Chronicle of Ellis Island , 1935 .
* Fairchild , A. Science at the Borders , 2004 .
*
Lerner , Ed . K. Lee , Brenda Wilmoth Lerner , and Adrienne Wilmoth Lerner .
" Introduction to Immigration from 1905–1945 : Immigration and Multiculturalism : Essential Primary Sources " , Gale , 2006 .
p121 .
* Moreno , B. , Images of America : Children of Ellis Island , 2005 .
* Moreno , B. , Images of America : Ellis Island , 2003 .
* Moreno , B. , Images of America :
Ellis Island 's Famous Immigrants , 2008 .
* Moreno , B. Encyclopedia of Ellis Island , 2004 .
Google Books
* Moreno , B.
The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Ellis Island
( Fall River Press , 2010 )
* Pitkin , T. M. Keepers of the Gate , 1975 .
*
Yew , E. , M.D. , " MEDICAL INSPECTION OF IMMIGRANTS AT ELLIS ISLAND , 1891 - 1924 " , Bulletin of the New York Academy of Medicine , Vol .
56 , No . 5 , June 1980 , New York Academy of Medicine .
FURTHER READING
* Ellis Island : Blocks 9019 thru 9023 , Block Group 9 , Census Tract 47 , Hudson County , NJ ; and Block 1000 , Block Group 1 , Census Tract 1 , New York County , New York ; United States Census Bureau .
* Report of the House Committee on Immigration and Naturalization under joint resolution of Senate and House of January 29 , 1892 , submitted by Mr. Stump .
Ordered to be printed July 28 , 1892 .
By United States Congress , House Committee on Immigration and Naturalization .
* Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians , Personal Justice Denied , 1982 report ; EXTERNAL LINKS * Ellis Island home page
* Ellis Island Visitor information
* Ellis Island Historical Timeline
* Free Search of Ellis Island Database - Port of New York Arrivals
1892–1924 * , video celebrating immigrants at Ellis Island , c. 1900–1926
* Supreme Court opinion in New Jersey v. New York ( 1998 )
* National Park Service map showing portions of the island belonging to New York and New Jersey
* The History of Ellis Island * Eerie Ellis Island , Then and Now - slideshow by NPR * History and Photos of Ellis Island Baggage & Dormitory Building * The Ellis Island Experience - Articles , Documents and Images - Gjenvick - Gjønvik Archives
* Emigrants Landing at Ellis Island , a film from 1903 by Alfred C. Abadie from the World Digital Library * Newspaper articles and clippings about Ellis Island at Newspapers.com