ENTER THE DRAGON Enter the Dragon is a 1973 martial arts action film starring Bruce Lee , John Saxon , and Jim Kelly .
It would be Bruce Lee 's final completed film appearance before his death on 20 July 1973 at age 32 .
The film , a joint American and Hong Kong production , premiered in Los Angeles on 19 August 1973 , one month after Lee 's death .
The film , which was directed by Robert Clouse , is considered to be one of the greatest martial arts films of all time .
In 2004 the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
Among the first films to combine martial arts action with the emerging Blaxploitation genre , its success led to a series of similar productions combining both genres .
The film 's themes have also generated scholarly debate about how they reflect the changes taking place within post - colonial Asian societies following the end of World War II .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Lee , a highly proficient Shaolin martial artist and instructor from Hong Kong , is approached by Braithwaite , a British intelligence agent investigating the suspected crime lord Han .
Lee is persuaded to attend a high - profile martial arts competition on Han 's private island in order to gather evidence that will prove Han 's involvement in drug trafficking and prostitution .
Shortly before his departure , Lee also learns that his sister 's killer , O'Hara , is working as Han 's bodyguard on the island .
Also fighting in the competition are the indebted gambling addict Roper and fellow Vietnam war veteran
Williams .
At the end of the first day , Han gives strict orders to the competitors not to leave their rooms .
Lee makes contact with undercover operative Mei Ling and sneaks into Han 's compound , looking for evidence .
He is discovered by several guards but manages to escape .
The next morning , Han orders his giant guard Bolo to kill the guards in public for failing their duties .
After the execution , Lee faces O'Hara in the competition and ends up killing him .
With the day 's competition over , Han confronts Williams , who had also left his room the previous night to exercise .
Han believes Williams to be the intruder and beats him to death when he refuses to co - operate .
Han then reveals his drug operation to Roper , hoping that he will join his organization .
He also implicitly threatens to imprison Roper , along with all the other martial artists who joined Han 's tournaments in the past , if Roper ever refuses .
Despite being initially intrigued , Roper refuses after learning of Williams ' fate .
Lee sneaks out again that night and manages to send a message to Braithwaite , but he is finally captured after a protracted battle with the guards .
The next morning , Han arranges for Roper to fight Lee , but Roper refuses .
As a punishment , Roper has to fight Bolo instead , whom he manages to overpower and kill after a grueling encounter .
Enraged by the unexpected failure , Han commands his remaining men to kill Lee and Roper .
Facing insurmountable odds , they are soon aided by the island 's prisoners , who had been freed by Mei Ling .
Han escapes and is pursued by Lee , who finally corners him in a hidden mirror room .
The mirrors give Han an advantage , but Lee breaks all the room 's mirrors to reveal Han 's location , and eventually kills him .
Lee returns outside to the main battle , which is now over .
A bruised and bloodied Roper sits victorious while the military finally arrive to take control of the island .
CAST
* Bruce Lee as Lee
* John Saxon as Roper * Jim Kelly as Williams
* Ahna Capri as Tania
* Shih Kien as Han ( voice dubbed by Keye Luke )
* Robert Wall as O'Hara ( as Bob Wall )
* Angela Mao as Su Lin , Lee 's sister ( as Angela Mao Ying )
* Betty Chung as Mei Ling
* Geoffrey Weeks as Braithwaite * Bolo Yeung as Bolo ( as Yang Sze )
* Peter Archer as Parsons
* Ho Lee Yan as Old Man * Marlene Clark as Secretary * Allan Kent as Golfer * William Keller as L.A. Cop * Mickey Caruso as L.A. Cop
* Pat E. Johnson as Hood
* Darnell Garcia as Hood
* Mike Bissell as Hood
* Jackie Chan as Han 's henchman
* Sammo Hung as Shaolin fighter * Roy Chiao as Shaolin Abbott * Paul Heller as Radio Operator
*
Lam Ching Ying
* Tony Liu as Tournament fighter
* Alan Chui Chung - San as Tournament fighter * Yuen Biao as Tournament fighter
* Yuen Wah as Tournament fighter
* Hidy Ochiai
* Wei Tung as Lao
*
Tadashi Yamashita
* Mars as Guard
* Mang Hoi as Ship 's mate PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Due to the success with his earlier films , Warner Bros began helping Bruce Lee with the film in 1972 .
They brought in producers Fred Weintraub and Paul Heller .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
The screenplay title was originally named Blood and Steel .
The story features Asian , White and Black heroic protagonists because the producers wanted a film that would appeal to the widest possible international audiences .
The scene in which Lee states that his style is " Fighting Without Fighting " is based upon a famous anecdote involving the 16th century samurai Tsukahara Bokuden .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
John Saxon is a black belt in Judo and Shotokan Karate , who studied under grandmaster Hidetaka Nishiyama for three years .
In negotiations , his agent told the film 's producers if they wanted him they would have to change the story , the character of Williams would be killed , not Roper .
They agreed and the script was changed .
Rockne Tarkington was originally cast in the role of Williams .
However , he unexpectedly dropped out days before the production was about to begin in Hong Kong .
Producer Fred Weintraub knew that karate world champion , Jim Kelly had a training dojo in Crenshaw , Los Angeles
so he hastily arranged a meeting .
Weintraub was immediately impressed with Kelly and he was cast in the film .
The success of Kelly 's appearance launched his career as a star : after Enter the Dragon , he signed a three - film deal with Warner Bros and went on to make several martial arts - themed blaxploitation films in the 1970s .
Jackie Chan appears as a guard during the underground lair battle scene and gets his neck snapped by Lee .
He also performed several stunts for the film , including the scene where Lee 's character quickly climbs a rooftop at night .
However , Yuen Wah was Lee 's main stunt double for the film .
Sammo Hung appears in a brief fight scene against Lee at the start of the film .
An urban legend surrounding the making of Enter The Dragon claims that actor Bob Wall did not like Bruce Lee and that their fight scenes were not choreographed .
However , Wall has denied this stating he and Lee were actually good friends .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
The film was shot on location in Hong Kong .
All scenes were filmed without sound : dialogue and sound effects were added or dubbed in during post - production .
Bruce Lee , after he had been goaded or challenged , fought several real fights with the film 's extras and some set intruders during filming .
The scenes of Han 's Island were filmed at a residence known as Palm Villa near the coastal town of Stanley .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Argentinian musician Lalo Schifrin composed the film 's musical score .
While Schifrin was widely known at the time for his jazz scores , he also incorporated funk and traditional film score elements into the film 's soundtrack .
He composed the score by sampling sounds from China , Korea , and Japan .
The soundtrack has sold over 500,000 copies , earning a gold record .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
Enter the Dragon was heavily advertised in the United States before its release .
The budget for advertising was over $ 1,000,000 .
It was unlike any promotional campaign that had been seen before , and was extremely comprehensive .
In order to advertise the film , the studio offered free Karate classes , produced thousands of illustrated flip books , comic books , posters , photographs , and organized dozens of news releases , interviews , and public appearances for the stars .
Esquire , The Wall Street Journal , Time , and Newsweek all wrote stories on the film .
The filmed earned a profit of in the United States , against a tight budget of $ 850,000 .
It was one of the most successful films of 1973 .
In Hong Kong , the film grossed HK$3,307,536—huge business for the time , but substantially less than Lee 's Fist of Fury and Way of the Dragon .
In Japan , the film grossed .
In India the movie was release in 1975 , the film opened to full houses , and had a packed 32-week run in Bombay .
In India city Kanpur vivek cinema was running houseful when the movie gain the popularity the positive review given by the newspaper .
Unfortunately , the Indian Censor Board found the film too violent and restricted it to ' Adults Only ' .
Even so , it ran four shows a day , with rampant black - marketing of tickets .
In France , it was one of the top five highest - grossing films of 1974 ( above two other Lee films , Way of the Dragon at # 8 and Fist of Fury at # 12 ) , with 4,444,582 box office admissions .
In Germany , it was one of the top ten highest - grossing films of 1974 , with 1.7million box office admissions .
Worldwide , the film grossed , including outside of the United States .
The film 's worldwide gross is equivalent to when adjusted for inflation in 2017 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The film was well received by critics and is regarded by many as one of the best films of 1973 .
Critics have referred to Enter the Dragon as " a low - rent James Bond thriller " , a " remake of Dr. No " with elements of Fu Manchu .
J.C. Maçek III of PopMatters wrote , " Of course the real showcase here is the obvious star here , Bruce Lee , whose performance as an actor and a fighter are the most enhanced by the perfect sound and video transfer .
While Kelly was a famous martial artist and a surprisingly good actor and Saxon was a famous actor and a surprisingly good martial artist , Lee proves to be a master of both fields . "
Many additional acclaimed newspapers and magazines reviewed the film as well .
Variety complimented multiple aspects of the film , claiming that film was overall " rich in the atmosphere " , the music score was " a strong asset " and the photography as interesting .
Additionally , The New York Times gave the film a rave review .
The review stated " The picture is expertly made and well - meshed ; it moves like lightning and brims with color .
It is also the most savagely murderous and numbing hand - hacker ( not a gun in it ) you will ever see anywhere . "
The film currently holds a 95 % approval rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes , with 43 reviews counted and an average rating of 7.8/10 .
In 2004 , the film was deemed " culturally significant " by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry .
The film also ranks No . 474 on Empire magazine 's 2008 list of The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time .
CENSORSHIP AND HOME VIDEO Section::::Censorship and home video .
Enter the Dragon has remained one of the most popular martial arts films since its premiere and has been released numerous times worldwide on every home video format .
For almost three decades , many theatrical and home video versions were censored for violence , especially in the West .
Since 2001 , the film has been released uncut in the UK and most other territories .
Most DVDs and Blu - rays come with a wide range of extra features in the form of documentaries , interviews , etc .
In 2013 , a second , remastered HD transfer appeared on Blu - ray , billed as the " 40th Anniversary Edition " .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
The film has been parodied and referenced in places such as the 1976 film
The Pink Panther Strikes Again , the satirical publication The Onion ,
the Japanese game - show Takeshi 's Castle , and the 1977 John Landis comedy anthology film Kentucky Fried Movie ( in its lengthy " A Fistful of Yen " sequence , basically a comedic , note for note remake of Dragon ) and also in the film Balls of Fury .
It was also parodied on television in That ' 70s Show during the episode " Jackie Moves
On " with regular character Fez taking on the Bruce Lee role .
Several clips from the film are comically used during the theatre scene in The Last Dragon .
In August 2007 , the now defunct Warner Independent Pictures announced that television producer Kurt Sutter would be remaking the film as a noir - style thriller entitled Awaken the Dragon with Korean singer - actor Rain starring .
It was announced in September 2014 that Spike Lee would work on the remake .
In March 2015 , Brett Ratner revealed that he wanted to make the remake .
In July 2018 , David Leitch is in early talks to direct the remake .
The little - known 1985 Nintendo arcade game Arm Wrestling contains voice leftovers from the film , as well as their original counterparts .
The popular video game Mortal Kombat borrows multiple plot elements from Enter the Dragon .
The popular 1980s martial arts video game Double Dragon features two enemies named Roper and Williams , a reference to the two characters Roper and Williams from Enter the Dragon .
The sequel includes opponents named Bolo and O'Hara .
Lee 's martial arts films were broadly lampooned in the recurring Almost Live !
sketch Mind Your Manners with Billy Quan .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS