IBERIAN PENINSULA
The Iberian Peninsula , also known as Iberia , is located in the southwest corner of Europe .
The peninsula is principally divided between Spain and Portugal , comprising most of their territory .
It also includes Andorra , small areas of France , and the British overseas territory of Gibraltar .
With an area of approximately ) , it is the second largest European peninsula , after the Scandinavian .
NAME GREEK NAME Section::::Name .
Section::::Greek name .
The word Iberia is a noun adapted from the Latin word " Hiberia " originated by the Ancient Greek word Ἰβηρία ( ) by Greek geographers under the rule of the Roman Empire to refer to what is known today in English as the Iberian Peninsula .
At that time , the name did not describe a single political entity or a distinct population of people .
Strabo 's ' Iberia ' was delineated from Keltikē ( Gaul ) by the Pyrenees and included the entire land mass southwest ( he says " west " ) of there .
The noun " Hiberia " fell into disuse when the Romans decided to call the most western part of the peninsula " Lusitania " ( today Portugal ) and the remaining territory " Hispania " ( modern Spain ) .
With the fall of the Roman Empire and the establishment of the new Castillian language in Spain , the word " Iberia " appeared for the first time in use as a direct ' descendant ' of the Greek word " Ἰβηρία " and the Roman word " Hiberia " .
The ancient Greeks reached the Iberian Peninsula , of which they had heard from the Phoenicians , by voyaging westward on the Mediterranean .
Hecataeus of Miletus was the first known to use the term Iberia , which he wrote about circa 500 BC .
Herodotus of Halicarnassus says of the Phocaeans that " it was they who made the Greeks acquainted with ... Iberia . "
According to Strabo , prior historians used Iberia to mean the country " this side of the Ἶβηρος ( ) " as far north as the river Rhône in France , but currently they set the Pyrenees as the limit .
Polybius respects that limit , but identifies Iberia as the Mediterranean side as far south as Gibraltar , with the Atlantic side having no name .
Elsewhere he says that Saguntum is " on the seaward foot of the range of hills connecting Iberia and Celtiberia . "
Strabo refers to the Carretanians as people " of the Iberian stock " living in the Pyrenees , who are distinct from either Celts or Celtiberians .
ROMAN NAMES Section::::Roman names .
According to Charles Ebel , the ancient sources in both Latin and Greek use Hispania and Hiberia ( Greek : Iberia ) as synonyms .
The confusion of the words was because of an overlapping in political and geographic perspectives .
The Latin word Hiberia , similar to the Greek Iberia , literally translates to " land of the Hiberians " .
This word was derived from the river Ebro , which the Romans called Hiberus .
Hiber ( Iberian ) was thus used as a term for peoples living near the river
Ebro .
The first mention in Roman literature was by the annalist poet Ennius in 200 BC .
Virgil refers to the Ipacatos Hiberos ( " restless Iberi " ) in his Georgics .
The Roman geographers and other prose writers from the time of the late Roman Republic called the entire peninsula Hispania .
As they became politically interested in the former Carthaginian territories , the Romans began to use the names Hispania Citerior and Hispania Ulterior for ' near ' and ' far ' Hispania .
At the time Hispania was made up of three Roman provinces : Hispania Baetica , Hispania Tarraconensis , and Hispania Lusitania .
Strabo says that the Romans use Hispania and Iberia synonymously , distinguishing between the near northern and the far southern provinces .
( The name " Iberia " was ambiguous , being also the name of the Kingdom of Iberia in the Caucasus . )
Whatever language may generally have been spoken on the peninsula soon gave way to Latin , except for that of the Vascones , which was preserved as a language isolate by the barrier of the Pyrenees .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The Iberian Peninsula has always been associated with the Ebro , Ibēros in ancient Greek and Ibērus or Hibērus in Latin .
The association was so well known it was hardly necessary to state ; for example , Ibēria was the country " this side of the Ibērus " in Strabo .
Pliny goes so far as to assert that the Greeks had called " the whole of Spain " Hiberia because of the Hiberus River .
The river appears in the Ebro Treaty of 226 BC between Rome and Carthage , setting the limit of Carthaginian interest at the Ebro .
The fullest description of the treaty , stated in Appian , uses Ibērus .
With reference to this border , Polybius states that the " native name " is Ibēr , apparently the original word , stripped of its Greek or Latin -os or -us termination .
The early range of these natives , which geographers and historians place from today 's southern Spain to today 's southern France along the Mediterranean coast , is marked by instances of a readable script expressing a yet unknown language , dubbed " Iberian .
" Whether this was the native name or was given to them by the Greeks for their residence on the Ebro remains unknown .
Credence in Polybius imposes certain limitations on etymologizing : if the language remains unknown , the meanings of the words , including Iber , must also remain unknown .
In modern Basque , the word ibar means " valley " or " watered meadow " , while ibai means " river " , but there is no proof relating the etymology of the Ebro River with these Basque names .
PREHISTORY PALAEOLITHIC Section::::Prehistory .
Section::::Palaeolithic .
The Iberian Peninsula has been inhabited for at least 1.2 million years as remains found in the sites in the Atapuerca Mountains demonstrate .
Among these sites is the cave of Gran Dolina , where six hominin skeletons , dated between 780,000 and one million years ago , were found in 1994 .
Experts have debated whether these skeletons belong to the species Homo erectus , Homo heidelbergensis , or a new species called Homo antecessor .
Around 200,000 BP , during the Lower Paleolithic period , Neanderthals first entered the Iberian Peninsula .
Around 70,000 BP , during the Middle Paleolithic period , the last glacial event began and the Neanderthal Mousterian culture was established .
Around 37,000 BP , during the Upper Paleolithic , the Neanderthal Châtelperronian cultural period began .
Emanating from Southern France , this culture extended into the north of the peninsula .
It continued to exist until around 30,000 BP , when Neanderthal man faced extinction .
About 40,000 years ago , anatomically modern humans entered the Iberian Peninsula from Southern France .
Here , this genetically homogeneous population ( characterized by the M173 mutation in the Y chromosome ) , developed the M343 mutation , giving rise to Haplogroup R1b , still the most common in modern Portuguese and Spanish males .
On the Iberian Peninsula , modern humans developed a series of different cultures , such as the Aurignacian , Gravettian , Solutrean and Magdalenian cultures , some of them characterized by the complex forms of the art of the Upper Paleolithic .
NEOLITHIC Section::::Neolithic .
During the Neolithic expansion , various megalithic cultures developed in the Iberian Peninsula .
An open seas navigation culture from the east Mediterranean , called the Cardium culture , also extended its influence to the eastern coasts of the peninsula , possibly as early as the 5th millennium BC .
These people may have had some relation to the subsequent development of the Iberian civilization .
CHALCOLITHIC Section::::Chalcolithic .
In the Chalcolithic ( c. 3000 BC ) , a series of complex cultures developed that would give rise to the peninsula 's first civilizations and to extensive exchange networks reaching to the Baltic , Middle East and North Africa .
Around 2800 – 2700 BC , the Beaker culture , which produced the Maritime Bell Beaker , probably originated in the vibrant copper - using communities of the Tagus estuary in Portugal and spread from there to many parts of western Europe .
BRONZE AGE Section::::Bronze Age .
Bronze Age cultures developed beginning c.1800 BC , when the civilization of Los Millares was followed by that of El Argar .
From this centre , bronze technology spread to other cultures like the Bronze of Levante , South - Western Iberian Bronze and Las Cogotas .
In the Late Bronze Age , the urban civilisation of Tartessos developed in the area of modern western Andalusia , characterized by Phoenician influence and using the Southwest Paleohispanic script for its Tartessian language , not related to the Iberian language .
Early in the first millennium BC , several waves of Pre - Celts and Celts migrated from Central Europe , thus partially changing the peninsula 's ethnic landscape to Indo - European - speaking in its northern and western regions .
In Northwestern Iberia ( modern Northern Portugal , Asturias and Galicia ) , a Celtic culture developed , the Castro culture , with a large number of hill forts and some fortified cities .
PROTO - HISTORY Section::::Proto - history .
By the Iron Age , starting in the 7th century BC , the Iberian Peninsula consisted of complex agrarian and urban civilizations , either Pre - Celtic or Celtic ( such as the Lusitanians , Celtiberians , Gallaeci , Astures , Celtici and others ) , the cultures of the Iberians in the eastern and southern zones and the cultures of the Aquitanian in the western portion of the Pyrenees .
The seafaring Phoenicians , Greeks and Carthaginians successively settled along the Mediterranean coast and founded trading colonies there over a period of several centuries .
Around 1100 BC , Phoenician merchants founded the trading colony of Gadir or Gades ( modern day Cádiz ) near Tartessos .
In the 8th century BC , the first Greek colonies , such as Emporion ( modern Empúries ) , were founded along the Mediterranean coast on the east , leaving the south coast to the Phoenicians .
The Greeks coined the name Iberia , after the river Iber ( Ebro ) .
In the sixth century BC , the Carthaginians arrived in the peninsula while struggling with the Greeks for control of the Western Mediterranean .
Their most important colony was Carthago Nova ( modern - day Cartagena , Spain ) .
HISTORY ROMAN RULE Section::::History .
Section::::Roman rule .
In 218 BC , during the Second Punic War against the Carthaginians , the first Roman troops invaded the Iberian Peninsula ; however , it was not until the reign of Augustus that it was annexed after 200 years of war with the Celts and Iberians .
The result was the creation of the province of Hispania .
It was divided into Hispania Ulterior and Hispania Citerior during the late Roman Republic , and during the Roman Empire , it was divided into Hispania Tarraconensis in the northeast , Hispania Baetica in the south and Lusitania in the southwest .
Hispania supplied the Roman Empire with silver , food , olive oil , wine , and metal .
The emperors Trajan , Hadrian , Marcus Aurelius , and Theodosius I , the philosopher Seneca the Younger , and the poets Martial and Lucan were born from families living on the Iberian Peninsula .
During their 600-year rule in the Iberian Peninsula , the Romans introduced the Latin language that influenced many of the languages that exist today in the Iberian peninsula .
GERMANIC KINGDOMS
Section::::Germanic kingdoms .
In the early fifth century , Germanic peoples invaded the peninsula , namely the Suebi , the Vandals ( Silingi and Hasdingi ) and their allies , the Alans .
Only the kingdom of the Suebi ( Quadi and Marcomanni ) would endure after the arrival of another wave of Germanic invaders , the Visigoths , who conquered all of the Iberian Peninsula and expelled or partially integrated the Vandals and the Alans .
The Visigoths eventually conquered the Suebi kingdom and its capital city , Bracara ( modern day Braga ) , in 584–585 .
They would also conquer the province of the Byzantine Empire ( 552–624 ) of Spania in the south of the peninsula and the Balearic Islands .
ISLAMIC CALIPHATE Section::::Islamic Caliphate .
In 711 , a Muslim army invaded the Visigothic Kingdom in Hispania .
Under Tariq ibn Ziyad , the Islamic army landed at Gibraltar and , in an eight - year campaign , occupied all except the northern kingdoms of the Iberian Peninsula in the Umayyad conquest of Hispania .
Al - Andalus ( , tr .
al-ʾAndalūs , possibly " Land of the Vandals " ) , is the Arabic name given to what is today southern Spain by its Muslim Berber and Arab occupiers .
From the 8th–15th centuries , only the southern part of the Iberian Peninsula was part of the Islamic world .
It became a center of culture and learning , especially during the Caliphate of Córdoba , which reached its height of its power under the rule of Abd - ar - Rahman III and his successor al - Hakam II .
The Muslims , who were initially Arabs and Berbers , included some local converts , the so - called Muladi .
The Muslims were referred to by the generic name , Moors The Reconquista gained momentum on c. 718 , when the Christian Asturians opposed the Moors .
RECONQUEST Section::::Reconquest .
Many of the ousted Gothic nobles took refuge in the unconquered north Kingdom of Asturias .
From there , they aimed to reconquer their lands from the Moors ; this war of reconquest is known as the Reconquista .
Christian and Muslim kingdoms fought and allied among themselves .
The fighting was characterised by raids into Islamic territory with the intent of destroying crops , orchards , and villages , and of killing and enslaving any Muslims they came across .
Christian forces were usually better armoured than their Muslim counterparts , with noble and non - noble milites and cavallers wearing mail hauberks , separate mail coifs and metal helmets , and armed with maces , cavalry axes , sword and lances .
During the Middle Ages , the peninsula housed many small states including the Kingdom of Castile , Crown of Aragon , Kingdom of Navarre , Kingdom of León and the Kingdom of Portugal .
The Muslims were driven out of Portugal by 1249 .
By the end of the thirteenth century , the Spanish Reconquista was largely completed .
Anti - Semitic animus accompanied the Reconquista .
There were mass killings in Aragon in the mid - fourteenth century , and 12,000 Jews were killed in Toledo .
In 1391 , mobs went from town to town throughout Castile and Aragon , killing an estimated 50,000 Jews .
Women and children were sold as slaves to Muslims , and many synagogues were converted into churches .
According to Hasdai Crescas , about 70 Jewish communities were destroyed .
The last Muslim stronghold , Granada , was conquered by a combined Castilian and Aragonese force in 1492 .
As many as 100,000 Moors died or were enslaved in the military campaign , while 200,000 fled to North Africa .
Muslims and Jews throughout the period were variously tolerated or shown intolerance in different Christian kingdoms .
After the fall of Granada , all Muslims and Jews were ordered to convert to Christianity or face expulsion — as many as 200,000 Jews were expelled from Spain .
Historian Henry Kamen estimates that some 25,000 Jews died en route from Spain .
The Jews were also expelled from Sicily and Sardinia , which were under Aragonese rule , and an estimated 37,000 to 100,000 Jews left .
In 1497 , King Manuel I of Portugal forced all Jews in his kingdom to convert or leave .
That same year he expelled all Muslims that were not slaves , and in 1502 the Catholic Monarchs followed suit , imposing the choice of conversion to Christianity or exile and loss of property .
Many Jews and Muslims fled to North Africa and the Ottoman Empire , while others publicly converted to Christianity and became known respectively as Marranos and Moriscos .
However , many of these continued to practice their religion in secret .
The Moriscos revolted several times and were ultimately forcibly expelled from Spain in the early 17th century .
From 1609–1614 , over 300,000 Moriscos were sent on ships to North Africa and other locations , and , of this figure , around 50,000 died resisting the expulsion , and 60,000 died on the journey .
POST - RECONQUEST Section::::Post - reconquest .
The small states gradually amalgamated over time .
Portugal was the exception , except for a brief period ( 1580–1640 ) during which the whole peninsula was united politically under the Iberian Union .
After that point , the modern position was reached and the peninsula now consists of the countries of Spain and Portugal ( excluding their islands — the Portuguese Azores and Madeira and the Spanish Canary Islands and Balearic Islands ; and the Spanish exclaves of Ceuta and Melilla ) , Andorra , French Cerdagne and Gibraltar .
GEOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY Section::::Geography and geology .
The Iberian Peninsula is the westernmost of the three major southern European peninsulas — the Iberian , Italian , and Balkan .
It is bordered on the southeast and east by the Mediterranean Sea , and on the north , west , and southwest by the Atlantic Ocean .
The Pyrenees mountains are situated along the northeast edge of the peninsula , where it adjoins the rest of Europe .
Its southern tip is very close to the northwest coast of Africa , separated from it by the Strait of Gibraltar and the Mediterranean Sea .
The Iberian Peninsula extends from the southernmost extremity at Punta de Tarifa ( ) to the northernmost extremity at Punta de Estaca de Bares ( ) over a distance between lines of latitude of about based on a degree length of per degree , and from the westernmost extremity at Cabo da Roca ( ) to the easternmost extremity at Cap de Creus ( ) over a distance between lines of longitude at 40 ° N latitude of about based on an estimated degree length of about for that latitude .
The irregular , roughly octagonal shape of the peninsula contained within this spherical quadrangle was compared to an ox - hide by the geographer Strabo .
About three quarters of that rough octagon is the Meseta Central , a vast plateau ranging from 610 to 760 m in altitude .
It is located approximately in the centre , staggered slightly to the east and tilted slightly toward the west ( the conventional centre of the Iberian Peninsula has long been considered Getafe just south of Madrid ) .
It is ringed by mountains and contains the sources of most of the rivers , which find their way through gaps in the mountain barriers on all sides .
COASTLINE Section::::Coastline .
The coastline of the Iberian Peninsula is , on the Mediterranean side and on the Atlantic side .
The coast has been inundated over time , with sea levels having risen from a minimum of lower than today at the Last Glacial Maximum ( LGM ) to its current level at 4,000 years BP .
The coastal shelf created by sedimentation during that time remains below the surface ; however , it was never very extensive on the Atlantic side , as the continental shelf drops rather steeply into the depths .
An estimated length of Atlantic shelf is only wide .
At the isobath , on the edge , the shelf drops off to .
The submarine topography of the coastal waters of the Iberian Peninsula has been studied extensively in the process of drilling for oil .
Ultimately , the shelf drops into the Bay of Biscay on the north ( an abyss ) , the Iberian abyssal plain at on the west , and Tagus abyssal plain to the south .
In the north , between the continental shelf and the abyss , is an extension called the Galicia Bank , a plateau that also contains the Porto , Vigo , and Vasco da Gama seamounts , which form the Galicia interior basin .
The southern border of these features is marked by Nazaré Canyon , which splits the continental shelf and leads directly into the abyss .
RIVERS Section::::Rivers .
The major rivers flow through the wide valleys between the mountain systems .
These are the Ebro , Douro , Tagus , Guadiana and Guadalquivir .
All rivers in the Iberian Peninsula are subject to seasonal variations in flow .
The Tagus is the longest river on the peninsula and , like the Douro , flows westwards with its lower course in Portugal .
The Guadiana river bends southwards and forms the border between Spain and Portugal in the last stretch of its course .
MOUNTAINS Section::::Mountains .
The terrain of the Iberian Peninsula is largely mountainous .
The major mountain systems are : * The Pyrenees and their foothills , the Pre - Pyrenees , crossing the isthmus of the peninsula so completely as to allow no passage except by mountain road , trail , coastal road or tunnel .
Aneto in the Maladeta massif , at 3,404 m , is the highest point *
The Cantabrian Mountains along the northern coast with the massive Picos de Europa .
Torre de Cerredo , at 2,648 m , is the highest point
* The Galicia / Trás - os - Montes Massif in the Northwest is made up of very old heavily eroded rocks .
Pena Trevinca , at 2,127 m , is the highest point *
The Sistema Ibérico , a complex system at the heart of the Peninsula , in its central / eastern region .
It contains a great number of ranges and divides the watershed of the Tagus , Douro and Ebro rivers .
Moncayo , at 2,313 m , is the highest point
*
The Sistema Central , dividing the Iberian Plateau into a northern and a southern half and stretching into Portugal ( where the highest point of Continental Portugal ( 1,993 m ) is located in the Serra da Estrela ) .
Pico Almanzor in the Sierra de Gredos is the highest point , at 2,592 m * The Montes de Toledo , which also stretches into Portugal from the La Mancha natural region at the eastern end .
Its highest point , at 1,603 m , is La Villuerca in the Sierra de Villuercas , Extremadura * The Sierra Morena , which divides the watershed of the Guadiana and Guadalquivir rivers .
At 1,332 m , Bañuela is the highest point *
The Baetic System , which stretches between Cádiz and Gibraltar and northeast towards Alicante Province .
It is divided into three subsystems : * Prebaetic System , which begins west of the Sierra Sur de Jaén , reaching the Mediterranean Sea shores in Alicante Province .
La Sagra is the highest point at 2,382 m. * Subbaetic System , which is in a central position within the Baetic Systems , stretching from Cape Trafalgar in Cádiz Province across Andalusia to the Region of Murcia .
The highest point , at , is Peña de la Cruz in Sierra Arana .
* Penibaetic System , located in the far southeastern area stretching between Gibraltar across the Mediterranean coastal Andalusian provinces .
It includes the highest point in the peninsula , the 3,478 m high Mulhacén in the Sierra Nevada .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
The Iberian Peninsula contains rocks of every geological period from the Ediacaran to the Recent , and almost every kind of rock is represented .
World - class mineral deposits can also be found there .
The core of the Iberian Peninsula consists of a Hercynian cratonic block known as the Iberian Massif .
On the northeast , this is bounded by the Pyrenean fold belt , and on the southeast it is bounded by the Baetic System .
These twofold chains are part of the Alpine belt .
To the west , the peninsula is delimited by the continental boundary formed by the magma - poor opening of the Atlantic Ocean .
The Hercynian Foldbelt is mostly buried by Mesozoic and Tertiary cover rocks to the east , but nevertheless outcrops through the Sistema Ibérico and the Catalan Mediterranean System .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
The Iberian peninsula has two dominant climate types .
One of these is the oceanic climate seen in the Atlantic coastal region resulting in evenly temperatures with relatively cool summers .
However , most of Portugal and Spain have a mediterranean climate with various precipitation and temperatures depending on latitude and position versus the sea .
There are also more localized semi - arid climates in central Spain , with temperatures resembling a more continental mediterranean climate .
In other extreme cases highland alpine climates such as in Sierra Nevada and areas with extremely low precitipation and desert climates or semi - arid climates such as the Almería area , Murcia area and southern Alicante area .
In the Spanish interior the hottest temperatures in Europe are found , with Córdoba averaging around in July .
The Spanish mediterranean coast usually averages around in summer .
In sharp contrast A Coruña at the northern tip of Galicia has a summer daytime high average at just below .
This cool and wet summer climate is replicated throughout most of the northern coastline .
Winter temperatures are more consistent throughout the peninsula , although frosts are common in the Spanish interior , even though daytime highs are usually above the freezing point .
In Portugal , the warmest winters of the country are found in the area of Algarve , very similar to the ones from Huelva in Spain , while most of the Portuguese Atlantic coast has fresh and humid winters , similar to Galicia .
+
Average temperatures for the six largest urban areas of the peninsula !
Location !
Coldest month !
April !
Warmest month !
October MAJOR MODERN COUNTRIES Section::::Major modern countries .
Political divisions of the Iberian Peninsula sorted by area : !
Country /
Territory !
Mainland population !
km !
sq mi !
Share Spain align =
right 43,731,572 approx .
79 % occupies most of the peninsula
Portugal align =
right 10,047,083 approx .
15 % occupies most of the west of the peninsula France
align =
right3,191,059 6 % French Cerdagne is on the south side of the Pyrenees mountain range , which runs along the border between Spain and France .
For example , the Segre river , which runs west and then south to meet the Ebro , has its source on the French side .
The Pyrenees range is often considered the northeastern boundary of Iberian Peninsula , although the French coastline converges away from the rest of Europe north of the range .
Andorra align =
right84,082 0.1 % a northern edge of the peninsula in the south side of the Pyrenees range between Spain and France Gibraltar align =
right29,431 < 0.1 % a British overseas territory near the southernmost tip of the peninsula MAJOR URBAN AREAS Section::::Major urban areas . !
Urban Area !
Country !
Region !
Population Lisbon
The main metropolitan areas of the Iberian Peninsula are Madrid , Barcelona , Lisbon , Valencia , Porto , Seville , Bilbao , Guimarães , Málaga , Braga , Central Asturias ( Gijón - Oviedo - Avilés ) , Alicante - Elche , Murcia and Coimbra .
MAJOR CITIES
Madridalign =
centerMadridCórdobaalign = centerAndalusiaBarcelonaalign = centerCataloniaValladolidalign = centerCastile and LeónValenciaalign = centerValenciaVigoalign =
centerGaliciaSevillealign =
centerAndalusiaVila Nova de Gaiaalign
= centerNorteZaragozaalign = centerAragonGijónalign =
centerAsturiasMálagaalign =
centerAndalusiaL'Hospitaletalign = centerCataloniaLisbonalign = centerLisboaA
Coruñaalign = centerGaliciaMurciaalign
= centerMurciaVitoria - Gasteizalign =
centerBasque
CountryBilbaoalign = centerBasque
CountryPortoalign = centerNorteAlicantealign =
centerValenciaGranadaalign = centerAndalusia , Spainalign
= center 237,540
Various other notable cities ( populations given are for the cities proper not the metro areas or municipalities ) are also present on the peninsula , such as : Elche ( 228,647 ) ( part of the Alicante - Elche - Elda metro area ) , Oviedo ( 225,973 ) , Badalona ( 220,977 ) and Terrassa ( 215 678 ) in Spain ; and Braga ( 192,494 ) , Amadora ( 175,558 ) , Almada ( 174,030 ) , Odivelas ( 144,549 ) and Coimbra ( 143,397 ) in Portugal .
ECOLOGY FORESTS Section::::Ecology .
Section::::Forests .
The woodlands of the Iberian Peninsula are distinct ecosystems .
Although the various regions are each characterized by distinct vegetation , there are some similarities across the peninsula .
While the borders between these regions are not clearly defined , there is a mutual influence that makes it very hard to establish boundaries and some species find their optimal habitat in the intermediate areas .
EAST ATLANTIC FLYWAY Section::::East Atlantic flyway .
The Iberian Peninsula in an important stopover on the East Atlantic flyway for birds migrating from northern Europe to Africa .
For example , curlew sandpipers rest in the region of the Bay of Cádiz .
In addition to the birds migrating through , some seven million wading birds from the north spend the winter in the estuaries and wetlands of the Iberian Peninsula , mainly at locations on the Atlantic coast .
In Galicia are Ría de Arousa ( a home of grey plover ) , Ria de Ortigueira , Ria de Corme and Ria de Laxe .
In Portugal , the Aveiro Lagoon hosts Recurvirostra avosetta , the common ringed plover , grey plover and little stint .
Ribatejo Province on the Tagus supports Recurvirostra arosetta , grey plover , dunlin , bar - tailed godwit and common redshank .
In the Sado Estuary are dunlin , Eurasian curlew , grey plover and common redshank .
The Algarve hosts red knot , common greenshank and turnstone .
The Guadalquivir Marshes region of Andalusia and the Salinas de Cádiz are especially rich in wintering wading birds :
Kentish plover , common ringed plover , sanderling , and black - tailed godwit in addition to the others .
And finally , the Ebro delta is home to all the species mentioned above .
LANGUAGES Section::::Languages .
With the sole exception of Basque , which is of unknown origin , all modern Iberian languages descend from Vulgar Latin and belong to the Western Romance languages .
Throughout history ( and pre - history ) , many different languages have been spoken in the Iberian Peninsula , contributing to the formation and differentiation of the contemporaneous languages of Iberia ; however , most of them have become extinct or fallen into disuse .
Basque is the only non - Indo - European surviving language in Iberia and Western Europe .
In modern times , Spanish ( cf .
30 to 40 million speakers ) , Portuguese ( cf .
around 10 million speakers ) , Catalan ( cf .
around 9 million speakers ) , Galician ( cf .
around 3 million speakers ) and Basque ( cf .
around 1 million speakers ) are the most widely spoken languages in the Iberian Peninsula .
Spanish and Portuguese have expanded beyond Iberia to the rest of world , becoming global languages .
ECONOMY
Section::::Economy .
Major industries include mining , tourism , small farms , and fishing .
Because the coast is so long , fishing is popular , especially sardines , tuna and anchovies .
Most of the mining occurs in the Pyrenees mountains .
Commodities mined include : iron , gold , coal , lead , silver , zinc , and salt .
SEE ALSO
* Continental Portugal * De rebus Hispaniae * Forests of the Iberian Peninsula *
Hispania
* Hispanic * Iberian and Celtic architecture * Iberian Federalism * Iberian Pact
* Imperator totius
Hispaniae
* Languages of Iberia
* List of World Heritage Sites in Portugal
* List of World Heritage Sites in Spain
* Nationalities and regions of Spain * Peninsular Spain *
Peninsulars * Spanish and Portuguese Jews
* Spanish irredentism
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS