INTERMOLECULAR FORCE Intermolecular forces ( IMF ) are the forces which mediate interaction between molecules , including forces of attraction or repulsion which act between molecules and other types of neighboring particles , e.g. , atoms or ions .
Intermolecular forces are weak relative to intramolecular forces – the forces which hold a molecule together .
For example , the covalent bond , involving sharing electron pairs between atoms , is much stronger than the forces present between neighboring molecules .
Both sets of forces are essential parts of force fields frequently used in molecular mechanics .
The investigation of intermolecular forces starts from macroscopic observations which indicate the existence and action of forces at a molecular level .
These observations include non - ideal - gas thermodynamic behavior reflected by virial coefficients , vapor pressure , viscosity , superficial tension , and absorption data .
The first reference to the nature of microscopic forces is found in Alexis Clairaut 's work Theorie de la Figure de la Terre .
Other scientists who have contributed to the investigation of microscopic forces include : Laplace , Gauss , Maxwell and Boltzmann .
Attractive intermolecular forces are categorized into the following types : * Ion - induced dipole forces * Ion - dipole forces
*
Hydrogen bonding
* van der Waals forces –
Keesom force , Debye force , and London dispersion force Information on intermolecular forces is obtained by macroscopic measurements of properties like viscosity , pressure , volume , temperature ( PVT ) data .
The link to microscopic aspects is given by virial coefficients and Lennard - Jones potentials .
HYDROGEN BONDING
Section::::Hydrogen bonding .
A hydrogen bond is the attraction between the lone pair of an electronegative atom and a hydrogen atom that is bonded to either nitrogen , oxygen , or fluorine .
The hydrogen bond is often described as a strong electrostatic dipole - dipole interaction .
However , it also has some features of covalent bonding : it is directional , stronger than a van der Waals force interaction , produces interatomic distances shorter than the sum of van der Waals radius , and usually involves a limited number of interaction partners , which can be interpreted as a kind of valence .
Intermolecular hydrogen bonding is responsible for the high boiling point of water ( 100 ° C ) compared to the other group 16 hydrides , which have no hydrogen bonds .
Intramolecular hydrogen oxygen bonding is partly responsible for the secondary , tertiary , and quaternary structures of proteins and nucleic acids .
It also plays an important role in the structure of polymers , both synthetic and natural .
DIPOLE – DIPOLE AND SIMILAR
INTERACTIONS
REGULAR DIPOLE Section::::Dipole – dipole and similar interactions .
Section::::Regular dipole .
Dipole –
dipole interactions are the electrostatic interactions between the molecules which have permanent dipole(s).These interactions tend to align the molecules to increase attraction ( reducing potential energy ) .
An example of a dipole – dipole interaction can be seen in hydrogen chloride ( HCl ) :
the positive end of a polar molecule will attract the negative end of the other molecule and influence its position .
Polar molecules have a net attraction between them .
Examples of polar molecules include hydrogen chloride ( HCl ) and chloroform ( CHCl ) .
Often molecules contain dipolar groups , but have no overall dipole moment .
This occurs if there is symmetry within the molecule that causes the dipoles to cancel each other out .
This occurs in molecules such as tetrachloromethane and carbon dioxide .
The dipole - dipole interaction between two individual atoms is usually zero , since atoms rarely carry a permanent dipole .
These forces are discussed further in the section about the Keesom interaction , below .
ION –
DIPOLE AND ION - INDUCED DIPOLE FORCES Section::::Ion – dipole and ion - induced dipole forces .
Ion - dipole and ion - induced dipole forces are similar to dipole - dipole and dipole - induced dipole interactions but involve ions , instead of only polar and non - polar molecules .
Ion - dipole and ion - induced dipole forces are stronger than dipole - dipole interactions because the charge of any ion is much greater than the charge of a dipole moment .
Ion - dipole bonding is stronger than hydrogen bonding .
An ion – dipole force consists of an ion and a polar molecule interacting .
They align so that the positive and negative groups are next to one another , allowing maximum attraction .
An ion - induced dipole force consists of an ion and a non - polar molecule interacting .
Like a dipole - induced dipole force , the charge of the ion causes distortion of the electron cloud on the non - polar molecule .
VAN DER WAALS FORCES
Section::::Van der Waals forces .
The van Waals forces arise from interaction between uncharged atoms or molecules , leading not only to such phenomena as the cohesion of condensed phases and physical adsorption of gases , but also to a universal force of attraction between macroscopic bodies .
KEESOM ( PERMANENT – PERMANENT DIPOLES )
INTERACTION
Section::::Keesom ( permanent – permanent dipoles ) interaction .
The first contribution to van der Waals forces is due to electrostatic interactions between charges ( in molecular ions ) , dipoles ( for polar molecules ) , quadrupoles ( all molecules with symmetry lower than cubic ) , and permanent multipoles .
It is termed Keesom interactions , named after Willem Hendrik Keesom .
These forces originate from the attraction between permanent dipoles ( dipolar molecules ) and are temperature dependent .
They consist of attractive interactions between dipoles that are ensemble averaged over different rotational orientations of the dipoles .
It is assumed that the molecules are constantly rotating and never get locked into place .
This is a good assumption , but at some point molecules do get locked into place .
The energy of a Keesom interaction depends on the inverse sixth power of the distance , unlike the interaction energy of two spatially fixed dipoles , which depends on the inverse third power of the distance .
The Keesom interaction can only occur among molecules that possess permanent dipole moments , i.e. , two polar molecules .
Also Keesom interactions are very weak van der Waals interactions and do not occur in aqueous solutions that contain electrolytes .
The angle averaged interaction is given by the following equation : where m = dipole moment , formula_2 = permitivity of free space , formula_3 = dielectric constant of surrounding material , T = temperature , formula_4 = Boltzmann constant , and r = distance between molecules .
DEBYE ( PERMANENT – INDUCED DIPOLES )
FORCE
Section::::Debye ( permanent – induced dipoles ) force .
The second contribution is the induction ( also termed polarization ) or Debye force , arising from interactions between rotating permanent dipoles and from the polarizability of atoms and molecules ( induced dipoles ) .
These induced dipoles occur when one molecule with a permanent dipole repels another molecule 's electrons .
A molecule with permanent dipole can induce a dipole in a similar neighboring molecule and cause mutual attraction .
Debye forces can not occur between atoms .
The forces between induced and permanent dipoles are not as temperature dependent as Keesom interactions because the induced dipole is free to shift and rotate around the non - polar molecule .
The Debye induction effects and Keesom orientation effects are termed polar interactions .
The induced dipole forces appear from the induction ( also termed polarization ) , which is the attractive interaction between a permanent multipole on one molecule with an induced ( by the former di / multi - pole ) multipole on another .
This interaction is called the Debye force , named after Peter J. W. Debye .
One example of an induction interaction between permanent dipole and induced dipole is the interaction between HCl and Ar .
In this system , Ar experiences a dipole as its electrons are attracted ( to the H side of HCl ) or repelled ( from the Cl side ) by HCl .
The angle averaged interaction is given by the following equation : where formula_6 = polarizability .
This kind of interaction can be expected between any polar molecule and non - polar / symmetrical molecule .
The induction - interaction force is far weaker than dipole – dipole interaction , but stronger than the London dispersion force .
LONDON DISPERSION FORCE ( FLUCTUATING DIPOLE - INDUCED DIPOLE INTERACTION )
Section::::London dispersion force ( fluctuating dipole - induced dipole interaction ) .
The third and dominant contribution is the dispersion or London force ( fluctuating dipole - induced dipole ) , which arises due to the non - zero instantaneous dipole moments of all atoms and molecules .
Such polarization can be induced either by a polar molecule or by the repulsion of negatively charged electron clouds in non - polar molecules .
Thus , London interactions are caused by random fluctuations of electron density in an electron cloud .
An atom with a large number of electrons will have a greater associated London force than an atom with fewer electrons .
The dispersion ( London ) force is the most important component because all materials are polarizable , whereas Keesom and Debye forces require permanent dipoles .
The London interaction is universal and is present in atom - atom interactions as well .
For various reasons , London interactions ( dispersion ) have been considered relevant for interactions between macroscopic bodies in condensed systems .
Hamaker developed the theory of van der Waals between macroscopic bodies in 1937 and showed that the additivity of these interactions renders them considerably more long - range .
RELATIVE STRENGTH OF FORCES Section::::Relative strength of forces . !
Bond type !
Dissociation energy(kcal / mol ) !
Dissociation energy !
Note
Ionic lattice
250–4000 1100 - 20000 Covalent bond
30–260 130–1100
Hydrogen bond 1–12 4–50
About 5 kcal / mol ( 21 kJ / mol ) in water Dipole – dipole 0.5–2 2–8 London dispersion forces < 1 to 15 < 4 to 63 Estimated from the enthalpies of vaporization of hydrocarbons
This comparison is approximate .
The actual relative strengths will vary depending on the molecules involved .
Ionic bonding and covalent bonding will always be stronger than intermolecular forces in any given substance .
EFFECT ON THE BEHAVIOR OF GASES Section::::Effect on the behavior of gases .
Intermolecular forces are repulsive at short distances and attractive at long distances ( see the Lennard – Jones potential ) .
In a gas , the repulsive force chiefly has the effect of keeping two molecules from occupying the same volume .
This gives a real gas a tendency to occupy a larger volume than an ideal gas at the same temperature and pressure .
The attractive force draws molecules closer together and gives a real gas a tendency to occupy a smaller volume than an ideal gas .
Which interaction is more important depends on temperature and pressure ( see compressibility factor ) .
In a gas , the distances between molecules are generally large , so intermolecular forces have only a small effect .
The attractive force is not overcome by the repulsive force , but by the thermal energy of the molecules .
Temperature is the measure of thermal energy , so increasing temperature reduces the influence of the attractive force .
In contrast , the influence of the repulsive force is essentially unaffected by temperature .
When a gas is compressed to increase its density , the influence of the attractive force increases .
If the gas is made sufficiently dense , the attractions can become large enough to overcome the tendency of thermal motion to cause the molecules to disperse .
Then the gas can condense to form a solid or liquid , i.e. , a condensed phase .
Lower temperature favors the formation of a condensed phase .
In a condensed phase , there is very nearly a balance between the attractive and repulsive forces .
QUANTUM MECHANICAL THEORIES
Section::::Quantum mechanical theories .
Intermolecular forces observed between atoms and molecules can be described phenomenologically as occurring between permanent and instantaneous dipoles , as outlined above .
Alternatively , one may seek a fundamental , unifying theory that is able to explain the various types of interactions such as hydrogen bonding , van der Waals forces and dipole - dipole interactions .
Typically , this is done by applying the ideas of quantum mechanics to molecules , and Rayleigh – Schrödinger perturbation theory has been especially effective in this regard .
When applied to existing quantum chemistry methods , such a quantum mechanical explanation of intermolecular interactions , this provides an array of approximate methods that can be used to analyze intermolecular interactions .
One of the most helpful methods to visualize this kind of intermolecular interactions , that we can found in quantum chemistry , is the non - covalent interaction index , which is based on the electron density of the system .
SEE ALSO
* Coomber 's relationship * Force field ( chemistry )
* Hydrophobic effect
* Intramolecular force
* Molecular solid * Polymer * Quantum chemistry computer programs
* van der Waals force
* Comparison of software for molecular mechanics modeling * Non - covalent interactions * Solvation REFERENCES