MARIANA TRENCH
The Mariana Trench or Marianas Trench is located in the western Pacific Ocean approximately east of the Mariana Islands , and has the deepest natural point in the world .
It is a crescent - shaped trough in the Earth 's crust averaging about long and wide .
The maximum known depth is ( ± ) at the southern end of a small slot - shaped valley in its floor known as the Challenger Deep .
However , some unrepeated measurements place the deepest portion at .
For comparison : if Mount Everest were dropped into the trench at this point , its peak would still be over under water .
At the bottom of the trench the water column above exerts a pressure of , more than 1,000 times the standard atmospheric pressure at sea level .
At this pressure , the density of water is increased by 4.96 % , so that 95.27 litres of water under the pressure of the Challenger Deep would contain the same mass as 100 litres at the surface .
The temperature at the bottom is .
The trench is not the part of the seafloor closest to the centre of the Earth .
This is because the Earth is not a perfect sphere ; its radius is about smaller at the poles than at the equator .
As a result , parts of the Arctic Ocean seabed are at least closer to the Earth 's centre than the Challenger Deep seafloor .
In 2009 , the Marianas Trench was established as a United States National Monument .
Xenophyophores have been found in the trench by Scripps Institution of Oceanography researchers at a record depth of below the sea surface .
On 17 March 2013 , researchers from the Scottish Association for Marine Science reported data that suggested microbial life forms thrive within the trench .
NAMES Section::::Names .
The Mariana Trench is named for the nearby Mariana Islands ( in turn named Las Marianas in honor of Spanish Queen Mariana of Austria , widow of Philip IV of Spain ) .
The islands are part of the island arc that is formed on an over - riding plate , called the Mariana Plate ( also named for the islands ) , on the western side of the trench .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
The Mariana Trench is part of the Izu - Bonin - Mariana subduction system that forms the boundary between two tectonic plates .
In this system , the western edge of one plate , the Pacific Plate , is subducted ( i.e. , thrust ) beneath the smaller Mariana Plate that lies to the west .
Crustal material at the western edge of the Pacific Plate is some of the oldest oceanic crust on earth ( up to 170 million years old ) , and is therefore cooler and more dense ; hence its great height difference relative to the higher - riding ( and younger )
Mariana Plate .
The deepest area at the plate boundary is the Mariana Trench proper .
The movement of the Pacific and Mariana plates is also indirectly responsible for the formation of the Mariana Islands .
These volcanic islands are caused by Flux melting of the upper mantle due to release of water that is trapped in minerals of the subducted portion of the Pacific Plate .
MEASUREMENTS
Section::::Measurements .
The trench was first sounded during the Challenger expedition in 1875 , using a weighted rope , which recorded a depth of .
In 1877 , a map was published called Tiefenkarte des Grossen Ozeans ( " Deep map of the Great Ocean " ) by Petermann , which showed a Challenger Tief ( " Challenger deep " ) at the location of that sounding .
In 1899 , USS Nero , a converted collier , recorded a depth of .
In 1951 , Challenger II surveyed the trench using echo sounding , a much more precise and vastly easier way to measure depth than the sounding equipment and drag lines used in the original expedition .
During this survey , the deepest part of the trench was recorded when the Challenger II measured a depth of at , known as the Challenger Deep .
In 1957 , the Soviet vessel reported a depth of at a location dubbed the Mariana Hollow .
In 1962 , the surface ship M.V. Spencer F. Baird recorded a maximum depth of using precision depth gauges .
In 1984 , the Japanese survey vessel Takuyō ( 拓洋 ) collected data from the Mariana Trench using a narrow , multi - beam echo sounder ; it reported a maximum depth of , also reported as ±. Remotely Operated Vehicle KAIKO reached the deepest area of the Mariana Trench and made the deepest diving record of on March 24 , 1995 .
During surveys carried out between 1997 and 2001 , a spot was found along the Mariana Trench that had depth similar to that of the Challenger Deep , possibly even deeper .
It was discovered while scientists from the Hawaii Institute of Geophysics and Planetology were completing a survey around Guam ; they used a sonar mapping system towed behind the research ship to conduct the survey .
This new spot was named the HMRG ( Hawaii Mapping Research Group )
Deep , after the group of scientists who discovered it .
On 1 June 2009 , sonar mapping of the Challenger Deep by the Simrad EM120 sonar multibeam bathymetry system for deep water , mapping aboard the RV Kilo Moana ( mothership of the Nereus vehicle ) , indicated a spot with a depth of .
The sonar system uses phase and amplitude bottom detection , with an accuracy of better than 0.2 % of water depth across the entire swath ( implying that the depth figure is accurate to ± ) .
In 2011 , it was announced at the American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting that a US Navy hydrographic ship equipped with a multibeam echosounder conducted a survey which mapped the entire trench to resolution .
The mapping revealed the existence of four rocky outcrops thought to be former seamounts .
The Mariana Trench is a site chosen by researchers at Washington University and the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in 2012 for a seismic survey to investigate the subsurface water cycle .
Using both ocean - bottom seismometers and hydrophones the scientists are able to map structures as deep as beneath the surface .
DESCENTS
Section::::Descents .
Four descents have been achieved .
The first was the manned descent by Swiss - designed , Italian - built , United States Navy - owned bathyscaphe Trieste which reached the bottom at 1:06 pm on 23 January 1960 , with Don Walsh and Jacques Piccard on board .
Iron shot was used for ballast , with gasoline for buoyancy .
The onboard systems indicated a depth of 11,521 m ( 37,799 ft ) , but this was later revised to 10,916 m ( 35,814 ft ) .
The depth was estimated from a conversion of pressure measured and calculations based on the water density from sea surface to seabed .
This was followed by the unmanned ROVs Kaikō in 1996 and Nereus in 2009 .
The first three expeditions directly measured very similar depths of .
The fourth was made by Canadian film director James Cameron in 2012 .
On 26 March , he reached the bottom of the Mariana Trench in the submersible vessel Deepsea Challenger .
In July 2015 , members of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , Oregon State University , and the Coast Guard submerged a hydrophone into the deepest part of the Mariana Trench , the Challenger Deep , never having deployed one past a mile .
The titanium - shelled hydrophone was designed to withstand the immense pressure 7 miles under .
Although researchers were unable to retrieve the hydrophone until November , the data capacity was full within the first 23 days .
After months of analyzing the sounds , the experts were surprised to pick up natural and man - made sounds such as boats , earthquakes , a typhoon , and baleen whales .
Due to the mission 's success , the researchers announced plans to deploy a second hydrophone in 2017 for an extended period of time .
PLANNED DESCENTS
Section::::Planned descents .
, at least two other teams are planning piloted submarines to reach the bottom of the Mariana Trench .
Triton Submarines , a Florida - based company that designs and manufactures private submarines , plans for a crew of three to take 120 minutes to reach the seabed .
DOER Marine , a marine technology company based near San Francisco and set up in 1992 , plans for a crew of two or three to take 90 minutes to reach the seabed .
LIFE Section::::Life .
The expedition conducted in 1960 claimed to have observed , with great surprise because of the high pressure , large creatures living at the bottom , such as a flatfish about long , and shrimp .
According to Piccard , " The bottom appeared light and clear , a waste of firm diatomaceous ooze " .
Many marine biologists are now skeptical of the supposed sighting of the flatfish , and it is suggested that the creature may instead have been a sea cucumber .
During the second expedition , the unmanned vehicle Kaikō collected mud samples from the seabed .
Tiny organisms were found to be living in those samples .
In July 2011 , a research expedition deployed untethered landers , called dropcams , equipped with digital video cameras and lights to explore this region of the deep sea .
Amongst many other living organisms , some gigantic single - celled amoebas with a size of more than , belonging to the class of xenophyophores were observed .
Xenophyophores are noteworthy for their size , their extreme abundance on the seafloor and their role as hosts for a variety of organisms .
In December 2014 , a new species of snailfish was discovered at a depth of , breaking the previous record for the deepest living fish seen on video .
During the 2014 expedition , several new species were filmed including huge crustaceans known as supergiants .
Deep - sea gigantism is the process where species grow larger than their shallow water relatives .
In May 2017 , an unidentified type of snailfish was filmed at a depth of .
POLLUTION Section::::Pollution .
In 2016 , a research expedition looked at the chemical makeup of crustacean scavengers collected from the range of 7,841–10,250 metres within the trench .
Within these organisms , the researchers found extremely elevated concentrations of PCBs , a chemical toxin banned for its environmental harm in the 1970s , concentrated at all depths within the sediment of the trench .
POSSIBLE
NUCLEAR WASTE DISPOSAL SITE Section::::Possible nuclear waste disposal site .
Like other oceanic trenches , the Mariana Trench has been proposed as a site for nuclear waste disposal , in the hope that tectonic plate subduction occurring at the site might eventually push the nuclear waste deep into the Earth 's mantle , the second layer of the Earth .
However , ocean dumping of nuclear waste is prohibited by international law .
Furthermore , plate subduction zones are associated with very large megathrust earthquakes , the effects of which are unpredictable for the safety of long - term disposal of nuclear wastes within the hadopelagic ecosystem .
SEE ALSO
* Marianas Trench Marine National Monument , United States national monument at the trench .
This National Monument protects of submerged lands and waters of the Mariana Archipelago .
It includes some of the Mariana Trench , but not the deepest part , the Challenger Deep , which lies just outside the monument area .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Mariana Trench Dive ( 25 March 2012 ) – Deepsea Challenger .
* Mariana Trench Dive ( 23 January 1960 ) – Trieste ( Newsreel ) .
* Mariana Trench Dive ( 50th Anniv ) – Trieste – Capt Don Walsh .
* Mariana Trench – Maps ( Google ) .
* NOAA – Ocean Explorer ( Ofc Ocean Exploration & Rsch ) .
* NOAA – Ocean Explorer – Multimedia –
Mariana Arc ( podcast ) .
* NOAA – Ocean Explorer – Video Playlist – Ring of Fire ( 2004–2006 ) .