BOOK OF LEVITICUS
The Book of Leviticus ( ) is the third book of the Torah and of the Old Testament .
Most of its chapters ( 1–7 , 11–27 ) consist of God 's speeches to Moses , in which he is commanded to repeat to the Israelites .
This takes place within the story of the Israelites ' Exodus after they escaped Egypt and reached Mt. Sinai ( Exodus 19:1 ) .
The Book of Exodus narrates how Moses led the Israelites in building the Tabernacle ( Exodus 35–40 ) based on God 's instructions ( Exodus 25–31 ) .
Then in Leviticus , God tells the Israelites and their priests how to make offerings in the Tabernacle and how to conduct themselves while camped around the holy tent sanctuary .
Leviticus takes place during the month or month - and - a - half between the completion of the Tabernacle ( Exodus 40:17 ) and the Israelites ' departure from Sinai ( Numbers 1:1 , 10:11 ) .
The instructions of Leviticus emphasize ritual , legal and moral practices rather than beliefs .
Nevertheless , they reflect the world view of the creation story in Genesis 1 that God wishes to live with humans .
The book teaches that faithful performance of the sanctuary rituals can make that possible , so long as the people avoid sin and impurity whenever possible .
The rituals , especially the sin and guilt offerings , provide the means to gain forgiveness for sins ( Leviticus 4–5 ) and purification from impurities ( Leviticus 11–16 ) so that God can continue to live in the Tabernacle in the midst of the people .
Scholars generally agree that Leviticus developed over a long time and that it reached its present form in the Persian period ( 538–332 BC ) .
NAME Section::::Name .
The English name Leviticus comes from the Latin Leviticus , which is in turn from the Greek Greek Λευιτικόν , Leuitikon , referring the priestly tribe of the Israelites , " Levi . "
The Greek expression is in turn a variant of the rabbinic Hebrew torat kohanim , " law of priests . "
In Hebrew the book is called Vayikra ( ) , from the opening of the book , va - yikra"And
He [ God ] called . "
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
" ( The outlines provided by commentaries are similar , though not identical ; compare those of Wenham , Hartley , Milgrom , and Watts ) I. Laws on sacrifice ( 1:1–7:38 ) II .
Institution of the priesthood ( 8:1–10:20 ) III .
Uncleanliness and its treatment ( 11:1–15:33 ) IV .
Day of Atonement : purification of the tabernacle from the effects of uncleanliness and sin ( ch . 16 ) V. Prescriptions for practical holiness ( the Holiness Code , chs .
17–26 )
VI .
Redemption of votive gifts ( ch . 27 ) SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
Chapters 1–5 describe the various sacrifices from the sacrificers ' point of view , although the priests are essential for handling the blood .
Chapters 6–7 go over much the same ground , but from the point of view of the priest , who , as the one actually carrying out the sacrifice and dividing the " portions " , needs to know how this is to be done .
Sacrifices are to be divided between God , the priest , and the offerers , although in some cases the entire sacrifice is a single portion consigned to God — i.e . , burnt to ashes .
Chapters 8–10 describe the consecration by Moses of Aaron and his sons as the first priests , the first sacrifices , and God 's destruction of two of Aaron 's sons for ritual offenses .
The purpose is to underline the character of altar priesthood ( i.e. , those priests empowered to offer sacrifices to God ) as an Aaronite privilege , and the responsibilities and dangers of their position .
With sacrifice and priesthood established , chapters 11–15 instruct the lay people on purity ( or cleanliness ) .
Eating certain animals produces uncleanliness , as does giving birth ; certain skin diseases ( but not all ) are unclean , as are certain conditions affecting walls and clothing ( mildew and similar conditions ) ; and genital discharges , including female menses and male gonorrhea , are unclean .
The reasoning behind the food rules are obscure ; for the rest the guiding principle seems to be that all these conditions involve a loss of " life force " , usually but not always blood .
Leviticus 16 concerns the Day of Atonement .
This is the only day on which the High Priest is to enter the holiest part of the sanctuary , the holy of holies .
He is to sacrifice a bull for the sins of the priests , and a goat for the sins of the laypeople .
A second goat is to be sent into the desert to " Azazel " , bearing the sins of the whole people .
Azazel may be a wilderness - demon , but its identity is mysterious .
Chapters 17–26 are the Holiness code .
It begins with a prohibition on all slaughter of animals outside the Temple , even for food , and then prohibits a long list of sexual contacts and also child sacrifice .
The " holiness " injunctions which give the code its name begin with the next section : penalties are imposed for the worship of Molech , consulting mediums and wizards , cursing one 's parents and engaging in unlawful sex .
Priests are instructed on mourning rituals and acceptable bodily defects .
Blasphemy is to be punished with death , and rules for the eating of sacrifices are set out ; the calendar is explained , and rules for sabbatical and Jubilee years set out ; and rules are made for oil lamps and bread in the sanctuary ; and rules are made for slavery .
The code ends by telling the Israelites they must choose between the law and prosperity on the one hand , or , on the other , horrible punishments , the worst of which will be expulsion from the land .
Chapter 27 is a disparate and probably late addition telling about persons and things dedicated to the Lord and how vows can be redeemed instead of fulfilled .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
The majority of scholars have concluded that the Pentateuch received its final form during the Persian period ( 538–332 BC ) .
Nevertheless , Leviticus had a long period of growth before reaching that form .
The entire book of Leviticus is composed of Priestly literature .
Most scholars see chapters 1–16 ( the Priestly code ) and chapters 17–26 ( the Holiness code ) as the work of two related schools , but while the Holiness material employs the same technical terms as the Priestly code , it broadens their meaning from pure ritual to the theological and moral , turning the ritual of the Priestly code into a model for the relationship of Israel to God : as the tabernacle is made holy by the presence of the Lord and kept apart from uncleanliness , so He will dwell among Israel when Israel is purified ( made holy ) and separated from other peoples .
The ritual instructions in the Priestly code apparently grew from priests giving instruction and answering questions about ritual matters ; the Holiness code ( or H ) used to be regarded as a separate document later incorporated into Leviticus , but it seems better to think of the Holiness authors as editors who worked with the Priestly code and actually produced Leviticus as we now have it .
THEMES SACRIFICE AND RITUAL Section::::Themes .
Section::::Sacrifice and ritual .
Many scholars argue that the rituals of Leviticus have a theological meaning concerning Israel 's relationship with its God .
Jacob Milgrom was especially influential in spreading this view .
He maintained that the priestly regulations in Leviticus expressed a rational system of theological thought .
The writers expected them to be put into practice in Israel 's temple , so the rituals would express this theology as well , as well as ethical concern for the poor .
Milgrom also argued that the book 's purity regulations ( chaps . 11–15 ) are based in ethical thinking .
Many other interpreters have followed Milgrom in exploring the theological and ethical implications of Leviticus 's regulations ( e.g. Marx , Balentine ) , though some have questioned how systematic they really are .
Ritual , therefore , is not a series of actions undertaken for their own sake , but a means of maintaining the relationship between God , the world , and humankind .
KEHUNA ( JEWISH PRIESTHOOD )
Section::::Kehuna ( Jewish Priesthood ) .
The main function of the priests is service at the altar , and only the sons of Aaron are priests in the full sense .
( Ezekiel also distinguishes between altar - priests and lower Levites , but in Ezekiel the altar - priests are called sons of Zadok instead of sons of Aaron ; many scholars see this as a remnant of struggles between different priestly factions in First Temple times , resolved by the Second Temple into a hierarchy of Aaronite altar - priests and lower - level Levites , including singers , gatekeepers and the like ) .
In chapter 10 , God kills Nadab and Abihu , the oldest sons of Aaron , for offering " strange incense " .
Aaron has two sons left .
Commentators have read various messages in the incident : a reflection of struggles between priestly factions in the post – Exilic period ( Gerstenberger ) ; or a warning against offering incense outside the Temple , where there might be the risk of invoking strange gods ( Milgrom ) .
In any case , the sanctuary has been polluted by the bodies of the two dead priests , leading into the next theme , holiness .
UNCLEANLINESS AND PURITY Section::::Uncleanliness and purity .
Ritual purity is essential for an Israelite to be able to approach Yahweh and remain part of the community .
Uncleanliness threatens holiness ; Chapters 11–15 review the various causes of uncleanliness and describe the rituals which will restore cleanliness ; cleanliness is to be maintained through observation of the rules on sexual behaviour , family relations , land ownership , worship , sacrifice , and observance of holy days .
Yahweh dwells with Israel in the holy of holies .
All of the priestly ritual is focused on Yahweh and the construction and maintenance of a holy space , but sin generates impurity , as do everyday events such as childbirth and menstruation ; impurity pollutes the holy dwelling place .
Failure to ritually purify the sacred space could result in God leaving , which would be disastrous .
ATONEMENT Section::::Atonement .
Through sacrifice the priest " makes atonement " for sin and the offerer is forgiven ( but only if God accepts the sacrifice — forgiveness comes only from God ) .
Atonement rituals involve blood , poured or sprinkled , as the symbol of the life of the victim : the blood has the power to wipe out or absorb the sin .
The role of atonement is reflected structurally in two - part division of the book : chapters 1–16 call for the establishment of the institution for atonement , and chapters 17–27 call for the life of the atoned community in holiness .
HOLINESS Section::::Holiness .
The consistent theme of chapters 17–26 is the repeated phrase , " Be holy , for I the Lord your God am holy .
"
Holiness in ancient Israel had a different meaning than in contemporary usage : it might have been regarded as the " god - ness " of God , an invisible but physical and potentially dangerous force .
Specific objects , or even days , can be holy , but they derive holiness from being connected with God — the seventh day , the tabernacle , and the priests all derive their holiness from God .
As a result , Israel had to maintain its own holiness in order to live safely alongside God .
The need for holiness is directed to the possession of the Promised Land ( Canaan ) , where the Jews will become a holy people : " You shall not do as they do in the land of Egypt where you dwelt , and you shall not do as they do in the land of Canaan to which I am bringing you ...
You shall do my ordinances and keep my statutes ...
I am the Lord , your God " ( ch .
18:3 ) .
SUBSEQUENT TRADITION
Section::::Subsequent tradition .
Leviticus , as part of the Torah , became the law book of Jerusalem 's Second Temple as well as of the Samaritan temple .
Evidence of its influence was found among the Dead Sea Scrolls , which included fragments of seventeen manuscripts of Leviticus dating from the third to the first centuries BC .
Many other Qumran scrolls cite the book , especially the Temple Scroll and 4QMMT .
Leviticus 's instructions for animal offerings have not been observed by Jews or Christians since the first century AD .
Because of the destruction of the temple in Jerusalem in 70 AD , Jewish worship has focused on prayer and the study of Torah .
Nevertheless , Leviticus constitutes a major source of Jewish law and is traditionally the first book taught to children in the Rabbinic system of education .
There are two main Midrashim on Leviticus — the halakhic one ( Sifra ) and a more aggadic one ( Vayikra Rabbah ) .
The New Testament , particularly the Epistle to the Hebrews , uses ideas and images from Leviticus to describe Christ as the high priest who offers his own blood as a sin offering .
Therefore , Christians do not make animal offerings either , as Gordon Wenham summarized : " With the death of Christ the only sufficient " burnt offering " was offered once and for all , and therefore the animal sacrifices which foreshadowed Christ 's sacrifice were made obsolete . "
Christians generally have the view that the New Covenant supersedes ( i.e. , replaces ) the Old Testament 's ritual laws , which includes many of the rules in Leviticus .
Christians therefore have usually not observed Leviticus ' rules regarding diet , purity , and agriculture .
Christian teachings have differed , however , as to where to draw the line between ritual and moral regulations .
CONTENTS
ACCORDING TO JUDAISM 'S WEEKLY TORAH PORTIONS SEE ALSO
* 613 commandments * En - Gedi Scroll REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY TRANSLATIONS OF LEVITICUS
*
Leviticus at Bible gateway COMMENTARIES ON LEVITICUS
* Bamberger , Bernard Jacob
The Torah :
A Modern Commentary ( 1981 ) , GENERAL
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links .
Online versions of Leviticus :
* Hebrew : * Leviticus - Mikraot Gedolot Haketer - online edition , Menachem Cohen , Bar Ilan University ( Hebrew )
* Leviticus at Mechon - Mamre ( Jewish Publication Society translation )
*
Leviticus ( The Living Torah )
Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan 's translation and commentary at Ort.org * Vayikra — Levitichius ( Judaica Press ) translation [ with Rashi 's commentary ] at Chabad.org * ויקרא Vayikra —
Leviticus ( Hebrew — English at Mechon - Mamre.org )
* Christian translations : * The Book of Leviticus , Douay Rheims Version , with Bishop Challoner Commentaries
* Online Bible at GospelHall.org ( King James Version )
* Online Audio and Classic Bible at Bible - Book.org
( King James Version )
* oremus Bible Browser ( New Revised Standard Version ) * oremus Bible Browser ( Anglicized New Revised Standard Version )
* Various versions Related article : * Book of Leviticus article ( Jewish Encyclopedia ) * The Literary Structure of Leviticus ( chaver.com ) Brief introduction
*
Leviticus