NEW MOON
In astronomy , the new moon is the first lunar phase , when the Moon and Sun have the same ecliptic longitude .
At this phase , the lunar disk is not visible to the unaided eye , except when silhouetted during a solar eclipse .
Daylight outshines the earthlight that dimly illuminates the new moon .
The actual phase is usually a very thin crescent .
The original meaning of the term new moon , which is still sometimes used in non - astronomical contexts , was the first visible crescent of the Moon , after conjunction with the Sun .
This crescent moon is briefly visible when low above the western horizon shortly after sunset and before moonset .
A lunation or synodic month is the average time from one new moon to the next .
In the J2000.0 epoch , the average length of a lunation is 29.530588 days ( or 29 days , 12 hours , 44 minutes , and 2.8 seconds ) .
However , the length of any one synodic month can vary from 29.26 to 29.80 days due to the perturbing effects of the Sun 's gravity on the Moon 's eccentric orbit .
In a lunar calendar , each month corresponds to a lunation .
Each lunar cycle can be assigned a unique lunation number to identify it .
FORMULA FOR NEW MOONS Section::::Formula for New Moons .
The length of a lunation is about 29.53 days .
Its precise duration is linked to many phenomena in nature , such as the variation between ( the most and least profound tidal variances respectively ) .
An approximate formula to compute the mean moments of new moon ( conjunction between Sun and Moon ) for successive months is : where N is an integer , starting with 0 for the first new moon in the year 2000 , and that is incremented by 1 for each successive synodic month ; and the result
d is the number of days ( and fractions ) since 2000 - 01 - 01 00:00:00 reckoned in the time scale known as Terrestrial Time ( TT ) used in ephemerides .
To obtain this moment expressed in Universal Time ( UT , world clock time ) , add the result of following approximate correction to the result d obtained above :
Periodic perturbations change the time of true conjunction from these mean values .
For all new moons between 1601 and 2401 , the maximum difference is 0.592 days =
14h13 m in either direction .
The duration of a lunation ( i.e. the time from new moon to the next new moon ) varies in this period between 29.272 and 29.833 days , i.e. −0.259d = 6h12 m shorter , or +0.302d =
7h15 m longer than average .
This range is smaller than the difference between mean and true conjunction , because during one lunation the periodic terms can not all change to their maximum opposite value .
See the article on the full moon cycle for a fairly simple method to compute the moment of new moon more accurately .
The long - term error of the formula is approximately :
1 cy seconds in TT , and 11 cy seconds in UT
( cy is centuries since 2000 ; see section Explanation of the formulae for details . )
EXPLANATION OF THE FORMULA Section::::Explanation of the formula .
The moment of mean conjunction can easily be computed from an expression for the mean ecliptical longitude of the Moon minus the mean ecliptical longitude of the Sun ( Delauney parameter D ) .
Jean Meeus gave formulae to compute this in his Astronomical Formulae for Calculators based on the ephemerides of Brown and Newcomb ( ca . 1900 ) ; and in his 1st edition of Astronomical Algorithms based on the ELP2000 - 85 ( the 2nd edition uses ELP2000 - 82 with improved expressions from Chapront et al .
in 1998 ) .
These are now outdated :
Chapront et al .
( 2002 ) published improved parameters .
Also Meeus 's formula uses a fractional variable to allow computation of the four main phases , and uses a second variable for the secular terms .
For the convenience of the reader , the formula given above is based on Chapront 's latest parameters and expressed with a single integer variable , and the following additional terms have been added : constant term : * Like Meeus , apply the constant terms of the aberration of light for the Sun 's motion and light - time correction for the Moon to obtain the apparent difference in ecliptical longitudes : *
For UT : at 1 January 2000 , ΔT (= TT − UT ) was +63.83 s ; hence the correction for the clock time UT = TT − ΔT of the conjunction is : quadratic term : *
In ELP2000–85 ( see Chapront et alii 1988 ) , D has a quadratic term of −5.8681"T ; expressed in lunations N , this yields a correction of +87.403N days to the time of conjunction .
The term includes a tidal contribution of 0.5×(−23.8946 " /cy ) .
The most current estimate from Lunar Laser Ranging for the acceleration is ( see Chapront et alii 2002 ) : ( −25.858 ±0.003)"/cy .
Therefore , the new quadratic term of D is = -6.8498"T.
Indeed , the polynomial provided by Chapront et alii ( 2002 ) provides the same value ( their Table 4 ) .
This translates to a correction of +14.622N days to the time of conjunction ; the quadratic term now is : *
For UT : analysis of historical observations shows that ΔT has a long - term increase of +31 s / cy .
Converted to days and lunations , the correction from ET to UT becomes : The theoretical tidal contribution to ΔT is about +42 s / cy the smaller observed value is thought to be mostly due to changes in the shape of the Earth .
Because the discrepancy is not fully explained , uncertainty of our prediction of UT ( rotation angle of the Earth ) may be as large as the difference between these values : 11 s / cy .
The error in the position of the Moon itself is only maybe 0.5"/cy , or ( because the apparent mean angular velocity of the Moon is about 0.5"/s ) , 1 s / cy in the time of conjunction with the Sun .
LUNATION NUMBER Section::::Lunation Number .
The Lunation Number or Lunation Cycle is a number given to each lunation beginning from a certain one in history .
Several conventions are in use .
The most commonly used is the Brown Lunation Number ( BLN ) , which defines lunation 1 as beginning at the first new moon of 1923 , the year when Ernest William Brown 's lunar theory was introduced in the major national astronomical almanacs .
Lunation 1 occurred at approximately 02:41 UTC , January 17 , 1923 .
New moons occur on Julian Dates formula_3 , with the given uncertainty due to varying torques from the sun .
Another increasingly popular lunation number ( simply called the Lunation Number ) , introduced by Jean Meeus , defines lunation 0 as beginning on the first new moon of 2000 ( this occurred at approximately 18:14 UTC , January 6 , 2000 ) .
The formula relating this Lunation Number with the Brown Lunation Number is : BLN = LN + 953 .
The Goldstine Lunation Number refers to the lunation numbering used by Herman Goldstine in his 1973 book New and Full Moons : 1001 B.C. to A.D. 1651 , with lunation 0 beginning on January 11 , 1001 BC , and can be calculated using GLN = LN + 37105 .
The Hebrew Lunation Number is the count of lunations in the Hebrew calendar with lunation 1 beginning on October 7 , 3761 BC .
It can be calculated using HLN = LN + 71234 .
The Islamic Lunation Number is the count of lunations in the Islamic calendar with lunation 1 as beginning on July 16 , 622 .
It can be calculated using ILN = LN + 17038 .
The Thai Lunation Number is called " มาสเกณฑ์ " ( Maasa - Kendha ) , defines lunation 0 as beginning of the SouthEast - Asian Calendar on Sunday March 22 , 638 ( Julian Calendar ) .
It can be calculated using TLN = LN + 16843 .
LUNAR CALENDARS
Section::::Lunar calendars .
In non - astronomical contexts , new moon refers to the first visible crescent of the Moon , after conjunction with the Sun .
This takes place over the western horizon in a brief period between sunset and moonset , and therefore the precise time and even the date of the appearance of the new moon by this definition will be influenced by the geographical location of the observer .
The astronomical new moon , sometimes known as the dark moon to avoid confusion , occurs by definition at the moment of conjunction in ecliptical longitude with the Sun , when the Moon is invisible from the Earth .
This moment is unique and does not depend on location , and in certain circumstances it coincides with a solar eclipse .
In the above meaning , the first crescent marks the beginning of the month in the Islamic calendar , and in some lunisolar calendars such as the Hebrew calendar .
In the Chinese calendar , the beginning of the month is marked by the dark moon .
The new moon is also important in astrology , as is the full moon .
HINDU CALENDAR Section::::Hindu calendar .
The new moon is significant in the Hindu calendar .
People generally wait for the new moon to begin projects , as the waxing period of the moon is considered to be favorable for new work .
There are fifteen moon dates for each of the waxing and waning periods .
These fifteen dates divided evenly into five categories : Nanda , Bhadra ' , Jaya , Rikta , and Purna " , which are cycled through in that order .
Nanda dates are considered to be favorable for auspicious works ; Bhadra dates for works related with community , social , family , friends ; and Jaya dates for dealing with conflict .
Rikta dates are considered beneficial only for works related to cruelty .
Purna dates are considered to be favorable for all work .
The first day of the Lunar Hindu calendar starts the day after the new moon ( Amavasya ) , which is considered a powerful force for good or evil .
The Hindu epic Mahabharatha states that the Kurukshetra War started this day , which was also a Tuesday
( Mangalvaar , day of the week named after Mars ) .
ISLAMIC CALENDAR Section::::Islamic calendar .
The Islamic calendar has retained an observational definition of the new moon , marking the new month when the first crescent moon is actually seen , and making it impossible to be certain in advance of when a specific month will begin ( in particular , the exact date on which Ramadan will begin is not known in advance ) .
In Saudi Arabia , the new King Abdullah Centre for Crescent Observations and Astronomy in Mecca has a clock for addressing this as an international scientific project .
In Pakistan , there is a " Central Ruet - e - Hilal Committee " whose head is Mufti Muneeb - ur - Rehman , assisted by 150 observatories of the Pakistan Meteorological Department , which announces the sighting of the new moon .
Since its creation in 1974 , the status of the Central Ruet - e - Hilal Committee has been controversial as it refused the " Witnesses " ( Shahadats ) from other sects .
An attempt to unify Muslims on a scientifically calculated worldwide calendar was adopted by both the Fiqh Council of North America and the European Council for Fatwa and Research in 2007 .
The new calculation requires that conjunction must occur before sunset in Mecca , Saudi Arabia , and that , in the same evening , moonset must take place after sunset .
These can be precisely calculated and therefore a unified calendar is imminent if it becomes adopted worldwide .
CHINESE CALENDAR
Section::::Chinese calendar .
The new moon is the beginning of the month in the Chinese calendar .
Some Buddhist Chinese keep a vegetarian diet on the new moon and full moon each month .
JEWISH CALENDAR Section::::Jewish calendar .
The new moon signifies the start of every Jewish month , and is considered an important date and minor holiday in the Hebrew calendar .
The modern form of the calendar is a rule - based lunisolar calendar , akin to the Chinese calendar , measuring months defined in lunar cycles as well as years measured in solar cycles , and distinct from the purely lunar Islamic calendar and the predominantly solar Gregorian calendar .
The Jewish calendar is calculated based on mathematical rules designed to ensure that festivals are observed in their traditional season .
Passover always falls in the springtime .
This fixed lunisolar calendar follows rules introduced by Hillel II and refined until the ninth century This calculation makes use of a mean lunation length used by Ptolemy and handed down from Babylonians , which is still very accurate : ca .
29.530594 days vs. a present value ( see ) of 29.530589 days .
This difference of only 0.0000005 , or five millionths of a day , adds up to about only four hours since Babylonian times .
The messianic Pentecostal group , the New Israelites of Peru , keeps the new moon as a Sabbath of rest .
As an evangelical church , it follows the Bible 's teachings that God sanctified the seventh - day Sabbath , and the new moons in addition to it .
See Ezekiel 46:1 , 3 .
No work may be done from dusk until dusk , and the services run for 11 hours , although a large number spend 24 hours within the gates of the temples , sleeping and singing praises throughout the night .
BAHÁ'Í CALENDAR Section::::Bahá'í
calendar .
In the Bahá'í Faith , effective from 2015 onwards , the " Twin Holy Birthdays " , referring to two successive holy days in the Bahá'í calendar ( the birth of the Báb and the birth of Bahá'u'lláh ) , will be observed on the first and the second day following the occurrence of the eighth new moon after Naw - Rúz ( Bahá'í New Year ) , as determined in advance by astronomical tables using Tehran as the point of reference .
This will result in the observance of the Twin Birthdays moving , year to year , from mid - October to mid - November according to the Gregorian calendar .
SEE ALSO
* Solar eclipse
* Dark moon * Black moon
* Blue moon
*
Hilal
* Lunar phase *
Wet moon
* Lilith ( hypothetical moon )
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Moon Watch site of the Nautical Almanac Office