MAC ADDRESS A media access control address ( MAC address ) of a device is a unique identifier assigned to a network interface controller ( NIC ) for communications at the data link layer of a network segment .
MAC addresses are used as a network address for most IEEE 802 network technologies , including Ethernet , Wi - Fi and Bluetooth .
In this context , MAC addresses are used in the medium access control protocol sublayer .
As typically represented , MAC addresses are recognizable as six groups of two hexadecimal digits , separated by hyphens , colons , or no separator ( see Notational conventions below ) .
A MAC may be referred to as the burned - in address ( BIA ) .
It may also be known as an Ethernet hardware address ( EHA ) , hardware address or physical address ( not to be confused with a memory physical address ) .
A network node may have multiple NICs and each NIC must have a unique MAC address .
Sophisticated network equipment such as a multilayer switch or router may require one or more permanently assigned MAC addresses .
MAC addresses are most often assigned by the manufacturer of a NIC and are stored in its hardware , such as the card 's read - only memory or some other firmware mechanism .
A MAC address may include the manufacturer 's organizationally unique identifier ( OUI ) .
MAC addresses are formed according to the rules of one of three numbering name spaces managed by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers ( IEEE ) :
EUI-48 ( it replaces the obsolete term MAC-48 ) and EUI-64 .
EUI is an abbreviation for Extended Unique Identifier .
ADDRESS DETAILS
Section::::Address details .
The original IEEE 802 MAC address comes from the original Xerox Network Systems Ethernet addressing scheme .
This 48-bit address space contains potentially 2 or 281,474,976,710,656 possible MAC addresses .
The IEEE manages allocation of MAC addresses , originally known as MAC-48 and which it now refers to as EUI-48 identifiers .
The IEEE has a target lifetime of 100 years ( until 2080 ) for applications using EUI-48 space and restricts applications accordingly .
The IEEE encourages adoption of the more plentiful EUI-64 for non - Ethernet applications .
The distinction between EUI-48 and MAC-48 identifiers is purely nominal : MAC-48 was used to address hardware interfaces within existing 802-based networking applications ; EUI-48 is also used to identify other devices and software , for example
Bluetooth .
The IEEE now considers the label MAC-48 to be an obsolete term .
EUI-48 should be used for this purpose .
In addition , the EUI-64 numbering system encompasses both MAC-48 and EUI-48 identifiers by a simple translation mechanism , but now it is deprecated .
To convert a MAC-48 into an EUI-64 , copy the organizationally unique identifier ( OUI ) , append the two octets ( though now as MAC-48 is deprecated , will never be used ) and then copy the organization - specified extension identifier .
To convert an EUI-48 into an EUI-64 , the same process is used , but the sequence inserted is .
In both cases , the process can be trivially reversed when necessary .
Organizations issuing EUI-64s are cautioned against issuing identifiers that could be confused with these forms .
IPv6 — one of the most prominent standards that uses a Modified EUI-64 — treats
MAC-48 as EUI-48 instead ( as it is chosen from the same address pool ) and toggles the U / L bit ( as this makes it easier to type locally assigned IPv6 addresses based on the Modified EUI-64 ) .
This results in extending MAC addresses ( such as IEEE 802 MAC address ) to Modified EUI-64 using only ( and never ) and with the U / L bit inverted .
An Individual Address Block is an inactive registry activity which has been replaced by the MA - S ( MA - S was previously named OUI-36 ) registry product as of January 1 , 2014 .
The IAB uses a OUI from MA - L ( MA - L registry was previously named OUI registry , the term OUI is still in use , but not for calling a registry ) belonging to the IEEE Registration Authority , concatenated with 12 additional IEEE - provided bits ( for a total of 36 bits ) , leaving only 12 bits for the IAB owner to assign to their ( up to 4096 ) individual devices .
An IAB is ideal for organizations requiring not more than 4096 unique 48-bit numbers ( EUI-48 ) .
Unlike an OUI , which allows the assignee to assign values in various different number spaces ( for example , EUI-48 , EUI-64 , and the various context - dependent identifier number spaces ) , the Individual Address Block could only be used to assign EUI-48 identifiers .
All other potential uses based on the OUI from which the IABs are allocated are reserved , and remain the property of the IEEE Registration Authority .
It should also be noted that , between 2007 and September 2012 , the OUI value 00:50 : C2 was used for IAB assignments .
After September 2012 , the value 40 : D8:55 was used .
The owners of an already assigned IAB may continue to use the assignment .
There is another registry which is called MA - M ( MAC Addresses - Medium ) .
The MA - M assignment block provides both 2 EUI-48 identifiers and 2 EUI-64 identifiers ( that means first 28 bits are IEEE assigned bits ) .
The first 24-bits of the assigned MA - M block are an OUI assigned to IEEE that will not be reassigned .
UNIVERSAL VS .
LOCAL Section::::Universal vs. local .
Addresses can either be universally administered addresses ( UAA ) or
locally administered addresses ( LAA ) .
A universally administered address is uniquely assigned to a device by its manufacturer .
The first three octets ( in transmission order ) identify the organization that issued the identifier and are known as the organizationally unique identifier ( OUI ) .
The remainder of the address ( three octets for EUI-48 or five for EUI-64 ) are assigned by that organization in nearly any manner they please , subject to the constraint of uniqueness .
A locally administered address is assigned to a device by a network administrator , overriding the burned - in address .
Universally administered and locally administered addresses are distinguished by setting the second - least - significant bit of the first octet of the address .
This bit is also referred to as the U / L bit , short for Universal / Local , which identifies how the address is administered .
If the bit is 0 , the address is universally administered .
If it is 1 , the address is locally administered .
In the example address the first octet is 06 ( hex ) , the binary form of which is 00000110 , where the second - least - significant bit is 1 .
Therefore , it is a locally administered address .
Another example that uses locally administered addresses is the DECnet protocol .
The MAC address of the Ethernet interface is changed by the DECnet software to be where reflects the DECnet network address xx.yy of the host .
This eliminates the need for an address resolution protocol since the MAC address for any DECnet host can be simply determined .
UNICAST VS .
MULTICAST Section::::Unicast vs. multicast .
When the least significant bit of an address 's first octet is 0 ( zero ) , the frame is meant to reach only one receiving NIC .
This type of transmission is called unicast .
A unicast frame is transmitted to all nodes within the collision domain .
In a modern wired setting the collision domain usually is the length of the Ethernet cable between two network cards .
In a wireless setting , the collision domain is all receivers that can detect a given wireless signal .
If a switch does not know which port leads to a given MAC address , the switch will forward a unicast frame to all of its ports ( except the originating port ) , an action known as unicast flood .
Only the node with the matching hardware MAC address will accept the frame ; network frames with non - matching MAC - addresses are ignored , unless the device is in promiscuous mode .
If the least significant bit of the first octet is set to 1 , the frame will still be sent only once ; however , NICs will choose to accept it based on criteria other than the matching of a MAC address : for example , based on a configurable list of accepted multicast MAC addresses .
This is called multicast addressing .
The IEEE has built in several special address types to allow more than one network interface card to be addressed at one time :
* Packets sent to the broadcast address , all one bits , are received by all stations on a local area network .
In hexadecimal the broadcast address would be .
A broadcast frame is flooded and is forwarded to and accepted by all other nodes .
* Packets sent to a multicast address are received by all stations on a LAN that have been configured to receive packets sent to that address .
* Functional addresses identify one or more Token Ring NICs that provide a particular service , defined in IEEE 802.5 .
These are all examples of group addresses , as opposed to individual addresses ; the least significant bit of the first octet of a MAC address distinguishes individual addresses from group addresses .
That bit is set to 0 in individual addresses and set to 1 in group addresses .
Group addresses , like individual addresses , can be universally administered or locally administered .
APPLICATIONS Section::::Applications .
The following network technologies use the EUI-48 identifier format : * Ethernet * 802.11 wireless networks ( Wi - Fi )
* Bluetooth
* IEEE 802.5 token ring * most other IEEE 802 networks * Fiber Distributed Data Interface ( FDDI ) * Asynchronous Transfer Mode ( ATM ) , switched virtual connections only , as part of an NSAP address * Fibre Channel and Serial Attached SCSI ( as part of a World Wide Name ) * The ITU - T G.hn standard , which provides a way to create a high - speed ( up to 1 gigabit / s ) local area network using existing home wiring ( power lines , phone lines and coaxial cables ) .
The G.hn Application Protocol Convergence ( APC ) layer accepts Ethernet frames that use the EUI-48 format and encapsulates them into G.hn Medium Access Control Service Data Units ( MSDUs ) .
Every device that connects to an IEEE 802 network ( such as Ethernet and WiFi ) has a EUI-48 address .
Common networked consumer devices such as PCs , smartphones and tablet computers use EUI-48 addresses .
EUI-64 identifiers are used in :
* IEEE 1394
( FireWire ) *
IPv6
( Modified EUI-64 as the least - significant 64 bits of a unicast network address or link - local address when stateless address autoconfiguration is used . )
* ZigBee / 802.15.4 / 6LoWPAN wireless personal - area networks USAGE IN HOSTS Section::::Usage in hosts .
On broadcast networks , such as Ethernet , the MAC address is expected to uniquely identify each node on that segment and allows frames to be marked for specific hosts .
It thus forms the basis of most of the link layer ( OSI Layer 2 ) networking upon which upper layer protocols rely to produce complex , functioning networks .
Although intended to be a permanent and globally unique identification , it is possible to change the MAC address on most modern hardware .
Changing MAC addresses is necessary in network virtualization .
It can also be used in the process of exploiting security vulnerabilities .
This is called MAC spoofing .
In IP networks , the MAC address of an interface can be queried given the IP address using the Address Resolution Protocol ( ARP ) for Internet Protocol Version 4 ( IPv4 ) or the Neighbor Discovery Protocol ( NDP ) for IPv6 .
In this way , ARP or NDP is used to relate IP addresses ( OSI layer 3 ) to Ethernet MAC addresses ( OSI layer 2 ) .
A MAC address is like a social security number which remains unchanged for a person 's life time ( here , the device ) , while an IP address is like a postal code which can be changed .
SPYING
Section::::Spying .
According to Edward Snowden , the US National Security Agency has a system that tracks the movements of everyone in a city by monitoring the MAC addresses of their electronic devices .
As a result of users being trackable by their devices ' MAC addresses , Apple has started using random MAC addresses in their iOS line of devices while scanning for networks .
Other vendors quickly followed : MAC address randomization during scanning was added in Android starting from version 6.0 , Windows 10 , and Linux kernel 3.18 .
The actual implementations of the MAC address randomization technique vary largely in different devices .
Moreover , various flaws and shortcomings in these implementations may allow an attacker to track a device even if its MAC address is changed , for instance its probe requests ' other elements , or their timing .
If random MAC addresses are not used , researchers have confirmed that it is possible to link a real identity to a particular wireless MAC address .
Many network interfaces ( including wireless ones ) support changing their MAC address .
The configuration is specific to the operating system .
On most Unix - like systems , the codice_1 command may be used to add and remove " link " ( Ethernet MAC family ) address aliases .
For instance , the " active " codice_2 directive may then be used on NetBSD to specify which of the attached addresses to activate .
Hence , various configuration scripts and utilities allow to randomize the MAC address at boot or network connection time .
Using wireless access points in SSID - hidden mode ( see network cloaking ) , a mobile wireless device may not only disclose its own MAC address
when traveling , but even the MAC addresses associated to SSIDs the device has already connected to , if they are configured to send these as part of probe request packets .
Alternative modes to prevent this include configuring access points to be either in beacon - broadcasting mode , or probe - response with SSID mode .
In these modes , probe requests may be unnecessary , or sent in broadcast mode without disclosing the identity of previously - known networks .
NOTATIONAL CONVENTIONS
Section::::Notational conventions .
The standard ( IEEE 802 ) format for printing EUI-48 addresses in human - friendly form is six groups of two hexadecimal digits , separated by hyphens ( ) in transmission order ( e.g. ) .
This form is also commonly used for EUI-64 ( e.g. ) .
Other conventions include six groups of two hexadecimal digits separated by colons ( ) ( e.g. ) , and three groups of four hexadecimal digits separated by dots ( ) ( e.g. ) ; again in transmission order .
BIT - REVERSED
NOTATION Section::::Bit - reversed notation .
The standard notation , also called canonical format , for MAC addresses is written in transmission order with the least significant bit of each byte transmitted first , and is used in the output of the codice_2 , codice_4 , and codice_5 commands , for example .
However , since IEEE 802.3 ( Ethernet ) and IEEE 802.4 ( Token Bus ) send the bytes ( octets ) over the wire , left - to - right , with least significant bit in each byte first , while IEEE 802.5 ( Token Ring ) and IEEE 802.6 ( FDDI ) send the bytes over the wire with the most significant bit first , confusion may arise when an address in the latter scenario is represented with bits reversed from the canonical representation .
For example , an address in canonical form would be transmitted over the wire as bits codice_6 in the standard transmission order ( least significant bit first ) .
But for Token Ring networks , it would be transmitted as bits codice_7 in most - significant - bit first order .
The latter might be incorrectly displayed as .
This is referred to as bit - reversed order , non - canonical form , MSB format , IBM format , or Token Ring format , as explained in .
SEE ALSO
* Hot Standby Router Protocol
* MAC filtering
* Network management
* Sleep Proxy Service , which may spoof another device 's MAC address during certain periods
* Transparent bridging * Virtual Router Redundancy Protocol
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * IEEE Registration Authority Tutorials * IEEE Registration Authority -
Frequently Asked Questions
* IEEE Public OUI and Company ID , etc .
Assignment lookup
* IEEE Public OUI / MA - L list * IEEE Public OUI-28 / MA - M list
* IEEE Public OUI-36 / MA - S list
* IEEE Public IAB list
* IEEE IAB and OUI MAC Address Lookup Database and API
* RFC 7042 .
IANA Considerations and IETF Protocol and Documentation Usage for IEEE 802 Parameters
* IANA list of Ethernet Numbers * Wireshark 's OUI Lookup Tool and MAC address list