PER CAPITA INCOME Per capita income ( PCI ) or average income measures
the average income earned per person in a given area ( city , region , country , etc . )
in a specified year .
It is calculated by dividing the area 's total income by its total population .
AS
A MEASURE OF PROSPERITY Section::::As a measure of prosperity .
Per capita income is national income / total population .
Per capita income is often used to measure an area 's average income .
This is used to see the wealth of the population with those of others .
Per capita income is often used to measure a country 's standard of living .
It is usually expressed in terms of a commonly used international currency such as the euro or United States dollar , and is useful because it is widely known , is easily calculable from readily available gross domestic product ( GDP ) and population estimates , and produces a useful statistic for comparison of wealth between sovereign territories .
This helps to ascertain a country 's development status .
It is one of the three measures for calculating the Human Development Index of a country .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , it is defined by the U.S. Census Bureau as the following : " Per capita income is the mean money income received in the past 12 months computed for every man , woman , and child in a geographic area . "
( Children are counted if they are at least 15 years old . )
CRITICS Section::::Critics .
Critics claim that per capita income has several weaknesses in measuring prosperity :
* Comparisons of per capita income over time need to consider inflation .
Without adjusting for inflation , figures tend to overstate the effects of economic growth .
* International comparisons can be distorted by cost of living differences not reflected in exchange rates .
Where the objective is to compare living standards between countries , adjusting for differences in purchasing power parity will more accurately reflect what people are actually able to buy with their money .
*
It is a mean value and does not reflect income distribution .
If a country 's income distribution is skewed , a small wealthy class can increase per capita income substantially while the majority of the population has no change in income .
In this respect , median income is more useful when measuring of prosperity than per capita income , as it is less influenced by outliers .
* Non - monetary activity , such as barter or services provided within the family , is usually not counted .
The importance of these services varies widely among economies .
* Per capita income does not consider whether income is invested in factors likely to improve the area 's development , such as health , education , or infrastructure .
SEE ALSO
* List of countries by average wage
* List of countries by GDP ( nominal ) per capita — GDP at market or government official exchange rates per inhabitant * List of countries by GDP ( PPP ) per capita — GDP calculated at purchasing power parity ( PPP ) exchange per inhabitant * List of countries by GNI ( nominal , Atlas method ) per capita
* List of countries by GNI ( PPP ) per capita
* List of countries by income equality
* Total personal income REFERENCES