RIFT VALLEY FEVER
Rift Valley fever ( RVF ) is a viral disease that can cause mild to severe symptoms .
The mild symptoms may include : fever , muscle pains , and headaches which often last for up to a week .
The severe symptoms may include : loss of sight beginning three weeks after the infection , infections of the brain causing severe headaches and confusion , and bleeding together with liver problems which may occur within the first few days .
Those who have bleeding have a chance of death as high as 50 % .
The disease is caused by the RVF virus , which is of the Phlebovirus type .
It is spread by either touching infected animal blood , breathing in the air around an infected animal being butchered , drinking raw milk from an infected animal , or the bite of infected mosquitoes .
Animals such as cows , sheep , goats , and camels may be affected .
In these animals it is spread mostly by mosquitoes .
It does not appear that one person can infect another person .
The disease is diagnosed by finding antibodies against the virus or the virus itself in the blood .
Prevention of the disease in humans is accomplished by vaccinating animals against the disease .
This must be done before an outbreak occurs because if it is done during an outbreak it may worsen the situation .
Stopping the movement of animals during an outbreak may also be useful , as may decreasing mosquito numbers and avoiding their bites .
There is a human vaccine ; however , as of 2010 it is not widely available .
There is no specific treatment and medical efforts are supportive .
Outbreaks of the disease have only occurred in Africa and Arabia .
Outbreaks usually occur during periods of increased rain which increase the number of mosquitoes .
The disease was first reported among livestock in Rift Valley of Kenya in the early 1900s , and the virus was first isolated in 1931 .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
In humans , the virus can cause several syndromes .
Usually , sufferers have either no symptoms or only a mild illness with fever , headache , muscle pains , and liver abnormalities .
In a small percentage of cases ( < 2 % ) , the illness can progress to hemorrhagic fever syndrome , meningoencephalitis ( inflammation of the brain and tissues lining the brain ) , or affect the eye .
Patients who become ill usually experience fever , generalised weakness , back pain , dizziness , and weight loss at the onset of the illness .
Typically , people recover within two to seven days after onset .
About 1 % of people with the disease die of it .
In livestock , the fatality level is significantly higher .
Pregnant livestock infected with RVF abort virtually 100 % of foetuses .
An epizootic ( animal disease epidemic ) of RVF is usually first indicated by a wave of unexplained abortions .
Other signs in livestock include vomiting and diarrhoea , respiratory disease , fever , lethargy , anorexia and sudden death in young animals .
CAUSE VIROLOGY Section::::Cause .
Section::::Virology .
The virus belongs to the Bunyavirales order .
This is a family of enveloped negative single stranded RNA viruses .
All Bunyaviruses have an outer lipid envelope with two glycoproteins — G(N ) and G(C)—required for cell entry .
They deliver their genome into the host - cell cytoplasm by fusing their envelope with an endosomal membrane .
The virus ' G(C ) protein has a class II membrane fusion protein architecture similar to that found in flaviviruses and alphaviruses .
This structural similarity suggests that there may be a common origin for these viral families .
The virus ' 11.5 kb tripartite genome is composed of single - stranded RNA .
As a Phlebovirus , it has an ambisense genome .
Its L and M segments are negative - sense , but its S segment is ambisense .
These three genome segments code for six major proteins :
L protein ( viral polymerase ) , the two glycoproteins G(N ) and G(C ) , the nucleocapsid N protein , and the nonstructural NSs and NSm proteins . TRANSMISSION Section::::Transmission .
The virus is transmitted through mosquito vectors , as well as through contact with the tissue of infected animals .
Two species — Culex tritaeniorhynchus and Aedes vexans — are known to transmit the virus .
Other potential vectors include Aedes caspius , Aedes mcintosh , Aedes ochraceus , Culex pipiens , Culex antennatus , Culex perexiguus , Culex zombaensis and Culex quinquefasciatus .
Contact with infected tissue is considered to be the main source of human infections .
The virus has been isolated from two bat species : the Peter 's epauletted fruit bat ( Micropteropus pusillus ) and the aba roundleaf bat ( Hipposideros abae ) , which are believed to be reservoirs for the virus .
PATHOGENESIS Section::::Pathogenesis .
Although many components of the RVFV 's RNA play an important role in the virus ' pathology , the nonstructural protein encoded on the S segment ( NSs ) is the only component that has been found to directly affect the host .
NSs is hostile and combative against the hosts interferon ( IFNs ) antiviral response .
IFNs are essential in order for the immune system to fight off viral infections in a host .
This inhibitory mechanism is believed to be due to a number of reasons , the first being , competitive inhibition of the formation of the transcription factor .
On this transcription factor , NSs interacts with and binds to a subunit that is needed for RNA polymerase I and II .
This interaction cause competitive inhibition with another transcription factor component and prevents the assembly process of the transcription factor complex , which results in the suppression of the host antiviral response .
Transcription suppression is believed to be another mechanism of this inhibitory process .
This occurs when an area of NSs interacts with and binds to the host 's protein , SAP30 and forms a complex .
This complex causes histone acetylation to regress , which is needed for transcriptional activation of the IFN promoter .
This causes IFN expression to be obstructed .
Lastly , NSs has also been known to affect regular activity of double - stranded RNA - dependent protein kinase R ..
This protein is involved in cellular antiviral responses in the host .
When RVFV is able to enter the hosts DNA , NSs forms a filamentous structure in the nucleus .
This allows the virus to interact with specific areas of the hosts DNA that relates to segregation defects and induction of chromosome continuity .
This increases host infectivity and decreases the host 's antiviral response .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Diagnosis relies on viral isolation from tissues , or serological testing with an ELISA .
Other methods of diagnosis include Nucleic Acid Testing ( NAT ) , cell culture , and IgM antibody assays .
As of September 2016 , the Kenya Medical Research Institute ( KEMRI ) has developed a product called Immunoline , designed to diagnose the disease in humans much faster than in previous methods .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
A person 's chances of becoming infected can be reduced by taking measures to decrease contact with blood , body fluids , or tissues of infected animals and protection against mosquitoes and other bloodsucking insects .
Use of mosquito repellents and bed nets are two effective methods .
For persons working with animals in RVF - endemic areas , wearing protective equipment to avoid any exposure to blood or tissues of animals that may potentially be infected is an important protective measure .
Potentially , establishing environmental monitoring and case surveillance systems may aid in the prediction and control of future RVF outbreaks .
No vaccines are currently available for humans .
Different types of vaccines for veterinary use are available .
The killed vaccines are not practical in routine animal field vaccination because of the need of multiple injections .
Live vaccines require a single injection but are known to cause birth defects and abortions in sheep and induce only low - level protection in cattle .
The live - attenuated vaccine , MP-12 , has demonstrated promising results in laboratory trials in domesticated animals , but more research is needed before the vaccine can be used in the field .
The live - attenuated clone 13 vaccine was recently registered and used in South Africa .
Alternative vaccines using molecular recombinant constructs are in development and show promising results .
A vaccine has been conditionally approved for use in animals in the US .
It has been shown that knockout of the NSs and NSm nonstructural proteins of this virus produces an effective vaccine in sheep as well .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
RVF outbreaks occur across sub - Saharan Africa , with outbreaks occurring elsewhere infrequently .
In Egypt in 1977–78 , an estimated 200,000 people were infected and there were at least 594 deaths .
Outbreaks of this disease usually correspond with the warm phases of the EI Niño / Southern Oscillation .
During this time there is an increase in rainfall , flooding and greenness of vegetation index , which leads to an increase in mosquito vectors .
RVFV can be transmitted vertically in mosquitos , meaning that the virus can be passed from the mother to her offspring .
During dry conditions , the virus can remain viable for a number of years in the egg .
Mosquitos lay their eggs in water , where they eventually hatch .
As water is essential for mosquito eggs to hatch , rainfall and flooding cause an increase in the mosquito population and an increased potential for the virus .
2006/07 OUTBREAK IN KENYA AND SOMALIA Section::::2006/07 outbreak in Kenya and Somalia .
In November 2006 , a Rift Valley fever outbreak started in Kenya .
The cases were from the North Eastern Province and Coast Province of Kenya , which had received heavy rain , causing floods and creating breeding grounds for mosquitoes , which spread the virus of the fever from infected livestock to humans .
By 7 January 2007 , about 75 people had died and another 183 were infected .
The outbreak forced the closure of livestock markets in the North Eastern Province , affecting the economy of the region .
The outbreak was subsequently reported to have moved into Maragua and Kirinyaga districts of Central Province of Kenya .
On 20 January 2007 , the outbreak was reported to have crossed into Somalia from Kenya and killed 14 people in the Lower Jubba region .
As of 23 January 2007 , cases had started to crop up at the Kenyan capital , Nairobi .
Businesses were suffering large losses , as customers were shunning the common meat joints for the popular nyama choma ( roast meat ) , as it was believed to be spreading the fever .
In December 2006 and again in January 2007 , Taiwan International Health Action ( Taiwan IHA ) began operating missions in Kenya consisting of medical experts assisting in training laboratory and health facility personnel , and included donations of supplies , such as mosquito sprays .
The United States Centers for Disease Control also set up an assistance mission and laboratory in Kenya .
By the end of January , 2007 , some 148 people had died since the outbreak began in December .
As at 14 March 2007 , the Kenyan government declared RVF as having diminished drastically after spending an estimated 2.5 million in vaccine and deployment costs .
It also lifted the ban on cattle movement in the affected areas .
The final death toll in this outbreak was more than 150 people .
2007 OUTBREAK IN SUDAN
Section::::2007 outbreak in Sudan .
As of 2 November 2007 , 125 cases , including 60 deaths , had been reported from more than 10 localities of White Nile , Sinnar , and Gezira states in Sudan .
Young adult males were predominantly affected .
More than 25 human samples have been found positive for RVF by PCR or ELISA .
2010
SOUTH AFRICA OUTBREAK Section::::2010
South Africa outbreak .
As of 8 April 2010 , the Ministry of Health South Africa had reported 87 human cases infected with Rift Valley fever ( RVF ) , including two deaths in Free State , Eastern Cape and Northern Cape provinces .
Most of these cases reported direct contact with RVFV - infected livestock and or were linked to farms with confirmed animal cases of RVF .
The human cases were among farmers , veterinarians and farm workers .
All cases were confirmed with RVF by test conducted at the National Institute of Communicable Diseases ( NICD ) in Johannesburg , South Africa .
An outbreak of Rift Valley fever virus ( RVFV ) infection affected sheep , goats , cattle and wildlife on farms within Free State , Eastern Cape , Northern Cape , Western Cape , Mpumalanga , North West , and Gauteng provinces .
As of 29 March 2010 , about 78 farms reported laboratory - confirmed animal cases , with extensive livestock deaths .
Before the 2010 outbreak , sporadic cases of RVFV infection in animals had been documented in South Africa .
The last major outbreak of the disease in humans occurred between 1974 and 1976 , where an estimated 10,000 to 20,000 cases were recorded .
2016 OUTBREAK IN UGANDA Section::::2016
outbreak in Uganda .
On March 2016 , a male butcher from Kabale District in western Uganda reported to a local hospital with symptoms of headache , fever , fatigue and bleeding , subsequently testing positive for Rift Valley Fever .
CDC sent epidemiologists to the District to assist the Ugandan Ministry of Health with the epidemiologic investigation of this small , localized outbreak of 3 confirmed and 2 probable cases .
Working with the Uganda Virus Research Institute ( UVRI ) and the Uganda Ministry of Health , the CDC team conducted a serologic study in animals and humans and also assessed residents ' knowledge , attitudes , and practices related to Rift Valley Fever .
The team collected samples from cows , goats and sheep , and interviewed and tested 650 district residents .
A coordinated educational campaign targeting the general population , farmers , herders , and butchers was initiated and informational posters were created targeting these groups .
2018 OUTBREAK IN KENYA Section::::2018 outbreak in Kenya .
As of 16 June 2018 , an outbreak of Rift Valley fever is ongoing in northern Kenya , with 26 suspected human cases including 6 deaths in Wajir County ( 24 cases ) and Marsabit County ( 2 cases ) ; 7 cases have been confirmed .
There have also been numerous deaths and abortions in camels , goats and other livestock across a wider area of the country .
BIOLOGICAL WEAPON
Section::::Biological weapon .
Rift Valley fever was one of more than a dozen agents that the United States researched as potential biological weapons before the nation suspended its biological weapons program in 1969 .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
The disease is one of several identified by WHO as a likely cause of a future epidemic in a new plan developed after the Ebola epidemic for urgent research and development toward new diagnostic tests , vaccines and medicines .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * CDC RVF Information Page
* Rift Valley Fever disease card at OIE