POWER ( PHYSICS )
In physics , power is the rate of doing work or transferring heat , the amount of energy transferred or converted per unit time .
Having no direction , it is a scalar quantity .
In the International System of Units , the unit of power is the joule per second ( J / s ) , known as the watt in honour of James Watt , the eighteenth - century developer of the condenser steam engine .
Another common and traditional measure is horsepower ( comparing to the power of a horse ) .
Being the rate of work , the equation for power can be written :
As a physical concept , power requires both a change in the physical system and a specified time in which the change occurs .
This is distinct from the concept of work , which is only measured in terms of a net change in the state of the physical system .
The same amount of work is done when carrying a load up a flight of stairs whether the person carrying it walks or runs , but more power is needed for running because the work is done in a shorter amount of time .
The output power of an electric motor is the product of the torque that the motor generates and the angular velocity of its output shaft .
The power involved in moving a vehicle is the product of the traction force of the wheels and the velocity of the vehicle .
The rate at which a light bulb converts electrical energy into light and heat is measured in watts — the higher the wattage , the more power , or equivalently the more electrical energy is used per unit time .
UNITS Section::::Units .
The dimension of power is energy divided by time .
The SI unit of power is the watt ( W ) , which is equal to one joule per second .
Other units of power include ergs per second ( erg / s ) , horsepower ( hp ) , metric horsepower ( Pferdestärke ( PS ) or cheval vapeur ( CV ) ) , and foot - pounds per minute .
One horsepower is equivalent to 33,000 foot - pounds per minute , or the power required to lift 550 pounds by one foot in one second , and is equivalent to about 746 watts .
Other units include dBm , a relative logarithmic measure with 1 milliwatt as reference ; food calories per hour ( often referred to as kilocalories per hour ) ; BTU per hour ( BTU / h ) ; and tons of refrigeration ( 12,000 BTU / h ) .
EQUATIONS FOR POWER Section::::Equations for power .
Power , as a function of time , is the rate at which work is done , so can be expressed by this equation : where P is power ,
W is work , and t is time .
Because work is a force F applied over a distance r , for a constant force , power can be rewritten as : AVERAGE POWER
Section::::Average power .
As a simple example , burning one kilogram of coal releases much more energy than does detonating a kilogram of TNT , but because the TNT reaction releases energy much more quickly , it delivers far more power than the coal .
If ΔW is the amount of work performed during a period of time of duration
Δt , the average power P over that period is given by the formula
It is the average amount of work done or energy converted per unit of time .
The average power is often simply called " power " when the context makes it clear .
The instantaneous power is then the limiting value of the average power as the time interval
Δt approaches zero .
In the case of constant power P , the amount of work performed during a period of duration T is given by :
In the context of energy conversion , it is more customary to use the symbol E rather than W. MECHANICAL POWER Section::::Mechanical power .
Power in mechanical systems is the combination of forces and movement .
In particular , power is the product of a force on an object and the object 's velocity , or the product of a torque on a shaft and the shaft 's angular velocity .
Mechanical power is also described as the time derivative of work .
In mechanics , the work done by a force F on an object that travels along a curve C is given by the line integral : where x defines the path C and v is the velocity along this path .
If the force F is derivable from a potential ( conservative ) , then applying the gradient theorem ( and remembering that force is the negative of the gradient of the potential energy )
yields : where A and B are the beginning and end of the path along which the work was done .
The power at any point along the curve C is the time derivative In one dimension , this can be simplified to :
In rotational systems , power is the product of the torque τ and angular velocity ω , where ω measured in radians per second .
The formula_13 represents scalar product .
In fluid power systems such as hydraulic actuators , power is given by where p is pressure in pascals , or N / m and Q is volumetric flow rate in m / s in SI units .
MECHANICAL ADVANTAGE Section::::Mechanical advantage .
If a mechanical system has no losses , then the input power must equal the output power .
This provides a simple formula for the mechanical advantage of the system .
Let the input power to a device be a force F acting on a point that moves with velocity v and the output power be a force F acts on a point that moves with velocity v. If there are no losses in the system , then and the mechanical advantage of the system ( output force per input force ) is given by
The similar relationship is obtained for rotating systems , where T and ω are the torque and angular velocity of the input and T and ω are the torque and angular velocity of the output .
If there are no losses in the system , then which yields the mechanical advantage
These relations are important because they define the maximum performance of a device in terms of velocity ratios determined by its physical dimensions .
See for example gear ratios .
ELECTRICAL POWER Section::::Electrical power .
The instantaneous electrical power P delivered to a component is given by where If the component is a resistor with time - invariant voltage to current ratio , then : where is the resistance , measured in ohms .
PEAK POWER AND DUTY CYCLE
Section::::Peak power and duty cycle .
In the case of a periodic signal formula_22 of period formula_23 , like a train of identical pulses , the instantaneous power
formula_24 is also a periodic function of period formula_23 .
The peak power is simply defined by :
The peak power is not always readily measurable , however , and the measurement of the average power formula_27 is more commonly performed by an instrument .
If one defines the energy per pulse as : then the average power is : One may define the pulse length formula_30
such that formula_31 so that the ratios are equal .
These ratios are called the duty cycle of the pulse train .
RADIANT POWER
Section::::Radiant power .
Power is related to intensity at a distance formula_33 ; the power emitted by a source can be written as :
SEE ALSO
* Simple machines
* Motive power
* Orders of magnitude ( power ) * Pulsed power * Intensity — in the radiative sense , power per area * Power gain — for linear , two - port networks .
* Power density
* Signal strength * Sound power
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS