NATURAL NUMBER
In mathematics , the natural numbers are those used for counting ( as in " there are six coins on the table " ) and ordering ( as in " this is the third largest city in the country " ) .
In common mathematical terminology , words colloquially used for counting are " cardinal numbers " and words connected to ordering represent " ordinal numbers " .
Some definitions , including the standard ISO 80000 - 2 , begin the natural numbers with , corresponding to the non - negative integers , whereas others start with 1 , corresponding to the positive integers .
Texts that exclude zero from the natural numbers sometimes refer to the natural numbers together with zero as the whole numbers , but in other writings , that term is used instead for the integers ( including negative integers ) .
The natural numbers are a basis from which many other number sets may be built by extension : the integers ( Grothendieck group ) , by including ( if not yet in ) the neutral element 0 and an additive inverse ( −n ) for each nonzero natural number n ; the rational numbers , by including a multiplicative inverse ( 1 / n ) for each nonzero integer n ( and also the product of these inverses by integers ) ; the real numbers by including with the rationals the limits of ( converging )
Cauchy sequences of rationals ; the complex numbers , by including with the real numbers the unresolved square root of minus one ( and also the sums and products thereof ) ; and so on .
These chains of extensions make the natural numbers canonically embedded ( identified ) in the other number systems .
Properties of the natural numbers , such as divisibility and the distribution of prime numbers , are studied in number theory .
Problems concerning counting and ordering , such as partitioning and enumerations , are studied in combinatorics .
In common language , for example in primary school , natural numbers may be called counting numbers both to intuitively exclude the negative integers and zero , and also to contrast the discreteness of counting to the continuity of measurement , established by the real numbers .
The natural numbers can , at times , appear as a convenient set of names ( labels ) , that is , as what linguists call nominal numbers , foregoing many or all of the properties of being a number in a mathematical sense .
HISTORY
ANCIENT
ROOTS Section::::History .
Section::::Ancient roots .
The most primitive method of representing a natural number is to put down a mark for each object .
Later , a set of objects could be tested for equality , excess or shortage , by striking out a mark and removing an object from the set .
The first major advance in abstraction was the use of numerals to represent numbers .
This allowed systems to be developed for recording large numbers .
The ancient Egyptians developed a powerful system of numerals with distinct hieroglyphs for 1 , 10 , and all the powers of 10 up to over 1 million .
A stone carving from Karnak , dating from around 1500 BC and now at the Louvre in Paris , depicts 276 as 2 hundreds , 7 tens , and 6 ones ; and similarly for the number 4,622 .
The Babylonians had a place - value system based essentially on the numerals for 1 and 10 , using base sixty , so that the symbol for sixty was the same as the symbol for one , its value being determined from context .
A much later advance was the development of the idea that can be considered as a number , with its own numeral .
The use of a 0 digit in place - value notation ( within other numbers ) dates back as early as 700 BC by the Babylonians , but they omitted such a digit when it would have been the last symbol in the number .
The Olmec and Maya civilizations used 0 as a separate number as early as the , but this usage did not spread beyond Mesoamerica .
The use of a numeral 0 in modern times originated with the Indian mathematician Brahmagupta in 628 .
However , 0 had been used as a number in the medieval computus ( the calculation of the date of Easter ) , beginning with Dionysius Exiguus in 525 , without being denoted by a numeral ( standard Roman numerals do not have a symbol for 0 ) ; instead nulla ( or the genitive form nullae ) from nullus , the Latin word for " none " , was employed to denote a 0 value .
The first systematic study of numbers as abstractions is usually credited to the Greek philosophers Pythagoras and Archimedes .
Some Greek mathematicians treated the number 1 differently than larger numbers , sometimes even not as a number at all .
Independent studies also occurred at around the same time in India , China , and Mesoamerica .
MODERN DEFINITIONS Section::::Modern definitions .
In 19th century Europe , there was mathematical and philosophical discussion about the exact nature of the natural numbers .
A school of Naturalism stated that the natural numbers were a direct consequence of the human psyche .
Henri Poincaré was one of its advocates , as was Leopold Kronecker who summarized " God made the integers , all else is the work of man " .
In opposition to the Naturalists , the constructivists saw a need to improve the logical rigor in the foundations of mathematics .
In the 1860s , Hermann Grassmann suggested a recursive definition for natural numbers thus stating they were not really natural but a consequence of definitions .
Later , two classes of such formal definitions were constructed ; later , they were shown to be equivalent in most practical applications .
Set - theoretical definitions of natural numbers were initiated by Frege and he initially defined a natural number as the class of all sets that are in one - to - one correspondence with a particular set , but this definition turned out to lead to paradoxes including Russell 's paradox .
Therefore , this formalism was modified so that a natural number is defined as a particular set , and any set that can be put into one - to - one correspondence with that set is said to have that number of elements .
The second class of definitions was introduced by Charles Sanders Peirce , refined by Richard Dedekind , and further explored by Giuseppe Peano ; this approach is now called Peano arithmetic .
It is based on an axiomatization of the properties of ordinal numbers : each natural number has a successor and every non - zero natural number has a unique predecessor .
Peano arithmetic is equiconsistent with several weak systems of set theory .
One such system is ZFC with the axiom of infinity replaced by its negation .
Theorems that can be proved in ZFC but can not be proved using the Peano Axioms include Goodstein 's theorem .
With all these definitions it is convenient to include 0 ( corresponding to the empty set ) as a natural number .
Including 0 is now the common convention among set theorists and logicians .
Other mathematicians also include 0 , e.g. , Computer languages often start from zero when enumerating items like loop counters and string- or array - elements .
Many mathematicians have kept the older tradition and take 1 to be the first natural number .
Since different properties are customarily associated to the tokens and , e.g. , neutral elements for addition and multiplications , respectively , it is important to know which version of natural numbers , generically denoted by formula_1 is employed in the case under consideration .
This can be done by explanation in prose , by explicitly writing down the set , or by qualifying the generic identifier with a super- or subscript ( see also in # Notation ) , e.g. , like this : * Naturals with zero :
formula_2
* Naturals without zero : formula_3 NOTATION Section::::Notation .
Mathematicians use N or ( an N in blackboard bold ) to refer to the set of all natural numbers .
Older texts have also occasionally employed J as the symbol for this set .
To be unambiguous about whether 0 is included or not , sometimes a subscript ( or superscript ) " 0 " is added in the former case , and a superscript " " or subscript " " is added in the latter case : Alternatively , since natural numbers naturally embed in the integers , they may be referred to as the positive , or the non - negative integers , respectively .
PROPERTIES INFINITY Section::::Properties .
Section::::Infinity .
The set of natural numbers is an infinite set .
This kind of infinity is , by definition , called countable infinity .
All sets that can be put into a bijective relation to the natural numbers are said to have this kind of infinity .
This is also expressed by saying that the cardinal number of the set is aleph - naught ( ) .
ADDITION Section::::Addition .
One can recursively define an addition operator on the natural numbers by setting and for all , .
Here should be read as " successor " .
This turns the natural numbers into a commutative monoid with identity element 0 , the so - called free object with one generator .
This monoid satisfies the cancellation property and can be embedded in a group ( in the mathematical sense of the word group ) .
The smallest group containing the natural numbers is the integers .
If 1 is defined as , then .
That is , is simply the successor of .
MULTIPLICATION
Section::::Multiplication .
Analogously , given that addition has been defined , a multiplication operator × can be defined via and .
This turns into a free commutative monoid with identity element 1 ; a generator set for this monoid is the set of prime numbers .
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ADDITION AND MULTIPLICATION Section::::Relationship between addition and multiplication .
Addition and multiplication are compatible , which is expressed in the distribution law : .
These properties of addition and multiplication make the natural numbers an instance of a commutative semiring .
Semirings are an algebraic generalization of the natural numbers where multiplication is not necessarily commutative .
The lack of additive inverses , which is equivalent to the fact that is not closed under subtraction ( i.e. , subtracting one natural from another does not always result in another natural ) , means that is not a ring ; instead it is a semiring ( also known as a rig ) .
If the natural numbers are taken as " excluding 0 " , and " starting at 1 " , the definitions of + and × are as above , except that they begin with and .
ORDER Section::::Order .
In this section , juxtaposed variables such as indicate the product , and the standard order of operations is assumed .
A total order on the natural numbers is defined by letting if and only if there exists another natural number where .
This order is compatible with the arithmetical operations in the following sense : if , and are natural numbers and , then and .
An important property of the natural numbers is that they are well - ordered : every non - empty set of natural numbers has a least element .
The rank among well - ordered sets is expressed by an ordinal number ; for the natural numbers , this is denoted as ( omega ) .
DIVISION Section::::Division .
In this section , juxtaposed variables such as indicate the product , and the standard order of operations is assumed .
While it is in general not possible to divide one natural number by another and get a natural number as result , the procedure of division with remainder is available as a substitute : for any two natural numbers and with there are natural numbers and such that The number is called the quotient and is called the remainder of the division of by .
The numbers and are uniquely determined by and .
This Euclidean division is key to several other properties ( divisibility ) , algorithms ( such as the Euclidean algorithm ) , and ideas in number theory .
ALGEBRAIC PROPERTIES
SATISFIED BY THE NATURAL NUMBERS Section::::Algebraic properties satisfied by the natural numbers .
The addition ( + ) and multiplication ( × ) operations on natural numbers as defined above have several algebraic properties :
* Closure under addition and multiplication : for all natural numbers and , both and are natural numbers .
* Associativity : for all natural numbers , , and , and .
* Commutativity : for all natural numbers and , and .
* Existence of identity elements : for every natural number a , and .
* Distributivity of multiplication over addition for all natural numbers , , and , .
*
No nonzero zero divisors : if and are natural numbers such that , then or ( or both ) . GENERALIZATIONS Section::::Generalizations .
Two important generalizations of natural numbers arise from the two uses of counting and ordering : cardinal numbers and ordinal numbers .
* A natural number can be used to express the size of a finite set ; more precisely , a cardinal number is a measure for the size of a set , which is even suitable for infinite sets .
This concept of " size " relies on maps between sets , such that two sets have the same size , exactly if there exists a bijection between them .
The set of natural numbers itself , and any bijective image of it , is said to be countably infinite and to have cardinality aleph - null ( ) .
* Natural numbers are also used as linguistic ordinal numbers : " first " , " second " , " third " , and so forth .
This way they can be assigned to the elements of a totally ordered finite set , and also to the elements of any well - ordered countably infinite set .
This assignment can be generalized to general well - orderings with a cardinality beyond countability , to yield the ordinal numbers .
An ordinal number may also be used to describe the notion of " size " for a well - ordered set , in a sense different from cardinality : if there is an order isomorphism ( more than a bijection ! )
between two well - ordered sets , they have the same ordinal number .
The first ordinal number that is not a natural number is expressed as ; this is also the ordinal number of the set of natural numbers itself .
Many well - ordered sets with cardinal number have an ordinal number greater than
( the latter is the lowest possible ) .
The least ordinal of cardinality ( i.e. , the initial ordinal ) is .
For finite well - ordered sets , there is a one - to - one correspondence between ordinal and cardinal numbers ; therefore they can both be expressed by the same natural number , the number of elements of the set .
This number can also be used to describe the position of an element in a larger finite , or an infinite , sequence .
A countable non - standard model of arithmetic satisfying the Peano Arithmetic ( i.e. , the first - order Peano axioms ) was developed by Skolem in 1933 .
The hypernatural numbers are an uncountable model that can be constructed from the ordinary natural numbers via the ultrapower construction .
Georges Reeb used to claim provocatively that The naïve integers do n't fill up .
Other generalizations are discussed in the article on numbers .
FORMAL DEFINITIONS PEANO AXIOMS
Section::::Formal definitions .
Section::::Peano axioms .
Many properties of the natural numbers can be derived from the five Peano axioms :
* 0 is a natural number .
*
* Every natural number has a successor .
* * 0 is not the successor of any natural number .
*
*
If the successor of formula_6 equals the successor of formula_7 , then formula_8 equals formula_9 .
*
*
The axiom of induction : If a statement is true of 0 , and if the truth of that statement for a number implies its truth for the successor of that number , then the statement is true for every natural number .
*
These are not the original axioms published by Peano , but are named in his honor .
Some forms of the Peano axioms have 1 in place of 0 .
In ordinary arithmetic , the successor of formula_8 is formula_11 .
Replacing Axiom Five by an axiom schema one obtains a ( weaker ) first - order theory called Peano Arithmetic .
CONSTRUCTIONS
BASED
ON SET THEORY
VON NEUMANN
ORDINALS Section::::Constructions based on set theory .
Section::::Von Neumann ordinals .
In the area of mathematics called set theory , a specific construction due to John von Neumann defines the natural numbers as follows :
* Set , the empty set ,
* Define for every set .
is the successor of , and is called the successor function .
*
By the axiom of infinity , there exists a set which contains 0 and is closed under the successor function .
Such sets are said to be ' inductive ' .
The intersection of all such inductive sets is defined to be the set of natural numbers .
It can be checked that the set of natural numbers satisfies the Peano axioms .
*
It follows that each natural number is equal to the set of all natural numbers less than it : With this definition , a natural number is a particular set with elements , and if and only if is a subset of .
The standard definition , now called definition of von Neumann ordinals , is : " each ordinal is the well - ordered set of all smaller ordinals . "
Also , with this definition , different possible interpretations of notations like ( -tuples versus mappings of into ) coincide .
Even if one does not accept the axiom of infinity and therefore can not accept that the set of all natural numbers exists , it is still possible to define any one of these sets .
ZERMELO ORDINALS Section::::Zermelo ordinals .
Although the standard construction is useful , it is not the only possible construction .
Ernst Zermelo 's construction goes as follows : *
Set
* Define , *
It then follows that SEE ALSO * Benacerraf 's identification problem * Canonical representation of a positive integer *
Countable set
* Number#Classification for other number systems ( rational , real , complex etc . )
NOTES REFERENCES
* - English translation of .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Axioms and Construction of Natural Numbers
*
Essays on the Theory of Numbers by Richard Dedekind at Project Gutenberg