PRIMARY SCHOOL
A primary school ( or elementary school in American English and often in Canadian English ) is a school in which children receive primary or elementary education from the age of about seven to twelve , coming after preschool , infant school and before secondary school .
( In some countries there is an intermediate stage of middle school between primary and secondary education . )
PRIMARY SCHOOLS Section::::Primary schools .
In most parts of the world , primary education is the first stage of compulsory education , and is normally available without charge , but may be offered in a fee - paying independent school .
The term grade school is sometimes used in the US , although this term may refer to both primary education and secondary education .
The term primary school is derived from the French école primaire , which was first used in 1802 .
* Primary school is the preferred term in the United Kingdom , Ireland and many Commonwealth nations , and in most publications of the United Nations Educational , Scientific , and Cultural Organization ( UNESCO ) .
* Elementary school is preferred in some countries , especially in the United States and Canada .
In the United States , " primary school " may refer to a school with grades Kindergarten through second grade or third grade .
( K-2 or 3 ) .
In these municipalities , the " elementary school " includes grade three through five or grades four to six .
In some places , primary schooling has historically further been divided between lower primary schools ( LP schools ) , which were the elementary schools , and higher primary schools ( HP schools ) , which were established to provide a more practical instruction to poorer classes than what was provided in the secondary schools .
GALLERY SEE ALSO
* Blab school *
Early childhood education * Elementary school * Elementary school ( United States )
* Elementary school ( England and Wales )
* Elementary schools in Japan
* Educational stage * Secondary school * School * Virtual reality in primary education
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * National Center for Education Statistics ( NCES )
( United States )
* Elementary Schools with Education and Crime Statistics
( United States )