ROULETTE Roulette is a casino game named after the French word meaning little wheel .
In the game , players may choose to place bets on either a single number , various groupings of numbers , the colors red or black , whether the number is odd or even , or if the numbers are high ( 19–36 ) or low ( 1–18 ) .
To determine the winning number and color , a croupier spins a wheel in one direction , then spins a ball in the opposite direction around a tilted circular track running around the outer edge of the wheel .
The ball eventually loses momentum , passes through an area of deflectors , and falls onto the wheel and into one of 37 ( single zero French / European style roulette ) or 38 ( double zero American style roulette )
colored and numbered pockets on the wheel .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first form of roulette was devised in 18th century France .
Many historians believe Blaise Pascal introduced a primitive form of roulette in the 17th century in his search for a perpetual motion machine .
The roulette mechanism is a hybrid of a gaming wheel invented in 1720 and the Italian game Biribi .
The game has been played in its present form since as early as 1796 in Paris .
An early description of the roulette game in its current form is found in a French novel La Roulette , ou le Jour by Jaques Lablee , which describes a roulette wheel in the Palais Royal in Paris in 1796 .
The description included the house pockets , " There are exactly two slots reserved for the bank , whence it derives its sole mathematical advantage .
" It then goes on to describe the layout with , " ... two betting spaces containing the bank 's two numbers , zero and double zero " .
The book was published in 1801 .
An even earlier reference to a game of this name was published in regulations for New France ( Québec ) in 1758 , which banned the games of " dice , hoca , faro , and roulette " .
The roulette wheels used in the casinos of Paris in the late 1790s had red for the single zero and black for the double zero .
To avoid confusion , the color green was selected for the zeros in roulette wheels starting in the 1800s .
In 1843 , in the German spa casino town of Bad Homburg , fellow Frenchmen François and Louis Blanc introduced the single 0 style roulette wheel in order to compete against other casinos offering the traditional wheel with single and double zero house pockets .
In some forms of early American roulette wheels , there were numbers 1 through 28 , plus a single zero , a double zero , and an American Eagle .
The Eagle slot , which was a symbol of American liberty , was a house slot that brought the casino extra edge .
Soon , the tradition vanished and since then the wheel features only numbered slots .
According to Hoyle " the single 0 , the double 0 , and eagle are never bars ; but when the ball falls into either of them , the banker sweeps every thing upon the table , except what may happen to be bet on either one of them , when he pays twenty - seven for one , which is the amount paid for all sums bet upon any single figure " .
In the 19th century , roulette spread all over Europe and the US , becoming one of the most famous and most popular casino games .
When the German government abolished gambling in the 1860s , the Blanc family moved to the last legal remaining casino operation in Europe at Monte Carlo , where they established a gambling mecca for the elite of Europe .
It was here that the single zero roulette wheel became the premier game , and over the years was exported around the world , except in the United States where the double zero wheel had remained dominant .
In the United States , the French double zero wheel made its way up the Mississippi from New Orleans , and then westward .
It was here , because of rampant cheating by both operators and gamblers , that the wheel was eventually placed on top of the table to prevent devices being hidden in the table or wheel , and the betting layout was simplified .
This eventually evolved into the American - style roulette game .
The American game was developed in the gambling dens across the new territories where makeshift games had been set up , whereas the French game evolved with style and leisure in Monte Carlo .
During the first part of the 20th century , the only casino towns of note were Monte Carlo with the traditional single zero French wheel , and Las Vegas with the American double zero wheel .
In the 1970s , casinos began to flourish around the world .
By 2008 there were several hundred casinos worldwide offering roulette games .
The double zero wheel is found in the U.S. , Canada , South America , and the Caribbean , while the single zero wheel is predominant elsewhere .
In 2016 The Venetian Las Vegas introduced the first triple - zero wheel , which has since spread to a few additional casinos .
The sum of all the numbers on the roulette wheel ( from 0 to 36 ) is 666 , which is the " Number of the Beast " .
One legend says that François Blanc made a deal with the devil to obtain the secrets of roulette .
RULES OF PLAY AGAINST
A CASINO Section::::Rules of play against a casino .
Roulette players have a variety of betting options .
Placing inside bets is either selecting the exact number of the pocket the ball will land in , or a small range of pockets based on their proximity on the layout .
Players wishing to bet on the ' outside ' will select bets on larger positional groupings of pockets , the pocket color , or whether the winning number is odd or even .
The payout odds for each type of bet are based on its probability .
The roulette table usually imposes minimum and maximum bets , and these rules usually apply separately for all of a player 's inside and outside bets for each spin .
For inside bets at roulette tables , some casinos may use separate roulette table chips of various colors to distinguish players at the table .
Players can continue to place bets as the ball spins around the wheel until the dealer announces no more bets or rien ne va plus .
When a winning number and color is determined by the roulette wheel , the dealer will place a marker , also known as a dolly , on that winning number on the roulette table layout .
When the dolly is on the table , no players may place bets , collect bets , or remove any bets from the table .
The dealer will then sweep away all other losing bets either by hand or rake , and determine all of the payouts to the remaining inside and outside winning bets .
When the dealer is finished making payouts , the marker is removed from the board where players collect their winnings and make new bets .
The winning chips remain on the board .
CALIFORNIA ROULETTE Section::::California Roulette .
In 2004 , California legalized a form of roulette known as California Roulette .
By law , the game must use cards and not slots on the roulette wheel to pick the winning number .
ROULETTE WHEEL NUMBER
SEQUENCE Section::::Roulette wheel number sequence .
The pockets of the roulette wheel are numbered from 0 to 36 .
In number ranges from 1 to 10 and 19 to 28 , odd numbers are red and even are black .
In ranges from 11 to 18 and 29 to 36 , odd numbers are black and even are red .
There is a green pocket numbered 0
( zero ) .
In American roulette , there is a second green pocket marked 00 .
Pocket number order on the roulette wheel adheres to the following clockwise sequence in most casinos : Single - zero wheel : 0 - 32 - 15 - 19 - 4 - 21 - 2 - 25 - 17 - 34 - 6 - 27 - 13 - 36 - 11 - 30 - 8 - 23 - 10 - 5 - 24 - 16 - 33 - 1 - 20 - 14 - 31 - 9 - 22 - 18 - 29 - 7 - 28 - 12 - 35 - 3 - 26 Double - zero wheel : 0 - 28 - 9 - 26 - 30 - 11 - 7 - 20 - 32 - 17 - 5 - 22 - 34 - 15 - 3 - 24 - 36 - 13 - 1 - 00 - 27 - 10 - 25 - 29 - 12 - 8 - 19 - 31 - 18 - 6 - 21 - 33 - 16 - 4 - 23 - 35 - 14 - 2 Triple - zero wheel : 0 - 000 - 00 - 32 - 15 - 19 - 4 - 21 - 2 - 25 - 17 - 34 - 6 - 27 - 13 - 36 - 11 - 30 - 8 - 23 - 10 - 5 - 24 - 16 - 33 - 1 - 20 - 14 - 31 - 9 - 22 - 18 - 29 - 7 - 28 - 12 - 35 - 3 - 26
ROULETTE TABLE LAYOUT Section::::Roulette table layout .
The cloth - covered betting area on a roulette table is known as the layout .
The layout is either single - zero or double - zero .
The European - style layout has a single zero , and the American style layout is usually a double - zero .
The American - style roulette table with a wheel at one end is now used in most casinos .
The French style table with a wheel in the centre and a layout on either side is rarely found outside of Monte Carlo .
TYPES OF BETS Section::::Types of bets .
In roulette , bets can either be inside or outside bets .
INSIDE BETS Section::::Inside bets . !
Name !
Description !
Chip placement
OUTSIDE BETS Section::::Outside bets .
Outside bets typically have smaller payouts with better odds at winning .
Except as noted , all of these bets lose if a zero comes up .
1 to 18 ( Low or Manque ) , or 19 to 36 ( High or Passe ) Red or black ( Rouge ou Noir )
Even or odd ( Pair ou Impair )
Dozen bet Column bet Snake Bet
In the United Kingdom , the farthest outside bets ( low / high , red / black , even / odd ) result in the player losing only half of his / her bet if a zero comes up .
BET ODDS TABLE Section::::Bet odds table .
The expected value of a $ 1 bet ( except for the special case of Top line bets ) , for American and European roulette , can be calculated as where n is the number of pockets in the wheel .
The initial bet is returned in addition to the mentioned payout .
It can be easily demonstrated that this payout formula would lead to a zero expected value of profit if there were only 36 numbers .
Having 37 or more numbers gives the casino its edge . ! align="left
" Bet name ! align="right
" Winning spaces ! align="left
"
Payout ! align="left
" Odds against winning ( French ) ! align="left
" Expected value(on a $ 1 bet )
( French ) ! align="left
" Odds against winning ( American ) ! align="left
" Expected value(on a $ 1 bet )
( American ) Note that Top line ( 0 , 00 , 1 , 2 , 3 ) has a different expected value because of approximation of the correct -to-1
payout obtained by the formula to
6-to-1 .
Note also that 0 and 00 are not odd or even , or high or low .
En prison rules , when used , reduce the house advantage .
HOUSE EDGE Section::::House edge .
The house average or house edge or house advantage ( also called the expected value ) is the amount the player loses relative for any bet made , on average .
If a player bets on a single number in the American game there is a probability of that the player wins 35 times the bet , and a chance that the player loses his bet .
The expected value is : For European roulette , a single number wins and loses : For triple - zero wheels , a single number wins and loses :
The presence of the green squares on the roulette wheel and on the table is technically the only house edge .
Outside bets will always lose when a single or double zero comes up .
However , the house also has an edge on inside bets because the pay outs ( including the original player 's bet ) are always set at 36 to 1 when you mathematically have a 1 out of 38 ( 1 out of 37 for French / European roulette ) chance at winning a straight bet on a single number .
To demonstrate the house edge on inside bets , imagine placing straight $ 1 wagers on all inside numbers ( including 0 and 00 ) to assure a win : you would only get back $ 36 , having spent $ 38 .
The only exceptions are the five numbers bet where the house edge is considerably higher ( 7.89 % on an American wheel ) , and the " even money " bets in some European games ( French Roulette ) where the house edge is halved because only half the stake is lost when a zero comes up .
This is commonly called the " la partage " rule , and it is considered being the main difference of European and French roulette .
There is also modification of this rule , which is called " en prison " rule .
These rules cut the house edge into half ( 1.35 % ) in French roulette , when playing even - money bets , as half of the even - money bets are given back for player if the zero is draw in the wheel .
The house edge should not be confused with the " hold " .
The hold is the average percentage of the money originally brought to the table that the player loses before he leaves — the actual " win " amount for the casino .
The Casino Control Commission in Atlantic City releases a monthly report showing the win / hold amounts for each casino .
The average win / hold for double zero wheels is between 21–30 % , significantly more than the 5.26 % house edge .
This reflects the fact that the player is churning the same money over and over again .
A 23.6 % hold , for example , would imply that , on average , the player bets the total he brought to the table five times , as 23.6 % is approximately equal to .
For example , a player with $ 100 making $ 10 bets on red ( which has a near 50/50 chance of winning ) is highly unlikely to lose all his money after only 10 bets , and will most likely continue to bet until he has lost all of his money or decides to leave .
A player making $ 10 bets on a single number ( with only 1/38 chance of success ) with a $ 100 bankroll is far more likely to lose all of his money after only 10 bets .
In the early frontier gambling saloons , the house would set the odds on roulette tables at 27 for 1 .
This meant that on a $ 1 bet you would get $ 27 and the house would keep your initial dollar .
Today most casino odds are set by law , and they have to be either 34 to 1 or 35 to 1 .
This means that the house pays you $ 34 or $ 35 and you get to keep your original $ 1 bet .
MATHEMATICAL MODEL
Section::::Mathematical model .
As an example , we can examine the European roulette model , that is , roulette with only one zero .
Since this roulette has 37 cells with equal odds of hitting , this is a final model of field probability formula_2 , where formula_3 , formula_4 for all formula_5 .
Call the bet
formula_6
a triple formula_7 , where formula_8 is the set of chosen numbers , formula_9 is the size of the bet , and , and formula_10 determines the return of the bet .
The rules of European roulette have 10 types of bets .
First we can examine the ' Straight Up ' bet .
In this case , formula_11 , for some formula_12 , and formula_13 is determined by
The bet 's expected net return , or profitability , is equal to Without details , for a bet , black ( or red ) , the rule is determined as and the profitability
For similar reasons it is simple to see that the profitability is also equal for all remaining types of bets .
formula_18 .
In reality this means that , the more bets a player makes , the more he is going to lose independent of the strategies ( combinations of bet types or size of bets ) that he employs : Here , the profit margin for the roulette owner is equal to approximately 2.7 % .
Nevertheless , several roulette strategy systems have been developed despite the losing odds .
These systems can not change the odds of the game in favor of the player .
It is worth noting that the odds for the player in American roulette are even worse , as the bet profitability is at worst formula_20 , and never better than formula_21 .
SIMPLIFIED MATHEMATICAL MODEL
Section::::Simplified mathematical model .
For a roulette wheel with formula_22 green numbers and 36 other unique numbers the chance of the ball landing on a given number is formula_23 .
For a betting option with formula_24 numbers that define a win , the chance of winning a bet is formula_25 For example , betting on " red " , there are 18 red numbers , formula_26 , the chance of winning is formula_27 .
The payout given by the casino for a win is based on the roulette wheel having 36 outcomes and the payout for a bet is given by formula_28 .
For example , betting on 1 - 12 there are 12 numbers that define a win , formula_29 , the payout is formula_30 , so the better wins 3 times their bet .
The average return on a player 's bet is given by formula_31
For formula_32 the average return is always lower than 1 so on average a player will lose money .
With 1 green number formula_33
the average return is formula_34 , that is , after a bet the player will on average have formula_34 of their original bet returned to them .
With 2 green numbers
formula_36
the average return is formula_37 .
This shows that the expected return is independent of the choice of bet .
CALLED ( OR CALL )
BETS OR ANNOUNCED
BETS Section::::Called ( or call ) bets or announced bets .
Although most often named " call bets " technically these bets are more accurately referred to as " announced bets " .
The legal distinction between a " call bet " and an " announced bet " is that a " call bet " is a bet called by the player without him placing any money on the table to cover the cost of the bet .
In many jurisdictions ( most notably the United Kingdom )
this is considered gambling on credit and is illegal in some jurisdictions around the world .
An " announced bet " is a bet called by the player for which he immediately places enough money to cover the amount of the bet on the table , prior to the outcome of the spin or hand in progress being known .
There are different number series in roulette that have special names attached to them .
Most commonly these bets are known as " the French bets " and each covers a section of the wheel .
For the sake of accuracy , zero spiel , although explained below , is not a French bet , it is more accurately " the German bet " .
Players at a table may bet a set amount per series ( or multiples of that amount ) .
The series are based on the way certain numbers lie next to each other on the roulette wheel .
Not all casinos offer these bets , and some may offer additional bets or variations on these .
VOISINS DU ZÉRO ( NEIGHBORS OF ZERO )
Section::::Voisins du zéro ( neighbors of zero ) .
This is a name , more accurately " grands voisins du zéro " , for the 17 numbers that lie between 22 and 25 on the wheel , including 22 and 25 themselves .
The series is 22 - 18 - 29 - 7 - 28 - 12 - 35 - 3 - 26 - 0 - 32 - 15 - 19 - 4 - 21 - 2 - 25 ( on a single - zero wheel ) .
Nine chips or multiples thereof are bet .
Two chips are placed on the 0 - 2 - 3 trio ; one on the 4 - 7 split ; one on 12 - 15 ; one on 18 - 21 ; one on 19 - 22 ; two on the 25 - 26 - 28 - 29 corner ; and one on 32 - 35 .
JEU ZÉRO ( ZERO GAME )
Section::::Jeu zéro ( zero game ) .
Zero game , also known as zero spiel ( Spiel is German for game or play ) , is the name for the numbers closest to zero .
All numbers in the zero game are included in the voisins , but are placed differently .
The numbers bet on are 12 - 35 - 3 - 26 - 0 - 32 - 15 .
The bet consists of four chips or multiples thereof .
Three chips are bet on splits and one chip straight - up : one chip on 0 - 3 split , one on 12 - 15 split , one on 32 - 35 split and one straight - up on number 26 .
This type of bet is popular in Germany and many European casinos .
It is also offered as a 5-chip bet in many Eastern European casinos .
As a 5-chip bet , it is known as " zero spiel naca " and includes , in addition to the chips placed as noted above , a straight - up on number 19 .
LE TIERS DU CYLINDRE ( THIRD OF THE WHEEL ) Section::::Le tiers du cylindre ( third of the wheel ) .
This is the name for the 12 numbers that lie on the opposite side of the wheel between 27 and 33 , including 27 and 33 themselves .
On a single - zero wheel , the series is 27 - 13 - 36 - 11 - 30 - 8 - 23 - 10 - 5 - 24 - 16 - 33 .
The full name ( although very rarely used , most players refer to it as " tiers " ) for this bet is " le tiers du cylindre " ( translated from French into English meaning one third of the wheel ) because it covers 12 numbers ( placed as 6 splits ) , which is as close to of the wheel as one can get .
Very popular in British casinos , tiers bets outnumber voisins and orphelins bets by a massive margin .
Six chips or multiples thereof are bet .
One chip is placed on each of the following splits : 5 - 8 ; 10 - 11 ; 13 - 16 ; 23 - 24 ; 27 - 30 ; 33 - 36 .
The tiers bet is also called the " small series " and
in some casinos ( most notably in South Africa ) " series 5 - 8 " .
A variant known as " tiers 5 - 8 - 10 - 11 " has an additional chip placed straight up on 5 , 8 , 10 and 11 ; and so is a 10-piece bet .
In some places the variant is called " gioco Ferrari " with a straight up on 8 , 11 , 23 and 30 ; the bet is marked with a red G on the racetrack .
ORPHELINS ( ORPHANS )
Section::::Orphelins ( orphans ) .
These numbers make up the two slices of the wheel outside the tiers and voisins .
They contain a total of 8 numbers , comprising 17 - 34 - 6 and 1 - 20 - 14 - 31 - 9 .
Five chips or multiples thereof are bet on four splits and a straight - up : one chip is placed straight - up on 1 and one chip on each of the splits : 6 - 9 ; 14 - 17 ; 17 - 20 and 31 - 34 . ... AND THE NEIGHBORS Section : : : : ... and the neighbors .
A number may be backed along with the two numbers on the either side of it in a 5-chip bet .
For example , " 0 and the neighbors " is a 5-chip bet with one piece straight - up on 3 , 26 , 0 , 32 and 15 .
Neighbors bets are often put on in combinations , for example " 1 , 9 , 14 and the neighbors " is a 15-chip bet covering 18 , 22 , 33 , 16 with one chip ; 9 , 31 , 20 , 1 with two chips and 14 with three chips .
Any of the above bets may be combined , e.g. " orphelins by 1 and zero and the neighbors by 1 " .
The " ... and the neighbors " is often assumed by the croupier .
FINAL BETS Section::::Final bets .
Another bet offered on the single - zero game is " final " , " finale " or " finals " .
Final 4 , for example , is a 4-chip bet and consists of one chip placed on each of the numbers ending in 4 , that is 4 , 14 , 24 and 34 .
Final 7 is a 3-chip bet , one chip each on 7 , 17 and 27 .
Final bets from final 0
( zero ) to final 6 cost four chips .
Final bets 7 , 8 and 9 cost three chips .
Some casinos also offer split - final bets , for example final 5 - 8 would be a 4-chip bet , one chip each on the splits 5 - 8 , 15 - 18 , 25 - 28 and one on 35 .
FULL COMPLETES / MAXIMUMS Section::::Full completes / maximums .
A complete bet places all of the inside bets on a certain number .
Full complete bets are most often bet by high rollers as maximum bets .
The maximum amount allowed to be wagered on a single bet in European roulette is based on a progressive betting model .
If the casino allows a maximum bet of $ 1,000 on a 35-to-1 straight - up , then on each 17-to-1 split connected to that straight - up , $ 2000 may be wagered .
Each 8-to-1 corner that covers four numbers ) may have $ 4000 wagered on it .
Each 11-to-1 street that covers three numbers may have $ 3000 wagered on it .
Each 5-to-1 six - line may have $ 6,000 wagered on it .
Each $ 1,000 incremental bet would be represented by a marker that is used to specifically identify the player and the amount bet .
For instance , if a patron wished to place a full complete bet on 17 , the player would call " 17 to the maximum " .
This bet would require a total of 40 chips , or $ 40,000 .
To manually place the same wager , the player would need to bet : +17 to the maximum !
Bet type ! !
Number(s ) bet on ! !
Chips ! !
Amount waged !
Total ! ! ! !
40 ! !
$ 40,000
The player calls his bet to the croupier ( most often after the ball has been spun ) and places enough chips to cover the bet on the table within reach of the croupier .
The croupier will immediately announce the bet ( repeat what the player has just said ) , ensure that the correct monetary amount has been given while simultaneously placing a matching marker on the number on the table and the amount wagered .
The payout for this bet if the chosen number wins is 392 chips , in the case of a $ 1000 straight - up maximum , $ 40,000 bet , a payout of $ 392,000 .
The player 's wagered 40 chips , as with all winning bets in roulette , are still his property and in the absence of a request to the contrary are left up to possibly win again on the next spin .
Based on the location of the numbers on the layout , the number of chips required to " complete " a number can be determined .
* Zero costs 17 chips to complete and pays 235 chips .
* Number 1 and number 3 each cost 27 chips and pay 297 chips .
* Number 2 is a 36-chip bet and pays 396 chips .
* 1st column numbers 4 to 31 and 3rd column numbers 6 to 33 , cost 30 chips each to complete .
The payout for a win on these 30-chip bets is 294 chips .
* 2nd column numbers 5 to 32 cost 40 chips each to complete .
The payout for a win on these numbers is 392 chips .
* Numbers 34 and 36
each cost 18 chips and pay 198 chips .
* Number 35 is a 24-chip bet which pays 264 chips .
Most typically ( Mayfair casinos in London and other top - class European casinos ) with these maximum or full complete bets , nothing ( except the aforementioned maximum button ) is ever placed on the layout even in the case of a win .
Experienced gaming staff , and the type of customers playing such bets , are fully aware of the payouts and so the croupier simply makes up the correct payout , announces its value to the table inspector ( floor person in the U.S. ) and the customer , and then passes it to the customer , but only after a verbal authorization from the inspector has been received .
Also typically at this level of play ( house rules allowing ) the experienced croupier caters to the needs of the customer and will most often add the customer 's winning bet to the payout , as the type of player playing these bets very rarely bets the same number two spins in succession .
For example , the winning 40-chip / $ 40,000 bet on " 17 to the maximum " pays 392 chips / $ 392,000 .
The experienced croupier would pay the player 432 chips / $ 432,000 , that is 392 + 40 , with the announcement that the payout " is with your bet down " .
There are also several methods to determine the payout when a number adjacent to a chosen number is the winner ; for example , player bets 40 chips on " 23 to the maximum " and number 26 is the winning number .
The most notable method is known as the " station " system or method .
When paying in stations , the dealer counts the number of ways or stations that the winning number hits the complete bet .
In the example above , 26 hits 4 stations – 2 different corners , 1 split and 1 six - line .
The dealer takes the number 4 , multiplies it by 30 and adds the remaining 8 to the payout : 4 × 30 = 120 , 120 + 8 = 128 .
If calculated as stations , they would just multiply 4 by 36 , making 144 with the players bet down .
In some casinos , a player may bet full complete for less than the table straight - up maximum ; for example , " number 17 full complete by $ 25 " would cost $ 1000 , that is 40 chips each at $ 25 value .
BETTING STRATEGIES AND TACTICS Section::::Betting strategies and tactics .
Over the years , many people have tried to beat the casino , and turn roulette — a game designed to turn a profit for the house — into one on which the player expects to win .
Most of the time this comes down to the use of betting systems , strategies which say that the house edge can be beaten by simply employing a special pattern of bets , often relying on the " Gambler 's fallacy " , the idea that past results are any guide to the future ( for example , if a roulette wheel has come up 10 times in a row on red , that red on the next spin is any more or less likely than if the last spin was black ) .
All betting systems that rely on patterns , when employed on casino edge games will result , on average , in the player losing money .
In practice , players employing betting systems may win , and may indeed win very large sums of money , but the losses ( which , depending on the design of the betting system , may occur quite rarely ) will outweigh the wins .
Certain systems , such as the Martingale , described below , are extremely risky , because the worst - case scenario ( which is mathematically certain to happen , at some point ) may see the player chasing losses with ever - bigger bets until he runs out of money .
The American mathematician Patrick Billingsley said that no betting system can convert a subfair game into a profitable enterprise .
At least in the 1930s , some professional gamblers were able to consistently gain an edge in roulette by seeking out rigged wheels ( not difficult to find at that time ) and betting opposite the largest bets .
PREDICTION METHODS Section::::Prediction methods .
Whereas betting systems are essentially an attempt to beat the fact that a geometric series with initial value of 0.95 ( American roulette ) or 0.97 ( European roulette ) will inevitably over time tend to zero , engineers instead attempt to overcome the house edge through predicting the mechanical performance of the wheel , most notably by Joseph Jagger at Monte Carlo in 1873 .
These schemes work by determining that the ball is more likely to fall at certain numbers , and if sufficiently good will raise the return of the game above 100 % , defeating the betting system problem .
Edward O. Thorp ( the developer of card counting and an early hedge - fund pioneer ) and Claude Shannon ( a mathematician and electronic engineer best known for his contributions to information theory ) built the first wearable computer to predict the landing of the ball in 1961 .
This system worked by timing the ball and wheel , and using the information obtained to calculate the most likely octant where the ball would fall .
Ironically , this technique works best with an unbiased wheel though it could still be countered quite easily by simply closing the table for betting before beginning the spin .
In 1982 , several casinos in Britain began to lose large sums of money at their roulette tables to teams of gamblers from the USA .
Upon investigation by the police , it was discovered they were using a legal system of biased wheel - section betting .
As a result of this , the British roulette wheel manufacturer John Huxley manufactured a roulette wheel to counteract the problem .
The new wheel , designed by George Melas , was called " low profile " because the pockets had been drastically reduced in depth , and various other design modifications caused the ball to descend in a gradual approach to the pocket area .
In 1986 , when a professional gambling team headed by Billy Walters won $ 3.8 million using the system on an old wheel at the Golden Nugget in Atlantic City , every casino in the world took notice , and within one year had switched to the new low - profile wheel .
Thomas Bass , in his book The Eudaemonic Pie ( 1985 ) ( published as The Newtonian Casino in Britain ) , has claimed to be able to predict wheel performance in real time .
The book describes the exploits of a group of University of California Santa Cruz students , who called themselves the Eudaemons , who in the late 1970s used computers in their shoes to win at roulette .
This is an updated and improved version of Edward O Thorp 's approach , where Newtonian Laws of Motion are applied to track the roulette ball 's deceleration ; hence the British title .
In the early 1990s , Gonzalo Garcia - Pelayo believed that casino roulette wheels were not perfectly random , and that by recording the results and analysing them with a computer , he could gain an edge on the house by predicting that certain numbers were more likely to occur next than the 1-in-36 odds offered by the house suggested .
This he did at the Casino de Madrid in Madrid , Spain , winning 600,000 euros in a single day , and one million euros in total .
Legal action against him by the casino was unsuccessful , it being ruled that the casino should fix its wheel .
To defend against exploits like these , many casinos use tracking software , use wheels with new designs , rotate wheel heads , and randomly rotate pocket rings .
At the Ritz London casino in March 2004 , two Serbs and a Hungarian used a laser scanner hidden inside a mobile phone linked to a computer to predict the sector of the wheel where the ball was most likely to drop .
They netted £ 1.3 m in two nights .
They were arrested and kept on police bail for nine months , but eventually released and allowed to keep their winnings as they had not interfered with the casino equipment .
SPECIFIC BETTING SYSTEMS Section::::Specific betting systems .
The numerous even - money bets in roulette have inspired many players over the years to attempt to beat the game by using one or more variations of a martingale betting strategy , wherein the gambler doubles the bet after every loss , so that the first win would recover all previous losses , plus win a profit equal to the original bet .
The problem with this strategy is that , remembering that past results do not affect the future , it is possible for the player to lose so many times in a row , that the player , doubling and redoubling his bets , either runs out of money or hits the table limit .
A large financial loss is certain in the long term if the player continued to employ this strategy .
Another strategy is the Fibonacci system , where bets are calculated according to the Fibonacci sequence .
Regardless of the specific progression , no such strategy can statistically overcome the casino 's advantage , since the expected value of each allowed bet is negative .
LABOUCHÈRE SYSTEM Section::::Labouchère system .
The Labouchère System is a progression betting strategy like the martingale but does not require the gambler to risk his stake as quickly with dramatic double - ups .
The Labouchere System involves using a series of numbers in a line to determine the bet amount , following a win or a loss .
Typically , the player adds the numbers at the front and end of the line to determine the size of the next bet .
When he wins , he crosses out numbers and continues working on the smaller line .
If he loses , then he adds his previous bet to the end of the line and continues to work on the longer line .
This is a much more flexible progression betting system and there is much room for the player to design his initial line to his own playing preference .
This system is one that is designed so that when the player has won over a third of his bets ( less than the expected 18/38 ) , he will win .
Whereas the martingale will cause ruin in the event of a long sequence of successive losses , the Labouchère system will cause bet size to grow quickly even where a losing sequence is broken by wins .
This occurs because as the player loses , the average bet size in the line increases .
As with all other betting systems , the average value of this system is negative .
D'ALEMBERT SYSTEM Section::::D'Alembert system .
The system , also called montant et demontant ( from French , meaning upwards and downwards ) , is often called a pyramid system .
It is based on a mathematical equilibrium theory devised by a French mathematician of the same name .
Like the martingale , this system is mainly applied to the even - money outside bets , and is favored by players who want to keep the amount of their bets and losses to a minimum .
The betting progression is very simple : After each loss , you add one unit to the next bet , and after each win , one unit is deducted from the next bet .
Starting with an initial bet of , say , 1 unit , a loss would raise the next bet to 2 units .
If this is followed by a win , the next bet would be 1 units .
This betting system relies on the gambler 's fallacy — that the player is more likely to lose following a win , and more likely to win following a loss .
OTHER SYSTEMS
Section::::Other systems .
There are numerous other betting systems that rely on this fallacy , or that attempt to follow ' streaks ' ( looking for patterns in randomness ) , varying bet size accordingly .
Many betting systems are sold online and purport to enable the player to ' beat ' the odds .
One such system was advertised by Jason Gillon of Rotherham , UK , who claimed you could ' earn £ 200 daily ' by following his betting system , described as a ' loophole ' .
As the system was advertised in the UK press , it was subject to Advertising Standards Authority regulation , and following a complaint , it was ruled by the ASA that Mr. Gillon had failed to support his claims you could earn £ 200 daily , and that he had failed to show that there was any loophole .
REAL - LIFE
ROULETTE EXPLOITS
*
In the summer of 1891 at the Monte Carlo casino , a part - time swindler and petty crook from London named Charles Wells broke the bank at each table he played over a period of several days .
Breaking the bank meant he won all the available money in the table bank that day , and a black cloth would be placed over the table until the bank was replenished .
*
In the 1960s and early 1970s , Dr. Richard Jarecki won about $ 1.2 million at dozens of European casinos .
He claimed that he was using a mathematical system designed on a powerful computer .
In reality , he simply observed more than 10,000 spins of each roulette wheel to determine flaws in the wheels .
Eventually the casinos realized that flaws in the wheels could be exploited , and replaced older wheels .
The manufacture of roulette wheels has improved over time .
*
In 2004 , Ashley Revell of London sold all of his possessions , clothing included , and placed his entire net worth of US$ 135,300 on red at the Plaza Hotel in Las Vegas .
The ball landed on " Red 7 " and Revell walked away with $ 270,600 .
IN LITERATURE
* The 1866 novella , titled The Gambler , by the famous Russian writer
Fyodor Dostoyevsky has a prime focus of the game as a major theme throughout the story .
At the point of his life that he wrote this , gambling was at its peak for him .
The novella is insightful about the game itself , and has technical descriptions of how he played the wheel and explains each move the main character does while playing the game .
*
In the 1937 comedic short story " All 's Well with Bingo " , by
British writer P. G. Wodehouse , the main character Bingo Little plays roulette at the Monte Carlo casino , betting on black .
When his wife Rosie , who does not want him to gamble , comes by the table , Bingo can not claim his winnings or else Rosie will see he is gambling .
He has no choice but
to let it all ride .
Fortunately , black keeps coming up .
Eventually , Rosie leaves , and Bingo is able to take his winnings .
The story also references the Martingale betting strategy and the " en prison " rule .
IN FILM AND TELEVISION
*
In the 1942 film Casablanca , Rick 's Café Américain has a trick roulette wheel .
Rick ( played by Humphrey Bogart ) uncharacteristically takes pity on a young Bulgarian refugee couple .
The husband has lost most of his money at roulette , trying to win enough to bribe police Captain Renault .
Rick suggests the man bet on 22 .
After the number comes up , Rick tells him to let it all ride .
He does , and wins again .
Rick tells him to cash in his winnings and never come back .
*
In season 5 , episode 25 of American sitcom I Love Lucy , Lucy Goes to Monte Carlo , Lucy finds a chip on the floor of the casino and tries to return it by placing it on the roulette table .
The number she places it on hits .
She tries to explain to the dealer that she did not want to place the bet , but he does not understand and thinks she wants to let it ride .
She continues to win while trying to return the money .
She finally gives up and collects her winnings and hides it from Ricky in the Mertz 's hotel room .
When Ricky finds the money , he thinks that Fred has been embezzling it from Ricky 's concert earnings .
*
In the 17 February 1965 episode of the classic series , Danger Man , The Ubiquitous Mr. Lovegrove , John Drake ( Patrick McGoohan ) is injured in a car accident , and , hallucinates he 's involved with the nefarious manager of a London casino .
By placing bets on a roulette wheel - at a predetermined time - with a croupier in on the scheme - money is transferred with information without any outside bettors being aware .
*
In the 22 October 1966 episode ( " Odds on Evil " ) of the series , the IMF team uses a wearable computer ( à la Thorpe and Shannon , above ) to predict the outcome of each spin of the roulette wheel at a fictional casino in a European principality .
The $ 200,000 they win at roulette provides the stake they need to challenge the prince to a high - stakes game of Banco , in which they take the Prince for the money he was planning to use to buy arms in order to go to war against a neighbor .
*
In the 1971 Western comedy Support Your Local Gunfighter , James Garner 's character has a gambling addiction — he can not stop betting everything he has on a single roulette spin .
He loses several times , but finally wins at the very end .
* Near the beginning of the 1973 film The Sting , Johnny Hooker ( Robert Redford ) takes his share of the money conned from a numbers runner and loses nearly all of it on a single bet against a rigged roulette wheel .
*
In the third part of the 1998 film Run , Lola , Run , Lola ( Franka Potente ) uses all her money to buy a 100-mark chip .
( She is actually just short of 100 marks , but gains the sympathy of a casino employee who gives her the chip for what money she has . )
She bets her single chip on 20 and wins .
She lets her winnings ride on 20 and wins again , making her total winnings 129,600 marks ( 29,600 more than her smuggler boyfriend owed his boss , Ronnie ) .
The odds of two consecutive wins on a European roulette wheel are exactly 1368-to-1 against .
*
On season 1 of ITV1 's Red or Black ? , a player can win £ 1,000,000 by guessing either red or black on the roulette wheel .
*
In the 2010 Disney Pixar film Toy Story 3 , a scene featured a See ' n Say being used as a roulette wheel for gambling .
*
In the 2011 film Fast Five , Don Omar and Tego Calderón play roulette and each bet their millions on red or black .
The ball lands on green .
*
In the 2012 film , the Penguins let their money ride / bet all of their money on a roulette wheel , selecting black and winning back twice as much .
*
In the 2015 Tamil film Vai Raja Vai directed by Aishwarya R. Dhanush , Gautham Karthik is being coerced to use his special power – ' premonition ' – to beat the roulette table .
He walks away winning against the casino by predicting the outcome in the roulette table .
RULES RELATED TO CASINO SECURITY
*
Players should not collect their winnings and betting chips until all bets have been paid .
This is to avoid confusion and minimize the chance for players to steal other players ' chips .
* Players must not touch chips after the dealer gives the hand signal or announces " no more bets " .
Players are not allowed to remove , change or add bets past this point .
*
When the dealer has placed the dolly ( the plastic marker used to mark the winning number )
it is strictly prohibited to touch any chips on a winning bet .
* Dealers are not allowed to take cash from a player 's hand .
To purchase chips with cash , place it on the table .
This provides a better view of the transaction for casino surveillance .
*
The use of electronic equipment at the table , such as mobile phones and cameras , is prohibited in most jurisdictions .
* The only items allowed in front of a player are chips , money , drinks , and cigarettes .
Bulky items such as wallets and purses or bags must not be placed on the table .
COMMON ETIQUETTE PRACTICES
* Players should place chips on the board rather than tossing them .
Tossed chips may displace other bets or roll down to the " chipping machine " .
If the player can not reach to place a bet themselves , they should announce the bet to the dealer .
This is treated as any other call bet .
* Changes for cash or color chips are supposed to be done in between spins .
If the dealer has time , they will make changes during the spin , but they will most likely prioritize call bets before changes .
*
All call bets are considered courtesy bets and are only placed if the dealer has time to change and place the bets .
The bet is considered taken only if the dealer and the inspector dealer has repeated the bet .
If the dealer does not take the bet , they will announce " no bet " .
To argue with the dealer about which bets have been taken is considered extremely impolite and will most likely render a warning from the inspector dealer or pit boss .
*
Most casinos ban food at the table .
Drinking rules vary .
SEE ALSO
* Bauernroulette * Eudaemons * Monte Carlo Paradox
* Russian roulette * Straperlo NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS