PI
The number ( ) is a mathematical constant .
Originally defined as the ratio of a circle 's circumference to its diameter , it now has various equivalent definitions and appears in many formulas in all areas of mathematics and physics .
It is approximately equal to 3.14159 .
It has been represented by the Greek letter " " since the mid-18th century , though it is also sometimes spelled out as " pi " .
It is also called Archimedes ' constant .
Being an irrational number , can not be expressed as a common fraction ( equivalently , its decimal representation never ends and never settles into a permanently repeating pattern ) .
Still , fractions such as 22/7 and other rational numbers are commonly used to approximate .
The digits appear to be randomly distributed .
In particular , the digit sequence of is conjectured to satisfy a specific kind of statistical randomness , but to date , no proof of this has been discovered .
Also , is a transcendental number ; that is , it is not the root of any polynomial having rational coefficients .
This transcendence of implies that it is impossible to solve the ancient challenge of squaring the circle with a compass and straightedge .
Ancient civilizations required fairly accurate computed values to approximate for practical reasons , including the Egyptians and Babylonians .
Around 250 BC
the Greek mathematician
Archimedes created an algorithm for calculating it .
In the 5th century AD Chinese mathematics approximated to seven digits , while Indian mathematics made a five - digit approximation , both using geometrical techniques .
The historically first exact formula for , based on infinite series , was not available until a millennium later , when in the 14th century the Madhava – Leibniz series was discovered in Indian mathematics .
In the 20th and 21st centuries , mathematicians and computer scientists discovered new approaches that , when combined with increasing computational power , extended the decimal representation of to many trillions of digits after the decimal point .
Practically all scientific applications require no more than a few hundred digits of , and many substantially fewer , so the primary motivation for these computations is the quest to find more efficient algorithms for calculating lengthy numeric series , as well as the desire to break records .
The extensive calculations involved have also been used to test supercomputers and high - precision multiplication algorithms .
Because its most elementary definition relates to the circle , is found in many formulae in trigonometry and geometry , especially those concerning circles , ellipses , and spheres .
In more modern mathematical analysis , the number is instead defined using the spectral properties of the real number system , as an eigenvalue or a period , without any reference to geometry .
It appears therefore in areas of mathematics and the sciences having little to do with the geometry of circles , such as number theory and statistics , as well as in almost all areas of physics .
The ubiquity of makes it one of the most widely known mathematical constants both inside and outside the scientific community .
Several books devoted to have been published , and record - setting calculations of the digits of often result in news headlines .
Attempts to memorize the value of with increasing precision have led to records of over 70,000 digits .
FUNDAMENTALS NAME
Section::::Fundamentals . Section::::Name .
The symbol used by mathematicians to represent the ratio of a circle 's circumference to its diameter is the lowercase Greek letter , sometimes spelled out as pi , and derived from the first letter of the Greek word perimetros , meaning circumference .
In English , is pronounced as " pie " ( , ) .
In mathematical use , the lowercase letter ( or π in sans - serif font ) is distinguished from its capitalized and enlarged counterpart , which denotes a product of a sequence , analogous to how denotes summation .
The choice of the symbol is discussed in the section Adoption of the symbol .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition . is commonly defined as the ratio of a circle 's circumference to its diameter :
The ratio is constant , regardless of the circle 's size .
For example , if a circle has twice the diameter of another circle it will also have twice the circumference , preserving the ratio .
This definition of implicitly makes use of flat ( Euclidean ) geometry ; although the notion of a circle can be extended to any curved ( non - Euclidean ) geometry , these new circles will no longer satisfy the formula .
Here , the circumference of a circle is the arc length around the perimeter of the circle , a quantity which can be formally defined independently of geometry using limits , a concept in calculus .
For example , one may directly compute the arc length of the top half of the unit circle , given in Cartesian coordinates by the equation , as the integral : An integral such as this was adopted as the definition of by Karl Weierstrass , who defined it directly as an integral in 1841 .
Definitions of such as these that rely on a notion of circumference , and hence implicitly on concepts of the integral calculus , are no longer common in the literature .
explains that this is because in many modern treatments of calculus , differential calculus typically precedes integral calculus in the university curriculum , so it is desirable to have a definition of that does not rely on the latter .
One such definition , due to Richard Baltzer , and popularized by Edmund Landau , is the following : is twice the smallest positive number at which the cosine function equals 0 .
The cosine can be defined independently of geometry as a power series , or as the solution of a differential equation .
In a similar spirit , can be defined instead using properties of the complex exponential , , of a complex variable .
Like the cosine , the complex exponential can be defined in one of several ways .
The set of complex numbers at which is equal to one is then an ( imaginary ) arithmetic progression of the form : and there is a unique positive real number with this property .
A more abstract variation on the same idea , making use of sophisticated mathematical concepts of topology and algebra , is the following theorem : there is a unique ( up to automorphism ) continuous isomorphism from the group R / Z of real numbers under addition modulo integers ( the circle group ) onto the multiplicative group of complex numbers of absolute value one .
The number is then defined as half the magnitude of the derivative of this homomorphism .
A circle encloses the largest area that can be attained within a given perimeter .
Thus the number is also characterized as the best constant in the isoperimetric inequality ( times one - fourth ) .
There are many other , closely related , ways in which appears as an eigenvalue of some geometrical or physical process ; see below .
IRRATIONALITY AND NORMALITY Section::::Irrationality and normality . is an irrational number , meaning that it can not be written as the ratio of two integers ( fractions such as are commonly used to approximate , but no common fraction ( ratio of whole numbers ) can be its exact value ) .
Because is irrational , it has an infinite number of digits in its decimal representation , and it does not settle into an infinitely repeating pattern of digits .
There are several proofs that is irrational ; they generally require calculus and rely on the reductio ad absurdum technique .
The degree to which can be approximated by rational numbers ( called the irrationality measure ) is not precisely known ; estimates have established that the irrationality measure is larger than the measure of or but smaller than the measure of Liouville numbers .
The digits of have no apparent pattern and have passed tests for statistical randomness , including tests for normality ; a number of infinite length is called normal when all possible sequences of digits ( of any given length ) appear equally often .
The conjecture that is normal has not been proven or disproven .
Since the advent of computers , a large number of digits of have been available on which to perform statistical analysis .
Yasumasa Kanada has performed detailed statistical analyses on the decimal digits of and found them consistent with normality ; for example , the frequencies of the ten digits 0 to 9 were subjected to statistical significance tests , and no evidence of a pattern was found .
Any random sequence of digits contains arbitrarily long subsequences that appear non - random , by the infinite monkey theorem .
Thus , because the sequence of 's digits passes statistical tests for randomness , it contains some sequences of digits that may appear non - random , such as a sequence of six consecutive 9s that begins at the 762nd decimal place of the decimal representation of .
This is also called the " Feynman point " in mathematical folklore , after Richard Feynman , although no connection to Feynman is known .
TRANSCENDENCE
Section::::Transcendence .
In addition to being irrational , more strongly is a transcendental number , which means that it is not the solution of any non - constant polynomial equation with rational coefficients , such as .
The transcendence of has two important consequences : First , can not be expressed using any finite combination of rational numbers and square roots or n - th roots such as or .
Second , since no transcendental number can be constructed with compass and straightedge , it is not possible to " square the circle " .
In other words , it is impossible to construct , using compass and straightedge alone , a square whose area is exactly equal to the area of a given circle .
Squaring a circle was one of the important geometry problems of the classical antiquity .
Amateur mathematicians in modern times have sometimes attempted to square the circle and sometimes claim success despite the fact that it is mathematically impossible .
CONTINUED FRACTIONS Section::::Continued fractions .
Like all irrational numbers , can not be represented as a common fraction ( also known as a simple or vulgar fraction ) , by the very definition of " irrational number " ( that is , " not a rational number " ) .
But every irrational number , including , can be represented by an infinite series of nested fractions , called a continued fraction : Truncating the continued fraction at any point yields a rational approximation for ; the first four of these are 3 , 22/7 , 333/106 , and 355/113 .
These numbers are among the most well - known and widely used historical approximations of the constant .
Each approximation generated in this way is a best rational approximation ; that is , each is closer to than any other fraction with the same or a smaller denominator .
Because is known to be transcendental , it is by definition not algebraic and so can not be a quadratic irrational .
Therefore , can not have a periodic continued fraction .
Although the simple continued fraction for ( shown above ) also does not exhibit any other obvious pattern , mathematicians have discovered several generalized continued fractions that do , such as : APPROXIMATE VALUE AND DIGITS Section::::Approximate value and digits .
Some approximations of pi include : * Integers : 3
* Fractions : Approximate fractions include ( in order of increasing accuracy ) , , , , , and .
( List is selected terms from and . )
* Digits : The first 50 decimal digits are ( see ) Digits in other number systems
*
The first 48 binary ( base 2 ) digits ( called bits ) are ( see )
* The first 20 digits in hexadecimal ( base 16 ) are ( see )
* The first five sexagesimal ( base 60 ) digits are 3;8,29,44,0,47 ( see ) COMPLEX NUMBERS AND EULER
'S
IDENTITY Section::::Complex numbers and Euler 's identity .
Any complex number , say , can be expressed using a pair of real numbers .
In the polar coordinate system , one number ( radius or r ) is used to represent 's distance from the origin of the complex plane and the other ( angle or ) to represent a counter - clockwise rotation from the positive real line as follows :
where is the imaginary unit satisfying = −1 .
The frequent appearance of in complex analysis can be related to the behavior of the exponential function of a complex variable , described by Euler 's formula : where the constant is the base of the natural logarithm .
This formula establishes a correspondence between imaginary powers of and points on the unit circle centered at the origin of the complex plane .
Setting = in Euler 's formula results in Euler 's identity , celebrated by mathematicians because it contains the five most important mathematical constants :
There are different complex numbers satisfying , and these are called the " -th roots of unity " .
They are given by this formula :
HISTORY ANTIQUITY Section::::History .
Section::::Antiquity .
The best - known approximations to dating before the Common Era were accurate to two decimal places ; this was improved upon in Chinese mathematics in particular by the mid - first millennium , to an accuracy of seven decimal places .
After this , no further progress was made until the late medieval period .
Some Egyptologists have claimed that the ancient Egyptians used an approximation of as from as early as the Old Kingdom .
This claim has met with skepticism .
The earliest written approximations of are found in Egypt and Babylon , both within one percent of the true value .
In Babylon , a clay tablet dated 1900–1600 BC has a geometrical statement that , by implication , treats as = 3.125 .
In Egypt , the Rhind Papyrus , dated around 1650 BC but copied from a document dated to 1850 BC , has a formula for the area of a circle that treats as ( ) ≈ 3.1605 .
Astronomical calculations in the Shatapatha Brahmana ( ca .
4th century BC ) use a fractional approximation of ≈ 3.139 ( an accuracy of 9×10 ) .
Other Indian sources by about 150 BC treat as ≈ 3.1622 .
POLYGON APPROXIMATION ERA Section::::Polygon approximation era .
The first recorded algorithm for rigorously calculating the value of was a geometrical approach using polygons , devised around 250 BC by the Greek mathematician Archimedes .
This polygonal algorithm dominated for over 1,000 years , and as a result is sometimes referred to as " Archimedes ' constant " .
Archimedes computed upper and lower bounds of by drawing a regular hexagon inside and outside a circle , and successively doubling the number of sides until he reached a 96-sided regular polygon .
By calculating the perimeters of these polygons , he proved that ( that is ) .
Archimedes ' upper bound of may have led to a widespread popular belief that is equal to .
Around 150 AD , Greek - Roman scientist Ptolemy , in his Almagest , gave a value for of 3.1416 , which he may have obtained from Archimedes or from Apollonius of Perga .
Mathematicians using polygonal algorithms reached 39 digits of in 1630 , a record only broken in 1699 when infinite series were used to reach 71 digits .
In ancient China , values for included 3.1547 ( around 1 AD ) , ( 100 AD , approximately 3.1623 ) , and ( 3rd century , approximately 3.1556 ) .
Around 265 AD , the Wei Kingdom mathematician Liu Hui created a polygon - based iterative algorithm and used it with a 3,072-sided polygon to obtain a value of of 3.1416 .
Liu later invented a faster method of calculating and obtained a value of 3.14 with a 96-sided polygon , by taking advantage of the fact that the differences in area of successive polygons form a geometric series with a factor of 4 .
The Chinese mathematician Zu Chongzhi , around 480 AD , calculated that ( a fraction that goes by the name Milü in Chinese ) , using Liu Hui 's algorithm applied to a 12,288-sided polygon .
With a correct value for its seven first decimal digits , this value of 3.141592920 remained the most accurate approximation of available for the next 800 years .
The Indian astronomer Aryabhata used a value of 3.1416 in his Āryabhaṭīya ( 499 AD ) .
Fibonacci in c. 1220 computed 3.1418 using a polygonal method , independent of Archimedes .
Italian author Dante apparently employed the value .
The Persian astronomer Jamshīd al - Kāshī produced 9 sexagesimal digits , roughly the equivalent of 16 decimal digits , in 1424 using a polygon with 3×2 sides , which stood as the world record for about 180 years .
French mathematician François Viète in 1579 achieved 9 digits with a polygon of 3×2 sides .
Flemish mathematician Adriaan van Roomen arrived at 15 decimal places in 1593 .
In 1596 , Dutch mathematician Ludolph van Ceulen reached 20 digits , a record he later increased to 35 digits ( as a result , was called the " Ludolphian number " in Germany until the early 20th century ) .
Dutch scientist Willebrord Snellius reached 34 digits in 1621 , and Austrian astronomer Christoph Grienberger arrived at 38 digits in 1630 using 10 sides , which remains the most accurate approximation manually achieved using polygonal algorithms .
INFINITE SERIES
Section::::Infinite series .
The calculation of was revolutionized by the development of infinite series techniques in the 16th and 17th centuries .
An infinite series is the sum of the terms of an infinite sequence .
Infinite series allowed mathematicians to compute with much greater precision than Archimedes and others who used geometrical techniques .
Although infinite series were exploited for most notably by European mathematicians such as James Gregory and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , the approach was first discovered in India sometime between 1400 and 1500 AD .
The first written description of an infinite series that could be used to compute was laid out in Sanskrit verse by Indian astronomer Nilakantha Somayaji in his Tantrasamgraha , around 1500 AD .
The series are presented without proof , but proofs are presented in a later Indian work , Yuktibhāṣā , from around 1530 AD .
Nilakantha attributes the series to an earlier Indian mathematician , Madhava of Sangamagrama , who lived c. 1350 – c. 1425 .
Several infinite series are described , including series for sine , tangent , and cosine , which are now referred to as the Madhava series or Gregory – Leibniz series .
Madhava used infinite series to estimate to 11 digits around 1400 , but that value was improved on around 1430 by the Persian mathematician Jamshīd al - Kāshī , using a polygonal algorithm .
The first infinite sequence discovered in Europe was an infinite product ( rather than an infinite sum , which are more typically used in calculations ) found by French mathematician François Viète in 1593 :
The second infinite sequence found in Europe , by John Wallis in 1655 , was also an infinite product :
The discovery of calculus , by English scientist Isaac Newton and German mathematician Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz in the 1660s , led to the development of many infinite series for approximating .
Newton himself used an arcsin series to compute a 15 digit approximation of in 1665 or 1666 , later writing "
I am ashamed to tell you to how many figures I carried these computations , having no other business at the time . "
In Europe , Madhava 's formula was rediscovered by Scottish mathematician James Gregory in 1671 , and by Leibniz in 1674 :
This formula , the Gregory – Leibniz series , equals when evaluated with = 1 .
In 1699 , English mathematician Abraham Sharp used the Gregory – Leibniz series for formula_13 to compute to 71 digits , breaking the previous record of 39 digits , which was set with a polygonal algorithm .
The Gregory – Leibniz for formula_14 series is simple , but converges very slowly ( that is , approaches the answer gradually ) , so it is not used in modern calculations .
In 1706 John Machin used the Gregory – Leibniz series to produce an algorithm that converged much faster : Machin reached 100 digits of with this formula .
Other mathematicians created variants , now known as Machin - like formulae , that were used to set several successive records for calculating digits of .
Machin - like formulae remained the best - known method for calculating well into the age of computers , and were used to set records for 250 years , culminating in a 620-digit approximation in 1946 by Daniel Ferguson – the best approximation achieved without the aid of a calculating device .
A record was set by the calculating prodigy Zacharias Dase , who in 1844 employed a Machin - like formula to calculate 200 decimals of in his head at the behest of German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss .
British mathematician William Shanks famously took 15 years to calculate to 707 digits , but made a mistake in the 528th digit , rendering all subsequent digits incorrect .
RATE OF CONVERGENCE Section::::Rate of convergence .
Some infinite series for converge faster than others .
Given the choice of two infinite series for , mathematicians will generally use the one that converges more rapidly because faster convergence reduces the amount of computation needed to calculate to any given accuracy .
A simple infinite series for is the Gregory – Leibniz series :
As individual terms of this infinite series are added to the sum , the total gradually gets closer to , and – with a sufficient number of terms – can get as close to as desired .
It converges quite slowly , though – after 500,000 terms , it produces only five correct decimal digits of .
An infinite series for ( published by Nilakantha in the 15th century )
that converges more rapidly than the Gregory –
Leibniz series is : The following table compares the convergence rates of these two series : !
Infinite series for ! !
After 1st term ! !
After 2nd term ! !
After 3rd term ! !
After 4th term ! !
After 5th term ! !
Converges to : 4.00002.6666 ... 3.4666 ... 2.8952 ...
3.3396 ...
rowspan=2 = 3.1415 ... 3.00003.1666 ...
3.1333 ...
3.1452 ...
3.1396 ...
After five terms , the sum of the Gregory – Leibniz series is within 0.2 of the correct value of , whereas the sum of Nilakantha 's series is within 0.002 of the correct value of .
Nilakantha 's series converges faster and is more useful for computing digits of .
Series that converge even faster include Machin 's series and Chudnovsky 's series , the latter producing 14 correct decimal digits per term .
IRRATIONALITY AND TRANSCENDENCE Section::::Irrationality and transcendence .
Not all mathematical advances relating to were aimed at increasing the accuracy of approximations .
When Euler solved the Basel problem in 1735 , finding the exact value of the sum of the reciprocal squares , he established a connection between and the prime numbers that later contributed to the development and study of the Riemann zeta function : Swiss scientist Johann Heinrich Lambert in 1761 proved that is irrational , meaning it is not equal to the quotient of any two whole numbers .
Lambert 's proof exploited a continued - fraction representation of the tangent function .
French mathematician Adrien - Marie Legendre proved in 1794 that is also irrational .
In 1882 , German mathematician Ferdinand von Lindemann proved that is transcendental , confirming a conjecture made by both Legendre and Euler .
Hardy and Wright states that " the proofs were afterwards modified and simplified by Hilbert , Hurwitz , and other writers " .
ADOPTION OF THE SYMBOL Section::::Adoption of the symbol .
In the earliest usages , the Greek letter was an abbreviation of the Greek word for periphery ( περιφέρεια ) , and was combined in ratios with δ ( for diameter ) or ρ ( for radius ) to form circle constants .
( Before then , mathematicians sometimes used letters such as c or p instead . )
The first recorded use is Oughtred 's " formula_21 " , to express the ratio of periphery and diameter in the 1647 and later editions of Clavis Mathematicae .
Barrow likewise used " formula_22 " to represent the constant 3.14 ... , while Gregory instead used " formula_23 " to represent 6.28 ... .
The earliest known use of the Greek letter alone to represent the ratio of a circle 's circumference to its diameter was by Welsh mathematician William Jones in his 1706 work Synopsis Palmariorum Matheseos ; or , a New Introduction to the Mathematics .
The Greek letter first appears there in the phrase " 1/2 Periphery ( ) " in the discussion of a circle with radius one .
However , he writes that his equations for are from the " ready pen of the truly ingenious Mr. John Machin " , leading to speculation that Machin may have employed the Greek letter before Jones .
Jones ' notation was not immediately adopted by other mathematicians , with the fraction notation still being used as late as 1767 .
Euler started using the single - letter form beginning with his 1727 Essay Explaining The Properties Of Air , though he used , the ratio of radius to periphery , in this and some later writing .
Euler first used in his 1736 work Mechanica , and continued in his widely - read 1748 work Introductio in analysin infinitorum ( he wrote : " for the sake of brevity we will write this number as ; thus is equal to half the circumference of a circle of radius 1 " ) .
Because Euler corresponded heavily with other mathematicians in Europe , the use of the Greek letter spread rapidly , and the practice was universally adopted thereafter in the Western world , though the definition still varied between 3.14 ... and 6.28 ... as late as 1761 .
MODERN QUEST FOR MORE DIGITS COMPUTER ERA AND ITERATIVE ALGORITHMS Section::::Modern quest for more digits .
Section::::Computer era and iterative algorithms .
The development of computers in the mid-20th century again revolutionized the hunt for digits of .
American mathematicians John Wrench and Levi Smith reached 1,120 digits in 1949 using a desk calculator .
Using an inverse tangent ( arctan ) infinite series , a team led by George Reitwiesner and John von Neumann that same year achieved 2,037 digits with a calculation that took 70 hours of computer time on the ENIAC computer .
The record , always relying on an arctan series , was broken repeatedly ( 7,480 digits in 1957 ; 10,000 digits in 1958 ; 100,000 digits in 1961 ) until 1 million digits were reached in 1973 .
Two additional developments around 1980 once again accelerated the ability to compute .
First , the discovery of new iterative algorithms for computing , which were much faster than the infinite series ; and second , the invention of fast multiplication algorithms that could multiply large numbers very rapidly .
Such algorithms are particularly important in modern computations because most of the computer 's time is devoted to multiplication .
They include the Karatsuba algorithm , Toom – Cook multiplication , and Fourier transform - based methods .
The iterative algorithms were independently published in 1975–1976 by American physicist Eugene Salamin and Australian scientist Richard Brent .
These avoid reliance on infinite series .
An iterative algorithm repeats a specific calculation , each iteration using the outputs from prior steps as its inputs , and produces a result in each step that converges to the desired value .
The approach was actually invented over 160 years earlier by Carl Friedrich Gauss , in what is now termed the arithmetic – geometric mean method ( AGM method ) or Gauss – Legendre algorithm .
As modified by Salamin and Brent , it is also referred to as the Brent – Salamin algorithm .
The iterative algorithms were widely used after 1980 because they are faster than infinite series algorithms :
whereas infinite series typically increase the number of correct digits additively in successive terms , iterative algorithms generally multiply the number of correct digits at each step .
For example , the Brent - Salamin algorithm doubles the number of digits in each iteration .
In 1984 , the Canadian brothers John and Peter Borwein produced an iterative algorithm that quadruples the number of digits in each step ; and in 1987 , one that increases the number of digits five times in each step .
Iterative methods were used by Japanese mathematician Yasumasa Kanada to set several records for computing between 1995 and 2002 .
This rapid convergence comes at a price : the iterative algorithms require significantly more memory than infinite series .
MOTIVES FOR COMPUTING Section::::Motives for computing .
For most numerical calculations involving , a handful of digits provide sufficient precision .
According to Jörg Arndt and Christoph Haenel , thirty - nine digits are sufficient to perform most cosmological calculations , because that is the accuracy necessary to calculate the circumference of the observable universe with a precision of one atom .
Accounting for additional digits needed to compensate for computational round - off errors , Arndt concludes that a few hundred digits would suffice for any scientific application .
Despite this , people have worked strenuously to compute to thousands and millions of digits .
This effort may be partly ascribed to the human compulsion to break records , and such achievements with often make headlines around the world .
They also have practical benefits , such as testing supercomputers , testing numerical analysis algorithms ( including high - precision multiplication algorithms ) ; and within pure mathematics itself , providing data for evaluating the randomness of the digits of .
RAPIDLY CONVERGENT SERIES Section::::Rapidly convergent series .
Modern calculators do not use iterative algorithms exclusively .
New infinite series were discovered in the 1980s and 1990s that are as fast as iterative algorithms , yet are simpler and less memory intensive .
The fast iterative algorithms were anticipated in 1914 , when the Indian mathematician Srinivasa Ramanujan published dozens of innovative new formulae for , remarkable for their elegance , mathematical depth , and rapid convergence .
One of his formulae , based on modular equations , is This series converges much more rapidly than most arctan series , including Machin 's formula .
Bill Gosper was the first to use it for advances in the calculation of , setting a record of 17 million digits in 1985 .
Ramanujan 's formulae anticipated the modern algorithms developed by the Borwein brothers and the Chudnovsky brothers .
The Chudnovsky formula developed in 1987 is
It produces about 14 digits of per term , and has been used for several record - setting calculations , including the first to surpass 1 billion ( 10 ) digits in 1989 by the Chudnovsky brothers , 2.7 trillion ( 2.7×10 ) digits by Fabrice Bellard in 2009 , 10 trillion ( 10 ) digits in 2011 by Alexander Yee and Shigeru Kondo , and the current record of over 22 trillion digits in 2016 by Peter Trueb .
For similar formulas , see also the Ramanujan – Sato series .
In 2006 , Canadian mathematician Simon Plouffe used the PSLQ integer relation algorithm to generate several new formulas for , conforming to the following template :
where is ( Gelfond 's constant ) , is an odd number , and are certain rational numbers that Plouffe computed .
MONTE
CARLO METHODS Section::::Monte Carlo methods .
Monte Carlo methods , which evaluate the results of multiple random trials , can be used to create approximations of .
Buffon 's needle is one such technique : If a needle of length is dropped times on a surface on which parallel lines are drawn units apart , and if of those times it comes to rest crossing a line ( > 0 )
, then one may approximate based on the counts : Another Monte Carlo method for computing is to draw a circle inscribed in a square , and randomly place dots in the square .
The ratio of dots inside the circle to the total number of dots will approximately equal .
Another way to calculate using probability is to start with a random walk , generated by a sequence of ( fair ) coin tosses : independent random variables such that with equal probabilities .
The associated random walk is so that , for each , is drawn from a shifted and scaled binomial distribution .
As varies , defines a ( discrete ) stochastic process .
Then can be calculated by
This Monte Carlo method is independent of any relation to circles , and is a consequence of the central limit theorem , discussed below .
These Monte Carlo methods for approximating are very slow compared to other methods , and do not provide any information on the exact number of digits that are obtained .
Thus they are never used to approximate when speed or accuracy is desired .
SPIGOT ALGORITHMS Section::::Spigot algorithms .
Two algorithms were discovered in 1995 that opened up new avenues of research into .
They are called spigot algorithms because , like water dripping from a spigot , they produce single digits of that are not reused after they are calculated .
This is in contrast to infinite series or iterative algorithms , which retain and use all intermediate digits until the final result is produced .
American mathematicians Stan Wagon and Stanley Rabinowitz produced a simple spigot algorithm in 1995 .
Its speed is comparable to arctan algorithms , but not as fast as iterative algorithms .
Another spigot algorithm , the BBP digit extraction algorithm , was discovered in 1995 by Simon Plouffe :
This formula , unlike others before it , can produce any individual hexadecimal digit of without calculating all the preceding digits .
Individual binary digits may be extracted from individual hexadecimal digits , and octal digits can be extracted from one or two hexadecimal digits .
Variations of the algorithm have been discovered , but no digit extraction algorithm has yet been found that rapidly produces decimal digits .
An important application of digit extraction algorithms is to validate new claims of record computations : After a new record is claimed , the decimal result is converted to hexadecimal , and then a digit extraction algorithm is used to calculate several random hexadecimal digits near the end ; if they match , this provides a measure of confidence that the entire computation is correct .
Between 1998 and 2000 , the distributed computing project PiHex used Bellard 's formula ( a modification of the BBP algorithm ) to compute the quadrillionth ( 10th ) bit of , which turned out to be 0 .
In September 2010 , a Yahoo !
employee used the company 's Hadoop application on one thousand computers over a 23-day period to compute 256 bits of at the two - quadrillionth ( 2×10th ) bit , which also happens to be zero .
ROLE AND CHARACTERIZATIONS IN MATHEMATICS Section::::Role and characterizations in mathematics .
Because is closely related to the circle , it is found in many formulae from the fields of geometry and trigonometry , particularly those concerning circles , spheres , or ellipses .
Other branches of science , such as statistics , physics , Fourier analysis , and number theory , also include in some of their important formulae .
GEOMETRY AND TRIGONOMETRY Section::::Geometry and trigonometry . appears in formulae for areas and volumes of geometrical shapes based on circles , such as ellipses , spheres , cones , and tori .
Below are some of the more common formulae that involve .
*
The circumference of a circle with radius is .
* The area of a circle with radius is .
* The volume of a sphere with radius is .
* The surface area of a sphere with radius is .
The formulae above are special cases of the volume of the n - dimensional ball and the surface area of its boundary , the ( n−1)-dimensional sphere , given below .
Definite integrals that describe circumference , area , or volume of shapes generated by circles typically have values that involve .
For example , an integral that specifies half the area of a circle of radius one is given by :
In that integral the function represents the top half of a circle ( the square root is a consequence of the Pythagorean theorem ) , and the integral computes the area between that half of a circle and the axis .
The trigonometric functions rely on angles , and mathematicians generally use radians as units of measurement .
plays an important role in angles measured in radians , which are defined so that a complete circle spans an angle of 2 radians .
The angle measure of 180 ° is equal to radians , and 1 ° = /180
radians .
Common trigonometric functions have periods that are multiples of ; for example , sine and cosine have period 2 , so for any angle and any integer , EIGENVALUES Section::::Eigenvalues .
Many of the appearances of in the formulas of mathematics and the sciences have to do with its close relationship with geometry .
However , also appears in many natural situations having apparently nothing to do with geometry .
In many applications , it plays a distinguished role as an eigenvalue .
For example , an idealized vibrating string can be modelled as the graph of a function on the unit interval , with fixed ends .
The modes of vibration of the string are solutions of the differential equation .
Here is an associated eigenvalue , which is constrained by Sturm – Liouville theory to take on only certain specific values .
It must be positive , since the second derivative is negative definite , so it is convenient to write where is called the wavenumber .
Then satisfies the boundary conditions and the differential equation with .
The value is , in fact , the least such value of the wavenumber , and is associated with the fundamental mode of vibration of the string .
One way to obtain this is by estimating the energy .
The energy satisfies an inequality , Wirtinger 's inequality for functions , which states that if a function is given such that and and are both square integrable , then the inequality holds : and the case of equality holds precisely when is a multiple of .
So appears as an optimal constant in Wirtinger 's inequality , and from this it follows that it is the smallest such wavenumber , using the variational characterization of the eigenvalue .
As a consequence , is the smallest singular value of the derivative on the space of functions on vanishing at both endpoints ( the Sobolev space formula_34 ) .
INEQUALITIES
Section::::Inequalities .
The number serves appears in similar eigenvalue problems in higher - dimensional analysis .
As mentioned above , it can be characterized via its role as the best constant in the isoperimetric inequality : the area enclosed by a plane Jordan curve of perimeter satisfies the inequality and equality is clearly achieved for the circle , since in that case and .
Ultimately as a consequence of the isoperimetric inequality , appears in the optimal constant for the critical Sobolev inequality in n dimensions , which thus characterizes the role of in many physical phenomena as well , for example those of classical potential theory .
In two dimensions , the critical Sobolev inequality is for f a smooth function with compact support in , formula_37 is the gradient of f , and formula_38 and formula_39 refer respectively to the and -norm .
The Sobolev inequality is equivalent to the isoperimetric inequality ( in any dimension ) , with the same best constants .
Wirtinger 's inequality also generalizes to higher - dimensional Poincaré inequalities that provide best constants for the Dirichlet energy of an n - dimensional membrane .
Specifically , is the greatest constant such that for all convex subsets of of diameter 1 , and square - integrable functions u on of mean zero .
Just as Wirtinger 's inequality is the variational form of the Dirichlet eigenvalue problem in one dimension , the Poincaré inequality is the variational form of the Neumann eigenvalue problem , in any dimension .
FOURIER TRANSFORM AND HEISENBERG UNCERTAINTY PRINCIPLE
Section::::Fourier transform and Heisenberg uncertainty principle .
The constant also appears as a critical spectral parameter in the Fourier transform .
This is the integral transform , that takes a complex - valued integrable function on the real line to the function defined as : There are several different conventions for the Fourier transform , all of which involve a factor of that is placed somewhere .
The appearance of is essential in these formulas , as there is there is no possibility to remove altogether from the Fourier transform and its inverse transform .
The definition given above is the most canonical , however , because it describes the unique unitary operator on that is also an algebra homomorphism of to .
The Heisenberg uncertainty principle also contains the number .
The uncertainty principle gives a sharp lower bound on the extent to which it is possible to localize a function both in space and in frequency : with our conventions for the Fourier transform , The physical consequence , about the uncertainty in simultaneous position and momentum observations of a quantum mechanical system , is discussed below .
The appearance of in the formulae of Fourier analysis is ultimately a consequence of the Stone – von Neumann theorem , asserting the uniqueness of the Schrödinger representation of the Heisenberg group .
GAUSSIAN INTEGRALS Section::::Gaussian integrals .
The fields of probability and statistics frequently use the normal distribution as a simple model for complex phenomena ; for example , scientists generally assume that the observational error in most experiments follows a normal distribution .
The Gaussian function , which is the probability density function of the normal distribution with mean and standard deviation , naturally contains : For this to be a probability density , the area under the graph of needs to be equal to one .
This follows from a change of variables in the Gaussian integral : which says that the area under the basic bell curve in the figure is equal to the square root of .
The central limit theorem explains the central role of normal distributions , and thus of , in probability and statistics .
This theorem is ultimately connected with the spectral characterization of as the eigenvalue associated with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle , and the fact that equality holds in the uncertainty principle only for the Gaussian function .
Equivalently , is the unique constant making the Gaussian normal distribution equal to its own Fourier transform .
Indeed , according to , the " whole business " of establishing the fundamental theorems of Fourier analysis reduces to the Gaussian integral .
PROJECTIVE GEOMETRY Section::::Projective geometry .
Let be the set of all twice differentiable real functions formula_45 that satisfy the ordinary differential equation formula_46 .
Then is a two - dimensional real vector space , with two parameters corresponding to a pair of initial conditions for the differential equation .
For any formula_47 , let formula_48 be the evaluation functional , which associates to each
formula_49
the value formula_50 of the function at the real point .
Then , for each t " , the kernel of formula_51 is a one - dimensional linear subspace of .
Hence formula_52 defines a function from formula_53 from the real line to the real projective line .
This function is periodic , and the quantity can be characterized as the period of this map .
TOPOLOGY Section::::Topology .
The constant appears in the Gauss –
Bonnet formula which relates the differential geometry of surfaces to their topology .
Specifically , if a compact surface has Gauss curvature K , then where is the Euler characteristic , which is an integer .
An example is the surface area of a sphere S of curvature 1 ( so that its radius of curvature , which coincides with its radius , is also 1 . )
The Euler characteristic of a sphere can be computed from its homology groups and is found to be equal to two .
Thus we have reproducing the formula for the surface area of a sphere of radius 1 .
The constant appears in many other integral formulae in topology , in particular , those involving characteristic classes via the Chern – Weil homomorphism .
VECTOR CALCULUS Section::::Vector calculus .
Vector calculus is a branch of calculus that is concerned with the properties of vector fields , and has many physical applications such as to electricity and magnetism .
The Newtonian potential for a point source situated at the origin of a three - dimensional Cartesian coordinate system is which represents the potential energy of a unit mass ( or charge ) placed a distance from the source , and is a dimensional constant .
The field , denoted here by , which may be the ( Newtonian ) gravitational field or the ( Coulomb ) electric field , is the negative gradient of the potential : Special cases include Coulomb 's law and Newton 's law of universal gravitation .
Gauss ' law states that the outward flux of the field through any smooth , simple , closed , orientable surface containing the origin is equal to :
It is standard to absorb this factor of into the constant , but this argument shows why it must appear somewhere .
Furthermore , is the surface area of the unit sphere , but we have not assumed that is the sphere .
However , as a consequence of the divergence theorem , because the region away from the origin is vacuum ( source - free ) it is only the homology class of the surface in that matters in computing the integral , so it can be replaced by any convenient surface in the same homology class , in particular , a sphere , where spherical coordinates can be used to calculate the integral .
A consequence of the Gauss law is that the negative Laplacian of the potential is equal to times the Dirac delta function :
More general distributions of matter ( or charge ) are obtained from this by convolution , giving the Poisson equation where is the distribution function .
The constant also plays an analogous role in four - dimensional potentials associated with Einstein 's equations , a fundamental formula which forms the basis of the general theory of relativity and describes the fundamental interaction of gravitation as a result of spacetime being curved by matter and energy : where is the Ricci curvature tensor , is the scalar curvature , is the metric tensor , is the cosmological constant , is Newton 's gravitational constant , is the speed of light in vacuum , and is the stress – energy tensor .
The left - hand side of Einstein 's equation is a non - linear analog of the Laplacian of the metric tensor , and reduces to that in the weak field limit , with the formula_61 term playing the role of a Lagrange multiplier , and the right - hand side is the analog of the distribution function , times .
CAUCHY 'S INTEGRAL FORMULA
Section::::Cauchy 's integral formula .
One of the key tools in complex analysis is contour integration of a function over a positively oriented ( rectifiable ) Jordan curve .
A form of Cauchy 's integral formula states that if a point is interior to , then Although the curve is not a circle , and hence does not have any obvious connection to the constant , a standard proof of this result uses Morera 's theorem , which implies that the integral is invariant under homotopy of the curve , so that it can be deformed to a circle and then integrated explicitly in polar coordinates .
More generally , it is true that if a rectifiable closed curve does not contain , then the above integral is times the winding number of the curve .
The general form of Cauchy 's integral formula establishes the relationship between the values of a complex analytic function on the Jordan curve and the value of at any interior point of : provided is analytic in the region enclosed by and extends continuously to .
Cauchy 's integral formula is a special case of the residue theorem , that if is a meromorphic function the region enclosed by and is continuous in a neighborhood of , then where the sum is of the residues at the poles of .
THE GAMMA FUNCTION AND STIRLING 'S APPROXIMATION Section::::The gamma function and Stirling 's approximation .
The factorial function is the product of all of the positive integers through .
The gamma function extends the concept of factorial ( normally defined only for non - negative integers ) to all complex numbers , except the negative real integers .
When the gamma function is evaluated at half - integers , the result contains ; for example formula_65 and formula_66 .
The gamma function is defined by its Weierstrass product development :
where is the Euler – Mascheroni constant .
Evaluated at and squared , the equation reduces to the Wallis product formula .
The gamma function is also connected to the Riemann zeta function and identities for the functional determinant , in which the constant plays an important role .
The gamma function is used to calculate the volume of the n - dimensional ball of radius r in Euclidean n - dimensional space , and the surface area of its boundary , the ( n−1)-dimensional sphere :
Further , it follows from the functional equation that The gamma function can be used to create a simple approximation to the factorial function for large : formula_71 which is known as Stirling 's approximation .
Equivalently , As a geometrical application of Stirling 's approximation , let denote the standard simplex in n - dimensional Euclidean space , and denote the simplex having all of its sides scaled up by a factor of .
Then Ehrhart 's volume conjecture is that this is the ( optimal ) upper bound on the volume of a convex body containing only one lattice point .
NUMBER THEORY AND RIEMANN ZETA FUNCTION Section::::Number theory and Riemann zeta function .
The Riemann zeta function is used in many areas of mathematics .
When evaluated at it can be written as Finding a simple solution for this infinite series
was a famous problem in mathematics called the Basel problem .
Leonhard Euler solved it in 1735 when he showed it was equal to .
Euler 's result leads to the number theory result that the probability of two random numbers being relatively prime ( that is , having no shared factors ) is equal to .
This probability is based on the observation that the probability that any number is divisible by a prime is ( for example , every 7th integer is divisible by 7 . )
Hence the probability that two numbers are both divisible by this prime is , and the probability that at least one of them is not is .
For distinct primes , these divisibility events are mutually independent ; so the probability that two numbers are relatively prime is given by a product over all primes :
This probability can be used in conjunction with a random number generator to approximate using a Monte Carlo approach .
The solution to the Basel problem implies that the geometrically derived quantity is connected in a deep way to the distribution of prime numbers .
This is a special case of Weil 's conjecture on Tamagawa numbers , which asserts the equality of similar such infinite products of arithmetic quantities , localized at each prime p , and a geometrical quantity : the reciprocal of the volume of a certain locally symmetric space .
In the case of the Basel problem , it is the hyperbolic 3-manifold .
The zeta function also satisfies Riemann 's functional equation , which involves as well as the gamma function : Furthermore , the derivative of the zeta function satisfies A consequence is that can be obtained from the functional determinant of the harmonic oscillator .
This functional determinant can be computed via a product expansion , and is equivalent to the Wallis product formula .
The calculation can be recast in quantum mechanics , specifically the variational approach to the spectrum of the hydrogen atom .
FOURIER SERIES Section::::Fourier series .
The constant also appears naturally in Fourier series of periodic functions .
Periodic functions are functions on the group of fractional parts of real numbers .
The Fourier decomposition shows that a complex - valued function on can be written as an infinite linear superposition of unitary characters of .
That is , continuous group homomorphisms from to the circle group of unit modulus complex numbers .
It is a theorem that every character of is one of the complex exponentials formula_78 .
There is a unique character on , up to complex conjugation , that is a group isomorphism .
Using the Haar measure on the circle group , the constant is half the magnitude of the Radon –
Nikodym derivative of this character .
The other characters have derivatives whose magnitudes are positive integral multiples of 2 .
As a result , the constant is the unique number such that the group T , equipped with its Haar measure , is Pontrjagin dual to the lattice of integral multiples of 2 .
This is a version of the one - dimensional Poisson summation formula .
MODULAR FORMS AND THETA FUNCTIONS
Section::::Modular forms and theta functions .
The constant is connected in a deep way with the theory of modular forms and theta functions .
For example , the Chudnovsky algorithm involves in an essential way the j - invariant of an elliptic curve .
Modular forms are holomorphic functions in the upper half plane characterized by their transformation properties under the modular group formula_79 ( or its various subgroups ) , a lattice in the group formula_80 .
An example is the Jacobi theta function which is a kind of modular form called a Jacobi form .
This is sometimes written in terms of the nome
formula_82 .
The constant is the unique constant making the Jacobi theta function an automorphic form , which means that it transforms in a specific way .
Certain identities hold for all automorphic forms .
An example is which implies that transforms as a representation under the discrete Heisenberg group .
General modular forms and other theta functions also involve , once again because of the Stone – von Neumann theorem .
CAUCHY DISTRIBUTION AND POTENTIAL THEORY
Section::::Cauchy distribution and potential theory .
The Cauchy distribution is a probability density function .
The total probability is equal to one , owing to the integral : The Shannon entropy of the Cauchy distribution is equal to , which also involves .
The Cauchy distribution plays an important role in potential theory because it is the simplest Furstenberg measure , the classical Poisson kernel associated with a Brownian motion in a half - plane .
Conjugate harmonic functions and so also the Hilbert transform are associated with the asymptotics of the Poisson kernel .
The Hilbert transform H is the integral transform given by the Cauchy principal value of the singular integral
The constant is the unique ( positive ) normalizing factor such that H defines a linear complex structure on the Hilbert space of square - integrable real - valued functions on the real line .
The Hilbert transform , like the Fourier transform , can be characterized purely in terms of its transformation properties on the Hilbert space : up to a normalization factor , it is the unique bounded linear operator that commutes with positive dilations and anti - commutes with all reflections of the real line .
The constant is the unique normalizing factor that makes this transformation unitary .
COMPLEX DYNAMICS Section::::Complex dynamics .
An occurrence of in the Mandelbrot set fractal was discovered by David Boll in 1991 .
He examined the behavior of the Mandelbrot set near the " neck " at .
If points with coordinates are considered , as ε tends to zero , the number of iterations until divergence for the point multiplied by ε converges to .
The point at the cusp of the large " valley " on the right side of the Mandelbrot set behaves similarly : the number of iterations until divergence multiplied by the square root of ε tends to .
OUTSIDE MATHEMATICS
DESCRIBING PHYSICAL PHENOMENA Section::::Outside mathematics .
Section::::Describing physical phenomena .
Although not a physical constant , appears routinely in equations describing fundamental principles of the universe , often because of 's relationship to the circle and to spherical coordinate systems .
A simple formula from the field of classical mechanics gives the approximate period of a simple pendulum of length , swinging with a small amplitude ( is the earth 's gravitational acceleration ) :
One of the key formulae of quantum mechanics is Heisenberg 's uncertainty principle , which shows that the uncertainty in the measurement of a particle 's position ( Δ ) and momentum ( Δ ) can not both be arbitrarily small at the same time ( where is Planck 's constant ) :
The fact that is approximately equal to 3 plays a role in the relatively long lifetime of orthopositronium .
The inverse lifetime to lowest order in the fine - structure constant is where is the mass of the electron .
The field of fluid dynamics contains in Stokes ' law , which approximates the frictional force exerted on small , spherical objects of radius , moving with velocity in a fluid with dynamic viscosity :
In electromagnetics , the vacuum permeability constant μ appears in Maxwell 's equations , which describe the properties of electric and magnetic fields and electromagnetic radiation .
It is defined as exactly A relation for the speed of light in vacuum , can be derived from Maxwell 's equations in the medium of classical vacuum using a relationship between μ and the electric constant ( vacuum permittivity ) , in SI units : Under ideal conditions ( uniform gentle slope on a homogeneously erodible substrate ) , the sinuosity of a meandering river approaches .
The sinuosity is the ratio between the actual length and the straight - line distance from source to mouth .
Faster currents along the outside edges of a river 's bends cause more erosion than along the inside edges , thus pushing the bends even farther out , and increasing the overall loopiness of the river .
However , that loopiness eventually causes the river to double back on itself in places and " short - circuit " , creating an ox - bow lake in the process .
The balance between these two opposing factors leads to an average ratio of between the actual length and the direct distance between source and mouth .
MEMORIZING DIGITS
Section::::Memorizing digits .
Piphilology is the practice of memorizing large numbers of digits of , and world - records are kept by the Guinness World Records .
The record for memorizing digits of , certified by Guinness World Records , is 70,000 digits , recited in India by Rajveer Meena in 9 hours and 27 minutes on 21 March 2015 .
In 2006 , Akira Haraguchi , a retired Japanese engineer , claimed to have recited 100,000 decimal places , but the claim was not verified by Guinness World Records .
One common technique is to memorize a story or poem in which the word lengths represent the digits of : The first word has three letters , the second word has one , the third has four , the fourth has one , the fifth has five , and so on .
An early example of a memorization aid , originally devised by English scientist James Jeans , is " How I want a drink , alcoholic of course , after the heavy lectures involving quantum mechanics . "
When a poem is used , it is sometimes referred to as a piem .
Poems for memorizing have been composed in several languages in addition to English .
Record - setting memorizers typically do not rely on poems , but instead use methods such as remembering number patterns and the method of loci .
A few authors have used the digits of to establish a new form of constrained writing , where the word lengths are required to represent the digits of .
The Cadaeic Cadenza contains the first 3835 digits of in this manner , and the full - length book Not a Wake contains 10,000 words , each representing one digit of .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Perhaps because of the simplicity of its definition and its ubiquitous presence in formulae , has been represented in popular culture more than other mathematical constructs .
In the 2008 Open University and BBC documentary co - production , The Story of Maths , aired in October 2008 on BBC Four , British mathematician Marcus du Sautoy shows a visualization of the – historically first exact – formula for calculating when visiting India and exploring its contributions to trigonometry .
In the Palais de la Découverte ( a science museum in Paris )
there is a circular room known as the pi room .
On its wall are inscribed 707 digits of .
The digits are large wooden characters attached to the dome - like ceiling .
The digits were based on an 1853 calculation by English mathematician William Shanks , which included an error beginning at the 528th digit .
The error was detected in 1946 and corrected in 1949 .
In Carl Sagan 's novel Contact it is suggested that the creator of the universe buried a message deep within the digits of .
The digits of have also been incorporated into the lyrics of the song " Pi " from the album Aerial by Kate Bush .
In the United States , Pi Day falls on 14 March ( written 3/14 in the US style ) , and is popular among students .
and its digital representation are often used by self - described " math geeks " for inside jokes among mathematically and technologically minded groups .
Several college cheers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology include " 3.14159 " .
Pi Day in 2015 was particularly significant because the date and time 3/14/15 9:26:53 reflected many more digits of pi .
During the 2011 auction for Nortel 's portfolio of valuable technology patents , Google made a series of unusually specific bids based on mathematical and scientific constants , including .
In 1958 Albert Eagle proposed replacing by ( tau ) , where , to simplify formulas .
However , no other authors are known to use in this way .
Some people use a different value , , arguing that , as the number of radians in one turn , or as the ratio of a circle 's circumference to its radius rather than its diameter , is more natural than and simplifies many formulas .
Celebrations of this number , because it approximately equals 6.28 , by making 28 June " Tau Day " and eating " twice the pie " , have been reported in the media .
However , this use of has not made its way into mainstream mathematics .
In 1897 , an amateur American mathematician attempted to persuade the Indiana legislature to pass the Indiana Pi Bill , which described a method to square the circle and contained text that implied various incorrect values for , including 3.2 .
The bill is notorious as an attempt to establish a value of scientific constant by legislative fiat .
The bill was passed by the Indiana House of Representatives , but rejected by the Senate , meaning it did not become a law .
IN COMPUTER CULTURE Section::::In computer culture .
In contemporary internet culture , individuals and organizations frequently pay homage to the number .
For instance , the computer scientist Donald Knuth let the version numbers of his program TeX approach .
The versions are 3 , 3.1 , 3.14 , and so forth .
NOTES Section::::Notes .
Footnotes References
* English translation by Catriona and David Lischka .
* , English translation by Stephen Wilson .
* .
[ https://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/3029284?sid=21105295462031&uid=2&uid=4 issue 3 Jan / Feb ] , issue 4 Mar / Apr , issue 5 May /
Jun
FURTHER READING
* Chudnovsky , David V. and Chudnovsky , Gregory V. , " Approximations and Complex Multiplication
According to Ramanujan " , in Ramanujan Revisited ( G.E. Andrews et al .
Eds ) , Academic Press , 1988 ,
pp .
375–396 , 468–472
* Cox , David A. , " The Arithmetic - Geometric Mean of Gauss " , L ' Ensignement Mathematique , 30(1984 ) 275–330
* Delahaye , Jean - Paul , " Le Fascinant Nombre Pi " , Paris :
Bibliothèque Pour la Science ( 1997 )
* Euler , Leonhard , " On the Use of the Discovered Fractions to Sum Infinite Series " , in Introduction to Analysis of the Infinite .
Book I , translated from the Latin by J.D. Blanton , Springer - Verlag , 1964 , pp .
137–153
* Hardy , G.H. and Wright E.M. , An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers first published 1938 , fifth Edition 1979 with additions 2000 , Clarendon Press , Oxford U.K.
* Heath , T.L. , The Works of Archimedes , Cambridge , 1897 ; reprinted in The Works of Archimedes with The Method of Archimedes , Dover , 1953 , pp .
91–98
*
Huygens , Christiaan , " De Circuli Magnitudine Inventa " , Christiani Hugenii Opera Varia
I , Leiden 1724 , pp .
384–388
*
Niven , Ivan , " A Simple Proof that pi Is Irrational " ,
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society , 53:7 ( July 1947 ) , 507 * Ramanujan , Srinivasa , " Modular Equations and Approximations to π " , Quarterly Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics , XLV , 1914 , 350–372 .
Reprinted in G.H. Hardy , P.V. Seshu Aiyar , and B. M. Wilson ( eds ) , Srinivasa Ramanujan : Collected Papers , 1927 ( reprinted 2000 ) , pp .
23–29
* Shanks , William , Contributions to Mathematics Chiefly of the Rectification of the Circle to 607 Places of Decimals , 1853 , pp .
i – xvi , 10
* Tropfke , Johannes , Geschichte Der Elementar - Mathematik in Systematischer Darstellung
( The history of elementary mathematics ) , BiblioBazaar , 2009 ( reprint ) , * Viete , Francois , Variorum de Rebus Mathematicis Reponsorum Liber VII .
F. Viete , Opera Mathematica ( reprint ) , Georg Olms Verlag , 1970 ,
pp .
398–401 ,
436–446 * Wagon , Stan , " Is Pi Normal ? " , The Mathematical Intelligencer , 7:3(1985 ) 65–67
* Wallis , John , Arithmetica Infinitorum , sive Nova Methodus Inquirendi in Curvilineorum Quadratum , aliaque difficiliora Matheseos Problemata , Oxford 1655–6 .
Reprinted in vol .
1
( pp .
357–478 ) of Opera Mathematica , Oxford 1693
* Zebrowski , Ernest , A History of the Circle : Mathematical Reasoning and the Physical Universe , Rutgers University Press , 1999 , EXTERNAL LINKS * 10 million decimal places * " Pi " at Wolfram Mathworld * Representations of Pi at Wolfram Alpha
* Demonstration by Lambert ( 1761 ) of irrationality of , online and analyzed BibNum ( PDF ) .
* Search Engine 2 billion searchable digits of , and