NATURAL LOGARITHM
The natural logarithm of a number is its logarithm to the base of the mathematical constant e , where e is an irrational and transcendental number approximately equal to .
The natural logarithm of x is generally written as , , or sometimes , if the base e is implicit , simply .
Parentheses are sometimes added for clarity , giving ln(x ) , log(x ) or log(x ) .
This is done in particular when the argument to the logarithm is not a single symbol , to prevent ambiguity .
The natural logarithm of x is the power to which e would have to be raised to equal x.
For example , ln(7.5 ) is 2.0149 ... , because .
The natural log of e itself , ln(e ) , is 1 , because , while the natural logarithm of 1 , ln(1 ) , is 0 , since .
The natural logarithm can be defined for any positive real number a as the area under the curve from 1 to a ( the area being taken as negative when a < 1 ) .
The simplicity of this definition , which is matched in many other formulas involving the natural logarithm , leads to the term " natural " .
The definition of the natural logarithm can be extended to give logarithm values for negative numbers and for all non - zero complex numbers , although this leads to a multi - valued function : see Complex logarithm .
The natural logarithm function , if considered as a real - valued function of a real variable , is the inverse function of the exponential function , leading to the identities : Like all logarithms , the natural logarithm maps multiplication into addition :
Thus , the logarithm function is a group isomorphism from positive real numbers under multiplication to the group of real numbers under addition , represented as a function : Logarithms can be defined to any positive base other than 1 , not only
e. However , logarithms in other bases differ only by a constant multiplier from the natural logarithm , and are usually defined in terms of the latter .
For instance , the binary logarithm is the natural logarithm divided by ln(2 ) , the natural logarithm of 2 .
Logarithms are useful for solving equations in which the unknown appears as the exponent of some other quantity .
For example , logarithms are used to solve for the half - life , decay constant , or unknown time in exponential decay problems .
They are important in many branches of mathematics and the sciences and are used in finance to solve problems involving compound interest .
By Lindemann – Weierstrass theorem , the natural logarithm of any positive algebraic number other than 1 is a transcendental number .
colspan=2 align = center Natural logarithm Representation
formula_5
Inverse formula_6
Derivative formula_7
nth Derivative formula_8
Indefinite Integral
formula_9 HISTORY Section::::History .
The concept of the natural logarithm was worked out by Gregoire de Saint - Vincent and Alphonse Antonio de Sarasa before 1649 .
Their work involved quadrature of the hyperbola by determination of the area of hyperbolic sectors .
Their solution generated the requisite " hyperbolic logarithm " function having properties now associated with the natural logarithm .
An early mention of the natural logarithm was by Nicholas Mercator in his work Logarithmotechnia published in 1668 , although the mathematics teacher John Speidell had already in 1619 compiled a table of what in fact were effectively natural logarithms .
NOTATIONAL CONVENTIONS
Section::::Notational conventions .
The notations and both refer unambiguously to the natural logarithm of x. Historically , the notations " " and " " were in use at least since the 1730s , and until at least the 1840s , then " log . " or " log " , at least since the 1790s .
Finally , in the twentieth century , the notations " Log " and " logh " are attested .
ORIGIN OF THE TERM NATURAL LOGARITHM Section::::Origin of the term natural logarithm .
The function formula_10 for n ∈
ℤ produces a bi - infinite sequence of hyperbolic points .
When two adjacent points are joined to ( 0 , 0 ) by hyperbolic radii , the hyperbolic sector so formed has unit area .
Thus the total area inside the hyperbola and its asymptotes is infinite , consistent with divergence of the harmonic series .
Area measure accords with the arc measure in both the circle and right hyperbola : in a circle of radius , the arc of a circular sector has an angle equal to the sector area .
Likewise , the hyperbolic angle of a hyperbolic arc is measured by the area of the corresponding hyperbolic sector of xy = 1 .
Tribute is paid to Leonhard Euler who profiled the importance of Euler 's number e = 2.71828 ...
as the base of the exponential function and natural logarithm .
He introduced the idea of a transcendental function to classify the trigonometric and exponential functions in the precalculus textbook Introduction to the Analysis of the Infinite ( 1748 ) .
The quadrature of the hyperbola requires the natural logarithm , so integral calculus was inhibited by the lack of an expression for hyperbolic quadrature until Gregoire de Saint - Vincent ( 1647 ) described it with a logarithmic feature : the correspondence of an arithmetic sequence of areas with a geometric sequence on the asymptote .
Expositions by Nicholas Mercator , Christiaan Huygens and others led to Euler 's Introduction that detailed the circular functions in terms of infinite series .
The connection between area and the arcs of circular and hyperbolic functions demonstrates the naturalness of this logarithm .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
Formally , ln(a ) may be defined as the area under the hyperbola 1 / x .
This is the integral , This function is a logarithm because it satisfies the fundamental property of a logarithm :
This can be demonstrated by splitting the integral that defines ln(ab ) into two parts and then making the variable substitution in the second part , as follows : In elementary terms , this is simply scaling by 1 / a in the horizontal direction and by a in the vertical direction .
Area does not change under this transformation , but the region between a and ab is reconfigured .
Because the function a/(ax ) is equal to the function
1 / x , the resulting area is precisely ln(b ) .
The number e is defined as the unique real number a such that ln(a ) = 1 .
Alternatively , if the exponential function has been defined first , say by using an infinite series , the natural logarithm may be defined as its inverse function , i.e. , ln is that function such that exp(ln(x ) ) = x.
Since the range of the exponential function on real arguments is all positive real numbers and since the exponential function is strictly increasing , this is well - defined for all positive x. PROPERTIES
* formula_14 * formula_15 * formula_16 * formula_17
* formula_18
* formula_19 * formula_21 Since formula_22 is the inverse of the exponential function
formula_6 , one can write Section::::Properties . which proves the claim .
* formula_25
* formula_26
The statement is true for formula_27 , and we now show that formula_28 for all formula_29 , which completes the proof by the fundamental theorem of calculus .
Hence , we want to show that ( Note that we have not yet proved that this statement is true . )
If this is true , then by multiplying the middle statement by the positive quantity formula_31 and subtracting formula_32 we would obtain
This statement is trivially true for formula_35 since the left hand side is negative or zero .
For formula_36 it is still true since both factors on the left are less than 1 ( recall that formula_37 ) .
Thus this last statement is true and by repeating our steps in reverse order we find that formula_28 for all formula_29 .
This completes the proof .
An alternate proof is to observe that formula_40 under the given conditions .
This can be proved , e.g. , by the norm inequalities .
Taking logarithms and using formula_41 completes the proof .
DERIVATIVE
Section::::Derivative .
The derivative of the natural logarithm as a real - valued function on the positive reals is given by How to establish this derivative of the natural logarithm
depends on how it is defined firsthand .
If the natural logarithm is defined as the integral then the derivative immediately follows from the first part of the fundamental theorem of calculus .
If the natural logarithm is defined as the inverse of the ( natural ) exponential function , then the derivative for x > 0 can be found by using the properties of the logarithm and a definition of the exponential function .
SERIES Section::::Series .
If formula_45 then This is the Taylor series for ln
x around 1 .
A change of variables yields the Mercator series : valid for x ≤ 1 and x ≠ −1 .
Leonhard Euler , disregarding formula_48 , nevertheless applied this series to x = −1 , in order to show that the harmonic series equals the ( natural ) logarithm of 1/(1 − 1 ) , that is the logarithm of infinity .
Nowadays , more formally , one can prove that the harmonic series truncated at N is close to the logarithm of N , when N is large .
At right is a picture of ln(1 + x ) and some of its Taylor polynomials around 0 .
These approximations converge to the function only in the region −1 < x ≤ 1 ; outside of this region the higher - degree Taylor polynomials evolve to worse approximations for the function .
A useful special case for positive integers n , taking formula_49 , is : If formula_51 then Now taking formula_53 for positive integers n , yields :
If formula_55 then Since we arrive at Substituting again formula_53 for positive integers n , yields :
This is , by far , the fastest converging of the series described here .
THE NATURAL LOGARITHM IN INTEGRATION Section::::The natural logarithm in integration .
The natural logarithm allows simple integration of functions of the form g(x ) =
f ' ( x)/f(x ) :
an antiderivative of g(x ) is given by ln(f(x ) ) .
This is the case because of the chain rule and the following fact :
In other words , and Here is an example in the case of g(x )
= tan(x ) :
Letting f(x ) = cos(x ) : where C is an arbitrary constant of integration .
The natural logarithm can be integrated using integration by parts : Let : then : NUMERICAL VALUE Section::::Numerical value .
For ln(x ) where x > 1 , the closer the value of x is to 1 , the faster the rate of convergence .
The identities associated with the logarithm can be leveraged to exploit this : Such techniques were used before calculators , by referring to numerical tables and performing manipulations such as those above .
NATURAL LOGARITHM OF 10 Section::::Natural logarithm of 10 .
The natural logarithm of 10 , which has the decimal expansion 2.30258509 ... , plays a role for example in the computation of natural logarithms of numbers represented in scientific notation , as a mantissa multiplied by a power of 10 :
This means that one can effectively calculate the logarithms of numbers with very large or very small magnitude using the logarithms of a relatively small set of decimals in the range
formula_73 .
HIGH PRECISION Section::::High precision .
To compute the natural logarithm with many digits of precision , the Taylor series approach is not efficient since the convergence is slow .
Especially if is near 1 , a good alternative is to use Halley 's method or Newton 's method to invert the exponential function , because the series of the exponential function converges more quickly .
For finding the value of to give using Halley 's method , or equivalently to give using Newton 's method , the iteration simplifies to which has cubic convergence to .
Another alternative for extremely high precision calculation is the formula where denotes the arithmetic - geometric mean of 1 and , and with chosen so that bits of precision is attained .
( For most purposes , the value of 8 for m is sufficient . )
In fact , if this method is used , Newton inversion of the natural logarithm may conversely be used to calculate the exponential function efficiently .
( The constants ln 2
and π can be pre - computed to the desired precision using any of several known quickly converging series . )
Based on a proposal by William Kahan and first implemented in the Hewlett - Packard HP-41C calculator in 1979 ( referred to under " LN1 " in the display , only ) , some calculators , computer algebra systems and programming languages ( for example C99 ) provide a special natural logarithm plus 1 function , alternatively named LNP1 , or log1p to give more accurate results for logarithms close to zero by passing arguments x , also close to zero , to a function log1p(x ) , which returns the value ln(1+x ) , instead of passing a value y close to 1 to a function returning ln(y ) .
The function log1p avoids in the floating point arithmetic a near cancelling of the absolute term 1 with the second term from the Taylor expansion of the ln , thereby allowing for a high accuracy for both the argument and the result near zero .
Similar inverse functions named " expm1 " , " expm " or " exp1 m " exist as well , all with the meaning of An identity in terms of the inverse hyperbolic tangent , gives a high precision value for small values of on systems that do not implement .
COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY
Section::::Computational complexity .
The computational complexity of computing the natural logarithm ( using the arithmetic - geometric mean ) is O(M(n )
ln n ) .
Here n is the number of digits of precision at which the natural logarithm is to be evaluated and M(n ) is the computational complexity of multiplying two n - digit numbers .
CONTINUED FRACTIONS Section::::Continued fractions .
While no simple continued fractions are available , several generalized continued fractions are , including :
These continued fractions — particularly the last — converge rapidly for values close to 1 .
However , the natural logarithms of much larger numbers can easily be computed by repeatedly adding those of smaller numbers , with similarly rapid convergence .
For example , since 2 = 1.25 × 1.024 , the natural logarithm of 2 can be computed as : Furthermore , since 10 = 1.25 × 1.024 , even the natural logarithm of 10 similarly can be computed as : COMPLEX LOGARITHMS Section::::Complex logarithms .
The exponential function can be extended to a function which gives a complex number as for any arbitrary complex number x ; simply use the infinite series with x complex .
This exponential function can be inverted to form a complex logarithm that exhibits most of the properties of the ordinary logarithm .
There are two difficulties involved : no x has ; and it turns out that .
Since the multiplicative property still works for the complex exponential function , , for all complex z and integers k.
So the logarithm can not be defined for the whole complex plane , and even then it is multi - valued – any complex logarithm can be changed into an " equivalent " logarithm by adding any integer multiple of 2i at will .
The complex logarithm can only be single - valued on the cut plane .
For example , = or or - , etc . ; and although can be defined as 2i , or 10i or −6i , and so on .
SEE ALSO
* Approximating natural exponents ( log base e )
* John Napier – discoverer of logarithms
* Logarithm of a matrix * Logarithmic integral function * Nicholas Mercator – first to use the term natural logarithm
* Polylogarithm * Von Mangoldt function *
The number e NOTES REFERENCES