LOW - ALCOHOL BEER Low - alcohol beer is beer with little or no alcohol content and aims to reproduce the taste of beer without the inebriating effects of standard alcoholic brews .
Most low - alcohol beers are lagers , but there are some low - alcohol ales .
Low - alcohol beer is also known as light beer , non - alcoholic beer , small beer , small ale , or near - beer .
In the United States , beverages containing less than 0.5 % alcohol by volume ( ABV ) were legally called non - alcoholic , according to the now - defunct Volstead Act .
Because of its very low alcohol content , non - alcoholic beer may be legally sold to minors in many American states .
In the United Kingdom , the following definitions apply by law ( correct as of May 2007 ) :
* No alcohol or alcohol - free : not more than 0.05 %
ABV
* Dealcoholized : over 0.05 % but less than 0.5 % ABV * Low - alcohol : not more than 1.2 %
ABV
In some parts of the European Union , beer must contain no more than 0.5 % ABV if it is labelled " alcohol - free " .
In Australia , the term " light beer " refers to any beer with less than 3.5 % alcohol .
Spain is the main consumer and producer of low - alcohol beer in the European Union .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Low - alcoholic brews such as small beer date back at least to Medieval Europe , where they served as a less risky alternative to water ( which often was polluted by feces and parasites ) and were less expensive than the full strength brews used at festivities .
More recently , the temperance movements and the need to avoid alcohol while driving , operating machinery etc led to the development of non - intoxicating beers .
In the United States , non - alcoholic brews were promoted during Prohibition , according to John Naleszkiewicz .
In 1917 , President Wilson proposed limiting the alcohol content of malt beverages to 2.75 % to try to appease avid prohibitionists .
In 1919 , Congress approved the Volstead Act , which limited the alcohol content of all beverages to 0.5 % .
These very low alcohol beverages became known as tonics , and many breweries began brewing them in order to stay in business during Prohibition .
Since removing the alcohol from the beer requires just one simple extra step , many breweries saw it as an easy change .
In 1933 , when Prohibition was repealed , breweries easily removed this extra step .
By the 1980s and 1990s , growing concerns about alcoholism led to the growing popularity of " light " beers .
In the 2010s , breweries have focused on marketing low - alcohol beers to counter the popularity of homebrew .
Declining consumption has also led to the introduction of mass - market non - alcoholic beverages , dubbed as " near beer " .
At the start of the 21st century , alcohol - free beer has seen a rise in popularity in the Middle East ( which now makes up a third of the market ) .
One reason for this is that Islamic scholars issued fatawa which permitted the consumption of beer as long as large quantities could be consumed without getting drunk .
PROS AND CONS Section::::Pros and cons .
Positive features of non - alcoholic brews include the ability to drive after consuming several drinks , the reduction in alcohol - related illness , and less severe hangover symptoms .
Some common complaints about non - alcoholic brews include a loss of flavor , addition of one step in the brewing process , sugary taste , and a shorter shelf life .
There are also legal implications .
Some state governments , e.g. Pennsylvania , prohibit the sale of non - alcoholic brews to persons under the age of 21 .
A study conducted by the department of psychology at Indiana University said , " Because non - alcoholic beer provides sensory cues that simulate alcoholic beer , this beverage may be more effective than other placebos in contributing to a credible manipulation of expectancies to receive alcohol " , making people feel " drunk " when physically they are not .
CATEGORIES LIGHT ( REDUCED ALCOHOL )
BEER Section::::Categories .
Section::::Light ( reduced alcohol ) beer .
Light beer is beer with reduced alcohol content and/or calories compared to regular beer .
The spelling " lite beer " is also commonly used .
Light beers may be chosen by drinkers who wish to manage their alcohol consumption or their calorie intake .
However , these beers are sometimes criticized for being less flavorful than full - strength beers , being " watered down " ( whether in perception or in fact ) , and thus advertising campaigns for light beers generally advertise their retention of flavor .
In Australia , regular beers have approximately 5 % ABV ; reduced - alcohol beers have 2.2%–3.2 % .
In Canada , a reduced - alcohol beer contains 2.6%–4.0 % ABV , and
an " extra - light " beer contains less than 2.5 % .
In the United States , most reduced - alcohol beers , including Bud Light , Coors Light , and Miller Lite , have 4.2 % ABV , which is 16 % less than beer with 5 % ABV .
In Sweden , low alcohol beer is either 2.2 % , 2.8 % or 3.5 % , and can be purchased in an ordinary supermarket whereas normal strength beers of above 3.5 % must be purchased at Systembolaget .
Beer containing 2.8 - 3.5 % ABV ( called Folköl or " Peoples ' Beer " ) may be legally sold in any convenience store to people over 18 years of age , whereas stronger beer may only be sold in state - run liquor stores to people older than 20 .
In addition , businesses selling food for on - premises consumption do not need an alcohol license to serve 3.5 % beer .
Virtually all major Swedish brewers , and several international ones , in addition to their full - strength beer , make 3.5 % folköl versions as well .
Beer below or equaling 2.25 % ABV ( lättöl ) is not legally subject to age restrictions ; however , some stores voluntarily opt out from selling it to minors anyway .
LOW - POINT BEER Section::::Low - point beer .
Low - point beer , which is often known in America as " three - two beer " or " 3 point 2 brew " , is beer that contains 3.2 % alcohol by weight ( equivalent to about 4 % ABV ) .
The term " low - point beer " is unique to the United States , where some states limit the sale of beer , but beers of this type are also available in countries ( such as Sweden and Finland )
that tax or otherwise regulate beer according to its alcohol content .
In the United States , 3.2 beer was the highest alcohol content beer allowed to be produced legally for nine months in 1933 .
As part of his New Deal , President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the Cullen – Harrison Act that repealed the Volstead Act on March 22 , 1933 .
In December 1933 , the Twenty - first Amendment to the United States Constitution was passed , negating the federal government 's power to regulate the sale of alcoholic beverages , though states retained the power to regulate .
After the repeal of Prohibition , a number of state laws prohibiting the sale of intoxicating liquors remained in effect .
As these were repealed , they were first replaced by laws limiting the maximum alcohol content allowed for sale as 3.2 ABW .
To this day , the states of Kansas , Minnesota , Colorado , Oklahoma ( whose laws will be relaxed after two State Questions passed , which will go into effect in October 2018 ) , and Utah permit general establishments such as supermarket chains and convenience stores to sell only low - point beer .
In these states , all alcoholic beverages containing more than 3.2 % alcohol by weight ( ABW ) must be sold from state - licensed liquor stores .
Oklahoma additionally requires that any beverage containing more than 3.2 % ABW must be sold at normal room temperature ( about 68 ° F/20 ° C ) .
Missouri also has a legal classification for low - point beer , which it calls " nonintoxicating beer " .
Unlike Kansas , Minnesota , Oklahoma , and Utah , however , Missouri does not limit supermarket chains and convenience stores to selling only low - point beer .
Instead , Missouri 's alcohol laws permit grocery stores , drug stores , gas stations , and even " general merchandise stores " ( a term that Missouri law does not define ) to sell any alcoholic beverage ; consequently , 3.2 % beer is rarely sold in Missouri .
NEAR BEER
Section::::Near beer .
Originally , " near beer " was a term for malt beverages containing little or no alcohol ( less than 0.5 % ABV ) , which were mass - marketed during Prohibition in the United States .
Near beer could not legally be labeled as " beer " and was officially classified as a " cereal beverage " .
The public , however , almost universally called it " near beer " .
The most popular " near beer " was Bevo , brewed by the Anheuser - Busch company .
The Pabst company brewed " Pablo " , Miller brewed " Vivo " , and Schlitz brewed " Famo " .
Many local and regional breweries stayed in business by marketing their own near - beers .
By 1921 production of near beer had reached over 300 million US gallons ( 1 billion L )
a year ( 36 L / s ) .
A popular illegal practice was to add alcohol to near beer .
The resulting beverage was known as spiked beer or needle beer , so called because a needle was used to inject alcohol through the cork of the bottle or keg .
Food critic and writer Waverley Root described the common American near beer as " such a wishy - washy , thin , ill - tasting , discouraging sort of slop that it might have been dreamed up by a Puritan Machiavelli with the intent of disgusting drinkers with genuine beer forever . "
Beginning in the late 2000s , the term " near beer " has been revived to refer to modern non - alcoholic beer .
In the early 2010s , major breweries began experimenting with mass - market non - alcoholic beers to counter with declining alcohol consumption amid growing preference for craft beer , launching beverages like Anheuser - Busch 's Budweiser Prohibition Brew , launched in 2016 .
A drink similar to " near beer " , " bjórlíki " was quite popular in Iceland before alcoholic beer was made legal in 1989 .
The Icelandic variant normally consisted of a shot of vodka added to a half - a - litre glass of light beer .
SMALL BEER Section::::Small beer .
Small beer ( also , small ale ) is a beer / ale that contains very little alcohol .
Sometimes unfiltered and porridge - like , it was a favored drink in Medieval Europe and colonial North America as opposed to the often polluted water and the expensive beer used for festivities .
Small beer was also produced in households for consumption by children and servants at those occasions .
However , small beer / small ale can also refer to a beer made of the " second runnings " from a very strong beer ( e.g. , scotch ale ) mash .
These beers can be as strong as a mild ale , depending on the strength of the original mash .
( Drake 's 24th Anniversary Imperial Small Beer was expected to reach above 9.5 % abv . )
This was done as an economy measure in household brewing in England up to the 18th century and is still done by some homebrewers .
One commercial brewery , San Francisco 's Anchor Brewing Company , also produces their Anchor Small Beer using the second runnings from their Old Foghorn Barleywine .
The term is also used for commercially produced beers which are thought to taste too weak .
NON - ALCOHOLIC BEER Section::::Non - alcoholic beer .
The Middle East accounts for almost a third of worldwide sales of nonalcoholic and alcohol - free beer .
ARAB WORLD Section::::Arab world .
Notable Islamic clerics in Saudi Arabia and Egypt have issued fatawa permitting the consumption of " alcohol - free " beers that can be proven to contain zero traces of alcohol .
Alcohol - free beers such as Holsten , Barbican and Moussy are often available in stores and restaurants throughout the Arab world .
MALAYSIA Section::::Malaysia .
The market for nonalcoholic beer in Malaysia has been slow in comparison to other Muslim - majority countries , and as of 2015 , the Malaysian government has not approved any nonalcoholic beers as halal .
IRAN Section::::Iran .
In 2008 , the sale of non - alcoholic beers in Iran continued its high performance with double - digit growth rates in both value and volume and is expected to more than double its total volume sales between 2008 and 2013 .
INDIA Section::::India .
Non alcoholic beer sales in India are relatively low .
One major upcoming player is ' Coolberg ' which offers multiple flavors suitable to the tastes of Indian consumers .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
North America is seeing a rise in craft non - alcoholic beer production .
LEGAL DRINKING AGE IN THE US Section::::Legal drinking age in the US .
Beers that are labeled " non - alcoholic " still contain a very small amount of alcohol .
Thus , some US states require the purchaser to be of a legal drinking age .
Exceptions include : *
In Texas , the law does not prohibit minors from consuming or buying non - alcoholic beer , but the law does specify that a beverage containing more than one half of one percent alcohol by volume is an alcoholic beverage and thus will follow the same restrictions as regular beer .
*
In Minnesota , non alcoholic beer ( under 0.5 % ABV ) does not fit in the category that the state defines as an alcoholic beverage and can be purchased by those under the legal drinking age .
*
In Wisconsin , the law does not regulate non - alcoholic beer ( less than 0.5 % ABV ) , and it can be purchased without any age restriction .
*
In New Jersey , the law governs only beverages of at least 0.5 % ABV .
*
In Illinois , beverages with under 0.5 % ABV are not governed by the Illinois Liquor Control Act and can be purchased and consumed by minors .
*
In the District of Columbia , the District 's alcohol laws apply to all beverages and food products that have an alcohol by volume equal or greater than .5 percent .
Beverages below .5 percent are not covered by the laws that ABRA regulates ; therefore , a beverage with an ABV lower than .5 percent may purchased by a person under the age of 21 .
The laws and regulations that ABRA administers does not reference products carrying the label of " non - alcoholic beverage . "
*
In Alaska , " ... non - alcoholic beer and wine ( containing less than 0.5 % alcohol by volume ) are not considered alcoholic beverages .
Legally , non - alcoholic beer and wine are no different than coffee , tea , or soft drinks . "
*
In Hawaii , Hawaii State Liquor Law § 281 - 101.5(b ) states " No minor shall consume or purchase liquor and no minor shall consume or have liquor in the minor 's possession ...
" In the " Liquor Laws of Hawaii " under § 281 - 1 " Definitions " , Liquor is defined as " … containing one - half of one per cent or more of alcohol by volume … " BREWING PROCESS Section::::Brewing process .
According to the Birmingham Beverage Company , the brewing process of traditional brews consists of eight basic steps , nine for brewing non - alcoholic brews .
* Malting – Barley is prepared by soaking it in water and allowing the grain to germinate or " sprout " .
This allows the tough starch molecules to be softened and begin conversion to sugars .
Next , the sprouts are dried in a kiln ; the temperature at which the sprouts are dried will affect the flavor of the finished brew .
*
* Milling – Next the malted grain is ground to a cornmeal - like consistency , which allows the sugars and remaining starches to be more easily released when mixed with water .
*
* Mashing – The finely - ground malted grain is mixed with water and pulverized .
By pulverizing the slurry , most of the remaining starches are converted to sugars due to enzymes present in the malt , and the sugars then dissolve into the water .
The mix is gradually heated to in what is called a mash tun .
The slurry is then filtered to remove the majority of particulates .
This filtered sugary liquid is called " wort " .
*
* Brewing – The wort is brought to a boil for roughly 1–2 hours .
During this time , other grains that will contribute flavor , color , and aroma to the brew are added .
Boiling allows several chemical reactions to occur and reduces the water content in the wort , condensing it .
*
* Cooling – The wort is filtered to remove the majority of the grains and hops and then immediately cooled to allow the yeast to survive and grow in the next step .
*
* Fermenting – The cooled wort is saturated with air , and yeast is added in the fermentation tank .
Different strains of yeast will create different styles of beer .
This step takes around ten days .
* * Maturation – The freshly fermented uncarbonated beer is placed into a conditioning tank and , in a similar process to wine making , is allowed to age .
If this step is rushed the beer will have an off flavor ( acetaldehyde ) that beer experts sometimes refer to as " green beer " because of its resemblance to green apples .
During this process of aging , the majority of the residual particulates will settle to the bottom of the tank .
*
Between the seventh and eighth steps , the brew can be converted to non - alcoholic beer .
*
* Finishing – Finally , the brewer is ready to finish the beer .
The beer is filtered one last time ; it is then carbonated and moved into a storage tank for either bottling or kegging .
* HOW LOW - ALCOHOL BEER IS MADE Section::::How low - alcohol beer is made .
Low - alcohol beer starts out as regular alcoholic beer , which is then cooked in order to evaporate the alcohol .
This is possible because alcohol is more volatile than water , so it is easier to boil off .
The alcohol is allowed to escape and the remaining liquid is used , essentially the opposite of distillation .
Most modern breweries also utilize vacuum evaporation to preserve flavor .
In essence , the beer is placed under a light vacuum to facilitate the alcohol molecules going into the gaseous phase .
If a sufficient vacuum is applied , it may not even be necessary to " cook " the beer , but heat must nevertheless be supplied .
An alternative process called reverse osmosis does not require heating .
The beer is passed through a filter with pores small enough that only alcohol and water ( and a few volatile acids ) can pass through .
The alcohol is distilled out of the alcohol - water mix using conventional distillation methods .
After adding the water and remaining acids back into the syrupy mixture of sugars and flavor compounds left on the other side of the filter , the process is then complete .
Sometimes beer is simply diluted with water to give the desired alcohol level .
HOW NON - ALCOHOLIC BEER IS MADE Section::::How
non - alcoholic beer is made .
The conversion from a traditional alcoholic beer to a non - alcoholic beer takes place after the seventh step and preceding the finishing step .
The uncarbonated beer is heated up to its boiling point .
Another method of removing the alcohol is to decrease the pressure so the alcohol boils at room temperature .
This is the preferred method because raising the temperature this late in the brewing process can greatly affect the flavor of the brew .
If brewers decide to convert their brew to a non - alcoholic brew they must consider the volume of liquid they have lost during the removal of the alcohol .
Typically the volume is reduced by roughly 4 % , and to compensate water is added .
Another tip would be avoiding using sugar from maize ; this simply increases the alcohol content without adding to the flavor or body of the beer .
Once the alcohol is removed , one proceeds with the normal finishing process in which the beer is carbonated and bottled . BRANDING
Section::::Branding .
Many low - alcohol beer brands incorporate the colour blue into the packaging design , including Becks Blue , Heineken 0.0 % , Ožujsko Cool and Erdinger
Alkoholfrei .
SEE ALSO
* Alcohol by volume * Beer * Kvass * Malzbier * Small beer REFERENCES