SOUTH AFRICAN ENGLISH
South African English ( SAfrE , SAfrEng , SAE , en - ZA ) is the set of English dialects native to South Africans .
HISTORY Section::::History .
British colonisers first introduced English to the South African region in 1795 , when they established a military holding operation at the Cape .
The goal of this first endeavor was to gain control of a key Cape sea route , not to establish a permanent settler colony .
The first major influx of English speakers arrived in 1820 .
About 5000 British settlers , mostly rural or working class , settled in the eastern Cape .
Though the British were a minority colonist group ( the Dutch had been in the region since 1652 , when traders from the Dutch East India Company developed a post ) , the Cape Colony governor , Lord Charles Somerset , declared English an official language in 1822 .
In order to spread the influence of English in the colony , officials began to recruit British schoolmasters and Scottish clergy to occupy positions in the education and church systems .
Another group of English speakers arrived from Britain in the 1840s and 1850s , along with the Natal settlers .
These individuals were largely " standard speakers " like retired military personnel and aristocrats .
A third wave of English settlers arrived between 1875 and 1904 , and brought with them a diverse variety of English dialects .
These last two waves did not have as large of an influence on South African English ( SAE ) , for " the seeds of development were already sown in 1820 " .
However , the Natal wave brought nostalgia for British customs and helped to define the idea of a " standard " variety that resembled Southern British English .
When the Union of South Africa was formed in 1910 , English and Dutch were the official state languages , although Afrikaans effectively replaced Dutch in 1925 .
After 1994 , nine other languages from the Bantu subfamily of Niger Kordorfanian languages achieved equal official status .
English has become a lingua franca for native African language speakers across the country , as it is the only language that has significant representation in all nine provinces .
Moreover , English predominates in several areas of public administration , and is increasingly popular as a " default language " in schools , universities , military camps , and other social settings .
SAE is an extraterritorial ( ET ) variety of English , or a language variety that has been " transported " outside its mainland home .
More specifically , SAE is a Southern hemisphere ET originating from later English colonisation in the 18th and 19th centuries ( Zimbabwean , Australian , and New Zealand
English are also Southern hemisphere ET varieties ) .
SAE resembles British English more closely than it does American English due to the close ties that South African colonies maintained with the mainland in the 19th and 20th centuries .
However , with the increasing influence of American pop - culture around the world via modes of contact like television , American English has become more familiar in South Africa .
Indeed , some American lexical items are becoming alternatives to comparable British terms .
VARIETIES
WHITE SOUTH AFRICAN ENGLISH Section::::Varieties .
Section::::White South African English .
Several South African English varieties have emerged , accompanied by varying levels of perceived social prestige .
Roger Lass describes White South African English as a system of three sub - varieties spoken primarily by White South Africans , called " The Great Trichotomy " ( a term first used to categorise Australian English varieties and subsequently applied to South African English ) .
In this classification , the " Cultivated " variety closely approximates England 's standard Received Pronunciation and is associated with the upper class ; the " General " variety is a social indicator of the middle class and is the common tongue ; and the " Broad " variety is most associated with the working class , low socioeconomic status , and little education .
These three sub - varieties have also been called " Conservative SAE " , " Respectable SAE " , and " Extreme SAE " , respectively .
Broad White SAE closely approximates the second - language variety of ( Afrikaans - speaking )
Afrikaners called Afrikaans English .
This variety has been stigmatised by middle and upper class SAE speakers and is considered a vernacular form of SAE .
BLACK SOUTH AFRICAN
ENGLISH
Section::::Black South African English .
Black South African English , or BSAE , is spoken by individuals whose first language is an indigenous African tongue .
BSAE is considered a " new " English because it has emerged through the education system among second - language speakers in places where English is not the majority language .
At least two sociolinguistic variants have been definitively studied on a post - creole continuum for the second - language Black South African English spoken by most Black South Africans : a high - end , prestigious " acrolect " and a more middle - ranging , mainstream " mesolect " .
The " basilect " variety is less similar to the colonial language ( natively - spoken English ) , while the " mesolect " is somewhat more so .
Historically , BSAE has been considered a " non - standard " variety of English , inappropriate for formal contexts and influenced by indigenous African languages .
According to the Central Statistical Services , as of 1994 about 7 million black people spoke English in South Africa .
BSAE originated in the South African school system , when the 1953 Bantu Education Act mandated the use of native African languages in the classroom .
When this law was established , most of the native English - speaking teachers were removed from schools .
This limited the exposure that black students received to standard varieties of English .
As a result , the English spoken in black schools developed distinctive patterns of pronunciation and syntax , leading to the formation of BSAE .
Some of these characteristic features can be linked to the mother tongues of the early BSAE speakers .
The policy of mother tongue promotion in schools ultimately failed , and in 1979 , the Department of Bantu Education allowed schools to choose their own language of instruction .
English was largely the language of choice , because it was viewed as a key tool of social and economic advancement .
However , by 1990 , most educators were still second language English speakers , and native African languages were still used widely in the classroom .
Access to English thus remained limited , and most students had little exposure to varieties of English besides BSAE .
INDIAN SOUTH AFRICAN ENGLISH
Section::::Indian South African English .
Indian South African English ( ISAE ) is a sub - variety that developed among the descendants of Indian immigrants to South Africa .
The Apartheid policy , in effect from 1948 to 1991 , prevented Indian children from publicly interacting with people of English heritage .
This separation caused an Indian variety to develop independently from White South African English , though with phonological and lexical features still fitting under the South African English umbrella .
Indian South African English includes a " basilect " , " mesolect " , and " acrolect " .
These terms describe varieties of a given language on a spectrum of similarity to the colonial version of that language : the " acrolect " being the most similar .
Today , basilect speakers are generally older non - native speakers with little education ; acrolect speakers closely resemble colonial native English speakers , with a few phonetic / syntactic exceptions ; and mesolect speakers fall somewhere in - between .
ISAE resembles Indian English in some respects , possibly because the varieties contain speakers with shared mother tongues or because early English teachers were brought to South Africa from India , or both .
Four prominent education - related lexical features shared by ISAE and Indian English are : tuition(s ) , which means " extra lessons outside school that one pays for " ; further studies , which means " higher education " ; alphabets , which means " the alphabet , letters of the alphabet " ; and by - heart , which means " to learn off by heart " ; these items show the influence of Indian English teachers in South Africa .
Phonologically , ISAE also shares several similarities with Indian English , though certain common features are decreasing in the South African variety .
For instance , consonant retroflexion in phonemes like /ḍ/ and strong aspiration in consonant production ( common in North Indian English ) are present in both varieties , but declining in ISAE .
Syllable - timed rhythm , instead of stress - timed rhythm , is still a prominent feature in both varieties , especially in more colloquial sub - varieties .
CAPE FLATS
ENGLISH Section::::Cape Flats English .
Another variety of South African English is Cape Flats English , originally and best associated with inner - city Cape Coloured speakers .
PHONETICS VOWELS
* Allophonic variation in the vowel ( from Wells ' 1982 lexical sets ) .
In some contexts , such as after , the KIT vowel is pronounced ; before tautosyllabic it is pronounced ; and in other contexts it is pronounced .
This feature is not present in Conservative SAE , and may have resulted from a vocalic chain shift in White SAE .
* Pronunciation of the ' vowel with the long monophthongal .
In contrast , other Southern Hemisphere Englishes like Australian English and New Zealand English have a diphthongized ' vowel ( ) .
* Back vowel , with lip rounding in the broader dialects ( or ) .
This differs from Australian English and New Zealand English , which have central instead .
* Short vowel ( ) , resulting in a BATH / TRAP split .
Australian English and New Zealand English also demonstrate this split .
*
The vowel is short , open , weakly rounded , and centralized , around .
*
The vowel is short , half - closed back and centralized , around .
*
The vowel tends to resemble the Received Pronunciation non - rhotic among Conservative SAE speakers , while the vowel is front , half - close , centralized in other varieties .
CONSONANTS
*
In Conservative and Respectable SAE , is the voiceless glottal fricative .
In Extreme SAE , has a more breathy - voiced pronunciation , .
is sometimes deleted in Extreme SAE where it is preserved in Conservative and Respectable SAE .
For instance , when it occurs initially in stressed syllables in words like " house " , it is deleted in Extreme SAE .
* Conservative SAE is completely non - rhotic like Received Pronunciation , while Respectable SAE has sporadic moments of rhoticity .
These rhotic moments generally occur in -final words .
More frequent rhoticity is a marker of Extreme SAE .
* Unaspirated voiceless plosives ( like , , and ) in stressed word - initial environments .
* Yod - assimilation : tune and dune tend to be realized as and , instead of the Received Pronunciation and .
LEXICON HISTORY OF SAE DICTIONARIES
Section::::Lexicon .
Section::::History of SAE Dictionaries .
In 1913 , Charles Pettman created the first South African English dictionary , entitled Africanderisms .
This work sought to identify Afrikaans terms that were emerging in the English language in South Africa .
In 1924 , the Oxford University Press published its first version of a South African English dictionary , The South African Pocket Oxford Dictionary .
Subsequent editions of this dictionary have tried to take a " broad editorial approach " in including vocabulary terms native to South Africa , though the extent of this inclusion has been contested .
Rhodes University ( South Africa ) and Oxford University ( Great Britain ) worked together to produced the 1978 Dictionary of South African English , which adopted a more conservative approach in its inclusion of terms .
This dictionary did include , for the first time , what the dictionary writers deemed " the jargon of townships " , or vocabulary terms found in Black journalism and literary circles .
Dictionaries specializing in scientific jargon , such as the common names of South African plants , also emerged in the twentieth century .
However , these works still often relied on Latin terminology and European pronunciation systems .
As of 1992 , Rajend Mesthrie had produced the only available dictionary of South African Indian English .
VOCABULARY Section::::Vocabulary .
SAE includes lexical items borrowed from other South African Languages .
The following list provides a sample of some of these terms : * braai ( barbeque ) from Afrikaans * impimpi ( police informant ) * indaba ( conference ; meeting ) from Zulu * kwela - kwela ( taxi or police pick - up van ) * madumbies ( a type of edible root ) found in Natal * mama ( term of address for a senior woman ) * mbaqanga ( type of music ) * morabaraba ( board game ) * sgebengu ( criminal ) found in IsiXhosa and IsiZulu speaking areas * skebereshe ( a loose woman ) found in Gauteng * y' all ( the contraction of " you all " ) for second person plural pronouns in ISAE BRITISH LEXICAL ITEMS Section::::British Lexical Items .
SAE also contains several lexical items that demonstrate the British influence on this variety :
* arse , bum ( ass ) * chemist ( drugstore ) * dinner - jacket ( tuxedo )
* dustbin ( garbage can ) * petrol ( gasoline ) * silencer ( muffler ) EXPRESSIONS Section::::Expressions .
A range of SAE expressions have been borrowed from other South African languages , or are uniquely used in this variety of English .
Some common expressions include : *
The borrowed Afrikaans interjection ag , meaning " oh ! " , as in , " Ag , go away man " !
( Equivalent to German " ach " )
SAE uses a number of discourse markers from Afrikaans in colloquial speech .
*
The expression to come with , common especially among Afrikaans people , as in " are they coming with ?
" This is influenced by the Afrikaans phrase hulle kom saam , literally " they come together " , with saam being misinterpreted as with .
In Afrikaans , saamkom is a separable verb , similar to meekomen in Dutch and mitkommen in German , which is translated into English as " to come along " .
" Come with ? " is also encountered in areas of the Upper Midwest of the United States , which had a large number of Scandinavian , Dutch and German immigrants , who , when speaking English , translated equivalent phrases directly from their own languages .
*
The use of the " strong obligative modal " must as a synonym for the polite should / shall .
" Must " has " much less social impact " in SAE than in other varieties .
* Now - now , as in " I 'll do it now - now " .
Likely borrowed from the Afrikaans nou - nou , this expression describes a time later than that referenced in the phrase
" I 'll do it now " .
* A large amount of slang comes from British origin , such as " naff " ( boring , dull or plain ) .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
The South African National Census of 2011 found a total of 4,892,623 speakers of English as a first language , making up 9.6 % of the national population .
The provinces with significant English - speaking populations were the Western Cape ( 20.2 % of the provincial population ) , Gauteng ( 13.3 % ) and KwaZulu - NatalBlack AfricanColouredIndian or AsianWhite EXAMPLES OF SOUTH AFRICAN ACCENTS Section::::Examples of South African accents .
The following examples of South African accents were obtained from George Mason University :
* Native English : Male ( Cape Town , South Africa )
* Native English : Female ( Cape Town , South Africa ) *
Native English :
Male ( Port Elizabeth , South Africa )
* Native English : Male ( Nigel , South Africa ) SEE ALSO
* List of English words of
Afrikaans origin
* List of lexical differences in South African English * List of South African slang words
* Standard written English
* Regional accents of English REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS
* English Academy of South Africa
* Zimbabwean Slang Dictionary * " Surfrikan " , South African surfing slang
*
The influence of Afrikaans on SA English ( in Dutch )
*
The Expat Portal RSA Slang
* Several Samples of The Dialect