UNBREAKABLE ( FILM )
Unbreakable is a 2000 American superhero thriller film written , produced , and directed by M. Night Shyamalan , and starring Bruce Willis and Samuel L. Jackson , alongside Robin Wright , Spencer Treat Clark and Charlayne Woodard .
It is the first installment in the Unbreakable series .
In Unbreakable , a security guard named David Dunn survives a horrific train crash .
After the incident , with the help of a disabled comic art gallery owner named Elijah Price , he learns that he possesses superhuman powers .
The film follows Dunn trying to explore and confront his powers and his life thus far while trying to navigate a difficult family life , constantly under the eerie , looming influence of Elijah Price .
Shyamalan organized the narrative of Unbreakable to parallel a comic book 's traditional three - part story structure .
After settling on the origin story , Shyamalan wrote the screenplay as a speculative screenplay with Bruce Willis already set to star in the film and Jackson in mind to portray Elijah Price .
Filming began in April 2000 and was completed in July .
Unbreakable was released on November 22 , 2000 .
It received positive reviews , with critics praising its aesthetics , the performances , and the score by James Newton Howard .
The film has subsequently gained a strong cult following .
A deconstruction of the superhero genre , many regard it as one of Shyamalan 's best films , and one of the best superhero films .
In 2011 , Time listed it as one of the top ten superhero films of all time , ranking it number four .
Quentin Tarantino also included it on his list of the top 20 films released since 1992 .
After years of development on a follow - up film , a thematic sequel , Split , with Willis reprising his role as David Dunn in a cameo role , was released in January 2017 .
After the financial and critical success of Split , Shyamalan immediately began working on a third film , titled Glass , which will be released January 18 , 2019 , thus making Unbreakable the first part of what has been referred to as the " Eastrail 177 Trilogy " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In Philadelphia in 1961 , Elijah Price is born with Type I osteogenesis imperfecta , a rare disease that renders sufferers ' bones extremely fragile and prone to fracture .
As revealed later in flashbacks , Elijah — who grows up to become a comic - book art dealer — develops a theory , based on the comics he has read during his many hospital stays , that if he represents extreme human frailty , there must be someone " unbreakable " at the opposite extreme .
In the present day , another Philadelphia man , security guard David Dunn , is also searching for meaning in his life .
He had given up a promising football career during his college days to marry Audrey after they were involved in an auto accident .
Now , however , their marriage is dissolving , to the distress of their young son Joseph .
As he returns home from a job interview in New York City , David 's train , the Eastrail 177 , crashes , killing the other 131 passengers .
He is the only survivor , sustaining no injuries .
At the crash victims ' memorial service , he finds a card on his car 's windshield , with the logo of Elijah 's art gallery , Limited Edition , printed on it , with a message on the back of the card asking if he 's ever been ill .
David and Joseph meet with Elijah , who proposes to David that he is the kind of person after whom comic book superheroes are modeled and repeatedly pursues the issue with David and Audrey , trying to learn whether or not David has ever been ill or injured .
Although Elijah unsettles him , David begins testing himself .
While lifting weights with Joseph watching , he bench presses about , well above what he could do before .
Joseph begins to idolize his father and believe that he is a superhero , although David still maintains that he is just " an ordinary man " .
David challenges Elijah 's theory with an incident from his childhood when he almost drowned .
Elijah suggests that the incident highlights the common trope whereby superheroes often have a weakness .
He contends that David 's weakness might be water : it is easier for him to drown or choke than regular people .
While surveying the stored wreckage of the train crash that he survived , David recalls the car accident that ended his athletics career , remembering that he was unharmed and ripped a door off the car in order to save Audrey .
David used the accident as an excuse to quit football because Audrey did not like the violence of the sport .
Under Elijah 's influence , David realizes that what he thought was just a natural " instinct " for picking out dangerous people during security checks is actually a form of extrasensory perception .
Now consciously honing this ability , David discovers that when he comes into touch contact with other people , he is able to glimpse criminal acts they have committed .
At Elijah 's suggestion , David stands in the middle of a crowd in Philadelphia 's 30th Street Station .
As various people bump into him , he senses the crimes they perpetrated , such as theft , assault , and rape , and finds one he can act on : a sadistic janitor who invaded a family home , killed the father , and is now holding the wife and their two children captive .
David follows the janitor to the victims ' house , frees the children , and finds their mother , but the janitor ambushes him and pushes him off a balcony into a swimming pool .
David nearly drowns since he can not swim , but the children rescue him .
He then attacks the janitor from behind and strangles him to death , while he remains uninjured and unfortunately discovers the mother is also dead .
That night , he and Audrey reconcile .
The following morning , he secretly shows a newspaper article on the anonymous heroic act , featuring a sketch of David in the hooded rain poncho he wore while confronting the janitor , to Joseph , who recognizes the hero as his father and promises to keep his secret .
David attends an exhibition at Limited Edition and meets Elijah 's mother , who explains the difference between villains who fight heroes with physical strength versus those who use their intelligence .
Elijah brings David to the back room of his studio , extends his hand , and asks David to shake it .
Upon doing so , David sees visions of Elijah orchestrating several terrorist disasters , including David 's recent train accident , causing hundreds of deaths .
David is horrified , but Elijah insists the deaths were justified as a means to find him .
Calling himself " Mr. Glass " , a nickname children had used to taunt him with when he was growing up , he explains that he now realizes his own purpose in life : to be the villain to David 's hero .
The film ends with David walking away in horror and disgust while Elijah taunts him , and screen captions reveal that David eventually reported Elijah 's actions to the police , and that Elijah was convicted of murder and terrorism and committed to an institution for the criminally insane .
CAST
* Bruce Willis as David Dunn , a former football player who became a security guard and has the ability to see visions of crimes committed by the people he touches while also having unbreakable skin but has a fear of drowning .
* Davis Duffield plays a 20 year old David .
* Samuel L. Jackson as Elijah Price
/ Mr .
Glass , a comic book theorist who has Type I osteogenesis imperfecta and was revealed to be the man behind the Eastrail # 177 incident .
*
Johnny Hiram Jamison plays a 13 year old Elijah .
* Robin Wright Penn as Audrey Dunn , David 's wife who works as a physical therapist .
* Laura Regan plays a 20 year old Audrey .
* Spencer Treat Clark as Joseph Dunn , David 's son who believes he is a superhero .
* Charlayne Woodard as Mrs. Price , Elijah 's mother .
* Eamonn Walker as Dr. Mathison * Leslie Stefanson as Kelly * Michaelia Carroll as Babysitter
* Bostin Christopher as Comic Book Clerk * Elizabeth Lawrence as School Nurse * Chance Kelly as Orange Suit Man
* Michael Kelly as Dr. Dubin * M. Night Shyamalan as Stadium Drug Dealer Section::::Cast .
In October 2018 , M. Night Shyamalan confirmed a popular fan theory stating that the child and mother who bump into David Dunn outside a stadium , credited as " Five - Year - Old Boy " and " Woman Walking By " and portrayed by Joey Hazinsky and Dianne Cotten Murphy , respectively , were younger versions of the characters Kevin Wendell Crumb and Mrs. Crumb from Split .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
When M. Night Shyamalan conceived the idea for Unbreakable , the outline had a comic book 's traditional three - part structure ( the superhero 's " birth " , his struggles against general evil - doers , and the hero 's ultimate battle against the " archenemy " ) .
Finding the birth section most interesting , he decided to write Unbreakable as an origin story .
During the filming of The Sixth Sense , Shyamalan had already approached Bruce Willis for the lead role of David Dunn .
With Willis and Samuel L. Jackson specifically in mind for the two leading characters , Shyamalan began to write Unbreakable as a spec script during post - production on The Sixth Sense .
Jackson recalled meeting Willis in a casino in Casablanca while he was on vacation prior to Unbreakables production ; Willis told Jackson that he had just finished filming for Shyamalan 's The Sixth Sense and told Jackson about the new script that was written for both of them .
With the financial and critical success of The Sixth Sense in August 1999 , Shyamalan gave Walt Disney Studios a first look deal for Unbreakable .
In return , Disney purchased Shyamalan 's screenplay at a " spec script record " for $ 5 million .
He was also given another $ 5 million to direct .
Disney decided to release Unbreakable under their Touchstone Pictures banner .
It also helped Shyamalan establish his own production company , Blinding Edge Pictures .
Julianne Moore dropped out of portraying Audrey , David 's wife , in favor of her role as Clarice Starling in Hannibal .
Robin Wright Penn was cast in her place .
Principal photography began on April 25 , 2000 and ended that July .
The majority of filming took place in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , the film 's setting .
Shyamalan and cinematographer Eduardo Serra chose several camera angles to simulate the look of a comic book panel .
Various visual narrative motifs were also applied .
Several scenes relating to the Mr. Glass character involve glass .
As a newborn , he is primarily seen reflected in mirrors , and as a young child , he is seen reflected in a blank TV screen .
When he leaves his calling card on the windshield of David Dunn 's car , he is reflected in a glass frame in his art gallery .
Jackson requested his walking stick be made of glass to make his character more menacing .
Using purple as Mr. Glass ' color to David Dunn 's green was also Jackson 's idea .
Mr. Glass ' wig was modeled after Afro - American statesman Frederick Douglass .
As he does in his other films , Shyamalan makes a cameo appearance ; he plays a man David suspects of dealing drugs inside the stadium .
More than 15 minutes of footage was deleted during post - production of Unbreakable .
These scenes are available on the DVD release .
Willis and Jackson had previously worked together on Die Hard with a Vengeance , Pulp Fiction , and Loaded Weapon 1 .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
James Newton Howard was approached by Shyamalan to work on Unbreakable immediately after scoring The Sixth Sense . "
He sat there and storyboarded the whole movie for me " , Howard said .
" I 've never had a director do that for me . " Shyamalan wanted a " singularity " tone for the music . " He wanted something that was very different , very distinctive , that immediately evoked the movie when people heard it , " Howard explained .
Howard and Shyamalan chose to simplify the score , and minimized the number of instruments ( strings , trumpets and piano ) , with limited orchestrations .
Some compositions were recorded in a converted church in London .
" You could have recorded the same music in a studio in Los Angeles , and it would have been great , but there is something about the sound of that church studio , " Howard remarked .
" It 's definitely more misterioso . "
COMIC BOOK REFERENCES Kevin Smith felt Unbreakable was briefly similar to a comic book titled Mage : The Hero Discovered , written and illustrated by Matt Wagner .
As in comic books , the main characters have their identified color schemes and aliases .
David 's are green and " Security " or " Hero " , while Elijah 's are purple and " Mr. Glass " .
The colors show up in their clothes , the wallpaper and bed sheets in their houses , Elijah 's note to David , and various personal items .
The people whose bad deeds are sensed by David are identified by an article of clothing in a single bright color ( red , orange ) , to contrast them with the dark and dreary color scheme typical of the rest of the movie ( but not of most comic books ) .
Several scenes also depict characters through reflections or doorways , as if framing them in a picture similar to comic books .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Unbreakable was released in the United States on November 22 , 2000 , in 2,708 theaters and grossed $ 30.3 million in its opening weekend , finishing second at the box office .
The film ended up earning $ 95 million domestically and $ 153.1 million internationally for a total of $ 248.1 million , against its $ 75 million production budget .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Unbreakable received generally positive reviews from critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 69 % based on 163 reviews , with an average rating of 6.2/10 .
The website 's critical consensus states , " With a weaker ending , Unbreakable is not as a good as The Sixth Sense .
However , it is a quietly suspenseful film that intrigues and engages , taking the audience through unpredictable twists and turns along the way .
" On Metacritic the film has a score of 62 out of 100 , based on 31 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " C " on an A+ to F scale .
Roger Ebert largely enjoyed the film , but was disappointed with the ending .
Ebert believed that Willis ' " subtle acting " was positively different from the actor 's usual work in " brainless action movies " .
Richard Corliss of Time reviewed that Unbreakable continued Shyamalan 's writing / direction of " balancing sophistication and horror in all of his movies " .
Desson Thomson from The Washington Post wrote that " just as he did in The Sixth Sense , writer - director M. Night Shyamalan leads you into a fascinating labyrinth , an alternative universe that lurks right under our noses .
In this case , it 's the mythological world and , in these modern times , the secret design to that labyrinth , the key to the path , is contained in comic books . "
Kenneth Turan , writing in Los Angeles Times , gave a negative review , arguing that Unbreakable had no originality .
" Whether it means to or not , the shadow of The Sixth Sense hangs over Unbreakable , " Turan reasoned .
" If The Sixth Sense had n't been as big a success as it was , this story might have been assigned to oblivion , or at least to rewrite . "
Todd McCarthy of Variety mostly criticized Shyamalan 's writing and the performances given by the actors .
He did praise Dylan Tichenor 's editing and James Newton Howard 's music composition .
Shyamalan admitted he was disappointed by the reaction Unbreakable received from the public and critics .
Shyamalan also disliked Touchstone Pictures ' marketing campaign .
He wanted to promote Unbreakable as a comic book movie , but Touchstone insisted on portraying it as a psychological thriller , similar to The Sixth Sense .
In 2009 , filmmaker Quentin Tarantino praised Unbreakable , and included it on his list of the top 20 films released since 1992 , the year he became a director .
Tarantino praised the film as a " brilliant retelling of the Superman mythology " , and said it contains what he considers to be Bruce Willis ' best performance .
He also criticized the way the film was marketed upon release , stating he felt that it would have been far more effective if the film 's advertising simply posed the question of " what if Superman was here on earth , and did n't know he was Superman ? "
In 2011 , Time ranked the film at # 4 in its list of top ten superhero movies of all time , describing it as one of the best superhero origin stories and as a " relatively quiet , subtle and realistic look at the pressures that come with being a superhero . "
In 2018 , The Hollywood Reporter called it a " deconstruction of the American superhero / villain complex " that is " more prescient than ever . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The film released on DVD and VHS in 2001 .
The DVD sold 2.3million units in the United States , and was the top DVD video rental of 2001 .
It grossed a total of from DVD sales and DVD / VHS rentals in the United States .
The film thus had a combined global box office and US home video revenue of $ 371,028,653 , with a 495 % return on investment .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
!
scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " rowspan=1Saturn Award colspan=2Best Action / Adventure / Thriller Film rowspan=1Black Reel Award colspan=2Best Film
Poster rowspan=1Golden Trailer Award colspan=2Best Horror / Thriller Film rowspan=4Blockbuster Entertainment Awards
rowspan=2Favorite Actor - Suspense Bruce Willis
rowspan=4 Samuel L. Jackson
Favorite Supporting Actor - Suspense
Spencer Treat Clark
Favorite Supporting Actress - Suspense Robin Wright rowspan=1Bram Stoker Award
Best Screenplay
rowspan=2M. Night Shayamalan
rowspan=1Nebula Award Best Script rowspan=1International Horror Guild Award
colspan=2Best
Film SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
After the film 's release , rumors of possible sequels began circulating in different interviews and in film fansites .
In 2000 , Bruce Willis was quoted as hoping for an Unbreakable trilogy .
In December 2000 , Shyamalan denied rumors he wrote Unbreakable as the first installment of a trilogy , saying he was not even thinking about it .
In August 2001 , Shyamalan stated that , because of successful DVD sales , he had approached Touchstone Pictures about an Unbreakable sequel , an idea Shyamalan said the studio originally turned down because of the film 's disappointing box office performance .
In a September 2008 article , Shyamalan and Samuel L. Jackson said there was some discussion of a sequel when the film was being made , but that it mostly died with the disappointing box office .
Jackson said he was still interested in a sequel but Shyamalan was non - committal .
In February 2010 , Willis said that Shyamalan was " still thinking about doing the fight movie between me and Sam that we were going to do " , and stated that as long as Jackson was able to participate he would be " up for it " .
SPLIT
Section::::Split .
In September 2010 , Shyamalan revealed that the second planned villain from the first film was moved to the planned sequel , but that character has now been used for an upcoming film that he will write and produce .
Shyamalan 's horror thriller film Split has been described as a thematic sequel to Unbreakable , and was released on January 20 , 2017 .
It is revealed that Split actually takes place in the same fictional storyline , with Bruce Willis 's character appearing in a final reveal , directly referencing Mr. Glass when discussing the film 's villain , " The Horde " .
Unbreakable is the first part of the so - called " Eastrail 177 Trilogy " ; the follow - up film Split was made as a " back door sequel " .
While Split was filmed substantially as a standalone film , Shyamalan included the David Dunn character from Unbreakable in the last portion of the film , thus putting the two films in the same universe .
Additionally , Shyamalan has stated the orange suited villain portrayed by Chance Kelly in Unbreakable was initially going to be the character " The Horde " .
However , features of The Horde were dropped to make the character simpler , for reasons of balance .
The fuller character was realized in Split .
GLASS
Section::::Glass .
Shyamalan expressed hope for a third installment following Split , saying , " I hope [ a third Unbreakable film happens ] .
The answer is yes .
I 'm just such a wimp sometimes .
I do n't know what 's going to happen when I go off in my room , a week after this film opens , to write the script .
But I 'm going to start writing .
[ I have ] a really robust outline , which is pretty intricate .
But now the standards for my outlines are higher .
I need to know I 've won already .
I 'm almost there
but I 'm not quite there .
"
In April 2017 , Shyamalan announced the official title , release date , and returning actors for the third movie .
The film , titled Glass , will be released January 18 , 2019 and will feature Bruce Willis , Samuel L. Jackson , Anya Taylor - Joy , and James McAvoy returning to their respective roles in the series .
SEE ALSO * 2000 in film * List of American superhero films * List of films featuring home invasions
* Superhero film
* List of sole survivors of airline accidents or incidents
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS