UNITED STATES DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
The United States Declaration of Independence is the statement adopted by the Second Continental Congress meeting at the Pennsylvania State House ( now known as Independence Hall ) in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania on July 4 , 1776 .
The Declaration announced that the Thirteen Colonies at war with the Kingdom of Great Britain would regard themselves as thirteen independent sovereign states , no longer under British rule .
With the Declaration , these new states took a collective first step toward forming the United States of America .
The declaration was signed by representatives from New Hampshire , Massachusetts Bay , Rhode Island , Connecticut , New York , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Maryland , Delaware , Virginia , North Carolina , South Carolina , and Georgia .
The Lee Resolution for independence was passed on July 2 with no opposing votes .
The Committee of Five had drafted the Declaration to be ready when Congress voted on independence .
John Adams , a leader in pushing for independence , had persuaded the committee to select Thomas Jefferson to compose the original draft of the document , which Congress edited to produce the final version .
The Declaration was a formal explanation of why Congress had voted to declare independence from Great Britain , more than a year after the outbreak of the American Revolutionary War .
Adams wrote to his wife Abigail , " The Second Day of July 1776 , will be the most memorable Epocha , in the History of America " – although Independence Day is actually celebrated on July 4 , the date that the wording of the Declaration of Independence was approved .
After ratifying the text on July 4 , Congress issued the Declaration of Independence in several forms .
It was initially published as the printed Dunlap broadside that was widely distributed and read to the public .
The source copy used for this printing has been lost and may have been a copy in Thomas Jefferson 's hand .
Jefferson 's original draft is preserved at the Library of Congress , complete with changes made by John Adams and Benjamin Franklin , as well as Jefferson 's notes of changes made by Congress .
The best - known version of the Declaration is a signed copy that is displayed at the National Archives in Washington , D.C. , and which is popularly regarded as the official document .
This engrossed copy was ordered by Congress on July 19 and signed primarily on August 2 .
The sources and interpretation of the Declaration have been the subject of much scholarly inquiry .
The Declaration justified the independence of the United States by listing colonial grievances against King George III and by asserting certain natural and legal rights , including a right of revolution .
Its original purpose was to announce independence , and references to the text of the Declaration were few in the following years .
Abraham Lincoln made it the centerpiece of his policies and his rhetoric , as in the Gettysburg Address of 1863 .
Since then , it has become a well - known statement on human rights , particularly its second sentence :
We hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights , that among these are Life , Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness .
This has been called " one of the best - known sentences in the English language " , containing " the most potent and consequential words in American history " .
The passage came to represent a moral standard to which the United States should strive .
This view was notably promoted by Lincoln , who considered the Declaration to be the foundation of his political philosophy and argued that it is a statement of principles through which the United States Constitution should be interpreted .
The Declaration of Independence inspired many similar documents in other countries , the first being the 1789 Declaration of Flanders issued during the Brabant Revolution in the Austrian Netherlands .
It also served as the primary model for numerous declarations of independence in Europe and Latin America , as well as Africa ( Liberia ) and Oceania ( New Zealand ) during the first half of the 19th century .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
By the time that the Declaration of Independence was adopted in July 1776 , the Thirteen Colonies and Great Britain had been at war for more than a year .
Relations had been deteriorating between the colonies and the mother country since 1763 .
Parliament enacted a series of measures to increase revenue from the colonies , such as the Stamp Act of 1765 and the Townshend Acts of 1767 .
Parliament believed that these acts were a legitimate means of having the colonies pay their fair share of the costs to keep them in the British Empire .
Many colonists , however , had developed a different conception of the empire .
The colonies were not directly represented in Parliament , and colonists argued that Parliament had no right to levy taxes upon them .
This tax dispute was part of a larger divergence between British and American interpretations of the British Constitution and the extent of Parliament 's authority in the colonies .
The orthodox British view , dating from the Glorious Revolution of 1688 , was that Parliament was the supreme authority throughout the empire , and so , by definition , anything that Parliament did was constitutional .
In the colonies , however , the idea had developed that the British Constitution recognized certain fundamental rights that no government could violate , not even Parliament .
After the Townshend Acts , some essayists even began to question whether Parliament had any legitimate jurisdiction in the colonies at all .
Anticipating the arrangement of the British Commonwealth , by 1774 American writers such as Samuel Adams , James Wilson , and Thomas Jefferson were arguing that Parliament was the legislature of Great Britain only , and that the colonies , which had their own legislatures , were connected to the rest of the empire only through their allegiance to the Crown .
CONGRESS CONVENES Section::::Congress convenes .
The issue of Parliament 's authority in the colonies became a crisis after Parliament passed the Coercive Acts ( known as the Intolerable Acts in the colonies ) in 1774 to punish the colonists for the Gaspee Affair of 1772 and the Boston Tea Party of 1773 .
Many colonists saw the Coercive Acts as a violation of the British Constitution and thus a threat to the liberties of all of British America , so the First Continental Congress convened in Philadelphia in September 1774 to coordinate a response .
Congress organized a boycott of British goods and petitioned the king for repeal of the acts .
These measures were unsuccessful because King George and the ministry of Prime Minister Lord North were determined to enforce parliamentary supremacy in America .
As the king wrote to North in November 1774 , " blows must decide whether they are to be subject to this country or independent " .
Most colonists still hoped for reconciliation with Great Britain , even after fighting began in the American Revolutionary War at Lexington and Concord in April 1775 .
The Second Continental Congress convened at the Pennsylvania State House in Philadelphia in May 1775 , and some delegates hoped for eventual independence , but no one yet advocated declaring it .
Many colonists no longer believed that Parliament had any sovereignty over them , yet they still professed loyalty to King George , who they hoped would intercede on their behalf .
They were disappointed in late 1775 when the king rejected Congress 's second petition , issued a Proclamation of Rebellion , and announced before Parliament on October 26 that he was considering " friendly offers of foreign assistance " to suppress the rebellion .
A pro - American minority in Parliament warned that the government was driving the colonists toward independence .
TOWARD INDEPENDENCE Section::::Toward independence .
Thomas Paine 's pamphlet Common Sense was published in January 1776 , just as it became clear in the colonies that the king was not inclined to act as a conciliator .
Paine had only recently arrived in the colonies from England , and he argued in favor of colonial independence , advocating republicanism as an alternative to monarchy and hereditary rule .
Common Sense made a persuasive and impassioned case for independence , which had not yet been given serious intellectual consideration in the American colonies .
Paine connected independence with Protestant beliefs as a means to present a distinctly American political identity , thereby stimulating public debate on a topic that few had previously dared to openly discuss , and public support for separation from Great Britain steadily increased after its publication .
Some colonists still held out hope for reconciliation , but developments in early 1776 further strengthened public support for independence .
In February 1776 , colonists learned of Parliament 's passage of the Prohibitory Act , which established a blockade of American ports and declared American ships to be enemy vessels .
John Adams , a strong supporter of independence , believed that Parliament had effectively declared American independence before Congress had been able to .
Adams labeled the Prohibitory Act the " Act of Independency " , calling it " a compleat Dismemberment of the British Empire " .
Support for declaring independence grew even more when it was confirmed that King George had hired German mercenaries to use against his American subjects .
Despite this growing popular support for independence , Congress lacked the clear authority to declare it .
Delegates had been elected to Congress by 13 different governments , which included extralegal conventions , ad hoc committees , and elected assemblies , and they were bound by the instructions given to them .
Regardless of their personal opinions , delegates could not vote to declare independence unless their instructions permitted such an action .
Several colonies , in fact , expressly prohibited their delegates from taking any steps towards separation from Great Britain , while other delegations had instructions that were ambiguous on the issue ; consequently , advocates of independence sought to have the Congressional instructions revised .
For Congress to declare independence , a majority of delegations would need authorization to vote for it , and at least one colonial government would need to specifically instruct its delegation to propose a declaration of independence in Congress .
Between April and July 1776 , a " complex political war " was waged to bring this about .
REVISING INSTRUCTIONS
Section::::Revising instructions .
In the campaign to revise Congressional instructions , many Americans formally expressed their support for separation from Great Britain in what were effectively state and local declarations of independence .
Historian Pauline Maier identifies more than ninety such declarations that were issued throughout the Thirteen Colonies from April to July 1776 .
These " declarations " took a variety of forms .
Some were formal written instructions for Congressional delegations , such as the Halifax Resolves of April 12 , with which North Carolina became the first colony to explicitly authorize its delegates to vote for independence .
Others were legislative acts that officially ended British rule in individual colonies , such as the Rhode Island legislature declaring its independence from Great Britain on May 4 , the first colony to do so .
Many " declarations " were resolutions adopted at town or county meetings that offered support for independence .
A few came in the form of jury instructions , such as the statement issued on April 23 , 1776 , by Chief Justice William Henry Drayton of South Carolina : " the law of the land authorizes me to declare ...
that George the Third , King of Great Britain ... has no authority over us , and we owe no obedience to him .
" Most of these declarations are now obscure , having been overshadowed by the declaration approved by Congress on July 2 , and signed July 4 .
Some colonies held back from endorsing independence .
Resistance was centered in the middle colonies of New York , New Jersey , Maryland , Pennsylvania , and Delaware .
Advocates of independence saw Pennsylvania as the key ; if that colony could be converted to the pro - independence cause , it was believed that the others would follow .
On May 1 , however , opponents of independence retained control of the Pennsylvania Assembly in a special election that had focused on the question of independence .
In response , Congress passed a resolution on May 10 which had been promoted by John Adams and Richard Henry Lee , calling on colonies without a " government sufficient to the exigencies of their affairs " to adopt new governments .
The resolution passed unanimously , and was even supported by Pennsylvania 's John Dickinson , the leader of the anti - independence faction in Congress , who believed that it did not apply to his colony .
MAY 15 PREAMBLE Section::::May 15 preamble .
As was the custom , Congress appointed a committee to draft a preamble to explain the purpose of the resolution .
John Adams wrote the preamble , which stated that because King George had rejected reconciliation and was hiring foreign mercenaries to use against the colonies , " it is necessary that the exercise of every kind of authority under the said crown should be totally suppressed " .
Adams 's preamble was meant to encourage the overthrow of the governments of Pennsylvania and Maryland , which were still under proprietary governance .
Congress passed the preamble on May 15 after several days of debate , but four of the middle colonies voted against it , and the Maryland delegation walked out in protest .
Adams regarded his May 15 preamble effectively as an American declaration of independence , although a formal declaration would still have to be made .
LEE 'S RESOLUTION Section::::Lee 's resolution .
On the same day that Congress passed Adams 's radical preamble , the Virginia Convention set the stage for a formal Congressional declaration of independence .
On May 15 , the Convention instructed Virginia 's congressional delegation " to propose to that respectable body to declare the United Colonies free and independent States , absolved from all allegiance to , or dependence upon , the Crown or Parliament of Great Britain " .
In accordance with those instructions , Richard Henry Lee of Virginia presented a three - part resolution to Congress on June 7 .
The motion was seconded by John Adams , calling on Congress to declare independence , form foreign alliances , and prepare a plan of colonial confederation .
The part of the resolution relating to declaring independence read :
Resolved , that these United Colonies are , and of right ought to be , free and independent States , that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown , and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain is , and ought to be , totally dissolved .
Lee 's resolution met with resistance in the ensuing debate .
Opponents of the resolution conceded that reconciliation was unlikely with Great Britain , while arguing that declaring independence was premature , and that securing foreign aid should take priority .
Advocates of the resolution countered that foreign governments would not intervene in an internal British struggle , and so a formal declaration of independence was needed before foreign aid was possible .
All Congress needed to do , they insisted , was to " declare a fact which already exists " .
Delegates from Pennsylvania , Delaware , New Jersey , Maryland , and New York were still not yet authorized to vote for independence , however , and some of them threatened to leave Congress if the resolution were adopted .
Congress , therefore , voted on June 10 to postpone further discussion of Lee 's resolution for three weeks .
Until then , Congress decided that a committee should prepare a document announcing and explaining independence in the event that Lee 's resolution was approved when it was brought up again in July .
THE FINAL PUSH Section::::The final push .
Support for a Congressional declaration of independence was consolidated in the final weeks of June 1776 .
On June 14 , the Connecticut Assembly instructed its delegates to propose independence and , the following day , the legislatures of New Hampshire and Delaware authorized their delegates to declare independence .
In Pennsylvania , political struggles ended with the dissolution of the colonial assembly , and a new Conference of Committees under Thomas McKean authorized Pennsylvania 's delegates to declare independence on June 18 .
The Provincial Congress of New Jersey had been governing the province since January 1776 ; they resolved on June 15 that Royal Governor William Franklin was " an enemy to the liberties of this country " and had him arrested .
On June 21 , they chose new delegates to Congress and empowered them to join in a declaration of independence .
Only Maryland and New York had yet to authorize independence towards the end of June .
Previously , Maryland 's delegates had walked out when the Continental Congress adopted Adams 's radical May 15 preamble , and had sent to the Annapolis Convention for instructions .
On May 20 , the Annapolis Convention rejected Adams 's preamble , instructing its delegates to remain against independence .
But Samuel Chase went to Maryland and , thanks to local resolutions in favor of independence , was able to get the Annapolis Convention to change its mind on June 28 .
Only the New York delegates were unable to get revised instructions .
When Congress had been considering the resolution of independence on June 8 , the New York Provincial Congress told the delegates to wait .
But on June 30 , the Provincial Congress evacuated New York as British forces approached , and would not convene again until July 10 .
This meant that New York 's delegates would not be authorized to declare independence until after Congress had made its decision .
DRAFT AND ADOPTION Section::::Draft and adoption .
Political maneuvering was setting the stage for an official declaration of independence even while a document was being written to explain the decision .
On June 11 , 1776 , Congress appointed a " Committee of Five " to draft a declaration , consisting of John Adams of Massachusetts , Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania , Thomas Jefferson of Virginia , Robert R. Livingston of New York , and Roger Sherman of Connecticut .
The committee took no minutes , so there is some uncertainty about how the drafting process proceeded ; contradictory accounts were written many years later by Jefferson and Adams , too many years to be regarded as entirely reliable — although their accounts are frequently cited .
What is certain is that the committee discussed the general outline which the document should follow and decided that Jefferson would write the first draft .
The committee in general , and Jefferson in particular , thought that Adams should write the document , but Adams persuaded them to choose Jefferson and promised to consult with him personally .
Considering Congress 's busy schedule , Jefferson probably had limited time for writing over the next 17 days , and he likely wrote the draft quickly .
He then consulted the others and made some changes , and then produced another copy incorporating these alterations .
The committee presented this copy to the Congress on June 28 , 1776 .
The title of the document was " A Declaration by the Representatives of the United States of America , in General Congress assembled . "
Congress ordered that the draft " lie on the table " and then methodically edited Jefferson 's primary document for the next two days , shortening it by a fourth , removing unnecessary wording , and improving sentence structure .
They removed Jefferson 's assertion that Great Britain had forced slavery on the colonies in order to moderate the document and appease persons in Great Britain who supported the Revolution .
Jefferson wrote that Congress had " mangled " his draft version , but the Declaration that was finally produced was " the majestic document that inspired both contemporaries and posterity , " in the words of his biographer John Ferling .
Congress tabled the draft of the declaration on Monday , July 1 and resolved itself into a committee of the whole , with Benjamin Harrison of Virginia presiding , and they resumed debate on Lee 's resolution of independence .
John Dickinson made one last effort to delay the decision , arguing that Congress should not declare independence without first securing a foreign alliance and finalizing the Articles of Confederation .
John Adams gave a speech in reply to Dickinson , restating the case for an immediate declaration .
A vote was taken after a long day of speeches ,
each colony casting a single vote , as always .
The delegation for each colony numbered from two to seven members , and each delegation voted amongst themselves to determine the colony 's vote .
Pennsylvania and South Carolina voted against declaring independence .
The New York delegation abstained , lacking permission to vote for independence .
Delaware cast no vote because the delegation was split between Thomas McKean , who voted yes , and George Read , who voted no .
The remaining nine delegations voted in favor of independence , which meant that the resolution had been approved by the committee of the whole .
The next step was for the resolution to be voted upon by Congress itself .
Edward Rutledge of South Carolina was opposed to Lee 's resolution but desirous of unanimity , and he moved that the vote be postponed until the following day .
On July 2 , South Carolina reversed its position and voted for independence .
In the Pennsylvania delegation , Dickinson and Robert Morris abstained , allowing the delegation to vote three - to - two in favor of independence .
The tie in the Delaware delegation was broken by the timely arrival of Caesar Rodney , who voted for independence .
The New York delegation abstained once again since they were still not authorized to vote for independence , although they were allowed to do so a week later by the New York Provincial Congress .
The resolution of independence was adopted with twelve affirmative votes and one abstention , and the colonies officially severed political ties with Great Britain .
John Adams wrote to his wife on the following day and predicted that July 2 would become a great American holiday He thought that the vote for independence would be commemorated ; he did not foresee that Americans would instead celebrate Independence Day on the date when the announcement of that act was finalized .
I am apt to believe that [ Independence Day ] will be celebrated , by succeeding Generations , as the great anniversary Festival .
It ought to be commemorated , as the Day of Deliverance by solemn Acts of Devotion to God Almighty .
It ought to be solemnized with Pomp and Parade , with shews , Games , Sports , Guns , Bells , Bonfires and Illuminations from one End of this Continent to the other from this Time forward forever more .
Congress next turned its attention to the committee 's draft of the declaration .
They made a few changes in wording during several days of debate and deleted nearly a fourth of the text .
The wording of the Declaration of Independence was approved on July 4 , 1776 and sent to the printer for publication .
There is a distinct change in wording from this original broadside printing of the Declaration and the final official engrossed copy .
The word " unanimous " was inserted as a result of a Congressional resolution passed on July 19 , 1776 : Resolved , That the Declaration passed on the 4th , be fairly engrossed on parchment , with the title and stile of " The unanimous declaration of the thirteen United States of America , " and that the same , when engrossed , be signed by every member of Congress .
Historian George Billias says : Independence amounted to a new status of interdependence : the United States was now a sovereign nation entitled to the privileges and responsibilities that came with that status .
America thus became a member of the international community , which meant becoming a maker of treaties and alliances , a military ally in diplomacy , and a partner in foreign trade on a more equal basis .
ANNOTATED TEXT OF THE ENGROSSED DECLARATION
Section::::Annotated text of the engrossed declaration .
The declaration is not divided into formal sections ; but it is often discussed as consisting of five parts : introduction , preamble , indictment of King George III , denunciation of the British people , and conclusion .
Asserts as a matter of Natural Law the ability of a people to assume political independence ; acknowledges that the grounds for such independence must be reasonable , and therefore explicable , and ought to be explained .
" When in the Course of human events , it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another , and to assume among the powers of the earth , the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature 's God entitle them , a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel them to the separation . "
Outlines a general philosophy of government that justifies revolution when government harms natural rights .
" We hold these truths to be self - evident , that all men are created equal , that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights , that among these are Life , Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness .
" That to secure these rights , Governments are instituted among Men , deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed , That whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends , it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it , and to institute new Government , laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its powers in such form , as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and Happiness .
Prudence , indeed , will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes ; and accordingly all experience hath shewn , that mankind are more disposed to suffer , while evils are sufferable , than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed .
But when a long train of abuses and usurpations , pursuing invariably the same Object evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism , it is their right , it is their duty , to throw off such Government , and to provide new Guards for their future security . "
A bill of particulars documenting the king 's " repeated injuries and usurpations " of the Americans ' rights and liberties .
" Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies ; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of Government .
The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries and usurpations , all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these States .
To prove this , let Facts be submitted to a candid world .
" He has refused his Assent to Laws , the most wholesome and necessary for the public good .
" He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of immediate and pressing importance , unless suspended in their operation till his Assent should be obtained ; and when so suspended , he has utterly neglected to attend to them .
" He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommodation of large districts of people , unless those people would relinquish the right of Representation in the Legislature , a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only .
" He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual , uncomfortable , and distant from the depository of their Public Records , for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures .
" He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly , for opposing with manly firmness of his invasions on the rights of the people .
" He has refused for a long time , after such dissolutions , to cause others to be elected , whereby the Legislative Powers , incapable of Annihilation , have returned to the People at large for their exercise ; the State remaining in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion from without , and convulsions within .
" He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States ; for that purpose obstructing the Laws for Naturalization of Foreigners ; refusing to pass others to encourage their migrations hither , and raising the conditions of new Appropriations of Lands .
" He has obstructed the Administration of Justice by refusing his Assent to Laws for establishing Judiciary Powers .
" He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone for the tenure of their offices , and the amount and payment of their salaries .
" He has erected a multitude of New Offices , and sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our people and eat out their substance .
" He has kept among us , in times of peace , Standing Armies without the Consent of our legislatures .
" He has affected to render the Military independent of and superior to the Civil Power .
" He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution , and unacknowledged by our laws ; giving his Assent to their Acts of pretended Legislation :
" For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us : " For protecting them , by a mock Trial from punishment for any Murders which they should commit on the Inhabitants of these States : " For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world : " For imposing Taxes on us without our Consent : " For depriving us in many cases , of the benefit of Trial by Jury : " For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pretended offences : " For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a neighbouring Province , establishing therein an Arbitrary government , and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these Colonies : " For taking away our Charters , abolishing our most valuable Laws and altering fundamentally the Forms of our Governments : " For suspending our own Legislatures , and declaring themselves invested with power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever .
" He has abdicated Government here , by declaring us out of his Protection and waging War against us .
" He has plundered our seas , ravaged our coasts , burnt our towns , and destroyed the lives of our people .
" He is at this time transporting large Armies of foreign Mercenaries to compleat the works of death , desolation , and tyranny , already begun with circumstances of Cruelty & Perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages , and totally unworthy the Head of a civilized nation .
" He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive on the high Seas to bear Arms against their Country , to become the executioners of their friends and Brethren , or to fall themselves by their Hands .
" He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us , and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers , the merciless Indian Savages whose known rule of warfare , is an undistinguished destruction of all ages , sexes and conditions .
" In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms : Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury .
A Prince , whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a Tyrant , is unfit to be the ruler of a free people . "
This section essentially finishes the case for independence .
The conditions that justified revolution have been shown .
" Nor have We been wanting in attentions to our British brethren .
We have warned them from time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us .
We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here .
We have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity , and we have conjured them by the ties of our common kindred to disavow these usurpations , which , would inevitably interrupt our connections and correspondence .
They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consanguinity .
We must , therefore , acquiesce in the necessity , which denounces our Separation , and hold them , as we hold the rest of mankind , Enemies in War , in Peace Friends . "
The signers assert that there exist conditions under which people must change their government , that the British have produced such conditions and , by necessity , the colonies must throw off political ties with the British Crown and become independent states .
The conclusion contains , at its core , the Lee Resolution that had been passed on July 2 .
" We , therefore , the Representatives of the united States of America , in General Congress , Assembled , appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions , do , in the Name , and by Authority of the good People of these Colonies , solemnly publish and declare , That these united Colonies are , and of Right ought to be Free and Independent States ; that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the British Crown , and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain , is and ought to be totally dissolved ; and that as Free and Independent States , they have full Power to levy War , conclude Peace , contract Alliances , establish Commerce , and to do all other Acts and Things which Independent States may of right do .
And for the support of this Declaration , with a firm reliance on the protection of divine Providence , we mutually pledge to each other our Lives , our Fortunes and our sacred Honor . "
The first and most famous signature on the engrossed copy was that of John Hancock , President of the Continental Congress .
Two future presidents ( Thomas Jefferson and John Adams ) and a father and great - grandfather of two other presidents ( Benjamin Harrison ) were among the signatories .
Edward Rutledge ( age 26 ) was the youngest signer , and Benjamin Franklin ( age 70 ) was the oldest signer .
The fifty - six signers of the Declaration represented the new states as follows ( from north to south ) : INFLUENCES AND LEGAL STATUS Section::::Influences and legal status .
Historians have often sought to identify the sources that most influenced the words and political philosophy of the Declaration of Independence .
By Jefferson 's own admission , the Declaration contained no original ideas , but was instead a statement of sentiments widely shared by supporters of the American Revolution .
As he explained in 1825 :
Neither aiming at originality of principle or sentiment , nor yet copied from any particular and previous writing , it was intended to be an expression of the American mind , and to give to that expression the proper tone and spirit called for by the occasion .
Jefferson 's most immediate sources were two documents written in June 1776 : his own draft of the preamble of the Constitution of Virginia , and George Mason 's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights .
Ideas and phrases from both of these documents appear in the Declaration of Independence .
They were , in turn , directly influenced by the 1689 English Declaration of Rights , which formally ended the reign of King James II .
During the American Revolution , Jefferson and other Americans looked to the English Declaration of Rights as a model of how to end the reign of an unjust king .
The Scottish Declaration of Arbroath ( 1320 ) and the Dutch Act of Abjuration ( 1581 ) have also been offered as models for Jefferson 's Declaration , but these models are now accepted by few scholars .
Jefferson wrote that a number of authors exerted a general influence on the words of the Declaration .
English political theorist John Locke is usually cited as one of the primary influences , a man whom Jefferson called one of " the three greatest men that have ever lived " .
In 1922 , historian Carl L. Becker wrote , " Most Americans had absorbed Locke 's works as a kind of political gospel ; and the Declaration , in its form , in its phraseology , follows closely certain sentences in Locke 's second treatise on government . "
The extent of Locke 's influence on the American Revolution has been questioned by some subsequent scholars , however .
Historian Ray Forrest Harvey argued in 1937 for the dominant influence of Swiss jurist Jean Jacques Burlamaqui , declaring that Jefferson and Locke were at " two opposite poles " in their political philosophy , as evidenced by Jefferson 's use in the Declaration of Independence of the phrase " pursuit of happiness " instead of " property " .
Other scholars emphasized the influence of republicanism rather than Locke 's classical liberalism .
Historian Garry Wills argued that Jefferson was influenced by the Scottish Enlightenment , particularly Francis Hutcheson , rather than Locke , an interpretation that has been strongly criticized .
Legal historian John Phillip Reid has written that the emphasis on the political philosophy of the Declaration has been misplaced .
The Declaration is not a philosophical tract about natural rights , argues Reid , but is instead a legal document — an indictment against King George for violating the constitutional rights of the colonists .
Historian David Armitage has argued that the Declaration was strongly influenced by de Vattel 's The Law of Nations , the dominant international law treatise of the period , and a book that Benjamin Franklin said was " continually in the hands of the members of our Congress " .
Armitage writes , " Vattel made independence fundamental to his definition of statehood " ; therefore , the primary purpose of the Declaration was " to express the international legal sovereignty of the United States " .
If the United States were to have any hope of being recognized by the European powers , the American revolutionaries first had to make it clear that they were no longer dependent on Great Britain .
The Declaration of Independence does not have the force of law domestically , but nevertheless it may help to provide historical and legal clarity about the Constitution and other laws .
SIGNING
Section::::Signing .
The Declaration became official when Congress voted for it on July 4 ; signatures of the delegates were not needed to make it official .
The handwritten copy of the Declaration of Independence that was signed by Congress is dated July 4 , 1776 .
The signatures of fifty - six delegates are affixed ; however , the exact date when each person signed it has long been the subject of debate .
Jefferson , Franklin , and Adams all wrote that the Declaration had been signed by Congress on July 4 .
But in 1796 , signer Thomas McKean disputed that the Declaration had been signed on July 4 , pointing out that some signers were not then present , including several who were not even elected to Congress until after that date .
The Declaration was transposed on paper , adopted by the Continental Congress , and signed by John Hancock , President of the Congress , on July 4 , 1776 , according to the 1911 record of events by the U.S. State Department under Secretary Philander C. Knox .
On August 2 , 1776 , a parchment paper copy of the Declaration was signed by 56 persons .
Many of these signers were not present when the original Declaration was adopted on July 4 .
Signer Matthew Thornton from New Hampshire was seated in the Continental Congress in November ; he asked for and received the privilege of adding his signature at that time , and signed on November 4 , 1776 .
Historians have generally accepted McKean 's version of events , arguing that the famous signed version of the Declaration was created after July 19 , and was not signed by Congress until August 2 , 1776 .
In 1986 , legal historian Wilfred Ritz argued that historians had misunderstood the primary documents and given too much credence to McKean , who had not been present in Congress on July 4 .
According to Ritz , about thirty - four delegates signed the Declaration on July 4 , and the others signed on or after August 2 .
Historians who reject a July 4 signing maintain that most delegates signed on August 2 , and that those eventual signers who were not present added their names later .
Two future U.S. presidents were among the signatories : Thomas Jefferson and John Adams .
The most famous signature on the engrossed copy is that of John Hancock , who presumably signed first as President of Congress .
Hancock 's large , flamboyant signature became iconic , and the term John Hancock emerged in the United States as an informal synonym for " signature " .
A commonly circulated but apocryphal account claims that , after Hancock signed , the delegate from Massachusetts commented , " The British ministry can read that name without spectacles . "
Another apocryphal report indicates that Hancock proudly declared , " There !
I guess King George will be able to read that ! "
Various legends emerged years later about the signing of the Declaration , when the document had become an important national symbol .
In one famous story , John Hancock supposedly said that Congress , having signed the Declaration , must now " all hang together " , and Benjamin Franklin replied : " Yes , we must indeed all hang together , or most assuredly we shall all hang separately . "
The quotation did not appear in print until more than fifty years after Franklin 's death .
The Syng inkstand used at the signing was also used at the signing of the United States Constitution in 1787 .
PUBLICATION AND REACTION Section::::Publication and reaction .
After Congress approved the final wording of the Declaration on July 4 , a handwritten copy was sent a few blocks away to the printing shop of John Dunlap .
Through the night , Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides for distribution .
Before long , it was being read to audiences and reprinted in newspapers throughout the 13 states .
The first formal public readings of the document took place on July 8 , in Philadelphia ( by John Nixon in the yard of Independence Hall ) , Trenton , New Jersey , and Easton , Pennsylvania ; the first newspaper to publish it was the Pennsylvania Evening Post on July 6 .
A German translation of the Declaration was published in Philadelphia by July 9 .
President of Congress John Hancock sent a broadside to General George Washington , instructing him to have it proclaimed " at the Head of the Army in the way you shall think it most proper " .
Washington had the Declaration read to his troops in New York City on July 9 , with thousands of British troops on ships in the harbor .
Washington and Congress hoped that the Declaration would inspire the soldiers , and encourage others to join the army .
After hearing the Declaration , crowds in many cities tore down and destroyed signs or statues representing royal authority .
An equestrian statue of King George in New York City was pulled down and the lead used to make musket balls .
British officials in North America sent copies of the Declaration to Great Britain .
It was published in British newspapers beginning in mid - August , it had reached Florence and Warsaw by mid - September , and a German translation appeared in Switzerland by October .
The first copy of the Declaration sent to France got lost , and the second copy arrived only in November 1776 .
It reached Portuguese America by Brazilian medical student " Vendek " José Joaquim Maia e Barbalho , who had met with Thomas Jefferson in Nîmes .
The Spanish - American authorities banned the circulation of the Declaration , but it was widely transmitted and translated : by Venezuelan Manuel García de Sena , by Colombian Miguel de Pombo , by Ecuadorian Vicente Rocafuerte , and by New Englanders Richard Cleveland and William Shaler , who distributed the Declaration and the United States Constitution among Creoles in Chile and Indians in Mexico in 1821 .
The North Ministry did not give an official answer to the Declaration , but instead secretly commissioned pamphleteer John Lind to publish a response entitled Answer to the Declaration of the American Congress .
British Tories denounced the signers of the Declaration for not applying the same principles of " life , liberty , and the pursuit of happiness " to African Americans .
Thomas Hutchinson , the former royal governor of Massachusetts , also published a rebuttal .
These pamphlets challenged various aspects of the Declaration .
Hutchinson argued that the American Revolution was the work of a few conspirators who wanted independence from the outset , and who had finally achieved it by inducing otherwise loyal colonists to rebel .
Lind 's pamphlet had an anonymous attack on the concept of natural rights written by Jeremy Bentham , an argument that he repeated during the French Revolution .
Both pamphlets asked how the American slaveholders in Congress could proclaim that " all men are created equal " without freeing their own slaves .
William Whipple , a signer of the Declaration of Independence who had fought in the war , freed his slave Prince Whipple because of revolutionary ideals .
In the postwar decades , other slaveholders also freed their slaves ; from 1790 to 1810 , the percentage of free blacks in the Upper South increased to 8.3 percent from less than one percent of the black population .
All Northern states abolished slavery by 1804 .
HISTORY OF THE DOCUMENTS Section::::History of the documents .
The official copy of the Declaration of Independence was the one printed on July 4 , 1776 , under Jefferson 's supervision .
It was sent to the states and to the Army and was widely reprinted in newspapers .
The slightly different " engrossed copy " ( shown at the top of this article ) was made later for members to sign .
The engrossed version is the one widely distributed in the 21st century .
Note that the opening lines differ between the two versions .
The copy of the Declaration that was signed by Congress is known as the engrossed or parchment copy .
It was probably engrossed ( that is , carefully handwritten ) by clerk Timothy Matlack .
A facsimile made in 1823 has become the basis of most modern reproductions rather than the original because of poor conservation of the engrossed copy through the 19th century .
In 1921 , custody of the engrossed copy of the Declaration was transferred from the State Department to the Library of Congress , along with the United States Constitution .
After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 , the documents were moved for safekeeping to the United States Bullion Depository at Fort Knox in Kentucky , where they were kept until 1944 .
In 1952 , the engrossed Declaration was transferred to the National Archives and is now on permanent display at the National Archives in the " Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom " .
The document signed by Congress and enshrined in the National Archives is usually regarded as the Declaration of Independence , but historian Julian P. Boyd argued that the Declaration , like Magna Carta , is not a single document .
Boyd considered the printed broadsides ordered by Congress to be official texts , as well .
The Declaration was first published as a broadside that was printed the night of July 4 by John Dunlap of Philadelphia .
Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides , of which 26 are known to survive .
The 26th copy was discovered in The National Archives in England in 2009 .
In 1777 , Congress commissioned Mary Katherine Goddard to print that listed the signers of the Declaration , unlike the Dunlap broadside .
Nine copies of the Goddard broadside are known to still exist .
A variety of broadsides printed by the states are also extant .
Several early handwritten copies and drafts of the Declaration have also been preserved .
Jefferson kept a four - page draft that late in life he called the " original Rough draught " .
It is not known how many drafts Jefferson wrote prior to this one , and how much of the text was contributed by other committee members .
In 1947 , Boyd discovered a fragment of an earlier draft in Jefferson 's handwriting .
Jefferson and Adams sent copies of the rough draft to friends , with slight variations .
During the writing process , Jefferson showed the rough draft to Adams and Franklin , and perhaps to other members of the drafting committee , who made a few more changes .
Franklin , for example , may have been responsible for changing Jefferson 's original phrase " We hold these truths to be sacred and undeniable " to " We hold these truths to be self - evident " .
Jefferson incorporated these changes into a copy that was submitted to Congress in the name of the committee .
The copy that was submitted to Congress on June 28 has been lost and was perhaps destroyed in the printing process , or destroyed during the debates in accordance with .
On April 21 , 2017 , it was announced that a second engrossed copy had been discovered in the archives at West Sussex County Council in Chichester , England .
Named by its finders the " Sussex Declaration " , it differs from the National Archives copy ( which the finders refer to as the " Matlack Declaration " ) in that the signatures on it are not grouped by States .
How it came to be in England is not yet known , but the finders believe that the randomness of the signatures points to an origin with signatory James Wilson , who had argued strongly that the Declaration was made not by the States but by the whole people .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
The Declaration was given little attention in the years immediately following the American Revolution , having served its original purpose in announcing the independence of the United States .
Early celebrations of Independence Day largely ignored the Declaration , as did early histories of the Revolution .
The act of declaring independence was considered important , whereas the text announcing that act attracted little attention .
The Declaration was rarely mentioned during the debates about the United States Constitution , and its language was not incorporated into that document .
George Mason 's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights was more influential , and its language was echoed in state constitutions and state bills of rights more often than Jefferson 's words .
"
In none of these documents " , wrote Pauline Maier , " is there any evidence whatsoever that the Declaration of Independence lived in men 's minds as a classic statement of American political principles . "
INFLUENCE IN OTHER COUNTRIES Section::::Influence in other countries .
Many leaders of the French Revolution admired the Declaration of Independence but were also interested in the new American state constitutions .
The inspiration and content of the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen ( 1789 ) emerged largely from the ideals of the American Revolution .
Its key drafts were prepared by Lafayette , working closely in Paris with his friend Thomas Jefferson .
It also borrowed language from George Mason 's Virginia Declaration of Rights .
The declaration also influenced the Russian Empire .
The document had a particular impact on the Decembrist revolt and other Russian thinkers .
According to historian David Armitage , the Declaration of Independence did prove to be internationally influential , but not as a statement of human rights .
Armitage argued that the Declaration was the first in a new genre of declarations of independence that announced the creation of new states .
Other French leaders were directly influenced by the text of the Declaration of Independence itself .
The Manifesto of the Province of Flanders ( 1790 ) was the first foreign derivation of the Declaration ; others include the Venezuelan Declaration of Independence ( 1811 ) , the Liberian Declaration of Independence ( 1847 ) , the declarations of secession by the Confederate States of America ( 1860–61 ) , and the Vietnamese Proclamation of Independence ( 1945 ) .
These declarations echoed the United States Declaration of Independence in announcing the independence of a new state , without necessarily endorsing the political philosophy of the original .
Other countries have used the Declaration as inspiration or have directly copied sections from it .
These include the Haitian declaration of January 1 , 1804 , during the Haitian Revolution , the United Provinces of New Granada in 1811 , the Argentine Declaration of Independence in 1816 , the Chilean Declaration of Independence in 1818 , Costa Rica in 1821 , El Salvador in 1821 , Guatemala in 1821 , Honduras in ( 1821 ) , Mexico in 1821 , Nicaragua in 1821 , Peru in 1821 , Bolivian War of Independence in 1825 , Uruguay in 1825 , Ecuador in 1830 , Colombia in 1831 , Paraguay in 1842 , Dominican Republic in 1844 , Texas Declaration of Independence in March 1836 , California Republic in November 1836 , Hungarian Declaration of Independence in 1849 , Declaration of the Independence of New Zealand in 1835 , and the Czechoslovak declaration of independence from 1918 drafted in Washington D.C. with Gutzon Borglum among the drafters .
The Rhodesian declaration of independence , ratified in November 1965 , is based on the American one as well ; however , it omits the phrases " all men are created equal " and " the consent of the governed " .
The from December 1860 also mentions the U.S. Declaration of Independence , though it , like the Rhodesian one , omits references to " all men are created equal " and " consent of the governed " .
REVIVAL OF INTEREST
Section::::Revival of interest .
Interest in the Declaration was revived in the 1790s with the emergence of the United States 's first political parties .
Throughout the 1780s , few Americans knew or cared who wrote the Declaration .
But in the next decade , Jeffersonian Republicans sought political advantage over their rival Federalists by promoting both the importance of the Declaration and Jefferson as its author .
Federalists responded by casting doubt on Jefferson 's authorship or originality , and by emphasizing that independence was declared by the whole Congress , with Jefferson as just one member of the drafting committee .
Federalists insisted that Congress 's act of declaring independence , in which Federalist John Adams had played a major role , was more important than the document announcing it .
But this view faded away , like the Federalist Party itself , and , before long , the act of declaring independence became synonymous with the document .
A less partisan appreciation for the Declaration emerged in the years following the War of 1812 , thanks to a growing American nationalism and a renewed interest in the history of the Revolution .
In 1817 , Congress commissioned John Trumbull 's famous painting of the signers , which was exhibited to large crowds before being installed in the Capitol .
The earliest commemorative printings of the Declaration also appeared at this time , offering many Americans their first view of the signed document .
Collective biographies of the signers were first published in the 1820s , giving birth to what Garry Wills called the " cult of the signers " .
In the years that followed , many stories about the writing and signing of the document were published for the first time .
When interest in the Declaration was revived , the sections that were most important in 1776 were no longer relevant : the announcement of the independence of the United States and the grievances against King George .
But the second paragraph was applicable long after the war had ended , with its talk of self - evident truths and unalienable rights .
The Constitution and the Bill of Rights lacked sweeping statements about rights and equality , and advocates of groups with grievances turned to the Declaration for support .
Starting in the 1820s , variations of the Declaration were issued to proclaim the rights of workers , farmers , women , and others .
In 1848 , for example , the Seneca Falls Convention of women 's rights advocates declared that " all men and women are created equal " .
JOHN TRUMBULL 'S DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE ( 1817–1826 )
Section::::John Trumbull 's Declaration of Independence ( 1817–1826 ) .
John Trumbull 's painting Declaration of Independence has played a significant role in popular conceptions of the Declaration of Independence .
The painting is in size and was commissioned by the United States Congress in 1817 ; it has hung in the United States Capitol Rotunda since 1826 .
It is sometimes described as the signing of the Declaration of Independence , but it actually shows the Committee of Five presenting their draft of the Declaration to the Second Continental Congress on June 28 , 1776 , and not the signing of the document , which took place later .
Trumbull painted the figures from life whenever possible , but some had died and images could not be located ; hence , the painting does not include all the signers of the Declaration .
One figure had participated in the drafting but did not sign the final document ; another refused to sign .
In fact , the membership of the Second Continental Congress changed as time passed , and the figures in the painting were never in the same room at the same time .
It is , however , an accurate depiction of the room in Independence Hall , the centerpiece of the Independence National Historical Park in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania .
Trumbull 's painting has been depicted multiple times on U.S. currency and postage stamps .
Its first use was on the reverse side of the $ 100 National Bank Note issued in 1863 .
A few years later , the steel engraving used in printing the bank notes was used to produce a 24-cent stamp , issued as part of the 1869 Pictorial Issue .
An engraving of the signing scene has been featured on the reverse side of the United States two - dollar bill since 1976 .
SLAVERY AND THE DECLARATION Section::::Slavery and the Declaration .
The apparent contradiction between the claim that " all men are created equal " and the existence of American slavery attracted comment when the Declaration was first published .
As mentioned above , Jefferson had included a paragraph in his initial draft that strongly indicted Great Britain 's role in the slave trade , but this was deleted from the final version .
Jefferson himself was a prominent Virginia slave holder , having owned hundreds of slaves .
Referring to this seeming contradiction , English abolitionist Thomas Day wrote in a 1776 letter , " If there be an object truly ridiculous in nature , it is an American patriot , signing resolutions of independency with the one hand , and with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves . "
In the 19th century , the Declaration took on a special significance for the abolitionist movement .
Historian Bertram Wyatt - Brown wrote that " abolitionists tended to interpret the Declaration of Independence as a theological as well as a political document " .
Abolitionist leaders Benjamin Lundy and William Lloyd Garrison adopted the " twin rocks " of " the Bible and the Declaration of Independence " as the basis for their philosophies .
" As long as there remains a single copy of the Declaration of Independence , or of the Bible , in our land , " wrote Garrison , " we will not despair . "
For radical abolitionists such as Garrison , the most important part of the Declaration was its assertion of the right of revolution .
Garrison called for the destruction of the government under the Constitution , and the creation of a new state dedicated to the principles of the Declaration .
The controversial question of whether to add additional slave states to the United States coincided with the growing stature of the Declaration .
The first major public debate about slavery and the Declaration took place during the Missouri controversy of 1819 to 1821 .
Antislavery Congressmen argued that the language of the Declaration indicated that the Founding Fathers of the United States had been opposed to slavery in principle , and so new slave states should not be added to the country .
Proslavery Congressmen led by Senator Nathaniel Macon of North Carolina
argued that the Declaration was not a part of the Constitution and therefore had no relevance to the question .
With the antislavery movement gaining momentum , defenders of slavery such as John Randolph and John C. Calhoun found it necessary to argue that the Declaration 's assertion that " all men are created equal " was false , or at least that it did not apply to black people .
During the debate over the Kansas – Nebraska Act in 1853 , for example , Senator John Pettit of Indiana argued that the statement " all men are created equal " was not a " self - evident truth " but a " self - evident lie " .
Opponents of the Kansas – Nebraska Act , including Salmon P. Chase and Benjamin Wade , defended the Declaration and what they saw as its antislavery principles .
LINCOLN AND THE DECLARATION Section::::Lincoln and the Declaration .
The Declaration 's relationship to slavery was taken up in 1854 by Abraham Lincoln , a little - known former Congressman who idolized the Founding Fathers .
Lincoln thought that the Declaration of Independence expressed the highest principles of the American Revolution , and that the Founding Fathers had tolerated slavery with the expectation that it would ultimately wither away .
For the United States to legitimize the expansion of slavery in the Kansas - Nebraska Act , thought Lincoln , was to repudiate the principles of the Revolution .
In his October 1854 Peoria speech , Lincoln said : The meaning of the Declaration was a recurring topic in the famed debates between Lincoln and Stephen Douglas in 1858 .
Douglas argued that the phrase " all men are created equal " in the Declaration referred to white men only .
The purpose of the Declaration , he said , had simply been to justify the independence of the United States , and not to proclaim the equality of any " inferior or degraded race " .
Lincoln , however , thought that the language of the Declaration was deliberately universal , setting a high moral standard to which the American republic should aspire .
" I had thought the Declaration contemplated the progressive improvement in the condition of all men everywhere , " he said .
During the seventh and last joint debate with Steven Douglas at Alton , Illinois on October 15 , 1858 , Lincoln said about the declaration :
According to Pauline Maier , Douglas 's interpretation was more historically accurate , but Lincoln 's view ultimately prevailed . "
In Lincoln 's hands , " wrote Maier , " the Declaration of Independence became first and foremost a living document " with " a set of goals to be realized over time " .
Like Daniel Webster , James Wilson , and Joseph Story before him , Lincoln argued that the Declaration of Independence was a founding document of the United States , and that this had important implications for interpreting the Constitution , which had been ratified more than a decade after the Declaration .
The Constitution did not use the word " equality " , yet Lincoln believed that the concept that " all men are created equal " remained a part of the nation 's founding principles .
He famously expressed this belief in the opening sentence of his 1863 Gettysburg Address : " Four score and seven years ago
[ i.e. in 1776 ] our fathers brought forth on this continent , a new nation , conceived in Liberty , and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal . "
Lincoln 's view of the Declaration became influential , seeing it as a moral guide to interpreting the Constitution . "
For most people now , " wrote Garry Wills in 1992 , " the Declaration means what Lincoln told us it means , as a way of correcting the Constitution itself without overthrowing it . "
Admirers of Lincoln such as Harry V. Jaffa praised this development .
Critics of Lincoln , notably Willmoore Kendall and Mel Bradford , argued that Lincoln dangerously expanded the scope of the national government and violated states ' rights by reading the Declaration into the Constitution .
WOMEN 'S SUFFRAGE AND THE DECLARATION
Section::::Women 's suffrage and the Declaration .
In July 1848 , the first woman 's rights convention , the Seneca Falls Convention , was held in Seneca Falls , New York .
The convention was organized by Elizabeth Cady Stanton , Lucretia Mott , Mary Ann McClintock , and Jane Hunt .
In their " Declaration of Sentiments " , patterned on the Declaration of Independence , the convention members demanded social and political equality for women .
Their motto was that " All men and women are created equal " and the convention demanded suffrage for women .
The suffrage movement was supported by William Lloyd Garrison and Frederick Douglass .
TWENTIETH CENTURY AND LATER Section::::Twentieth century and
later .
The Declaration was chosen to be the first digitized text ( 1971 ) .
The Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence was dedicated in 1984 in Constitution Gardens on the National Mall in Washington , D.C. , where the signatures of all the original signers are carved in stone with their names , places of residence , and occupations .
The new One World Trade Center building in New York City ( 2014 ) is 1776 feet high to symbolize the year that the Declaration of Independence was signed .
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Popular culture .
The adoption of the Declaration of Independence was dramatized in the 1969 Tony Award – winning musical 1776 and the 1972 film version , as well as in the 2008 television miniseries John Adams .
In 1970 , The 5th Dimension recorded the opening of the Declaration on their album Portrait in the song " Declaration " .
It was first performed on the Ed Sullivan Show on December 7 , 1969 , and it was taken as a song of protest against the Vietnam War .
The Declaration of Independence is also a plot device in the 2004 American film National Treasure .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Armitage , David .
The Declaration Of Independence : A Global History , Cambridge , Massachusetts :
Harvard University Press , 2007 . .
* Bailyn , Bernard .
The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution .
Enlarged edition .
Originally published 1967 .
Harvard University Press , 1992 . .
* Becker , Carl .
The Declaration of Independence : A Study in the History of Political Ideas .
1922 .
Available online from The Online Library of Liberty and Google Book Search .
Revised edition New York :
Vintage Books , 1970 . .
* Boyd , Julian P.
The Declaration of Independence : The Evolution of the Text .
Originally published 1945 .
Revised edition edited by Gerard W. Gawalt .
University Press of New England , 1999 . .
* Boyd , Julian P. , ed .
The Papers of Thomas Jefferson , vol . 1 .
Princeton University Press , 1950 .
* Boyd , Julian P.
" The Declaration of Independence : The Mystery of the Lost Original " .
Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography 100 , number 4 ( October 1976 ) ,
438–67 .
* Burnett , Edward Cody .
The Continental Congress .
New York :
Norton , 1941 .
* Christie , Ian R. and Benjamin W. Labaree .
Empire or Independence , 1760–1776 :
A British - American Dialogue on the Coming of the American Revolution .
New York :
Norton , 1976 .
* Detweiler , Philip F. " Congressional Debate on Slavery and the Declaration of Independence , 1819–1821 " , American Historical Review 63 ( April 1958 ) : 598–616 .
in JSTOR
* Detweiler , Philip F. " The Changing Reputation of the Declaration of Independence : The First Fifty Years " .
William and Mary Quarterly , 3rd series , 19 ( 1962 ) : 557–74 .
in JSTOR * Dumbauld , Edward .
The Declaration of Independence
And What It Means Today .
Norman : University of Oklahoma Press , 1950 .
* Ellis , Joseph .
American Creation :
Triumphs and Tragedies at the Founding of the Republic .
New York :
Knopf , 2007 . .
* Dupont , Christian Y. and Peter S. Onuf , eds .
Declaring Independence :
The Origins and Influence of America 's Founding Document .
Revised edition .
Charlottesville , Virginia : University of Virginia Library , 2010 . .
* Ferling , John E. A Leap in the Dark : The Struggle to Create the American Republic .
New York :
Oxford University Press , 2003 . .
* Friedenwald , Herbert .
The Declaration of Independence : An Interpretation and an Analysis .
New York : Macmillan , 1904 .
Accessed via the Internet Archive .
* Gustafson , Milton . "
Travels of the Charters of Freedom " .
Prologue Magazine 34 , no 4 .
( Winter 2002 ) .
* Hamowy , Ronald .
" Jefferson and the Scottish Enlightenment : A Critique of Garry Wills 's Inventing America : Jefferson 's Declaration of Independence " .
William and Mary Quarterly , 3rd series , 36 ( October 1979 ) , 503–23 .
* Hazelton , John H.
The Declaration of Independence : Its History .
Originally published 1906 .
New York :
Da Capo Press , 1970 . .
1906 edition available on Google Book Search * Journals of the Continental Congress,1774–1789 , Vol .
5
( Library of Congress , 1904–1937 )
*
Jensen , Merrill .
The Founding of a Nation : A History of the American Revolution , 1763–1776 .
New York :
Oxford University Press , 1968 .
* Lucas , Stephen E. , " Justifying America :
The Declaration of Independence as a Rhetorical Document " , in Thomas W. Benson , ed . , American Rhetoric : Context and Criticism , Carbondale , Illinois : Southern Illinois University Press , 1989
* Maier , Pauline .
American Scripture :
Making the Declaration of Independence .
New York : Knopf , 1997 . .
* Malone , Dumas .
Jefferson the Virginian .
Volume 1 of Jefferson and His Time .
Boston :
Little Brown , 1948 .
* Mayer , Henry .
All on Fire : William Lloyd Garrison and the Abolition of Slavery .
New York :
St. Martin 's Press , 1998 . .
* McDonald , Robert M. S. " Thomas Jefferson 's Changing Reputation as Author of the Declaration of Independence : The First Fifty Years " .
Journal of the Early Republic 19 , no . 2
( Summer 1999 )
: 169–95 .
* McPherson , James .
Abraham Lincoln and the Second American Revolution .
New York :
Oxford University Press , 1991 . .
* Middlekauff , Robert .
The Glorious Cause : The American Revolution , 1763–1789 .
Revised and expanded edition .
New York :
Oxford University Press , 2005 .
* Norton , Mary Beth , et al . , A People and a Nation , Eighth Edition , Boston , Wadsworth , 2010 . .
* Rakove , Jack N.
The Beginnings of National Politics : An Interpretive History of the Continental Congress .
New York :
Knopf , 1979 . .
* Ritz , Wilfred J. " The Authentication of the Engrossed Declaration of Independence on July 4 , 1776 " .
Law and History Review 4 , no . 1
( Spring 1986 )
: 179–204 .
* Ritz , Wilfred J. "
From the Here of Jefferson 's Handwritten Rough Draft of the Declaration of Independence to the There of the Printed Dunlap Broadside " .
Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography 116 , no . 4 ( October 1992 ) : 499–512 .
* Tsesis , Alexander .
For Liberty and Equality : The Life and Times of the Declaration of Independence ( Oxford University Press ; 2012 ) 397 pages ; explores the impact on American politics , law , and society since its drafting .
* Warren , Charles . "
Fourth of July Myths " .
The William and Mary Quarterly , Third Series , vol .
2 , no . 3 ( July 1945 )
: 238–72 . .
* United States Department of State , " The Declaration of Independence , 1776 , 1911 .
* Wills , Garry .
Inventing America : Jefferson 's Declaration of Independence .
Garden City , New York :
Doubleday , 1978 . .
* Wills , Garry .
Lincoln at Gettysburg : The Words That Rewrote America .
New York :
Simon & Schuster , 1992 . .
* Wyatt - Brown , Bertram .
Lewis Tappan and the Evangelical War Against Slavery .
Cleveland :
Press of Case Western Reserve University , 1969 . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Declare the Causes :
The Declaration of Independence " lesson plan for grades 9–12 from National Endowment for the Humanities * Declaration of Independence at the National Archives * Declaration of Independence at the Library of Congress *
" The Stylistic Artistry of the Declaration of Independence " by Stephen E. Lucas
* Short film released in 2002 with actors reading the Declaration , with an introduction by Morgan Freeman * Mobile - Friendly Declaration of Independence * Various editions of the Declaration of Independence at the Online Books Page Loyalist responses to the Declaration of Independence
* Strictures upon the Declaration of the Congress at Philadelphia ( London 1776 ) , Thomas Hutchinson 's reaction to the Declaration * The Loyalist Declaration of Independence published in The Royal Gazette , ( New York ) on November 17 , 1781
( Transcription provided by Bruce Wallace and posted on The On - Line Institute for Advanced Loyalist Studies . )