WARSAW PACT
The Warsaw Pact , formally known as the Treaty of Friendship , Cooperation and Mutual Assistance , was a collective defence treaty signed in Warsaw , Poland among the Soviet Union and seven Soviet satellite states of Central and Eastern Europe in May 1955 , during the Cold War .
The Warsaw Pact was the military complement to the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance ( CoMEcon ) , the regional economic organization for the socialist states of Central and Eastern Europe .
The Warsaw Pact was created in reaction to the integration of West Germany into NATO in 1955 per the London and Paris Conferences of 1954 , but it is also considered to have been motivated by Soviet desires to maintain control over military forces in Central and Eastern Europe .
The Warsaw Pact was established as a balance of power or counterweight to NATO ; there was no direct confrontation between them .
Instead , the conflict was fought on an ideological basis and in proxy wars .
Both NATO and the Warsaw Pact led to the expansion of military forces and their integration into the respective blocs .
Its largest military engagement was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 ( with the participation of all Pact nations except Albania , Romania and East Germany ) , which , in part , resulted in Albania withdrawing from the pact less than a month later .
The Pact began to unravel in its entirety with the spread of the Revolutions of 1989 through the Eastern Bloc , beginning with the Solidarity movement in Poland and its electoral success in June 1989 .
East Germany withdrew from the Pact following reunification with West Germany in 1990 .
On 25 February 1991 , the Pact was declared at an end at a meeting of defence and foreign ministers from the six remaining member states in Hungary .
The USSR itself was dissolved in December 1991 , although most of the former Soviet republics formed the Collective Security Treaty Organization shortly thereafter .
Throughout the following 20 years , the seven Warsaw Pact countries outside the USSR each joined NATO ( East Germany through its reunification with West Germany ; and the Czech Republic and Slovakia as separate countries ) , as did the three Baltic states ( Estonia , Latvia and Lithuania ) that had been part of the Soviet Union .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
In the Western Bloc , the Warsaw Treaty Organization of Friendship , Cooperation and Mutual Assistance is often called the Warsaw Pact military alliance — abbreviated WAPA , Warpac and WP .
Elsewhere , in the former member states , the Warsaw Treaty is known as : * Romanized Belarusian : Dagavor ab druzhe , supratsoŭnitstve
i ŭzaemnaŭ dapamoze
* Romanized Bulgarian : Dogovor za druzhba , satrudnichestvo
i vzaimopomosht *
Romanized Russian : Dogovor o druzhbe , sotrudnichestve
i
vzaimnoy pomoshchi * Romanized Ukrainian :
Dogovir pro druzhbu , spivrobitnitstvo
i vzaêmnu dopomogu STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The Warsaw Treaty 's organization was two - fold : the Political Consultative Committee handled political matters , and the Combined Command of Pact Armed Forces controlled the assigned multi - national forces , with headquarters in Warsaw , Poland .
Furthermore , the Supreme Commander of the Unified Armed Forces of the Warsaw Treaty Organization which commanded and controlled all the military forces of the member countries was also a First Deputy Minister of Defence of the USSR , and the Chief of Combined Staff of the Unified Armed Forces of the Warsaw Treaty Organization was also a First Deputy Chief of the General Staff of the Armed Forces of the USSR .
Therefore , although ostensibly an international collective security alliance , the USSR dominated the Warsaw Treaty armed forces .
STRATEGY Section::::Strategy .
The strategy behind the formation of the Warsaw Pact was driven by the desire of the Soviet Union to dominate Central and Eastern Europe .
The Soviets wanted to keep their part of Europe and not let the Americans take it from them .
This policy was driven by ideological and geostrategic reasons .
Ideologically , the Soviet Union arrogated the right to define socialism and communism and act as the leader of the global socialist movement .
A corollary to this idea was the necessity of intervention if a country appeared to be violating core socialist ideas and Communist Party functions , which was explicitly stated in the Brezhnev Doctrine .
Geostrategic principles also drove the Soviet Union with the desire to create a buffer zone to prevent invasion of its territory by Western European powers .
HISTORY BEGINNINGS Section::::History .
Section::::Beginnings .
Before the creation of the Warsaw Pact , Czechoslovak leadership , fearful of a rearmed Germany , sought to create a security pact with East Germany and Poland .
These states protested strongly against the re - militarization of West Germany .
The Warsaw Pact was primarily put in place as a consequence of the rearming of West Germany inside NATO .
Soviet leaders , like many European countries on both sides of the Iron Curtain , feared Germany being once again a military power and a direct threat .
The terrible consequences of German militarism remained a fresh memory among the Soviets and Eastern Europeans .
As the Soviet Union already had bilateral treaties with all of its eastern satellites , the Pact has been long considered ' superfluous ' , and because of the rushed way in which it was conceived , NATO officials labeled it as a ' cardboard castle ' .
Previously , in March 1954 , the USSR , fearing the restoration of German militarism in West Germany , requested admission to NATO .
The Soviet request to join NATO arose in the aftermath of the Berlin Conference of January – February 1954 .
Soviet foreign minister Molotov made proposals to have Germany reunified and elections for a pan - German government , under conditions of withdrawal of the four powers ' armies and German neutrality , but all were refused by the other foreign ministers , Dulles ( USA ) , Eden ( UK ) and Bidault ( France ) .
Proposals for the reunification of Germany were nothing new : earlier on 20 March 1952 , talks about a German reunification , initiated by the so - called ' Stalin Note ' , ended after the United Kingdom , France and the United States insisted that a unified Germany should not be neutral and should be free to join the European Defence Community and rearm .
James Dunn ( USA ) , who met in Paris with Eden , Adenauer and Robert Schuman ( France ) , affirmed that " the object should be to avoid discussion with the Russians and to press on the European Defense Community " .
According to John Gaddis " there was little inclination in Western capitals to explore this offer " from USSR .
While historian Rolf Steininger asserts that Adenauer 's conviction that " neutralization means sovietization " was the main factor in the rejection of the Soviet proposals , Adenauer also feared that German unification might have resulted in the end of the CDU 's dominance in the West German Bundestag .
Consequently , Molotov , fearing that the EDC would be directed in the future against the USSR and " seeking to prevent the formation of groups of European States directed against other European States " , made a proposal for a General European Treaty on Collective Security in Europe " open to all European States without regard as to their social systems " which would have included the unified Germany ( thus making the EDC – perceived by the USSR as a threat – unusable ) .
But Eden , Dulles and Bidault opposed the proposal .
One month later , the proposed European Treaty was rejected not only by supporters of the EDC but also by Western opponents of the European Defence Community ( like French Gaullist leader Palewski ) who perceived it as " unacceptable in its present form because it excludes the USA from participation in the collective security system in Europe " .
The Soviets then decided to make a new proposal to the governments of the USA , UK and France to accept the participation of the USA in the proposed General European Agreement .
And considering that another argument deployed against the Soviet proposal was that it was perceived by Western powers as " directed against the North Atlantic Pact and its liquidation " , the Soviets decided to declare their " readiness to examine jointly with other interested parties the question of the participation of the USSR in the North Atlantic bloc " , specifying that " the admittance of the USA into the General European Agreement should not be conditional on the three Western powers agreeing to the USSR joining the North Atlantic Pact " .
Again all proposals , including the request to join NATO , were rejected by the UK , US and French governments shortly after .
Emblematic was the position of British General Hastings Ismay , a fierce supporter of NATO expansion .
He opposed the request to join NATO made by the USSR in 1954 saying that " the Soviet request to join NATO is like an unrepentant burglar requesting to join the police force " .
In April 1954 Adenauer made his first visit to the USA meeting Nixon , Eisenhower and Dulles .
Ratification of EDC was delaying but the US representatives made it clear to Adenauer that EDC would have to become a part of NATO .
Memories of the Nazi occupation were still strong , and the rearmament of Germany was feared by France too .
On 30 August 1954 French Parliament rejected the EDC , thus ensuring its failure and blocking a major objective of US policy towards Europe : to associate Germany militarily with the West .
The US Department of State started to elaborate alternatives : Germany would be invited to join NATO or , in the case of French obstructionism , strategies to circumvent a French veto would be implemented in order to obtain a German rearmament outside NATO .
On 23 October 1954 – only nine years after Allies ( UK , USA and USSR ) defeated Nazi Germany ending World War II in Europe –
the admission of the Federal Republic of Germany to the North Atlantic Pact was finally decided .
The incorporation of West Germany into the organization on 9 May 1955 was described as " a decisive turning point in the history of our continent " by Halvard Lange , Foreign Affairs Minister of Norway at the time .
In November 1954 , the USSR requested a new European Security Treaty , in order to make a final attempt to not have a remilitarized West Germany potentially opposed to the Soviet Union , with no success .
On 14 May 1955 , the USSR and other seven European countries " reaffirming their desire for the establishment of a system of European collective security based on the participation of all European states irrespective of their social and political systems " established the Warsaw Pact in response to the integration of the Federal Republic of Germany into NATO , declaring that : " a remilitarized Western Germany and the integration of the latter in the North - Atlantic bloc [ ... ] increase the danger of another war and constitutes a threat to the national security of the peaceable states ;
[ ... ] in these circumstances the peaceable European states must take the necessary measures to safeguard their security " .
One of the founding members , East Germany was allowed to re - arm by the Soviet Union and the National People 's Army was established as the armed forces of the country to counter the rearmament of West Germany and vice versa .
MEMBERS Section::::Members .
The eight member countries of the Warsaw Pact pledged the mutual defence of any member who would be attacked .
Relations among the treaty signatories were based upon mutual non - intervention in the internal affairs of the member countries , respect for national sovereignty , and political independence .
However , almost all governments of those member states were indirectly controlled by the Soviet Union .
The founding signatories to the Treaty of Friendship , Cooperation and Mutual Assistance consisted of the following communist governments :
* Albania ( withheld support in 1961 because of the Soviet - Albanian split , formally withdrew in 1968 ) * ( withdrew on 2 October 1990 prior to German reunification ) * ( temporarily withdrew from 1–4 November 1956 during the Hungarian Revolution ) DURING COLD WAR Section::::During Cold War .
For 36 years , NATO and the Warsaw Pact never directly waged war against each other in Europe ; the United States and the Soviet Union and their respective allies implemented strategic policies aimed at the containment of each other in Europe , while working and fighting for influence within the wider Cold War on the international stage .
These included the Korean War , Vietnam War , Bay of Pigs invasion , Dirty War , Cambodian – Vietnamese War and the others .
In 1956 , following the declaration of the Imre Nagy government of withdrawal of Hungary from the Warsaw Pact , Soviet troops entered the country and removed the government .
Soviet forces crushed the nationwide revolt , leading to the death of an estimated 2,500 Hungarian citizens .
The multi - national Communist armed forces ' sole joint action was the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in August 1968 .
All member countries , with the exception of the Socialist Republic of Romania and the People 's Republic of Albania , participated in the invasion .
The German Democratic Republic provided only minimal support , however .
END OF THE COLD WAR Section::::End of the Cold War .
Beginning at the Cold War 's conclusion , in late 1989 , popular civil and political public discontent forced the Communist governments of the Warsaw Treaty countries from power , while independent national politics made feasible with the perestroika and glasnost induced institutional collapse of Communist government in the USSR .
Between 1989 and 1991 , Communist governments were overthrown in Albania , Poland , Hungary , Czechoslovakia , East Germany , Romania , Bulgaria and the Soviet Union .
As the last acts of the Cold War were playing out , several Warsaw Pact states ( Poland , Czechoslovakia and Hungary ) participated in the U.S.-led coalition effort to liberate Kuwait in the Gulf War .
On 25 February 1991 , the Warsaw Pact was declared disbanded at a meeting of defence and foreign ministers from remaining Pact countries meeting in Hungary .
On 1 July 1991 , in Prague , the Czechoslovak President Václav Havel formally ended the 1955 Warsaw Treaty Organization of Friendship , Cooperation and Mutual Assistance and so disestablished the Warsaw Treaty after 36 years of military alliance with the USSR .
The USSR disestablished itself in December 1991 .
CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE
AFTER THE WARSAW TREATY Section::::Central and Eastern Europe after the Warsaw Treaty .
On 12 March 1999 , the Czech Republic , Hungary and Poland joined NATO ; Bulgaria , Estonia , Latvia , Lithuania , Romania and Slovakia joined in March 2004 ; Albania joined on 1 April 2009 .
Russia and some other post - USSR states joined the Collective Security Treaty Organization ( CSTO ) in 1992 , or the Shanghai Five in 1996 , which was renamed the Shanghai Cooperation Organization ( SCO ) after Uzbekistan 's addition in 2001 .
In November 2005 , the Polish government opened its Warsaw Treaty archives to the Institute of National Remembrance , which published some 1,300 declassified documents in January 2006 .
Yet the Polish government reserved publication of 100 documents , pending their military declassification .
Eventually , 30 of the reserved 100 documents were published ; 70 remained secret and unpublished .
Among the documents published is the Warsaw Treaty 's nuclear war plan , Seven Days to the River Rhine – a short , swift counter - attack capturing Austria , Denmark , Germany and Netherlands east of River Rhine , using nuclear weapons , in self - defence , after a NATO first strike .
The plan originated as a 1979 field training exercise war game and metamorphosed into official Warsaw Treaty battle doctrine , until the late 1980s – which is why the Polish People 's Republic was a nuclear weapons base , first , to 178 , then , to 250 tactical - range rockets , though these numbers may differ .
Doctrinally , as a Soviet - style ( offensive ) battle plan , Seven Days to the River Rhine gave commanders few defensive - war strategies for fighting NATO in Warsaw Treaty territory .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * Collective Security Treaty Organization ( CSTO ) – Modern military alliance between six former Soviet states .
* Shanghai Cooperation Organization ( SCO ) –
Modern Eurasian political , economic and military organization .
REFERENCES
WORKS CITED
FURTHER READING
* Faringdon , Hugh .
Confrontation : the strategic geography of NATO and the Warsaw Pact .
( London : Routledge & Kegan Paul , 1986 . )
* Mackintosh , Malcolm .
The evolution of the Warsaw Pact ( International Institute for Strategic Studies , 1969 ) * Kramer , Mark N. " Civil - military relations in the Warsaw Pact , The East European component , " International Affairs , Vol .
61 ,
No . 1 , Winter 1984–85 .
* A. James McAdams , " East Germany and Detente . "
Cambridge University Press , 1985 .
* McAdams , A. James . "
Germany Divided : From the Wall to Reunification . "
Princeton University Press , 1992 and 1993 .
OTHER LANGUAGES * –
Original Ed .
:
MEMOIRS
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Woodrow Wilson Center Cold War International History Project 's Warsaw Pact Document Collection * Parallel History Project on Cooperative Security
* Library of Congress / Federal Research Division / Country Studies / Area Handbook Series / Soviet Union / Appendix C :
The Warsaw Pact ( 1989 )
* Map of Russia and the Warsaw Pact ( omniatlas.com )
* Map of Europe and the Warsaw Pact ( omniatlas.com ) * The Warsaw Pact , 1955–1968 .
by Hugh Collins Embry .
Contain extensive documentation of the Pacts first 13 years .