THE PARENT TRAP ( 1961 FILM )
The Parent Trap is a 1961 Walt Disney Technicolor film .
It stars Hayley Mills ( in a dual role ) , Maureen O'Hara and Brian Keith in a story about teenage twins on a quest to reunite their divorced parents .
The screenplay by the film 's director David Swift was based upon the 1949 book Lottie and Lisa ( German : ) by Erich Kästner .
The Parent Trap was nominated for two Academy Awards , was broadcast on television , saw three television sequels , was remade in 1998 with Lindsay Lohan , and has been released on digital stereo LaserDisc format in 1986 as well as VHS and DVD in 2000 .
The original film was Mills ' second of six films for Disney .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Identical twins Susan Evers and Sharon McKendrick ( Hayley Mills ) meet at Miss Inch 's Summer Camp for Girls , unaware that they are sisters .
Their identical appearance initially creates rivalry , and they pull pranks on each other , culminating in the camp dance being ruined .
As punishment , Miss Inch decides that they must live together in the isolated " Serendipity " cabin ( and eat together at an " Isolation Table " ) for the remainder of the camp season .
After discovering that they both come from single - parent homes , they soon realize they are twin sisters and that their parents , Mitchell " Mitch " Evers ( Brian Keith ) and Margaret " Maggie " McKendrick ( Maureen O'Hara ) , divorced shortly after their birth , with each parent having custody of one of them .
The twins , each eager to meet the parent she never knew , decide to switch places .
Susan gives Sharon a matching haircut and has her bite her nails .
They also take a crash - course getting to know each other while learning about each other 's personalities and ways of life .
While Susan is in Boston at their grandparents ' house pretending to be Sharon , Sharon goes to California to their father 's house , pretending to be Susan .
Sharon learns their father is engaged to a child - hating gold digger named Vicky Robinson ( Joanna Barnes ) .
Sharon calls Susan to tell her that their father is planning to marry Vicky , who is beautiful and dangerous , and that she must bring their mother to California immediately .
Susan eventually reveals to their mother and grandparents the truth about their switching places .
They are extremely happy to see Susan again , and Maggie and Susan fly to California .
After Mitch and Maggie are reunited , they argue and the twins make their surprise appearance together .
Mitch is extremely happy to see Sharon again , and after he tells Vicky the truth about the twins , she is shocked and furious — especially after learning that Maggie plans to spend the night at his house .
The girls recreate their parents ' first date at the Italian restaurant Martinelli 's with a gypsy violinist .
The former spouses are gradually drawn together , but have another fight with Maggie telling Mitch that she and Sharon are leaving in the morning , and that she wishes him the best of everything with Vicky .
Susan and Sharon try to find a way to delay their return to Boston , so the twins dress and talk alike so their parents are unable to tell them apart .
They will reveal who is who only after returning from the annual family camping trip .
Mitch and Maggie reluctantly agree .
Vicky is furious , so Maggie tricks her into taking her place and letting her know it would give her a chance to get to know the twins better .
Mitch is an outdoorsman , but Vicky is not , and she is not used to climbing mountains and being in the woods , so the twins decide to play tricks on her .
Vicky spends her time swatting mosquitoes after unknowingly using sugared water instead of mosquito repellent , and being awakened by two bear cubs licking honey off her feet , which the twins had previously placed there .
Exasperated , Vicky finally has a shouting tantrum destroying everything in her path and culminating in angrily slapping one of the girls , leaving Mitch with a whole new - found view of her .
When she runs off to escape back to the city in a great huff , Mitch seems none too worried to be rid of her .
Back at the house , the twins apologize for what they did to Vicky , and are forgiven .
Maggie makes dinner , and Mitch talks about what their life was like when they were married .
They realize they still love each other , and do not want to grow into a couple of old and lonely people .
They share a kiss , and decide to remarry .
CAST * Hayley Mills as Sharon McKendrick / Susan Evers * Brian Keith as Mitchell " Mitch " Evers * Maureen O'Hara as Margaret " Maggie " McKendrick * Joanna Barnes as Vicky Robinson * Charlie Ruggles as Charles McKendrick * Cathleen Nesbitt as Louise McKendrick * Una Merkel as Verbena the housekeeper * Leo G. Carroll as Reverend Dr. Mosby
* Linda Watkins as Edna Robinson
* Ruth McDevitt as Miss Abbey Inch * Crahan Denton as Hecky the ranch foreman * Nancy Kulp as Miss Grunecker * Frank De Vol as Mr. Eaglewood * as Sharon McKendrick / Susan Evers ( body double )
[ uncredited ]
PRODUCTION NOTES Section::::Production notes .
The film originally called for only a few trick photography shots of Hayley Mills in scenes with herself ; the bulk of the film was to be shot using a body double .
The film used Disney 's proprietary sodium vapor process for compositing rather than the usual chroma key technique .
When Walt Disney saw how seamless the processed shots were , he ordered the script reconfigured to include more of the special effect .
Disney also wanted Mills to appear on camera as much as possible , knowing that she was having growth spurts during filming .
The film was shot mostly at various locales in California .
The summer camp scenes were filmed at Bluff Lake Camp ( then owned by the Pasadena YMCA , now by Habonim Dror 's Camp Gilboa ) and the family camping scenes later in the movie at Cedar Lake Camp , both in the San Bernardino Mountains near the city of Big Bear Lake in Southern California .
The Monterey scenes were filmed in various California locations , including millionaire Stuyvesant Fish 's ranch in Carmel and Monterey 's Pebble Beach golf course .
The scenes at the Monterey house were shot at the studio 's Golden Oak Ranch in Placerita Canyon , where Mitch 's ranch was built .
It was the design of this set that proved the most popular , and to this day the Walt Disney Archives receives requests for plans of the home 's interior design .
In fact , there never was such a house ; the set was simply various rooms built on a sound stage .
Camp Inch was based on a real girls ' camp called Camp Crestridge for Girls at the Ridgecrest Baptist Conference Center near Asheville , North Carolina .
MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Musical numbers .
Richard and Robert Sherman provided the songs , which , besides the title song " The Parent Trap " , includes " For Now , For Always " , and " Let 's Get Together " .
" Let 's Get Together " ( sung by Annette Funicello ) is heard playing from a record player at the summer camp ; the tune is reprised by the twins when they restage their parents ' first date and that version is sung double - tracked by Hayley Mills .
( Hayley 's own single of the song , credited to " Hayley Mills and Hayley Mills , " reached # 8 on the US charts . )
The film 's title song was performed by Tommy Sands and Annette Funicello , who were both on the studio lot shooting Babes in Toyland at the time .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
The film was nominated for two Academy Awards : one for Sound by Robert O. Cook , and the other for Film Editing by Philip W. Anderson .
The film and its editor , Philip W. Anderson , won the inaugural 1962 Eddie Award of the American Cinema Editors .
SUBSEQUENT DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Subsequent developments .
In 1961 a comic book version of the film was published , adapted and illustrated by Dan Spiegle .
The film was theatrically re - released in 1968 and earned $ 1.8 million in rentals .
The Disney Studios produced three television sequels The Parent Trap II ( 1986 ) , Parent Trap III ( 1989 ) and ( 1989 ) .
The original was remade in 1998 starring Lindsay Lohan , Dennis Quaid and Natasha Richardson .
Joanna Barnes also made an appearance as Dennis Quaid 's character 's fiance , Meredith 's mother , Vicki , the same name as Barnes ' character in the 1961 film , hinting at the fate of her original character .
In India , there have been several films inspired by The Parent Trap .
In 1965 , a Tamil language version of the story called Kuzhandaiyum Deivamum , starring Kutty Padmini was released .
The following year , it was remade into Telugu as Leta Manasulu also starring Kutty Padmini .
A Hindi version Do Kaliyaan starring Neetu Singh in the double role was made in 1968 .
The 1987 film Pyar Ke Kabil also has a similar storyline , as does the 2001 film Kuch Khatti Kuch Meethi which has Kajol playing the double role of 23-year - old twins .
HOME MEDIA DVD & BLU - RAY Section::::Home media DVD & Blu - ray .
The film was released on a 2-disc special edition DVD in 2005 .
Also enclosed in this package is the made - for - television sequel , The Parent Trap II ( 1986 ) , plus the original film trailer and other bonus features .
Blu - ray release :
On April 24 , 2018 , The Parent Trap ( 1961 ) was released on HD Blu - ray by the Disney Movie Club .
The 1998 remake was also released on HD Blu - ray the same day .
SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1961 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS