FASTER - THAN - LIGHT COMMUNICATION Superluminal communication is a hypothetical process in which information is sent at faster - than - light ( FTL ) speeds .
The current scientific consensus is that faster - than - light communication is not possible , and to date it has not been achieved in any experiment .
Under present knowledge superluminal communication is impossible because , in a Lorentz - invariant theory , it could be used to transmit information into the past .
This contradicts causality and leads to logical paradoxes .
A number of theories and phenomena related to superluminal communication have been proposed or studied , including tachyons , quantum nonlocality , and wormholes .
PROPOSED MECHANISMS
TACHYONS
Section::::Proposed mechanisms .
Section::::Tachyons .
Tachyonic particles are hypothetical particles that travel faster than light .
These would allow superluminal communication , and for this reason are widely believed not to exist .
By contrast , tachyonic fields - quantum fields with imaginary mass - certainly do exist , and exhibit superluminal group velocity under some circumstances .
However , such fields have luminal signal velocity and do not allow superluminal communication .
QUANTUM NONLOCALITY Section::::Quantum nonlocality .
Quantum mechanics is non - local in the sense that distant systems can be entangled .
Entangled states lead to correlations in the results of otherwise random measurements , even when the measurements are made nearly simultaneously and at far distant points .
The impossibility of superluminal communication led Einstein , Podolsky , and Rosen to propose that quantum mechanics must be incomplete ( see EPR paradox ) .
However , it is now well understood that quantum entanglement does not allow any influence or information to propagate superluminally .
Technically , the microscopic causality postulate of axiomatic quantum field theory implies the impossibility of superluminal communication using any phenomena whose behavior can be described by orthodox quantum field theory .
A special case of this is the no - communication theorem , which prevents communication using the quantum entanglement of a composite system shared between two spacelike - separated observers .
Some authors have argued that using the no - communication theorem to deduce the impossibility of superluminal communication is circular , since the no - communication theorem assumes that the system is composite .
WORMHOLES Section::::Wormholes .
If wormholes are possible , then ordinary subluminal methods of communication could be sent through them to achieve superluminal transmission speeds .
Considering the immense energy that current theories suggest would be required to open a wormhole large enough to pass spacecraft through , it may be that only atomic - scale wormholes would be practical to build , limiting their use solely to information transmission .
Some hypotheses of wormhole formation would prevent them from ever becoming " timeholes " , allowing superluminal communication without the additional complication of allowing communication with the past .
FICTIONAL DEVICES ULTRAWAVE AND HYPERWAVE Section::::Fictional devices . Section::::Ultrawave and hyperwave .
The terms " ultrawave " and " hyperwave " have been used by several authors , often interchangeably , to denote faster - than - light communications .
Examples include : * E. E. Smith used the term " ultrawave " in his Lensman series , for waves which propagated through a sub - ether and could be used for weapons , communications , and other applications .
*
In Isaac Asimov 's Foundation series , " ultrawave " and " hyperwave " are used interchangeably to represent a superluminal communications medium .
The hyperwave relay also features .
*
In the Star Trek universe , subspace carries faster - than - light communication ( subspace radio ) and travel ( warp drive ) .
*
The Cities in Flight series by James Blish featured ultrawave communications which used the known phenomenon of phase velocity to carry information , a property which in fact is impossible .
The limitations of phase velocity beyond the speed of light later led him to develop his Dirac communicator .
* Larry Niven used hyperwave in his Known Space series as the term for an FTL method of communication .
Unlike the hyperdrive that moved ships at a finite FTL speed , hyperwave was essentially instantaneous .
*
In Richard K. Morgan 's Takeshi Kovacs novels human colonies on distant planets maintain contact with earth and each other via hyperspatial needlecast , a technology which moves information " ... so close to instantaneously that scientists are still arguing about the terminology " .
TACHYON - LIKE Section::::Tachyon - like .
The Dirac communicator features in several of the works of James Blish , notably his 1954 short story " " .
As alluded to in the title , any active device received the sum of all transmitted messages in universal space - time , in a single pulse , so that demultiplexing yielded information about the past , present , and future .
ANSIBLE
Section::::Ansible .
A later device was the ansible coined by Ursula K. Le Guin and used extensively in her Hainish cycle .
Like Blish 's device it provided instantaneous communication , but without the inconvenient beep .
The ansible is a major plot element , nearly a MacGuffin , in Elizabeth Moon 's Vatta 's War series .
Much of the story line revolves around various parties attacking or repairing ansibles , and around the internal politics of ISC ( InterStellar Communications ) , which holds a monopoly on the ansible technology .
QUANTUM ENTANGLEMENT
*
In Ernest Cline 's novel Armada , alien invaders possess technology for instant " quantum communication " with unlimited range .
Humans reverse engineer the device from captured alien technology .
*
In the Mass Effect series of video games , instantaneous communication is possible using quantum - entanglement communicators placed in the communications rooms of starships .
*
In the Avatar continuity , faster - than - light communication via a subtle control over the state of entangled particles is possible , but for practical purposes extremely slow and expensive : at a transmission rate of three bits of information per hour and a cost of $ 7,500 per bit , it is used for only the highest priority messages .
* Charles Stross 's books Singularity Sky and Iron Sunrise make use of " causal channels " which use entangled particles for instantaneous two - way communication .
The technique has drawbacks in that the entangled particles are expendable and the use of faster - than - light travel destroys the entanglement , so that one end of the channel must be transported below light speed .
This makes them expensive and limits their usefulness somewhat .
PSYCHIC LINKS Section::::Psychic links .
Psychic links , generally considered to belong to pseudoscience , have been described as explainable by physical principles or unexplained , but they are claimed to operate instantaneously over large distances .
In the Stargate television series , characters are able to communicate instantaneously over long distances by transferring their consciousness into another person or being anywhere in the universe using " Ancient communication stones " .
It is not known how these stones operate , but the technology explained in the show usually revolves around wormholes for instant teleportation , faster - than - light , space - warping travel , and sometimes around quantum multiverses .
In Robert A. Heinlein 's Time for the Stars , twin telepathy was used to maintain communication with a distant spaceship .
OTHER DEVICES
Section::::Other devices .
Similar devices are present in the works of numerous others , such as Frank Herbert and Philip Pullman , who called his a lodestone resonator .
Anne McCaffrey 's Crystal Singer series posited an instantaneous communication device powered by rare " Black Crystal " from the planet Ballybran .
Black Crystals cut from the same mineral deposit could be " tuned " to sympathetically vibrate with each other instantly , even when separated by interstellar distances , allowing instantaneous telephone - like voice and data communication .
Similarly , in Gregory Keyes ' series The Age of Unreason , " aetherschreibers " use two halves of a single " chime " to communicate , aided by scientific alchemy .
While the speed of communication is important , so is the fact that the messages can not be overheard except by listeners with a piece of the same original crystal .
Stephen R. Donaldson , in his Gap cycle , proposed a similar system , Symbiotic Crystalline Resonance Transmission , clearly ansible - type technology but very difficult to produce and limited to text messages .
In the story " With Folded Hands " ( 1947 ) , by Jack Williamson , instant communication and power transfer through interstellar space is possible with something referred to as rhodomagnetic waves .
In Ivan Yefremov 's 1957 novel Andromeda Nebula , a device for instant transfer of information and matter is made real by using " bipolar mathematics " to explore use of anti - gravitational shadow vectors through a zero field and the antispace , which enables them to make contact with the planet of Epsilon Tucanae .
In Cordwainer Smith 's Instrumentality novels and stories , interplanetary and interstellar communication is normally relayed from planet to planet , presumably at superluminal speed for each stage ( at least between solar systems ) but with a cumulative delay .
For urgent communication there is the " instant message " , which is effectively instantaneous but very expensive .
In Liu Cixin 's novel
The Three - Body Problem , the alien Trisolarans , while preparing to invade the Solar System , use a device with Ansible characteristics to communicate with their collaborators on Earth in real time .
Additionally , they use spying / sabotaging devices called ' Sophons ' on Earth which by penetration can access any kind of electronically saved and visual information , interact with electronics , and communicate results back to Trisolaris in real - time .
The technology used is " single protons that have been unfolded from eleven space dimensions to two dimensions , programmed , and then refolded " and thus Sophons remain undetectable for humans .
In Howard Taylor 's web comic series Schlock Mercenary , superluminal communication is performed via the hypernet , a galaxy - spanning analogue to the internet .
Through the hypernet , communications and data are routed through nanoscopic wormholes , using conventional electromagnetic signals .
SEE ALSO
* Bell test experiments
* Delayed choice quantum eraser *
Light * Near and far field * Quantum teleportation
* SETI Institute *
Synchronicity
* Wheeler – Feynman absorber theory REFERENCES