SQUIRREL Squirrels are members of the family Sciuridae , a family that includes small or medium - size rodents .
The squirrel family includes tree squirrels , ground squirrels , chipmunks , marmots ( including woodchucks ) , flying squirrels , and prairie dogs amongst other rodents .
Squirrels are indigenous to the Americas , Eurasia , and Africa , and were introduced by humans to Australia .
The earliest known squirrels date from the Eocene period and are most closely related to the mountain beaver and to the dormouse among other living rodent families .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word " squirrel " , first attested in 1327 , comes from the Anglo - Norman esquirel which is from the Old French escurel , the reflex of a Latin word sciurus .
This Latin word was borrowed from the Ancient Greek word σκίουρος , skiouros , which means shadow - tailed , referring to the bushy appendage possessed by many of its members .
The native Old English word for the squirrel , ācweorna , survived only into Middle English ( as aquerne ) before being replaced .
The Old English word is of Common Germanic origin , cognates of which are still used in other Germanic languages , including the German Eichhörnchen ( diminutive of Eichhorn , which is not as frequently used ) ,
the Norwegian ikorn / ekorn , the Dutch eekhoorn , the Swedish ekorre and the Danish egern .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Squirrels are generally small animals , ranging in size from the African pygmy squirrel at in length and just in weight , to the Laotian giant flying squirrel at in length and the Alpine marmot , which weighs from .
Squirrels typically have slender bodies with bushy tails and large eyes .
In general , their fur is soft and silky , though much thicker in some species than others .
The coat color of squirrels is highly variable between — and often even within — species .
In most squirrel species , the hind limbs are longer than the fore limbs , while all species have either four or five toes on each paw .
The paws , which include an often poorly developed thumb , have soft pads on the undersides and versatile , sturdy claws for grasping and climbing .
Tree squirrels , unlike most mammals , can descend a tree head - first .
They do so by rotating their ankles 180 degrees , enabling the hind paws to point backward and thus grip the tree bark from the opposite direction .
Squirrels live in almost every habitat , from tropical rainforest to semiarid desert , avoiding only the high polar regions and the driest of deserts .
They are predominantly herbivorous , subsisting on seeds and nuts , but many will eat insects and even small vertebrates .
As their large eyes indicate , squirrels have an excellent sense of vision , which is especially important for the tree - dwelling species .
Many also have a good sense of touch , with vibrissae on their limbs as well as their heads .
The teeth of sciurids follow the typical rodent pattern , with large incisors ( for gnawing ) that grow throughout life , and cheek teeth ( for grinding ) that are set back behind a wide gap , or diastema .
The typical dental formula for sciurids is .
Many juvenile squirrels die in the first year of life .
Adult squirrels can have a lifespan of 5 to 10 years in the wild .
Some can survive 10 to 20 years in captivity .
Premature death may be caused when a nest falls from the tree , in which case the mother may abandon her young if their body temperature is not correct .
Many such baby squirrels have been rescued and fostered until they could be safely returned to the wild .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
Squirrels mate either once or twice a year and , following a gestation period of three to six weeks , give birth to a number of offspring that varies by species .
The young are altricial , being born naked , toothless , and blind .
In most species of squirrel , the female alone looks after the young , which are weaned at six to ten weeks and become sexually mature by the end of their first year .
In general , the ground - dwelling squirrel species are social , often living in well - developed colonies , while the tree - dwelling species are more solitary .
Ground squirrels and tree squirrels are usually either diurnal or crepuscular , while the flying squirrels tend to be nocturnal — except for lactating flying squirrels and their young , which have a period of diurnality during the summer .
FEEDING
Section::::Feeding .
Because squirrels can not digest cellulose , they must rely on foods rich in protein , carbohydrates , and fats .
In temperate regions , early spring is the hardest time of year for squirrels because the nuts they buried are beginning to sprout ( and thus are no longer available to eat ) , while many of the usual food sources have not yet become available .
During these times , squirrels rely heavily on the buds of trees .
Squirrels , being primarily herbivores , eat a wide variety of plants , as well as nuts , seeds , conifer cones , fruits , fungi , and green vegetation .
Some squirrels , however , also consume meat , especially when faced with hunger .
Squirrels have been known to eat small birds , young snakes , and smaller rodents , as well as bird eggs and insects .
Indeed , some tropical squirrel species have shifted almost entirely to a diet of insects .
Predatory behavior has been observed in various species of ground squirrels , in particular the thirteen - lined ground squirrel .
For example , Bailey , a scientist in the 1920s , observed a thirteen - lined ground squirrel preying upon a young chicken .
Wistrand reported seeing this same species eating a freshly killed snake .
Whitaker examined the stomachs of 139 thirteen - lined ground squirrels and found bird flesh in four of the specimens and the remains of a short - tailed shrew in one ; Bradley , examining the stomachs of white - tailed antelope squirrels , found at least 10 % of his 609 specimens ' stomachs contained some type of vertebrate , mostly lizards and rodents .
Morgart observed a white - tailed antelope squirrel capturing and eating a silky pocket mouse .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The living squirrels are divided into five subfamilies , with about 58 genera and some 285 species .
The oldest squirrel fossil , Hesperopetes , dates back to the Chadronian ( late Eocene , about 40–35 million years ago ) and is similar to modern flying squirrels .
A variety of fossil squirrels , from the latest Eocene to the Miocene , could not be assigned with certainty to any living lineage .
At least some of these probably were variants of the oldest basal " protosquirrels " ( in the sense that they lacked the full range of living squirrels ' autapomorphies ) .
The distribution and diversity of such ancient and ancestral forms suggest the squirrels as a group may have originated in North America .
Apart from these sometimes little - known fossil forms , the phylogeny of the living squirrels is fairly straightforward .
The three main lineages are the Ratufinae ( Oriental giant squirrels ) , Sciurillinae and all other subfamilies .
The Ratufinae contain a mere handful of living species in tropical Asia .
The neotropical pygmy squirrel of tropical South America is the sole living member of the Sciurillinae .
The third lineage , by far the largest , has a near - cosmopolitan distribution .
This further supports the hypothesis that the common ancestor of all squirrels , living and fossil , lived in North America , as these three most ancient lineages seem to have radiated from there ; if squirrels had originated in Eurasia , for example , one would expect quite ancient lineages in Africa , but African squirrels seem to be of more recent origin .
The main group of squirrels also can be split into three subgroups , which yield the remaining subfamilies .
The Sciurinae contains the flying squirrels ( Pteromyini ) and the Sciurini , which among others contains the American tree squirrels ; the former have often been considered a separate subfamily , but are now seen as a tribe of the Sciurinae .
The pine squirrels ( Tamiasciurus ) , on the other hand , are usually included with the main tree squirrel lineage , but appear to be about as distinct as the flying squirrels ; hence , they are sometimes considered a distinct tribe , Tamiasciurini .
Two of the three subfamilies are of about equal size , containing between nearly 70 and 80 species each ; the third is about twice as large .
The Sciurinae contains arboreal ( tree - living ) squirrels , mainly of the Americas and to a lesser extent Eurasia .
The Callosciurinae is most diverse in tropical Asia and contains squirrels that are also arboreal , but have a markedly different habitus and appear more " elegant " , an effect enhanced by their often very colorful fur .
The Xerinae — the largest subfamily — are made up from the mainly terrestrial ( ground - living ) forms and include the large marmots and the popular prairie dogs , among others , as well as the tree squirrels of Africa ; they tend to be more gregarious than other squirrels , which do not usually live together in close - knit groups .
* Basal and incertae sedis Sciuridae ( all fossil ) *
Hesperopetes *
Kherem
* Lagrivea * Oligosciurus * Plesiosciurus * Prospermophilus
* Sciurion * Similisciurus *
Sinotamias
* Vulcanisciurus * Subfamily Cedromurinae ( fossil ) * Subfamily Ratufinae – Oriental giant squirrels ( 1 genus , 4 species )
* Subfamily Sciurillinae – neotropical pygmy squirrel ( monotypic ) *
Subfamily Sciurinae
* Tribe Sciurini – tree squirrels ( 5 genera , about 38 species )
* Tribe Pteromyini – true flying squirrels ( 15 genera , about 45 species )
* Subfamily Callosciurinae – Asian ornate squirrels
* Tribe Callosciurini ( 13 genera , nearly 60 species ) * Tribe Funambulini palm squirrels ( 1 genus , 5 species )
* Subfamily Xerinae – terrestrial squirrels * Tribe Xerini – spiny squirrels ( 3 genera , 6 species )
* Tribe Protoxerini ( 6 genera , about 50 species ) * Tribe Marmotini – ground squirrels , marmots , chipmunks , prairie dogs , etc .
( 6 genera , about 90 species ) SEE
ALSO
* American red squirrel * Animal track
* Fox squirrel *
Purple squirrel
* Blue squirrel * Red squirrel * Squirrel relationship with humans
* Western gray squirrel
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
*
Milton , Katherine ( 1984 ) : [ Family Sciuridae ] .
In : Macdonald , D. ( ed . ) : The Encyclopedia of Mammals : 612–623 .
Facts on File , New York .
* Steppan , Scott J. & Hamm , Shawn M. ( 2006 ) : Tree of Life Web Project – Sciuridae ( Squirrels ) .
Version of 13 May 2006 .
Retrieved 10 December 2007 .
* Thorington , R.W. & Hoffmann , R.S. ( 2005 ) : Family Sciuridae .
In : Mammal Species of the World – A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference : 754–818 .
Johns Hopkins University Press , Baltimore .
* Whitaker , John O. Jr. & Elman , Robert ( 1980 ) : The Audubon Society Field Guide to North American Mammals ( 2nd ed . ) .
Alfred Knopf , New York .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Tree of Life : Sciuridae * Squirrel Tracks : How to identify squirrel tracks in the wild * National Geographic link on Squirrels * List of names of squirrel taxa