TABASCO SAUCE Tabasco sauce is a brand of hot sauce made exclusively from tabasco peppers ( Capsicum frutescens var .
tabasco ) , vinegar , and salt .
It is produced by McIlhenny Company of Avery Island , Louisiana . HISTORY Section::::History .
Although the name comes from the Mexican state of Tabasco , the sauce is a U.S. product produced by McIlhenny Company .
According to company legend , Tabasco sauce was first produced in 1868 by Edmund McIlhenny , a Maryland - born former banker who moved to Louisiana around 1840 .
However , as Jeffrey Rothfeder 's book McIlhenny 's Gold points out , at least some of the self - promotional McIlhenny Company official history is fictitious .
An October 10 , 2007 book review by Mark Robichaux in The Wall Street Journal , Oct. 10 , 2007 , quotes that book :
" The story actually begins in the pre - Civil War era with a New Orleans plantation owner named Maunsel White , who was famous for the food served at his sumptuous dinner parties .
Mr. White 's table no doubt groaned with the region 's varied fare — drawing inspiration from European , Caribbean and Cajun sources — but one of his favorite sauces was of his own devising , made from a pepper named for its origins in the Mexican state of Tabasco .
White added the sauce to various dishes and bottled it for his guests .
Although the McIlhennys have tried to dismiss the possibility , it seems clear now that in 1849 , a full two decades before Edmund McIlhenny professed to discover the Tabasco pepper , White was already growing Tabasco chilies on his plantation . "
Rothfeder cited a January 26 , 1850 letter to the New Orleans Daily Delta newspaper crediting the slave - owning banker - politician Maunsel White as having introduced " Tobasco red pepper " ( sic ) to the southern United States and asserting that the McIlhenny sauce was at least inspired by White 's recipe .
Jean Andrews , in her book " Peppers : the Domesticated Capsicums , " goes further to declare — citing United States Circuit Court testimony from 1922 —
that prior to his death in 1862 , " White gave some [ pepper ] pods , along with his sauce recipe , to his friend Edmund McIlhenny , during a visit to White 's Deer Range Plantation . "
To distribute his sauce , Edmund McIlhenny initially used discarded cologne bottles sourced from a New Orleans glass supplier .
On his death in 1890 , McIlhenny was succeeded by his eldest son , John Avery McIlhenny , who expanded and modernized the business , but resigned after only a few years in order to join Theodore Roosevelt 's 1st US Volunteer Cavalry Regiment , the Rough Riders .
On John 's departure , brother Edward Avery McIlhenny , a self - taught naturalist fresh from an Arctic adventure , assumed control of the company and also focused on expansion and modernization , running the business from 1898 until his death in 1949 .
Walter S. McIlhenny in turn succeeded his uncle Edward Avery McIlhenny , serving as president of McIlhenny Company from 1949 until his death in 1985 .
Edward McIlhenny Simmons then ran the company as president and CEO for several years , remaining as board chairman until his death in 2012 .
Paul McIlhenny became company president in 1998 and was chairman until his death in 2013 .
In 2012 , McIlhenny cousin Tony Simmons assumed the company 's presidency and runs the company today .
McIlhenny is one of just a few U.S. companies to have received a royal warrant of appointment that certifies the company as a supplier to Queen Elizabeth II .
McIlhenny is one of the 850 companies around the world that have been officially designated as suppliers to the queen by such warrants .
The warrant held is " Supplier of Tabasco Sauce HM The Queen – Master of the Household – Granted in 2009 " .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Originally all peppers used in Tabasco sauce were grown on Avery Island .
Today peppers grown on the Island are used to produce seed stock , which is then shipped to foreign growers , primarily in Central and South America .
More predictable weather and readily available farmland in these locales allow a constant year - round supply .
This ensures the availability of peppers should severe weather or other problems occur at a particular growing location .
Following company tradition , peppers are picked by hand .
To ensure ripeness , pickers compare peppers to a little red stick ( le petit bâton rouge ) ; peppers that match the color of the stick are then introduced into the sauce production process .
Peppers are ground into a mash on the day of harvest and placed along with salt in white oak barrels ( aging barrels previously used for Jack Daniel 's Tennessee whiskey ) .
To prepare the barrel , the inside of the barrel is de - charred ( top layer of wood is removed ) , torched , and cleaned , to minimize the presence of any residual whiskey .
The barrels are then used in warehouses on Avery Island for aging the mash .
After aging for up to three years , the mash is strained to remove skins and seeds .
The resulting liquid is then mixed with vinegar , stirred occasionally for a month , and then bottled as finished sauce .
Tabasco has released a Tabasco reserve edition with peppers aged for up to eight years , mixed with wine vinegar .
Tabasco diamond reserve edition has been released as of 2018 .
This sauce consists of peppers that have been aged for up to fifteen years , then mixed with sparkling white wine vinegar .
It becomes black instead of red .
Much of the salt used in Tabasco production comes from an Avery Island salt mine , one of the largest in the U.S.
In 2005 , Avery Island was hit hard by Hurricane Rita .
As a result , the family constructed a -high levee around the low side of the factory and invested in back - up generators .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Several sauces are produced under the Tabasco brand name , including jalapeño - based green , chipotle - based smoked , habanero , garlic , " sweet and spicy " , and " Buffalo style " sauces .
The habanero , chipotle , and garlic sauces include the tabasco peppers blended with other peppers , whereas the jalapeño variety does not include tabasco peppers .
None of these sauces , however , has the three - year aging process the flagship product uses .
The brand also produces a selection of Tabasco Chocolate .
SPICINESS Section::::Spiciness .
The flagship red variety of Tabasco pepper sauce measures 2,500–5,000 SHU on the Scoville scale .
The habanero sauce is considerably hotter , rating above 7,000 + Scoville units .
The chipotle sauce adds chipotle pepper to the original sauce , measuring 1,500–2,500 .
The garlic variety , which blends milder peppers in with the tabasco peppers , rates 1,200–1,400 Scovilles , and the green pepper ( jalapeño ) sauce is even milder at 600–1,200 Scovilles .
The Sweet and Spicy sauce is the mildest of all the sauces at only 100–600 Scoville units .
In 2017 , Tabasco released a limited edition sauce made with the Trinidad Moruga Scorpion pepper , which can reach up to 2,000,000 scoville units .
PACKAGING Section::::Packaging .
Tabasco brand pepper sauce is sold in more than 185 countries and territories and is packaged in 22 languages and dialects .
The Tabasco bottle is still modeled after the cologne - style bottles used for the first batch of sauce in 1868 .
As many as 720,000 two - ounce ( 57 ml ) bottles of Tabasco sauce are produced daily at the Tabasco factory on Avery Island .
Bottles range from the common two - ounce and five - ounce ( 59 ml and 148 ml ) bottles , up to a one US gallon-(3.8 liter ) jug for food service businesses , and down to a 1/8-ounce ( 3.7 ml ) miniature bottle .
There are also 0.11-ounce portion control ( PC ) packets of Tabasco sauce .
One - eighth - ounce bottles of Tabasco , bearing the presidential seal , are served on Air Force One .
The US military has included Tabasco sauce in Meals , Ready - to - Eat ( MREs ) since the 1980s .
The Australian , British and Canadian armies also issue small bottles of Tabasco sauce in their rations .
USES Section::::Uses .
McIlhenny Company produces Tabasco brand products that contain pepper seasoning , including popcorn , nuts , olives , mayonnaise , mustard , steak sauce , Worcestershire sauce , soy sauce , teriyaki sauce , marinating sauce , barbecue sauce , chili sauce , pepper jelly , and Bloody Mary mix .
McIlhenny Company also permits other brands to use and advertise Tabasco sauce as an ingredient in their products ( a common marketing practice called " co - branding " ) , including Spam , Hormel chili , Slim Jim beef sticks , Heinz ketchup , A1 steak sauce , Plochman 's mustard ,
Cheez - It crackers , Lawry 's salt , Zapp 's potato chips , Heluva Good dip , and Vlasic pickles .
The original red Tabasco sauce has a shelf life of five years when stored in a cool and dry place ; other Tabasco flavors have shorter shelf lives .
Tabasco appeared on the menu of NASA 's space shuttle program and went into orbit on the shuttles .
It was on Skylab and on the International Space Station and is popular with astronauts as a means of countering the bland food they frequently are provided in space .
COOKBOOKS Section::::Cookbooks .
During the Vietnam War , Brigadier General Walter S. McIlhenny issued The Charlie Ration Cookbook .
( Charlie ration was the name for the field meal then given to troops . )
This cookbook came wrapped around a two - ounce bottle of Tabasco sauce in a camouflaged , water - resistant container .
It instructed troops how to mix C - rations to make such meals as " Combat Canapés " or " Breast of Chicken under Bullets .
" Soldiers also requested their families to send them Tabasco sauce in " care packages " from home .
During the 1980s , the U.S. military began to include miniature bottles of Tabasco sauce in its MREs .
Eventually , miniature bottles of Tabasco sauce were included in two - thirds of all MRE menus .
During the same period , McIlhenny Company issued a new military - oriented cookbook using characters from the comic strip Beetle Bailey .
Titled The Unofficial MRE Cookbook , it was offered free of charge to U.S. troops .
IN ART AND CULTURE Section::::In art and culture .
The Tabasco bottle is an original design and has remained almost unchanged up to the present .
In 1894 composer George W. Chadwick composed the Burlesque Opera of Tabasco , a musical comedy that conductor Paul Mauffray revived in 2018 with support from McIlhenny Company .
Tabasco has appeared in many movies and cartoons , as well as on television .
Some appearances date as far back as the Our Gang short Birthday Blues in 1932 and Charlie Chaplin 's Modern Times in 1936 .
The bottle also graced the side of Darrell Waltrip 's race car for a brief period .
In , the saloon bartender uses Tabasco as an ingredient for an instant hangover cure he calls " wake - up juice " .
SEE ALSO
* Condiment * List of hot sauces * List of brand name condiments
* Tabasco Road
NOTES
REFERENCES
* .
FURTHER READING
* Rothfeder , Jeffrey , McIlhenny 's Gold : How a Louisiana Family Built the Tabasco Empire , HarperCollins , Apr 21 , 2009 * Bernard , Shane K. Tabasco : An Illustrated History .
University Press of Mississippi , 2007 . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official website
* How It 's Made episode for Tabasco Sauce