TABLESPOON
A tablespoon is a large spoon used for serving or eating .
In many English - speaking regions , the term now refers to a large spoon used for serving , however , in some regions , including parts of Canada , it is the largest type of spoon used for eating .
By extension , the term is used as a measure of volume in cooking .
In this capacity , it is most commonly abbreviated tbsp or T , and occasionally referred to as a tablespoonful to distinguish it from the utensil .
The unit of measurement varies by region : a United States tablespoon is approximately , a United Kingdom and Canadian tablespoon is exactly , and an Australian tablespoon is .
The capacity of the utensil ( as opposed to the measurement ) is not defined by law or custom and bears no particular relation to the measurement .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Before about 1700 , it was customary for Europeans to bring their own spoons to the table .
Spoons were carried as personal property in much the same way as people today carry wallets , key rings , etc .
From about 1700 the place setting became popular , and with it the " table - spoon " , " table - fork " and " table - knife " .
Around the same time the tea - spoon and dessert - spoon first appeared , and the table - spoon was reserved for eating soup .
The 18th century witnessed a proliferation of different sorts of spoons , including the mustard - spoon , salt - spoon , coffee - spoon , and soup - spoon .
In the late 19th century UK , the dessert - spoon and soup - spoon began to displace the table - spoon as the primary implement for eating from a bowl , at which point the name " table - spoon " took on a secondary meaning as a much larger serving spoon .
At the time the first edition of the Oxford English Dictionary was published in 1928 , " tablespoon " ( which by then was no longer hyphenated ) still had two definitions in the UK : the original definition ( eating spoon ) and the new definition ( serving spoon ) .
In the 18th century , the table - spoon became an unofficial unit of the Apothecaries ' system of measures , equal to 4 drams or fl oz .
It was more commonly known by the Latin cochleare majus ( abbreviated cochl .
maj . )
or , in Apothecaries ' notation , f ℥ ss or f
℥ ß . VARIANTS Section::::Variants .
A level tablespoon , the usual meaning without further qualification , is measured by filling the spoon and scraping it level .
In contrast , a heaped , heaping , or rounded spoonful is not leveled off , and includes a heap above the spoon .
The exact volume of a heaped tablespoon depends somewhat on the shape and curvature of the measuring spoon being used , and so is not a precise unit of measurement .
Common tablespoons intended for use as cutlery ( called dessert spoons in the UK , where a tablespoon is always a serving spoon ) usually hold , considerably less than some tablespoons used for serving .
RELATIONSHIP TO TEASPOON AND FLUID
OUNCE Section::::Relationship to teaspoon and fluid ounce .
In most regions ( including the US , UK , most Commonwealth countries , East Asia and the Philippines ) , one tablespoon equals three teaspoons .
In many of these regions , one tablespoon is .
In South Africa , one tablespoon is 15 ml .
In some places like the US , the tablespoon was historically defined as US fl oz ( 2 tbsp .
=
1
US fl oz ) .
In Australia , a tablespoon is defined as four teaspoons , equaling to .
Victorian and Edwardian era tablespoons used in the UK are often or sometimes larger .
They are used only for preparing and serving food , not as part of a place - setting .
In writing volume - based recipes , an abbreviation like tbsp .
is usually used to refer to a tablespoon , to differentiate it from the smaller teaspoon ( tsp . ) .
Some authors additionally capitalize the abbreviation , as Tbsp . , while leaving tsp .
in lower case , to emphasize that the larger tablespoon , rather than the smaller teaspoon , is wanted .
The tablespoon abbreviation is sometimes further abbreviated to " Tb . " or T. TRADITIONAL DEFINITIONS
Section::::Traditional definitions .
The traditional US interpretation of the tablespoon as a unit of volume is : 1 US tablespoon =
4 fluid drams =
3 teaspoons = US fluid ounce = US shot = US gill = US cup ≈ 14.8 ml
In nutrition labeling in the US and the UK , a tablespoon is defined as .
A metric tablespoon is exactly equal to .
The Australian definition of the tablespoon as a unit of volume is : 1
Australian tablespoon = 20 ml SEE ALSO
* Dessert spoon * Teaspoon REFERENCES