UNDERGROUND RAILROAD
The Underground Railroad was a network of secret routes and safe houses established in the United States during the early to mid-19th century , and used by African - American slaves to escape into free states and Canada with the aid of abolitionists and allies who were sympathetic to their cause .
The term is also applied to the abolitionists , both black and white , free and enslaved , who aided the fugitives .
Various other routes led to Mexico or overseas .
An earlier escape route running south toward Florida , then a Spanish possession ( except 1763–83 ) , existed from the late 17th century until Florida became a part of United States territory in 1821 ( ending the safe haven for escaped slaves was the main reason Florida changed nationality ) .
However , the network now generally known as the Underground Railroad was formed in the late 1700s , and it ran north to the free states and Canada , and reached its height between 1850 and 1860 .
One estimate suggests that by 1850 , 100,000 slaves had escaped via the " Railroad " .
British North America ( present - day Canada ) , where slavery was prohibited , was a popular destination , as its long border gave many points of access .
Most former slaves settled in Ontario .
More than 30,000 people were said to have escaped there via the network during its 20-year peak period , although U.S. Census figures account for only 6,000 .
Numerous fugitives ' stories are documented in the 1872 book The Underground Railroad Records by William Still , an abolitionist who then headed the Philadelphia Vigilance Committee .
POLITICAL BACKGROUND Section::::Political background .
At its peak , nearly 1,000 slaves per year escaped from slave - holding states using the Underground Railroad – more than 5,000 court cases for escaped slaves were recorded –
many fewer than the natural increase of the enslaved population .
The resulting economic impact was minuscule , but the psychological influence on slave holders was immense .
Under the original Fugitive Slave Act of 1793 , officials from free states were required to assist slaveholders or their agents who recaptured runaway slaves , but citizens and governments of many free states ignored the law , and the Underground Railroad thrived .
With heavy lobbying by southern politicians , the Compromise of 1850 was passed by Congress after the Mexican – American War .
It stipulated a more stringent Fugitive Slave Law ; ostensibly , the compromise addressed regional problems by compelling officials of free states to assist slave catchers , granting them immunity to operate in free states .
Because the law required sparse documentation to claim a person was a fugitive , slave catchers also kidnapped free blacks , especially children , and sold them into slavery .
Southern politicians often exaggerated the number of escaped slaves and often blamed these escapes on Northerners interfering with Southern property rights .
The law deprived suspected slaves of the right to defend themselves in court , making it difficult to prove free status .
In a de facto bribe , judges were paid a higher fee ( $ 10 ) for a decision that confirmed a suspect as a slave than for one ruling that the suspect was free ( $ 5 ) .
Many Northerners who might have ignored slave issues in the South were confronted by local challenges that bound them to support slavery .
This was a primary grievance cited by the Union during the American Civil War , and the perception that Northern States ignored the fugitive slave law was a major justification for secession .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The escape network was not literally underground nor a railroad .
It was figuratively " underground " in the sense of being an underground resistance .
It was known as a " railroad " by way of the use of rail terminology in the code .
The Underground Railroad consisted of meeting points , secret routes , transportation , and safe houses , and personal assistance provided by abolitionist sympathizers .
Participants generally organized in small , independent groups ; this helped to maintain secrecy because individuals knew some connecting " stations " along the route but knew few details of their immediate area .
Escaped slaves would move north along the route from one way station to the next .
" Conductors " on the railroad came from various backgrounds and included free - born blacks , white abolitionists , former slaves ( either escaped or manumitted ) , and Native Americans .
Church clergy and congregations often played a role , especially the Religious Society of Friends ( Quakers ) , Congregationalists , Wesleyans , and Reformed Presbyterians , as well as certain sects of mainstream denominations such as branches of the Methodist church and American Baptists .
Without the presence and support of free black residents , there would have been almost no chance for fugitive slaves to pass into freedom unmolested .
ROUTE Section::::Route .
To reduce the risk of infiltration , many people associated with the Underground Railroad knew only their part of the operation and not of the whole scheme .
" Conductors " led or transported the fugitives from station to station .
A conductor sometimes pretended to be a slave in order to enter a plantation .
Once a part of a plantation , the conductor would direct the runaways to the North .
Slaves traveled at night , about to each station .
They rested , and then a message was sent to the next station to let the station master know the runaways were on their way .
They would stop at the so - called " stations " or " depots " during the day and rest .
The stations were often located in barns , under church floors , or in hiding places in caves and hollowed - out riverbanks .
The resting spots where the runaways could sleep and eat were given the code names " stations " and " depots " , which were held by " station masters " .
" Stockholders " gave money or supplies for assistance .
Using biblical references , fugitives referred to Canada as the " Promised Land " or " Heaven " and the Ohio River as the " River Jordan " , which marked the boundary between slave states and free states .
TRAVELING CONDITIONS
Section::::Traveling conditions .
Although the fugitives sometimes traveled on boat or train , they usually traveled on foot or by wagon in groups of one to three slaves .
Some groups were considerably larger .
Abolitionist Charles Turner Torrey and his colleagues rented horses and wagons and often transported as many as 15 or 20 slaves at a time .
Routes were often purposely indirect to confuse pursuers .
Most escapes were by individuals or small groups ; occasionally , there were mass escapes , such as with the Pearl incident .
The journey was often considered particularly difficult and dangerous for women or children .
Children were sometimes hard to keep quiet or were unable to keep up with a group .
In addition , enslaved women were rarely allowed to leave the plantation , making it harder for them to escape in the same ways that men could .
Although escaping was harder for women , some women were successful .
One of the most famous and successful conductors ( people who secretly traveled into slave states to rescue those seeking freedom ) was Harriet Tubman , an escaped slave woman .
Due to the risk of discovery , information about routes and safe havens was passed along by word of mouth .
Southern newspapers of the day were often filled with pages of notices soliciting information about escaped slaves and offering sizable rewards for their capture and return .
Federal marshals and professional bounty hunters known as slave catchers pursued fugitives as far as the Canada – US border .
Fugitives were not the only black people at risk from slavecatchers .
With demand for slaves high in the Deep South as cotton was developed , strong , healthy blacks in their prime working and reproductive years were seen and treated as highly valuable commodities .
Both former slaves and free blacks were sometimes kidnapped and sold into slavery , as was Solomon Northup of Saratoga Springs , New York .
" Certificates of freedom , " signed , notarized statements attesting to the free status of individual blacks also known as free papers , could easily be destroyed or stolen , so provided little protection to bearers .
Some buildings , such as the Crenshaw House in far southeastern Illinois , are known sites where free blacks were sold into slavery , known as the " Reverse Underground Railroad " .
Under the terms of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 , when suspected fugitives were seized and brought to a special magistrate known as a commissioner , they had no right to a jury trial and could not testify in their own behalf .
Technically , they were guilty of no crime .
The marshal or private slave - catcher needed only to swear an oath to acquire a writ of replevin for the return of property .
Congress was dominated by southern Congressmen , as apportionment was based on three - fifths of the number of slaves being counted in population totals .
They passed the Fugitive Slave Law of 1850 because of frustration at having fugitive slaves helped by the public and even official institutions outside the South .
In some parts of the North , slave - catchers needed police protection to exercise their federal authority .
Opposition to slavery did not mean that all states welcomed free blacks .
For instance , Indiana , whose area along the Ohio River was settled by Southerners , passed a constitutional amendment that barred free blacks from settling in that state .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
Members of the Underground Railroad often used specific terms , based on the metaphor of the railway .
For example : * People who helped slaves find the railroad were " agents " ( or " shepherds " )
* Guides were known as " conductors " * Hiding places were " stations " or " way stations " *
" Station masters " hid slaves in their homes
* Escaped slaves were referred to as " passengers " or " cargo "
* Slaves would obtain a " ticket " * Similar to common gospel lore , the " wheels would keep on turning " * Financial benefactors of the Railroad were known as " stockholders " The Big Dipper ( whose " bowl " points to the North Star ) was known as the drinkin ' gourd .
The Railroad was often known as the " freedom train " or " Gospel train " , which headed towards " Heaven " or " the Promised Land " , i.e. , Canada .
William Still , sometimes called " The Father of the Underground Railroad " , helped hundreds of slaves to escape ( as many as 60 a month ) , sometimes hiding them in his Philadelphia home .
He kept careful records , including short biographies of the people , that contained frequent railway metaphors .
He maintained correspondence with many of them , often acting as a middleman in communications between escaped slaves and those left behind .
He later published these accounts in the book The Underground Railroad : Authentic Narratives and First - Hand Accounts ( 1872 ) , a valuable resource for historians to understand how the system worked and learn about individual ingenuity in escapes .
According to Still , messages were often encoded so that they could be understood only by those active in the railroad .
For example , the following message , " I have sent via at two o'clock four large hams and two small hams " , indicated that four adults and two children were sent by train from Harrisburg to Philadelphia .
The additional word via indicated that the " passengers " were not sent on the usual train , but rather via Reading , Pennsylvania .
In this case , the authorities were tricked into going to the regular location ( station ) in an attempt to intercept the runaways , while Still met them at the correct station and guided them to safety .
They eventually escaped either to the North or to Canada , where slavery had been abolished during the 1830s .
NATIONAL UNDERGROUND RAILROAD NETWORK Section::::National Underground Railroad Network .
Following upon legislation passed in 1990 , in 1997 , Congress passed H.R. 1635 , which President Bill Clinton signed into law , and which authorized the United States National Park Service to establish the National Underground Railroad Network to Freedom program to identify associated sites , as well as preserve them and popularize the Underground Railroad and stories of people involved in it .
The National Park Service has designated many sites within the network , posted stories about people and places , sponsors an essay contest , and holds a national conference about the Underground Railroad in May or June each year .
FOLKLORE Section::::Folklore .
Since the 1980s , claims have arisen that quilt designs were used to signal and direct slaves to escape routes and assistance .
According to advocates of the quilt theory , ten quilt patterns were used to direct slaves to take particular actions .
The quilts were placed one at a time on a fence as a means of nonverbal communication to alert escaping slaves .
The code had a dual meaning : first to signal slaves to prepare to escape , and second to give clues and indicate directions on the journey .
The quilt design theory is disputed .
The first published work documenting an oral history source was in 1999 , and the first publication of this theory is believed to be a 1980 children 's book .
Quilt historians and scholars of pre - Civil - War America have disputed this legend .
There is no contemporary evidence of any sort of quilt code , and quilt historians such as Pat Cummings and Barbara Brackman have raised serious questions about the idea .
In addition , Underground Railroad historian Giles Wright has published a pamphlet debunking the quilt code .
Similarly , some popular , nonacademic sources claim that spirituals and other songs , such as " Steal Away " or " Follow the Drinking Gourd " , contained coded information and helped individuals navigate the railroad .
They have offered little evidence to support their claims .
Scholars tend to believe that while the slave songs may certainly have expressed hope for deliverance from the sorrows of this world , these songs did not present literal help for runaway slaves .
The Underground Railroad inspired cultural works .
For example , " Song of the Free " , written in 1860 about a man fleeing slavery in Tennessee by escaping to Canada , was composed to the tune of " Oh ! Susanna " .
Every stanza ends with a reference to Canada as the land " where colored men are free " .
Slavery in Upper Canada ( now Ontario ) was outlawed in 1793 ; in 1819 , John Robinson , the Attorney General of Upper Canada , declared that by residing in Canada , black residents were set free , and that Canadian courts would protect their freedom .
Slavery in Canada as a whole had been in rapid decline after an 1803 court ruling , and was finally abolished outright in 1834 .
LEGAL AND POLITICAL Section::::Legal and political .
When frictions between North and South culminated in the Civil War , many blacks , slave and free , fought for the Union Army .
Following Union victory in the Civil War , on December 6 , 1865 , the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution outlawed slavery .
Following its passage , in some cases the Underground Railroad operated in the opposite direction , as fugitives returned to the United States .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Frederick Douglass , writer , statesman , and an escaped slave , wrote critically of the Underground Railroad in his seminal autobiography , Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass , an American Slave :
He went on to say that , although he honors the movement , he feels that the efforts serve more to enlighten the slave - owners than the slaves , making them more watchful and making it more difficult for future slaves to escape .
ARRIVAL IN CANADA Section::::Arrival in Canada .
Estimates vary widely , but at least 30,000 slaves , and potentially more than 100,000 , escaped to Canada via the Underground Railroad .
The largest group settled in Upper Canada ( Ontario ) , called Canada West from 1841 .
Numerous Black Canadian communities developed in Southern Ontario .
These were generally in the triangular region bounded by Niagara Falls , Toronto , and Windsor .
Several rural villages made up mostly of ex - slaves were established in Kent and Essex counties .
Fort Malden in Amherstburg , Ontario , was deemed the " chief place of entry " for slaves seeking to enter Canada .
The abolitionist Levi Coffin supported this assessment , describing Fort Malden as " the great landing place , the principle terminus of the underground railroad of the west . "
After 1850 , approximately thirty fugitive slaves a day were crossing over to Fort Malden by steamboat .
The Sultana was one of such ships and made " frequent round trips " between Great Lakes ports .
Its captain , C.W. Appleby , a celebrated mariner , facilitated the conveyance of several fugitive slaves from various Lake Erie ports to Fort Malden .
Another important center of population was Nova Scotia , for example Africville and other villages near Halifax ( see Black Nova Scotians ) .
Many of these settlements were started by Black Loyalists after the American Revolutionary War .
Important black settlements also developed in other parts of British North America ( now parts of Canada ) .
These included Lower Canada ( present - day Quebec ) and Vancouver Island , where Governor James Douglas encouraged black immigration because of his opposition to slavery .
He also hoped a significant black community would form a bulwark against those who wished to unite the island with the United States .
Upon arriving at their destinations , many fugitives were disappointed , as life in Canada was difficult .
While the British colonies had no slavery after 1834 , discrimination was still common .
Many of the new arrivals had to compete with mass European immigration for jobs , and overt racism was common .
For example , in reaction to Black Loyalists being settled in eastern Canada by the Crown , the city of Saint John , New Brunswick , amended its charter in 1785 specifically to exclude blacks from practicing a trade , selling goods , fishing in the harbour , or becoming freemen ; these provisions stood until 1870 .
With the outbreak of the Civil War in the U.S. , many black refugees left Canada to enlist in the Union Army .
While some later returned to Canada , many remained in the United States .
Thousands of others returned to the American South after the war ended .
The desire to reconnect with friends and family was strong , and most were hopeful about the changes emancipation and Reconstruction would bring . NOTABLE PEOPLE * Henry Box Brown
* John Brown * Owen Brown * Samuel Burris * Obadiah Bush
* Levi Coffin * Elizabeth Rous Comstock * George Corson * Moses Dickson * Frederick Douglass
* Asa Drury
*
Calvin Fairbank * Matilda Joslyn Gage
* Thomas Galt * Thomas Garrett * William Lloyd Garrison
* Sydney Howard Gay *
Josiah Bushnell Grinnell
* Frances Harper * Laura Smith Haviland *
Lewis Hayden
*
Josiah Henson *
Roger Hooker Leavitt *
Isaac Hopper
* John Hunn * Jermain Wesley Loguen * Samuel Joseph May * John Berry Meachum * Mary Meachum * William M. Mitchell * James Mott
* Lucretia Coffin Mott
* Solomon Northup
* John Parker
* John Wesley Posey
*
Amy and Isaac Post
* John Rankin * Alexander Milton Ross
* David Ruggles * Gerrit Smith
* George Luther Stearns
*
William Still * Lewis Tappan * Charles Turner
Torrey
* William Troy
* Sojourner Truth * Harriet Tubman
* Jonathan Walker
* John Greenleaf Whittier
*
Martha Coffin Wright * Joseph Parrish Thompson * Mary Ellen Pleasant * John Van Zandt RELATED EVENTS
* 1776Declaration of Independence * 1793Act Against Slavery
* 1800Second Great Awakening
* 1816Battle of Negro Fort
* 1820Missouri Compromise
* 1850Compromise of 1850
* 1850Fugitive Slave Act
* 1851Jerry Rescue * 1854Kansas – Nebraska Act * 1857Dred Scott decision * 1858Oberlin – Wellington Rescue * 1860Abraham Lincoln of Illinois elected the first Republican U.S. President * 1861 through 1865American Civil War * 1863Emancipation Proclamation issued by President Lincoln * 1865Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution INSPIRATIONS FOR FICTION
*
The Underground Railroad was the inspiration for a faction in Fallout 4 , the Railroad , consisting of safehouses for synthetic humanoids who escaped another faction known as the Institute .
*
The Underground Railroad is a 2016 novel by Colson Whitehead .
It won the 2016 National Book Award and the 2017 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction .
*
Underground is an American television series that premiered in 2016 , on WGN America .
* The Simpsons episode " The Colour Yellow " S21 E13 mentions that the Simpsons ' ancestor helped on the railroad .
CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE
* David Walker ( 1829 ) Appeal to the Coloured Citizens of the World * Harriet Beecher Stowe ( 1852 )
Uncle Tom 's Cabin * Caroline Lee Hentz ( 1854 )
The Planter 's Northern Bride * William M. Mitchell ( 1860 ) * Sarah Hopkins Bradford ( 1869 )
Scenes in the Life of Harriet Tubman ; ( 1896 ) Harriet Tubman , Moses of Her People SEE ALSO
* Ausable Chasm , NY , home of the North Star Underground Railroad Museum
* Bilger 's Rocks * Caroline Quarlls ( 1824–1892 ) , first known person to escape slavery through Wisconsin 's Underground Railroad *
Fort Mose Historic State Park
* List of Underground Railroad sites
* Reverse Underground Railroad
* Slave codes
* Escape to Sweden , an " underground railroad " during the Holocaust in Norway NOTES REFERENCES * Foner , Eric ( 2015 ) .
Gateway To Freedom : The Hidden History of the Underground Railroad .
New York , NY : Norton .
* Forbes , Ella ( 1998 )
But We Have No Country : The 1851 Christiana Pennsylvania Resistance .
Africana Homestead Legacy Publishers .
* Griffler , Keith P.(2004 )
Front Line of Freedom : African Americans and the Forging of the Underground Railroad in the Ohio Valley .
University Press of Kentucky . .
FURTHER READING
* Blackett , R.J.M. ( 2013 ) .
Making Freedom : The Underground Railroad and the Politics of Slavery .
Chapel Hill , NC : University of North Carolina Press .
* ( Stories about Thomas Garrett , a famous agent on the Underground Railroad )
* ( Classic book documenting the Underground Railroad operations in Philadelphia ) .
* Public domain ebook at Project Gutenberg FOLKLORE AND MYTH
EXTERNAL LINKS * Underground Railroad Studies
* Underground Railroad Timeline * Friends of the Underground Railroad
* National Underground Railroad Freedom Center * Underground Railroad Research Institute at Georgetown College * Underground Railroad in Buffalo and Upstate New York : A bibliography by The Buffalo History Museum * Newspaper articles and clippings about the Underground Railroad at Newspapers.com