THE ROCK ( FILM )
The Rock is a 1996 American action thriller film directed by Michael Bay , produced by Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer , and written by David Weisberg and Douglas S. Cook .
The film stars Sean Connery , Nicolas Cage and Ed Harris , with William Forsythe and Michael Biehn co - starring .
It is dedicated to Simpson , who died five months before its release .
The film received moderately positive reviews from critics , and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Sound at the 69th Academy Awards .
It was a box office success , grossing over $ 335 million against a production budget of $ 75 million .
In the film , an FBI chemist and a former SAS captain are tasked with stopping a group of rogue US Force Recon Marines who have seized Alcatraz Island , taken hostages , and threatened to launch rockets filled with nerve gas over San Francisco unless they are paid $ 100 million .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
A group of rogue U.S. Force Recon Marines , led by disenchanted Brigadier General Frank Hummel and his second - in - command Major Tom Baxter , storm a heavily guarded naval weapons depot and steal a stockpile of deadly VX gas - armed M55 rockets , losing one of their own men in the process .
The next day , Hummel and his men — along with newly - recruited Marine Captains Frye and Darrow — seize control of Alcatraz Island , taking eighty - one tourists hostage .
He threatens to launch the rockets against San Francisco unless the U.S. government pays him $ 100 million from a military slush fund , which he will distribute to his men and the families of Recon Marines who died on clandestine missions under his command but whose deaths were not compensated .
The Pentagon and FBI develop a plan to retake the island with a U.S. Navy SEAL team led by Commander Anderson , enlisting the FBI 's top chemical weapons specialist ,
Dr. Stanley Goodspeed .
FBI Director James Womack is forced to offer a pardon to federal prisoner John Mason , in return for information .
Mason , a 60-year - old British national imprisoned without charges for three decades , is the only Alcatraz inmate ever to escape the island .
After being set up in a hotel , Mason escapes , resulting in a car chase with Goodspeed through the streets of San Francisco .
While seeking out his estranged daughter , Jade , Goodspeed arrives , but covers for Mason by telling Jade that he is aiding the FBI .
Goodspeed , Mason , and the SEALs infiltrate Alcatraz but Hummel 's men are alerted to their presence and ambush them in a shower room .
All the SEALs , including Anderson , are killed — leaving only Mason and Goodspeed alive .
Mason sees his chance to escape custody and disarms Goodspeed , but is convinced to help defuse the rockets after the Marines use explosive devices to flush them out .
They eliminate several teams of Marines and disable 12 of the 15 rockets by removing their guidance chips .
Hummel threatens to execute a hostage if they do not surrender and return the guidance chips ; instead , Mason destroys the chips and surrenders to Hummel to try and reason with him as well as buy Goodspeed some time .
Though Goodspeed disables another rocket , the Marines capture him .
With the incursion team lost , the military initiates their backup plan : an airstrike by F / A-18s with thermite plasma , which will neutralize the poison gas and kill everyone on the island .
Mason and Goodspeed escape , after which the former explains why he was held prisoner : he was a British SAS Captain who stole a microfilm containing details of the United States ' most closely guarded secrets , refusing to give it up when captured because he knew he would be killed if he did .
When the deadline for the transfer of the ransom passes , Hummel is urged by his men to fire one of the rockets ; at first he does this , but then redirects it to detonate at sea .
Hummel , confronted by Frye and Darrow , declares the mission is over — explaining that it was all an elaborate bluff as he never had any intention of harming innocent lives .
Hummel orders them to exit Alcatraz with a few hostages and the remaining rocket to cover their retreat while he assumes blame .
Frye and Darrow rebel upon realizing they will not be paid their $ 1 million apiece , killing Baxter and mortally wounding Hummel — who tells Goodspeed where the last rocket is before dying .
Darrow and Frye proceed with the plan to fire on San Francisco .
Goodspeed seeks out the rocket while Mason deals with the remaining Marines .
As the jets approach , Goodspeed disables the rocket before killing both Darrow and Frye .
He signals that the threat is over just as one jet drops a bomb ; though no hostages are injured , Goodspeed is thrown into the sea by the blast and Mason rescues him .
Goodspeed and Mason part ways after Mason reveals the location of the microfilm ; Goodspeed fakes Mason 's death by telling Womack that he was killed in the bomb explosion .
Sometime later , Goodspeed and his newlywed wife Carla are seen stealing the microfilm from a church and driving away .
CAST PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Jonathan Hensleigh participated in writing the script , which became the subject of a dispute with the Writers Guild of America .
The spec script ( by David Weisberg and Douglas Cook ) was reworked by several writers , but other than the original team , Mark Rosner was the only one granted official credit by guild arbitration .
The rule is that the credited writing team must contribute 50 % of the final script ( effectively limiting credits to the screenplay 's initial authors , plus one re - write team ) .
Despite their work on the script , neither Hensleigh nor Aaron Sorkin was credited in the film .
The director Michael Bay wrote an open letter of protest , in which he criticized the arbitration procedure as a " sham " and a " travesty " .
He said Hensleigh had worked closely with him on the movie and should have received screen credit .
Quentin Tarantino was also an uncredited screenwriter .
L.A.-based British screenwriting team Dick Clement and Ian La Frenais were brought in at Connery 's request to rewrite his lines , but ended up altering much of the film 's dialogue .
It was Nicolas Cage 's idea that his character would not swear ; his euphemisms include " gee whiz . "
Bay had worked closely with Ed Harris to develop his character as concretely as possible , later adding a sympathetic edge to Hummel .
There were tensions during shooting between director Bay and Walt Disney Studios executives who were supervising the production .
On the commentary track for the Criterion Collection DVD , Bay recalls a time when he was preparing to leave the set for a meeting with the executives when he was approached by Sean Connery in golfing attire .
Connery , who also produced the film , asked Bay where he was going , and when Bay explained he had a meeting with the executives , Connery asked if he could accompany him .
Bay complied and when he arrived in the conference room , the executives ' jaws dropped when they saw Connery appear behind him .
According to Bay , Connery then stood up for Bay and insisted that he was doing a good job and should be left alone .
Most of the film was shot on location in the Alcatraz Prison on Alcatraz Island .
As a national park , it was n't possible to close Alcatraz down , and much of the filming had to accommodate tour parties milling around .
The scene in which FBI director Womack is thrown off the balcony was filmed on location at the Fairmont Hotel in San Francisco .
The filming led to numerous calls to the hotel by people who saw a man dangling from the balcony .
In the scene in which Paxton demands to know from Womack who Mason is , Paxton utters , " Yeah , I know all the cloak and dagger stories " .
This line was a direct reference to Forsythe 's earlier film , Cloak & Dagger .
CONTROVERSY
CENSORSHIP Section::::Controversy .
Section::::Censorship .
In the original UK DVD release , the scene in which Connery throws a knife through Scarpetti 's throat and says " you must never hesitate " to Cage was cut , although the scene was shown on British television .
Consequently , a later scene in which Connery says to Cage , " I 'm rather glad you did n't hesitate too long " lost its impact on viewers who had not seen the first scene .
Other cuts included the reduction of multiple gunshot impacts into Gamble 's feet in the morgue down to a single hit ; a close - up of his screaming face as the air conditioner falls onto him ; a sound cut to Mason snapping a Marine 's neck and two bloody gunshot wounds ( to Hummel and Baxter ) , both near the end of the film .
IRAQI CHEMICAL WEAPONS
PROGRAM Section::::Iraqi chemical weapons program .
A scene from the film featuring Connery and Cage was the basis for incorrect and false descriptions of the Iraqi chemical weapons program .
Britain 's Secret Intelligence Service was led to believe Saddam Hussein was continuing to produce weapons of mass destruction by a false agent who based his reports on the Hollywood action movie , according to the Chilcot Inquiry .
In September 2002 , MI6 chief Sir Richard Dearlove said the agency had acquired information from a new source revealing that Iraq was stepping up production of chemical and biological warfare ( CBW ) agents .
The source , who was said to have " direct access " , claimed senior staff were working seven days a week while the regime was concentrating a great deal of effort on the production of anthrax .
Sir Richard told the chairman of the Joint Intelligence Committee ( JIC ) , Sir John Scarlett , that they were " on the edge of ( a ) significant intel breakthrough " which could be the " key to unlock " Iraq 's CBW programme .
However , questions were raised about the agent 's claims when it was noticed his description bore a striking resemblance to a scene from the movie .
" It was pointed out that glass containers were not typically used in chemical munitions , and that a popular movie ( The Rock ) had inaccurately depicted nerve agents being carried in glass beads or spheres , " the Chilcot report stated .
By February 2003 - a month before the invasion of Iraq - MI6 concluded that their source had been lying " over a period of time " but failed to inform No 10 " or others " , even though Tony Blair had been briefed on his intelligence .
The film 's co - writer David Weisberg said , " What was so amazing was anybody in the poison gas community would immediately know that this was total bullshit – such obvious bullshit " .
Weisberg said he was unsurprised a desperate agent might resort to movies for inspiration , but dismayed that authorities " did n't do apparently the most basic fact - checking or vetting of the information .
If you 'd just asked a chemical weapons expert , it would have been immediately obvious
it was ludicrous " .
Weisberg said he 'd had some " funny emails " after Wednesday 's report , but he felt " it 's not a nice legacy for the film " .
" It 's tragic that we went to war " , he concluded .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Produced on a $ 75 million budget , The Rock was a smash hit , grossing a total of $ 134 million domestically and $ 201 million internationally , for a worldwide total of $ 335 million .
Of the year 1996 , it was the seventh highest home - grossing film in the U.S. , and the fourth highest - grossing U.S. film worldwide .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film received mildly positive reviews from film critics .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 66 % , based on 64 reviews .
The site 's consensus says , " For visceral thrills , it ca n't be beat .
Just do n't expect The Rock to engage your brain . "
To date , it is the only film directed by Bay to have a " fresh " score .
On Metacritic , the film has a score of 59 out of 100 , based on 18 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A " on an A+ to F scale .
Roger Ebert awarded it 3.5 out of 4 stars , praising it as " a first - rate , slam - bang action thriller with a lot of style and no little humor .
Todd McCarthy of Variety gave the movie a positive review , commenting " The yarn has its share of gaping holes and jaw - dropping improbabilities , but director Michael Bay sweeps them all aside with his never - take - a - breath pacing . "
Richard Corliss , writing for the Time expressed favorable opinions towards the film , saying " Slick , brutal and almost human , this is the team - spirit action movie should have been . " AWARDS AND RECOGNITION Section::::Awards and recognition .
The Rock won several minor awards , including ' Best On - Screen Duo ' for Connery and Cage at the MTV Movie Awards .
It was also nominated for an Academy Award for Best Sound ( Kevin O'Connell , Greg P. Russell and Keith A. Wester ) .
The film was selected for a limited edition DVD release by the Criterion Collection , a distributor of primarily arthouse films it categorizes as " important classic and contemporary films " and " cinema at its finest " .
In an essay supporting the selection of The Rock , Roger Ebert , who was strongly critical of most of Bay 's later films , gave the film a 3 1/2 out of four stars , calling it " an action picture that rises to the top of the genre because of a literate , witty screenplay and skilled craftsmanship in the direction and special effects . "
In 2014 , Time Out polled several film critics , directors , actors and stunt actors to list their top action films .
The Rock was listed at 74th place on the list .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack to The Rock was released on June 7 , 1996 by Hollywood Records .
Nick Glennie - Smith , Hans Zimmer and Harry Gregson - Williams were the principal composers , with additional music composed by Don Harper and Steven M. Stern .
The main theme ( Hummell Gets The Rockets ) was composed by Hans Zimmer and Nick Glennie - Smith .
Personnel Credits adapted from FilmScoreMonthly .
* Composers , Producers – Nick Glennie Smith , Hans Zimmer
* Conductors – Bruce Fowler , Don Harper , Nick Glennie Smith
* Contractor [ Music ] –
Sandy De Crescent
* Compilers – Marc Streitenfeld , Nick Glennie Smith
* Copyist [ Music Preparation ] –
Dominic Fidelibus
* Editing [ Assistant Editor ] –
Shannon Erbe , Sienna Pascarella
* Editing [ Music Editor ] –
Bob Badami , John Finklea
* Engineer [ Additional ] –
Marc Streitenfeld * Executive Producer [ Soundtrack ] – Jerry Bruckheimer * Electric Guitar [ " the Rock " ]
– Bob Daspit * Electric Guitar [ " the Roll " ] - Michael Thompson * Acoustic Guitar [ " the Roll " ] – Michael Stevens * Mixing [ Score ] – Alan Meyerson
* Music [ Additional ] – Don Harper , Steven Stern
* Orchestrating – Bruce Fowler , Dennis Dreith , Ladd McIntosh , Suzette Moriarty , Walter Fowler
*
Other [ Assistant To Hans Zimmer ] –
Justin Burnett , Marc Streitenfeld
* Other [ Executive In Charge Of Music For The Walt Disney Motion Pictures Group ] – Kathy Nelson , Bill Green * Other [ Executive In Charge Of Soundtracks For Hollywood Records ] –
Mitchell Leib
* Sound Programming [ Euphonix ] , Computer Programming [ Steinberg Cubase ] , Programming
[ Yamaha , Fairlight CMI ] -
Hans Zimmer * Recording [ Assistant Recorder ] –
Brian Richards , Gregg W. Silk * Recording [ Paramount Recordist ] – Paul Wertheimer * Recording [ Score ] – Alan Meyerson , Bruce Botnick , Paul Wertheimer
*
Technician [ Score Former ] –
Emma Burnham ABANDONED SEQUEL
Section::::Abandoned sequel .
In June 2017 , director Michael Bay discussed his idea for a follow - up to The Rock that never developed past the concept that Mason is chased by the government after escaping .
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring the United States Navy SEALs
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Rock an essay by Roger Ebert at the Criterion Collection