SAKS FIFTH AVENUE Saks Fifth Avenue is an American chain of luxury department stores owned by the oldest commercial corporation in North America , the Hudson 's Bay Company .
Its main flagship store is located on Fifth Avenue in Midtown Manhattan , New York City .
HISTORY EARLY YEARS Section::::History .
Section::::Early years .
Saks Fifth Avenue is the successor of a business founded by Andrew Saks in 1867 and incorporated in New York in 1902 as Saks & Company .
Saks died in 1912 , and in 1923 Saks & Co. merged with Gimbel Brothers , Inc. , which was owned by a cousin of Horace Saks , Bernard Gimbel , operating as a separate autonomous subsidiary .
On September 15 , 1924 , Horace Saks and Bernard Gimbel opened Saks Fifth Avenue in New York City , with a full - block avenue frontage south of St. Patrick 's Cathedral , facing what would become Rockefeller Center .
The architects were Starrett & van Vleck , who developed a reticent , genteel Anglophile classicizing facade similar to their Gimbels Department Store in Pittsburgh ( 1914 ) .
When Bernard 's brother , Adam Gimbel , became president of Saks Fifth Avenue in 1926 after Horace Saks 's sudden passing , the company expanded , opening seasonal resort branches in Palm Beach , Florida and Southampton , New York , in 1928 .
The first full - line year - round Saks store opened in Chicago , in 1929 , followed by another resort store in Miami Beach , Florida .
In 1938 , Saks expanded to the West Coast , opening in Beverly Hills , California .
By the end of the 1930s , Saks Fifth Avenue had a total of 10 stores , including resort locations such as Sun Valley , Idaho , Mount Stowe , and Newport , Rhode Island .
More full - line stores followed with Detroit , Michigan , in 1940 and Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , in 1949 .
In Downtown Pittsburgh , the company moved to its own freestanding location approximately one block from its former home on the fourth floor in the downtown Gimbel 's flagship .
The San Francisco location opened in 1952 , competing locally with I. Magnin .
BATUS Inc. acquired Gimbel Bros. , Inc. and its Saks Fifth Avenue subsidiary in 1973 as part of its diversification strategy .
More expansion followed from the 1960s through the 1990s including the Midwest , and the South , particularly in Texas .
In 1990 , BATUS sold Saks to Investcorp S.A. , which took Saks public in 1996 as Saks Holdings ,
Inc. In 1990 , " Saks Off 5th " was launched , an outlet store offshoot of the main brand , with 107 stores worldwide by 2016 .
PROFFITT 'S
ACQUISITION
Section::::Proffitt 's acquisition .
In 1998 , Proffitt 's , Inc. the parent company of Proffitt 's and other department stores , acquired
Saks Holdings Inc. Upon completing the acquisition , Proffitt 's , Inc. changed its name to Saks , Inc. Since 2000 Saks has opened international locations in Saudi Arabia , United Arab Emirates , Bahrain , Kazakhstan , Canada , and Mexico City .
In August 2007 , the United States Postal Service began an experimental program selling the plus zip code extension to businesses .
The first company to do so was Saks Fifth Avenue , which received the zip code of 10022 - 7463 ( " SHOE " ) for the eighth - floor shoe department in its flagship Fifth Avenue store .
During the 2007–2009 recession , Saks Fifth Avenue had to close some stores and to cut prices and profit margins , thus according to Reuters " training shoppers to expect discounts .
It took three years before it could start selling at closer to full price " .
In the following years , the company closed stores in locations including Orange County ( 2010 ) , Denver ( 2011 ) , Pittsburgh ( 2012 ) , Chicago ( 2012/13 ) and in June 2013 its last Dallas store to implement the " strategy of employing our resources in our most productive locations " .
As of 2013 , the New York flagship store , whose real estate value was estimated between $ 800 million and over $ 1 billion at the time , generated around 20 % of Saks ' annual sales at $ 620 million , with other stores being less profitable according to analysts .
HUDSON 'S BAY COMPANY ACQUISITION
Section::::Hudson 's Bay Company acquisition .
On July 29 , 2013 , the Hudson 's Bay Company ( HBC ) , owner of the competing chain Lord & Taylor , announced it would acquire Saks Fifth Avenue 's parent company for US$ 2.9 billion .
Plans called for up to seven Saks Fifth Avenues to open in major Canadian markets .
Expansion into Canada is expected to compete with Canadian Holt Renfrew chain and challenge Nordstrom 's expansion into Canada , which began in summer 2014 with the opening of a Nordstrom store in Calgary .
In January 2014 , HBC announced the first Saks store in Canada would occupy in its flagship Queen Street building in downtown Toronto , connected to the Toronto Eaton Centre via sky bridge .
The store opened in February 2016 with a second Toronto area location in the Sherway Gardens shopping center opening in spring 2016 .
On February 22 , 2018 , Saks Fifth Avenue opened its third Canadian store in Calgary , Alberta .
Starting in 2015 Saks began a $ 250 million , three - year restoration of its Fifth Avenue flagship store .
In the summer of 2015 , it was announced that Saks will debut a new location in Greenwich , Connecticut .
In the fall of 2015 , Saks was planning to replace its existing store at the Houston Galleria with a new store .
In February 2017 , Saks was reported to be in advanced talks with Indian retailer Aditya Birla Fashion Retail Ltd. to open two stores in India .
The stores are expected to be located at Aerocity in Delhi , and the Bandra Kurla Complex in Mumbai .
In September 2017 , Saks Fifth Avenue would be introducing new futuristic salon concept at stores through a partnership with the Warren Tricomi .
LEGAL CONTROVERSIES Section::::Legal controversies .
In 2005 , vendors filed against Saks alleging unlawful chargebacks .
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) investigated the complaint for years and , according to the New York Times , " exposed a tangle of illicit tactics that let Saks ...
keep money it owed to clothing makers " , inflating Saks ' yearly earnings up to 43 % and abusively collecting around $ 30 million from suppliers over seven years .
Saks settled with the SEC in 2007 , after firing three or more executives involved in the fraudulent activities .
In 2014 , Saks fired transgender employee Leyth Jamal after she was allegedly " belittled by coworkers , forced to use the men 's room and repeatedly referred to by male pronouns ( he and him ) " .
After Jamal submitted a lawsuit for unfair dismissal , the company stated in a motion to dismiss that " it is well settled that transsexuals are not protected by Title VII . "
In a court filing , the United States Department of Justice rebuked Saks ' argument , stating that " discrimination against an individual based on gender identity is discrimination because of sex .
" The company was removed from the Human Rights Campaign 's list of " allies " during the controversy .
The lawsuit was later settled amicably , without disclosing the terms of the settlement .
In 2017 , following the events of Hurricane Maria in Puerto Rico , Saks 's San Juan store located in Mall of San Juan suffered major damages along with its neighboring anchor store Nordstrom .
Taubman Centers , the company who owns the mall , filed a lawsuit against Saks for failing to provide an estimated reopening date and failing to restore damages after the hurricane . , and while Nordstrom has a reopening date of November 9 , 2018 , the Saks store does not have an official opening date yet .
GALLERY SEE ALSO
* Saks-34th Street
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website