UNITED STATES
MINOR OUTLYING ISLANDS
The United States Minor Outlying Islands are a statistical designation defined by the International Organization for Standardization 's ISO 3166 - 1 code .
The entry code is .
The minor outlying islands and groups of islands consist of eight United States insular areas in the Pacific Ocean ( Baker Island , Howland Island , Jarvis Island , Johnston Atoll , Kingman Reef , Midway Atoll , Palmyra Atoll , and Wake Island ) and one in the Caribbean Sea ( Navassa Island ) .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Except for Palmyra Atoll , all of these islands are unincorporated , unorganized territories of the United States .
, none of the islands have any permanent residents .
The U.S. Territory of Palmyra Island is an incorporated territory , separated in 1959 from the rest of the former incorporated Territory of Hawaii when Hawaii became a state .
The only human population consists of temporarily stationed scientific and military personnel .
The 2000 census counted 315 people on Johnston Atoll and 94 people on Wake Island .
There has been no modern indigenous population , except at the 1940 census .
In 1936 a colonization program began to settle Americans on Baker , Howland , and Jarvis , but all three islands were evacuated in 1942 as a result of World War II .
The islands are grouped together as a statistical convenience .
They are not administered collectively , nor do they share a single cultural or political history beyond being uninhabited islands under the sovereignty of the United States .
They are all outside of the customs territory of the United States and have no customs duties .
Except for Midway Atoll , the Pacific islands are surrounded by large Exclusive Economic Zones and are within the bounds of the Pacific Remote Islands Marine National Monument .
They are collectively represented by the ISO 3166 - 1 alpha-2 code .
The individual islands have ISO 3166 - 2 numerical codes .
The Internet country code top - level domain ( ccTLD ) " .um " has historically been assigned to the islands ; however , the .um ccTLD was retired in January 2007 .
ISO introduced the term " United States Minor Outlying Islands " in 1986 .
From 1974 until 1986 , five of the islands ( Baker Island , Howland Island , Jarvis Island , Palmyra Atoll and Kingman Reef ) were grouped under the term United States Miscellaneous Pacific Islands , with ISO 3166 code .
The code of Midway Atoll was , the code of Johnston Atoll was , and the code of Wake Island was .
Prior to 1986 , Navassa Island , along with several small islands in the Caribbean Sea — that are no longer under U.S. sovereignty — were grouped under the term United States Miscellaneous Caribbean Islands , with FIPS country code .
The populated Stewart Islands , called Sikaiana and now effectively controlled by the Solomon Islands , are not included in official lists of U.S. Minor Outlying Islands .
In 1856 , the Kingdom of Hawaii Privy Council and King Kamehameha IV voted to accept their voluntary cession .
The Kingdom later became the Republic of Hawaii , all of which was annexed by the United States in 1898 .
In 1959 , the resulting federal U.S. Territory of Hawaii , excluding only Palmyra Island and Midway Island , became a U.S. state .
Residents of the Stewarts , who are Polynesian like the native Hawaiians rather than Melanesian , claimed to be citizens of the United States since the Stewarts were given to King Kamehameha IV in 1856 and were part of Hawaii at the time of the United States ' annexation in 1898 .
The U.S. federal and Hawaii state governments informally accept the recent claim of the Solomon Islands over the Stewarts , and the United States makes no official claim of sovereignty .
Most of the islands in the U.S.
Minor Outlying Islands are closed to the public —
visitors to islands such as Jarvis Island need a permit ; Palmyra Atoll is open to the public , but there is no easy way to reach it .
TRANSPORTATION AIRPORTS Section::::Transportation .
Section::::Airports .
Airports in the United States Minor Outlying Islands provide critical emergency landing points across the vast Pacific Ocean for all types of aircraft , allow for important military presence in key strategic zones , and have limited scheduled commercial services .
The following is a list of island airports with ICAO ( IATA ) codes : * PMDY ( MDY ) :
Henderson Field ( Naval Air Facility ) , Sand Island , Midway Atoll .
* PWAK ( AWK ) :
Wake Island Airfield , Wake Island
* PLPA : Palmyra ( Cooper ) Airport , Palmyra Atoll , Cooper Island
* PBAR :
Baker Island Airport , Baker Island
* PLUR : Jarvis Airport , Jarvis Island Other airports include : * Kamakaiwi Field : Howland Island ( 1937 to about 1945 )
* Kingman Reef :
The lagoon was used as a halfway station between Hawaii and American Samoa by Pan American Airways for flying boats in 1937 and 1938 .
* Johnston Atoll Airport , Johnston Atoll ( Formerly PJON / JON )
: The airport was built during WWII , and saw significant commercial traffic during the second half of the 20th century .
However , it was abandoned in 2003 .
SEAPORTS Section::::Seaports .
Three of the islands are listed with ports in the World Port Index , with World Port Number : * 56325
JOHNSTON ATOLL :
Johnston Atoll * 56328 MIDWAY ISLAND :
Midway Atoll * 56330 WAKE ISLAND :
Wake Island * not listed WEST LAGOON :
Palmyra Atoll Baker Island , Howland Island and Jarvis Island each have a small boat landing place .
Kingman Reef and Navassa Island have offshore anchorage only .
ISLANDS
Atoll or islandLagoonNWRPacific Ocean , Northwestern Hawaiian Islands North Pacific Ocean , scattered isolated islands North Pacific Ocean ,
Northern Line Islands North Pacific Ocean , Northern Phoenix Islands South Pacific Ocean , Central Line Islands
North Atlantic Ocean , Caribbean Sea FLORA AND FAUNA SEE ALSO
* Guano Islands Act
* Insular cases
* List of territorial disputes REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * WorldStatesmen – U.S. * Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges
* CIA World Factbook : United States Pacific Island Wildlife Refuges