POLYTETRAFLUOROETHYLENE Polytetrafluoroethylene ( PTFE ) is a synthetic fluoropolymer of tetrafluoroethylene that has numerous applications .
The best known brand name of PTFE - based formulas is Teflon by Chemours .
Chemours is a spin - off of DuPont , which originally discovered the compound in 1938 .
PTFE is a fluorocarbon solid , as it is a high - molecular - weight compound consisting wholly of carbon and fluorine .
PTFE is hydrophobic : neither water nor water - containing substances wet PTFE , as fluorocarbons demonstrate mitigated London dispersion forces due to the high electronegativity of fluorine .
PTFE has one of the lowest coefficients of friction of any solid .
PTFE is used as a non - stick coating for pans and other cookware .
It is nonreactive , partly because of the strength of carbon – fluorine bonds , and so it is often used in containers and pipework for reactive and corrosive chemicals .
Where used as a lubricant , PTFE reduces friction , wear , and energy consumption of machinery .
It is commonly used as a graft material in surgical interventions .
Also , it is frequently employed as coating on catheters ; this interferes with the ability of bacteria and other infectious agents to adhere to catheters and cause hospital - acquired infections .
HISTORY Section::::History .
PTFE was accidentally discovered in 1938 by Roy J. Plunkett while he was working in New Jersey for DuPont .
As Plunkett attempted to make a new chlorofluorocarbon refrigerant , the tetrafluoroethylene gas in its pressure bottle stopped flowing before the bottle 's weight had dropped to the point signaling " empty . "
Since Plunkett was measuring the amount of gas used by weighing the bottle , he became curious as to the source of the weight , and finally resorted to sawing the bottle apart .
He found the bottle 's interior coated with a waxy white material that was oddly slippery .
Analysis showed that it was polymerized perfluoroethylene , with the iron from the inside of the container having acted as a catalyst at high pressure .
Kinetic Chemicals patented the new fluorinated plastic ( analogous to the already known polyethylene ) in 1941 , and registered the Teflon trademark in 1945 .
By 1948 , DuPont , which founded Kinetic Chemicals in partnership with General Motors , was producing over two million pounds ( 900 tons ) of Teflon brand PTFE per year in Parkersburg , West Virginia .
An early use was in the Manhattan Project as a material to coat valves and seals in the pipes holding highly reactive uranium hexafluoride at the vast K-25 uranium enrichment plant in Oak Ridge , Tennessee .
In 1954 , the wife of French engineer Marc Grégoire urged him to try the material he had been using on fishing tackle on her cooking pans .
He subsequently created the first PTFE - coated , non - stick pans under the brandname Tefal ( combining " Tef " from " Teflon " and " al " from aluminium ) .
In the United States , Marion A. Trozzolo , who had been using the substance on scientific utensils , marketed the first US - made PTFE - coated pan , " The Happy Pan " , in 1961 .
However , Tefal was not the only company to utilize PTFE in nonstick cookware coatings .
In subsequent years , many cookware manufacturers developed proprietary PTFE - based formulas , including Swiss Diamond International , which uses a diamond - reinforced PTFE formula ; Scanpan , which uses a titanium - reinforced PTFE formula ; and both All - Clad and Newell Rubbermaid 's Calphalon , which use a non - reinforced PTFE - based nonstick .
Other cookware companies , such as Meyer Corporation 's Anolon , use Teflon nonstick coatings purchased from Chemours .
Chemours is a 2015 corporate spin - off of DuPont .
In the 1990s , it was found that PTFE could be radiation cross - linked above its melting point in an oxygen - free environment .
Electron beam processing is one example of radiation processing .
Cross - linked PTFE has improved high - temperature mechanical properties and radiation stability .
This was significant because , for many years , irradiation at ambient conditions has been used to break down PTFE for recycling .
This radiation - induced chain scission allows it to be more easily reground and reused .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
PTFE is produced by free - radical polymerization of tetrafluoroethylene .
The net equation is Because tetrafluoroethylene can explosively decompose to tetrafluoromethane and carbon , special apparatus is required for the polymerization to prevent hot spots that might initiate this dangerous side reaction .
The process is typically initiated with persulfate , which homolyzes to generate sulfate radicals : The resulting polymer is terminated with sulfate ester groups , which can be hydrolyzed to give OH end - groups .
Because PTFE is poorly soluble in almost all solvents , the polymerization is conducted as an emulsion in water .
This process gives a suspension of polymer particles .
Alternatively , the polymerization is conducted using a surfactant such as PFOS .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
PTFE is a thermoplastic polymer , which is a white solid at room temperature , with a density of about 2200 kg / m .
According to Chemours , its melting point is .
It maintains high strength , toughness and self - lubrication at low temperatures down to , and good flexibility at temperatures above .
PTFE gains its properties from the aggregate effect of carbon - fluorine bonds , as do all fluorocarbons .
The only chemicals known to affect these carbon - fluorine bonds are highly reactive metals like the alkali metals , and at higher temperatures also such metals as aluminium and magnesium , and fluorinating agents such as xenon difluoride and cobalt(III ) fluoride . !
Property !
Value
The coefficient of friction of plastics is usually measured against polished steel .
PTFE 's coefficient of friction is 0.05 to 0.10 , which is the third - lowest of any known solid material ( BAM being the first , with a coefficient of friction of 0.02 ; diamond - like carbon being second - lowest at 0.05 ) .
PTFE 's resistance to van der Waals forces means that it is the only known surface to which a gecko can not stick .
In fact , PTFE can be used to prevent insects climbing up surfaces painted with the material .
PTFE is so slippery that insects can not get a grip and tend to fall off .
For example , PTFE is used to prevent ants climbing out of formicaria .
Because of its chemical inertness , PTFE can not be cross - linked like an elastomer .
Therefore , it has no " memory " and is subject to creep .
Because of its superior chemical and thermal properties , PTFE is often used as a gasket material within industries that require resistance to aggressive chemicals such as pharmaceuticals or chemical processing .
However , because of the propensity to creep , the long - term performance of such seals is worse than for elastomers which exhibit zero , or near - zero , levels of creep .
In critical applications , Belleville washers are often used to apply continuous force to PTFE gaskets , ensuring a minimal loss of performance over the lifetime of the gasket .
PROCESSING Section::::Processing .
Processing PTFE can be difficult and expensive , because the high melting temperature , , is above the initial decomposition temperature , .
Even when melted , PTFE does not flow , but instead behaves as a gel due to the absence of crystalline phase and high melt viscosity .
Some PTFE parts are made by cold - moulding , a form of compression molding .
Here , fine powdered PTFE is forced into a mould under high pressure ( 10–100 MPa ) .
After a settling period , lasting from minutes to days , the mould is heated at , allowing the fine particles to fuse into a single mass .
APPLICATIONS AND USES Section::::Applications and uses .
The major application of PTFE , consuming about 50 % of production , is for wiring in aerospace and computer applications ( e.g. hookup wire , coaxial cables ) .
This application exploits the fact that PTFE has excellent dielectric properties , especially at high radio frequencies , making it suitable for use as an excellent insulator in connector assemblies and cables , and in printed circuit boards used at microwave frequencies .
Combined with its high melting temperature , this makes it the material of choice as a high - performance substitute for the weaker and lower - melting - point polyethylene commonly used in low - cost applications .
In industrial applications , owing to its low friction , PTFE is used for plain bearings , gears , slide plates , seals , gaskets , bushings , and more applications with sliding action of parts , where it outperforms acetal and nylon .
Its extremely high bulk resistivity makes it an ideal material for fabricating long - life electrets , the electrostatic analogues of permanent magnets .
PTFE film is also widely used in the production of carbon fiber composites as well as fiberglass composites , notably in the aerospace industry .
PTFE film is used as a barrier between the carbon or fiberglass part being built , and breather and bagging materials used to incapsulate the bondment when debulking ( vacuum removal of air from between layers of laid - up plies of material ) and when curing the composite , usually in an autoclave .
The PTFE , used here as a film , prevents the non - production materials from sticking to the part being built , which is sticky due to the carbon - graphite or fiberglass plies being pre - pregnated with bismaleimide resin .
Non - production materials such as Teflon , Airweave Breather and the bag itself would be considered F.O.D. ( foreign object debris / damage ) if left in layup .
Because of its extreme non - reactivity and high temperature rating , PTFE is often used as the liner in hose assemblies , expansion joints , and in industrial pipe lines , particularly in applications using acids , alkalis , or other chemicals .
Its frictionless qualities allow improved flow of highly viscous liquids , and for uses in applications such as brake hoses .
Gore - Tex is a brand of expanded PTFE ( ePTFE ) , a material incorporating a fluoropolymer membrane with micropores .
The roof of the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome in Minneapolis , US , was one of the largest applications of PTFE coatings .
of the material was used in the creation of the white double - layered PTFE - coated fiberglass dome .
PTFE is often found in musical instrument lubrication product ; most commonly , valve oil .
PTFE is used in some aerosol lubricant sprays , including in micronized and polarized form .
It is notable for its extremely low coefficient of friction , its hydrophobia ( which serves to inhibit rust ) , and for the dry film it forms after application , which allows it to resist collecting particles that might otherwise form an abrasive paste .
PTFE ( Teflon ) is best known for its use in coating non - stick frying pans and other cookware , as it is hydrophobic and possesses fairly high heat resistance .
The sole plates of some clothes irons are coated with PTFE ( Teflon ) .
Other niche applications include : *
It is often found in ski bindings as a non - mechanical AFD ( anti - friction device )
*
It can be stretched to contain small pores of varying sizes and is then placed between fabric layers to make a waterproof , breathable fabric in outdoor apparel .
*
It is used widely as a fabric protector to repel stains on formal school - wear , like uniform blazers .
*
It is used as a film interface patch for sports and medical applications , featuring a pressure - sensitive adhesive backing , which is installed in strategic high friction areas of footwear , insoles , ankle - foot orthosis , and other medical devices to prevent and relieve friction - induced blisters , calluses and foot ulceration .
* Expanded PTFE membranes have been used in trials to assist trabeculectomy surgery to treat glaucoma .
* Powdered PTFE is used in pyrotechnic compositions as an oxidizer with powdered metals such as aluminium and magnesium .
Upon ignition , these mixtures form carbonaceous soot and the corresponding metal fluoride , and release large amounts of heat .
They are used in infrared decoy flares and as igniters for solid - fuel rocket propellants .
Aluminium and PTFE is also used in some thermobaric fuel compositions .
* Powdered PTFE is used in a suspension with a low - viscosity , azeotropic mixture of siloxane ethers to create a lubricant for use in twisty puzzles .
*
In optical radiometry , sheets of PTFE are used as measuring heads in spectroradiometers and broadband radiometers ( e.g. , illuminance meters and UV radiometers ) due to PTFE 's capability to diffuse a transmitting light nearly perfectly .
Moreover , optical properties of PTFE stay constant over a wide range of wavelengths , from UV down to near infrared .
In this region , the ratio of its regular transmittance to diffuse transmittance is negligibly small , so light transmitted through a diffuser ( PTFE sheet ) radiates like Lambert 's cosine law .
Thus PTFE enables cosinusoidal angular response for a detector measuring the power of optical radiation at a surface , e.g. in solar irradiance measurements .
* Certain types of bullets are coated with PTFE to reduce wear on the rifling of firearms that uncoated projectiles would cause .
PTFE itself does not give a projectile an armor - piercing property .
*
Its high corrosion resistance makes PTFE useful in laboratory environments , where it is used for lining containers , as a coating for magnetic stirrers , and as tubing for highly corrosive chemicals such as hydrofluoric acid , which will dissolve glass containers .
It is used in containers for storing fluoroantimonic acid , a superacid .
*
PTFE tubes are used in gas - gas heat exchangers in gas cleaning of waste incinerators .
Unit power capacity is typically several megawatts .
*
PTFE is widely used as a thread seal tape in plumbing applications , largely replacing paste thread dope .
*
PTFE membrane filters are among the most efficient industrial air filters .
PTFE - coated filters are often used in dust collection systems to collect particulate matter from air streams in applications involving high temperatures and high particulate loads such as coal - fired power plants , cement production and steel foundries .
*
PTFE grafts can be used to bypass stenotic arteries in peripheral vascular disease if a suitable autologous vein graft is not available .
* Many bicycle lubricants and greases contain PTFE and are used on chains and other moving parts subjected to frictional forces ( such as hub bearings ) .
* PTFE can also be used for dental fillings , to isolate the contacts of the anterior tooth so the filling materials will not stick to the adjacent tooth .
* PTFE sheets are used in the production of butane hash oil due to its non - stick properties and resistance to non - polar solvents .
* PTFE , associated with a slightly textured laminate , makes the plain bearing system of a Dobsonian telescope .
*
PTFE is widely used as a non - stick coating for food processing equipment ; dough hoppers , mixing bowls , conveyor systems , rollers , and chutes .
PTFE can also be reinforced where abrasion is present – for equipment processing seeded or grainy dough for example .
* PTFE has been experimented with for electroless nickel plating .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Pyrolysis of PTFE is detectable at , and it evolves several fluorocarbon gases and a sublimate .
An animal study conducted in 1955 concluded that it is unlikely that these products would be generated in amounts significant to health at temperatures below .
While PTFE is stable and nontoxic at lower temperatures , it begins to deteriorate after the temperature of cookware reaches about , and decomposes above .
The degradation by - products can be lethal to birds , and can cause flu - like symptoms in humans — see polymer fume fever .
Meat is usually fried between , and most oils start to smoke before a temperature of is reached , but there are at least two cooking oils ( refined safflower oil at and avocado oil at ) that have a higher smoke point .
PFOA Section::::PFOA . Perfluorooctanoic acid ( PFOA , or C8 ) has been used as a surfactant in the emulsion polymerization of PTFE , although several manufacturers have entirely discontinued its use .
PFOA persists indefinitely in the environment .
It is a toxicant and carcinogen in animals .
PFOA has been detected in the blood of more than 98 % of the general US population in the low and sub - parts per billion range , and levels are higher in chemical plant employees and surrounding subpopulations .
The general population has been exposed to PFOA through massive dumping of C8 waste into the ocean and near the Ohio River Valley .
PFOA has been detected in industrial waste , stain resistant carpets , carpet cleaning liquids , house dust , microwave popcorn bags , water , food and Teflon cookware .
As a result of a class - action lawsuit and community settlement with DuPont , three epidemiologists conducted studies on the population surrounding a chemical plant that was exposed to PFOA at levels greater than in the general population .
The studies concluded that there was probably an association between PFOA exposure and six health outcomes : kidney cancer , testicular cancer , ulcerative colitis , thyroid disease , hypercholesterolemia ( high cholesterol ) , and pregnancy - induced hypertension .
Overall , PTFE cookware is considered an insignificant exposure pathway to PFOA .
SIMILAR POLYMERS Section::::Similar polymers .
The Teflon trade name is also used for other polymers with similar compositions : *
Perfluoroalkoxy alkane ( PFA ) * Fluorinated ethylene propylene ( FEP )
These retain the useful PTFE properties of low friction and nonreactivity , but are more easily formable .
For example , FEP is softer than PTFE and melts at ; it is also highly transparent and resistant to sunlight .
SEE ALSO
* Superhydrophobic coating
* ETFE * Magnesium / Teflon / Viton pyrolant thermite composition
* Polymer adsorption
* Polymer fume fever * BS
4994 PTFE as a thermoplastic lining for dual laminate chemical process plant equipment REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS
* EPA : Compound in Teflon may cause cancer , Tom Costello , NBC News , 29 June 2005 .
( Flash video required )
* Plasma Processes and Adhesive Bonding of Polytetrafluoroethylene
* PTFE Tubing Properties