VINEGAR Vinegar is an aqueous solution of acetic acid and trace chemicals that may include flavorings .
Vinegar typically contains 5–20 % by volume acetic acid .
Usually the acetic acid is produced by the fermentation of ethanol or sugars by acetic acid bacteria .
Vinegar is now mainly used as a cooking ingredient , or in pickling .
There are many types of vinegar , depending upon the source materials .
As the most easily manufactured mild acid , it has historically had a wide variety of industrial , medical , and domestic uses .
Some of these are still commonly practiced , such as its use as a household cleaner .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Commercial vinegar is produced either by a fast or a slow fermentation process .
In general , slow methods are used in traditional vinegars , where fermentation proceeds over the course of a few months to a year .
The longer fermentation period allows for the accumulation of a nontoxic slime composed of acetic acid bacteria .
Fast methods add mother of vinegar ( bacterial culture ) to the source liquid before adding air to oxygenate and promote the fastest fermentation .
In fast production processes , vinegar may be produced in one to three days .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
The conversion of ethanol ( CHCHOH ) and oxygen ( O ) to acetic acid ( CHCOOH ) takes place by the following reaction : POLYPHENOLS Section::::Polyphenols .
Vinegar contains numerous flavonoids , phenolic acids , and aldehydes , which vary in content depending on the source material used to make the vinegar , such as orange peel or various fruit juice concentrates .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word vinegar arrived in Middle English from Old French vyn egre , which in turn derives from Latin vinum ( wine )
+ acer ( sour ) . HISTORY Section::::History .
Vinegar was used as a condiment and for conservation by the Babylonians as much as 5,000 years ago .
Traces of it also have been found in Egyptian urns from around 3000 BC .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Source materials for making vinegar are varied , including different fruits , grains , alcoholic beverages or other fermentable materials .
FRUIT Section::::Fruit .
Fruit vinegars are made from fruit wines , usually without any additional flavoring .
Common flavors of fruit vinegar include apple , blackcurrant , raspberry , quince , and tomato .
Typically , the flavors of the original fruits remain in the final product .
Most fruit vinegars are produced in Europe , where there is a growing market for high - price vinegars made solely from specific fruits ( as opposed to non - fruit vinegars that are infused with fruits or fruit flavors ) .
Several varieties , however , also are produced in Asia .
Persimmon vinegar , called gam sikcho , is popular in South Korea .
Jujube vinegar , called zaocu or hongzaocu , and wolfberry vinegar are produced in China .
Apple cider vinegar is made from cider or apple must , and has a brownish - gold color .
It is sometimes sold unfiltered and unpasteurized with the mother of vinegar present , as a natural product .
It can be diluted with fruit juice or water or sweetened ( usually with honey ) for consumption .
A byproduct of commercial kiwifruit growing is a large amount of waste in the form of misshapen or otherwise - rejected fruit ( which may constitute up to 30 percent of the crop ) and kiwifruit pomace , the presscake residue left after kiwifruit juice manufacture .
One of the uses for this waste is the production of kiwifruit vinegar , produced commercially in New Zealand since at least the early 1990s , and in China in 2008 .
Coconut vinegar , made from fermented coconut water or sap , is used extensively in Southeast Asian cuisine ( notably the Philippines ) , as well as in some cuisines of India and Sri Lanka , especially Goan cuisine .
A cloudy white liquid , it has a particularly sharp , acidic taste with a slightly yeasty note .
Vinegar made from dates is a traditional product of the Middle East .
Pomegranate vinegar ( Hebrew : חומץ רימונים ) is used widely in Israel as a dressing for salad but also in meat stew and in dips .
Vinegar made from raisins , called ( " grape vinegar " ) is used in cuisines of the Middle East , and is produced there .
It is cloudy and medium brown in color , with a mild flavor .
Palm vinegar , made from the fermented sap from flower clusters of the nipa palm ( also called attap palm ) , is used most often in the Philippines , where it is produced , and where it is called sukang paombong .
It has a citrusy flavor note to it and imparts a distinctly musky aroma .
BALSAMIC
Section::::Balsamic .
Balsamic vinegar is an aromatic aged vinegar produced in the Modena and Reggio Emilia provinces of Italy .
The original productTraditional Balsamic Vinegaris made from the concentrated juice , or must , of white Trebbiano grapes .
It is very dark brown , rich , sweet , and complex , with the finest grades being aged in successive casks made variously of oak , mulberry , chestnut , cherry , juniper , and ash wood .
Originally a costly product available to only the Italian upper classes , traditional balsamic vinegar is marked " tradizionale " or " DOC " to denote its Protected Designation of Origin status , and is aged for 12 to 25 years .
A cheaper non - DOC commercial form described as " aceto balsamico di Modena " ( balsamic vinegar of Modena ) became widely known and available around the world in the late 20th century , typically made with concentrated grape juice mixed with a strong vinegar , then coloured and slightly sweetened with caramel and sugar .
Regardless of how it is produced , balsamic vinegar must be made from a grape product .
It contains no balsam fruit .
A high acidity level is somewhat hidden by the sweetness of the other ingredients , making it very mellow .
CANE Section::::Cane .
Vinegar made from sugarcane juice is most popular in the Philippines , in particular in the northern Ilocos Region ( where it is called Sukang Iloko ) , although it also is produced in France and the United States .
It ranges from dark yellow to golden brown in color , and has a mellow flavor , similar in some respects to rice vinegar , though with a somewhat " fresher " taste .
Because it contains no residual sugar , it is no sweeter than any other vinegar .
In the Philippines it often is labeled as sukang maasim ( Tagalog for " sour vinegar " ) .
Cane vinegars from Ilocos are made in two different ways .
One way is to simply place sugar cane juice in large jars ; it becomes sour by the direct action of bacteria on the sugar .
The other way is through fermentation to produce a local wine known as basi .
Low - quality basi is then allowed to undergo acetic acid fermentation that converts alcohol into acetic acid .
Contaminated basi also becomes vinegar .
A white variation has become quite popular in Brazil in recent years , where it is the cheapest type of vinegar sold .
It is now common for other types of vinegar ( made from wine , rice and apple cider ) to be sold mixed with cane vinegar to lower the cost .
Sugarcane sirka is made from sugarcane juice in Punjab , India .
During summer people put cane juice in earthenware pots with iron nails .
The fermentation takes place due to the action of wild yeast .
The cane juice is converted to vinegar having a blackish color .
The sirka is used to preserve pickles and for flavoring curries .
GRAINS Section::::Grains .
Chinese black vinegar is an aged product made from rice , wheat , millet , sorghum , or a combination thereof .
It has an inky black color and a complex , malty flavor .
There is no fixed recipe , so some Chinese black vinegars may contain added sugar , spices , or caramel color .
The most popular variety , Zhenjiang vinegar , originates in the city of Zhenjiang in Jiangsu Province , eastern China .
Shanxi mature vinegar is another popular type of Chinese vinegar that is made exclusively from sorghum and other grains .
Nowadays in Shanxi province , there are still some traditional vinegar workshops producing handmade vinegar which is aged for at least five years with a high acidity .
Only the vinegar made in Taiyuan and some counties in Jinzhong and aged for at least three years is considered authentic Shanxi mature vinegar according to the latest national standard .
A somewhat lighter form of black vinegar , made from rice , is produced in Japan , where it is called kurozu .
Rice vinegar is most popular in the cuisines of East and Southeast Asia .
It is available in " white " ( light yellow ) , red , and black varieties .
The Japanese prefer a light rice vinegar for the preparation of sushi rice and salad dressings .
Red rice vinegar traditionally is colored with red yeast rice .
Black rice vinegar ( made with black glutinous rice ) is most popular in China , and it is also widely used in other East Asian countries .
White rice vinegar has a mild acidity with a somewhat " flat " and uncomplex flavor .
Some varieties of rice vinegar are sweetened or otherwise seasoned with spices or other added flavorings .
According to Canadian regulations , malt vinegar is defined as a vinegar that includes undistilled malt that has not yet undergone acetous fermentation .
It must be dextro - rotary and can not contain less than 1.8 grams of solids and 0.2 grams of ash per 100 millilitres at 20 degrees Celsius .
It may contain additional cereals or caramel .
SPIRITS Section::::Spirits .
The term spirit vinegar is sometimes reserved for the stronger variety ( 5 % to 21 % acetic acid ) made from sugar cane or from chemically produced acetic acid .
To be called " Spirit Vinegar " , the product must come from an agricultural source and must be made by " double fermentation " .
The first fermentation is sugar to alcohol and the second alcohol to acetic acid .
Product made from chemically produced acetic acid can not be called " vinegar " in the UK , where the term allowed is " Non - brewed condiment " .
Sherry vinegar is linked to the production of sherry wines of Jerez .
Dark mahogany in color , it is made exclusively from the acetic fermentation of wines .
It is concentrated and has generous aromas , including a note of wood , ideal for vinaigrettes and flavoring various foods .
Wine vinegar is made from red or white wine , and is the most commonly used vinegar in Southern and Central Europe , Cyprus and Israel .
As with wine , there is a considerable range in quality .
Better - quality wine vinegars are matured in wood for up to two years , and exhibit a complex , mellow flavor .
Wine vinegar tends to have a lower acidity than white or cider vinegars .
More expensive wine vinegars are made from individual varieties of wine , such as champagne , sherry , or pinot gris .
The term " distilled vinegar " as used in the United States ( called " spirit vinegar " in the UK , " white vinegar " in Canada ) is something of a misnomer because it is not produced by distillation but by fermentation of distilled alcohol .
The fermentate is diluted to produce a colorless solution of 5 % to 8 % acetic acid in water , with a pH of about 2.6 .
This is variously known as distilled spirit , " virgin " vinegar , or white vinegar , and is used in cooking , baking , meat preservation , and pickling , as well as for medicinal , laboratory , and cleaning purposes .
The most common starting material in some regions , because of its low cost , is malt , or in the United States , corn .
It is sometimes derived from petroleum .
Distilled vinegar in the UK is produced by the distillation of malt to give a clear vinegar which maintains some of the malt flavour .
Distilled vinegar is used predominantly for cooking , although in Scotland it is used as an alternative to brown or light malt vinegar .
White distilled vinegar can also be used for cleaning , and some is actually sold specifically for this purpose .
KOMBUCHA Section::::Kombucha .
Kombucha vinegar is made from kombucha , a symbiotic culture of yeast and bacteria .
The bacteria produce a complex array of bacteria .
Kombucha vinegar primarily is used to make a vinaigrette , and is flavored by adding strawberries , blackberries , mint , or blueberries at the beginning of fermentation .
USES CULINARY Section::::Uses .
Section::::Culinary .
Vinegar is commonly used in food preparation , in particular pickling liquids , and vinaigrettes and other salad dressings .
It is an ingredient in sauces , such as hot sauce , mustard , ketchup , and mayonnaise .
Vinegar is sometimes used in chutneys .
It is often used as a condiment on its own or as part of other condiments .
Marinades often contain vinegar .
In terms of its shelf life , vinegar 's acidic nature allows it to last indefinitely without the use of refrigeration .
BEVERAGES Section::::Beverages .
Several beverages are made using vinegar , for instance Posca in ancient Rome .
The ancient Greek oxymel is a drink made from vinegar and honey , and sekanjabin is a traditional Persian drink similar to oxymel .
Other preparations , known colloquially as " shrubs " , range from simply mixing sugar water or honey water with small amounts of fruity vinegar , to making syrup by laying fruit or mint in vinegar for several days , then sieving off solid parts , and adding considerable amounts of sugar .
Some prefer to boil the " shrub " as a final step .
These recipes have lost much of their popularity with the rise of carbonated beverages , such as soft drinks .
DIET AND METABOLISM Section::::Diet and metabolism .
Small amounts of vinegar ( 2 to 4 Tablespoons ) may reduce post - meal levels of blood glucose and insulin in people with and without diabetes .
Some preliminary research indicates that taking vinegar with food increases satiety and reduces the amount of food consumed , producing a loss in body weight , although this effect remains unconfirmed .
FOLK MEDICINE Section::::Folk medicine .
For millennia , folk medicine treatments have used vinegar , but there is no evidence from clinical research to support health claims of benefits for diabetes , weight loss , cancer or use as a probiotic .
Some treatments with vinegar pose risks to health .
Esophageal injury by apple cider vinegar has been reported , and because vinegar products sold for medicinal purposes are neither regulated nor standardized , such products may vary widely in content and acidity .
PESTS
Section::::Pests .
Twenty percent acetic acid vinegar can be used as a herbicide , but acetic acid is not absorbed into root systems so the vinegar will only kill the top growth and perennial plants may reshoot .
Applying vinegar to common jellyfish stings deactivates the nematocysts , although not as effectively as hot water .
This does not apply to the Portuguese man o ' war , which , although generally considered to be a jellyfish , is not ; vinegar applied to Portuguese man o ' war stings can cause their nematocysts to discharge venom , making the pain worse .
Vinegar is not effective against lice .
HOUSEHOLD Section::::Household .
White vinegar is often used as a household cleaning agent .
For most uses , dilution with water is recommended for safety and to avoid damaging the surfaces being cleaned .
Because it is acidic , it can dissolve mineral deposits from glass , coffee makers , and other smooth surfaces .
Vinegar is known as an effective cleaner of stainless steel and glass .
Malt vinegar sprinkled onto crumpled newspaper is a traditional , and still - popular , method of cleaning grease - smeared windows and mirrors in the United Kingdom .
Vinegar can be used for polishing copper , brass , bronze or silver .
It is an excellent solvent for cleaning epoxy resin as well as the gum on sticker - type price tags .
It has been reported as an effective drain cleaner .
MISCELLANEOUS Section::::Miscellaneous .
Most commercial vinegar solutions available to consumers for household use do not exceed 5 % .
Solutions above 10 % require careful handling , as they are corrosive and damaging to the skin .
When a bottle of vinegar is opened , mother of vinegar may develop .
It is considered harmless and can be removed by filtering .
Vinegar eels ( Turbatrix aceti ) , a form of nematode , may occur in some forms of vinegar unless the vinegar is kept covered .
These feed on the mother of vinegar and can occur in naturally fermenting vinegar .
Some countries prohibit the selling of vinegar over a certain percentage acidity .
As an example , the government of Canada limits the acetic acid of vinegars to between 4.1 % and 12.3 % .
According to legend , in France during the Black Plague , four thieves were able to rob houses of plague victims without being infected themselves .
When finally caught , the judge offered to grant the men their freedom , on the condition that they revealed how they managed to stay healthy .
They claimed that a medicine woman sold them a potion made of garlic soaked in soured red wine ( vinegar ) .
Variants of the recipe , called Four Thieves Vinegar , have been passed down for hundreds of years and are a staple of New Orleans hoodoo practices .
A solution of vinegar can be used for water slide decal application as used on scale models and musical instruments , among other things .
One part white distilled vinegar ( 5 % acidity ) diluted with two parts of distilled or filtered water creates a suitable solution for the application of water - slide decals to hard surfaces .
The solution is very similar to the commercial products , often described as " decal softener " , sold by hobby shops .
The slight acidity of the solution softens the decal and enhances its flexibility , permitting the decal to cling to contours more efficiently .
When baking soda and vinegar are combined , the bicarbonate ion of the baking soda reacts to form carbonic acid , which decomposes into carbon dioxide and water .
SEE ALSO
* Food additive * List of condiments
* Vinegar tasters REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS