LÉON : THE PROFESSIONAL Léon : The Professional ( ) , titled Leon in the UK ( and originally titled The Professional in the US and Australia ) , is a 1994 English - language French thriller film written and directed by Luc Besson .
It stars Jean Reno and Gary Oldman , and features the motion picture debut of Natalie Portman .
In the film , Léon ( Reno ) , a professional hitman , reluctantly takes in 12-year - old Mathilda ( Portman ) , after her family is murdered by corrupt Drug Enforcement Administration agent Norman Stansfield ( Oldman ) .
Léon and Mathilda form an unusual relationship , as she becomes his protégée and learns the hitman 's trade .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Léon Montana is an Italian hitman ( or " cleaner " , as he refers to himself ) living a solitary life in New York City 's Little Italy .
His work comes from a mafioso named Tony .
Léon spends his idle time engaging in calisthenics , nurturing a houseplant , and watching old films .
One day , Léon meets Mathilda Lando , a lonely 12-year - old girl .
Mathilda lives with her dysfunctional family in an apartment down the hall , and has stopped attending class at her school for troubled girls .
Mathilda 's abusive father attracts the ire of corrupt DEA agents , who have been paying him to stash cocaine in his apartment .
After they discover he has been cutting the cocaine to keep for himself , DEA agents storm the building , led by sharply dressed drug addict Norman Stansfield .
During the raid , Stansfield quickly becomes unhinged and murders Mathilda 's entire family while she is out shopping for groceries .
When Mathilda returns , she realizes what has happened just in time to continue down the hall to Léon 's apartment , who hesitantly gives her shelter .
Mathilda quickly discovers that Léon is a hitman .
She begs him to take care of her and to teach her his skills , as she wants to avenge the murder of her four - year - old brother .
At first , Léon is unsettled by her presence , and considers murdering her , but he eventually trains Mathilda and shows her how to use various weapons .
In exchange , she runs his errands , cleans his apartment , and teaches him how to read .
In time , the pair forms a close bond .
Mathilda often tells Léon she loves him , but he refuses to reciprocate .
When Léon heads out for an apparent assignment , Mathilda fills a bag with guns from Léon 's collection and sets out to kill Stansfield .
She bluffs her way into the DEA office by posing as a delivery girl , only to be ambushed by Stansfield in a bathroom ; one of his men arrives and announces that Léon had just killed Malky , one of the corrupt DEA agents , in Chinatown that morning .
Léon , after discovering her plan in a note left for him , rescues Mathilda , killing two more of Stansfield 's men in the process .
An enraged Stansfield confronts Tony , who is violently interrogated for Léon 's whereabouts .
As Mathilda and Léon recover from the ordeal , Mathilda attempts to seduce Léon .
Léon refuses , instead opening up about how he became a cleaner ; when Léon was young in Italy , he was in love with a girl from a wealthy family .
The two made plans to elope , but when the girl 's father discovered their relationship , he killed her out of anger and escaped justice .
Léon killed the man out of revenge and fled to New York , where he met Tony and trained to become a cleaner .
Later , while Mathilda returns home from grocery shopping , a NYPD ESU team sent by Stansfield captures her and attempts to infiltrate Léon 's apartment .
Léon ambushes the ESU team and rescues Mathilda .
Léon creates a quick escape for Mathilda by smashing a hole in an air shaft ; he then reassures her , and tells her that he loves her , moments before the police blow up the apartment .
In the chaos that follows , Léon sneaks out of the building disguised as a wounded ESU officer ; he goes unnoticed save for Stansfield , who follows him and shoots him in the back .
As he is dying , Léon places an object in Stansfield 's hands that he says is " from Mathilda " before succumbing to his wounds ; Stansfield discovers that it is a grenade pin .
He then opens Léon 's vest to find a cluster of active grenades which detonate , killing Stansfield .
Mathilda goes to Tony , as Léon had told her to do in the event of his death .
Tony tells Mathilda he had been instructed by Léon to give his money to her if anything happened to him ; he offers to hold it and provide the money on an allowance basis .
Mathilda returns to school and meets the headmistress , who readmits her after Mathilda reveals what had happened to her .
She then walks onto a field near the school to plant Léon 's houseplant , as she had told Léon that he should " give it roots " .
CAST
* Jean Reno as Léon Montana
* Natalie Portman as Mathilda Lando * Gary Oldman as Norman Stansfield * Danny Aiello as Tony
* Michael Badalucco as Mathilda 's father * Ellen Greene as Mathilda 's stepmother * Elizabeth Regen as Mathilda 's sister * Peter Appel as Malky * Joseph Malerba as Stairway Swat
* Maïwenn as The Blond Babe * George Martin as The Hotel Receptionist
* Jean - Hugues Anglade as Cameo PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Léon : The Professional is to some extent an expansion of an idea in Besson 's earlier 1990 film , La Femme Nikita ( in some countries Nikita ) .
In La Femme Nikita Jean Reno plays a similar character named Victor .
Besson described Léon as " Now maybe Jean is playing the American cousin of Victor .
This time he 's more human . "
While most of the interior footage was shot in France , the rest of the film was shot on location in New York .
The final scene at the school was filmed at the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken , New Jersey .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A soundtrack for the film was released in October 1994 .
It was commercially successful in Japan , being certified gold for 100,000 copies shipped in December 1999 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Léon : The Professional received favorable reviews from critics .
The film holds a 72 % positive aggregate rating based on 61 critical reviews on Rotten Tomatoes with an average rating of 6.7/10 .
The site 's consensus states , " Pivoting on the unusual relationship between seasoned hitman and his 12-year - old apprentice — a breakout turn by young Natalie Portman —
Luc Besson 's Léon is a stylish and oddly affecting thriller " .
At Metacritic , the film received an average score of 64 based on 12 reviews , indicating " Generally favorable reviews " .
Mark Salisbury of Empire magazine awarded the film a full five stars .
He said , " Oozing style , wit and confidence from every sprocket , and offering a dizzyingly , fresh perspective on the Big Apple that only Besson could bring , this is , in a word , wonderful " .
Mark Deming at AllMovie awarded the film four stars out of five , describing it as " As visually stylish as it is graphically violent " , and featuring " a strong performance from Jean Reno , a striking debut by Natalie Portman , and a love - it - or - hate - it , over - the - top turn by Gary Oldman " .
Richard Schickel of Time magazine lauded the film , writing , " this is a Cuisinart of a movie , mixing familiar yet disparate ingredients , making something odd , possibly distasteful , undeniably arresting out of them " .
He praised Oldman 's performance as " divinely psychotic " .
Roger Ebert awarded the film two - and - a - half stars out of four , writing : " It is a well - directed film , because Besson has a natural gift for plunging into drama with a charged - up visual style .
And it is well acted . "
However , he was not entirely complimentary : " Always at the back of my mind was the troubled thought that there was something wrong about placing a 12-year - old character in the middle of this action . ...
In what is essentially an exercise — a slick urban thriller — it seems to exploit the youth of the girl without really dealing with it . "
The New York Times Janet Maslin wrote , " The Professional is much too sentimental to sound shockingly amoral in the least .
Even in a finale of extravagant violence , it manages to be maudlin … Mr. Oldman expresses most of the film 's sadism as well as many of its misguidedly poetic sentiments . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Léon : The Professional was a commercial success , grossing over $ 45 million worldwide on a $ 16 million budget .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Léon : The Professional won the Czech Lion Award for Best Foreign Language Film and the Golden Reel Award for Best Sound Editing – Foreign Feature .
The film was also nominated for seven César Awards in 1995 , namely Best Film , Best Actor ( Jean Reno ) , Best Director , Best Cinematography , Best Editing , Best Music , and Best Sound .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
In the 2013 book , Poseur : A Memoir of Downtown New York City in the ' 90s , Marc Spitz wrote that the film is " considered a cult classic " .
In 2014 , Time Out polled several film critics , directors , actors and stunt actors to list their top action films ; Léon : The Professional was listed at No . 42 .
The character Norman Stansfield has since been named by several publications as one of cinema 's greatest villains .
The British band
Alt - J released a song about the film , titled " Matilda " [ sic ] .
The first line in the lyrics , " this is from Matilda " , refer to Léon 's last words to Stansfield , shortly before the grenades detonate and kills them .
The Bollywood film Bichhoo was inspired by Léon :
The Professional .
In 2014 , Somali - British director Mo Ali made his second directorial feature Montana , a British action film .
The film was inspired by both Léon and The Karate Kid .
South Korean comedian Park Myeong - su and singer - songwriter IU released and performed a song inspired by the film , " Leon " , for a bi - annual music festival of South Korea 's highly popular variety show , Infinite Challenge , in 2015 .
SEQUEL Section::::Sequel .
Besson wrote a script for a sequel , Mathilda , but filming was delayed until Portman was older .
In the script , Mathilda was described as " older " and " more mature , " and was working as a cleaner .
However , in the meantime , Besson left Gaumont Film Company to start his own movie studio , EuropaCorp .
Unhappy at Besson 's departure , Gaumont Film Company " has held The Professional rights close to the vest — and will not budge " .
In 2011 , director Olivier Megaton told reporters that he and Besson used the script for Mathilda as the basis for Colombiana , a film about a young cleaner played by Zoe Saldana .
Like Mathilda , her character goes to war with a drug cartel as revenge for the murder of her family when she was a child .
EXTENDED
VERSION
Section::::Extended version .
There is also an extended version of the film , referred to as " international version , " " version longue , " or " version intégrale " .
Containing 25 minutes of additional footage , it is sometimes called the " Director 's Cut " but Besson refers to the original version as the Director 's Cut and the new version as " The Long Version " .
According to Besson , this is the version he wanted to release , but for the fact that the extra scenes tested poorly with Los Angeles preview audiences .
The additional material is found in the film 's second act , and it depicts more of the interactions and relationship between Léon and Mathilda , as well as explicitly demonstrating how Mathilda accompanies Léon on several of his hits as " a full co - conspirator " , to further her training as a contracted killer .
The extended version of Léon was shown as " version longue " in French cinemas in 1996 , and then released on VHS .
It was subsequently released as " version intégrale " on LaserDisc and later Region 2 DVD in Japan .
It appeared as the " international version " on Region 1 DVD in North America in 2000 , and was re - issued in 2005 .
It was first released in the United Kingdom in 2009 as the " Director 's Cut . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS