VULCANIZATION Vulcanization (
British : vulcanisation ) is a chemical process used to harden rubber .
Vulcanization traditionally referred to the treatment of natural rubber with sulfur and this remains the most common example , however the term has also grown to include the hardening of other ( synthetic ) rubbers via various means .
Examples include silicone rubber via room temperature vulcanizing and chloroprene rubber ( neoprene ) using metal oxides .
Vulcanisation can therefore be defined as the curing of elastomers ; with the terms ' vulcanization ' and ' curing ' sometimes used interchangeably in this context .
It works by forming cross - links between sections of polymer chain which results in increased rigidity and durability , as well as other changes in the mechanical and electronic properties of the material .
Vulcanization , in common with the curing of other thermosetting polymers , is generally irreversible .
The word vulcanisation is derived from Vulcan , the Roman god of fire .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
In contrast with thermoplastic processes ( the melt - freeze process that characterize the behavior of most modern polymers ) , vulcanization , in common with the curing of other thermosetting polymers , is generally irreversible .
Five types of curing systems are in common use :
* Sulfur systems *
* Peroxides
* * Metallic oxides *
* Acetoxysilane * * Urethane crosslinkers
* VULCANIZATION WITH SULFUR Section::::Vulcanization with sulfur .
By far the most common vulcanizing methods depend on sulfur .
Sulfur , by itself , is a slow vulcanizing agent and does not vulcanize synthetic polyolefins .
Accelerated vulcanization is carried out using various compounds that modify the kinetics of crosslinking , this mixture is often referred to as a cure package .
The main polymers subjected to sulfur vulcanization are polyisoprene ( natural rubber ) and styrene - butadiene rubber ( SBR ) , which are used for most street - vehicle tires .
The cure package is adjusted specifically for the substrate and the application .
The reactive sites — cure sites — are allylic hydrogen atoms .
These C - H bonds are adjacent to carbon - carbon double bonds .
During vulcanization , some of these C - H bonds are replaced by chains of sulfur atoms that link with a cure site of another polymer chain .
These bridges contain between one and several atoms .
The number of sulfur atoms in the crosslink strongly influences the physical properties of the final rubber article .
Short crosslinks give the rubber better heat resistance .
Crosslinks with higher number of sulfur atoms give the rubber good dynamic properties but less heat resistance .
Dynamic properties are important for flexing movements of the rubber article , e.g. , the movement of a side - wall of a running tire .
Without good flexing properties these movements rapidly form cracks , and ultimately make the rubber article fail .
VULCANIZATION OF POLYCHLOROPRENE Section::::Vulcanization of polychloroprene .
The vulcanization of neoprene or polychloroprene rubber ( CR rubber ) is carried out using metal oxides ( specifically MgO and ZnO , sometimes PbO )
rather than sulfur compounds which are presently used with many natural and synthetic rubbers .
In addition , because of various processing factors ( principally scorch , this being the premature cross - linking of rubbers due to the influence of heat ) , the choice of accelerator is governed by different rules to other diene rubbers .
Most conventionally used accelerators are problematic when CR rubbers are cured and the most important accelerant has been found to be ethylene thiourea ( ETU ) , which , although being an excellent and proven accelerator for polychloroprene , has been classified as reprotoxic .
The European rubber industry has started a research project SafeRubber to develop a safer alternative to the use of ETU .
VULCANIZATION OF SILICONES Section::::Vulcanization of silicones .
Room - temperature vulcanizing ( RTV ) silicone is constructed of reactive oil - based polymers combined with strengthening mineral fillers .
There are two types of room - temperature vulcanizing silicone : * RTV-1 ( One - component systems ) ; hardens due to the action of atmospheric humidity , a catalyst , and acetoxysilane .
Acetoxysilane , when exposed to humid conditions , will form acetic acid .
The curing process begins on the outer surface and progresses through to its core .
The product is packed in airtight cartridges and is either in a fluid or paste form .
RTV-1 silicone has good adhesion , elasticity , and durability characteristics .
The Shore hardness can be varied between 18 and 60 .
Elongation at break can range from 150 % up to 700 % .
They have excellent aging resistance due to superior resistance to UV radiation and weathering .
*
*
RTV-2 ( Two - component systems ) ; two - component products that , when mixed , cure at room - temperature to a solid elastomer , a gel , or a flexible foam .
RTV-2 remains flexible from .
Break - down occurs at temperatures above , leaving an inert silica deposit that is non - flammable and non - combustible .
They can be used for electrical insulation due to their dielectric properties .
Mechanical properties are satisfactory .
RTV-2 is used to make flexible moulds , as well as many technical parts for industry and paramedical applications .
* SEE ALSO
* Polymer stabilizers * Vulcanized fibre REFERENCES