KLONDIKE ( SOLITAIRE )
Klondike ( North America ) or Canfield ( traditional ) is a patience game ( solitaire card game ) .
In the U.S. and Canada , Klondike is the best - known solitaire card game , to the point that the term " solitaire " , in the absence of additional qualifiers , typically refers to Klondike .
Equally in the UK , it is often just known as " patience " .
Meanwhile elsewhere the game is known as American Patience .
The game rose to fame in the late 19th century , being named " Klondike " after the Canadian region where a gold rush happened .
It is rumored that the game was either created or popularized by the prospectors in Klondike .
RULES Section::::Rules .
Klondike is played with a standard 52-card deck , without Jokers .
After shuffling , seven piles of cards are laid from left to right .
Each pile begins with one upturned card .
From left to right , each pile contains one more card than the last .
The first and left - most pile contains a single upturned card , the second pile contains two cards ( one downturned , one upturned ) , the third contains three ( two downturned , one upturned ) , and so on , until the seventh pile which contains seven cards ( six downturned , one upturned ) .
The remaining cards form the stock , and are placed facedown at the upper left of the layout .
The four foundations ( light rectangles in the upper right of the figure ) are built up by suit from Ace ( low in this game ) to King , and the tableau piles can be built down by alternate colors .
Every face - up card in a partial pile , or a complete pile , can be moved , as a unit , to another talon pile on the basis of their highest card .
Any empty piles can be filled with a King , or a pile of cards with a King .
The aim of the game is to build up four stacks of cards starting with Ace and ending with King , all of the same suit , on one of the four foundations , at which time the player would have won .
There are different ways of dealing the remainder of the deck from the stock to the talon , including the following :
* Turning three cards at once to the talon , with no limit on passes through the deck .
* Turning three cards at once to the talon , with three passes through the deck .
* Turning one card at a time to the talon , with three passes through the deck .
* Turning one card at a time to the talon with only a single pass through the deck , and playing it if possible .
* Turning one card at a time to the talon , with no limit on passes through the deck .
If the player can no longer move any reasonable cards , the game is considered lost .
At this point , winning is impossible .
PROBABILITY OF WINNING
Section::::Probability of winning .
For a standard game of Klondike , drawing three cards at a time and placing no limit on the number of re - deals , the number of possible hands is over , or an 8 followed by 67 zeros .
About 79 % of the games are theoretically winnable , but in practice , human players do not win 79 % of games played , due to wrong moves that cause the game to become unwinnable .
If one allows cards from the foundation to be moved back to the tableau , then between 82 % and 91.5 % are theoretically winnable .
Note that these results depend on complete knowledge of the positions of all 52 cards , which a player does not possess .
Another recent study has found the Draw 3 , Re - Deal Infinite to have a 83.6 % win rate after 1000 random games were solved by a computer solver .
The issue is that a wrong move can not be known in advance whenever more than one move is possible .
The number of games a skilled player can probabilistically expect to win is at least 43 % .
In addition , some games are " unplayable " in which no cards can be moved to the foundations even at the start of the game ; these occur in only 0.25 % ( 1 in 400 ) of hands dealt .
There are four types of hands : winnable games , theoretically winnable lost games ( the player made a selection that resulted in a lost game , but could not know what the correct selection was because the relevant cards were hidden ) , unwinnable games ( there is no selection that leads to a winning result ) , and unplayable games .
There is a modified version of the game called " Thoughtful Solitaire " , in which the identity of all 52 cards is known .
Because the only difference between the two games ( Klondike and Thoughtful ) is the knowledge of card location , all Thoughtful games with solutions will also have solutions in Klondike .
Similarly , all dead - ends in Thoughtful will be dead ends in Klondike .
However , the theoretical odds of winning a standard game of non - Thoughtful Klondike are currently not known exactly .
The inability of theoreticians to precisely calculate these odds has been referred to by mathematician Persi Diaconis as " one of the embarrassments of applied probability " .
SCORING
Section::::Scoring .
Standard scoring in the Windows Solitaire game is determined as follows : !
Move !
Points Moving cards directly from the Waste stack to a Foundation awards 10 points .
However , if the card is first moved to a Tableau , and then to a Foundation , then an extra 5 points are received for a total of 15 .
Thus in order to receive a maximum score , no cards should be moved directly from the Waste to Foundation .
Time can also play a factor in Windows Solitaire , if the Timed game option is selected .
For every 10 seconds of play , 2 points are taken away .
Bonus points are calculated with the formula of 700,000 /
( seconds to finish ) if the game takes more than 30 seconds .
If the game takes less than 30 seconds , no bonus points are awarded .
VARIATIONS
SINGLE
52-CARD DECK Section::::Variations .
Section::::Single 52-card deck .
Below are some variations of the game of Klondike :
*
In Agnes , the stock is dealt in batches of seven on reserve piles and every one is available .
Furthermore , the bases of the foundations depends on the twenty - ninth card , which is dealt on the foundations .
*
In Easthaven
( a.k.a . Aces Up ) , twenty - one cards are dealt into seven piles of three , two face - down and one face - up .
A space in this game can only be filled by a king or any sequence starting with a king ( although they can simplify the rule and put any card or a sequence in an empty space , as it does in several rules ) , and when a play goes to a standstill , seven new cards are dealt to the tableau , one top of each pile .
Easthaven may include 2 or 3 card decks .
*
In Nine
Across nine columns of cards are dealt , as opposed to the seven of conventional Klondike .
The player can choose which cards to form the foundations ; if one or more eights are exposed , for example , the player may decide to build on eights , and the piles are built up 8 - 9 - 10-J - Q - K - Ace-2 - 3 - 4 - 5 - 6 - 7 .
If eights are built on , sevens fill up spaces and so forth .
The stock is dealt through one by one as many times as required .
*
In Thumb and Pouch , a card in the tableau can be built upon another that is any suit other than its own ( e.g. spades can not be placed over spades ) and spaces can be filled by any card or sequence .
*
In Whitehead , all cards are dealt face up , building is by color ( red on red , black on black ) , a sequence made up of cards that are of the same suit can be moved as a unit , and a space can be filled by any card or sequence .
*
In Westcliff , thirty cards are dealt into ten piles of three cards , two face down and one face up .
A space in this game can be filled with any card or sequence .
TAROT DECK
Section::::Tarot deck .
The game can be played with a Tarot - style 78-card deck ( such as a Tarot Nouveau ) .
There are two ways of doing this .
Each has nine increasing tableau stacks .
*
Klondike Nouveau Run :
use five foundations , and either use the Fool as the first card in the trumps foundation , or remove it before playing .
The Knight ( Chevalier ) appears between the Jack and the Queen .
*
Klondike Tarot Evens
: use six foundations ; the usual four , and then use the red knights ( cavaliers ) as the royals for trumps 1 - 10 , and the black knights as the royals for trumps 11 - 21 .
COMPUTERIZED VERSIONS
* The Atari Program Exchange published Mark Reid 's implementation of Klondike for the Atari 8-bit family , simply titled Solitaire , in 1981 .
* Michael A. Casteel 's shareware version of Klondike for the Macintosh was first released in 1984 , and has been continually updated since .
* A software version of Klondike named simply " Solitaire " was included in all versions of Microsoft Windows from Windows 3.0 ( 1990 ) to Windows 7 .
The embedded versions of Microsoft Windows — originally called Windows CE , later Windows Mobile , and now called Windows Phone — have also included Solitaire .
In Windows 8 , Solitaire is no longer included by default .
However , the Microsoft Solitaire Collection can be downloaded for free from the Windows Store , which includes Klondike plus 4 other solitaire games .
Klondike has been added back in Windows 10 .
Microsoft Solitaire Collection can now be installed from Google Play Store on Android devices .
*
Klondike was featured in the Hoyle 's Official Book of Games Series , including Volume 2 which showcased 28 variations of Solitaire .
* Klondike Deluxe AGA v1.1 for Amiga 1993 .
*
Klondike is one of the games included in the modern iPod 's " Extras " section .
* PySol is an open source and platform independent computer game that incorporates around 1,000 solitaire games , including card games like Klondike and other types of single - player games .
It is written in the Python programming language .
* As of August 25 , 2016 , searching for " solitaire " on Google returns a Klondike game embedded within the search results page .
SEE ALSO
* FreeCell * List of solitaires * Glossary of solitaire * JavaScript Klondike REFERENCES NOTES