SQUID Squid are cephalopods in the order Teuthida with elongated bodies , large eyes , eight arms and two tentacles .
Like all other cephalopods , squid have a distinct head , bilateral symmetry , and a mantle .
They are mainly soft - bodied , like octopuses , but have a small internal skeleton in the form of a rod - like gladius or pen , made of chitin .
Squid can change colour for camouflage and signalling .
Some species are bioluminescent , using their light for counter - illumination camouflage .
TAXONOMY AND PHYLOGENY Section::::Taxonomy and phylogeny .
Squid are members of the class Cephalopoda , subclass Coleoidea .
The squid orders Myopsida and Oegopsida are in the superorder Decapodiformes ( from the Greek for " ten - legged " ) .
Two other orders of decapodiform cephalopods are also called squid , although they are taxonomically distinct from squids and differ recognizably in their gross anatomical features .
They are the bobtail squid of order Sepiolida and the ram 's horn squid of the monotypic order Spirulida .
The vampire squid , however , is more closely related to the octopuses than to any squid .
The cladogram , not fully resolved , is based on Sanchez et al , 2018 .
Their molecular phylogeny used mitochondrial and nuclear DNA marker sequences ; they comment that a robust phylogeny " has proven very challenging to obtain " .
If it is accepted that Sepiidae cuttlefish are a kind of squid , then the squids , excluding the vampire squid , form a clade as illustrated .
Orders are shown in boldface ; all the families not included in those orders are in the paraphyletic order " Oegopsida " .
EVOLUTION Section::::Evolution .
Crown Coleoids ( the ancestors of octopuses and squid ) diverged at the end of the Paleozoic , in the Permian .
Squid diverged during the Jurassic , but many squid families appeared in or after the Cretaceous .
Squid have differentiated from their ancestral molluscs such that the body plan has been condensed antero - posteriorly and extended dorso - ventrally .
What may have been the foot of the ancestor is modified into a complex set of tentacles and highly developed sense organs , including advanced eyes similar to those of vertebrates .
The ancestral shell has been lost , with only an internal gladius , or pen , remaining .
The pen , made of a chitin - like material , is a feather - shaped internal structure that supports the squid 's mantle and serves as a site for muscle attachment .
The cuttlebone or sepion of the Sepiidae is calcareous and appears to have evolved afresh in the Tertiary .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The head and foot of the squid are at one end of a long body , and this end is functionally anterior , leading the animal as it moves through the water .
The foot has been transformed into a set of eight arms and two tentacles , which surround the mouth ; each takes the form of a muscular hydrostat .
These are flexible and prehensile , and usually bear disc - like suckers .
In the mature male , the outer half of one of the left arms is hectocotylised – and ends in a copulatory pad rather than suckers .
This is used for depositing a spermatophore inside the mantle cavity of a female .
A ventral part of the foot has been converted into a funnel through which water exits the mantle cavity .
The main body mass is enclosed in the mantle , which has a swimming fin along each side .
These fins are not the main source of locomotion in most species .
The mantle wall is heavily muscled and inside , the visceral mass , which is covered by a thin , membranous epidermis , forms a cone - shaped posterior region known as the " visceral hump " .
The mollusc shell is reduced to an internal , longitudinal chitinous " pen " in the functionally dorsal part of the animal ; the pen acts to stiffen the squid and provides attachments for muscles .
On the functionally ventral part of the body is an opening to the mantle cavity , which contains the gills ( ctenidia ) and openings from the excretory , digestive and reproductive systems .
An inhalant siphon behind the funnel draws water into the mantel cavity via a valve .
The squid uses the funnel for locomotion via precise jet propulsion .
In this form of locomotion , water is sucked into the mantle cavity and expelled out of the funnel in a fast , strong jet .
The direction of travel is varied by the orientation of the funnel .
Squid are strong swimmers and certain species can " fly " for short distances out of the water .
CAMOUFLAGE Section::::Camouflage .
Squid make use of different kinds of camouflage , namely active camouflage for background matching ( in shallow water ) and counter - illumination .
This helps to protect them from their predators and allows them to approach their prey .
The skin is covered in controllable chromatophores of different colours , enabling the squid to match its coloration to its surroundings .
The play of colours may also distract prey from the squid 's approaching tentacles .
The skin also contains light reflectors called iridophores and leucophores that , when activated , in milliseconds create changeable skin patterns of polarized light .
Such skin camouflage may serve various functions , such as contrast enhancement and communication with nearby squid , prey detection , navigation , and orientation during hunting or seeking shelter .
Neural control of the iridophores enabling rapid changes in skin iridescence appears to be regulated by a cholinergic process affecting reflectin proteins .
Some mesopelagic squid such as the firefly squid ( Watasenia scintillans ) and the midwater squid ( Abralia veranyi ) use counter - illumination camouflage , generating light to match the downwelling light from the ocean surface .
This creates the effect of countershading , making the underside lighter than the upperside .
DEFENCE
Section::::Defence .
Squid distract attacking predators by ejecting a cloud of ink , giving themselves an opportunity to escape .
The ink gland and its associated ink sac empties into the rectum close to the anus , allowing the squid to rapidly discharge black ink into the mantle cavity and surrounding water .
The ink is a suspension of melanin particles .
NERVOUS SYSTEM Section::::Nervous system .
Cephalopods have the most highly developed nervous systems among invertebrates .
Squids have a complex brain in the form of a nerve ring encircling the oesophagus , enclosed in a cartilaginous cranium .
Paired cerebral ganglia above the oesophagus receive sensory information from the eyes and statocysts , and further ganglia below control the muscles of the mouth , foot , mantle and viscera .
Giant axons up to 1 mm in diameter
convey messages with great rapidity to the circular muscles of the mantle wall allowing a synchronous , powerful contraction and maximum speed via the jet propulsion system .
The paired eyes , on either side of the head , are housed in capsules fused to the cranium .
Their structure is very similar to that of a fish eye , with a globular lens that has a depth of focus from to infinity .
The image is focused by changing the position of the lens , as in a camera or telescope , rather than changing the shape of the lens , as in the human eye .
Squid adjust to changes in light intensity by expanding and contracting the slit - shaped pupil .
Deep sea squids in the Histioteuthidae family have eyes of two different types and orientation .
The large left eye is tubular in shape and looks upwards , presumably searching for the silhouettes of animals higher in the water column .
The normally - shaped right eye points forwards and downwards to detect prey .
The statocysts are involved in maintaining balance and are analogous to the inner ear of fish .
They are housed in cartilaginous capsules on either side of the cranium .
They provide the squid with information on its body position in relation to gravity , its orientation , acceleration and rotation , and are able to perceive incoming vibrations .
Without the statocysts , the squid can not maintain equilibrium .
Squid appear to have limited hearing .
Squid are among the most intelligent invertebrates .
For example , groups of Humboldt squid hunt cooperatively , using active communication .
REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM Section::::Reproductive system .
The sexes are separate in squid , there being a single gonad in the posterior part of the body with fertilisation being external , and usually taking place in the mantle cavity of the female .
The male has a testis from which sperm pass into a single gonoduct where they are rolled together into a long bundle , or spermatophore .
The gonoduct is elongated into a " penis " that extends into the mantle cavity and through which spermatophores are ejected .
In shallow water species , the penis is short , and the spermatophore is removed from the mantle cavity by a tentacle of the male , which is specially adapted for the purpose and known as a hectocotylus , and placed inside the mantle cavity of the female during mating .
The female has a large translucent ovary , situated towards the posterior of the visceral mass .
From here , eggs travel along the gonocoel , where there are a pair of white nidamental glands , which lie anterior to the gills .
Also present are red - spotted accessory nidamental glands containing symbiotic bacteria ; both organs are associated with nutrient manufacture and forming shells for the eggs .
The gonocoel enters the mantle cavity at the gonopore , and in some species , receptacles for storing spermatophores are located nearby , in the mantle wall .
In shallow - water species of the continental shelf and epipelagic or mesopelagic zones , it is frequently one or both of arm pair IV of males that are modified into hectocotyli .
However , most deep - sea squid lack hectocotyl arms and have longer penises ; Ancistrocheiridae and Cranchiinae are exceptions .
Giant squid of the genus
Architeuthis are unusual in that they possess both a large penis and modified arm tips , although whether the latter are used for spermatophore transfer is uncertain .
Penis elongation has been observed in the deep - water species Onykia ingens ; when erect , the penis may be as long as the mantle , head , and arms combined .
As such , deep - water squid have the greatest known penis length relative to body size of all mobile animals , second in the entire animal kingdom only to certain sessile barnacles .
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM Section::::Digestive system .
Like all cephalopods , squids are predators and have complex digestive systems .
The mouth is equipped with a sharp , horny beak mainly made of chitin and cross - linked proteins , which is used to kill and tear prey into manageable pieces .
The beak is very robust , but does not contain minerals , unlike the teeth and jaws of many other organisms , including marine species .
The stomachs of captured whales often have indigestible squid beaks inside .
The mouth contains the radula , the rough tongue common to all molluscs except bivalvia , which is equipped with multiple rows of teeth .
In some species , toxic saliva helps to control large prey ; when subdued , the food can be torn in pieces by the beak , moved to the oesophagus by the radula , and swallowed .
The food bolus is moved along the gut by peristalsis .
The long oesophagus leads to a muscular stomach roughly in the middle of the visceral mass .
The digestive gland , which is equivalent to a vertebrate liver , diverticulates here , as does the pancreas , and both of these empty into the caecum , a pouch - shaped sac where most of the absorption of nutrients takes place .
Indigestible food can be passed directly from the stomach to the rectum where it joins the flow from the caecum and is voided through the anus into the mantle cavity .
Cephalopods are short - lived , and in mature squid , priority is given to reproduction ; the female Onychoteuthis banksii for example , sheds its feeding tentacles on reaching maturity , and becomes flaccid and weak after spawning .
CARDIOVASCULAR AND
EXCRETORY SYSTEMS Section::::Cardiovascular and excretory systems .
The squid mantle cavity is a seawater - filled sac containing three hearts and other organs supporting circulation , respiration , and excretion .
Squid have a main systemic heart that pumps blood to the general circulatory system , and two branchial hearts that pump specifically to the gills .
The systemic heart consists of three chambers , a lower ventricle and two upper atria , which are all contractile .
The blood contains the copper - rich protein , hemocyanin , which is used for oxygen transport at low ocean temperatures and low oxygen concentrations , and makes the oxygenated blood a deep , blue color .
As systemic blood returns via two vena cavae to the branchial hearts , excretion of urine , carbon dioxide , and waste solutes occurs through outpockets ( called nephridial appendages ) in the vena cavae walls that enable gas exchange and excretion via the mantle cavity seawater .
SIZE Section::::Size .
The majority are no more than long , although the giant squid may reach .
In 1978 , sharp , curved claws on the suction cups of squid tentacles cut up the rubber coating on the hull of the USS Stein .
The size suggested the largest squid known at the time .
In 2003 , a large specimen of an abundant but poorly understood species , Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni ( the colossal squid ) , was discovered .
This species may grow to in length , making it the largest invertebrate .
Squid have the largest eyes in the animal kingdom .
The kraken is a legendary tentacled monster possibly based on sightings of real giant squid .
In February 2007 , a New Zealand fishing vessel caught the largest squid ever documented , weighing and measuring around off the coast of Antarctica .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The eggs of squid are large for a mollusc , containing a large amount of yolk to nourish the embryo as it develops directly , without an intervening veliger larval stage .
Cleavage is superficial and a germinal disc develops at the pole .
During gastrulation , the margins of the germinal disc grow to surround the yolk , forming a yolk sac , which eventually forms part of the animal 's gut .
The dorsal side of the disc grows upwards and forms the embryo , with a shell gland on its dorsal surface , gills , mantle and eyes .
The arms and funnel develop as part of the foot on the ventral side of the disc .
The arms later migrate upwards , coming to form a ring around the funnel and mouth .
The yolk is gradually absorbed as the embryo grows .
Some juvenile squid live higher in the water column than do adults .
Squids tend to be short - lived ; Loligo for example lives from one to three years according to species , typically dying soon after spawning .
BEHAVIOUR
Section::::Behaviour .
Courtship in squid takes place in the open water and involves the male selecting a female , the female responding , and the transfer by the male of spermatophores to the female .
In many instances the male may display to identify himself to the female and drive off any potential competitors .
The pair adopt a head - to - head position , and " jaw locking " may take place , in a similar manner to that adopted by some cichlid fish .
The heterodactylus of the male is used to transfer the spermatophore and deposit it in the female 's mantle cavity in the position appropriate for the species ; this may be adjacent to the gonopore or in a seminal receptacle .
HUMAN USES COMMERCIAL FISHING Section::::Human uses .
Section::::Commercial fishing .
According to the FAO , the cephalopod catch for 2002 was .
Of this , 2,189,206 tonnes , or 75.8 percent , was squid .
The following table lists squid species fishery catches that exceeded in 2002 .
+ World squid catch in 2002 !
Species !
Family !
Common name !
Catchtonnes !
Percent AS
FOOD Section::::As food .
Squid form a major food resource and are used in cuisines around the world , notably in Japan where it is eaten as ika - somen , sliced into vermicelli - like strips ; as sashimi ; and as tempura .
Three species of Loligo are used in large quantities , L. vulgaris in the Mediterranean ( known as Calamar in Spanish , Calamaro in Italian )
; L. forbesii in the Northeast Atlantic ; and L. pealei on the American East Coast .
Among the Ommastrephidae , Todarodes pacificus is the main commercial species , harvested in large quantities across the North Pacific in Canada , Japan and China .
In English - speaking countries , squid as food is often called calamari , adopted from Italian into English in the 17th century .
Squid are found abundantly in certain areas , and provide large catches for fisheries .
The body can be stuffed whole , cut into flat pieces , or sliced into rings .
The arms , tentacles , and ink are also edible ; the only parts not eaten are the beak and gladius ( pen ) .
Squid is a good food source for zinc and manganese , and high in copper , selenium , vitamin B , and riboflavin .
IN LITERATURE AND ART Section::::In literature and art .
Giant squid have featured as monsters of the deep since classical times .
Giant squid were described by Aristotle ( 4th century BC ) in his History of Animals and Pliny the Elder ( 1st century AD ) in his Natural History .
The Gorgon of Greek mythology may have been inspired by squid or octopus , the animal itself representing the severed head of Medusa , the beak as the protruding tongue and fangs , and its tentacles as the snakes .
The six - headed sea monster of the Odyssey , Scylla , may have had a similar origin .
The Nordic legend of the kraken may also have derived from sightings of large cephalopods ; the science fiction writer Jules Verne told a tale of a kraken - like monster in his 1870 novel Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea .
In literature , H. G. Wells ' short story " The Sea Raiders " featured a man - eating squid species Haploteuthis ferox .
IN BIOMIMICRY Section::::In biomimicry .
Prototype chromatophores that mimic the squid 's adaptive camouflage , have been made by Bristol University researchers using an electroactive dielectric elastomer , a flexible " smart " material that changes its colour and texture in response to electrical signals .
The researchers state that their goal is to create an artificial skin that provides rapid active camouflage .
SEE ALSO
* Paralarva NOTES REFERENCES SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* CephBase : Teuthida * Colossal Squid at the Museum of
New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa
* Market squid mating , laying eggs ( video ) * Scientific American – Giant Squid
* The Cephalopod Page * The Octopus News Magazine Online