NITROUS OXIDE
Nitrous oxide , commonly known as laughing gas or nitrous , is a chemical compound , an oxide of nitrogen with the formula .
At room temperature , it is a colourless non - flammable gas , with a slight metallic scent and taste .
At elevated temperatures , nitrous oxide is a powerful oxidizer similar to molecular oxygen .
It is soluble in water .
Nitrous oxide has significant medical uses , especially in surgery and dentistry , for its anaesthetic and pain reducing effects .
Its name " laughing gas " , coined by Humphry Davy , is due to the euphoric effects upon inhaling it , a property that has led to its recreational use as a dissociative anaesthetic .
It is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most effective and safe medicines needed in a health system .
It also is used as an oxidizer in rocket propellants , and in motor racing to increase the power output of engines .
Nitrous oxide occurs in small amounts in the atmosphere , but recently has been found to be a major scavenger of stratospheric ozone , with an impact comparable to that of CFCs .
It is estimated that 30 % of the in the atmosphere is the result of human activity , chiefly agriculture .
USES ROCKET
MOTORS Section::::Uses .
Section::::Rocket motors .
Nitrous oxide may be used as an oxidizer in a rocket motor .
This is advantageous over other oxidisers in that it is much less toxic , and due to its stability at room temperature is also easier to store and relatively safe to carry on a flight .
As a secondary benefit , it may be decomposed readily to form breathing air .
Its high density and low storage pressure ( when maintained at low temperature ) enable it to be highly competitive with stored high - pressure gas systems .
In a 1914 patent , American rocket pioneer Robert Goddard suggested nitrous oxide and gasoline as possible propellants for a liquid - fuelled rocket .
Nitrous oxide has been the oxidiser of choice in several hybrid rocket designs ( using solid fuel with a liquid or gaseous oxidizer ) .
The combination of nitrous oxide with hydroxyl - terminated polybutadiene fuel has been used by SpaceShipOne and others .
It also is notably used in amateur and high power rocketry with various plastics as the fuel .
Nitrous oxide also may be used in a monopropellant rocket .
In the presence of a heated catalyst , will decompose exothermically into nitrogen and oxygen , at a temperature of approximately .
Because of the large heat release , the catalytic action rapidly becomes secondary , as thermal autodecomposition becomes dominant .
In a vacuum thruster , this may provide a monopropellant specific impulse ( I ) of as much as 180 s.
While noticeably less than the I available from hydrazine thrusters ( monopropellant or bipropellant with dinitrogen tetroxide ) , the decreased toxicity makes nitrous oxide an option worth investigating .
Nitrous oxide is said to deflagrate at approximately at a pressure of 309 psi ( 21 atmospheres ) .
At 600 for example , the required ignition energy is only 6 joules , whereas at 130 psi a 2500-joule ignition energy input is insufficient .
INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE Section::::Internal combustion engine .
In vehicle racing , nitrous oxide ( often referred to as just " nitrous " ) allows the engine to burn more fuel by providing more oxygen than air alone , resulting in a more powerful combustion .
The gas is not flammable at a low pressure / temperature , but it delivers more oxygen than atmospheric air by breaking down at elevated temperatures .
Therefore , it often is mixed with another fuel that is easier to deflagrate .
Nitrous oxide is a strong oxidant , roughly equivalent to hydrogen peroxide , and much stronger than oxygen gas .
Nitrous oxide is stored as a compressed liquid ; the evaporation and expansion of liquid nitrous oxide in the intake manifold causes a large drop in intake charge temperature , resulting in a denser charge , further allowing more air / fuel mixture to enter the cylinder .
Sometimes nitrous oxide is injected into ( or prior to )
the intake manifold , whereas other systems directly inject , right before the cylinder ( direct port injection ) to increase power .
The technique was used during World War II by Luftwaffe aircraft with the GM-1 system to boost the power output of aircraft engines .
Originally meant to provide the Luftwaffe standard aircraft with superior high - altitude performance , technological considerations limited its use to extremely high altitudes .
Accordingly , it was only used by specialized planes such as high - altitude reconnaissance aircraft , high - speed bombers , and high - altitude interceptor aircraft .
It sometimes could be found on Luftwaffe aircraft also fitted with another engine - boost system , MW 50 , a form of water injection for aviation engines that used methanol for its boost capabilities .
One of the major problems of using nitrous oxide in a reciprocating engine is that it can produce enough power to damage or destroy the engine .
Very large power increases are possible , and if the mechanical structure of the engine is not properly reinforced , the engine may be severely damaged , or destroyed , during this kind of operation .
It is very important with nitrous oxide augmentation of petrol engines to maintain proper operating temperatures and fuel levels to prevent " pre - ignition " , or " detonation " ( sometimes referred to as " knock " ) .
Most problems that are associated with nitrous oxide do not come from mechanical failure due to the power increases .
Since nitrous oxide allows a much denser charge into the cylinder , it dramatically increases cylinder pressures .
The increased pressure and temperature can cause problems such as melting the piston or valves .
It also may crack or warp the piston or head and cause pre - ignition due to uneven heating .
Automotive - grade liquid nitrous oxide differs slightly from medical - grade nitrous oxide .
A small amount of sulfur dioxide ( ) is added to prevent substance abuse .
Multiple washes through a base ( such as sodium hydroxide ) can remove this , decreasing the corrosive properties observed when is further oxidised during combustion into sulfuric acid , making emissions cleaner .
AEROSOL PROPELLANT Section::::Aerosol propellant .
The gas is approved for use as a food additive ( also known as E942 ) , specifically as an aerosol spray propellant .
Its most common uses in this context are in aerosol whipped cream canisters and cooking sprays .
The gas is extremely soluble in fatty compounds .
In aerosol whipped cream , it is dissolved in the fatty cream until it leaves the can , when it becomes gaseous and thus creates foam .
Used in this way , it produces whipped cream four times the volume of the liquid , whereas whipping air into cream only produces twice the volume .
If air were used as a propellant , oxygen would accelerate rancidification of the butterfat , but nitrous oxide inhibits such degradation .
Carbon dioxide can not be used for whipped cream because it is acidic in water , which would curdle the cream and give it a seltzer - like " sparkling " sensation .
The whipped cream produced with nitrous oxide is unstable , however , and will return to a more liquid state within half an hour to one hour .
Thus , the method is not suitable for decorating food that will not be served immediately .
During December 2016 , some manufacturers reported a shortage of aerosol whipped creams in the United States due to an explosion at the Air Liquide nitrous oxide facility in Florida in late August .
With a major facility offline , the disruption caused a shortage resulting in the company diverting the supply of nitrous oxide to medical clients rather than to food manufacturing .
The shortage came during the Christmas and holiday season when canned whipped cream use is normally at its highest .
Similarly , cooking spray , which is made from various types of oils combined with lecithin ( an emulsifier ) , may use nitrous oxide as a propellant .
Other propellants used in cooking spray include food - grade alcohol and propane .
MEDICINE Section::::Medicine .
Nitrous oxide has been used in dentistry and surgery , as an anaesthetic and analgesic , since 1844 .
In the early days , the gas was administered through simple inhalers consisting of a breathing bag made of rubber cloth .
Today , the gas is administered in hospitals by means of an automated relative analgesia machine , with an anaesthetic vaporiser and a medical ventilator , that delivers a precisely dosed and breath - actuated flow of nitrous oxide mixed with oxygen in a 2:1 ratio .
Nitrous oxide is a weak general anaesthetic , and so is generally not used alone in general anaesthesia , but used as a carrier gas ( mixed with oxygen ) for more powerful general anaesthetic drugs such as sevoflurane or desflurane .
It has a minimum alveolar concentration of 105 % and a blood / gas partition coefficient of 0.46 .
The use of nitrous oxide in anaesthesia , however , can increase the risk of postoperative nausea and vomiting .
Dentists use a simpler machine , that only delivers a / mixture for the patient to inhale while conscious .
The patient is kept conscious throughout the procedure , and retains adequate mental faculties to respond to questions and instructions from the dentist .
Inhalation of nitrous oxide is used frequently to relieve pain associated with childbirth , trauma , oral surgery , and acute coronary syndrome ( includes heart attacks ) .
Its use during labour has been shown to be a safe and effective aid for birthing women .
Its use for acute coronary syndrome is of unknown benefit .
In Britain and Canada , Entonox and Nitronox are used commonly by ambulance crews ( including unregistered practitioners ) as a rapid and highly effective analgesic gas .
50 % nitrous oxide can be considered for use by trained non - professional first aid responders in prehospital settings , given the relative ease and safety of administering 50 % nitrous oxide as an analgesic .
The rapid reversibility of its effect would also prevent it from precluding diagnosis .
RECREATIONAL USE Section::::Recreational use .
Recreational inhalation of nitrous oxide , with the purpose of causing euphoria and/or slight hallucinations , began as a phenomenon for the British upper class in 1799 , known as " laughing gas parties " .
Starting in the nineteenth century , widespread availability of the gas for medical and culinary purposes allowed the recreational use to expand greatly , throughout the world .
In the United Kingdom , as of 2014 , nitrous oxide was estimated to be used by almost half a million young people at nightspots , festivals , and parties .
The legality of that use varies greatly from country to country , and even from city to city in some countries .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
The major safety hazards of nitrous oxide come from the fact that it is a compressed liquefied gas , an asphyxiation risk , and a dissociative anaesthetic .
While relatively non - toxic , nitrous oxide has a number of recognized ill effects on human health , whether through breathing it in or by contact of the liquid with skin or eyes .
Nitrous oxide is a significant occupational hazard for surgeons , dentists , and nurses .
Because nitrous oxide is minimally metabolised in humans ( with a rate of 0.004 % ) , it retains its potency when exhaled into the room by the patient , and can pose an intoxicating and prolonged exposure hazard to the clinic staff if the room is poorly ventilated .
Where nitrous oxide is administered , a continuous - flow fresh - air ventilation system or scavenger system is used to prevent a waste - gas buildup .
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health recommends that workers ' exposure to nitrous oxide should be controlled during the administration of anaesthetic gas in medical , dental , and veterinary operators .
It set a recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 25 ppm ( 46 mg / m ) to escaped anaesthetic .
MENTAL AND MANUAL
IMPAIRMENT Section::::Mental and manual impairment .
Exposure to nitrous oxide causes short - term decreases in mental performance , audiovisual ability , and manual dexterity .
These effects coupled with the induced spatial and temporal disorientation could result in physical harm to the user from environmental hazards .
NEUROTOXICITY AND NEUROPROTECTION Section::::Neurotoxicity and neuroprotection .
Like other NMDA antagonists , was suggested to produce neurotoxicity in the form of Olney 's lesions in rodents upon prolonged ( several hour ) exposure .
New research has arisen suggesting that Olney 's lesions do not occur in humans , however , and similar drugs such as ketamine are now believed not to be acutely neurotoxic .
It has been argued that , because has a very short duration under normal circumstances , it is less likely to be neurotoxic than other NMDA antagonists .
Indeed , in rodents , short - term exposure results in only mild injury that is rapidly reversible , and neuronal death occurs only after constant and sustained exposure .
Nitrous oxide also may cause neurotoxicity after extended exposure because of hypoxia .
This is especially true of non - medical formulations such as whipped - cream chargers ( also known as " whippets " or " nangs " ) , which never contain oxygen , since oxygen makes cream rancid .
Additionally , nitrous oxide depletes vitamin B levels .
This can cause serious neurotoxicity if the user has preexisting vitamin B deficiency .
Nitrous oxide at 75-vol% reduce ischemia - induced neuronal death induced by occlusion of the middle cerebral artery in rodents , and decrease NMDA - induced Ca2
+ influx in neuronal cell cultures , a critical event involved in excitotoxicity .
OXYGEN DEPRIVATION
Section::::Oxygen deprivation .
If pure nitrous oxide is inhaled without oxygen mixed in , this can eventually lead to oxygen deprivation resulting in loss of blood pressure , fainting and even heart attacks .
This can occur if the user inhales large quantities continuously , as with a strap - on mask connected to a gas canister .
It can also happen if the user engages in excessive breath - holding or uses any other inhalation system that cuts off their supply of fresh air .
VITAMIN B
DEFICIENCY Section::::Vitamin B deficiency .
Long - term exposure to nitrous oxide may cause vitamin B deficiency .
It inactivates the cobalamin form of vitamin B by oxidation .
Symptoms of vitamin B deficiency , including sensory neuropathy , myelopathy , and encephalopathy , may occur within days or weeks of exposure to nitrous oxide anaesthesia in people with subclinical vitamin B deficiency .
Symptoms are treated with high doses of vitamin B , but recovery can be slow and incomplete .
People with normal vitamin B levels have stores to make the effects of nitrous oxide insignificant , unless exposure is repeated and prolonged ( nitrous oxide abuse ) .
Vitamin B levels should be checked in people with risk factors for vitamin B deficiency prior to using nitrous oxide anaesthesia .
PRENATAL DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Prenatal development .
Several experimental studies in rats indicate that chronic exposure of pregnant females to nitrous oxide may have adverse effects on the developing fetus .
CHEMICAL / PHYSICAL RISKS
Section::::Chemical / physical risks .
At room temperature ( 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) )
the saturated vapour pressure is 50.525 bar , rising up to 72.45 bar at — the critical temperature .
The pressure curve is thus unusually sensitive to temperature .
Liquid nitrous oxide acts as a good solvent for many organic compounds ; liquid mixtures may form shock sensitive explosives .
As with many strong oxidisers , contamination of parts with fuels have been implicated in rocketry accidents , where small quantities of nitrous / fuel mixtures explode due to " water hammer"-like effects ( sometimes called " dieseling"—heating due to adiabatic compression of gases can reach decomposition temperatures ) .
Some common building materials such as stainless steel and aluminium can act as fuels with strong oxidisers such as nitrous oxide , as can contaminants that may ignite due to adiabatic compression .
There also have been incidents where nitrous oxide decomposition in plumbing has led to the explosion of large tanks .
MECHANISM OF ACTION Section::::Mechanism of action .
The pharmacological mechanism of action of in medicine is not fully known .
However , it has been shown to directly modulate a broad range of ligand - gated ion channels , and this likely plays a major role in many of its effects .
It moderately blocks NMDA and β - subunit - containing nACh channels , weakly inhibits AMPA , kainate , GABA , and 5-HT receptors , and slightly potentiates GABA and glycine receptors .
It also has been shown to activate two - pore - domain channels .
While affects quite a few ion channels , its anaesthetic , hallucinogenic , and euphoriant effects are likely caused predominantly , or fully , via inhibition of NMDA receptor - mediated currents .
In addition to its effects on ion channels , may act to imitate nitric oxide ( NO ) in the central nervous system , and this may be related to its analgesic and anxiolytic properties .
Nitrous oxide is 30 - 40 times more soluble than nitrogen .
The effects of inhaling sub - anaesthetic doses of Nitrous Oxide have been known to vary , based on several factors , including settings and individual differences , however , from his discussion , Jay ( 2008 ) suggests that it has been reliably known to induce the following states and sensations :
* Intoxication * Euphoria / dysphoria * Spatial disorientation * Temporal disorientation
* Reduced pain sensitivity
A minority of users also will present with uncontrolled vocalisations and muscular spasms .
These effects generally disappear minutes after removal of the nitrous oxide source .
EUPHORIC EFFECT
Section::::Euphoric effect .
In rats , stimulates the mesolimbic reward pathway via inducing dopamine release and activating dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area and nucleus accumbens , presumably through antagonisation of NMDA receptors localised in the system .
This action has been implicated in its euphoric effects , and notably , appears to augment its analgesic properties as well .
It is remarkable , however , that in mice , blocks amphetamine - induced carrier - mediated dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens and behavioural sensitisation , abolishes the conditioned place preference ( CPP ) of cocaine and morphine , and does not produce reinforcing ( or aversive ) effects of its own .
Effects of CPP of in rats are mixed , consisting of reinforcement , aversion , and no change .
In contrast , it is a positive reinforcer in squirrel monkeys , and is well known as a drug of abuse in humans .
These discrepancies in response to may reflect species variation or methodological differences .
In human clinical studies , was found to produce mixed responses , similarly to rats , reflecting high subjective individual variability .
ANXIOLYTIC EFFECT
Section::::Anxiolytic effect .
In behavioural tests of anxiety , a low dose of is an effective anxiolytic , and this anti - anxiety effect is associated with enhanced activity of GABA receptors , as it is partially reversed by benzodiazepine receptor antagonists .
Mirroring this , animals that have developed tolerance to the anxiolytic effects of benzodiazepines are partially tolerant to .
Indeed , in humans given 30 % , benzodiazepine receptor antagonists reduced the subjective reports of feeling " high " , but did not alter psychomotor performance , in human clinical studies .
ANALGESIC EFFECT Section::::Analgesic effect .
The analgesic effects of are linked to the interaction between the endogenous opioid system and the descending noradrenergic system .
When animals are given morphine chronically , they develop tolerance to its pain - killing effects , and this also renders the animals tolerant to the analgesic effects of .
Administration of antibodies that bind and block the activity of some endogenous opioids ( not β - endorphin ) also block the antinociceptive effects of .
Drugs that inhibit the breakdown of endogenous opioids also potentiate the antinociceptive effects of .
Several experiments have shown that opioid receptor antagonists applied directly to the brain block the antinociceptive effects of , but these drugs have no effect when injected into the spinal cord .
Conversely , α - adrenoceptor antagonists block the pain - reducing effects of when given directly to the spinal cord , but not when applied directly to the brain .
Indeed , α - adrenoceptor knockout mice or animals depleted in norepinephrine are nearly completely resistant to the antinociceptive effects of .
Apparently -induced release of endogenous opioids causes disinhibition of brain stem noradrenergic neurons , which release norepinephrine into the spinal cord and inhibit pain signalling .
Exactly how causes the release of endogenous opioid peptides remains uncertain .
PROPERTIES AND REACTIONS Section::::Properties and reactions .
Nitrous oxide is a colourless , non - toxic gas with a faint , sweet odour .
Nitrous oxide supports combustion by releasing the dipolar bonded oxygen radical , thus it can relight a glowing splint .
The above reaction is the route adopted by the commercial chemical industry to produce azide salts , which are used as detonators .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The gas was first synthesised in 1772 by English natural philosopher and chemist Joseph Priestley , who called it phlogisticated nitrous air ( see phlogiston ) or inflammable nitrous air .
Priestley published his discovery in the book Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air ( 1775 ) , where he described how to produce the preparation of " nitrous air diminished " , by heating iron filings dampened with nitric acid .
EARLY USE
Section::::Early use .
The first important use of nitrous oxide was made possible by Thomas Beddoes and James Watt , who worked together to publish the book Considerations on the Medical Use and on the Production of Factitious Airs ( 1794 ) .
This book was important for two reasons .
First , James Watt had invented a novel machine to produce " Factitious Airs " ( i.e. nitrous oxide ) and a novel " breathing apparatus " to inhale the gas .
Second , the book also presented the new medical theories by Thomas Beddoes , that tuberculosis and other lung diseases could be treated by inhalation of " Factitious Airs " .
The machine to produce " Factitious Airs " had three parts : a furnace to burn the needed material , a vessel with water where the produced gas passed through in a spiral pipe ( for impurities to be " washed off " ) , and finally the gas cylinder with a gasometer where the gas produced , " air " , could be tapped into portable air bags ( made of airtight oily silk ) .
The breathing apparatus consisted of one of the portable air bags connected with a tube to a mouthpiece .
With this new equipment being engineered and produced by 1794 , the way was paved for clinical trials , which began in 1798 when Thomas Beddoes established the " Pneumatic Institution for Relieving Diseases by Medical Airs " in Hotwells ( Bristol ) .
In the basement of the building , a large - scale machine was producing the gases under the supervision of a young Humphry Davy , who was encouraged to experiment with new gases for patients to inhale .
The first important work of Davy was examination of the nitrous oxide , and the publication of his results in the book : Researches , Chemical and Philosophical ( 1800 ) .
In that publication , Davy notes the analgesic effect of nitrous oxide at page 465 and its potential to be used for surgical operations at page 556 .
Davy coined the name " laughing gas " for nitrous oxide .
Despite Davy 's discovery that inhalation of nitrous oxide could relieve a conscious person from pain , another 44 years elapsed before doctors attempted to use it for anaesthesia .
The use of nitrous oxide as a recreational drug at " laughing gas parties " , primarily arranged for the British upper class , became an immediate success beginning in 1799 .
While the effects of the gas generally make the user appear stuporous , dreamy , and sedated , some people also " get the giggles " in a state of euphoria , and frequently erupt in laughter .
One of the earliest commercial producers in the U.S. was George Poe , cousin of the poet Edgar Allan Poe , who also was the first to liquefy the gas .
ANAESTHETIC USE
Section::::Anaesthetic use .
The first time nitrous oxide was used as an anaesthetic drug in the treatment of a patient was when dentist Horace Wells , with assistance by Gardner Quincy Colton and John Mankey Riggs , demonstrated insensitivity to pain from a dental extraction on 11 December 1844 .
In the following weeks , Wells treated the first 12–15 patients with nitrous oxide in Hartford , Connecticut , and according to his own record , only failed in two cases .
In spite of these convincing results having been reported by Wells to the medical society in Boston in December 1844 , this new method was not immediately adopted by other dentists .
The reason for this was most likely that Wells , in January 1845 at his first public demonstration to the medical faculty in Boston , had been partly unsuccessful , leaving his colleagues doubtful regarding its efficacy and safety .
The method did not come into general use until 1863 , when Gardner Quincy Colton successfully started to use it in all his " Colton Dental Association " clinics , that he had just established in New Haven and New York City .
Over the following three years , Colton and his associates successfully administered nitrous oxide to more than 25,000 patients .
Today , nitrous oxide is used in dentistry as an anxiolytic , as an adjunct to local anaesthetic .
Nitrous oxide was not found to be a strong enough anaesthetic for use in major surgery in hospital settings , however .
Instead , diethyl ether , being a stronger and more potent anaesthetic , was demonstrated and accepted for use in October 1846 , along with chloroform in 1847 .
When Joseph Thomas Clover invented the " gas - ether inhaler " in 1876 , however , it became a common practice at hospitals to initiate all anaesthetic treatments with a mild flow of nitrous oxide , and then gradually increase the anaesthesia with the stronger ether or chloroform .
Clover 's gas - ether inhaler was designed to supply the patient with nitrous oxide and ether at the same time , with the exact mixture being controlled by the operator of the device .
It remained in use by many hospitals until the 1930s .
Although hospitals today are using a more advanced anaesthetic machine , these machines still use the same principle launched with Clover 's gas - ether inhaler , to initiate the anaesthesia with nitrous oxide , before the administration of a more powerful anaesthetic .
AS
A PATENT MEDICINE Section::::As a patent medicine .
Colton 's popularization of nitrous oxide led to its adoption by a number of less than reputable quacksalvers , who touted it as a cure for consumption , scrofula , catarrh , and other diseases of the blood , throat , and lungs .
Nitrous oxide treatment was administered and licensed as a patent medicine by the likes of C. L. Blood and Jerome Harris in Boston and Charles E. Barney of Chicago .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Reviewing various methods of producing nitrous oxde is published .
INDUSTRIAL METHODS Section::::Industrial methods .
Nitrous oxide is prepared on an industrial scale by careful heating of ammonium nitrate at about 250 C , which decomposes into nitrous oxide and water vapour .
The addition of various phosphate salts favours formation of a purer gas at slightly lower temperatures .
This reaction may be difficult to control , resulting in detonation .
LABORATORY METHODS Section::::Laboratory methods .
The decomposition of ammonium nitrate is also a common laboratory method for preparing the gas .
Equivalently , it can be obtained by heating a mixture of sodium nitrate and ammonium sulfate :
Another method involves the reaction of urea , nitric acid , and sulfuric acid : Direct oxidation of ammonia with a manganese dioxide - bismuth oxide catalyst has been reported : cf .
Ostwald process .
Hydroxylammonium chloride reacts with sodium nitrite to give nitrous oxide .
If the nitrite is added to the hydroxylamine solution , the only remaining by - product is salt water .
If the hydroxylamine solution is added to the nitrite solution ( nitrite is in excess ) , however , then toxic higher oxides of nitrogen also are formed : Treating with and HCl also has been demonstrated : Hyponitrous acid decomposes to NO and water with a half - life of 16 days at 25 ° C at pH 1–3 .
ATMOSPHERIC OCCURRENCE Section::::Atmospheric occurrence .
Nitrous oxide is a minor component of Earth 's atmosphere , currently with a concentration of about 0.330 ppm .
EMISSIONS
BY SOURCE Section::::Emissions by source .
As of 2010 , it was estimated that about 29.5 million tonnes of ( containing 18.8 million tonnes of nitrogen ) were entering the atmosphere each year ; of which 64 % were natural , and 36 % due to human activity .
Most of the emitted into the atmosphere , from natural and anthropogenic sources , is produced by microorganisms such as bacteria and fungi in soils and oceans .
Soils under natural vegetation are an important source of nitrous oxide , accounting for 60 % of all naturally produced emissions .
Other natural sources include the oceans ( 35 % ) and atmospheric chemical reactions ( 5 % ) .
The main components of anthropogenic emissions are fertilized agricultural soils and livestock manure ( 42 % ) , runoff and leaching of fertilizers ( 25 % ) , biomass burning ( 10 % ) , fossil fuel combustion and industrial processes ( 10 % ) , biological degradation of other nitrogen - containing atmospheric emissions ( 9 % ) , and human sewage ( 5 % ) .
Agriculture enhances nitrous oxide production through soil cultivation , the use of nitrogen fertilisers , and animal waste handling .
These activities stimulate naturally - occurring bacteria to produce more nitrous oxide .
Nitrous oxide emissions from soil can be challenging to measure as they vary markedly over time and space , and the majority of a year 's emissions may occur when conditions are favorable during " hot moments " and/or at favorable locations known as " hotspots " .
Among industrial emissions , the production of nitric acid and adipic acid are the largest sources of nitrous oxide emissions .
The adipic acid emissions specifically arise from the degradation of the nitrolic acid intermediate derived from nitration of cyclohexanone .
BIOLOGICAL PROCESSES
Section::::Biological processes .
Natural processes that generate nitrous oxide may be classified as nitrification and denitrification .
Specifically , they include : * aerobic autotrophic nitrification , the stepwise oxidation of ammonia ( ) to nitrite ( ) and to nitrate ( ) * anaerobic heterotrophic denitrification , the stepwise reduction of to , nitric oxide ( NO ) , and ultimately , where facultative anaerobe bacteria use as an electron acceptor in the respiration of organic material in the condition of insufficient oxygen ( ) * nitrifier denitrification , which is carried out by autotrophic −oxidizing bacteria and the pathway whereby ammonia ( ) is oxidised to nitrite ( ) , followed by the reduction of to nitric oxide ( NO ) , and molecular nitrogen ( ) * heterotrophic nitrification * aerobic denitrification by the same heterotrophic nitrifiers
* fungal denitrification
* non - biological chemodenitrification
These processes are affected by soil chemical and physical properties such as the availability of mineral nitrogen and organic matter , acidity , and soil type ; as well as climate - related factors such as soil temperature and water content .
The emission of the gas to the atmosphere is limited greatly by its consumption inside the cells , by a process catalyzed by the enzyme nitrous oxide reductase .
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT GREENHOUSE EFFECT
Section::::Environmental impact .
Section::::Greenhouse effect .
Nitrous oxide has significant global warming potential as a greenhouse gas .
On a per - molecule basis , considered over a 100-year - period , nitrous oxide has 298 times the atmospheric heat - trapping ability of carbon dioxide ( ) , however , because of its low concentration ( less than 1/1000 of that of ) , its contribution to the greenhouse effect is less than one - third that of carbon dioxide , and also less than water vapour and methane .
On the other hand , since 38 % or more of the entering the atmosphere is the result of human activity , and its concentration has increased 15 % since 1750 , control of nitrous oxide is considered part of efforts to curb greenhouse gas emissions .
A 2008 study by Nobel Laureate Paul Crutzen suggests that the amount of nitrous oxide release attributable to agricultural nitrate fertilizers has been seriously underestimated , most of which presumably , would come under soil and oceanic release in the Environmental Protection Agency data .
OZONE LAYER DEPLETION
Section::::Ozone layer depletion .
Nitrous oxide also has been implicated in thinning of the ozone layer .
A new study suggests that emission currently is the single most important ozone - depleting substance ( ODS ) emission and is expected to remain the largest throughout the twenty - first century .
LEGALITY Section::::Legality .
In the United States , possession of nitrous oxide is legal under federal law and is not subject to DEA purview .
It is , however , regulated by the Food and Drug Administration under the Food Drug and Cosmetics Act ; prosecution is possible under its " misbranding " clauses , prohibiting the sale or distribution of nitrous oxide for the purpose of human consumption .
Many states have laws regulating the possession , sale , and distribution of nitrous oxide .
Such laws usually ban distribution to minors or limit the amount of nitrous oxide that may be sold without special license .
For example , in the state of California , possession for recreational use is prohibited and qualifies as a misdemeanour .
In August 2015 , the Council of the London Borough of Lambeth ( UK ) banned the use of the drug for recreational purposes , making offenders liable to an on - the - spot fine of up to £ 1,000 .
In New Zealand , the Ministry of Health has warned that nitrous oxide is a prescription medicine , and its sale or possession without a prescription , is an offense under the Medicines Act .
This statement would seemingly prohibit all non - medicinal uses of nitrous oxide , although it is implied that only recreational use will be targeted legally .
In India , transfer of nitrous oxide from bulk cylinders to smaller , more transportable E - type , 1590 liter - capacity tanks , is legal when the intended use of the gas is for medical anaesthesia .
SEE ALSO
* Whipped - cream charger
* Diffusion hypoxia * Nitrous oxide fuel blend
*
DayCent
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Occupational Safety and Health Guideline for Nitrous Oxide
* Paul Crutzen Interview Freeview video of Paul Crutzen Nobel Laureate for his work on decomposition of ozone talking to Harry Kroto Nobel Laureate by the Vega Science Trust .
* National Pollutant Inventory – Oxide of nitrogen fact sheet * National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health – Nitrous Oxide
* CDC – NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards – Nitrous Oxide
* Nitrous Oxide FAQ
* Erowid article on Nitrous Oxide * Nitrous oxide fingered as monster ozone slayer , Science News
* Dental Fear Central article on the use of nitrous oxide in dentistry * Altered States Database