ZEBRA Zebras
( , ) are several species of African equids ( horse family ) united by their distinctive black and white striped coats .
Their stripes come in different patterns , unique to each individual .
They are generally social animals that live in small harems to large herds .
Unlike their closest relatives , horses and donkeys , zebras have never been truly domesticated .
There are three species of zebras : the plains zebra , the mountain zebra and the Grévy 's zebra .
The plains zebra and the mountain zebra belong to the subgenus Hippotigris , but Grévy 's zebra is the sole species of subgenus Dolichohippus .
The latter resembles an ass , to which zebras are closely related , while the former two look more horse - like .
All three belong to the genus Equus , along with other living equids .
The unique stripes of zebras make them one of the animals most familiar to people .
They occur in a variety of habitats , such as grasslands , savannas , woodlands , thorny scrublands , mountains , and coastal hills .
However , various anthropogenic factors have had a severe impact on zebra populations , in particular hunting for skins and habitat destruction .
Grévy 's zebra and the mountain zebra are endangered .
While plains zebras are much more plentiful , one subspecies , the quagga , became extinct in the late 19th century – though there is currently a plan , called the Quagga Project , that aims to breed zebras that are phenotypically similar to the quagga in a process called breeding back .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The name " zebra " in English dates back to c. 1600 , from Italian zebra , perhaps from Portuguese , which in turn is said to be Congolese ( as stated in the Oxford English Dictionary ) .
The Encarta Dictionary says its ultimate origin is uncertain , but perhaps it may come from Latin equiferus meaning " wild horse " ; from equus ( " horse " ) and ferus ( " wild , untamed " ) .
The word was traditionally pronounced with a long initial vowel , but over the course of the 20th century , the pronunciation with the short initial vowel became the usual one in the UK and Commonwealth .
The pronunciation with a long initial vowel remains standard in the United States .
A group of zebras are referred to as a herd , dazzle , or zeal .
TAXONOMY AND EVOLUTION Section::::Taxonomy and evolution .
Zebras evolved among the Old World horses within the last 4 million years .
It has been suggested that zebras are paraphyletic and that striped equids evolved more than once .
Extensive stripes are posited to have been of little use to equids that live in low densities in deserts ( like asses and some horses ) or ones that live in colder climates with shaggy coats and annual shading ( like some horses ) .
However , molecular evidence supports zebras as a monophyletic lineage .
The zebra has between 32 and 46 chromosomes , depending on the species .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
There are three extant species .
Collectively , two of the species have eight subspecies ( seven extant ) .
Zebra populations are diverse , and the relationships between , and the taxonomic status of , several of the subspecies are not well known .
* Genus :
Equus * Subgenus : Hippotigris * Plains zebra , Equus quagga
* †Quagga , Equus quagga quagga ( extinct ) * Burchell 's zebra , Equus quagga burchellii ( includes Damara zebra )
* Grant 's zebra , Equus quagga boehmi * Selous ' zebra , Equus quagga selousi
* Maneless zebra , Equus quagga borensis
* Chapman 's zebra , Equus quagga chapmani
* Crawshay 's zebra , Equus quagga crawshayi * Mountain zebra , Equus zebra * Cape mountain zebra ,
Equus zebra zebra
* Hartmann 's mountain zebra , Equus zebra hartmannae
* Subgenus : Dolichohippus * Grévy 's zebra , Equus grevyi
The plains zebra ( Equus quagga , formerly Equus burchelli ) is the most common , and has or had about six subspecies distributed across much of southern and eastern Africa .
It , or particular subspecies of it , have also been known as the common zebra , the dauw , Burchell 's zebra ( actually the subspecies Equus quagga burchellii ) , Chapman 's zebra , Wahlberg 's zebra , Selous ' zebra , Grant 's zebra , Boehm 's zebra and the quagga ( another extinct subspecies , Equus quagga quagga ) .
The mountain zebra ( Equus zebra ) of southwest Africa tends to have a sleek coat with a white belly and narrower stripes than the plains zebra .
It has two subspecies and is classified as vulnerable .
Grévy 's zebra ( Equus grevyi ) is the largest type , with a long , narrow head , making it appear rather mule - like .
It is an inhabitant of the semi - arid grasslands of Ethiopia and northern Kenya .
Grévy 's zebra is the rarest species , and is classified as endangered .
Although zebra species may have overlapping ranges , they do not interbreed .
In captivity , plains zebras have been crossed with mountain zebras .
The hybrid foals lacked a dewlap and resembled the plains zebra apart from their larger ears and their hindquarters pattern .
Attempts to breed a Grévy 's zebra stallion to mountain zebra mares resulted in a high rate of miscarriage .
In captivity , crosses between zebras and other ( non - zebra ) equines have produced several distinct hybrids , including the zebroid , zeedonk , zony , and zorse .
In certain regions of Kenya , plains zebras and Grévy 's zebra coexist , and fertile hybrids occur .
The Hagerman horse ( Equus simplicidens ) is sometimes referred to as the American zebra due to perceived similarities to the plains zebra , and sometimes depicted as striped .
However , consensus appears to be that it was n't particularly closely related to either Hippotigiris nor Dolichohippus , nor is there unambiguous evidence that it had stripes .
PHYSICAL ATTRIBUTES
SIZE AND WEIGHT Section::::Physical attributes . Section::::Size and weight .
The common plains zebra is about at the shoulder with a body ranging from long with a tail .
It can weigh up to , males being slightly bigger than females .
Grévy 's zebra is considerably larger , while the mountain zebra is somewhat smaller .
STRIPES Section::::Stripes .
It was previously believed that zebras were white animals with black stripes , since some zebras have white underbellies .
Embryological evidence , however , shows that the animal 's background color is black and the white stripes and bellies are additions .
It is likely that the stripes are caused by a combination of factors .
The stripes are typically vertical on the head , neck , forequarters , and main body , with horizontal stripes at the rear and on the legs of the animal .
A wide variety of hypotheses have been proposed to account for the evolution of the striking stripes of zebras .
The more traditional of these ( 1 and 2 , below ) relate to camouflage .
*
The vertical striping may help the zebra hide in the grass by disrupting its outline .
In addition , even at moderate distances , the striking striping merges to an apparent grey .
However , the camouflage has been contested with arguments that most of a zebra 's predators ( such as lions and hyenas ) can not see well at a distance , and are more likely to have smelled or heard a zebra before seeing it from a distance , especially at night .
*
* The stripes may help to confuse predators by motion dazzle — a group of zebras standing or moving close together may appear as one large mass of flickering stripes , making it more difficult for the lion to pick out a target .
It has been suggested that when moving , the stripes may confuse observers , such as mammalian predators and biting insects , by two visual illusions : the wagon - wheel effect , where the perceived motion is inverted , and the barberpole illusion , where the perceived motion is in a wrong direction .
*
* The stripes may serve as visual cues and identification .
Although the striping pattern is unique to each individual , it is not known whether zebras can recognize one another by their stripes .
*
* Experiments by different researchers indicate that the stripes are effective in attracting fewer flies , including blood - sucking tsetse flies and tabanid horseflies .
A 2012 experiment in Hungary showed that zebra - striped models were nearly minimally attractive to tabanid horseflies .
These flies are attracted to linearly polarized light , and the study showed that black and white stripes disrupt the attractive pattern .
Further , attractiveness increases with stripe width , so the relatively narrow stripes of the three living species of zebras should be unattractive to horseflies .
*
* Stripes may be used to cool the zebra .
Air may move more quickly over black light - absorbing stripes while moving more slowly over white stripes .
This would create convection currents around the zebra that would cool it .
One study analyzes that zebras have more stripes in hotter habitats .
* GAITS Section::::Gaits .
Zebras have four gaits : walk , trot , canter and gallop .
They are generally slower than horses , but their great stamina helps them outrun predators .
When chased , a zebra will zig - zag from side to side , making it more difficult for the predator to attack .
When cornered , the zebra will rear up and kick or bite its attacker .
SENSES Section::::Senses .
Zebras have excellent eyesight .
Like most ungulates , the zebra 's eyes are on the sides of its head , giving it a wide field of view .
Zebras also have night vision , although not as advanced as that of most of their predators .
Zebras have excellent hearing and have larger , rounder ears than horses ; like other ungulates , zebras can turn their ears in almost any direction .
In addition to superb eyesight and hearing , zebras also have acute senses of smell and taste .
DISEASES Section::::Diseases .
Being an equid , zebras are subject to many of the same common infections and diseases of the domestic horse .
* Parasites :
* Equid intestinal roundworms parascaris sp .
and Strongylus vulgaris * Roundworms of the lungs
*
Botfly larvae in the zebra 's stomach * Lice * Mange * Ticks , which can serve as vectors for other diseases including Babesia * Salmonella infection of the intestine * Pneumonia and pleuritis * Acute heart lesions due to stress
* Tetanus *
Anthrax Two Grévy 's zebras were poisoned in 1995 by leaves from a hybrid red maple tree ( acer rubrum ) at the St. Louis Zoo .
Horses were first reported in 1981 to be susceptible and even a small amount of the leaves can be toxic to ponies .
In 2000 , a zebra was reported to be infected with a nematode , halicephalobus , usually associated with decaying plant material .
ECOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR HAREMS Section::::Ecology and behavior .
Section::::Harems .
Like most members of the horse family , zebras are highly social .
Their social structure , however , depends on the species .
Mountain zebras and plains zebras live in groups , known as ' harems ' , consisting of one stallion with up to six mares and their foals .
Bachelor males either live alone or with groups of other bachelors until they are old enough to challenge a breeding stallion .
When attacked by packs of hyenas or wild dogs a zebra group will huddle together with the foals in the middle while the stallion tries to ward them off .
Unlike the other zebra species , Grévy 's zebras do not have permanent social bonds .
A group of these zebras rarely stays together for more than a few months .
The foals stay with their mothers , while adult males live alone .
Like the other two zebra species , bachelor male zebras will organize in groups .
Like horses , zebras sleep standing up , and only sleep when neighbors are around to warn them of predators .
COMMUNICATION Section::::Communication .
Zebras communicate with each other with high - pitched barks and whinnying .
Grévy 's zebras make mulelike brays .
A zebra 's ears signify its mood .
When a zebra is in a calm , tense or friendly mood , its ears stand erect .
When it is frightened , its ears are pushed forward .
When angry , the ears are pulled backward .
When surveying an area for predators , zebras will stand in an alert posture with ears erect , head held high , and staring .
When tense , they will also snort .
When a predator is spotted or sensed , a zebra will bark ( or bray ) loudly .
FOOD AND FORAGING Section::::Food and foraging .
Zebras feed almost entirely on grasses , but may occasionally eat shrubs , herbs , twigs , leaves and bark .
Their digestive systems allow them to subsist on diets of lower nutritional quality than that necessary for other herbivores .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Female zebras mature earlier than the males , and a mare may have her first foal by the age of three .
Males are not able to breed until the age of five or six .
Mares may give birth to one foal every twelve months .
She nurses the foal for up to a year .
Like horses , zebras are able to stand , walk and suckle shortly after they are born .
A zebra foal is brown and white instead of black and white at birth .
Plains and mountain zebra foals are protected by their mothers , as well as the head stallion and the other mares in their group .
Grévy 's zebra foals have only their mother as a regular protector , since , as noted above , Grévy 's zebra groups often disband after a few months .
INTERACTION
WITH HUMANS DOMESTICATION Section::::Interaction with humans .
Section::::Domestication .
Attempts have been made to train zebras for riding , since they have better resistance than horses to African diseases .
While occasionally successful , most of these attempts failed due to the zebra 's more unpredictable nature and tendency to panic under stress .
For this reason , zebra - mules or zebroids ( crosses between any species of zebra and a horse , pony , donkey or ass ) are preferred over purebred zebras .
In England , the zoological collector Walter Rothschild frequently used zebras to draw a carriage .
In 1907 , Rosendo Ribeiro , the first doctor in Nairobi , Kenya , used a riding zebra for house calls .
In the mid-19th century , Governor George Grey imported zebras to New Zealand from his previous posting in South Africa , and used them to pull his carriage on his privately owned Kawau Island .
Captain Horace Hayes , in " Points of the Horse " ( circa 1893 ) , compared the usefulness of different zebra species .
In 1891 , Hayes broke a mature , intact mountain zebra stallion to ride in two days ' time , and the animal was quiet enough for his wife to ride and be photographed upon .
He found the Burchell 's zebra easy to break , and considered it ideal for domestication , as it was immune to the bite of the tsetse fly .
He considered the quagga ( now extinct ) well - suited to domestication due to being easy to train to saddle and harness .
CONSERVATION Section::::Conservation .
Modern man has had great impact on the zebra population .
Zebras were , and still are , hunted for their skins , and for meat .
They also compete with livestock for forage and are sometimes culled .
The Cape mountain zebra was hunted to near extinction , with less than 100 individuals by the 1930s .
The population has since increased to about 700 due to conservation efforts .
Both mountain zebra subspecies are currently protected in national parks , but are still endangered .
The Grévy 's zebra is also endangered .
Hunting and competition from livestock have greatly decreased their population .
Because of the population 's small size , environmental hazards , such as drought , are capable of affecting the entire species .
Plains zebras are much more numerous and have a healthy population .
Nevertheless , they too have been reduced by hunting and loss of habitat to farming .
One subspecies , the quagga , is now extinct .
CULTURAL DEPICTIONS Section::::Cultural depictions .
Zebras have been the subject of African folk tales which tell how they got their stripes .
According to a San folk tale of Namibia , the zebra was once all white , but acquired its black stripes after a fight with a baboon over a waterhole .
After kicking the baboon so hard , the zebra lost his balance and tripped over a fire , and the fire sticks left scorch marks all over his white coat .
In the film Fantasia , two centaurs are depicted being half human and half zebra , instead of the typical half human and half horse .
Zebras are a popular subject in art .
The fourth Mughal emperor Jahangir ( r.1605–24 ) , commissioned a painting of the zebra , which was completed by Ustad Mansur .
Zebra stripes are also a popular style for furniture , carpets and fashion .
When depicted in movies and cartoons , zebras are most often miscellaneous characters , but have had some starring roles , notably in Madagascar , Racing Stripes and Khumba .
One of the recurring characters in is a zebra named Zecora .
Zebras also serve as mascots and symbols for products and corporations , notably Zebra Technologies and Fruit Stripe gum as well as Investec .
Zebras are featured on the coat of arms of Botswana .
Some on - field officials in various sports , especially American football , basketball , and ice hockey , may be nicknamed " zebras " due to the resemblance of their uniforms ( which feature alternating black and white stripes ) to the animal 's markings .
BIOFUEL Section::::Biofuel .
Recent research has shown that TU-103 , a strain of Clostridium bacteria found in zebra feces , can convert nearly any form of cellulose into butanol fuel .
SEE ALSO
* Dazzle camouflage * Tijuana Zebra
* Zebra crossing
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Churcher , C.S. 1993 .
Mammalian Species No . 453 .
American Society of Mammalogists .
* Estes , R. ( 2012 ) .
The Behavior Guide to African Mammals , Including Hoofed Mammals , Carnivores , Primates 20th Anniversary Edition , University of California Press .
* McClintock , Dorcas .
A Natural History Of Zebras September 1976 .
Scribner 's , New York .
*
Robert , Eric , dir .
( 2001 ) .
Zebras , in series , Families in the Wild ( DVD , 53 min . ) .
Goldhil Entertainment GH-1593 .
N.B. : " About the Grant zebras living in Tanzania . "
EXTERNAL LINKS