PANCREAS
The pancreas is an organ of the digestive system and endocrine system of vertebrates .
In humans , it is located in the abdominal cavity behind the stomach .
The pancreas is a mixed gland , having both an endocrine and an exocrine function .
As an endocrine gland , it secretes into the blood several important hormones , including insulin , glucagon , somatostatin , and pancreatic polypeptide .
As an exocrine gland , it secretes pancreatic juice into the duodenum through the pancreatic duct .
This juice contains bicarbonate , which neutralizes acid entering the duodenum from the stomach ; and digestive enzymes , which break down carbohydrates , proteins , and lipids in ingested food entering the duodenum from the stomach .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The pancreas is an organ that in humans lies in the upper left part of the abdomen .
It is found behind the stomach .
The pancreas is about long .
Anatomically , the pancreas is divided into the head of pancreas , the neck of pancreas , the body of pancreas , and the tail of pancreas .
The head is surrounded by the duodenum in its concavity .
The head surrounds two blood vessels , the superior mesenteric artery and vein .
From the back of the head emerges a small uncinate process , which extends to the back of the superior mesenteric vein and ends at the superior mesenteric artery .
The neck is about long and lies between the head and the body and in front of the superior mesenteric artery and vein .
Its front upper surface supports the pylorus ( the base ) of the stomach .
The neck arises from the left upper part of the front of the head .
It is directed first upward and forward , and then upward and to the left to join the body ; it is somewhat flattened from above downward and backward .
On the right it is grooved by the gastroduodenal artery .
The body is the largest part of the pancreas and lies behind the pylorus , at the same level as the transpyloric plane .
The tail ends by abutting the spleen .
The pancreas is a secretory structure with an internal hormonal role ( endocrine ) and an external digestive role ( exocrine ) .
The endocrine part is composed of hormonal tissue distributed along the pancreas in discrete units called islets of Langerhans .
Islets of Langerhans have a well - established structure and form density routes through the exocrine tissue .
The exocrine part has two main ducts , the main pancreatic duct and the accessory pancreatic duct .
These drain enzymes through the ampulla of Vater into the duodenum .
MARGINS Section::::Margins .
The upper margin of the pancreas is blunt and flat to the right , and narrow and sharp to the left , near the tail .
It begins on the right in the omental tuber , and is in relation with the celiac artery , from which the hepatic artery courses to the right just above the gland , while the splenic artery runs toward the left in a groove along this border .
The lower margin of the pancreas separates the posterior from the inferior surface ; the superior mesenteric vessels emerge under its right extremity .
The frontal margin of the pancreas separates the anterior from the inferior surface of the pancreas , and along this border the two layers of the transverse mesocolon diverge from one another , one passing upward over the frontal surface , the other backward over the inferior surface .
SURFACES Section::::Surfaces .
The inferior surface of the pancreas is narrow on the right , broader on the left , and covered by peritoneum ; it lies upon the duodenojejunal flexure and on some coils of the jejunum ; its left extremity rests on the splenic flexure of the colon .
The anterior surface of the pancreas faces the front of the abdomen .
Most of the right half of this surface is in contact with the transverse colon , with only areolar tissue intervening .
From its upper part , it joins to the neck of the pancreas at a well - marked prominence , the omental tuber , which abuts the lesser omentum .
Its right edge is marked by a groove for the gastroduodenal artery .
The lower part of the right half , below the transverse colon , is covered by peritoneum continuous with the inferior layer of the transverse mesocolon , and is in contact with the coils of the small intestine .
The superior mesenteric artery passes down in front of the left half across the uncinate process ; the superior mesenteric vein runs upward on the right side of the artery and , behind the neck , joins with the lienal vein to form the portal vein .
BLOOD SUPPLY Section::::Blood supply .
The pancreas receives blood from branches of both the coeliac artery and superior mesenteric artery .
The splenic artery runs along the top margin of the pancreas , and supplies the neck , body and tail of the pancreas through its pancreatic branches , the largest of which is called the greater pancreatic artery .
The superior and inferior pancreaticoduodenal arteries run along the anterior and posterior surfaces of the head of the pancreas at its border with the duodenum .
These supply the head of the pancreas .
The body and neck of the pancreas drain into the splenic vein ; the head drains into the superior mesenteric and portal veins .
HISTOLOGY Section::::Histology .
The pancreas contains tissue with an endocrine and exocrine role , and this division is also visible when the pancreas is viewed under a microscope .
The tissues with an endocrine role can be seen under staining as lightly - stained clusters of cells , called pancreatic islets ( also called islets of Langerhans ) .
Darker - staining cells form clusters called acini , which are arranged in lobes separated by a thin fibrous barrier .
The secretory cells of each acinus surround a small intercalated duct .
Because of their secretory function , these cells have many small granules of zymogens that are visible .
The intercalated ducts drain into larger ducts within the lobule , and finally interlobular ducts .
The ducts are lined by a single layer of columnar epithelium .
With increasing diameter , several layers of columnar cells may be seen .
VARIATION Section::::Variation .
The size of the pancreas varies considerably .
Several anatomical variations exist , relating to the embryological development of the two pancreatic buds .
The pancreas develops from these buds on either side of the duodenum .
The ventral bud eventually rotates to lie next to the dorsal bud , eventually fusing .
If the two buds , each having a duct , do not fuse , a pancreas may exist with two separate ducts , a condition known as a pancreas divisum .
This condition has no physiologic consequence .
If the ventral bud does not fully rotate , an annular pancreas may exist .
This is where sections of the pancreas completely encircle the duodenum , and may even lead to duodenal atresia .
An accessory pancreatic duct may exist if the main duct of the pancreas does not regress .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
As part of embryonic development , the pancreas forms from the embryonic foregut and is therefore of endodermal origin .
Pancreatic development begins with the formation of a ventral and a dorsal pancreatic bud .
Each structure communicates with the foregut through a duct .
The dorsal pancreatic bud forms the head , neck , body , and tail , whereas the ventral pancreatic bud forms the uncinate process .
Differential rotation and fusion of the ventral and dorsal pancreatic buds results in the formation of the definitive pancreas .
As the duodenum rotates to the right , it carries with it the ventral pancreatic bud and common bile duct .
Upon reaching its final destination , the ventral pancreatic bud fuses with the much larger dorsal pancreatic bud .
At this point of fusion , the main ducts of the ventral and dorsal pancreatic buds fuse , forming the main pancreatic duct .
The duct of the dorsal bud regresses , leaving the main pancreatic duct .
Differentiation of cells of the pancreas proceeds through two different pathways , corresponding to the dual endocrine and exocrine functions of the pancreas .
In progenitor cells of the exocrine pancreas , important molecules that induce differentiation include follistatin , fibroblast growth factors , and activation of the Notch receptor system .
Development of the exocrine acini progresses through three successive stages .
These are the predifferentiated , protodifferentiated , and differentiated stages , which correspond to undetectable , low , and high levels of digestive enzyme activity , respectively .
The multi - potent pancreatic progenitor cells have the capacity to differentiate into any of the pancreatic cells : acinar cells , endocrine cells , and ductal cells .
These progenitor cells are characterised by the co - expression of the transcription factors PDX1 and NKX6 - 1 .
Under the influence of neurogenin-3 and ISL1 , but in the absence of notch receptor signaling , these cells differentiate to form two lines of committed endocrine precursor cells .
The first line , under the direction of a Pax gene , forms α- and
γ- cells , which produce glucagon and pancreatic polypeptides , respectively .
The second line , influenced by Pax-6 , produces beta cells ( β- ) and delta cells ( δ- ) , which secrete insulin and somatostatin , respectively .
Insulin and glucagon can be detected in the human fetal circulation by the fourth or fifth month of fetal development .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The pancreas is involved in blood sugar control and metabolism within the body , and also in the secretion of substances ( collectively pancreatic juice ) which help digestion .
Classically , these are divided into an " endocrine " role , relating to the secretion of insulin and other substances within pancreatic islets and helping control blood sugar levels and metabolism within the body , and an " exocrine " role , relating to the secretion of enzymes involved in digesting substances from outside of the body .
SUGAR CONTROL AND METABOLISM
Section::::Sugar control and metabolism .
Approximately 3 million cell clusters called pancreatic islets are present in the pancreas .
Within these islets are four main types of cells which are involved in the regulation of blood glucose levels .
Each type of cell secretes a different type of hormone : α alpha cells secrete glucagon ( increase glucose in blood ) , β beta cells secrete insulin ( decrease glucose in blood ) , δ delta cells secrete somatostatin ( regulates / stops α and β cells ) and PP cells , or γ ( gamma ) cells , secrete pancreatic polypeptide .
These act to control blood glucose through secreting glucagon to increase the levels of glucose , and insulin to decrease it .
The islets are crisscrossed by a dense network of capillaries .
The capillaries of the islets are lined by layers of islet cells , and most endocrine cells are in direct contact with blood vessels , either by cytoplasmic processes or by direct apposition .
The islets function independently from the digestive role played by the majority of pancreatic cells .
Activity of the cells in the islets is affected by the autonomic nervous system :
Sympathetic ( adrenergic ) : α2 :
decreases secretion from beta cells , increases secretion from alpha cells , β2 :
increases secretion from beta cells Parasympathetic ( muscarinic )
: M3 : increases stimulation of alpha cells and beta cells DIGESTION Section::::Digestion .
The pancreas plays a vital role in the digestive system .
It secretes a fluid that contains enzymes into the duodenum .
These enzymes help to break down carbohydrates ( usually starch ) , proteins and lipids ( fats ) .
This role is called the " exocrine " role of the pancreas .
Cells are arranged in clusters called acini .
Secretes into the middle of the acinus , which accumulates in intralobular ducts , which drain to the main pancreatic duct , which drains directly into the duodenum .
The cells are filled with granules containing the digestive enzymes .
These are secreted in an inactive form termed zymogens or proenzymes .
When released into the duodenum , they are activated by the enzyme enteropeptidase present in the lining of the duodenum .
The proenzymes are cleaved , creating a cascade of activating enzymes : enteropeptidase activates the proenzyme trypsinogen by cleaving it to form trypsin .
The free trypsin then cleaves the rest of the trypsinogen , as well as chymotrypsinogen to its active form chymotrypsin .
The pancreas secretes substances which help in the digestion of starch and other carbohydrates , proteins and fats .
Proteases , the enzymes involved in the digestion of proteins , include trypsinogen and chymotrypsinogen .
The enzyme involved in the digestion of fats is lipase .
Amylase , also secreted by the pancreas , breaks down starch ( amylum ) and other carbohydrates .
The pancreas also secretes phospholipase A2 , lysophospholipase , and cholesterol esterase .
Secretion of these proenzymes is via the hormones gastrin , cholecystokinin and secretin , which are secreted by cells in the stomach and duodenum in response to distension and/or food .
GENE AND PROTEIN EXPRESSION Section::::Gene and protein expression .
About 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and about 50 % of these genes are expressed in the normal pancreas .
Less than 100 of these genes are more specifically expressed in the pancreas .
Similar to the salivary glands , most of the pancreas specific genes encode for secreted proteins .
Corresponding pancreas specific proteins are either expressed in the exocrine cellular compartment and have functions related to digestion of food uptake such as digestive chymotrypsinogen enzymes and pancreatic lipase PNLIP , or expressed in the various cells of the endocrine pancreatic islets and have functions related to secreted hormones such as insulin , glucagon , somatostatin and pancreatic polypeptide .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
A perforation of the pancreas , which may lead to the secretion of digestive enzymes such as lipase and amylase into the abdominal cavity as well as subsequent pancreatic self - digestion and digestion and damage to organs within the abdomen , generally requires prompt and experienced medical intervention .
It is possible for one to live without a pancreas , provided that the person takes insulin for proper regulation of blood glucose concentration and pancreatic enzyme supplements to aid digestion .
INFLAMMATION
Section::::Inflammation .
Inflammation of the pancreas is known as pancreatitis .
Pancreatitis is most often associated with recurrent gallstones or chronic alcohol use , although a variety of other causes , including measles , mumps , some medications , the congenital condition alpha-1 antitrypsin deficiency and even some scorpion stings , may cause pancreatitis .
Pancreatitis is likely to cause intense pain in the central abdomen , that often radiates to the back , and may be associated with jaundice .
In addition , due to causing problems with fat digestion and bilirubin excretion , pancreatitis often presents with pale stools and dark urine .
In pancreatitis , enzymes of the exocrine pancreas damage the structure and tissue of the pancreas .
Detection of some of these enzymes , such as amylase and lipase in the blood , along with symptoms and findings on x - ray , are often used to indicate that a person has pancreatitis .
A person with pancreatitis is also at risk of shock .
Pancreatitis is often managed medically with analgesics , removal of gallstones or treatment of other causes , and monitoring to ensure a patient does not develop shock .
CANCER Section::::Cancer .
Pancreatic cancers , particularly the most common type , pancreatic adenocarcinoma , remain very difficult to treat , and are mostly diagnosed only at a stage that is too late for surgery , which is the only curative treatment .
Pancreatic cancer is rare in those younger than 40 , and the median age of diagnosis is 71 .
Risk factors include smoking , obesity , diabetes , and certain rare genetic conditions including multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 and hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer among others .
About 25 % of cases are attributable to tobacco smoking , while 5–10 % of cases are linked to inherited genes .
There are several types of pancreatic cancer , involving both the endocrine and exocrine tissue .
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma , which affects the exocrine part of the pancreas , is by far the most common form .
The many types of pancreatic endocrine tumors are all uncommon or rare , and have varied outlooks .
However the incidence of these cancers has been rising sharply ; it is not clear to what extent this reflects increased detection , especially through medical imaging , of tumors that would be very slow to develop .
Insulinomas ( largely benign ) and gastrinomas are the most common types .
In the United States pancreatic cancer is the fourth most common cause of deaths due to cancer .
The disease occurs more often in the developed world , which had 68 % of new cases in 2012 .
Pancreatic adenocarcinoma typically has poor outcomes with the average percentage alive for at least one and five years after diagnosis being 25 % and 5 % respectively .
In localized disease where the cancer is small ( < 2 cm )
the number alive at five years is approximately 20 % .
For those with neuroendocrine cancers the number alive after five years is much better at 65 % , varying considerably with type .
A solid pseudopapillary tumour is a low - grade malignant tumour of the pancreas of papillary architecture that typically afflicts young women .
DIABETES MELLITUS TYPE 1
DIABETES Section::::Diabetes Mellitus .
Section::::Type 1 diabetes .
Diabetes mellitus type 1 is a chronic autoimmune disorder in which the immune system attacks the insulin - secreting cells of the pancreas .
Insulin is needed to keep blood sugar levels within optimal ranges , and its lack can lead to high blood sugar .
As an untreated chronic condition , diabetic neuropathy can result .
Type 1 diabetes can develop at any age but is most often diagnosed before adulthood .
For people living with type 1 diabetes , insulin injections are critical for survival .
An experimental procedure to treat type 1 diabetes is the transplantation of pancreatic islet cells from a donor into the patient 's liver so that the cells can produce the deficient insulin .
TYPE 2 DIABETES Section::::Type 2 diabetes .
Diabetes mellitus type 2 is the most common form of diabetes .
The causes for high blood sugar in this form of diabetes usually are a combination of insulin resistance and impaired insulin secretion , with both genetic and environmental factors playing an important role in the development of the disease .
The management of type 2 diabetes relies on a series of changes in diet and physical activity with the purpose of reducing blood sugar levels to normal ranges and increasing insulin sensitivity .
Biguanides such as metformin are also used as part of the treatment along with insulin therapy .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The pancreas was first identified by Herophilus ( 335–280 BC ) , a Greek anatomist and surgeon .
A few hundred years later , Rufus of Ephesus , another Greek anatomist , gave the pancreas its name .
Etymologically , the term " pancreas " , a modern Latin adaptation of Greek πάγκρεας , [ πᾶν ( " all " , " whole " ) , and κρέας ( " flesh " ) ] , originally means sweetbread , although literally meaning all - flesh , presumably because of its fleshy consistency .
It was only in 1889 when Oskar Minkowski discovered that removing the pancreas from a dog caused it to become diabetic ( insulin was later discovered by
Frederick Banting and Charles Herbert Best in 1921 ) .
OTHER ANIMALS
Section::::Other animals .
Pancreatic tissue is present in all vertebrates , but its precise form and arrangement varies widely .
There may be up to three separate pancreases , two of which arise from ventral buds , and the other dorsally .
In most species ( including humans ) , these " fuse " in the adult , but there are several exceptions .
Even when a single pancreas is present , two or three pancreatic ducts may persist , each draining separately into the duodenum ( or equivalent part of the foregut ) .
Birds , for example , typically have three such ducts .
In teleosts , and a few other species ( such as rabbits ) , there is no discrete pancreas at all , with pancreatic tissue being distributed diffusely across the mesentery and even within other nearby organs , such as the liver or spleen .
In a few teleost species , the endocrine tissue has fused to form a distinct gland within the abdominal cavity , but otherwise it is distributed among the exocrine components .
The most primitive arrangement , however , appears to be that of lampreys and lungfish , in which pancreatic tissue is found as a number of discrete nodules within the wall of the gut itself , with the exocrine portions being little different from other glandular structures of the intestine .
CUISINE Section::::Cuisine .
The pancreas of calf ( ris de veau ) and lamb ( ris d'agneau ) , and , less commonly , of beef and pork , are used as food under the culinary name of sweetbread .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pancreas at the Human Protein
Atlas
* Pancreatic Diseases – English – The Gastro Specialist