TURTLE Turtles are diapsids of the order Testudines ( or Chelonii ) characterized by a special bony or cartilaginous shell developed from their ribs and acting as a shield .
" Turtle " may refer to the order as a whole ( American English ) or to fresh - water and sea - dwelling testudines ( British English ) .
The order Testudines includes both extant ( living ) and extinct species .
The earliest known members of this group date from , making turtles one of the oldest reptile groups and a more ancient group than snakes or crocodilians .
Of the 356 known species alive today , some are highly endangered .
Turtles are ectotherms — animals commonly called cold - blooded — meaning that their internal temperature varies according to the ambient environment .
However , because of their high metabolic rate , leatherback sea turtles have a body temperature that is noticeably higher than that of the surrounding water .
Turtles are classified as amniotes , along with other reptiles , birds , and mammals .
Like other amniotes , turtles breathe air and do not lay eggs underwater , although many species live in or around water .
The study of turtles is called cheloniology , after the Greek word for turtle .
It is also sometimes called testudinology , after the Latin name for turtles .
TURTLE , TORTOISE , OR TERRAPIN Section::::Turtle , tortoise , or terrapin .
Differences exist in usage of the common terms turtle , tortoise , and terrapin , depending on the variety of English being used .
These terms are common names and do not reflect precise biological or taxonomic distinctions .
Turtle may either refer to the order as a whole , or to particular turtles that make up a form taxon that is not monophyletic , or may be limited to only aquatic species .
Tortoise usually refers to any land - dwelling , non - swimming chelonian .
Terrapin is used to describe several species of small , edible , hard - shell turtles , typically those found in brackish waters .
In North America , all chelonians are commonly called turtles .
Tortoise is used only in reference to fully terrestrial turtles or , more narrowly , only those members of Testudinidae , the family of modern land tortoises .
Terrapin may refer to small semi - aquatic turtles that live in fresh and brackish water , in particular the diamondback terrapin ( Malaclemys terrapin ) .
Although the members of the genus Terrapene dwell mostly on land , they are referred to as box turtles rather than tortoises .
The American Society of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists uses " turtle " to describe all species of the order Testudines , regardless of whether they are land - dwelling or sea - dwelling , and uses " tortoise " as a more specific term for slow - moving terrestrial species .
In the United Kingdom , the word turtle is used for water - dwelling species , including ones known in the US as terrapins , but not for terrestrial species , which are known only as tortoises .
The word chelonian is popular among veterinarians , scientists , and conservationists working with these animals as a catch - all name for any member of the superorder Chelonia , which includes all turtles living and extinct , as well as their immediate ancestors .
Chelonia is based on the Greek word for turtles , chelone ; Greek chelys " tortoise " is also used in the formation of scientific names of chelonians .
Testudines , on the other hand , is based on the Latin word for tortoise , testudo .
Terrapin comes from an Algonquian word for turtle .
Some languages do not have this distinction , as all of these are referred to by the same name .
For example , in Spanish , the word tortuga is used for turtles , tortoises , and terrapins .
A sea - dwelling turtle is tortuga marina , a freshwater species tortuga de río , and a tortoise tortuga terrestre .
ANATOMY AND MORPHOLOGY Section::::Anatomy and morphology .
The largest living chelonian is the leatherback sea turtle ( Dermochelys coriacea ) , which reaches a shell length of and can reach a weight of over .
Freshwater turtles are generally smaller , but with the largest species , the Asian softshell turtle Pelochelys cantorii , a few individuals have been reported up to .
This dwarfs even the better - known alligator snapping turtle , the largest chelonian in North America , which attains a shell length of up to and weighs as much as .
Giant tortoises of the genera Geochelone , Meiolania , and others were relatively widely distributed around the world into prehistoric times , and are known to have existed in North and South America , Australia , and Africa .
They became extinct at the same time as the appearance of man , and it is assumed humans hunted them for food .
The only surviving giant tortoises are on the Seychelles and Galápagos Islands and can grow to over in length , and weigh about .
The largest ever chelonian was Archelon ischyros , a Late Cretaceous sea turtle known to have been up to long .
The smallest turtle is the speckled padloper tortoise of South Africa .
It measures no more than in length and weighs about .
Two other species of small turtles are the American mud turtles and musk turtles that live in an area that ranges from Canada to South America .
The shell length of many species in this group is less than in length .
NECK RETRACTION
Section::::Neck retraction .
Turtles are divided into two groups , according to how they retract their necks into their shells ( something the ancestral Proganochelys could not do ) .
The mechanism of neck retraction differs phylogenetically : the suborder Pleurodira retracts laterally to the side , anterior to shoulder girdles , while the suborder Cryptodira retracts straight back , between shoulder girdles .
These motions are largely due to the morphology and arrangement of cervical vertebrae .
Of all recent turtles , the cervical column consists of nine joints and eight vertebrae , which are individually independent .
Since these vertebrae are not fused and are rounded , the neck is more flexible , being able to bend in the backwards and sideways directions .
The primary function and evolutionary implication of neck retraction is thought to be for feeding rather than protection .
Neck retraction and reciprocal extension allows the turtle to reach out further to capture prey while swimming .
Neck expansion creates suction when the head is thrust forward and the oropharynx is expanded , and this morphology suggests the retraction function is for feeding purposes as the suction helps catch prey .
The protection the shell provides the head when it is retracted is therefore not the main function of retraction , thus is an exaptation .
As for the difference between the two methods of retraction , both Pleurodirans and Cryptodirans use the quick extension of the neck as a method of predation , so the difference in retraction mechanism is not due to a difference in ecological niche .
HEAD Section::::Head .
Most turtles that spend most of their lives on land have their eyes looking down at objects in front of them .
Some aquatic turtles , such as snapping turtles and soft - shelled turtles , have eyes closer to the top of the head .
These species of turtle can hide from predators in shallow water , where they lie entirely submerged except for their eyes and nostrils .
Near their eyes , sea turtles possess glands that produce salty tears that rid their body of excess salt taken in from the water they drink .
Turtles have rigid beaks and use their jaws to cut and chew food .
Instead of having teeth , which they appear to have lost about 150 - 200 million years ago , the upper and lower jaws of the turtle are covered by horny ridges .
Carnivorous turtles usually have knife - sharp ridges for slicing through their prey .
Herbivorous turtles have serrated - edged ridges that help them cut through tough plants .
They use their tongues to swallow food , but unlike most reptiles , they can not stick out their tongues to catch food .
SHELL Section::::Shell .
The upper shell of the turtle is called the carapace .
The lower shell that encases the belly is called the plastron .
The carapace and plastron are joined together on the turtle 's sides by bony structures called bridges .
The inner layer of a turtle 's shell is made up of about 60 bones that include portions of the backbone and the ribs , meaning the turtle can not crawl out of its shell .
In most turtles , the outer layer of the shell is covered by horny scales called scutes that are part of its outer skin , or epidermis .
Scutes are made up of the fibrous protein keratin that also makes up the scales of other reptiles .
These scutes overlap the seams between the shell bones and add strength to the shell .
Some turtles do not have horny scutes ; for example , the leatherback sea turtle and the soft - shelled turtles have shells covered with leathery skin instead .
The shape of the shell gives helpful clues about how a turtle lives .
Most tortoises have a large , dome - shaped shell that makes it difficult for predators to crush the shell between their jaws .
One of the few exceptions is the African pancake tortoise , which has a flat , flexible shell that allows it to hide in rock crevices .
Most aquatic turtles have flat , streamlined shells , which aid in swimming and diving .
American snapping turtles and musk turtles have small , cross - shaped plastrons that give them more efficient leg movement for walking along the bottom of ponds and streams .
Another exception is the Belawan Turtle ( Cirebon , West Java ) , which has sunken - back soft - shell .
The color of a turtle 's shell may vary .
Shells are commonly colored brown , black , or olive green .
In some species , shells may have red , orange , yellow , or grey markings , often spots , lines , or irregular blotches .
One of the most colorful turtles is the eastern painted turtle , which includes a yellow plastron and a black or olive shell with red markings around the rim .
Tortoises , being land - based , have rather heavy shells .
In contrast , aquatic and soft - shelled turtles have lighter shells that help them avoid sinking in water and swim faster with more agility .
These lighter shells have large spaces called fontanelles between the shell bones .
The shells of leatherback sea turtles are extremely light because they lack scutes and contain many fontanelles .
It has been suggested by Jackson ( 2002 ) that the turtle shell can function as pH buffer .
To endure through anoxic conditions , such as winter periods trapped beneath ice or within anoxic mud at the bottom of ponds , turtles utilize two general physiological mechanisms .
In the case of prolonged periods of anoxia , it has been shown that the turtle shell both releases carbonate buffers and uptakes lactic acid .
RESPIRATION Section::::Respiration .
Respiration , for many amniotes , is achieved by the contraction and relaxation of specific muscle groups ( i.e. intercostals , abdominal muscles , and/or a diaphragm ) attached to an internal rib - cage that can expand or contract the body wall thus assisting airflow in and out of the lungs .
The ribs of Chelonians , however , are fused with their carapace and external to their pelvic and pectoral girdles , a feature unique among turtles .
This rigid shell is not capable of expansion , and by rendering their rib - cage immobile , Testudines have had to evolve special adaptations for respiration .
Turtle pulmonary ventilation occurs by using specific groups of abdominal muscles attached to their viscera and shell that pull the lungs ventrally during inspiration , where air is drawn in via a negative pressure gradient ( Boyle 's Law ) .
In expiration , the contraction of the transversus abdominis is the driving force by propelling the viscera into the lungs and expelling air under positive pressure .
Conversely , the relaxing and flattening of the oblique abdominis muscle pulls the transversus back down which , once again , draws air back into the lungs .
Important auxiliary muscles used for ventilatory processes are the pectoralis , which is used in conjunction with the transverse abdominis during inspiration , and the serratus , which moves with the abdominal oblique accompanying expiration .
The lungs of Testudines are multi - chambered and attached their entire length down the carapace .
The number of chambers can vary between taxa , though most commonly they have three lateral chambers , three medial chambers , and one terminal chamber .
As previously mentioned , the act of specific abdominal muscles pulling down the viscera ( or pushing back up ) is what allows for respiration in turtles .
Specifically , it is the turtles large liver that pulls or pushes on the lungs .
Ventral to the lungs , in the coelomic cavity , the liver of turtles is attached directly to the right lung , and their stomach is directly attached to the left lung by the ventral mesopneumonium , which is attached to their liver by the ventral mesentery .
When the liver is pulled down , inspiration begins .
Supporting the lungs is the post - pulmonary septum , which is found in all Testudines , and is thought to prevent the lungs from collapsing .
SKIN AND MOLTING Section::::Skin and molting .
As mentioned above , the outer layer of the shell is part of the skin ; each scute ( or plate ) on the shell corresponds to a single modified scale .
The remainder of the skin has much smaller scales , similar to the skin of other reptiles .
Turtles do not molt their skins all at once as snakes do , but continuously in small pieces .
When turtles are kept in aquaria , small sheets of dead skin can be seen in the water ( often appearing to be a thin piece of plastic ) having been sloughed off when the animals deliberately rub themselves against a piece of wood or stone .
Tortoises also shed skin , but dead skin is allowed to accumulate into thick knobs and plates that provide protection to parts of the body outside the shell .
By counting the rings formed by the stack of smaller , older scutes on top of the larger , newer ones , it is possible to estimate the age of a turtle , if one knows how many scutes are produced in a year .
This method is not very accurate , partly because growth rate is not constant , but also because some of the scutes eventually fall away from the shell .
LIMBS Section::::Limbs .
Terrestrial tortoises have short , sturdy feet .
Tortoises are famous for moving slowly , in part because of their heavy , cumbersome shells , which restrict stride length .
Amphibious turtles normally have limbs similar to those of tortoises , except that the feet are webbed and often have long claws .
These turtles swim using all four feet in a way similar to the dog paddle , with the feet on the left and right side of the body alternately providing thrust .
Large turtles tend to swim less than smaller ones , and the very big species , such as alligator snapping turtles , hardly swim at all , preferring to walk along the bottom of the river or lake .
As well as webbed feet , turtles have very long claws , used to help them clamber onto riverbanks and floating logs upon which they bask .
Male turtles tend to have particularly long claws , and these appear to be used to stimulate the female while mating .
While most turtles have webbed feet , some , such as the pig - nosed turtle , have true flippers , with the digits being fused into paddles and the claws being relatively small .
These species swim in the same way as sea turtles do ( see below ) .
Sea turtles are almost entirely aquatic and have flippers instead of feet .
Sea turtles fly through the water , using the up - and - down motion of the front flippers to generate thrust ; the back feet are not used for propulsion but may be used as rudders for steering .
Compared with freshwater turtles , sea turtles have very limited mobility on land , and apart from the dash from the nest to the sea as hatchlings , male sea turtles normally never leave the sea .
Females must come back onto land to lay eggs .
They move very slowly and laboriously , dragging themselves forwards with their flippers .
BEHAVIOR SENSES Section::::Behavior .
Section::::Senses .
Turtles are thought to have exceptional night vision due to the unusually large number of rod cells in their retinas .
Turtles have color vision with a wealth of cone subtypes with sensitivities ranging from the near ultraviolet ( UVA ) to red .
Some land turtles have very poor pursuit movement abilities , which are normally found only in predators that hunt quick - moving prey , but carnivorous turtles are able to move their heads quickly to snap .
COMMUNICATION Section::::Communication .
While typically thought of as mute , turtles make various sounds when communicating .
Tortoises may be vocal when courting and mating .
Various species of both freshwater and sea turtles emit numerous types of calls , often short and low frequency , from the time they are in the egg to when they are adults .
These vocalizations may serve to create group cohesion when migrating .
INTELLIGENCE Section::::Intelligence .
It has been reported that wood turtles are better than white rats at learning to navigate mazes .
Case studies exist of turtles playing .
They do , however , have a very low encephalization quotient ( relative brain to body mass ) , and their hard shells enable them to live without fast reflexes or elaborate predator avoidance strategies .
In the laboratory , turtles ( Pseudemys nelsoni ) can learn novel operant tasks and have demonstrated a long - term memory of at least 7.5 months .
TURTLE MATING STRATEGIES Section::::Turtle Mating Strategies .
Turtles are known for displaying a wide variety of mating behaviors , however , they are not known for forming pair - bonds or for being part of a social group .
Once fertilization has occurred and an offspring has been produced , neither parent will provide care for the offspring once it 's hatched .
Females generally outnumber males in various turtle species ( such as Green turtles ) , and as a result , most males will engage in multiple copulation with multiple partners throughout their lifespan .
However , due to the sexual dimorphism present in most turtle species , males must develop different courting strategies or use alternate methods to gain access to a potential mate .
Most terrestrial species have males that are larger than females , and fighting between males often determines a hierarchical order in which the higher up the order an individual is , the better the chance is of the individual getting access to a potential mate .
For most semi - aquatic species and bottom - walking aquatic species , combat occurs less often .
Males belonging to semi - aquatic and bottom - walking species instead often use their larger size advantage to forcibly mate with a female .
In fully aquatic species , males are often smaller than females and therefore they can not use the same strategy as their semi - aquatic relatives , which relies on overpowering the females with strength .
Males in this category resort to using courtship displays in an attempt to gain mating access to a female .
FIGHTING BETWEEN MALES Section::::Fighting Between Males .
Wood turtles are an example of a terrestrial species where the males have a hierarchical ranking system based on dominance through fighting , and it 's shown that the males with the highest rank and thus the most wins in fights have the most offspring .
Galapagos tortoises are another example of a species which has a hierarchical rank that is determined by dominance displays , and access to food and mates is regulated by this dominance hierarchy .
Two male saddle backs most often compete for access to cactus trees , which is their source of food .
The winner is the individual who stretches their neck the highest , and that individual gets access to the cactus tree , which can attract potential mates .
FORCE MATING Section::::Force Mating .
The male scorpion mud turtle is an example of a bottom - walking aquatic species that relies on overpowering females with its larger size as a mating strategy .
The male approaches the female from the rear , and often resorts to aggressive methods such as biting the female 's tail or hind limbs , followed by a mounting behavior in which the male clasps the edges of her carapace with his forelimbs and hind limbs to hold her in position .
The male follows this action by laterally waving his head and sometimes biting the female 's head in an attempt to get her to withdraw her head into her shell .
This exposes her cloaca , and with it exposed , the male can attempt copulation by trying to insert his grasping tail .
Male radiated tortoises are also known to use the force mating strategy wherein they use surrounding vegetation to trap or prevent females from escaping , then pin them down for copulation .
COURTSHIP DISPLAYS Section::::Courtship Displays .
Red - eared sliders are an example of a fully aquatic species in which the male performs a courtship behavior .
In this case the male extends his forelegs with the palms facing out and flutters his forelegs in the female 's face .
Female choice is important in this method , and the females of some species , such as green sea turtles , are n't always receptive .
As such , they 've evolved certain behaviors to avoid the male 's attempts at copulation , such as swimming away , confronting the male followed by biting , or a refusal position in which the female assumes
a vertical position with her limbs widely outspread and her plastron facing the male .
If the water is too shallow to perform the refusal position , the females will resort to beaching themselves , which is a proven deterrent method , as the males will not follow them ashore .
ECOLOGY AND LIFE HISTORY Section::::Ecology and life history .
Although many turtles spend large amounts of their lives underwater , all turtles and tortoises breathe air and must surface at regular intervals to refill their lungs .
They can also spend much or all of their lives on dry land .
Aquatic respiration in Australian freshwater turtles is currently being studied .
Some species have large cloacal cavities that are lined with many finger - like projections .
These projections , called papillae , have a rich blood supply and increase the surface area of the cloaca .
The turtles can take up dissolved oxygen from the water using these papillae , in much the same way that fish use gills to respire .
Like other reptiles , turtles lay eggs that are slightly soft and leathery .
The eggs of the largest species are spherical while the eggs of the rest are elongated .
Their albumen is white and contains a different protein from bird eggs , such that it will not coagulate when cooked .
Turtle eggs prepared to eat consist mainly of yolk .
In some species , temperature determines whether an egg develops into a male or a female : a higher temperature causes a female , a lower temperature causes a male .
Large numbers of eggs are deposited in holes dug into mud or sand .
They are then covered and left to incubate by themselves .
Depending on the species , the eggs will typically take 70–120 days to hatch .
When the turtles hatch , they squirm their way to the surface and head toward the water .
There are no known species in which the mother cares for her young .
Sea turtles lay their eggs on dry , sandy beaches .
Immature sea turtles are not cared for by the adults .
Turtles can take many years to reach breeding age , and in many cases , breed every few years rather than annually .
Researchers have recently discovered a turtle 's organs do not gradually break down or become less efficient over time , unlike most other animals .
It was found that the liver , lungs , and kidneys of a centenarian turtle are virtually indistinguishable from those of its immature counterpart .
This has inspired genetic researchers to begin examining the turtle genome for longevity genes .
A group of turtles is known as a bale .
DIET Section::::Diet .
A turtle 's diet varies greatly depending on the environment in which it lives .
Adult turtles typically eat aquatic plants ; invertebrates such as insects , snails , and worms ; and have been reported to occasionally eat dead marine animals .
Several small freshwater species are carnivorous , eating small fish and a wide range of aquatic life .
However , protein is essential to turtle growth and juvenile turtles are purely carnivorous .
Sea turtles typically feed on jellyfish , sponges , and other soft - bodied organisms .
Some species with stronger jaws have been observed to eat shellfish , while others , such as the green sea turtle , do not eat meat at all and , instead , have a diet largely made up of algae .
SYSTEMATICS AND EVOLUTION Section::::Systematics and evolution .
Based on body fossils , the first proto - turtles are believed to have existed in the late Triassic Period of the Mesozoic era , about 220 million years ago , and their shell , which has remained a remarkably stable body plan , is thought to have evolved from bony extensions of their backbones and broad ribs that expanded and grew together to form a complete shell that offered protection at every stage of its evolution , even when the bony component of the shell was not complete .
This is supported by fossils of the freshwater Odontochelys semitestacea or " half - shelled turtle with teeth " , from the late Triassic , which have been found near Guangling in southwest China .
Odontochelys displays a complete bony plastron and an incomplete carapace , similar to an early stage of turtle embryonic development .
Prior to this discovery , the earliest - known fossil turtle ancestors , like Proganochelys , were terrestrial and had a complete shell , offering no clue to the evolution of this remarkable anatomical feature .
By the late Jurassic , turtles had radiated widely , and their fossil history becomes easier to read .
Their exact ancestry has been disputed .
It was believed they are the only surviving branch of the ancient evolutionary grade Anapsida , which includes groups such as procolophonids , millerettids , protorothyrids , and pareiasaurs .
All anapsid skulls lack a temporal opening while all other extant amniotes have temporal openings ( although in mammals , the hole has become the zygomatic arch ) .
The millerettids , protorothyrids , and pareiasaurs became extinct in the late Permian period and the procolophonoids during the Triassic .
However , it was later suggested that the anapsid - like turtle skull may be due to reversion rather than to anapsid descent .
More recent morphological phylogenetic studies with this in mind placed turtles firmly within diapsids , slightly closer to Squamata than to Archosauria .
All molecular studies have strongly upheld the placement of turtles within diapsids ; some place turtles within Archosauria , or , more commonly , as a sister group to extant archosaurs , though an analysis conducted by Lyson et al .
( 2012 ) recovered turtles as the sister group of lepidosaurs instead .
Reanalysis of prior phylogenies suggests that they classified turtles as anapsids both because they assumed this classification ( most of them studying what sort of anapsid turtles are ) and because they did not sample fossil and extant taxa broadly enough for constructing the cladogram .
Testudines were suggested to have diverged from other diapsids between 200 and 279 million years ago , though the debate is far from settled .
Even the traditional placement of turtles outside Diapsida can not be ruled out at this point .
A combined analysis of morphological and molecular data conducted by Lee ( 2001 ) found turtles to be anapsids ( though a relationship with archosaurs could n't be statistically rejected ) .
Similarly , a morphological study conducted by Lyson et al ..
( 2010 ) recovered them as anapsids most closely related to Eunotosaurus .
A molecular analysis of 248 nuclear genes from 16 vertebrate taxa suggests that turtles are a sister group to birds and crocodiles ( the Archosauria ) .
The date of separation of turtles and birds and crocodiles was estimated to be .
The most recent common ancestor of living turtles , corresponding to the split between Pleurodira and Cryptodira , was estimated to have occurred around .
The oldest definitive crown - group turtle ( member of the modern clade Testudines ) is the species Caribemys oxfordiensis from the late Jurassic period ( Oxfordian stage ) .
Through utilizing the first genomic - scale phylogenetic analysis of ultraconserved elements ( UCEs ) to investigate the placement of turtles within reptiles , Crawford et al .
( 2012 ) also suggest that turtles are a sister group to birds and crocodiles ( the Archosauria ) .
The first genome - wide phylogenetic analysis was completed by Wang et al .
( 2013 ) .
Using the draft genomes of Chelonia mydas and Pelodiscus sinensis , the team used the largest turtle data set to date in their analysis and concluded that turtles are likely a sister group of crocodilians and birds ( Archosauria ) .
This placement within the diapsids suggests that the turtle lineage lost diapsid skull characteristics as it now possesses an anapsid - like skull .
The earliest known fully shelled member of the turtle lineage is the late Triassic Proganochelys .
This genus already possessed many advanced turtle traits , and thus probably indicates many millions of years of preceding turtle evolution ; this is further supported by evidence from fossil tracks from the Early Triassic of the United States ( Wyoming and Utah ) and from the Middle Triassic of Germany , indicating that proto - turtles already existed as early as the Early Triassic .
Proganochelys lacked the ability to pull its head into its shell , had a long neck , and had a long , spiked tail ending in a club .
While this body form is similar to that of ankylosaurs , it resulted from convergent evolution .
Turtles are divided into two extant suborders : Cryptodira and Pleurodira .
The Cryptodira is the larger of the two groups and includes all the marine turtles , the terrestrial tortoises , and many of the freshwater turtles .
The Pleurodira are sometimes known as the side - necked turtles , a reference to the way they retract their heads into their shells .
This smaller group consists primarily of various freshwater turtles .
CLASSIFICATION OF TURTLES Section::::Classification of turtles .
Clade Testudinata
* Genus †Pappochelys * Family †Proganochelyidae * Family †Australochelidae * Family †Proterochersidae * Clade †Mesochelydia * Family †Indochelyidae
* Family †Heckerochelyidae
* Clade †Perichelydia * Family †Chelycarapookidae * Family
†Sichuanchelyidae
* Family †Helochelydridae
* Clade †Meiolaniformes * Family
†Meiolaniidae
* Family †Otwayemyidae * Genus †Trapalcochelys * Genus †Chubutemys * Genus †Peligrochelys * Genus †Patagoniaemys
* Family †Kallokibotiidae * Clade Testudines * Suborder Pleurodira * Family †Apertotemporalidae * Family
†Platychelyidae
* Family †Dortokidae * Family †Notoemyidae * Superfamily Cheloides * Family Chelidae * Superfamily Pelomedusoides * Family †Araripemydidae
* Family Pelomedusidae ( African sideneck turtles )
* Family †Euraxemydidae
* Family †Bothremydidae
* Family Podocnemididae ( Madagascan big - headed and American sideneck river turtles )
* Suborder Cryptodira * Infraorder Paracryptodira * Family †Pleurosternidae
* Family †Compsemyidae
* Family †Baenidae
* Infraorder Eucryptodira * Family †Macrobaenidae * Family †Eurysternidae
* Family †Plesiochelyidae * Family †Xinjiangchelyidae
* Clade Centrocryptodira * Family †Osteopygidae * Family †Sinemydidae
* Clade Polycryptodira * Clade Pantrionychia * Family †Adocidae
* Superfamily Trionychoidea * Family Carettochelyidae ( pignose turtles )
* Family Trionychidae ( softshell turtles )
* Superfamily Testudinoidea * Family †Haichemydidae * Family †Lindholmemydidae * Family †Sinochelyidae * Family Emydidae ( pond , box , and water turtles )
* Family Geoemydidae ( Asian river turtles , Asian leaf turtles , Asian box turtles , and roofed turtles )
* Family Testudinidae ( true tortoises ) * Clade Americhelydia * Family Chelydridae ( snapping turtles ) * Superfamily Kinosternoidea * Family Dermatemydidae ( river turtles ) * Family Kinosternidae ( mud turtles ) * Superfamily Chelonioidea ( sea turtles ) * Family †Toxochelyidae
* Family Cheloniidae ( green sea turtles and relatives )
* Family
†Thalassemydidae
* Family Dermochelyidae ( leatherback sea turtles )
* Family †Protostegidae
FOSSIL RECORD Section::::Fossil record .
Turtle fossils of hatchling and nestling size have been documented in the scientific literature .
Paleontologists from North Carolina State University have found the fossilized remains of the world 's largest turtle in a coal mine in Colombia .
The specimen named as Carbonemys cofrinii is around 60 million years old and nearly 2.4 m ( 8 ft ) long .
On a few rare occasions , paleontologists have succeeded in unearthing large numbers of Jurassic or Cretaceous turtle skeletons accumulated in a single area ( the Nemegt Formation in Mongolia , the Turtle Graveyard in North Dakota , or the Black Mountain Turtle Layer in Wyoming ) .
The most spectacular find of this kind to date occurred in 2009 in Shanshan County in Xinjiang , where over a thousand ancient freshwater turtles apparently died after the last water hole in an area dried out during a major drought .
Though absent from New Zealand in recent times , turtle fossils are known from the Miocene Saint Bathans Fauna , represented by a meiolaniid and pleurodires .
GENOMICS Section::::Genomics .
Turtles possess diverse chromosome numbers ( 2n = 28–66 ) and a myriad of chromosomal rearrangements have occurred during evolution .
IN HUMAN CULTURE
AS PETS Section::::In human culture .
Section::::As pets .
Some turtles , particularly small terrestrial and freshwater turtles , are kept as pets .
Among the most popular are Russian tortoises , spur - thighed tortoises , and red - eared sliders .
In the United States , due to the ease of contracting salmonellosis through casual contact with turtles , the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) established a regulation in 1975 to discontinue the sale of turtles under .
It is supposed to be illegal in every US state for anyone to sell any turtles under long , but many stores and flea markets still sell small turtles due to a loophole in the FDA regulation which allows turtles under to be sold for educational purposes .
Some states have other laws and regulations regarding possession of red - eared sliders as pets because they are looked upon as invasive species or pests where they are not native , but have been introduced through the pet trade .
As of July 1 , 2007 , it is illegal in Florida to sell any wild type red - eared slider .
Unusual color varieties such as albino and pastel red - eared sliders , which are derived from captive breeding , are still allowed for sale in that state .
AS FOOD , TRADITIONAL MEDICINE , AND
COSMETICS Section::::As food , traditional medicine , and cosmetics .
The flesh of turtles , calipash or calipee , was and still is considered a delicacy in a number of cultures .
Turtle soup has been a prized dish in Anglo - American cuisine , and still remains so in some parts of Asia .
Gopher tortoise stew was popular with some groups in Florida .
Turtles remain a part of the traditional diet on the island of Grand Cayman , so much so that when wild stocks became depleted , a turtle farm was established specifically to raise sea turtles for their meat .
The farm also releases specimens to the wild as part of an effort to repopulate the Caribbean Sea .
Fat from turtles is also used in the Caribbean and in Mexico as a main ingredient in cosmetics , marketed under its Spanish name crema de tortuga .
Turtle plastrons ( the part of the shell that covers a tortoise from the bottom ) are widely used in traditional Chinese medicine ; according to statistics , Taiwan imports hundreds of tons of plastrons every year .
A popular medicinal preparation based on powdered turtle plastron ( and a variety of herbs ) is the guilinggao jelly ; these days , though , it is typically made with only herbal ingredients .
CONSERVATION STATUS Section::::Conservation status .
In February 2011 , the Tortoise and Freshwater Turtle Specialist Group published a report about the top 25 species of turtles most likely to become extinct , with a further 40 species at very high risk of becoming extinct .
This list excludes sea turtles , however , both the leatherback and the Kemp 's ridley would make the top 25 list .
The report is due to be updated in four years time allowing to follow the evolution of the list .
Between 48 and 54 % of all 328 of their species considered threatened , turtles and tortoises are at a much higher risk of extinction than many other vertebrates .
Of the 263 species of freshwater and terrestrial turtles , 117 species are considered Threatened , 73 are either Endangered or Critically Endangered and 1 is Extinct .
Of the 58 species belonging to the family Testudinidae , 33 species are Threatened , 18 are either Endangered or Critically Endangered , 1 is Extinct in the wild and
7 species are Extinct .
71 % of all tortoise species are either gone or almost gone .
Asian species are the most endangered , closely followed by the five endemic species from Madagascar .
Turtles face many threats , including habitat destruction , harvesting for consumption , and the pet trade .
The high extinction risk for Asian species is primarily due to the long - term unsustainable exploitation of turtles and tortoises for consumption and traditional Chinese medicine , and to a lesser extent for the international pet trade .
Efforts have been made by Chinese entrepreneurs to satisfy increasing demand for turtle meat as gourmet food and traditional medicine with farmed turtles , instead of wild - caught ones ; according to a study published in 2007 , over a thousand turtle farms operated in China .
Turtle farms in Oklahoma and Louisiana raise turtles for export to China .
Nonetheless , wild turtles continue to be caught and sent to market in large number ( as well as to turtle farms , to be used as breeding stock ) , resulting in a situation described by conservationists as " the Asian turtle crisis " .
In the words of the biologist George Amato , " the amount and the volume of captured turtles ... vacuumed up entire species from areas in Southeast Asia " , even as biologists still did not know how many distinct turtle species live in the region .
About 75 % of Asia 's 90 tortoise and freshwater turtle species are estimated to have become threatened .
Harvesting wild turtles is legal in a number of states in the USA .
In one of these states , Florida , just a single seafood company in Fort Lauderdale was reported in 2008 as buying about 5,000 pounds of softshell turtles a week .
The harvesters ( hunters ) are paid about $ 2 a pound ; some manage to catch as many as 30–40 turtles ( 500 pounds ) on a good day .
Some of the catch gets to the local restaurants , while most of it is exported to Asia .
The Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission estimated in 2008 that around 3,000 pounds of softshell turtles were exported each week via Tampa International Airport .
Nonetheless , the great majority of turtles exported from the USA are farm raised .
According to one estimate by the World Chelonian Trust , about 97 % of 31.8 million animals harvested in the U.S. over a three - year period ( November 4 , 2002 – November 26 , 2005 ) were exported .
It has been estimated ( presumably , over the same 2002–2005 period ) that about 47 % of the US turtle exports go to People 's Republic of China ( predominantly to Hong Kong ) , another 20 % to Taiwan , and 11 % to Mexico .
TurtleSAt is a smartphone app that has been developed in Australia in honor of World Turtle Day to help in the conservation of fresh water turtles in Australia .
The app will allow the user to identify turtles with a picture guide and the location of turtles using the phones GPS to record sightings and help find hidden turtle nesting grounds .
The app has been developed because there has been a high per cent of decline of fresh water turtles in Australia due to foxes , droughts , and urban development .
The aim of the app is to reduce the number of foxes and help with targeting feral animal control .
SEE ALSO * Animal track * Cheloniology * Cultural depictions of turtles
* Symposium on Turtle Evolution NOTES
REFERENCES
* .
Filmmaker Eric Daniel Metzgar , the creator of the film The Chances of the World Changing , talks to George Amato , the director of conservation genetics at the American Museum of Natural History about turtle conservation and the relationship between evolution and extinction *
( 3rd ed .
2004 )
*
Their source is an article by James Parham , Shi Haitao , and two other authors , published in Feb 2007 in the journal Conservation Biology *
There is also a copy of the article at the TSA site .
Articles by Peter Paul van Dijk are mentioned as the main source .
* ( Major destinations : 13,625,673 animals to Hong Kong , 1,365,687 to the rest of the PRC , 6,238,300 to Taiwan , 3,478,275 to Mexico , and 1,527,771 to Japan , 945,257 to Singapore , and 596,966 to Spain . )
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Chelonian studbook Collection and display of the weights / sizes of captive turtles * Biogeography and Phylogeny of the Chelonia ( taxonomy , maps ) * New Scientist article ( including video ) on how the turtle evolved its shell