WARRANT OFFICER
A warrant officer ( WO ) is an officer in a military organisation who is designated an officer by a warrant , as distinguished from a commissioned officer who is designated an officer by a commission , and a non - commissioned officer who is designated an officer , often by virtue of seniority .
The rank was first used in the 13th century in the Royal Navy and is today used in most services in many countries , including the Commonwealth nations and the United States .
Outside the United States , warrant officers are included in the " Other Ranks " ( OR ) category , equivalent to the US " E " ( Enlisted ) category and rank between non - commissioned officers and commissioned officers .
The warrant officers in Commonwealth navies rank between chief petty officer and sub - lieutenant , in Commonwealth air forces between flight sergeant and pilot officer , and in Commonwealth armies between staff sergeant and second - lieutenant .
Warrant officers in the United States are classified as officers and are in the " W " category ( NATO " WO " ) ; they are technical leaders and specialists .
Chief warrant officers are commissioned by the President of the United States and take the same oath as regular commissioned officers .
They may be technical experts with a long service as enlisted personnel , or direct entrants , notably for U.S. Army helicopter pilots .
ORIGINS IN THE ROYAL NAVY Section::::Origins in the Royal Navy .
The warrant officer corps began in the nascent Royal Navy .
At that time , noblemen with military experience took command of the new navy , adopting the military ranks of lieutenant and captain .
These officers often had no knowledge of life on board a ship — let alone how to navigate such a vessel — and relied on the expertise of the ship 's master and other seamen who tended to the technical aspects of running the ship .
As cannon came into use , the officers also required gunnery experts ; specialist gunners began to appear in the 16th century and also had warrant officer status .
Literacy was one thing that most warrant officers had in common , and this distinguished them from the common seamen : according to the Admiralty regulations , " no person shall be appointed to any station in which he is to have charge of stores , unless he can read and write , and is sufficiently skilled in arithmetic to keep an account of them correctly " .
Since all warrant officers had responsibility for stores , this was enough to debar the illiterate .
RANK AND STATUS
IN THE 18TH CENTURY Section::::Rank and status in the 18th century .
In origin , warrant officers were specialist professionals whose expertise and authority demanded formal recognition .
In the 18th century they fell into two clear categories : on the one hand , those privileged to share with the commissioned officers in the wardroom and on the quarterdeck ; and on the other , those who ranked with more junior members of the ship 's crew .
Somewhere between the two , however , were the standing officers ; notable because , unlike the rest of the ship 's company , they remained with the ship even when it was out of commission ( e.g. for repair , refitting or replenishment , or whilst laid up ) ; in these circumstances they were under the pay and supervision of the Royal Dockyard .
WARDROOM WARRANT OFFICERS Section::::Wardroom warrant officers .
These classes of warrant officer messed in the wardroom with the commissioned officers : * the master : the senior warrant officer , a qualified navigator and experienced seaman who set the sails , maintained the ship 's log and advised the captain on the seaworthiness of the ship and crew ;
* the ship 's doctor : who treated the sick and injured and advised the captain on matters of health ; * the purser : responsible for supplies , food and pay for the crew .
In the early 19th century , they were joined in the wardroom by naval chaplains , who also had warrant officer status ( though they were only usually present on larger vessels ) .
STANDING WARRANT OFFICERS Section::::Standing warrant officers .
The standing officers were : * the boatswain : responsible for maintenance of the ship 's boats , sails , rigging , anchors and cables ; * the carpenter : responsible for maintenance of the ship 's hull and masts ; * the gunner : responsible for care and maintenance of the ship 's guns and gunpowder .
JUNIOR WARRANT OFFICERS Section::::Junior warrant officers .
Other warrant officers included surgeon 's mates , boatswain 's mates and carpenter 's mates , sailmakers , armourers , schoolmasters ( involved in the education of boys , midshipmen and others aboard ship ) and clerks .
Masters - at - arms , who had formerly overseen small - arms provision on board , had by this time taken on responsibility for discipline .
WARRANT OFFICERS IN CONTEXT Section::::Warrant officers in context .
By the end of the century , the rank structure could be illustrated as follows ( the warrant officers are underlined ) : DEMISE OF THE ROYAL NAVAL WARRANTS
Section::::Demise of the royal naval warrants .
In 1843 , the wardroom warrant officers were given commissioned status , while in 1853 the lower - grade warrant officers were absorbed into the new rate of chief petty officer , both classes thereby ceasing to be warrant officers .
On 25 July 1864 the standing warrant officers were divided into two grades : warrant officers and chief warrant officers ( or " commissioned warrant officers " , a phrase that was replaced in 1920 with " commissioned officers promoted from warrant rank " , although they were still usually referred to as " commissioned warrant officers " , even in official documents ) .
By the time of the First World War , their ranks had been expanded with the adoption of modern technology in the Royal Navy to include telegraphists , electricians , shipwrights , artificer engineers , etc .
Both warrant officers and commissioned warrant officers messed in the warrant officers ' mess rather than the wardroom ( although in ships too small to have a warrant officers ' mess , they did mess in the wardroom ) .
Warrant officers and commissioned warrant officers also carried swords , were saluted by ratings , and ranked between sub - lieutenants and midshipmen .
In 1949 , the ranks of warrant officer and commissioned warrant officer were changed to " commissioned officer " and " senior commissioned officer " , the latter ranking with but after the rank of lieutenant , and they were admitted to the wardroom , the warrant officers ' messes closing down .
Collectively , these officers were known as " branch officers " , being retitled " special duties " officers in 1956 .
In 1998 , the special duties list was merged with the general list of officers in the Royal Navy , all officers now having the same opportunity to reach the highest commissioned ranks .
MODERN USAGE AUSTRALIA Section::::Modern usage .
Section::::Australia .
The Australian Army has two warrant officer ranks : warrant officer class one ( WO1 ) and warrant officer class two ( WO2 ) ; the former is superior in rank to the latter .
All warrant officers are addressed as " Sir " or " Ma'am " .
To gain the attention of a particular warrant officer in a group , they can be addressed as " Warrant Officer Bloggs , sir / ma'am " or by their appointment , e.g. " ASM Bloggs , sir / ma'am " .
Some warrant officers hold an appointment such as company sergeant major ( WO2 ) or regimental sergeant major ( WO1 ) .
The WO1 appointed to the position of Regimental Sergeant Major of the Army ( RSM - A ) is the most senior warrant officer in the Australian Regular Army , including the Army Reserve .
The appointment of RSM - A was introduced in 1991 .
The rank insignia are : a crown for a WO2 ; the Australian Commonwealth coat of arms ( changed from the Royal coat of arms in 1976 ) for a WO1 ; and the Australian Commonwealth coat of arms surrounded by a laurel wreath for the RSM - A.
The Royal Australian Navy rank of warrant officer ( WO ) is the navy 's only rank appointed by warrant and is equivalent to the army 's WO1 ( the equivalent of the army 's WO2 rank is now chief petty officer , although previously there was no equivalent ) .
The most senior non - commissioned member of the navy is the warrant officer appointed Warrant Officer of the Navy ( WO - N ) .
The Royal Australian Air Force rank of warrant officer ( WOFF ) is the air force 's only rank appointed by warrant and is equivalent to both the army 's WO1 and the navy 's WO ( the equivalent of the army 's WO2 is now flight sergeant , although previously there was no equivalent ) .
The most senior non - commissioned member is the warrant officer appointed Warrant Officer of the Air Force ( WOFF - AF ) .
BENELUX Section::::Benelux .
In the Belgian Army and Luxembourg Army , the ranks are Adjudant , Adjudant - Chef and Adjudant - Major ( or Adjudant - Majoor in Dutch ) .
In Dutch , they are collectively known as Keuronderofficier ( " elite NCOs " ) .
Adjudant - Onderofficier is the only rank of warrant officer in the Royal Netherlands Army .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In the Canadian Army and Royal Canadian Air Force , the cadre of warrant officers includes the specific ranks of warrant officer ( adjudant in French ) , master warrant officer ( adjudant - maître ) , and chief warrant officer ( adjudant - chef ) .
FRANCE Section::::France .
In the French Army , Air Force and Gendarmerie , the ranks of adjudant ( premier maître in the navy ) , adjudant - chef ( maître - principal in the navy ) , and major may be considered equivalent to Commonwealth warrant officer ranks .
These ranks are senior to the rank of sergeant and junior to the rank of major .
Like the officers , the adjudants are entitled to the mon before their rank , as in " mon adjudant " The adjutant ranks are , in order of seniority : * Adjutant ( adjudant ) : equivalent to a U.S. master sergeant or a British Commonwealth Warrant Officer 2 * Chief Adjutant ( adjudant - chef ) : equivalent , but slightly junior , to a U.S. Sergeant Major or a British / Commonwealth Warrant Officer 1
In France , each corps has a color ( gold or silver ) .
A French adjutant wears a band , with thin red line , in the opposite colour to that of his corps .
A chief adjutant wears a band , with thin red line , in the colour of his corps .
In order to distinguish an adjutant from a chief adjutant it is therefore necessary to know the arm 's colour : This will be the colour of the cap badge e.g. gold cap badge for the infantry , silver cap badge for armoured cavalry .
INDONESIA
Section::::Indonesia .
In the Indonesian Armed Forces , there are two warrant officer ranks known as pembantu letnan ( assistant lieutenant ) .
These are warrant officer 2nd class ( pelda ) and warrant officer 1st class ( peltu ) .
INDIA Section::::India .
Junior commissioned officers are the Indian Armed Forces equivalent of warrant officer ranks .
Those in the Indian Air Force actually use the ranks of junior warrant officer , warrant officer , and master warrant officer .
In the British Indian Army , warrant officer ranks existed but were restricted to British personnel , mostly in specialist appointments such as conductor and sub - conductor .
Unlike in the British Army , although these appointments were warranted , the appointment and rank continued to be the same and the actual rank of warrant officer was never created .
Indian equivalents were viceroy 's commissioned officers .
IRISH NAVAL SERVICE
ISRAEL DEFENSE FORCES Section::::Israel Defense Forces .
The רב - נגד משנה rav nagad mishne ( " warrant officer " ) and the רב - נגד rav nagad ( " chief warrant officer " ) are both non - commissioned officers ranks in the Israel Defense Forces ( IDF ) .
Because the IDF is an integrated force , they have a unique rank structure .
Israel Defense Forces ranks are the same in all services ( army , navy , air force , etc . ) .
The ranks are derived from those of the paramilitary Haganah developed in the British Mandate of Palestine period to protect the Yishuv .
This origin is reflected in the slightly - compacted IDF rank structure .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
The New Zealand Army usage is similar to that of the Australian Army , except that it has two warrant officer ranks .
The Warrant Officer Class 2 ( WO2 ) , which is addressed as " Sergeant Major " and the Warrant Officer Class 1 ( WO1 ) which is addressed as " Sir or Ma'am " .
There are also appointments such as Company and Squadron sergeant major ( CSM and SSM ) which are usually WO2 positions and Regimental sergeant major ( RSM ) , which are usually WO1 positions .
The highest ranking WO1 holds the position of Sergeant Major of the Army ( SMA ) and is addressed as " Sir or Ma'am " .
In certain uniforms , WO2 's wear black shoes , the same as the enlisted ranks whilst WO1s wear brown shoes , the same as commissioned officers .
The exception to this are WO1s of the Royal New Zealand Armoured Corps ( RNZAC ) who wear black shoes .
The Royal New Zealand Navy has a single warrant officer rank and is addressed as " Sir " or " Ma'am " .
The WO is equivalent to the Army WO1 .
The Royal New Zealand Air Force also has a single warrant officer rank and is addressed as " Sir " or " Ma'am " .
The WO is equivalent to the Navy WO and the Army WO1 .
SINGAPORE BOYS ' BRIGADE Section::::Singapore .
Section::::Boys ' Brigade .
The rank of warrant officer is the highest rank a Boys ' Brigade boy can attain in secondary school .
NATIONAL CIVIL
DEFENCE CADET CORPS Section::::National Civil Defence Cadet Corps .
The rank of warrant officer is given to selected non - commissioned officers in National Civil Defence Cadet Corps units .
It is above the rank of staff sergeant , and below the rank of cadet lieutenant .
It is the highest rank a cadet can attain in the NCDCC while they are in secondary school .
The rank insignia is one point - up chevron , a Singapore coat of arms , and a garland below .
SINGAPORE ARMED FORCES Section::::Singapore Armed Forces .
In the Singapore Armed Forces , warrant officers begin as third warrant officers ( 3WO ) , previously starting at 2WO .
This rank is given to former specialists who have attained the rank of master sergeant and have either gone through , or are about to go through the Warfighter Course at the Specialist and Warrant Officer Advanced School ( SWAS ) in the Specialist and Warrant Officer Institute ( SWI ) .
In order to be promoted to a second warrant officer ( 2WO ) and above , they must have been selected for and graduated from the joint warrant officer course at the SAF Warrant Officer School .
Warrant officers rank between specialists and commissioned officers .
They ordinarily serve as battalion or brigade regimental sergeant majors .
Many of them serve as instructors and subject - matter experts in various training establishments .
Warrant officers are also seen on the various staffs headed by the respective specialist officers .
There are six grades of warrant officer ( 3WO , 2WO , 1WO , MWO , SWO & CWO ) .
Warrant officers used to have their own mess .
For smaller camps , this mess are combined with the officers ' mess as a combined mess for better camaraderie .
Warrant officers have similar responsibilities to commissioned officers .
Warrant officers are usually addressed as " sir " by the other ranks or as " warrant ( surname ) " .
They are also usually addressed " encik " ( " mister " in Malay language ) by commissioned officers .
Warrant officers are not saluted .
SINGAPORE
CIVIL
DEFENCE FORCE Section::::Singapore Civil Defence Force .
In the Singapore Civil Defence Force , there are two warrant officer ranks .
These ranks are ( in order of ascending seniority ) :
2nd warrant officer and 1st warrant officer .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
In the South African National Defence Force a warrant officer is a non - commissioned officer rank .
Before 2008 there were two classes - warrant officer class one and two .
A warrant officer class one could be appointed to positions such as regimental sergeant major , formation sergeant major or even sergeant major of the army while still in the rank of warrant officer class one .
In 2008 the warrant officer ranks were expanded so that the substantive ranks that came with senior appointments
now became ranks that an individual kept after moving from that post .
UNITED KINGDOM
ROYAL NAVY Section::::United Kingdom .
Section::::Royal Navy .
In 1973 , warrant officers reappeared in the Royal Navy , but these appointments followed the army model , with the new warrant officers being ratings rather than officers .
They were initially known as fleet chief petty officers ( FCPOs ) , but were renamed warrant officers in the 1980s .
They rank with warrant officers class one in the British Army and Royal Marines and with warrant officers in the Royal Air Force .
There are executive warrant officers for commands and ships .
Five branches ( surface ships , submarines , Royal Marines , Fleet Air Arm , and Maritime Reserves ) each have a command warrant officer .
The senior RN WO is the Warrant Officer of the Naval Service .
In 2004 , the rank of warrant officer class 2 was introduced .
However , the rank was phased out in April 2014 , although existing holders of the rank were permitted to retain it until they were either promoted or left the service .
BRITISH ARMY Section::::British Army .
In the British Army , there are two warrant ranks , warrant officer class two ( WO2 ) and warrant officer class one
( WO1 ) , the latter being the senior of the two .
These ranks were previously abbreviated as WOII and WOI ( using Roman instead of Arabic numerals ) .
" Warrant officer first class " or " second class " is incorrect .
The rank immediately below WO2 is staff sergeant ( or colour sergeant ) .
From 1938 to 1940 there was a WOIII platoon sergeant major rank .
In March 2015 , the new appointment of Army Sergeant Major was created as the most senior warrant officer in the Army .
The creation of the appointment of command sergeant major was announced in 2009 .
ROYAL MARINES Section::::Royal Marines .
Before 1879 , the Royal Marines had no warrant officers : by the end of 1881 , the Royal Marines had given warrant rank to their sergeant - majors and some other senior non - commissioned officers , in a similar fashion to the army .
When the army introduced the ranks of warrant officer class I and class II in 1915 , the Royal Marines did the same shortly after .
From February 1920 , Royal Marines warrant officers class I were given the same status as Royal Navy warrant officers and the rank of warrant officer class II was abolished in the Royal Marines , with no further promotions to this rank .
The marines had introduced warrant officers equivalent in status to the Royal Navy 's from 1910 with the Royal Marines gunner ( originally titled gunnery sergeant - major ) , equivalent to the navy 's warrant rank of gunner .
Development of these ranks closely paralleled that of their naval counterparts : as in the Royal Navy , by the Second World War there were warrant officers and commissioned warrant officers ( e.g. staff sergeant majors ) , commissioned staff sergeant majors , Royal Marines gunners , commissioned Royal Marines gunners , etc .
As officers they were saluted by junior ranks in the Royal Marines and the army .
These all became ( commissioned ) branch officer ranks in 1949 , and special duties officer ranks in 1956 .
These ranks would return in 1972 , this time similar to their army counterparts , and not as the RN did before .
The most senior Royal Marine warrant officer is the Corps Regimental Sergeant Major .
Unlike the RN proper ( since 2014 ) , it retains both WO ranks .
ROYAL AIR FORCE Section::::Royal Air Force .
The Royal Air Force first used the ranks of warrant officer class I and II as inherited from the Royal Flying Corps .
It first used the rank badges of the Royal coat of arms for WOI and the crown for WOII .
Until the 1930s , these ranks were often known as sergeant major first and second class .
In 1939 , the RAF abolished the rank of WOII and retained just the WOI rank , referred to as just warrant officer ( WO ) , which it remains to this day .
The RAF has no equivalent to WO2 ( NATO OR-8 ) , an RAF WO being equivalent to WO1 ( NATO OR-9 ) and wearing the same badge of rank , the Royal coat of arms .
The correct way to address a warrant officer is " sir " or " ma'am " by airmen and " mister or warrant officer -surname- " by officers .
Most RAF warrant officers do not hold appointments as in the army or Royal Marines ; the exception to this is the station warrant officer , who is considered a " first amongst equals " on an RAF station .
Warrant officer is the highest non - commissioned rank and ranks above flight sergeant .
In 1946 , the RAF renamed its aircrew warrant officers to master aircrew , a designation which still survives .
In 1950 , it renamed warrant officers in technical trades to master technicians , a designation which survived only until 1964 .
The most senior RAF warrant officer by appointment is the Chief of the Air Staff 's Warrant Officer .
He holds the same rank as all other warrant officers .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States Armed Forces , a warrant officer ( grade W-1 to W-5 ) is ranked as an officer above the senior - most enlisted ranks , as well as officer cadets and officer candidates , but below the officer grade of O-1 ( NATO : OF-1 ) .
Warrant officers are highly skilled , single - track specialty officers , and while the ranks are authorized by Congress , each branch of the military selects , manages , and utilizes warrant officers in slightly different ways .
For appointment to warrant officer ( W-1 ) , a warrant is approved by the Service Secretary of the respective branch of service ( Secretary of the Army , or Secretary of the Navy for USMC warrant officers ) , while chief warrant officers ( W-2 to W-5 ) are commissioned by the President of the United States .
Both warrant officers and chief warrant officers take the same oath of office as regular commissioned officers ( O-1 to O-10 ) .
A small number of warrant officers command detachments , units , activities , vessels , aircraft , and armored vehicles , as well as lead , coach , train , and counsel subordinates .
However , the warrant officer 's primary task is to serve as a technical expert , providing valuable skills , guidance , and expertise to commanders and organizations in their particular field .
All U.S. armed services employ warrant officer grades except the U.S. Air Force .
Although still technically authorized , the air force discontinued appointing new warrant officers in 1959 , retiring its last chief warrant officer from the Air Force Reserve in 1992 .
The U.S. Army utilizes warrant officers heavily and separates them into two types : Aviators and technical .
Army aviation warrant officers pilot both rotary - wing and fixed wing aircraft and represent the largest group of Army warrant officers .
Technical warrant officers in the Army specialize in a single branch technical area such as intelligence , sustainment , supply , military police , or special forces ; and provide advice and support to commanders .
For example , a military police officer and a military intelligence officer both have to be branch qualified in their respective fields , learning how to manage the entire spectrum of their profession .
However , within those broad fields warrant officers include such specialists as CID Special Agents ( a very specific track within the military police ) and Counterintelligence Special Agents ( a very specific track within military intelligence ) .
These technical warrant officers allow for a soldier with subject matter expertise ( like non - commissioned officers ) , but with the authority of a commissioned officer .
Both technical and aviation warrant officers go through initial qualification training at the Army Warrant Officer Candidate School ( WOCS ) , but then follow separate training and education paths .
Technical warrant officers are generally selected from the non - commissioned officer ranks ( typically E-6 through E-9 ) .
Aviation warrant officers are able to apply from all branches of service , as well as before becoming non - commissioned officers , and some even earlier ( these types of aviation warrant officers join through the Warrant Officer Flight Training Program ) .
The U.S. Navy and U.S. Coast Guard discontinued the grade of W-1 in 1975 , appointing and commissioning all new entrants as chief warrant officer two ( pay grade W-2 , with rank abbreviation of CWO2 ) .
This was to prevent a pay decrease that an entrant may take since all Navy chief warrant officers are selected strictly from the chief petty officer pay grades ( E-7 through E-9 ) .
The Coast Guard allows E-6 personnel to apply for chief warrant officer rank , but only after they have displayed their technical ability by earning a placement in the top 50 % on the annual eligibility list for advancement to E-7 .
In 2018 , the U.S. Navy expanded the warrant program , re - implementing the W-1 pay grade for cyber warrant officers and accepting three new WO1s in fiscal year 2019 .
The U.S. Maritime Service , which is established at 46 U.S. Code § 51701 , falls under the authority of the Maritime Administration of the Department of Transportation and is authorized to appoint warrant officers .
In accordance with 46 U.S. Code § 51701 , the USMS rank structure must be the same as that of the U.S. Coast Guard while uniforms worn are those of the U.S. Navy with distinctive USMS insignia and devices .
The USMS has appointed warrant officers , of various specialty fields , during and after World War II .
Warrant officer rank is also occasionally used in law enforcement agencies to grant status and pay to certain senior specialist officers who are not in command , such as senior technicians or helicopter pilots .
As in the armed forces , they rank above sergeants , but below lieutenants .
For example , the North Carolina State Highway Patrol had several warrant officer helicopter pilot positions from the 1960s until the mid-1980s .
The WO insignia was a silver bar with a black square in the center .
The WO ranks were abolished when the aviation program expanded and nearly twenty trooper pilot positions were created .
The New York State Police rank of technical lieutenant is similar to a warrant officer rank insofar as it is used to grant commissioned officer authority to non - commissioned officers with extensive technical expertise . !
Branch !
W-1 !
W-2 ! W-3 !
W-4 !
W-5 SEE ALSO
* Comparative military ranks REFERENCES