WORCESTERSHIRE SAUCE Worcestershire sauce ( ) is a fermented liquid condiment of complex mixture originally created in the town of Worcester in Worcestershire , England in the first half of the 19th century .
The creators were the chemists John Wheeley Lea and William Henry Perrins , both known as " William Marshall " , who went on to form the company Lea & Perrins .
Worcestershire sauce legally has been considered a generic term since 1876 when the High Court of the United Kingdom ruled that Lea & Perrins did not own the trademark to " Worcestershire " .
Worcestershire sauce is frequently used to enhance food and drink recipes , including traditional Welsh rarebit , Caesar salad , Oysters Kirkpatrick , and deviled eggs .
As both a background flavour and a source of umami ( the savoury " fifth flavour " ) , it is also now added to dishes which historically did not contain it , such as chili con carne and beef stew .
It is also used directly as a condiment on steaks , hamburgers , and other finished dishes .
The sauce is also used to flavour cocktails such as the Bloody Mary and Caesar .
HISTORY Section::::History .
A fermented fish sauce called garum was a staple of Greco - Roman cuisine and of the Mediterranean economy of the Roman Empire , as the first - century encyclopaedist Pliny the Elder writes in his Historia Naturalis and the fourth / fifth - century Roman culinary text Apicius includes garum in its recipes .
The use of similar fermented anchovy sauces in Europe can be traced back to the 17th century .
LEA & PERRINS PRODUCT HISTORY Section::::Lea & Perrins .
Section::::Product History .
The Lea & Perrins brand was commercialised in 1837 and has continued to be the leading global brand of Worcestershire sauce .
The origin of the Lea & Perrins recipe is unclear .
The packaging originally stated that the sauce came " from the recipe of a nobleman in the county " .
The company has also claimed that " Lord Marcus Sandys , ex - Governor of Bengal " encountered it while in India with the East India Company in the 1830s , and commissioned the local apothecaries to recreate it .
According to company tradition , when the recipe was first mixed there the resulting product was so strong that it was considered inedible and the barrel was abandoned in the basement .
Looking to make space in the storage area a few years later , the chemists decided to try it again , and discovered that the long fermented sauce had mellowed and was now palatable .
In 1838 the first bottles of " Lea & Perrins Worcestershire sauce " were released to the general public .
On 16 October 1897 , Lea & Perrins relocated manufacturing of the sauce from their pharmacy to a factory in the city of Worcester on Midland Road , where it is still made .
The factory produces ready - mixed bottles for domestic distribution and a concentrate for bottling abroad .
In 1930 , the Lea & Perrins operation was purchased by HP Foods , which was in turn acquired by the Imperial Tobacco Company in 1967 .
HP was sold to Danone in 1988 and then to Heinz in 2005 .
Due to a shortage during World War II , Lea and Perrins switched from using soy sauce to hydrolyzed vegetable protein .
US PACKAGING Section::::US packaging .
The US version is packaged differently from the British version , coming in a dark bottle with a beige label and wrapped in paper .
Lea & Perrins USA claims this practice is a vestige of shipping practices from the 19th century , when the product was imported from England , as a measure of protection for the bottles .
The producer also claims that its Worcestershire sauce is the oldest commercially bottled condiment in the US .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
The original ingredients of bottle of Worcestershire sauce sold were : * Barley malt vinegar * Spirit vinegar * Molasses
* Sugar *
Salt
*
Anchovies * Tamarind extract
* Onions * Garlic
* Spice * Flavourings The " spice " and " flavourings " are believed to include cloves , soy sauce , lemons , pickles and peppers .
Notes from the 1800s were found dumped in a skip in 2009 by company accountant Brian Keogh .
The documents are to be placed on display at the Worcester City Art Gallery & Museum .
Anchovies in many Worcestershire sauces is a concern to people allergic to fish , vegans , other vegetarians and others who avoid eating fish .
The Codex Alimentarius recommends that prepared food containing Worcestershire sauce with anchovies include a label warning of fish content although this is not required in most jurisdictions .
The US Department of Agriculture has forced the recall of some products with undeclared Worcestershire sauce .
Several brands sell anchovy - free varieties of Worcestershire sauce , often labelled as vegetarian or vegan .
Generally , Orthodox Jews refrain from eating fish and meat in the same dish , so can not use traditional Worcestershire sauce to flavour meat .
However , certain brands are certified to contain less than 1/60th of the fish product and can be used with meat .
A teaspoon of low - sodium Worcestershire sauce available in the United States has : * 5 calories * 0 grams of fat * 0 grams of protein * 1 gram of carbohydrates * 20 milligrams of sodium * 0 milligrams of cholesterol OTHER WORCESTERSHIRE SAUCES
DENMARK
Section::::Other worcestershire sauces .
Section::::Denmark .
In Denmark , Worcestershire sauce is commonly known as Engelsk sauce , meaning ' English sauce ' .
EL SALVADOR
Section::::El
Salvador . Worcestershire Sauce , known colloquially as La salsa inglesa ( English sauce ) or La salsa Perrins ( Perrins sauce ) , is extremely popular in El Salvador , where many restaurants provide a bottle on each table .
Over 120,000 gallons is consumed annually , the highest per - capita consumption in the world .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
In Japan , Worcestershire sauce is labelled Worcester ( rather than Worcestershire ) in katakana .
Thicker , Worcestershire sauce - based sauces are manufactured there under brand names such as Otafuku and Bulldog , but these are brown sauces more similar to HP Sauce rather than any type of Worcestershire sauce .
Tonkatsu sauce is a variation of Worcestershire sauce associated with the dish tonkatsu .
It is a vegetarian sauce made from vegetables and fruits .
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
Gy - NGuang Worcestershire sauce has been produced since 1917 .
UNITED KINGDOM , AUSTRALIA , NEW ZEALAND Section::::United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand .
Holbrook 's worcestershire has been produced since 1875 but relocated to Australia in the 1950s UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
French 's worcestershire sauce Introduced in 1941
Heinz Worcestershire Sauce SEE ALSO * A1 Steak Sauce
* Anglo - Indian cuisine
* French 's * Henderson 's Relish * List of sauces
* Sarson 's REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * , abetted by Lea & Perrins , reports and debunks the myth , without unveiling Lady Sandys .