WESTMINSTER ABBEY Westminster Abbey , formally titled the Collegiate Church of St Peter at Westminster , is a large , mainly Gothic abbey church in the City of Westminster , London , England , just to the west of the Palace of Westminster .
It is one of the United Kingdom 's most notable religious buildings and the traditional place of coronation and burial site for English and , later , British monarchs .
The building itself was a Benedictine monastic church until the monastery was dissolved in 1539 .
Between 1540 and 1556 , the abbey had the status of a cathedral .
Since 1560 , the building is no longer an abbey or a cathedral , having instead the status of a Church of England " Royal Peculiar"—a church responsible directly to the sovereign .
According to a tradition first reported by Sulcard in about 1080 , a church was founded at the site ( then known as Thorn Ey ( Thorn Island ) ) in the seventh century , at the time of Mellitus , a Bishop of London .
Construction of the present church began in 1245 , on the orders of King Henry III .
Since the coronation of William the Conqueror in 1066 , all coronations of English and British monarchs have been in Westminster Abbey .
There have been 16 royal weddings at the abbey since 1100 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
A late tradition claims that Aldrich , a young fisherman on the River Thames , had a vision of Saint Peter near the site .
This seems to have been quoted as the origin of the salmon that Thames fishermen offered to the abbey in later years – a custom still observed annually by the Fishmongers ' Company .
The recorded origins of the Abbey date to the 960s or early 970s , when Saint Dunstan and King Edgar installed a community of Benedictine monks on the site .
1042 :
EDWARD THE CONFESSOR STARTS REBUILDING ST PETER 'S ABBEY
Section::::1042 :
Edward the Confessor starts rebuilding St Peter 's Abbey .
Between 1042 and 1052 , King Edward the Confessor began rebuilding St Peter 's Abbey to provide himself with a royal burial church .
It was the first church in England built in the Romanesque style .
The building was completed around 1060 and was consecrated on 28 December 1065 , only a week before Edward 's death on 5 January 1066 .
A week later , he was buried in the church ; and , nine years later , his wife Edith was buried alongside him .
His successor , Harold II , was probably crowned in the abbey , although the first documented coronation is that of William the Conqueror later the same year .
The only extant depiction of Edward 's abbey , together with the adjacent Palace of Westminster , is in the Bayeux Tapestry .
Some of the lower parts of the monastic dormitory , an extension of the South Transept , survive in the Norman Undercroft of the Great School , including a door said to come from the previous Saxon abbey .
Increased endowments supported a community increased from a dozen monks in Dunstan 's original foundation , up to a maximum about eighty monks .
CONSTRUCTION OF THE PRESENT CHURCH Section::::Construction of the present church .
The abbot and monks , in proximity to the royal Palace of Westminster , the seat of government from the later 12th century , became a powerful force in the centuries after the Norman Conquest .
The Abbot of Westminster often was employed on royal service and in due course took his place in the House of Lords as of right .
Released from the burdens of spiritual leadership , which passed to the reformed Cluniac movement after the mid-10th century , and occupied with the administration of great landed properties , some of which lay far from Westminster , " the Benedictines achieved a remarkable degree of identification with the secular life of their times , and particularly with upper - class life " , Barbara Harvey concludes , to the extent that her depiction of daily life provides a wider view of the concerns of the English gentry in the High and Late Middle Ages .
The proximity of the Palace of Westminster did not extend to providing monks or abbots with high royal connections ; in social origin the Benedictines of Westminster were as modest as most of the order .
The abbot remained Lord of the Manor of Westminster as a town of two to three thousand persons grew around it : as a consumer and employer on a grand scale the monastery helped fuel the town economy , and relations with the town remained unusually cordial , but no enfranchising charter was issued during the Middle Ages .
The abbey became the coronation site of Norman kings .
None were buried there until Henry III , intensely devoted to the cult of the Confessor , rebuilt the abbey in Anglo - French Gothic style as a shrine to venerate King Edward the Confessor and as a suitably regal setting for Henry 's own tomb , under the highest Gothic nave in England .
The Confessor 's shrine subsequently played a great part in his canonization .
Construction of the present church began in 1245 by Henry III who selected the site for his burial .
The first building stage included the entire eastern end , the transepts , and the easternmost bay of the nave .
The Lady Chapel built from around 1220 at the extreme eastern end was incorporated into the chevet of the new building , but was later replaced .
This work must have been largely completed by 1258 - 60 , when the second stage was begun .
This carried the nave on an additional five bays , bringing it to one bay beyond the ritual choir .
Here construction stopped in about 1269 , a consecration ceremony being held on 13 October of that year , and because of Henry 's death did not resume .
The old Romanesque nave remained attached to the new building for over a century , until it was pulled down in the late 14th century and rebuilt from 1376 , closely following the original ( and by now outdated ) design .
Construction was largely finished by the architect Henry Yevele in the reign of Richard II .
Henry III also commissioned the unique Cosmati pavement in front of the High Altar ( the pavement has recently undergone a major cleaning and conservation programme and was re - dedicated by the Dean at a service on 21 May 2010 ) .
Henry VII added a Perpendicular style chapel dedicated to the Blessed Virgin Mary in 1503 ( known as the Henry VII Chapel or the " Lady Chapel " ) .
Much of the stone came from Caen , in France ( Caen stone ) , the Isle of Portland ( Portland stone ) and the Loire Valley region of France ( tuffeau limestone ) .
The chapel was finished circa 1519 .
16TH AND 17TH CENTURIES :
DISSOLUTION AND RESTORATION Section::::16th and 17th
centuries : dissolution and restoration .
In 1535 , the abbey 's annual income of £ 3,000 ( equivalent to £ as of ) , during the assessment attendant on the Dissolution of the Monasteries .
1540–1550
: 10 YEARS AS A CATHEDRAL Section::::1540–1550 : 10 years as a cathedral .
Henry VIII assumed direct royal control in 1539 and granted the abbey the status of a cathedral by charter in 1540 , simultaneously issuing letters patent establishing the Diocese of Westminster .
By granting the abbey cathedral status , Henry VIII gained an excuse to spare it from the destruction or dissolution which he inflicted on most English abbeys during this period .
AFTER 1550 : TURBULENT TIMES Section::::After 1550 : turbulent times .
Westminster diocese was dissolved in 1550 , but the abbey was recognised ( in 1552 , retroactively to 1550 ) as a second cathedral of the Diocese of London until 1556 .
The already - old expression " robbing Peter to pay Paul " may have been given a new lease of life when money meant for the abbey , which is dedicated to Saint Peter , was diverted to the treasury of St Paul 's Cathedral .
The abbey was restored to the Benedictines under the Catholic
Mary I of England , but they were again ejected under Elizabeth I in 1559 .
In 1560 , Elizabeth re - established Westminster as a " Royal Peculiar " – a church of the Church of England responsible directly to the Sovereign , rather than to a diocesan bishop – and made it the Collegiate Church of St Peter ( that is , a non - cathedral church with an attached chapter of canons , headed by a dean . )
It suffered damage during the turbulent 1640s , when it was attacked by Puritan iconoclasts , but was again protected by its close ties to the state during the Commonwealth period .
Oliver Cromwell was given an elaborate funeral there in 1658 , only to be disinterred in January 1661 and posthumously hanged from a gibbet at Tyburn .
1722–1745 :
WESTERN TOWERS CONSTRUCTED
Section::::1722–1745 : Western towers constructed .
The abbey 's two western towers were built between 1722 and 1745 by Nicholas Hawksmoor , constructed from Portland stone to an early example of a Gothic Revival design .
Purbeck marble was used for the walls and the floors of Westminster Abbey , even though the various tombstones are made of different types of marble .
Further rebuilding and restoration occurred in the 19th century under Sir George Gilbert Scott .
A narthex ( a portico or entrance hall ) for the west front was designed by Sir Edwin Lutyens in the mid-20th century but was not built .
Images of the abbey prior to the construction of the towers are scarce , though the abbey 's official website states that the building had " towers which had been left unfinished in the medieval period " .
SECOND WORLD
WAR Section::::Second World War .
Westminster suffered minor damage during the Blitz on 15 November 1940 .
Then on May 10/11 1941 , the Westminster Abbey precincts and roof were hit by incendiary bombs .
All the bombs were extinguished by ARP wardens , except for one bomb which ignited out of reach among the wooden beams and plaster vault of the lantern roof ( of 1802 ) over the North Transept .
Flames rapidly spread and burning beams and molten lead began to fall on the wooden stalls , pews and other ecclesiastical fixtures 130 feet below .
Despite the falling debris , the staff dragged away as much furniture as possible before withdrawing .
Finally the Lantern roof crashed down into the crossing , preventing the fires from spreading further .
POST - WAR Section::::Post - war .
It was at Westminster Abbey that six companies of eminent churchmen led by Lancelot Andrewes , Dean of Westminster , newly translated the Bible into English , so creating the King James Version in the early 17th century .
The Joint Committee responsible for assembling the New English Bible also met twice a year at Westminster Abbey in the 1950s and 1960s .
In the 1990s , two icons by the Russian icon painter Sergei Fyodorov were hung in the abbey .
In 1997 , the abbey , which was then receiving approximately 1.75 million visitors each year , began charging admission fees to visitors .
On 6 September 1997 , the funeral of Diana , Princess of Wales was held at the abbey .
On 17 September 2010 , Pope Benedict XVI became the first pope to set foot in the abbey .
In June 2009 the first major building work at the abbey for 250 years was proposed .
A corona – a crown - like architectural feature – was suggested to be built around the lantern over the central crossing , replacing an existing pyramidal structure dating from the 1950s .
This was part of a wider £ 23 m development of the abbey completed in 2013 .
On 4 August 2010 the Dean and Chapter announced that , " [ a]fter a considerable amount of preliminary and exploratory work " , efforts toward the construction of a corona would not be continued .
In 2012 , architects Panter Hudspith completed refurbishment of the 14th - century food - store originally used by the abbey 's monks , converting it into a restaurant with English oak furniture by Covent Garden - based furniture makers Luke Hughes and Company .
This is now the Cellarium Café and Terrace .
On 29 April 2011 , the wedding of Prince William and Catherine Middleton occurred at the abbey .
The Queen 's Diamond Jubilee Galleries have been created in the medieval triforium of the abbey .
This is a display area for the abbey 's treasures in the galleries high up around the abbey 's nave .
A new Gothic access tower with lift was designed by the abbey architect and Surveyor of the Fabric , Ptolemy Dean .
The new galleries opened in June 2018 .
GALLERY CORONATIONS Section::::Coronations .
Since the coronations in 1066 of both King Harold and William the Conqueror , every English and British monarch ( except Edward V and Edward VIII , who were never crowned ) has been crowned in Westminster Abbey .
In 1216 , Henry III could not be crowned in London when he came to the throne , because the French prince Louis had taken control of the city , and so the king was crowned in Gloucester Cathedral .
This coronation was deemed by Pope Honorius III to be improper , and a further coronation was held in Westminster Abbey on 17 May 1220 .
King Edward 's Chair ( or St Edward 's Chair ) , the throne on which English and British sovereigns have been seated at the moment of crowning , is now housed within the Abbey in St George 's Chapel near the West Door , and has been used at every coronation since 1308 .
From 1301 to 1996 ( except for a short time in 1950 when the stone was temporarily stolen by Scottish nationalists ) , the chair also housed the Stone of Scone upon which the kings of Scots are crowned .
Although the Stone is now kept in Scotland , in Edinburgh Castle , it is intended that the Stone will be returned to St Edward 's Chair for use during future coronation ceremonies .
ROYAL
WEDDINGS CHRONOLOGY Section::::Royal weddings .
Section::::Chronology . !
Date!!Groom!!Bride 11 November 1100
King Henry I of EnglandMatilda of Scotland 20 November 1947 Duke of Edinburgh ( who was Lt Philip Mountbatten until that morning )
Princess Elizabeth ( now Queen Elizabeth II ) , elder daughter of King George VI 29 April 2011 Prince William , Duke of Cambridge , grandson of Queen Elizabeth II Miss Catherine Middleton DEAN AND CHAPTER Section::::Dean and Chapter .
Westminster Abbey is a collegiate church governed by the Dean and Chapter of Westminster , as established by Royal charter of Queen Elizabeth
I dated 21 May 1560 , which created it as the Collegiate Church of St Peter Westminster , a Royal Peculiar under the personal jurisdiction of the Sovereign .
The members of the Chapter are the Dean and four canons residentiary ; they are assisted by the Receiver General and Chapter Clerk .
One of the canons is also Rector of St Margaret 's Church , Westminster , and often also holds the post of Chaplain to the Speaker of the House of Commons .
In addition to the Dean and canons , there are at present three full - time minor canons : the precentor , the sacrist and the chaplain .
A series of Priests Vicar assist the minor canons .
BURIALS AND MEMORIALS Section::::Burials and memorials .
Henry III rebuilt the abbey in honour of a royal saint , Edward the Confessor , whose relics were placed in a shrine in the sanctuary .
Henry III himself was interred nearby , as were many of the Plantagenet kings of England , their wives and other relatives .
Until the death of George II in 1760 , most kings and queens were buried in the abbey , some notable exceptions being Henry VI , Edward IV , Henry VIII and Charles I who are buried in St George 's Chapel at Windsor Castle .
Other exceptions include Edward II buried at Gloucester Cathedral , John buried at Worcester Cathedral , Henry IV buried at Canterbury Cathedral and Richard III , now buried at Leicester Cathedral , and the de facto queen Lady Jane Grey , buried in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in the Tower of London .
More recently monarchs have been buried either in St George 's Chapel or at Frogmore to the east of Windsor Castle .
From the Middle Ages , aristocrats were buried inside chapels , while monks and other people associated with the abbey were buried in the cloisters and other areas .
One of these was Geoffrey Chaucer , who was buried here as he had apartments in the abbey where he was employed as master of the King 's Works .
Other poets , writers and musicians were buried or memorialised around Chaucer in what became known as Poets ' Corner .
Abbey musicians such as Henry Purcell were also buried in their place of work .
Subsequently , it became one of Britain 's most significant honours to be buried or commemorated in the abbey .
The practice of burying national figures in the abbey began under Oliver Cromwell with the burial of Admiral Robert Blake in 1657 .
The practice spread to include generals , admirals , politicians , doctors and scientists such as Isaac Newton , buried on 4 April 1727 , Charles Darwin , buried on 26 April 1882 , and Stephen Hawking , buried on 15 June 2018 .
Another was William Wilberforce who led the movement to abolish slavery in the United Kingdom and the Plantations , buried on 3 August 1833 .
Wilberforce was buried in the north transept , close to his friend , the former Prime Minister , William Pitt .
During the early 20th century it became increasingly common to bury cremated remains rather than coffins in the abbey .
In 1905 the actor Sir Henry Irving was cremated and his ashes buried in Westminster Abbey , thereby becoming the first person ever to be cremated prior to interment at the abbey .
The majority of interments at the Abbey are of cremated remains , but some burials still take place – Frances Challen , wife of Sebastian Charles , Canon of Westminster , was buried alongside her husband in the south choir aisle in 2014 .
Members of the Percy family have a family vault , The Northumberland Vault , in St Nicholas 's chapel within the abbey .
In the floor , just inside the great west door , in the centre of the nave , is the tomb of The Unknown Warrior , an unidentified British soldier killed on a European battlefield during the First World War .
He was buried in the abbey on 11 November 1920 .
This grave is the only one in the abbey on which it is forbidden to walk .
At the east end of the Lady Chapel is a memorial chapel to the airmen of the Royal Air Force who were killed in the Second World War .
It incorporates a memorial window to the Battle of Britain , which replaces an earlier Tudor stained glass window destroyed in the war .
On 6 September 1997 the formal , though not " state " funeral of Diana , Princess of Wales , was held .
It was a royal ceremonial funeral including royal pageantry and Anglican funeral liturgy .
A second public service was held on Sunday at the demand of the people .
The burial occurred privately later the same day .
Diana 's former husband , sons , mother , siblings , a close friend , and a clergyman were present .
Diana 's body was clothed in a black long - sleeved dress designed by Catherine Walker , which she had chosen some weeks before .
A set of rosary beads was placed in her hands , a gift she had received from Mother Teresa , who died a day before Diana 's funeral .
Her grave is on the grounds of her family estate , Althorp , on a private island .
In 1998 ten vacant statue niches on the façade above the Great West Door were filled with representative 20th - century Christian martyrs of various denominations .
Those commemorated are Maximilian Kolbe , Manche Masemola , Janani Luwum , Grand Duchess Elizabeth of Russia , Martin Luther King Jr. , Óscar Romero , Dietrich Bonhoeffer , Esther John , Lucian Tapiedi , and Wang Zhiming .
On 9 April 2002
the ceremonial funeral of Queen Elizabeth
The Queen Mother was held in the abbey .
She was interred later the same day in the King George VI Memorial Chapel at St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle next to her husband , King George VI , who had died 50 years previously .
At the same time , the ashes of the Queen Mother 's daughter , Princess Margaret , Countess of Snowdon , who had died on 9 February 2002 , were also interred in a private family service .
SCHOOLS Section::::Schools .
Westminster School and Westminster Abbey Choir School are also in the precincts of the abbey .
The Choir School educates and trains the choirboys who sing for services in the Abbey .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Westminster Abbey is renowned for its choral tradition , and the repertoire of Anglican church music is heard in daily worship , particularly at the service of Choral Evensong .
ORGAN Section::::Organ .
The organ was built by Harrison & Harrison in 1937 , then with four manuals and 84 speaking stops , and was used for the first time at the coronation of King George VI .
Some pipework from the previous Hill organ of 1848 was revoiced and incorporated in the new scheme .
The two organ cases , designed and built in the late 19th century by John Loughborough Pearson , were re - instated and coloured in 1959 .
In 1982 and 1987 , Harrison and Harrison enlarged the organ under the direction of the then abbey organist Simon Preston to include an additional Lower Choir Organ and a Bombarde Organ : the current instrument now has five manuals and 109 speaking stops .
In 2006 , the console of the organ was refurbished by Harrison and Harrison , and space was prepared for two additional 16 ft stops on the Lower Choir Organ and the Bombarde Organ .
The current Organist and Master of the Choristers , James O'Donnell , has been in post since 2000 .
BELLS Section::::Bells .
The bells at the abbey were overhauled in 1971 .
The ring is now made up of ten bells , hung for change ringing , cast in 1971 , by the Whitechapel Bell Foundry , tuned to the notes : F # , E , D , C # , B , A , G , F # , E and D.
The Tenor bell in D ( 588.5 Hz ) has a weight of 30 cwt , 1 qtr , 15 lb ( 3403 lb or 1544 kg ) .
In addition there are two service bells , cast by Robert Mot , in 1585 and 1598 respectively , a Sanctus bell cast in 1738 by Richard Phelps and Thomas Lester and two unused bells — one cast about 1320 , by the successor to R de Wymbish , and a second cast in 1742 , by Thomas Lester .
The two service bells and the 1320 bell , along with a fourth small silver " dish bell " , kept in the refectory , have been noted as being of historical importance by the Church Buildings Council of the Church of England .
CHAPTER HOUSE
Section::::Chapter house .
The chapter house was built concurrently with the east parts of the abbey under Henry III , between about 1245 and 1253 .
It was restored by Sir George Gilbert Scott in 1872 .
The entrance is approached from the east cloister walk and includes a double doorway with a large tympanum above .
Inner and outer vestibules lead to the octagonal chapter house , which is of exceptional architectural purity .
It is built in a Geometrical Gothic style with an octagonal crypt below .
A pier of eight shafts carries the vaulted ceiling .
To the sides are blind arcading , remains of 14th - century paintings and numerous stone benches above which are innovatory large 4-light quatre - foiled windows .
These are virtually contemporary with the Sainte - Chapelle , Paris .
The chapter house has an original mid-13th - century tiled pavement .
A door within the vestibule dates from around 1050 and is believed to be the oldest in England .
The exterior includes flying buttresses added in the 14th century and a leaded tent - lantern roof on an iron frame designed by Scott .
The Chapter house was originally used in the 13th century by Benedictine monks for daily meetings .
It later became a meeting place of the King 's Great Council and the Commons , predecessors of Parliament .
The Pyx Chamber formed the undercroft of the monks ' dormitory .
It dates to the late 11th century and was used as a monastic and royal treasury .
The outer walls and circular piers are of 11th - century date , several of the capitals were enriched in the 12th century and the stone altar added in the 13th century .
The term pyx refers to the boxwood chest in which coins were held and presented to a jury during the Trial of the Pyx , in which newly minted coins were presented to ensure they conformed to the required standards .
The chapter house and Pyx Chamber at Westminster Abbey are in the guardianship of English Heritage , but under the care and management of the Dean and Chapter of Westminster .
MUSEUM
Section::::Museum .
The Westminster Abbey Museum was located in the 11th - century vaulted undercroft beneath the former monks ' dormitory in Westminster Abbey .
This was one of the oldest areas of the abbey , dating back almost to the foundation of the church by Edward the Confessor in 1065 .
This space had been used as a museum since 1908 but was closed to the public in June 2018 , when it was replaced as a museum by the Queen 's Diamond Jubilee Galleries , high up in the Abbey triforium .
TRANSPORT Section::::Transport .
London Underground GALLERY SEE
ALSO
* Archdeacon of Westminster * List of Deans of Westminster
* List of churches in London
* The Abbey – a three - part BBC TV documentary written and hosted by playwright Alan Bennett
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Bradley , S. and N. Pevsner ( 2003 )
The Buildings of England – London 6 :
Westminster , New Haven :
Yale University Press , pp .
105–207 .
* Mortimer , Richard , ed . , Edward the Confessor : The Man and the Legend , The Boydell Press , 2009 .
Eric Fernie , ' Edward the Confessor 's Westminster Abbey ' , pp .
139–150 .
Warwick Rodwell , ' New Glimpses of Edward
the Confessor 's Abbey at Westminster ' , pp .
151–167 .
Richard Gem , Craftsmen and Administrators in the Building of the Confessor 's Abbey ' , pp .
168–172 .
* Harvey , B. ( 1993 )
Living and Dying in England 1100–1540 :
The Monastic Experience , Ford Lecture series , Oxford : Clarendon Press .
* Morton , H. V. [ 1951 ] ( 1988 )
In Search of London , London : Methuen .
* Trowles , T. ( 2008 ) Treasures of Westminster Abbey , London : Scala . FURTHER READING *
Westminster Abbey 900 Years .
1965
* Brooke - Hunt , Violet The Story of Westminster Abbey .
London :
James Nisbet EXTERNAL LINKS * Walter Thornbury , Old and New London , Volume 3 , 1878 , pp .
394–462 , British History Online
* Westminster Abbey Article at Encyclopædia Britannica
* Historic images of Westminster Abbey
* Westminster Abbey :
A Peek Inside – slideshow by Life magazine * Keith Short – Sculptor Images of stone carving for Westminster Abbey
* Carved Crests for the Knights of the Bath * A history of the choristers and choir school of Westminster Abbey
* Catholic Encyclopedia :
Westminster Abbey
* Adrian Fletcher 's Paradoxplace Westminster Abbey Pages — Photos * A panorama of Westminster Abbey in daytime – JPG and 3D QuickTime versions
* Westminster Abbey on Twitter
* Audio Guide of Westminster Abbey