GENOTYPE –
PHENOTYPE DISTINCTION
The genotype – phenotype distinction is drawn in genetics .
" Genotype " is an organism 's full hereditary information .
" Phenotype " is an organism 's actual observed properties , such as morphology , development , or behavior .
This distinction is fundamental in the study of inheritance of traits and their evolution .
It is the organism 's physical properties which directly determine its chances of survival and reproductive output , but the inheritance of physical properties is dependent on the inheritance of genes .
Therefore , understanding the theory of evolution via natural selection , requires understanding the genotype – phenotype distinction .
The genes contribute to a trait , and the phenotype is the observable expression of the genes ( and therefore the genotype that affects the trait ) .
If a white mouse had recessive genes that caused the genes responsible for color to be inactive , its genotype would be responsible for its phenotype ( the white color ) .
The mapping of a set of genotypes to a set of phenotypes is sometimes referred to as the genotype – phenotype map .
An organism 's genotype is a major ( the largest by far for morphology ) influencing factor in the development of its phenotype , but it is not the only one .
Even two organisms with identical genotypes normally differ in their phenotypes .
One experiences this in everyday life with monozygous ( i.e. identical ) twins .
Identical twins share the same genotype , since their genomes are identical ; but they never have the same phenotype , although their phenotypes may be very similar .
This is apparent in the fact that their mothers and close friends can always tell them apart , even though others might not be able to see the subtle differences .
Further , identical twins can be distinguished by their fingerprints , which are never completely identical .
The concept of phenotypic plasticity defines the degree to which an organism 's phenotype is determined by its genotype .
A high level of plasticity means that environmental factors have a strong influence on the particular phenotype that develops .
If there is little plasticity , the phenotype of an organism can be reliably predicted from knowledge of the genotype , regardless of environmental peculiarities during development .
An example of high plasticity can be observed in larval newts : when these larvae sense the presence of predators such as dragonflies , they develop larger heads and tails relative to their body size and display darker pigmentation .
Larvae with these traits have a higher chance of survival when exposed to the predators , but grow more slowly than other phenotypes .
In contrast to phenotypic plasticity , the concept of genetic canalization addresses the extent to which an organism 's phenotype allows conclusions about its genotype .
A phenotype is said to be canalized if mutations ( changes in the genome ) do not noticeably affect the physical properties of the organism .
This means that a canalized phenotype may form from a large variety of different genotypes , in which case it is not possible to exactly predict the genotype from knowledge of the phenotype ( i.e. the genotype – phenotype map is not invertible ) .
If canalization is not present , small changes in the genome have an immediate effect on the phenotype that develops .
The terms " genotype " and " phenotype " were created by Wilhelm Johannsen in 1911 , although the meaning of the terms and the significance of the distinction have evolved since they were introduced .
IMPORTANCE TO EVOLUTIONARY BIOLOGY Section::::Importance to evolutionary biology .
According to Lewontin , the theoretical task for population genetics is a process in two spaces : a " genotypic space " and a " phenotypic space " .
The challenge of a complete theory of population genetics is to provide a set of laws that predictably map a population of genotypes ( G ) to a phenotype space ( P ) , where selection takes place , and another set of laws that map the resulting population ( P ) back to genotype space ( G ) where Mendelian genetics can predict the next generation of genotypes , thus completing the cycle .
Even if non - Mendelian aspects of molecular genetics are ignored , this is a gargantuan task .
Visualizing the transformation schematically : ( adapted from Lewontin 1974 , p. 12 ) .
T represents the genetic and epigenetic laws , the aspects of functional biology , or development , that transform a genotype into phenotype .
This is the " genotype - phenotype map " .
T is the transformation due to natural selection , T are epigenetic relations that predict genotypes based on the selected phenotypes and finally T the rules of Mendelian genetics .
In practice , there are two bodies of evolutionary theory that exist in parallel , traditional population genetics operating in the genotype space and the biometric theory used in plant and animal breeding , operating in phenotype space .
The missing part is the mapping between the genotype and phenotype space .
This leads to a " sleight of hand " ( as Lewontin terms it )
whereby variables in the equations of one domain , are considered parameters or constants , where , in a full - treatment they would be transformed themselves by the evolutionary process and are functions of the state variables in the other domain .
The " sleight of hand " is assuming that the mapping is known .
Proceeding as if it is understood is enough to analyze many cases of interest .
For example , if the phenotype is almost one - to - one with genotype ( sickle - cell disease ) or the time - scale is sufficiently short , the " constants " can be treated as such ; however , there are also many situations where that assumption does not hold .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry
*
" Wilhelm Johannsen 's Genotype - Phenotype Distinction " at the Embryo Project Encyclopedia