SIDEREAL TIME
Sidereal time is a timekeeping system that astronomers use to locate celestial objects .
Using sidereal time , it is possible to easily point a telescope to the proper coordinates in the night sky .
Briefly , sidereal time is a " time scale that is based on Earth 's rate of rotation measured relative to the fixed stars " From a given observation point , a star found at one location in the sky will be found at the same location on another night at the same sidereal time .
This is similar to how the time kept by a sundial can be used to find the location of the Sun .
Just as the Sun and Moon appear to rise in the east and set in the west due to the rotation of Earth , so do the stars .
Both solar time and sidereal time make use of the regularity of Earth 's rotation about its polar axis , solar time following the Sun while sidereal time roughly follows the stars .
More exactly , sidereal time is the angle , measured along the celestial equator , from the observer 's meridian to the great circle that passes through the March equinox and both celestial poles , and is usually expressed in hours , minutes , and seconds .
Common time on a typical clock measures a slightly longer cycle , accounting not only for Earth 's axial rotation but also for Earth 's orbit around the Sun .
A sidereal day is approximately 23 hours , 56 minutes , 4.0905 SI seconds or also ( 24 hours - 4 minutes + 4 seconds ) .
The March equinox itself precesses slowly westward relative to the fixed stars , completing one revolution in about 26,000 years , so the misnamed sidereal day ( " sidereal " is derived from the Latin sidus meaning " star " ) is 0.0084 seconds shorter than Earth 's period of rotation relative to the fixed stars .
The slightly longer " true " sidereal period is measured as the Earth Rotation Angle ( ERA ) , formerly the stellar angle .
An increase of 360 ° in the ERA is a full rotation of the Earth .
Because Earth orbits the Sun once a year , the sidereal time at any given place and time will gain about four minutes against local civil time , every 24 hours , until , after a year has passed , one additional sidereal " day " has elapsed compared to the number of solar days that have gone by .
COMPARISON
TO SOLAR TIME Section::::Comparison to solar time .
Solar time is measured by the apparent diurnal motion of the Sun , and local noon in apparent solar time is the moment when the Sun is exactly due south or north ( depending on the observer 's latitude and the season ) .
A mean solar day ( what we normally measure as a " day " ) is the average time between local solar noons ( " average " since this varies slightly over the year ) .
Earth makes one rotation around its axis in a sidereal day ; during that time it moves a short distance ( about 1 ° ) along its orbit around the Sun .
So after a sidereal day has passed , Earth still needs to rotate slightly more before the Sun reaches local noon according to solar time .
A mean solar day is , therefore , nearly 4 minutes longer than a sidereal day .
The stars are so far away that Earth 's movement along its orbit makes nearly no difference to their apparent direction ( see , however , parallax ) , and so they return to their highest point in a sidereal day .
Another way to see this difference is to notice that , relative to the stars , the Sun appears to move around Earth once per year .
Therefore , there is one fewer solar day per year than there are sidereal days .
This makes a sidereal day approximately times the length of the 24-hour solar day , giving approximately 23 h 56 min 4.1 s ( 86,164.1 s ) .
PRECESSION EFFECTS Section::::Precession effects .
Earth 's rotation is not a simple rotation around an axis that would always remain parallel to itself .
Earth 's rotational axis itself rotates about a second axis , orthogonal to Earth 's orbit , taking about 25,800 years to perform a complete rotation .
This phenomenon is called the precession of the equinoxes .
Because of this precession , the stars appear to move around Earth in a manner more complicated than a simple constant rotation .
For this reason , to simplify the description of Earth 's orientation in astronomy and geodesy , it was conventional to chart the positions of the stars in the sky according to right ascension and declination , which are based on a frame that follows Earth 's precession , and to keep track of Earth 's rotation , through sidereal time , relative to this frame as well .
In this reference frame , Earth 's rotation is close to constant , but the stars appear to rotate slowly with a period of about 25,800 years .
It is also in this reference frame that the tropical year , the year related to Earth 's seasons , represents one orbit of Earth around the Sun .
The precise definition of a sidereal day is the time taken for one rotation of Earth in this precessing reference frame .
MODERN DEFINITION Section::::Modern definition .
In the past , time was measured by observing stars with instruments such as photographic zenith tubes and Danjon astrolabes , and the passage of stars across defined lines would be timed with the observatory clock .
Then , using the right ascension of the stars from a star catalog , the time when the star should have passed through the meridian of the observatory was computed , and a correction to the time kept by the observatory clock was computed .
Sidereal time was defined such that the March equinox would transit the meridian of the observatory at 0 hours local sidereal time .
Beginning in the 1970s the radio astronomy methods
Very Long Baseline Interferometry ( VLBI ) and pulsar timing overtook optical instruments for the most precise astrometry .
This led to the determination of UT1 ( mean solar time at 0 ° longitude ) using VLBI , a new measure of the rotation of the Earth named Earth Rotation Angle , and new definitions of sidereal time .
These changes were put into practice on 1 January 2003 .
EARTH
ROTATION ANGLE
DEFINITION Section::::Earth Rotation Angle definition .
The Earth Rotation Angle ( ERA ) measures the rotation of the Earth from an origin on the celestial equator , the Celestial Intermediate Origin
, that has no instantaneous motion along the equator ; it was originally referred to as the non - rotating origin .
ERA replaces Greenwich Apparent Sidereal Time ( GAST ) .
The origin on the celestial equator for GAST , called the true equinox , does move , due to the movement of the equator and the ecliptic .
The lack of motion of the origin of ERA is considered a significant advantage .
ERA , measured in radians , is related to UT1 by the expression
formula_1 where t is the Julian UT1 date − 2451545.0 .
The ERA may be converted to other units ; for example , the Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2017 tabulated it in degrees , minutes , and seconds .
As an example , the Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2017 gave the ERA at 0 h 1 January 2017 UT1 as 100 ° 37′ 12.4365″. SIDEREAL TIME
DEFINITION Section::::Sidereal time definition .
Although ERA is intended to replace sidereal time , there is a need to maintain definitions for sidereal time during the transition , and when working with older data and documents .
Similarly to mean solar time , every location on Earth has its own local sidereal time ( LST ) , depending on the longitude of the point .
Since it is not feasible to publish tables for every longitude , astronomical tables make use of Greenwich sidereal time ( GST ) , which is sidereal time on the IERS Reference Meridian , less precisely called the Greenwich , or prime meridian .
There are two varieties , mean sidereal time if the mean equator and equinox of date are used , or apparent sidereal time if the apparent equator and equinox of date are used .
The former ignores the effect of nutation while the latter includes nutation .
When the choice of location is combined with the choice of including nutation or not , the acronyms GMST , LMST , GAST , and LAST result .
The following relationships hold : local mean sidereal time =
GMST + east longitude local apparent sidereal time =
GAST + east longitude
The new definitions of Greenwich mean and apparent sidereal time ( since 2003 , see above ) are formula_2
formula_3 where θ is the Earth Rotation Angle , E is the accumulated precession , and E is equation of the origins , which represents accumulated precession and nutation .
The calculation of precession and nutation was described in Chapter 6 of Urban & Seidelmann .
As an example , the Astronomical Almanac for the Year 2017 gave the ERA at 0 h 1 January 2017 UT1 as 100 °
17′ 12.4365″.
The GAST was 6 h 43 m
20.7109 s.
For GMST the hour and minute were the same but the second was 21.1060 .
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN SOLAR TIME AND SIDEREAL TIME
INTERVALS Section::::Relationship between solar time and sidereal time intervals .
If a certain interval I is measured in both mean solar time ( UT1 ) and sidereal time , the numerical value will be greater in sidereal time than in UT1 , because sidereal days are shorter than UT1 days .
The ratio is formula_4 where t represents the number of Julian centuries elapsed since noon 1 January 2000 Terrestrial Time .
SIDEREAL DAYS
COMPARED TO SOLAR DAYS ON OTHER PLANETS Section::::Sidereal days compared to solar days on other planets .
Of the eight solar planets , all but Venus and Uranus have prograde rotation — that is , they rotate more than once per year in the same direction as they orbit the Sun , so the Sun rises in the east .
Venus and Uranus , however , have retrograde rotation .
For prograde rotation , the formula relating the lengths of the sidereal and solar days is or equivalently On the other hand , the formula in the case of retrograde rotation is or equivalently All the solar planets more distant from the Sun than Earth are similar to Earth in that , since they experience many rotations per revolution around the Sun , there is only a small difference between the length of the sidereal day and that of the solar day — the ratio of the former to the latter never being less than Earth 's ratio of 0.997 .
But the situation is quite different for Mercury and Venus .
Mercury 's sidereal day is about two - thirds of its orbital period , so by the prograde formula its solar day lasts for two revolutions around the Sun — three times as long as its sidereal day .
Venus rotates retrograde with a sidereal day lasting about 243.0 Earth days , or about 1.08 times its orbital period of 224.7 Earth days ; hence by the retrograde formula its solar day is about 116.8 Earth days , and it has about 1.9 solar days per orbital period .
By convention , rotation periods of planets are given in sidereal terms unless otherwise specified .
SEE ALSO
* Anti - sidereal time
* Earth 's rotation
* International Celestial Reference Frame * Nocturnal ( instrument ) * Sidereal month * Sidereal year * Synodic day
* Transit instrument NOTES CITATIONS REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Web based Sidereal time calculator