BACK TO THE FUTURE
Back to the Future is a 1985 American science fiction film directed by Robert Zemeckis and written by Zemeckis and Bob Gale .
It stars Michael J. Fox as teenager Marty McFly , who accidentally travels back in time to 1955 , where he meets his future parents and becomes his mother 's romantic interest .
Christopher Lloyd portrays the eccentric scientist Dr. Emmett " Doc " Brown , inventor of the time - traveling DeLorean , who helps Marty repair history and return to 1985 .
Zemeckis and Gale wrote the script after Gale wondered whether he would have befriended his father if they had attended school together .
Film studios rejected it until the financial success of Zemeckis ' Romancing the Stone .
Zemeckis approached Steven Spielberg , who agreed to produce the project at Amblin Entertainment , with Universal Pictures as distributor .
Fox was the first choice to play Marty , but he was busy filming his television series Family Ties , and Eric Stoltz was cast ; after the filmmakers decided he was wrong for the role , a deal was struck to allow Fox to film Back to the Future without interrupting his television schedule .
Back to the Future was released on July 3 , 1985 and it grossed over $ 381 million worldwide , becoming the highest - grossing film of 1985 .
It won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film , and the Academy Award for Best Sound Effects Editing .
It received three Academy Award nominations , five BAFTA nominations , and four Golden Globe nominations , including Best Motion Picture ( Musical or Comedy ) .
In 2007 , the Library of Congress selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry , and in June 2008 the American Film Institute 's special AFI 's 10 Top 10 designated it the 10th - best science fiction film .
The film began a franchise including two sequels , Back to the Future Part II ( 1989 ) and Back to the Future Part III ( 1990 ) , an animated series , , and several video games .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1985 Hill Valley , California , teenager Marty McFly and his girlfriend , Jennifer Parker , are chastised by the school principal for lateness .
Marty auditions for the Battle of the Bands , but is rejected for being too loud .
At home , Marty 's father George is bullied by his supervisor , Biff Tannen , while his mother Lorraine is an overweight , depressed alcoholic .
Lorraine recalls how she met George when her father hit him with his car .
Marty is invited by his friend , eccentric inventor Dr. Emmett Brown , to meet him in a parking lot in the early hours .
Doc unveils a time machine built from a modified DeLorean and powered by plutonium stolen from terrorists .
Preparing to demonstrate the time machine , Doc sets the date to November 5 , 1955 : the day he invented time travel .
The terrorists arrive and shoot Doc .
Marty escapes in the DeLorean , but inadvertently activates the time machine .
Marty finds himself in 1955 without enough plutonium to return .
He encounters the teenaged George , who is bullied by his classmate Biff .
After Marty saves George from an oncoming car , he is knocked unconscious and awakens to find himself tended to by Lorraine , who is infatuated with him .
Marty tracks down Doc 's younger self for help .
With no plutonium , Doc explains that the only power source capable of generating the necessary 1.21 gigawatts of electricity for the time machine is a bolt of lightning .
Marty shows Doc a flyer from the future that recounts a lightning strike at the town 's courthouse due the coming Saturday night .
Doc instructs Marty to not leave his house or interact with anyone , as he could inadvertently alter the future ; because of this , Doc refuses to heed warnings from Marty about his death in 1985 .
When they realize that he has prevented his parents from meeting , Doc warns Marty that he must find a way to introduce George to Lorraine or he will be erased from existence .
Doc formulates a plan to harness the power of the lightning , while Marty sets about introducing his parents .
After Lorraine asks Marty to the school dance , Marty concocts a plan : he will feign inappropriate advances on Lorraine , allowing George to " rescue " her .
The plan goes awry when a drunken Biff attempts to force himself on Lorraine .
George , enraged , knocks out Biff , and Lorraine follows him to the dance floor , where they kiss while Marty performs with the band .
As the storm arrives , Marty returns to the clock tower and the lightning strikes , sending Marty back to 1985 .
Doc has survived the shooting , as he had listened to Marty 's warnings and worn a bullet - proof vest .
Doc takes Marty home and departs to the future .
Marty awakens the next morning to find that George is a successful author , Lorraine is fit and happy , and Biff is now an obsequious auto valet .
As Marty reunites with Jennifer , the DeLorean appears with Doc , insisting they accompany him to 2015 to resolve a problem with their future children .
The trio board the DeLorean , which has been upgraded with hover technology , and warp to the future .
CAST
* Michael J. Fox as Marty McFly * Christopher Lloyd as Dr. Emmett " Doc " Brown * Lea Thompson as Lorraine Baines - McFly * Crispin Glover as George McFly
* Thomas F. Wilson as Biff Tannen * Claudia Wells as Jennifer Parker * James Tolkan as Mr. Strickland * Marc McClure as Dave McFly * Wendie Jo Sperber as Linda McFly PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Writer and producer Bob Gale conceived Back to the Future after he visited his parents in St. Louis , Missouri after the release of Used Cars .
Searching their basement , Gale found his father 's high school yearbook and discovered he was president of his graduating class .
Gale had not known the president of his own graduating class , and wondered whether he would have been friends with his father if they went to high school together .
When he returned to California , Gale told director Robert Zemeckis about the idea .
Zemeckis thought of a mother claiming she never kissed a boy at school when , in fact , she had been promiscuous .
The two took the project to Columbia Pictures , and made a development deal for a script in September 1980 .
Zemeckis and Gale set the story in 1955 because a 17-year - old traveling to meet his parents at the same age arithmetically required the script to travel to that decade .
The era also marked the rise of teenagers as an important cultural element , the birth of rock n ' roll , and suburban expansion , which flavored the story .
In an early script , the time machine was a refrigerator , and Marty would need the power of an atomic explosion at the Nevada Test Site to return home .
Zemeckis was concerned that children would accidentally lock themselves in refrigerators , and felt it was more useful if the time machine were mobile .
The DeLorean DMC-12 was chosen because its design made the gag about the family of farmers mistaking it for a flying saucer believable .
Zemeckis and Gale found it difficult to create a believable friendship between Marty and Brown before they created the giant guitar amplifier , and only resolved his Oedipal relationship with Marty 's mother when they wrote the line
" It 's like I 'm kissing my brother . "
Biff Tannen was named after studio executive Ned Tanen , who behaved aggressively toward Zemeckis and Gale during a script meeting for I
Wanna Hold Your Hand .
The first draft of Back to the Future was finished in February 1981 and presented to Columbia , who put the film in turnaround .
" They thought it was a really nice , cute , warm film , but not sexual enough , " Gale said .
" They suggested that we take it to Disney , but we decided to see if any other of the major studios wanted a piece of us . "
Every major film studio rejected the script for the next four years , while Back to the Future went through two more drafts .
During the early 1980s , popular teen comedies ( such as Fast Times at Ridgemont High and Porky 's ) were risqué and adult - aimed , so the script was rejected for being too light .
Gale and Zemeckis finally pitched Back to the Future to Disney , but they felt the story of a mother falling in love with her son was not appropriate for a family film under the Disney name .
The two were tempted to ally themselves with Steven Spielberg , who produced Used Cars and
I Wanna Hold Your Hand , which were both box office bombs .
Zemeckis and Gale initially had shown the screenplay to Spielberg , who had " loved " it .
Spielberg , however , was absent from the project during development because Zemeckis felt if he produced another flop under him , he would never be able to make another film .
Gale said " we were afraid that we would get the reputation that we were two guys who could only get a job because we were pals with Steven Spielberg . "
Zemeckis chose to direct Romancing the Stone instead , which was a box office success .
Now a high - profile director , Zemeckis reapproached Spielberg with the concept .
Agreeing to produce Back to the Future , Spielberg set the project up at his production company , Amblin Entertainment , with Kathleen Kennedy and Frank Marshall joining Spielberg as executive producers on the film .
The script remained with Columbia until legal problems forced them to withdraw .
The studio was set to begin shooting a comedic send - up of Double Indemnity entitled Big Trouble .
Columbia 's legal department determined that the film 's plot was too similar to Double Indemnity and they needed the permission of Universal Pictures , owners of the earlier film , if the film was ever to begin shooting .
With Big Trouble set to go , desperate Columbia executives phoned Universal 's Frank Price to get the necessary paperwork .
Price was a former Columbia executive who had been fond of the script for Back to the Future during his tenure there .
As a result , Universal agreed to trade the Double Indemnity license in exchange for the rights to Back to the Future .
Executive Sidney Sheinberg made suggestions to the script , such as changing Marty 's mother 's name from Meg to Lorraine ( the name of his wife , actress Lorraine Gary ) , changing Brown 's name from Professor Brown to Doc Brown , and replacing Doc 's pet chimpanzee with a dog .
Sheinberg also wanted the title changed to Space Man from Pluto , convinced no successful film ever had " future " in the title .
He suggested that the scene with Marty dressed as an alien should have Marty identify himself as " a space man from the Planet Pluto " [ sic ] instead of " Darth Vader from Vulcan " , and that the farmer 's son 's comic book be titled Spaceman from Pluto rather than Space Zombies from Pluto .
Appalled , Zemeckis asked Spielberg for help .
Spielberg dictated a memo to Sheinberg convincing him they thought his title was a joke , thus embarrassing him into dropping the idea .
The original climax was deemed too expensive by Universal executives and was simplified by keeping the plot within Hill Valley and incorporating the clocktower sequence .
Spielberg used the omitted refrigerator and Nevada nuclear site elements in his 2008 film Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Michael J. Fox was the first choice to play Marty McFly , but he was committed to the show Family Ties .
Family Ties producer Gary David Goldberg felt that Fox was essential to the show 's success .
With co - star Meredith Baxter on maternity leave , he refused to allow Fox time off to work on a film .
Back to the Future was originally scheduled for a May 1985 release and it was late 1984 when it was learned that Fox would be unable to star in the film .
Zemeckis ' next two choices were C. Thomas Howell and Eric Stoltz .
Stoltz impressed the producers enough with his earlier portrayal of Roy L. Dennis in Mask ( which had yet to be released ) that they selected him to play Marty McFly .
Because of the difficult casting process , the start date was pushed back twice .
Four weeks into filming , Zemeckis determined Stoltz had been miscast .
Although he and Spielberg realized re - shooting the film would add $ 3 million to the $ 14 million budget , they decided to recast .
Spielberg explained Zemeckis felt Stoltz was not comedic enough and gave a " terrifically dramatic performance " .
Gale further explained they felt Stoltz was simply acting out the role , whereas Fox himself had a personality like Marty McFly .
He felt Stoltz was uncomfortable riding a skateboard , whereas Fox was not .
Stoltz confessed to director Peter Bogdanovich during a phone call , two weeks into the shoot , that he was unsure of Zemeckis and Gale 's direction , and concurred that he was wrong for the role .
Fox 's schedule was opened up in January 1985 when Baxter returned to Family Ties following her pregnancy .
The Back to the Future crew met with Goldberg again , who made a deal that Fox 's main priority would be Family Ties , and if a scheduling conflict arose , " we win " .
Fox loved the script and was impressed by Zemeckis and Gale 's sensitivity in releasing Stoltz , because they nevertheless " spoke very highly of him " .
Per Welinder and Bob Schmelzer assisted on the skateboarding scenes .
Fox found his portrayal of Marty McFly to be very personal .
" All I did in high school was skateboard , chase girls and play in bands .
I even dreamed of becoming a rock star . "
Christopher Lloyd was cast as Doc Brown after the first choice , John Lithgow , became unavailable .
Having worked with Lloyd on The Adventures of Buckaroo Banzai ( 1984 ) , producer Neil Canton suggested him for the part .
Lloyd originally turned down the role , but changed his mind after reading the script and at the persistence of his wife .
He improvised some of his scenes , taking inspiration from Albert Einstein and conductor Leopold Stokowski .
Brown pronounces gigawatts as " jigawatts " , which was the way a physicist said the word when he met with Zemeckis and Gale as they researched the script , rather than with an initial hard " g " , although both pronunciations are acceptable .
Doc Brown 's notable hunch came about because at Lloyd was considerably taller than Fox at , and they needed to look closer in height .
Crispin Glover played George McFly .
Zemeckis said Glover improvised much of George 's nerdy mannerisms , such as his shaky hands .
The director joked he was " endlessly throwing a net over Crispin because he was completely off about fifty percent of the time in his interpretation of the character " .
Due to a contract disagreement , Glover was replaced by Jeffrey Weissman in Part II and Part III .
Lea Thompson was cast as Lorraine McFly because she had acted opposite Stoltz in The Wild Life ; the producers noticed her as they had watched the film while casting Stoltz .
Her prosthetic makeup for scenes at the beginning of the film , set in 1985 , took three and a half hours to apply .
Thomas F. Wilson was cast as Biff Tannen because the producers felt that the original choice , J. J. Cohen , was n't physically imposing enough to bully Stoltz .
Cohen was recast as Skinhead , one of Biff 's cohorts .
Had Fox been cast from the beginning , Cohen probably would have won the part because he was sufficiently taller than Fox .
Melora Hardin was originally cast in the role of Marty 's girlfriend Jennifer , but was let go after Stoltz was dismissed , with the explanation that the actress was now too tall to be playing against Fox .
Hardin was dismissed before she had a chance to shoot a single scene and was replaced with Claudia Wells .
Actress Jill Schoelen had also been considered to play Marty 's girlfriend .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Following Stoltz 's departure , Fox 's schedule during weekdays consisted of filming Family Ties during the day , and Back to the Future from 6:30 pm to 2:30 am .
He averaged five hours of sleep each night .
During Fridays , he shot from 10 pm to 6 or 7 am , and then moved on to film exterior scenes throughout the weekend , as only then was he available during daytime hours .
Fox found it exhausting , but " it was my dream to be in the film and television business , although I did n't know I 'd be in them simultaneously .
It was just this weird ride
and I got on . "
Zemeckis concurred , dubbing Back to the Future " the film that would not wrap " .
He recalled that because they shot night after night , he was always " half asleep " and the " fattest , most out - of - shape and sick
I ever was " .
The Hill Valley town square scenes were shot at Courthouse Square , located in the Universal Studios backlot ( ) .
Gale explained it would have been impossible to shoot on location " because no city is going to let a film crew remodel their town to look like it 's in the 1950s .
"
The filmmakers " decided to shoot all the 50s stuff first , and make the town look real beautiful and wonderful .
Then we would just totally trash it down and make it all bleak and ugly for the 1980s scenes .
" The interiors for Doc Brown 's house were shot at the Robert R. Blacker House , while exteriors took place at Gamble House .
The exterior shots of the Twin Pines Mall , and later the Lone Pine Mall ( from 1985 ) were shot at the Puente Hills Mall in City of Industry , California .
The exterior shots and some interior scenes at Hill Valley High School were filmed at Whittier High School in Whittier , California .
The Battle of the Bands tryout scene was filmed at the McCambridge Park Recreation Center in Burbank , and the " Enchantment Under the Sea " dance was filmed in the gymnasium at Hollywood United Methodist Church .
The scenes outside of the Baines ' house in 1955 were shot at Bushnell Avenue , South Pasadena , California .
Filming wrapped after 100 days on April 20 , 1985 , and the film was delayed from May to August .
But after a highly positive test screening ( " I 'd never seen a preview like that , " said Frank Marshall , " the audience went up to the ceiling " )
, Sheinberg chose to move the release date to July 3 .
To make sure the film met this new date , two editors , Arthur Schmidt and Harry Keramidas , were assigned to the picture , while many sound editors worked 24-hour shifts on the film .
Eight minutes were cut , including Marty watching his mom cheat during an exam , George getting stuck in a telephone booth before rescuing Lorraine , as well as much of Marty pretending to be Darth Vader .
Zemeckis almost cut out the " Johnny B. Goode " sequence as he felt it did not advance the story , but the preview audience loved it , so it was kept .
Industrial Light & Magic created the film 's 32 effects shots , which did not satisfy Zemeckis and Gale until a week before the film 's completion date .
The compositing involved for the film 's time travel sequences , as well as for the lightning effects in the climactic clock tower scene , was handled by animation supervisor Wes Takahashi , who would also work on the subsequent two Back to the Future films with the rest of the ILM crew .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Alan Silvestri collaborated with Zemeckis on Romancing the Stone , but Spielberg disliked that film 's score .
Zemeckis advised Silvestri to make his compositions grand and epic , despite the film 's small scale , to impress Spielberg .
Silvestri began recording the score two weeks before the first preview .
He also suggested Huey Lewis and the News create the theme song .
Their first attempt was rejected by Universal , before they recorded " The Power of Love " .
The studio loved the final song , but were disappointed it did not feature the film 's title , so they had to send memos to radio stations to always mention its association with Back to the Future .
In the end , the track " Back in Time " was featured in the film , playing during the scene when Marty wakes up after his return to 1985 and also during the end credits .
Although it appears that Fox is actually playing a guitar , music supervisor Bones Howe hired Hollywood guitar coach and musician Paul Hanson to teach Fox to simulate playing all the parts so it would look realistic , including playing behind his head .
Fox lip - synched " Johnny B. Goode " to vocals by Mark Campbell ( of Jack Mack and the Heart Attack fame ) , with the guitar solo played by Tim May.
The original 1985 soundtrack album only included two tracks culled from Silvestri 's compositions for the film , both Huey Lewis tracks , the songs played in the film by the fictional band Marvin Berry and The Starlighters ( and Marty McFly ) , one of the vintage 1950s songs in the movie , and two pop songs that are only very briefly heard in the background of the film .
On November 24 , 2009 , an authorized , limited - edition two - CD set of the entire score was released by Intrada Records .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Back to the Future opened on July 3 , 1985 , on 1,200 screens in North America .
Zemeckis was concerned the film would flop because Fox had to film a Family Ties special in London and was unable to promote the film .
Gale was also dissatisfied with Universal Pictures ' tagline "
Are you telling me my mother 's got the hots for me ? " .
When the film was released on VHS in 1986 , Universal added a " To be continued ... " graphic at the end to increase awareness of production on Part II .
This caption is omitted on the film 's DVD release in 2002 and on subsequent Blu - ray and DVD releases .
In October 2010 , in commemoration for the film 's 25th anniversary , Back to the Future was digitally restored and remastered for a theatrical re - release in the US , the UK and Italy .
The release also coincided with Universal Pictures Home Entertainment 's Blu - ray Disc releases of the trilogy .
On October 21 , 2015 , the futuristic date depicted in Part II , the entire trilogy was re - released theatrically for one day in celebration of the film 's 30th anniversary .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Back to the Future spent 11 weeks at number one .
Gale recalled " Our second weekend was higher than our first weekend , which is indicative of great word of mouth .
National Lampoon 's European Vacation came out in August and it kicked us out of number one for one week and then we were back to number one .
"
The film went on to gross $ 210.61 million in North America and $ 178.5 million in foreign countries , accumulating a worldwide total of $ 389.1 million .
Back to the Future had the fourth - highest opening weekend of 1985 and was the top - grossing film of the year .
Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 59 million tickets in the US .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On review aggregator Metacritic the film received an average score of 87 , which indicates " universal acclaim " , based on 12 reviews .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 96 % of critics gave the film a positive review based on 77 reviews ; the average rating is 8.7/10 .
The website 's consensus reads : " Inventive , funny , and breathlessly constructed , Back to the Future is a rousing time - travel adventure with an unforgettable spirit . "
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times felt Back to the Future had similar themes to the films of Frank Capra , especially It 's a Wonderful Life .
Ebert commented " [ Producer ] Steven Spielberg is emulating the great authentic past of Classical Hollywood cinema , who specialized in matching the right director ( Robert Zemeckis ) with the right project . "
He gave the film 3 1/2 out of 4 stars .
Janet Maslin of The New York Times believed the film had a balanced storyline : " It 's a cinematic inventing of humor and whimsical tall tales for a long time to come . "
Christopher Null , who first saw the film as a teenager , called it " a quintessential 1980s flick that combines science fiction , action , comedy , and romance all into a perfect little package that kids and adults will both devour . "
Dave Kehr of Chicago Reader felt Gale and Zemeckis wrote a script that perfectly balanced science fiction , seriousness and humor .
Variety praised the performances , arguing Fox and Lloyd imbued Marty and Doc Brown 's friendship with a quality reminiscent of King Arthur and Merlin .
BBC News lauded the intricacies of the " outstandingly executed " script , remarking that " nobody says anything that does n't become important to the plot later . "
Dennis Fischer of Cinefantastique gave the film four stars out of five , calling it an " instant classic " .
Back to the Future appeared on Gene Siskel 's top ten film list of 1985 .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
At the 58th Academy Awards , Back to the Future won for Best Sound Effects Editing , while Zemeckis and Gale were nominated for Best Original Screenplay , " The Power of Love " was nominated for Best Original Song , and Bill Varney , B. Tennyson Sebastian II , Robert Thirlwell and William B. Kaplan were nominated for Best Sound Mixing .
The film won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation and the Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film .
Michael J. Fox and the visual effects designers won categories at the Saturn Awards .
Zemeckis , composer Alan Silvestri , the costume design and supporting actors Christopher Lloyd , Lea Thompson , Crispin Glover and Thomas F. Wilson were also nominated .
The film was nominated for numerous BAFTAs at the 39th British Academy Film Awards , including Best Film , original screenplay , visual effects , production design and editing .
At the 43rd Golden Globe Awards , Back to the Future was nominated for Best Motion Picture ( Musical or Comedy ) , original song ( for " The Power of Love " ) , Best Actor in a Motion Picture Musical or Comedy ( Fox ) and Best Screenplay for Zemeckis and Gale .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
President Ronald Reagan , a fan of the film , referred to the film in his 1986 State of the Union Address when he said , " Never has there been a more exciting time to be alive , a time of rousing wonder and heroic achievement .
As they said in the film Back to the Future , ' Where we 're going , we do n't need roads ' .
" When he first saw the joke about him being president , he ordered the projectionist of the theater to stop the reel , roll it back , and run it again .
The film ranked number 28 on Entertainment Weeklys list of the 50 Best High School Movies .
In 2008 , Back to the Future was voted the 23rd greatest film ever made by readers of Empire .
It was also placed on a similar list by The New York Times , a list of 1000 movies .
In January 2010 , Total Film included the film on its list of The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time .
In 2007 , the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
In 2006 , the original screenplay for Back to the Future was selected by the Writers Guild of America as the 56th best screenplay of all time .
In June 2008 , the American Film Institute revealed the AFI 's 10 Top 10 – the best ten films in ten classic American film genres – after polling more than 1,500 people from the creative community .
Back to the Future was acknowledged as the 10th best film in the science fiction genre .
A musical theater production , also called Back to the Future , is in development for a debut in London 's West End theatre during the film 's 30th anniversary in 2015 .
Zemeckis and Gale reunited to write the play , while Silvestri and Glen Ballard provide music .
The scenes of Marty McFly skateboarding in the film took place during the infancy of the skateboarding sub - culture and numerous skateboarders , as well as companies in the industry , pay tribute to the film for its influence in this regard .
Examples can be seen in promotional material , in interviews in which professional skateboarders cite the film as an initiation into the action sport , and in the public 's recognition of the film 's influence .
Back to the Future is ranked tenth on Film4 's 50 Films to See Before You Die .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
Back to the Future success led to two film sequels :
Back to the Future Part II and Back to the Future Part III .
Part II was released on November 22 , 1989 , to mixed reviews and similar financial success as the original , finishing as the third highest - grossing film of the year worldwide .
The film continues directly from the ending of Back to the Future and follows Marty and Doc as they travel into the future of 2015 , an alternative 1985 , and 1955 where Marty must repair the future while avoiding his past self from the original film .
Part II became notable for its 2015 setting and predictions of technology such as hoverboards .
Part III , released on May 25 , 1990 , continued the story , following Marty as he travels back to 1885 to rescue a time - stranded Doc .
Part III was less financially successful than its predecessors despite being better received by critics than Part II .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS