IRRIGATION Irrigation is the application of controlled amounts of water to plants at needed intervals .
Irrigation helps to grow agricultural crops , maintain landscapes , and revegetate disturbed soils in dry areas and during periods of less than average rainfall .
Irrigation also has other uses in crop production , including frost protection , suppressing weed growth in grain fields and preventing soil consolidation .
In contrast , agriculture that relies only on direct rainfall is referred to as rain - fed or dry land farming .
Irrigation systems are also used for cooling livestock , dust suppression , disposal of sewage , and in mining .
Irrigation is often studied together with drainage , which is the removal of surface and sub - surface water from a given area .
Irrigation has been a central feature of agriculture for over 5,000 years and is the product of many cultures .
Historically , it was the basis for economies and societies across the globe , from Asia to the Southwestern United States .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Archaeological investigation has found evidence of irrigation where natural rainfall was insufficient to support crops for rainfed agriculture .
Irrigation was used as a means of manipulation of water in the alluvial plains of the Indus valley civilization , the application of it is estimated to have begun around 4500 BC and drastically increased the size and prosperity of their agricultural settlements .
Sophisticated irrigation and water storage systems were developed by the Indus Valley Civilization , including artificial reservoirs at Girnar dated to 3000 BCE , and an early canal irrigation system from c. 2600 BCE .
Large scale agriculture was practiced and an extensive network of canals was used for the purpose of irrigation .
Perennial irrigation was practiced in the Mesopotamian plain whereby crops were regularly watered throughout the growing season by coaxing water through a matrix of small channels formed in the field .
Ancient Egyptians practiced Basin irrigation using the flooding of the Nile to inundate land plots which had been surrounded by dykes .
The flood water was held until the fertile sediment had settled before the surplus was returned to the watercourse .
There is evidence of the ancient Egyptian pharaoh Amenemhet III in the twelfth dynasty ( about 1800 BCE ) using the natural lake of the Faiyum Oasis as a reservoir to store surpluses of water for use during the dry seasons .
The lake swelled annually from flooding of the Nile .
The Ancient Nubians developed a form of irrigation by using a waterwheel - like device called a sakia .
Irrigation began in Nubia some time between the third and second millennium BCE .
It largely depended upon the flood waters that would flow through the Nile River and other rivers in what is now the Sudan .
In sub - Saharan Africa irrigation reached the Niger River region cultures and civilizations by the first or second millennium BCE and was based on wet season flooding and water harvesting .
Terrace irrigation is evidenced in pre - Columbian America , early Syria , India , and China .
In the Zana Valley of the Andes Mountains in Peru , archaeologists found remains of three irrigation canals radiocarbon dated from the 4th millennium BCE , the 3rd millennium BCE and the 9th century CE .
These canals are the earliest record of irrigation in the New World .
Traces of a canal possibly dating from the 5th millennium BCE were found under the 4th millennium canal .
Ancient Persia ( modern day Iran ) used irrigation as far back as the 6th millennium BCE to grow barley in areas where natural rainfall was insufficient .
The Qanats , developed in ancient Persia in about 800 BCE , are among the oldest known irrigation methods still in use today .
They are now found in Asia , the Middle East and North Africa .
The system comprises a network of vertical wells and gently sloping tunnels driven into the sides of cliffs and steep hills to tap groundwater .
The noria , a water wheel with clay pots around the rim powered by the flow of the stream ( or by animals where the water source was still ) , was first brought into use at about this time by Roman settlers in North Africa .
By 150 BCE the pots were fitted with valves to allow smoother filling as they were forced into the water .
The irrigation works of ancient Sri Lanka , the earliest dating from about 300 BCE , in the reign of King Pandukabhaya and under continuous development for the next thousand years , were one of the most complex irrigation systems of the ancient world .
In addition to underground canals , the Sinhalese were the first to build completely artificial reservoirs to store water .
These reservoirs and canal systems were used primarily to irrigate paddy fields which require a lot of water to cultivate .
Most of these irrigation systems still exist undamaged up to now , in Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa , because of the advanced and precise engineering .
The system was extensively restored and further extended during the reign of King Parakrama Bahu ( 1153–1186 CE ) .
CHINA Section::::China .
The oldest known hydraulic engineers of China were Sunshu Ao ( 6th century BCE ) of the Spring and Autumn period and Ximen Bao ( 5th century BCE ) of the Warring States period , both of whom worked on large irrigation projects .
In the Sichuan region belonging to the State of Qin of ancient China , the Dujiangyan Irrigation System devised by the Qin Chinese hydrologist and irrigation engineer Li Bing was built in 256 BCE to irrigate a vast area of farmland that today still supplies water .
By the 2nd century AD , during the Han Dynasty , the Chinese also used chain pumps that lifted water from a lower elevation to a higher one .
These were powered by manual foot pedal , hydraulic waterwheels , or rotating mechanical wheels pulled by oxen .
The water was used for public works of providing water for urban residential quarters and palace gardens , but mostly for irrigation of farmland canals and channels in the fields .
KOREA
Section::::Korea .
In 15th century Korea , the world 's first rain gauge , uryanggye ( Korean:우량계 ) , was invented in 1441 .
The inventor was Jang Yeong - sil , a Korean engineer of the Joseon Dynasty , under the active direction of the king , Sejong the Great .
It was installed in irrigation tanks as part of a nationwide system to measure and collect rainfall for agricultural applications .
With this instrument , planners and farmers could make better use of the information gathered in the survey .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
The earliest agricultural irrigation canal system known in the U.S. dates to between 1200 B.C. and 800 B.C. and was discovered in Marana , Arizona ( adjacent to Tucson ) in 2009 .
The irrigation canal system predates the Hohokam culture by two thousand years and belongs to an unidentified culture .
In North America , the Hohokam were the only culture known to rely on irrigation canals to water their crops , and their irrigation systems supported the largest population in the Southwest by AD 1300 .
The Hohokam constructed an assortment of simple canals combined with weirs in their various agricultural pursuits .
Between the 7th and 14th centuries , they also built and maintained extensive irrigation networks along the lower Salt and middle Gila rivers that rivaled the complexity of those used in the ancient Near East , Egypt , and China .
These were constructed using relatively simple excavation tools , without the benefit of advanced engineering technologies , and achieved drops of a few feet per mile , balancing erosion and siltation .
The Hohokam cultivated varieties of cotton , tobacco , maize , beans and squash , as well as harvested an assortment of wild plants .
Late in the Hohokam Chronological Sequence , they also used extensive dry - farming systems , primarily to grow agave for food and fiber .
Their reliance on agricultural strategies based on canal irrigation , vital in their less than hospitable desert environment and arid climate , provided the basis for the aggregation of rural populations into stable urban centers .
PRESENT EXTENT
Section::::Present extent .
In year 2000 , the total fertile land was 2,788,000 km² ( 689 million acres ) and it was equipped with irrigation infrastructure worldwide .
About 68 % of this area is in Asia , 17 % in the Americas , 9 % in Europe , 5 % in Africa and 1 % in Oceania .
The largest contiguous areas of high irrigation density are found : Smaller irrigation areas are spread across almost all populated parts of the world .
Only eight years later , in 2008 , the area of irrigated land had increased to an estimated total of 3,245,566 km² ( 802 million acres ) , which is nearly the size of India .
TYPES OF IRRIGATION Section::::Types of irrigation .
There are several methods of irrigation .
They vary in how the water is supplied to the plants .
The goal is to apply the water to the plants as uniformly as possible , so that each plant has the amount of water it needs , neither too much nor too little .
SURFACE IRRIGATION
Section::::Surface irrigation .
Surface irrigation is the oldest form of irrigation and has been in use for thousands of years .
In surface ( furrow , flood , or level basin ) irrigation systems , water moves across the surface of an agricultural lands , in order to wet it and infiltrate into the soil .
Surface irrigation can be subdivided into furrow , borderstrip or basin irrigation .
It is often called flood irrigation when the irrigation results in flooding or near flooding of the cultivated land .
Historically , this has been the most common method of irrigating agricultural land and is still used in most parts of the world .
Where water levels from the irrigation source permit , the levels are controlled by dikes , usually plugged by soil .
This is often seen in terraced rice fields ( rice paddies ) , where the method is used to flood or control the level of water in each distinct field .
In some cases , the water is pumped , or lifted by human or animal power to the level of the land .
The water application efficiency of surface irrigation is typically lower than other forms of irrigation .
Surface irrigation is even used to water landscapes in certain areas , for example , in and around Phoenix , Arizona .
The irrigated area is surrounded by a berm and the water is delivered according to a schedule set by a local irrigation district .
MICRO - IRRIGATION Section::::Micro - irrigation .
Micro - irrigation , sometimes called localized irrigation , low volume irrigation , or trickle irrigation is a system where water is distributed under low pressure through a piped network , in a pre - determined pattern , and applied as a small discharge to each plant or adjacent to it .
Traditional drip irrigation using individual emitters , subsurface drip irrigation ( SDI ) , micro - spray or micro - sprinkler irrigation , and mini - bubbler irrigation all belong to this category of irrigation methods .
DRIP IRRIGATION Section::::Drip irrigation .
Drip ( or micro ) irrigation , also known as trickle irrigation , functions as its name suggests .
In this system water falls drop by drop just at the position of roots .
Water is delivered at or near the root zone of plants , drop by drop .
This method can be the most water - efficient method of irrigation , if managed properly , evaporation and runoff are minimized .
The field water efficiency of drip irrigation is typically in the range of 80 to 90 percent when managed correctly .
In modern agriculture , drip irrigation is often combined with plastic mulch , further reducing evaporation , and is also the means of delivery of fertilizer .
The process is known as fertigation .
Deep percolation , where water moves below the root zone , can occur if a drip system is operated for too long or if the delivery rate is too high .
Drip irrigation methods range from very high - tech and computerized to low - tech and labor - intensive .
Lower water pressures are usually needed than for most other types of systems , with the exception of low energy center pivot systems and surface irrigation systems , and the system can be designed for uniformity throughout a field or for precise water delivery to individual plants in a landscape containing a mix of plant species .
Although it is difficult to regulate pressure on steep slopes , pressure compensating emitters are available , so the field does not have to be level .
High - tech solutions involve precisely calibrated emitters located along lines of tubing that extend from a computerized set of valves .
SPRINKLER IRRIGATION Section::::Sprinkler irrigation .
In sprinkler or overhead irrigation , water is piped to one or more central locations within the field and distributed by overhead high - pressure sprinklers or guns .
A system using sprinklers , sprays , or guns mounted overhead on permanently installed risers is often referred to as a solid - set irrigation system .
Higher pressure sprinklers that rotate are called rotors and are driven by a ball drive , gear drive , or impact mechanism .
Rotors can be designed to rotate in a full or partial circle .
Guns are similar to rotors , except that they generally operate at very high pressures of 275 to 900 kPa ( 40 to 130 psi ) and flows of 3 to 76 L / s ( 50 to 1200 US gal / min ) , usually with nozzle diameters in the range of 10 to 50 mm ( 0.5 to 1.9 in ) .
Guns are used not only for irrigation , but also for industrial applications such as dust suppression and logging .
Sprinklers can also be mounted on moving platforms connected to the water source by a hose .
Automatically moving wheeled systems known as traveling sprinklers may irrigate areas such as small farms , sports fields , parks , pastures , and cemeteries unattended .
Most of these use a length of polyethylene tubing wound on a steel drum .
As the tubing is wound on the drum powered by the irrigation water or a small gas engine , the sprinkler is pulled across the field .
When the sprinkler arrives back at the reel the system shuts off .
This type of system is known to most people as a " waterreel " traveling irrigation sprinkler and they are used extensively for dust suppression , irrigation , and land application of waste water .
Other travelers use a flat rubber hose that is dragged along behind while the sprinkler platform is pulled by a cable .
CENTER
PIVOT
Section::::Center pivot .
Center pivot irrigation is a form of sprinkler irrigation utilising several segments of pipe ( usually galvanized steel or aluminium ) joined together and supported by trusses , mounted on wheeled towers with sprinklers positioned along its length .
The system moves in a circular pattern and is fed with water from the pivot point at the center of the arc .
These systems are found and used in all parts of the world and allow irrigation of all types of terrain .
Newer systems have drop sprinkler heads as shown in the image that follows .
IRRIGATION BY LATERAL MOVE ( SIDE ROLL , WHEEL LINE , WHEELMOVE )
Section::::Irrigation by lateral move ( side roll , wheel line , wheelmove ) .
A series of pipes , each with a wheel of about 1.5 m diameter permanently affixed to its midpoint , and sprinklers along its length , are coupled together .
Water is supplied at one end using a large hose .
After sufficient irrigation has been applied to one strip of the field , the hose is removed , the water drained from the system , and the assembly rolled either by hand or with a purpose - built mechanism , so that the sprinklers are moved to a different position across the field .
The hose is reconnected .
The process is repeated in a pattern until the whole field has been irrigated .
This system is less expensive to install than a center pivot , but much more labor - intensive to operate – it does not travel automatically across the field : it applies water in a stationary strip , must be drained , and then rolled to a new strip .
Most systems use 100 or 130 mm ( 4 or 5 inch ) diameter aluminum pipe .
The pipe doubles both as water transport and as an axle for rotating all the wheels .
A drive system ( often found near the centre of the wheel line ) rotates the clamped - together pipe sections as a single axle , rolling the whole wheel line .
Manual adjustment of individual wheel positions may be necessary if the system becomes misaligned .
Wheel line systems are limited in the amount of water they can carry , and limited in the height of crops that can be irrigated .
One useful feature of a lateral move system is that it consists of sections that can be easily disconnected , adapting to field shape as the line is moved .
They are most often used for small , rectilinear , or oddly - shaped fields , hilly or mountainous regions , or in regions where labor is inexpensive .
LAWN SPRINKLER SYSTEMS Section::::Lawn sprinkler systems .
A lawn sprinkler system is permanently installed , as opposed to a hose - end sprinkler , which is portable .
Sprinkler systems are installed in residential lawns , in commercial landscapes , for churches and schools , in public parks and cemeteries , and on golf courses .
Most of the components of these irrigation systems are hidden under ground , since aesthetics are important in a landscape .
A typical lawn sprinkler system will consist of one or more zones , limited in size by the capacity of the water source .
Each zone will cover a designated portion of the landscape .
Sections of the landscape will usually be divided by microclimate , type of plant material , and type of irrigation equipment .
A landscape irrigation system may also include zones containing drip irrigation , bubblers , or other types of equipment besides sprinklers .
Although manual systems are still used , most lawn sprinkler systems may be operated automatically using an irrigation controller , sometimes called a clock or timer .
Most automatic systems employ electric solenoid valves .
Each zone has one or more of these valves that are wired to the controller .
When the controller sends power to the valve , the valve opens , allowing water to flow to the sprinklers in that zone .
There are two main types of sprinklers used in lawn irrigation , pop - up spray heads and rotors .
Spray heads have a fixed spray pattern , while rotors have one or more streams that rotate .
Spray heads are used to cover smaller areas , while rotors are used for larger areas .
Golf course rotors are sometimes so large that a single sprinkler is combined with a valve and called a ' valve in head ' .
When used in a turf area , the sprinklers are installed with the top of the head flush with the ground surface .
When the system is pressurized , the head will pop up out of the ground and water the desired area until the valve closes and shuts off that zone .
Once there is no more pressure in the lateral line , the sprinkler head will retract back into the ground .
In flower beds or shrub areas , sprinklers may be mounted on above ground risers or even taller pop - up sprinklers may be used and installed flush as in a lawn area .
HOSE - END SPRINKLERS Section::::Hose - end sprinklers .
There are many types of hose - end sprinklers .
Many of them are smaller versions of larger agricultural and landscape sprinklers , sized to work with a typical garden hose .
Some have a spiked base allowing them to be temporarily stuck in the ground , while others have a sled base designed to be dragged while attached to the hose .
SUBIRRIGATION
Section::::Subirrigation .
Subirrigation has been used for many years in field crops in areas with high water tables .
It is a method of artificially raising the water table to allow the soil to be moistened from below the plants ' root zone .
Often those systems are located on permanent grasslands in lowlands or river valleys and combined with drainage infrastructure .
A system of pumping stations , canals , weirs and gates allows it to increase or decrease the water level in a network of ditches and thereby control the water table .
Subirrigation is also used in commercial greenhouse production , usually for potted plants .
Water is delivered from below , absorbed upwards , and the excess collected for recycling .
Typically , a solution of water and nutrients floods a container or flows through a trough for a short period of time , 10–20 minutes , and is then pumped back into a holding tank for reuse .
Sub - irrigation in greenhouses requires fairly sophisticated , expensive equipment and management .
Advantages are water and nutrient conservation , and labor savings through reduced system maintenance and automation .
It is similar in principle and action to subsurface basin irrigation .
Another type of subirrigation is the self - watering container , also known as a sub - irrigated planter .
This consists of a planter suspended over a reservoir with some type of wicking material such as a polyester rope .
The water is drawn up the wick through capillary action .
SUBSURFACE TEXTILE IRRIGATION
Section::::Subsurface textile irrigation .
Subsurface Textile Irrigation ( SSTI ) is a technology designed specifically for subirrigation in all soil textures from desert sands to heavy clays .
A typical subsurface textile irrigation system has an impermeable base layer ( usually polyethylene or polypropylene ) , a drip line running along that base , a layer of geotextile on top of the drip line and , finally , a narrow impermeable layer on top of the geotextile ( see diagram ) .
Unlike standard drip irrigation , the spacing of emitters in the drip pipe is not critical as the geotextile moves the water along the fabric up to 2 m from the dripper .
The impermeable layer effectively creates an artificial water table .
WATER SOURCES Section::::Water sources .
Irrigation water can come from groundwater ( extracted from springs or by using wells ) , from surface water ( withdrawn from rivers , lakes or reservoirs ) or from non - conventional sources like treated wastewater , desalinated water , drainage water , or fog collection .
A special form of irrigation using surface water is spate irrigation , also called floodwater harvesting .
In case of a flood ( spate ) , water is diverted to normally dry river beds ( wadis ) using a network of dams , gates and channels and spread over large areas .
The moisture stored in the soil will be used thereafter to grow crops .
Spate irrigation areas are in particular located in semi - arid or arid , mountainous regions .
While floodwater harvesting belongs to the accepted irrigation methods , rainwater harvesting is usually not considered as a form of irrigation .
Rainwater harvesting is the collection of runoff water from roofs or unused land and the concentration of this .
Around 90 % of wastewater produced globally remains untreated , causing widespread water pollution , especially in low - income countries .
Increasingly , agriculture uses untreated wastewater as a source of irrigation water .
Cities provide lucrative markets for fresh produce , so are attractive to farmers .
However , because agriculture has to compete for increasingly scarce water resources with industry and municipal users ( see Water scarcity below ) , there is often no alternative for farmers but to use water polluted with urban waste , including sewage , directly to water their crops .
Significant health hazards can result from using water loaded with pathogens in this way , especially if people eat raw vegetables that have been irrigated with the polluted water .
The International Water Management Institute has worked in India , Pakistan , Vietnam , Ghana , Ethiopia , Mexico and other countries on various projects aimed at assessing and reducing risks of wastewater irrigation .
They advocate a ' multiple - barrier ' approach to wastewater use , where farmers are encouraged to adopt various risk - reducing behaviours .
These include ceasing irrigation a few days before harvesting to allow pathogens to die off in the sunlight , applying water carefully so it does not contaminate leaves likely to be eaten raw , cleaning vegetables with disinfectant or allowing fecal sludge used in farming to dry before being used as a human manure .
The World Health Organization has developed guidelines for safe water use .
There are numerous benefits of using recycled water for irrigation , including the low cost ( when compared to other sources , particularly in an urban area ) , consistency of supply ( regardless of season , climatic conditions and associated water restrictions ) , and general consistency of quality .
Irrigation of recycled wastewater is also considered as a means for plant fertilization and particularly nutrient supplementation .
This approach carries with it a risk of soil and water pollution through excessive wastewater application .
Hence , a detailed understanding of soil water conditions is essential for effective utilization of wastewater for irrigation .
In countries where humid air sweeps through at night , water can be obtained by condensation onto cold surfaces .
This is practiced in the vineyards at Lanzarote using stones to condense water .
Fog collectors are also made of canvas or foil sheets .
Using condensate from air conditioning units as a water source is also becoming more popular in large urban areas .
EFFICIENCY Section::::Efficiency .
Modern irrigation methods are efficient enough to supply the entire field uniformly with water , so that each plant has the amount of water it needs , neither too much nor too little .
Water use efficiency in the field can be determined as follows : * Field Water Efficiency ( % ) = ( Water Transpired by Crop ÷ Water Applied to Field )
x
100 Until 1960s , the common perception was that water was an infinite resource .
At that time , there were fewer than half the current number of people on the planet .
People were not as wealthy as today , consumed fewer calories and ate less meat , so less water was needed to produce their food .
They required a third of the volume of water we presently take from rivers .
Today , the competition for water resources is much more intense .
This is because there are now more than seven billion people on the planet , their consumption of water - thirsty meat and vegetables is rising , and there is increasing competition for water from industry , urbanisation and biofuel crops .
To avoid a global water crisis , farmers will have to strive to increase productivity to meet growing demands for food , while industry and cities find ways to use water more efficiently .
Successful agriculture is dependent upon farmers having sufficient access to water .
However , water scarcity is already a critical constraint to farming in many parts of the world .
With regards to agriculture , the World Bank targets food production and water management as an increasingly global issue that is fostering a growing debate .
Physical water scarcity is where there is not enough water to meet all demands , including that needed for ecosystems to function effectively .
Arid regions frequently suffer from physical water scarcity .
It also occurs where water seems abundant but where resources are over - committed .
This can happen where there is overdevelopment of hydraulic infrastructure , usually for irrigation .
Symptoms of physical water scarcity include environmental degradation and declining groundwater .
Economic scarcity , meanwhile , is caused by a lack of investment in water or insufficient human capacity to satisfy the demand for water .
Symptoms of economic water scarcity include a lack of infrastructure , with people often having to fetch water from rivers for domestic and agricultural uses .
Some 2.8 billion people currently live in water - scarce areas .
TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
Section::::Technical challenges .
Irrigation schemes involve solving numerous engineering and economic problems while minimizing negative environmental impact .
* Competition for surface water rights .
* Overdrafting ( depletion ) of underground aquifers .
In the mid-20th century , the advent of diesel and electric motors led to systems that could pump groundwater out of major aquifers faster than drainage basins could refill them .
This can lead to permanent loss of aquifer capacity , decreased water quality , ground subsidence , and other problems .
The future of food production in such areas as the North China Plain , the Punjab , and the Great Plains of the US is threatened by this phenomenon .
* Ground subsidence ( e.g. New Orleans , Louisiana )
* Underirrigation or irrigation giving only just enough water for the plant ( e.g. in drip line irrigation ) gives poor soil salinity control which leads to increased soil salinity with consequent buildup of toxic salts on soil surface in areas with high evaporation .
This requires either leaching to remove these salts and a method of drainage to carry the salts away .
When using drip lines , the leaching is best done regularly at certain intervals ( with only a slight excess of water ) , so that the salt is flushed back under the plant 's roots .
* Overirrigation because of poor distribution uniformity or management wastes water , chemicals , and may lead to water pollution .
* Deep drainage ( from over - irrigation ) may result in rising water tables which in some instances will lead to problems of irrigation salinity requiring watertable control by some form of subsurface land drainage .
* Irrigation with saline or high - sodium water may damage soil structure owing to the formation of alkaline soil * Clogging of filters : It is mostly algae that clog filters , drip installations and nozzles .
UV and ultrasonic method can be used for algae control in irrigation systems .
* Assisting smallholders in sustainably and collectively managing irrigation technology and changes in technology .
IMPACT ON SOCIETY Section::::Impact on society .
A 2016 study found that countries whose agriculture depended on irrigation are more likely to be autocratic than other countries .
The authors of the study " argue that the effect has historical origins : irrigation allowed landed elites in arid areas to monopolize water and arable land .
This made elites more powerful and better able to oppose democratization . " SEE
ALSO REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Elvin , Mark .
The retreat of the elephants : an environmental history of China ( Yale University Press , 2004 )
* Hallows , Peter J. , and Donald G. Thompson .
History of irrigation in Australia ANCID , 1995 .
* Howell , Terry .
"
Drops of life in the history of irrigation .
"
Irrigation journal 3 ( 2000 ) : 26–33 .
the history of sprinker systems online
* Hassan , John .
A history of water in modern England and Wales
( Manchester University Press , 1998 )
* Vaidyanathan , A. Water resource management : institutions and irrigation development in India ( Oxford University Press , 1999 ) JOURNALS
* Irrigation Science , ( electronic ) 0342
- 7188 ( paper ) , Springer * Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering , , ASCE Publications * Irrigation and Drainage , , John Wiley & Sons , Ltd. * Agricultural Water Management , , Elsevier .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Royal Engineers Museum :
19th century Irrigation in India
* International Commission on Irrigation and Drainage ( ICID )
* Irrigation at the Water Quality Information Center , U.S. Department of Agriculture * AQUASTAT : FAO 's global information system on water and agriculture Section::::External links .