WHITE BASS
The white bass , silver bass , or sand bass ( Morone chrysops ) is a freshwater fish of the temperate bass family Moronidae .
It is the state fish of Oklahoma .
RANGE Section::::Range .
White bass are distributed widely across the United States , particularly in the Midwest .
They are very abundant in Pennsylvania and the area around Lake Erie .
Some native ranges of the white bass are the Arkansas River , Lake Erie near Cleveland , Ohio , and Lake Poinsett in South Dakota ; they are abundant in the Winnebago lakes system of Wisconsin ; and they are also very abundant in Oklahoma .
White bass have also been found in rivers that flow to the Mississippi .
Native to many northern habitats , they have been introduced in many different waters around the United States , particularly in southern locations .
They were also successfully introduced to Manitoba starting in the 1960s , where they have gained importance as a sport fish .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The species ' main color is silver - white to pale green .
Its back is dark , with white sides and belly , and with narrow dark stripes running lengthwise on its sides .
It has large , rough scales and two dorsal fins .
The more anterior dorsal fin is much harder and appears to have spines on them .
Although these are not true spines , this type of fin is called a spinous ray .
The more posterior of the two dorsal fins is much softer , and is thus called a soft - ray .
Because the vertebrae do not extend into the tail , the white bass has what is called a homocercal tail .
The body is deep and compressed laterally .
Most grow to a length between , though they can reach or more .
Because the dorsal and ventral portions of the its tail angle inward toward a point to create a clear angle , the tail is said to be notched .
The record size for white bass caught on fishing tackle is shared by fish caught in 1989 in Orange Lake , Orange , Virginia , and in 2010 in Amite River , Louisiana .
DIET Section::::Diet .
White bass are carnivores .
They have four main taxa in their diet : calanoid copepods , cyclopoid copepods , daphnia , and leptodora .
They are visual feeders .
When not frightened , they will bite readily at live bait such as worms and minnows .
Only the largest fish will feed on other fish , and as the summer season progresses , there is an overall trend towards eating fewer fish .
Fish that are able to accumulate lipids over the summer are better able to survive cold winters .
When looking at midwestern white bass , particularly in South Dakota , diet overlap occurs between the bass and the walleye .
As seasons progress through the summer and fall , the amount of diet overlap decreases as a result of both fish increasing in length .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
White bass inhabit large reservoirs and rivers .
When mating in the spring , they are more often found in shallow rivers , creeks , and streams .
White bass are found in high densities in the upstream segment of rivers .
This portion of the river becomes the most degraded , as a number of different kinds of fish live in this segment , as well .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
The spawning season for the white bass is mid - March to late May.
The optimal water temperatures are .
They are known to find their home spawning ground even if it is moved to a different part of the same lake .
They often spawn in moving water in a tributary stream , but they will spawn in windswept lake shores .
They spawn during daylight .
Females release 242,000 to 933,000 eggs which stick to the surface of objects .
Eggs are laid in clear , relatively shallow water on plants , submerged logs , gravel , or rocks .
The parents move to deeper water and do not care for the young fish .
The young fish live in shallow water for a while until they move to deeper water .
When trying to find a female with whom to mate , males will bump against a female 's abdominal area .
The female will then rise closer to the surface and begin spinning and releasing eggs .
Several males that have stayed in the area will be able to fertilize the eggs the female releases .
REFERENCES