SPLEEN
The spleen is an organ found in virtually all vertebrates .
Similar in structure to a large lymph node , it acts primarily as a blood filter .
The word spleen comes .
The spleen plays important roles in regard to red blood cells ( erythrocytes ) and the immune system .
It removes old red blood cells and holds a reserve of blood , which can be valuable in case of hemorrhagic shock , and also recycles iron .
As a part of the mononuclear phagocyte system , it metabolizes hemoglobin removed from senescent red blood cells ( erythrocytes ) .
The globin portion of hemoglobin is degraded to its constitutive amino acids , and the heme portion is metabolized to bilirubin , which is removed in the liver .
The spleen synthesizes antibodies in its white pulp and removes antibody - coated bacteria and antibody - coated blood cells by way of blood and lymph node circulation .
A study published in 2009 using mice found that the red pulp of the spleen forms a reservoir that contains over half of the body 's monocytes .
These monocytes , upon moving to injured tissue ( such as the heart after myocardial infarction ) , turn into dendritic cells and macrophages while promoting tissue healing .
The spleen is a center of activity of the mononuclear phagocyte system and can be considered analogous to a large lymph node , as its absence causes a predisposition to certain infections .
In humans the spleen is purple in color and is in the left upper quadrant of the abdomen .
ANATOMY Section::::Anatomy .
The spleen is underneath the left part of the diaphragm , and has a smooth , convex surface that faces the diaphragm .
It is underneath the ninth , tenth , and eleventh ribs .
The other side of the spleen is divided by a ridge into two regions : an anterior gastric portion , and a posterior renal portion .
The gastric surface is directed forward , upward , and toward the middle , is broad and concave , and is in contact with the posterior wall of the stomach .
Below this it is in contact with the tail of the pancreas .
The renal surface is directed medialward and downward .
It is somewhat flattened , considerably narrower than the gastric surface , and is in relation with the upper part of the anterior surface of the left kidney and occasionally with the left adrenal gland .
MEASUREMENTS
Section::::Measurements .
+ 90 % confidence interval of maximum spleen length by abdominal ultrasonography by height of the person !
rowspan=2 Height ! !
colspan=2 Spleen length !
Women ! !
Men
The spleen , in healthy adult humans , is approximately to in length .
It usually weighs between and .
An easy way to remember the anatomy of the spleen is the 1×3×5×7×9×11 rule .
The spleen is , weighs approximately , and lies between the 9th and 11th ribs on the left hand side .
BLOOD SUPPLY Section::::Blood supply .
Near the middle of the spleen is a long fissure , the hilum , which is the point of attachment for the gastrosplenic ligament and the point of insertion for the splenic artery and splenic vein .
There are other openings present for lymphatic vessels and nerves .
Like the thymus , the spleen possesses only efferent lymphatic vessels .
The spleen is part of the lymphatic system .
Both the short gastric arteries and the splenic artery supply it with blood .
The germinal centers are supplied by arterioles called penicilliary radicles .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The spleen is unique in respect to its development within the gut .
While most of the gut organs are endodermally derived ( with the exception of the neural - crest derived adrenal gland ) , the spleen is derived from mesenchymal tissue .
Specifically , the spleen forms within , and from , the dorsal mesentery .
However , it still shares the same blood supply — the celiac trunk — as the foregut organs .
FUNCTION PULP Section::::Function .
Section::::Pulp . !
Area ! !
Function ! !
Composition * " sinuses " ( or " sinusoids " ) , which are filled with blood * " splenic cords " of reticular fibers
* " marginal zone " bordering on white pulp white pulp Active immune response through humoral and cell - mediated pathways .
Composed of nodules , called Malpighian corpuscles .
These are composed of : * " lymphoid follicles " ( or " follicles " ) , rich in B - lymphocytes * " periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths " ( PALS ) , rich in T - lymphocytes OTHER Section::::Other .
Other functions of the spleen are less prominent , especially in the healthy adult :
* Production of opsonins , properdin , and tuftsin .
* Creation of red blood cells .
While the bone marrow is the primary site of hematopoiesis in the adult , the spleen has important hematopoietic functions up until the fifth month of gestation .
After birth , erythropoietic functions cease , except in some hematologic disorders .
As a major lymphoid organ and a central player in the reticuloendothelial system , the spleen retains the ability to produce lymphocytes and , as such , remains a hematopoietic organ .
* Storage of red blood cells , lymphocytes and other formed elements .
In horses , roughly 30 % of the red blood cells are stored there .
The red blood cells can be released when needed .
In humans , up to a cup ( 240 ml ) of red blood cells can be held in the spleen and released in cases of hypovolemia and hypoxia .
It can store platelets in case of an emergency and also clears old platelets from the circulation .
Up to a quarter of lymphocytes can be stored in the spleen at any one time .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
ENLARGED SPLEEN Section::::Clinical significance .
Section::::Enlarged spleen .
Disorders include splenomegaly , where the spleen is enlarged for various reasons , such as cancer , specifically blood - based leukemias , or thalassemia .
RUPTURE OF SPLEEN Section::::Rupture of spleen .
Traumas , such as a road traffic collision , can cause rupture of the spleen , which is a situation requiring immediate medical attention .
SPLEEN
DEFLATION Section::::Spleen deflation .
Human spleens have been noted to decrease in volume up to 40 % when subjected to stimuli from strenuous exercise or hypoxic gas inhalation .
DECREASED FUNCTION Section::::Decreased function .
Asplenia refers to a non - functioning spleen , which may be congenital , damaged by trauma , or caused by disease such as sickle cell anaemia .
Hyposplenia refers to a partially functioning spleen .
These conditions may cause a modest increase in circulating white blood cells and platelets , a diminished response to some vaccines , and an increased susceptibility to infection .
In particular , there is an increased risk of sepsis from polysaccharide encapsulated bacteria .
Encapsulated bacteria inhibit binding of complement or prevent complement assembled on the capsule from interacting with macrophage receptors .
Phagocytosis needs natural antibodies , which are immunoglobulins that facilitate phagocytosis either directly or by complement deposition on the capsule .
They are produced by IgM memory B cells ( a subtype of B cells ) in the marginal zone of the spleen .
A splenectomy ( removal of the spleen ) also causes asplenia and results in a greatly diminished frequency of memory B cells .
A 28-year follow - up of 740 World War II veterans whose spleens were removed on the battlefield showed a significant increase in the usual death rate from pneumonia ( 6 rather than the expected 1.3 ) and an increase in the death rate from ischemic heart disease ( 41 rather than the expected 30 ) , but not from other conditions .
ACCESSORY SPLEEN Section::::Accessory spleen .
An accessory spleen is a small splenic nodule extra to the spleen usually formed in early embryogenesis .
Accessory spleens are found in approximately 10 percent of the population and are typically around 1 centimeter in diameter .
Splenosis is a condition where displaced pieces of splenic tissue ( often following trauma or splenectomy ) autotransplant in the abdominal cavity as accessory spleens .
Polysplenia is a congenital disease manifested by multiple small accessory spleens , rather than a single , full - sized , normal spleen .
Polysplenia sometimes occurs alone , but it is often accompanied by other developmental abnormalities such as intestinal malrotation or biliary atresia , or cardiac abnormalities , such as dextrocardia .
These accessory spleens are non - functional .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE Section::::Society and culture .
The word spleen comes from the Ancient Greek ( splḗn ) , and is the idiomatic equivalent of the heart in English , i.e. to be good - spleened ( , eúsplankhnos ) means to be good - hearted or compassionate .
In English the word spleen was customary during the period of the 18th century .
Authors like Richard Blackmore or George Cheyne employed it to characterise the hypochondriacal and hysterical affections .
William Shakespeare , in Julius Caesar uses the spleen to describe Cassius ' irritable nature .
Must I observe you ?
must I stand and crouch Under your testy humour ?
By the gods You shall digest the venom of your spleen , Though it do split you ; for , from this day forth , I 'll use you for my mirth , yea , for my laughter , When you are waspish .
In French , " splénétique " refers to a state of pensive sadness or melancholy .
It has been popularized by the poet Charles Baudelaire ( 1821–1867 ) but was already used before in particular to the Romantic literature ( 19th century ) .
The French word for the organ is " rate " .
The connection between spleen ( the organ ) and melancholy ( the temperament ) comes from the humoral medicine of the ancient Greeks .
One of the humours ( body fluid ) was the black bile , secreted by the spleen organ and associated with melancholy .
In eighteenth-
and nineteenth - century England , women in bad humor were said to be afflicted by the spleen , or the vapours of the spleen .
In modern English , " to vent one 's spleen " means to vent one 's anger , e.g. by shouting , and can be applied to both males and females .
Similarly , the English term " splenetic " is used to describe a person in a foul mood .
In contrast , the Talmud ( tractate Berachoth 61b ) refers to the spleen as the organ of laughter while possibly suggesting a link with the humoral view of the organ .
Sanhedrin 21b additionally describes how in the ancient world , some runners had their spleens surgically removed and the soles of their feet hollowed to increase their speed .
The spleen also plays an important role in Traditional Chinese Medicine and is the Yin part of the Earth element paired with its Yang counterpart the Stomach .
OTHER ANIMALS
Section::::Other animals .
In cartilaginous and ray - finned fish , it consists primarily of red pulp and is normally somewhat elongated , as it lies inside the serosal lining of the intestine .
In many amphibians , especially frogs , it has the more rounded form and there is often a greater quantity of white pulp .
In reptiles , birds , and mammals , white pulp is always relatively plentiful , and in birds and mammals the spleen is typically rounded , but it adjusts its shape somewhat to the arrangement of the surrounding organs .
In most vertebrates , the spleen continues to produce red blood cells throughout life ; only in mammals this function is lost in middle - aged adults .
Many mammals have tiny spleen - like structures known as haemal nodes throughout the body that are presumed to have the same function as the spleen .
The spleens of aquatic mammals differ in some ways from those of fully land - dwelling mammals ; in general they are bluish in colour .
In cetaceans and manatees they tend to be quite small , but in deep diving pinnipeds , they can be quite massive , due to their function of storing red blood cells .
The only vertebrates lacking a spleen are the lampreys and hagfishes ( the Cyclostomata ) .
Even in these animals , there is a diffuse layer of haematopoeitic tissue within the gut wall , which has a similar structure to red pulp and is presumed to be homologous with the spleen of higher vertebrates .
In mice the spleen stores half the body 's monocytes so that upon injury , they can migrate to the injured tissue and transform into dendritic cells and macrophages and so assist wound healing .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
SEE ALSO
* Marginal zone
* Asplenia with cardiovascular anomalies REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * — "
The visceral surface of the spleen .
"
* " spleen " from Encyclopædia Britannica Online * Spleen and Lymphatic System , Kidshealth.org ( American Academy of Family Physicians ) * Spleen Diseases from MedlinePlus *
" Finally , the Spleen Gets Some Respect "
New York Times piece on the spleen * Normal range of spleen size for a given age in children