RULES OF CHESS
The rules of chess ( also known as the laws of chess ) are rules governing the play of the game of chess .
While the exact origins of chess are unclear , modern rules first took form during the Middle Ages .
The rules continued to be slightly modified until the early 19th century , when they reached essentially their current form .
The rules also varied somewhat from place to place .
Today , the standard rules are set by FIDE ( Fédération Internationale des Échecs ) , the international governing body for chess .
Slight modifications are made by some national organizations for their own purposes .
There are variations of the rules for fast chess , correspondence chess , online chess , and Chess960 .
Chess is a two - player board game utilizing a chessboard and sixteen pieces of six types for each player .
Each type of piece moves in a distinct way .
The goal of the game is to checkmate ( threaten with unescapable capture ) the opponent 's king .
Games do not necessarily end with checkmate ; players often resign if they believe they will lose .
A game can also end in a draw in several ways .
Besides the basic moves of the pieces , rules also govern the equipment used , time control , conduct and ethics of players , accommodations for physically challenged players , and recording of moves using chess notation .
Procedures for resolving irregularities that can occur during a game are provided as well .
INITIAL SETUP Section::::Initial setup .
Chess is played on a chessboard , a square board divided into 64 squares ( eight - by - eight ) of alternating color , which is similar to that used in draughts ( checkers ) .
No matter what the actual colors of the board , the lighter - colored squares are called " light " or " white " , and the darker - colored squares are called " dark " or " black " .
Sixteen " white " and sixteen " black " pieces are placed on the board at the beginning of the game .
The board is placed so that a white square is in each player 's near - right corner .
Horizontal rows are called ranks and vertical rows are called files .
Each player controls sixteen pieces : !
Piece ! !
King ! !
Queen ! !
Rook ! !
Bishop ! !
Knight ! !
Pawn !
Number !
Symbols
At the beginning of the game , the pieces are arranged as shown in the diagram : for each side one king , one queen , two rooks , two bishops , two knights , and eight pawns .
The pieces are placed , one on a square , as follows : * The rooks are placed on the outside corners , right and left edge .
*
The knights are placed immediately inside of the rooks .
*
The bishops are placed immediately inside of the knights .
* The queen is placed on the central square of the same color of that of the player : white queen on the white square and black queen on the black square .
* The king takes the vacant spot next to the queen .
*
The pawns are placed one square in front of all of the other pieces .
Popular mnemonics used to remember the setup are " queen on her own color " and " white on right " .
The latter refers to setting up the board so that the square closest to each player 's right is white .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The player controlling the white pieces is named " White " ; the player controlling the black pieces is named " Black " .
White moves first , then players alternate moves .
Making a move is required ; it is not legal to skip a move , even when having to move is detrimental .
Play continues until a king is checkmated , a player resigns , or a draw is declared , as explained below .
In addition , if the game is being played under a time control players who exceed their time limit lose the game .
The official chess rules do not include a procedure for determining who plays White .
Instead , this decision is left open to tournament - specific rules ( e.g. a Swiss system tournament or Round - robin tournament ) or , in the case of non - competitive play , mutual agreement , in which case some kind of random choice is often employed .
A common method is for one player to conceal a piece ( usually a pawn ) of each color in either hand ; the other player chooses a hand to open , and receives the color of the piece that is revealed .
MOVEMENT BASIC MOVES Section::::Movement .
Section::::Basic moves .
Each type of chess piece has its own method of movement .
A piece moves to a vacant square except when an opponent 's piece .
Except for any move of the knight and castling , pieces can not jump over other pieces .
A piece is captured ( or taken ) when an attacking enemy piece replaces it on its square ( en passant is the only exception ) .
The captured piece is thereby permanently removed from the game .
The king can be put in check but can not be captured ( see below ) .
* The king moves exactly one square horizontally , vertically , or diagonally .
A special move with the king known as castling is allowed only once per player , per game ( see below ) .
* A rook moves any number of vacant squares in a horizontal or vertical direction .
It also is moved when castling .
* A bishop moves any number of vacant squares in any diagonal direction .
*
The queen moves any number of vacant squares in a horizontal , vertical , or diagonal direction .
* A knight moves to the nearest square not on the same , , or .
( This can be thought of as moving two squares horizontally then one square vertically , or moving one square horizontally then two squares vertically — i.e . in an " L " pattern . )
The knight is not blocked by other pieces : it jumps to the new location .
* Pawns have the most complex rules of movement :
CASTLING
Section::::Castling .
Castling consists of moving the king two squares towards a rook , then placing the rook on the other side of the king , adjacent to it .
Castling is only permissible if all of the following conditions hold : * The king and rook involved in castling must not have previously moved ; * There must be no pieces between the king and the rook ; * The king may not currently be in check , nor may the king pass through or end up in a square that is under attack by an enemy piece ( though the rook is permitted to be under attack and to pass over an attacked square ) ; * The king and the rook must be on the same .
EN
PASSANT
Section::::En
passant .
When a pawn advances two squares from its original square and ends the turn adjacent to a pawn of the opponent 's on the same rank , it may be captured by that pawn of the opponent 's , as if it had moved only one square forward .
This capture is only legal on the opponent 's next move immediately following the first pawn 's advance .
The diagrams on the right demonstrate an instance of this
: if the white pawn moves from a2 to a4 , the black pawn on b4 can capture it en passant , moving from b4 to a3 while the white pawn on a4 is removed from the board .
PAWN PROMOTION
Section::::Pawn promotion .
If a player advances a pawn to its eighth rank , the pawn is then promoted ( converted ) to a queen , rook , bishop , or knight of the same color at the choice of the player ( a queen is usually chosen ) .
The choice is not limited to previously pieces .
Hence it is theoretically possible for a player to have up to nine queens or up to ten rooks , bishops , or knights if all of their pawns are promoted .
If the desired piece is not available , the player should call the to provide the piece .
CHECK Section::::Check .
A king is in check when it is under attack by at least one enemy piece .
A piece unable to move because it would place its own king in check ( it is pinned against its own king ) may still deliver check to the opposing player .
It is illegal to make a move that places or leaves one 's king in check .
The possible ways to get out of check are :
* Move the king to a square where it is not in check .
* Capture the checking piece ( possibly with the king ) .
* Block the check by placing a piece between the king and the opponent 's threatening piece , , .
If it is not possible to get out of check , the king is checkmated and the game is over ( see the next section ) .
In informal games , it is customary to announce " check " when making a move that puts the opponent 's king in check .
However , in formal competitions check is rarely announced .
END OF THE GAME CHECKMATE Section::::End of the game .
Section::::Checkmate .
If a player 's king is placed in check and there is no legal move that player can make to escape check , then the king is said to be checkmated , the game ends , and that player loses .
Unlike other pieces , the king is never actually captured or removed from the board because checkmate ends the game .
The diagram shows an example checkmate position .
The white king is threatened by the black queen ; the square to which the king could move is also threatened ; it can not capture the queen , because it would then be in check by the rook .
RESIGNING Section::::Resigning .
Either player may at any time and their opponent wins the game .
Players typically resign when they believe they are very likely to lose the game .
A player may resign by saying it verbally or by indicating it on their in any of three ways : ( 1 ) by writing " resigns " , ( 2 ) by circling the result of the game , or ( 3 ) by writing " 1–0 " if Black resigns or " 0–1 " if White resigns .
Tipping over the king also indicates resignation , but it is not frequently used ( and should be distinguished from accidentally knocking the king over ) .
Stopping both clocks is not an indication of resigning , since clocks can be stopped to call the arbiter .
An offer of a handshake is not necessarily a resignation either , since one player could think they are agreeing to a draw .
DRAWS
Section::::Draws .
The game ends in a draw if any of these conditions occur :
* The game is automatically a draw
if the player to move is not in check but has no legal move .
This situation is called a stalemate .
An example of such a position is shown in the adjacent diagram .
*
The game is immediately drawn when there is no possibility of checkmate for either side with any series of legal moves .
This draw is often due to insufficient material , including the endgames * king against king ; * king against king and bishop ; * king against king and knight ; * king and bishop against king and bishop , with both bishops on squares of the same color ( see Checkmate#Unusual mates ) .
*
Both players agree to a draw after one of the players makes such an offer .
The player having the move may claim a draw by declaring that one of the following conditions exists , or by declaring an intention to make a move which will bring about one of these conditions :
* Fifty - move rule : There has been no or pawn move in the last fifty moves by each player .
*
Threefold repetition : The same board position has occurred three times with the same player to move and all pieces having the same rights to move , including the right to castle or capture en passant .
If the claim is proven true , the game is drawn .
At one time , if a player was able to check the opposing king continually ( perpetual check ) and the player indicated their intention to do so , the game was drawn .
This rule is no longer in effect ; however , players will usually agree to a draw in such a situation , since either the rule on threefold repetition or the fifty - move rule will eventually be applicable , .
TIME CONTROL Section::::Time control .
A game played under time control will end as a loss for a player who uses up all of their allotted time , unless the opponent can not possibly checkmate him ( see the Timing section above ) .
There are different types of time control .
Players may have a fixed amount of time for the entire game or they may have to make a certain number of moves within a specified time .
Also , a small increment of time may be added for each move made .
COMPETITION RULES Section::::Competition rules .
These rules apply to games played " " .
There are special rules for correspondence chess , blitz chess , computer chess , and for handicapped players .
ACT OF MOVING THE PIECES Section::::Act of moving the pieces .
The movement of pieces is to be done with one hand .
Once the hand is taken off a piece after moving it , the move can not be retracted unless the move is illegal .
When castling , the player should first move the king with one hand and then move the rook with the same hand .
In the case of a pawn promotion , if the player releases the pawn on the eighth rank , the player must promote the pawn .
After the pawn has moved , the player may touch any piece not on the board and the promotion is not finalized until the new piece is released on the promotion square .
TOUCH - MOVE RULE Section::::Touch - move rule .
In serious play , if a player having the move touches a piece as if having the intention of moving it , then the player must move it if it can be legally moved .
So long as the hand has not left the piece on a new square , any legal move can be made with the piece .
If a player touches one of the opponent 's pieces then that piece must be if there is a legal move that does so .
If none of the touched pieces can be moved or captured there is no penalty .
When castling , the king must be the first piece touched .
If the player touches the rook at the same time as touching the king , the player must castle with that rook if it is legal to do so .
If the player completes a two - square king move without touching a rook , the player must move the correct rook accordingly if castling in that direction is legal .
If a player starts to castle illegally , another legal king move must be made if possible , including castling with the other rook .
If a player moves a pawn to its eighth rank , it can not be substituted for a different move of the pawn when the player has stopped touching it .
However , the move is not complete until the promoted piece is released on that square .
If a player wishes to touch a piece with the intention of adjusting its position on a square , the player must first alert the opponent of this intention by saying J'adoube or " I adjust " .
Once the game has started , only the player with the move may touch the pieces on the board .
TIMING
Section::::Timing .
Tournament games are played under time constraints , called time controls , using a chess clock .
Players must make their moves within the time control or forfeit the game .
There are different types of time controls .
In some cases each player will have a certain amount of time to make a certain number of moves .
In other cases each player will have a limited amount of time to make all of their moves .
Also , the player may gain a small amount of additional time for each move made , either by a small increment added for each move made , or by the clock delaying a small amount of time each time it is started after the opponent 's move .
*
If a player delivers a checkmate , the game is over and that player wins , no matter what is subsequently noticed about the time on the clock .
*
If player A calls attention to player B being out of time while player A is not out of time and some sequence of legal moves leads to B being checkmated then player A wins automatically .
*
If player A does not have the possibility of checkmating B then the game is a draw .
The United States Chess Federation ( USCF ) rule is different .
USCF Rule 14E defines " insufficient material to win on time " , that is lone king , king plus knight , king plus bishop , and king plus two knights opposed by no pawns , and there is no forced win in the final position .
Hence to win on time with this material , the USCF rule requires that a win can be forced from that position , while the FIDE rule merely requires a win to be possible .
( See Monika Soćko rules appeal in 2008 and Women 's World Chess Championship 2008 for a famous instance of this rule . )
* If a player is out of time and also calls attention to their opponent running out of time , then : * If a time control is not being used , the game continues in the next time control period .
* if the game is played under a sudden death time control , then if it can be established which player ran out of time first , the game is lost by that player ; otherwise the game is drawn .
If a player believes that the opponent is attempting to win the game on time and not by normal means ( i.e. checkmate ) , if it is a sudden death time control and the player has less than two minutes remaining , the player may stop the clocks and claim a draw with the arbiter .
The arbiter may declare the game a draw or postpone the decision and allot the opponent two extra minutes .
RECORDING MOVES
Section::::Recording moves .
Each square of the chessboard is identified with a unique pair of a letter and a number .
The vertical files are labeled a through h , from White 's left ( i.e. the queenside ) to White 's right .
Similarly , the horizontal ' are numbered from 1 to 8 , starting from the one nearest White 's side of the board .
Each square of the board , then , is uniquely identified by its file letter and rank number .
The white king , for example , starts the game on square e1 .
The black knight on b8 can move to a6 or c6 .
In formal competition , each player is obliged to record each move as it is played in a chess notation in order to settle disputes about illegal positions , overstepping time control , and making claims of draws by the fifty - move rule or repetition of position .
Algebraic chess notation is the accepted standard for recording games today .
There are other systems such as ICCF numeric notation for international correspondence chess and the obsolete descriptive chess notation .
The current rule is that a move must be made on the board before it is written on paper or recorded with an electronic device .
Both players should indicate offers of a draw by writing " = " at that move on their score sheet .
Notations about the time on the clocks can be made .
If a player has less than five minutes left to complete all of their moves , they are not required to record the moves ( unless a delay of at least thirty seconds per move is being used ) .
The score sheet must be made available to the at all times .
A player may respond to an opponent 's move before writing it down .
ADJOURNMENT IRREGULARITIES
ILLEGAL MOVE Section::::Irregularities .
Section::::Illegal move .
A player who makes an illegal move must retract that move and make a legal move .
That move must be made with the same piece if possible , because the touch - move rule applies .
If the illegal move was an attempt to castle , the touch - move rule applies to the king but not to the rook .
The arbiter should adjust the time on the clock according to the best evidence .
If the mistake is only noticed later on , the game should be restarted from the position in which the error occurred .
Some regional organizations have different rules .
If blitz chess is being played ( in which both players have a small , limited time , e.g. five minutes )
the rule varies .
A player may correct an illegal move if the player has not pressed their clock .
If a player has pressed their clock , the opponent may claim a win if he or she has n't moved .
If the opponent moves , the illegal move is accepted and without penalty .
According to the FIDE Laws of Chess , the first completed illegal move is penalized by awarding the opponent two additional minutes on the clock .
The second completed illegal move by the same player results in the loss of the game , unless the position is such that it is impossible for the opponent to win by any series of legal moves ( e.g. if the opponent has a bare king ) in which case the game is drawn .
A move is completed when it has been made and the player has pressed the clock .
In rapid chess and blitz chess , the first completed illegal move results in a loss .
ILLEGAL POSITION Section::::Illegal position .
If it is discovered during the game that the starting position was incorrect , the game is restarted .
If it is discovered during the game that the board is oriented incorrectly , the game is continued with the pieces transferred to a correctly oriented board .
If the game starts with the colors of the pieces reversed , the game continues ( unless the arbiter rules otherwise ) .
Some regional organizations have different rules .
If a player knocks over pieces , it is their responsibility to restore them to their correct position on their time .
If it is discovered that an illegal move has been made , or that pieces have been displaced , the game is restored to the position before the irregularity .
If that position can not be determined , the game is restored to the last known correct position .
CONDUCT Section::::Conduct .
Players may not use any notes , outside sources of information ( including computers ) , or advice from other people .
Analysis on another board is not permitted .
Scoresheets are to record objective facts about the game only , such as time on the clock or draw offers .
Players may not leave the competition area without permission of the arbiter .
High standards of etiquette and ethics are expected .
Players should shake hands before and after the game .
Generally a player should not speak during the game , except to offer a draw , resign , or to call attention to an irregularity .
An announcement of " check " is made in amateur games but should not be used in officially sanctioned games .
A player may not distract or annoy another player by any means , including repeatedly offering a draw .
Due to increasing concerns about the use of chess engines and outside communication , mobile phone usage is banned .
The first forfeit by a high profile player , for their phone ringing during play , occurred in 2003 .
In 2014 FIDE extended this to ban all mobile phones from the playing area during chess competitions , under penalty of forfeiture of the game or even expulsion from the tournament .
However , the rules also allow for less rigid enforcement in amateur events .
EQUIPMENT Section::::Equipment .
The size of the squares of the chessboard should be approximately 1.25 to 1.3 times the diameter of the base of the king , or 50 to 65 mm .
Squares of approximately 57 mm ( inches ) normally are well - suited for pieces with the kings in the preferred size range .
The darker squares are usually brown or green and the lighter squares are off - white or buff .
Pieces of the Staunton chess set design are the standard and are usually made of wood or plastic .
They are often black and white ; other colors may be used ( like a dark wood or even red for the dark pieces ) but they would still be called the " white " and " black " pieces ( see White and Black in chess ) .
The height of the king should be 85 to 105 millimetres ( 3.35–4.13 inches ) .
A height of approximately 95 to 102 mm ( – 4 inches ) is preferred by most players .
The diameter of the king should be 40 to 50 % of its height .
The size of the other pieces should be in proportion to the king .
The pieces should be well balanced .
In games subject to time control , a chess clock is used , consisting of two adjacent clocks and buttons to stop one clock while starting the other , such that the two component clocks never run simultaneously .
The clock can be analog or digital though a digital clock is highly preferred under both USCF and FIDE rulesets .
This is since most tournaments now include either a time delay ( a countdown to when a clock starts again ) or add ( extra time being added prior or after the move ) to their time controls .
Before the start of the game , either the arbiter decides , or whomever is playing Black , where the chess clock is placed .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The rules of chess have evolved much over the centuries from the early chess - like games played in India in the 6th century .
For much of that time the rules have varied from area to area .
The modern rules first took form in Italy during the 13th century , giving more mobility to pieces that previously had more restricted movement ( such as the queen and bishop ) .
Such modified rules entered into an accepted form during the late 15th century or early 16th century .
The basic moves of the king , rook , and knight are unchanged .
Pawns originally did not have the option of moving two squares on their first move and promoted only to a queen if they reached the eighth rank .
The queen was originally the fers or farzin , which could move one square diagonally in any direction .
In European chess it became able to leap two squares diagonally , forwards , backwards , or to left or right on its first move ; some area also gave this right to a newly promoted pawn .
In the Persian and Arabic game the bishop was a pīl ( Persian ) or fīl ( Arabic ) ( meaning " elephant " ) which moved two squares diagonally with jump .
In the Middle Ages the pawn could only be promoted to the equivalent of a queen ( which at that time was the weakest piece ) if it reached its eighth rank .
During the 12th century the squares on the board sometimes alternated colors , and this became the standard in the 13th century .
Between 1200 and 1600
several laws emerged that drastically altered the game .
Checkmate became a requirement to win ; a player could not win by capturing all of the opponent 's pieces .
Stalemate was added , although the outcome has changed several times ( see History of the stalemate rule ) .
Pawns gained the option of moving two squares on their first move , and the en passant rule was a natural consequence of that new option .
The king and rook acquired the right to castle ( see Variations throughout history of castling for different versions of the rule ) .
Between 1475 and 1500 the queen and the bishop also acquired their current moves , which made them much stronger pieces .
When all of these changes were accepted the game was in essentially its modern form .
The rules for pawn promotion have changed several times .
As stated above , originally the pawn could only be promoted to the queen , which at that time was a weak piece .
When the queen acquired its current move and became the most powerful piece , the pawn could then be promoted to a queen or a rook , bishop , or knight .
In the 18th century rules allowed only the promotion to a piece already captured , e.g. the rules published in 1749 by François - André Danican Philidor .
In the 19th century this restriction was lifted , which allowed for a player to have more than one queen , e.g. the 1828 rules by Jacob Sarratt .
Two new rules concerning draws were introduced , each of which have changed through the years :
* The threefold repetition rule was added , although at some times up to six repetitions have been required , and the exact conditions have been specified more clearly ( see Threefold repetition#History ) .
* The fifty - move rule was also added .
At various times , the number of moves required was different , such as 24 , 60 , 70 , or 75 .
For several years in the 20th century , the standard fifty moves was extended to one hundred moves for a few specific endgames ( see Fifty - move rule 's history ) .
Another group of new laws included ( 1 ) the touch - move rule and the accompanying " j'adoube / adjust " rule ; ( 2 ) that White moves first ( in 1889 ) ; ( 3 ) the orientation of the board ; ( 4 ) the procedure if an illegal move was made ; ( 5 ) the procedure if the king had been left in check for some moves ; and ( 6 ) issues regarding the behavior of players and spectators .
The Staunton chess set was introduced in 1849 and it became the standard style of pieces .
The size of pieces and squares of the board was standardized .
Until the middle of the 19th century , chess games were played without any time limit .
In an 1834 match between Alexander McDonnell and Louis - Charles Mahé de La Bourdonnais , McDonnell took an inordinate amount of time to move , sometimes up to 1½ hours .
In 1836 Pierre Charles Fournier de Saint - Amant suggested a time limit , but no action was taken .
At the 1851 London tournament , Staunton blamed his loss in his match against Elijah Williams on Williams ' slow play ; one game was adjourned for the day after only 29 moves .
The next year a match between Daniel Harrwitz and Johann Löwenthal used a limit of 20 minutes per move .
The first use of a modern - style time limit was in an 1861 match between Adolph Anderssen and Ignác Kolisch .
CODIFICATION Section::::Codification .
The first known publication of chess rules was in a book by Luis Ramírez de Lucena about 1497 , shortly after the movement of the queen , bishop , and pawn were changed to their modern form .
In the 16th and 17th centuries , there were differences of opinion concerning rules such as castling , pawn promotion , stalemate , and en passant .
Some of these differences existed until the 19th century .
Ruy López de Segura gave rules of chess in his 1561 book Libro de la invencion liberal y arte del juego del axedrez .
As chess clubs arose and tournaments became common , there was a need to formalize the rules .
In 1749 Philidor ( 1726–1795 ) wrote a set of rules that were widely used , as well as rules by later writers such as the 1828 rules by Jacob Sarratt ( 1772–1819 ) and rules by George Walker ( 1803–1879 ) .
In the 19th century , many major clubs published their own rules , including The Hague in 1803 , London in 1807 , Paris in 1836 , and St. Petersburg in 1854 .
In 1851 Howard Staunton ( 1810–1874 ) called for a " Constituent Assembly for Remodeling the Laws of Chess " and proposals by Tassilo von Heydebrand und der Lasa ( 1818–1889 ) were published in 1854 .
Staunton had published rules in Chess Player 's Handbook in 1847 , and his new proposals were published in 1860 in Chess Praxis ; they were generally accepted in English - speaking countries .
German - speaking countries usually used the writings of chess authority Johann Berger ( 1845–1933 ) or Handbuch des Schachspiels by Paul Rudolf von Bilguer ( 1815–1840 ) , first published in 1843 .
In 1924 , Fédération Internationale des Échecs ( FIDE ) was formed and in 1929 it took up the task of standardizing the rules .
At first FIDE tried to establish a universal set of rules , but translations to various languages differed slightly .
Although FIDE rules were used for international competition under their control , some countries continued to use their own rules internally .
In 1952 FIDE created the Permanent Commission for the Rules of Chess ( also known as the Rules Commission ) and published a new edition of the rules .
The third official edition of the laws was published in 1966 .
The first three editions of the rules were published in French , with that as the official version .
In 1974 FIDE published the English version of the rules ( which was based on an authorized 1955 translation ) .
With that edition , English became the official language of the rules .
Another edition was published in 1979 .
Throughout this time , ambiguities in the laws were handed by frequent interpretations that the Rules Commission published as supplements and amendments .
In 1982 the Rules Commission rewrote the laws to incorporate the interpretations and amendments .
In 1984 FIDE abandoned the idea of a universal set of laws , although FIDE rules are the standard for high - level play .
With the 1984 edition , FIDE implemented a four - year moratorium between changes to the rules .
Other editions were issued in 1988 and 1992 , .
The rules of national FIDE affiliates ( such as the United States Chess Federation , or USCF ) are based on the FIDE rules , with slight variations .
Kenneth Harkness published popular rulebooks in the United States starting in 1956 , and the USCF continues to publish rulebooks for use in tournaments it sanctions .
In 2008 , FIDE added the variant Chess960 to the appendix of the " Laws of Chess " .
Chess960 uses a random initial set - up of main pieces , with the conditions that the king is placed somewhere between the two rooks , and bishops on opposite - color squares .
The castling rules are extended to cover all these positions .
In the 21st century , rules about mobile phones have been brought in : see # Conduct .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
From time to time , rules have been introduced at certain tournaments to discourage players from agreeing to short draws .
One such case was the " no drawing or resigning during the first 30 moves " rule used at the .
SEE ALSO
* Algebraic chess notation
* Cheating in chess * Chess * Chessboard * Chess clock *
Chess glossary * Chess piece * Chess tournament Specific rules * Adjournment ( games )
( rare now )
* Castling
* Check *
Checkmate * Draw
* Draw by agreement *
En passant * Fifty - move rule
* Perpetual check ( former rule )
* Promotion * Stalemate * Threefold repetition
* Time control * Touch - move rule
NOTES
REFERENCES
* ( 1985 Batsford reprint , ) FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS * FIDE Laws of Chess * FIDE equipment standards
* USCF Learn to play chess
*
USCF
Let 's Play Chess
* USCF clock rules