KNIGHT ( CHESS )
The knight ( ♘ ♞ ) is a piece in the game of chess , representing a knight ( armored cavalry ) .
It is normally represented by a horse 's head and neck .
Each player starts with two knights , which begin on the row closest to the player , between the rooks and bishops .
NAMES Section::::Names .
Colloquially it is sometimes referred to as a " horse " , which is also the translation of the piece 's name in several languages .
Some languages refer to it as the " jumper " , reflecting the knight 's ability to move over pieces in its way : Polish skoczek , Danish / Norwegian springer , German Springer , Luxembourgish Sprénger , Slovene skakač .
In Sicilian it is called sceccu , a slang term for a donkey , derived from the Arabic sheikh , who during the Islamic period rode from village to village on donkeys collecting taxes .
MOVEMENT Section::::Movement .
valign="top " The knight move is unusual among chess pieces .
It moves to a square that is two squares away horizontally and one square vertically , or two squares vertically and one square horizontally .
The complete move therefore looks like the letter " L " .
Unlike all other standard chess pieces , the knight can " jump over " all other pieces ( of either color ) to its destination square .
It captures an enemy piece by replacing it on its square .
The knight 's ability to " jump over " other pieces means it tends to be at its most powerful in , in contrast to a bishop .
The knight moves alternately to light and dark squares .
A knight should always be close to where the action is , meaning it is best used on areas of the board where the opponent 's pieces are clustered or close together .
Pieces are generally more powerful if placed near the center of the board , but this is particularly true for a knight .
A knight on the edge of the board attacks only three or four squares ( depending on its exact location ) and a knight in the corner only two .
Moreover , it takes more moves for an uncentralized knight to switch operation to the opposite side of the board than an uncentralized bishop , rook , or queen .
The mnemonic phrases " A knight on the rim is grim " or " A knight on the rim is dim " are often used in chess instruction to reflect this principle .
The knight is the only piece that can move at the beginning of the game without first moving a pawn .
For the reasons above , the best square for the initial move of each knight is usually one towards the center .
Knights are usually brought into play slightly sooner than the bishops and much sooner than the rooks and the queen .
valign="top
" Because of its move pattern , the knight is especially well - suited for executing a fork .
In the numbered diagram , the numbers represent how many moves it takes for a knight starting from f5 to reach each square on the chessboard .
VALUE Section::::Value .
A knight is approximately equal in strength and value to a bishop .
The bishop has longer range , but is restricted to only half the squares on the board .
Since the knight can jump over pieces which obstruct other pieces , it is usually more valuable when the board is more crowded ( positions , and early in the game ) .
A knight is best when it has a " support point " or outpost – a relatively sheltered square where it can be positioned to exert its strength remotely .
On the fourth a knight is comparable in power to a bishop , and on the fifth it is often superior to the bishop , and on the sixth rank it can be a decisive advantage .
This is assuming the knight is taking part in the action ; a knight on the sixth rank which is not doing anything useful is not a well - placed piece .
A knight is usually worst positioned on the edge of the board .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Enemy pawns are very effective at harassing knights because a pawn attacking a knight is not itself attacked by the knight .
For this reason , a knight is most effective when placed in a weakness in the opponent 's pawn structure , i.e. a square which can not be attacked by enemy pawns .
In the diagram at left , White 's knight on d5 is very powerful – more powerful than Black 's bishop on g7 .
Whereas two bishops cover each other 's weaknesses , two knights tend not to cooperate with each other as efficiently .
As such , a pair of bishops is usually considered better than a pair of knights .
World Champion José Raúl Capablanca considered that a queen and a knight is usually a better combination than a queen and a bishop .
However , Glenn Flear found no game of Capablanca 's that supported his statement and statistics do not support the statement either .
In an endgame without other pieces or pawns , two knights generally have a better chance against a queen than two bishops or a bishop and a knight ( see Fortress ( chess ) ) .
Compared to a bishop , a knight is often not as good in an endgame .
The knight 's potential range of movement is more limited , which often makes it less suitable in endgames with pawns on both sides of the board .
However , this limitation is less important in endgames with pawns on only one side of the board .
Knights are superior to bishops in an endgame if all the pawns are on one side of the board .
Furthermore , knights have the advantage of being able to control squares of either color , unlike a lone bishop .
Nonetheless , a disadvantage of the knight ( compared to the other pieces ) is that by itself it can not lose a move to put the opponent in zugzwang ( see triangulation and tempo ) , while a bishop can .
In this position , if the knight is on a white square and it is White 's turn to move , White can not win .
Similarly , if the knight was on a black square and it was Black 's turn to move , White can not win .
In the other two cases , White would win .
If instead of the knight , White had a bishop on either color of square , White would win with either side to move .
At the end of the game , if one side has only a king and a knight while the other side has only a king , the game is a draw since a checkmate is impossible .
When a bare king faces a king and two knights , checkmate can occur only if the opponent commits a blunder by moving his king to a square where it may be checkmated on the next move .
Otherwise , a checkmate can never be forced .
However checkmate can be forced with a bishop and knight , or with two bishops , even though the bishop and knight are in general about equal in value .
Paradoxically , checkmate with two knights sometimes can be forced if the weaker side has a single extra pawn , but this is a curiosity of little practical value ( see two knights endgame ) .
Pawnless endings are a rarity , and if the stronger side has even a single pawn , an extra knight should give him an easy win .
A bishop can trap ( although it can not then capture ) a knight on the rim ( diagram ) , especially in the endgame .
NOTATION Section::::Notation .
In algebraic notation , the usual modern way of recording chess games , the letter N stands for the knight ( K is reserved for the king ) ; in descriptive chess notation , Kt is sometimes used instead , mainly in older literature .
In chess problems and endgame studies , the letter S , standing for the German name for the piece , Springer , is often used ( and in some variants of fairy chess N is used for the popular fairy chess piece , the nightrider ) .
KNIGHT VARIATIONS
Section::::Knight variations .
Even among sets of the standard Staunton pattern , the style of the pieces varies .
The knights vary considerably .
Here are some examples .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The knight , along with the king and the rook , has the oldest defined movement of any chess piece , its movement being unchanged since the invention of chaturanga in India around the 6th century .
Similar pieces are found in almost all games of the chess family .
The ma of xiangqi and janggi are slightly more restricted ; conceptually , the piece is considered to pass through the adjacent orthogonal square , which must be unoccupied , rather than " jumping " .
Another related piece is the keima of shogi , which moves like a knight but may only move two squares forward followed by one square sideways , restricting its movement to two possible squares .
UNICODE Section::::Unicode .
Unicode defines two codepoints for knight :
♘ U+2658 White Chess Knight ( HTML ♘ )
♞ U+265E Black Chess Knight ( HTML ♞ ) SEE ALSO NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Piececlopedia : Knight by Fergus Duniho and Hans Bodlaender , The Chess Variant Pages