FLOUNDER
Flounders are a group of flatfish species .
They are demersal fish , found at the bottom of oceans around the world ; some species will also enter estuaries .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The name " flounder " is used for several only distantly related species , though all are in the suborder Pleuronectoidei ( families Achiropsettidae , Bothidae , Pleuronectidae , Paralichthyidae , and Samaridae ) .
Some of the better known species that are important in fisheries are : *
Western Atlantic
* Gulf flounder –
Paralichthys albigutta * Southern flounder
– Paralichthys lethostigma * Summer flounder ( also known as fluke ) – Paralichthys dentatus * Winter flounder – Pseudopleuronectes americanus * European waters * European flounder –
Platichthys flesus
* North Pacific * Halibut – Hippoglossus stenolepis * Olive flounder – Paralichthys olivaceus
EYE MIGRATION Section::::Eye migration .
In its life cycle , an adult flounder has two eyes on one side of its head , and at hatching one eye is on each side of its head .
One eye migrates to the other side of the body through a metamorphosis as it grows from larval to juvenile stage .
As an adult , a flounder changes its habits and camouflages itself by lying on the bottom of the ocean floor as protection against predators .
As a result , the eyes are then on the side which faces up .
The side to which the eyes migrate is dependent on the species type .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
Flounders ambush their prey , feeding at soft muddy areas of the sea bottom , near bridge piles , docks and coral reefs .
A flounder 's diet consists mainly of fish spawn , crustaceans , polychaetes and small fish .
Flounder typically grow to a length of , and as large as .
Their width is about half their length .
Male Platichthys are known to display a pioneering spirit , and have been found up to 80 miles off the coast of northern Sardinia , sometimes with heavy encrustations of various species of barnacle .
Fluke , a type of flounder , are being farm raised in open water by Mariculture Technologies in Greenport , New York .
THREATS Section::::Threats .
World stocks of large predatory fish and large ground fish , including sole and flounder , were estimated in 2003 to be only about 10 % of pre - industrial levels , largely due to overfishing .
Most overfishing is due to the extensive activities of the fishing industry .
Current estimates suggest that approximately 30 million flounder ( excluding sole ) are alive in the world today .
In the Gulf of Mexico , along the coast of Texas , research indicates the flounder population could be as low as 15 million due to heavy overfishing and industrial pollution .
According to Seafood Watch , Atlantic flounders and soles are currently on the list of seafood that sustainability - minded consumers should avoid .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Common names containing " flounder " at FishBase