THE STRANGER ( CAMUS NOVEL )
L'Étranger ( The Outsider [ UK ] , or The Stranger [ US ] ) is a 1942 novel by French author Albert Camus .
Its theme and outlook are often cited as examples of Camus 's philosophy of the absurd and existentialism , though Camus personally rejected the latter label .
The title character is Meursault , an indifferent French Algerian described as " a citizen of France domiciled in North Africa , a man of the Mediterranean , an homme du midi yet one who hardly partakes of the traditional Mediterranean culture " .
He attends his mother 's funeral .
A few days later , he kills an Arab man in French Algiers , who was involved in a conflict with a friend .
Meursault is tried and sentenced to death .
The story is divided into two parts , presenting Meursault 's first - person narrative view before and after the murder , respectively .
In January 1955 , Camus wrote : The Stranger 's first edition consisted of 4,400 copies and was not an immediate best - seller .
But the novel was well received , partly because of Jean - Paul Sartre 's article " Explication de L'Etranger , " on the eve of publication of the novel , and a mistake from the Propaganda - Staffel .
Translated four times into English , and also into numerous other languages , the novel has long been considered a classic of 20th - century literature .
Le Monde ranks it as number one on its 100 Books of the Century .
The novel was twice adapted as films :
Lo Straniero ( 1967 ) ( Italian ) by Luchino Visconti and Yazgı ( Fate ) by Zeki Demirkubuz ( Turkish ) .
PLOT
PART 1 Section::::Plot .
Section::::Part 1 .
Meursault learns of the death of his mother , who has been living in a retirement home .
At her funeral , he expresses none of the expected emotions of grief .
When asked if he wishes to view the body , he says no , and , instead , smokes and drinks coffee in front of the coffin .
Rather than expressing his feelings , he comments to the reader only about the aged attendees at the funeral .
Meursault later encounters Marie , a former employee of his firm .
The two become re - acquainted , go swimming , watch a comedy film , and begin to have a sexual relationship a day after his mother 's funeral .
In the next few days , Meursault helps his friend and neighbor , Raymond Sintès , take revenge on a Moorish girlfriend suspected of infidelity .
For Raymond , Meursault agrees to write a letter to his girlfriend , with the sole purpose of inviting her over so that Raymond can have sex with her but spit in her face at the last minute as emotional revenge .
Meursault sees no reason not to help him , and it pleases Raymond .
He does not express concern that Raymond 's girlfriend is going to be emotionally hurt , as he believes Raymond 's story that she has been unfaithful .
While listening to Raymond , he is both somewhat drunk and characteristically unfazed by any feelings of empathy .
In general , he considers other people either interesting or annoying , or feels nothing for them at all .
The letter works : the girlfriend returns on a Sunday morning , but the situation escalates when she slaps Raymond after he tries to kick her out , and he beats her .
Raymond asks Meursault to testify in court that the girlfriend has been unfaithful .
Meursault agrees and the two go out to a café .
On their return they encounter Salamano , his curmudgeonly old neighbour who has lost his abused and disease - riddled dog , who is maintaining his usual spiteful and uncaring attitude for the dog .
Later that evening and the next , Salamano goes to Meursault for comfort - he explains that he had adopted the dog shortly after his wife 's death as a companion .
Salamano mentions that the neighbours ' said nasty things ' about him after sending his mother to a retirement home .
Meursault is surprised to learn about the negative impression of his actions .
Later , he is taken to court where Meursault , who witnessed the event while returning to his apartment with Marie , testifies that she had been unfaithful , and Raymond is let off with a warning .
After this , the girlfriend 's brother and several Arab friends begin trailing Raymond .
Raymond invites Meursault and Marie to a friend 's beach house for the weekend .
There they encounter the spurned girlfriend 's brother and an Arab friend ; these two confront Raymond and wound him with a knife during a fist fight .
Later , Meursault walks back along the beach alone , now armed with a revolver which he took from Raymond to prevent him from acting rashly .
Meursault encounters the brother of Raymond 's Arab girlfriend .
Disoriented and on the edge of heatstroke , Meursault shoots when the Arab flashes his knife at him .
It is a fatal shot , but Meursault shoots the man four more times after a pause .
He does not divulge to the reader any specific reason for his crime or what he feels , other than being bothered by the heat and intensely bright sunlight .
PART 2 Section::::Part 2 .
Meursault is now incarcerated , and explains his arrest , time in prison , and upcoming trial .
His general detachment makes living in prison very tolerable , especially after he gets used to the idea of being restricted and unable to have sex with Marie .
He passes the time sleeping , or mentally listing the objects he owned in his apartment .
At the trial , the prosecuting attorney portrays Meursault 's quietness and passivity as demonstrating guilt and a lack of remorse .
The prosecutor tells the jury more about Meursault 's inability or unwillingness to cry at his mother 's funeral and the murder .
He pushes Meursault to tell the truth , but the man resists .
Later , on his own , Meursault tells the reader that he simply was never able to feel any remorse or personal emotions for any of his actions in life .
The dramatic prosecutor denounces Meursault , claiming that he must be a soulless monster , incapable of remorse , and thus deserves to die for his crime .
Although Meursault 's attorney defends him and later tells Meursault that he expects the sentence to be light , Meursault is alarmed when the judge informs him of the final decision : that he will be publicly guillotined .
In prison , Meursault awaits the results of his appeal .
While waiting to learn his fate , either his successful appeal or execution of his death sentence , Meursault meets with a chaplain , but rejects his proffered opportunity of turning to God .
Meursault says that God is a waste of his time .
Although the chaplain persists in trying to lead Meursault from his atheism ( or , perhaps more precisely , his apatheism ) , Meursault finally accosts him in a rage .
He has an outburst about his frustrations and the absurdity of the human condition , and his personal anguish without respite at the meaninglessness of his freedom , existence and responsibility .
He expresses anger about others , saying that they have no right to judge him for his actions or for who he is , that no one has the right to judge another .
It is hinted that the priest believed Meursault 's appeal would be granted , but it is unclear if he is still of this opinion after the ordeal .
Meursault however has grasped the universe 's indifference towards humankind , and prepares for his execution .
At night in his cell , he finds a final happiness in his indifference towards the world and the lack of meaning he sees in everyone and everything .
His final assertion is that a large , hateful crowd at his execution will end his loneliness and bring everything to a comsummate end .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
Meursault is a French Algerian who learns of his mother 's death by telegram .
Meursault 's indifference to his mother 's death demonstrates some emotional detachment from his environment .
Other instances are shown .
Meursault is also a truthful person , speaking his mind without regard for others .
He is regarded as a stranger to society due to his indifference .
Meursault 's mother was sent to an old people 's home three years prior to her death , as noted in the opening lines of the novel .
As Meursault nears the time for his execution , he feels a kinship with his mother , thinking she , too , embraced a meaningless universe .
Raymond Sintès is a neighbour of Meursault who beats his Arab mistress .
Her brother and friends try to take revenge .
He brings Meursault into the conflict , and the latter kills the brother .
Raymond and Meursault seem to develop a bond , and he testifies for Meursault during his trial .
Marie Cardona was a typist in the same workplace as Meursault .
A day after he attends his mother 's funeral , she meets him at a public beach , and they begin a relationship .
Marie , like Meursault , enjoys sex .
She represents the enjoyable life Meursault wants , and he misses her while in jail .
Masson is the owner of the beach house where Raymond takes Marie and Meursault .
Masson is a carefree person who likes to live his life and be happy .
Salamano is an old man who routinely walks his dog .
He abuses it but is still attached to it .
When he loses his dog , he is distressed and asks Meursault for advice .
The Arabs include Raymond 's mistress , her brother and assumed friends .
None of the Arabs in The Stranger are named , reflecting the distance between the French colonists and indigenous people .
The Arab ( the brother of the mistress of Raymond ) is a man shot and killed by Meursault on a beach in colonial Algiers .
CRITICAL ANALYSIS
Section::::Critical analysis .
In his 1956 analysis of the novel , Carl Viggiani wrote : Victor Brombert has analysed L'Etranger and Sartre 's " Explication de L'Etranger " in the philosophical context of the Absurd .
Louis Hudon has dismissed characterisation of L'Etranger as an existentialist novel in his 1960 analysis .
The 1963 study by Ignace Feuerlicht begins with an examination of the themes of alienation , in the sense of Meursault being a ' stranger ' in his society .
In his 1970 analysis , Leo Bersani commented that L'Etranger is " mediocre " in its attempt to be a " ' profound ' novel " , but describes the novel as an " impressive if flawed exercise in a kind of writing promoted by the New Novelists of the 1950s " .
Paul P. Somers Jr has compared Camus ' L'Etranger and Sartre 's Nausea , in light of Sartre 's essay on Camus ' novel .
Sergei Hackel has explored parallels between L'Etranger and Dostoyevsky 's Crime and Punishment .
Terry Otten has studied in detail the relationship between Meursault and his mother .
Gerald Morreale examines Meursault 's killing of the Arab and the question of whether Meursault 's action is an act of murder .
Ernest Simon has examined the nature of Meursault 's trial in L'Etranger , with respect to earlier analysis by Richard Weisberg and Richard A. Posner .
René Girard has critiqued the relative nature of ' indifference ' in the character of Meursault in relation to his surrounding society .
Kamel Daoud has written a novel The Meursault Investigation ( 2013/2014 ) , first published in Algeria in 2013 , and then republished in France to critical acclaim .
This postcolonialist response to The Stranger counters Camus ' version , elements from the perspective of the brother of the unnamed Arab victim ( naming him and presenting him as a real person who was mourned ) and other protagonists .
Daoud explores their subsequent lives following the withdrawal of French authorities and most pied - noirs from Algeria after the conclusion of the Algerian War of Independence in 1962 .
PUBLICATION HISTORY AND ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS Section::::Publication history and English translations .
On 27 May 1941 , Camus was informed about the changes suggested by André Malraux after he had read the manuscript and took his remarks into account .
For instance , Malraux thought the minimalist syntactic structure was too repetitive .
Some scenes and passages ( the murder , the conversation with the chaplain ) should also be revised .
The manuscript was then read by editors Jean Paulhan and Raymond Queneau .
Gerhard Heller , a German editor , translator and lieutenant in the Wehrmacht working for the Censorship Bureau offered to help .
The book was eventually published in June 1942 –
4,400 copies of it were printed .
* 1942 , L'Étranger ( French ) , Paris : Gallimard * 1946 , The Outsider ( translated by Stuart Gilbert ) , London : Hamish Hamilton ( USA edition published in 1946 by Alfred A. Knopf as The Stranger ) * 1982 , The Outsider ( translated by Joseph Laredo ) , London : Hamish Hamilton , * 1989 , The Stranger ( translated by Matthew Ward ) , New York : Vintage , * 2012 , The Outsider ( translated by Sandra Smith ) , London : Penguin , Gallimard first published the original French - language novel in 1942 .
A British author , Stuart Gilbert , first translated L'Étranger into English in 1946 ; for more than thirty years his version was the standard English translation .
Gilbert 's choice of title , The Stranger , was changed by Hamish Hamilton to The Outsider , because they considered it " more striking and appropriate " and because Maria Kuncewiczowa 's Polish novel Cudzoziemka had recently been published in London as The Stranger .
In the United States , Knopf had already typeset the manuscript using Gilbert 's original title when informed of the name change and so disregarded it ; the British - American difference in titles has persisted in subsequent editions .
In 1982 , the British publisher Hamish Hamilton , which had issued Gilbert 's translation , published a translation by Joseph Laredo , also as The Outsider .
Penguin Books bought this version in 1983 for a paperback edition .
In 1988 , Vintage published a version in the United States with a translation by American Matthew Ward under the standard American title of The Stranger .
Camus was influenced by American literary style , and Ward 's translation expresses American usage .
A new translation of The Outsider by Sandra Smith was published by Penguin in 2012 .
A critical difference among these translations is the expression of emotion in the sentence towards the close of the novel : " I laid my heart open to the benign indifference of the universe " in Gilbert 's translation , versus Laredo 's
" I laid my heart open to the gentle indifference of the universe " ( original French : ; literally , " the tender indifference of the world " ) .
The Penguin Classics
2000 reprint of Laredo 's translation has " gentle " changed to " benign " .
The ending lines differ as well
: Gilbert translates " on the day of my execution there should be a huge crowd of spectators and that they should greet me with howls of execration " , which contrasts with Laredo 's translation of " greet me with cries of hatred .
"
This passage describes a scene that would serve as a foil to the prior " indifference of the world " .
In French , the phrase is .
Ward translates this as " with cries of hate " .
Gilbert juxtaposes " execration " with " execution " .
ADAPTATIONS AND ALLUSIONS FILM ADAPTATIONS / ALLUSIONS DIRECT
ADAPTATIONS * 1967
Lo Straniero by Luchino Visconti ( Italian ) * 2001
Yazgı ( Fate ) by Zeki Demirkubuz 's ( Turkish ) ALLUSIONS * 2001
The Man Who Was n't There ( 2001 film ) by Coen brothers
LITERATURE
* The Meursault Investigation by Kamel Daoud is a counter to the story from the perspective of a man described as the brother of the murdered " The Arab " , who he says was named Musa and who existed and was mourned by his family .
IN SONG
*
" Killing an Arab " , the 1979 debut single by the Cure , was described by Robert Smith as " a short poetic attempt at condensing my impression of the key moments in ' l'entranger ' ( The Outsider ) by Albert Camus " .
* " Noch koroche dnya " , from the 1995 album of the same name by the Russian heavy metal band Aria , is based on Meursault 's encounter with the chaplain in the final scene of the novel .
It is also narrated from Meursault 's first - person perspective and includes ( in Russian )
the line , " The cries of hate will be my reward /
Upon my death , I will not be alone " .
*
At the end of " Asa Phelps Is Dead " , from the album Ghost Stories by The Lawrence Arms , the passage in which Meursault accepts his impending execution is read by Chris McCaughan .
It parallels certain themes in the song 's lyrics .
* Folk Singer - Songwriter Eric Andersen features a song called " The Stranger ( Song of Revenge ) " as one of 4 songs based on Camus ' works on his 2014 EP The Shadow and Light of Albert Camus .
SEE ALSO
* Absurdism
* Existentialism
* Character evidence
* Le Mondes 100 Books of the Century
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * L'Étranger , ebooksgratuits.com ; HTML format , public domain in Canada * " The Stranger " data visualization and learning guide from LitCharts .