CONVULSION
A convulsion is a medical condition where body muscles contract and relax rapidly and repeatedly , resulting in an uncontrolled shaking of the body .
Because epileptic seizures typically include convulsions , the term convulsion is sometimes used as a synonym for seizure .
However , not all epileptic seizures lead to convulsions , and not all convulsions are caused by epileptic seizures .
Convulsions are also consistent with an electric shock and improper enriched air scuba diving .
For non - epileptic convulsions , see non - epileptic seizures .
The word " fit " is sometimes used to mean a convulsion or epileptic seizure .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
When a person is having a convulsion , they may experience several different symptoms .
These may include : a brief blackout , confusion , drooling , loss of bowel / bladder control , sudden shaking of entire body , uncontrollable muscle spasms , temporary cessation of breathing , and many more .
Symptoms usually last from a few seconds to around 15 minutes .
If someone has a fit like this , it is advised to make sure they do n't fall and injure themselves , cushion their head and loosen any restricting clothing / jewelry , and also call for medical help .
Do not try to pin / hold them in place , as this could possibly cause harm or injury to the individual .
Do not place anything between the person 's teeth during a seizure ( including your fingers ) .
GENERALIZED
SEIZURES
Section::::Generalized seizures .
The most common type of seizure is called a generalized seizure , also known as a generalized convulsion .
This is characterized by a loss of consciousness which may lead to the person collapsing .
The body stiffens for about a minute
and then jerks uncontrollably for the next minute .
During this , the patient may fall and injure themselves or bite their tongue and lose control of their bladder .
A familial history of this puts a person at a greater risk for developing them .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Convulsions are often the result of abnormal electrical activity in the brain .
The specific cause is often not clear .
Convulsions can be caused by specific chemicals in the blood , as well as infections like meningitis or encephalitis .
A common cause in children is febrile seizures .
Other possibilities include celiac disease , head trauma , stroke or lack of oxygen to the brain .
Sometimes the convulsion can be caused by genetic defects or brain tumors .
Convulsions can also occur when the blood sugar is too low and deficiency of vitamin B6 ( pyridoxine ) .
In Nigeria , Malaria , is a very important cause of Convulsions among children under 5 years of age .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS