GULF OF GUINEA
The Gulf of Guinea is the northeasternmost part of the tropical Atlantic Ocean between Cape Lopez in Gabon , north and west to Cape Palmas in Liberia .
The intersection of the Equator and Prime Meridian ( zero degrees latitude and longitude ) is in the gulf .
Among the many rivers that drain into the Gulf of Guinea are the Niger and the Volta .
The coastline on the gulf includes the Bight of Benin and the Bight of Bonny .
NAME Section::::Name .
The origin of the name
Guinea is thought to be an area in the region , although the specifics are disputed .
Bovill ( 1995 ) gives a thorough description :
The name " Guinea " was also applied to south coast of West Africa , north of the Gulf of Guinea , which became known as " Upper Guinea " , and the west coast of Southern Africa , to the east , which became known as " Lower Guinea " .
The name " Guinea " is still attached to the names of three countries in Africa : Guinea , Guinea - Bissau , and Equatorial Guinea , as well as New Guinea in Melanesia .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The main river shedding its waters in the gulf is the Niger River .
Different definitions of the geographic limits of the Gulf of Guinea are given ; the International Hydrographic Organization defines the southwest extent of the Gulf of Guinea as " A line from Cap Lopez ( ) , in Gabon , northwestward to Ihléu Gago Coutinho ( Ilhéu das Rôlas ) ( ) ; and thence a line from Ihléu Gago Coutinho northwestward to Cape Palmas ( ) , in Liberia .
ISLANDS IN THE GULF OF GUINEA Section::::Islands in the Gulf of Guinea .
The Gulf of Guinea contains a number of islands , the largest of which are in a southwest - northeast chain , forming part of the Cameroon line of volcanoes .
Annobón , also known as Pagalu or Pigalu , is an island that is part of Equatorial Guinea .
Bobowasi Island is an island off the west coast of Africa in the Gulf of Guinea that is part of Western region Ghana .
Bioko is an island off the west coast of Africa in the Gulf of Guinea that is part of Equatorial Guinea .
Corisco is an island belonging to Equatorial Guinea .
Elobey Grande and Elobey Chico are two small islands belonging to Equatorial Guinea .
São Tomé and Príncipe ( officially the Democratic Republic of São Tomé and Príncipe ) is a Portuguese - speaking island nation in the Gulf of Guinea that became independent from Portugal in 1975 .
It is located off the western equatorial coast of Africa and consists of two islands , São Tomé and Príncipe .
They are located about apart and about , respectively , off the northwestern coast of Gabon .
Both islands are part of an extinct volcanic mountain range .
São Tomé , the sizeable southern island , is situated just north of the Equator .
SEE ALSO
* Benin * Cameroon * Equatorial Guinea * Gabon * Ghana * Guinea ( region )
* Nigeria * Togo * Whales in Ghanaian waters REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Gulf of Guinea Commission - CGG - GGC