FOUR CORNERS MONUMENT
The Four Corners Monument marks the quadripoint in the Southwestern United States where the states of Arizona , Colorado , New Mexico , and Utah meet .
It is the only point in the United States shared by four states , leading to the area being named the Four Corners region .
The monument also marks the boundary between two semi - autonomous Native American governments , the Navajo Nation , which maintains the monument as a tourist attraction , and the Ute Mountain Ute Tribe Reservation .
The origins of the state boundaries marked by the monument occurred just prior to , and during , the American Civil War , when the United States Congress acted to form governments in the area to combat the spread of slavery to the region .
When the early territories were formed , their boundaries were designated along meridian and parallel lines .
Beginning in the 1860s , these lines were surveyed and marked .
These early surveys included some errors , but even so , the markers placed became the legal boundaries , superseding the written descriptions of geographical meridians and parallels .
This includes the Four Corners Monument , which has been legally established as the corner of the four states .
MONUMENT Section::::Monument .
The monument where " visitors can simultaneously straddle the territory of four states " is maintained as a tourist attraction by the Navajo Nation Parks and Recreation Department .
Unlike many other attractions based on what are ( or were ) primarily political boundaries , such as the Berlin Wall , Four Corners Monument is an example of a political boundary that is a tourist destination in its own right .
The monument consists of a granite disk embedded with a smaller bronze disk around the point , surrounded by smaller , appropriately located state seals and flags representing both the states and tribal nations of the area .
Circling the point , starting from north , the disk reads with two words in each state "
Here meet in freedom under God four states " .
Around the monument , local Navajo and Ute artisans sell souvenirs and food .
An admission fee is required to view and photograph the monument .
The monument is a popular tourist attraction despite its remote and isolated location .
As early as 1908 , people traveled long distances to take pictures of family and friends at the monument in Twister - like poses , sitting on the disk , in a circle of friends or family around the disk , or for couples to kiss directly over the disk .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
The monument is located on the Colorado Plateau west of U.S. Highway 160 , approximately southwest of Cortez , Colorado .
The monument is centered at .
In addition to the four states , two semi - autonomous American Indian tribal governments have boundaries at the monument , the Navajo Nation and the Ute Mountain Ute Tribe Reservation , with the Ute Mountain tribal boundaries coinciding with Colorado 's boundaries at the monument .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Located in the Colorado Plateau desert region of the Southwestern United States , The Four Corners Monument has a strong cold desert climate ( BWk ) according to the Köppen climate classification system .
Winters are chilly - to - cold , but sunny , while summers are hot and dry .
The record high temperature of was observed five times , on June 19 , 29 and 30 , 1974 , July 14 , 2003 , and July 21 , 2005 .
The record low temperature of was observed on January 3 , 1974 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The area now called Four Corners was initially American Indian land and beginning in the 16th century it was claimed by Spain as part of New Spain .
After Mexico gained independence from Spain in 1821 , the area was governed by Mexico until being ceded to the United States by the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848 following the United States ' victory in the Mexican – American War .
The first boundary which would become part of the monument was set as part of the Compromise of 1850 , which created the New Mexico Territory and Utah Territory .
The border between the two territories was congressionally defined as the 37th parallel north by the 31st United States Congress .
In 1861 , the 36th United States Congress transferred land previously allocated to the Utah Territory , to the newly created Colorado Territory .
The Colorado Territory 's southern border would remain as the 37th parallel north , but a new border — between the Colorado and Utah Territories — was declared to be the 32nd meridian west from Washington .
This line was derived from the reference used at the time , the Washington meridian .
In 1860 , just prior to the outbreak of the American Civil War , a group of people in the southern portion of New Mexico Territory passed a resolution condemning the United States for creating such a vast territory with only a single , small government in place at Santa Fe .
They claimed by doing so the U.S. had ignored the needs of the southern portion , left them without a functional system of law and order , and allowed the situation to deteriorate into a state of chaos and near anarchy .
The group declared secession from the United States and announced their intent to join the Confederate States of America under the name of the Arizona Territory .
The U.S. Congress responded in 1863 by creating another Arizona Territory with different , but partially overlapping boundaries .
The Confederate boundaries split New Mexico along an east – west line , the 34th parallel north , allowing for a single state connection from Texas to the Colorado River .
This would give the Confederacy access to California and the Pacific coast .
The Union definition split New Mexico along a north – south line , the 32nd meridian west from Washington , which simply extended the boundary between Colorado and Utah southward .
The Union plan eventually became reality , and this created the quadripoint at the modern Four Corners .
After the split , New Mexico resembled its modern form , with only slight differences .
SURVEYING THE BOUNDARIES
Section::::Surveying the boundaries .
After the Civil War , efforts began to survey and mark the actual borders .
In 1868 , the General Land Office ( GLO ) had Ehud N. Darling survey and set markers along the border between the Colorado and New Mexico Territories ( the 37th parallel north ) ; this border has become known as the " Darling Line " .
In 1875 , another GLO surveyor , Chandler Robbins , surveyed and marked the border between the Arizona and New Mexico Territories ( the 32nd meridian west of Washington ) .
Robbins began near the Mexico – United States border , and worked his way north marking the border every so often .
Near the 37th parallel north he intersected the Darling Line , and here he erected a sandstone shaft .
This sandstone shaft marked today 's location of the Four Corners Monument .
In 1878 , Rollin J. Reeves surveyed and marked the border between the newly created State of Colorado and the Utah Territory .
Reeves located the sandstone shaft marker placed by Robbins at today 's Four Corners Monument .
He then began to survey and mark the border between Colorado and Utah from this point northward .
In 1901 , Howard B. Carpenter surveyed and marked the border between Arizona and Utah , completing the survey of borders making up the Four Corners Monument .
The results of these surveys and the markers placed were later accepted as the legal boundaries between the various states .
THE MARKER 'S TRANSFORMATION INTO A MONUMENT Section::::The marker 's transformation into a monument .
By 1899 , the sandstone shaft marker placed by Chandler Robbins in 1875 had been disturbed and broken , so it was replaced with a new stone by two U.S. Surveyors , Hubert D. Page and James M. Lentz .
In 1912 , a simple concrete pad was poured around the marker .
The first modern Navajo government convened in 1923 in an effort to organize and regulate an increasing amount of oil exploration activities on Navajo lands , and they would play a big role in the monument 's further development .
In 1931 , Everett H. Kimmell , another U.S. Surveyor , found this newer stone had broken too and he replaced it with a brass disc marker set in concrete .
In 1962 , the Bureau of Land Management and the Bureau of Indian Affairs poured an elevated concrete pad around the 1931 brass marker ; this pad included the state border lines and names in tile .
The monument was completely rebuilt in 1992 , and the 1931 brass marker was replaced with a disc shaped aluminum - bronze plate set in granite .
The monument was again rebuilt in 2010 , although the disc shaped plate from 1992 remained in place .
MISPLACEMENT CONTROVERSY
Section::::Misplacement controversy .
Since the early 20th century , controversies have arisen regarding the accuracy of the monument 's placement .
After the initial surveys , it was found that the borders did not always follow the lines of meridian and parallel ( as they had been intended to ) due to the primitive surveying technology available at the time of construction .
This discrepancy left the four states asking if the correct borders were the exact lines of meridian and parallel ( and if new , more accurate , surveys needed to be done ) , or if the markers placed during the initial surveys were now the actual border .
The issue was resolved when New Mexico sued Colorado in 1919 , and in 1925 the Supreme Court ruled that the markers placed during the initial surveys were the actual borders , even if the markers were off in some locations ( this includes the Four Corners Monument ) .
Today 's legal description of these border lines is based on the original markers , and not the written description of the borders created when the territories were formed .
Because of this , the borders between these states are not perfectly straight and often zigzag .
One example is the border between Colorado and Utah , where in one area the border jogs west about from where it was intended to be placed ( ) .
Because this error occurred in the original survey , which superseded the written description ( being simply the 32nd meridian west of Washington ) , the border set out by the markers remains the border between the two states .
In 2009 this issue was again brought to the forefront due to
U.S. media reports that the monument was placed west of its intended location .
These reports were quickly corrected after it was discovered that sources had forgotten that when the initial surveys were conducted that the Washington meridian was used .
This meridian has an offset from the modern reference , the Prime Meridian , which has been used in the United States since 1912 .
This offset is often missed by those not familiar with the history of U.S. surveying .
Even after the mistakes in the reports were discovered , a spokesperson for the U.S. National Geodetic Survey admitted the monument is placed east of where modern surveyors would mark the point .
However , he defended the accuracy of the original survey , stating surveyors " nailed it " considering the primitive tools of the day .
Pointing out the achievement given the conditions , he further stated , " Their ability to replicate that exact point — what they did was phenomenal , what they did was spot on . "
He concluded by stating that any claims of errors in the location of the monument are irrelevant .
Once a survey commissioned to establish a boundary has been accepted by the involved parties , the survey markers are legally binding , regardless of any error that is later discovered .
Similar statements were issued by the Navajo Nation , defending their work in maintaining and promoting the monument .
In addition , general U.S. land principles , law , and the Supreme Court have established that the location of the monument is the legal corner of the four states .
SEE ALSO
* 37th parallel north – Congressionally defined border running east – west through the monument * 32nd meridian west from Washington – Congressionally defined border running north – south through the monument * New Mexico State Road 597 – Highway used to access the monument SIMILAR
PLACES
* Canadian four corners
*
No Man 's Heath * Tres Fronteras
* Triple Frontier *
Treriksröset
*
Vaalserberg REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official site – Navajo Parks and Recreation
* NGS Survey Information * Geocaching Recovery Logs