CHROMA KEY Chroma key compositing , or chroma keying , is a visual effects / post - production technique for compositing ( layering ) two images or video streams together based on color hues ( chroma range ) .
The technique has been used heavily in many fields to remove a background from the subject of a photo or video – particularly the newscasting , motion picture , and video game industries .
A color range in the foreground footage is made transparent , allowing separately filmed background footage or a static image to be inserted into the scene .
The chroma keying technique is commonly used in video production and post - production .
This technique is also referred to as color keying , colour - separation overlay ( CSO ; primarily by the BBC ) , or by various terms for specific color - related variants such as green screen , and blue screen – chroma keying can be done with backgrounds of any color that are uniform and distinct , but green and blue backgrounds are more commonly used because they differ most distinctly in hue from most human skin colors .
No part of the subject being filmed or photographed may duplicate the color used as the backing .
It is commonly used for weather forecast broadcasts , wherein a news presenter is usually seen standing in front of a large CGI map during live television newscasts , though in actuality it is a large blue or green background .
When using a blue screen , different weather maps are added on the parts of the image where the color is blue .
If the news presenter wears blue clothes , his or her clothes will also be replaced with the background video .
Chroma keying is also common in the entertainment industry for visual effects in movies and video games .
HISTORY
PREDECESSORS Section::::History .
Section::::Predecessors .
Prior to the introduction of travelling mattes and optical printing , double exposure was used to introduce elements into a scene which were not present in the initial exposure .
This was done using black draping where a green screen would be used today .
George Albert Smith first used this approach in 1898 .
In 1903 , The Great Train Robbery by Edwin S. Porter used double exposure to add background scenes to windows which were black when filmed on set , using a garbage matte to expose only the window areas .
In order to have figures in one exposure actually move in front of a substituted background in the other , a travelling matte was needed , to occlude the correct portion of the background in each frame .
In 1918 Frank Williams patented a travelling matte technique , again based on using a black background .
This was used in many films , such as The Invisible Man .
In the 1920s , Walt Disney used a white backdrop to include human actors with cartoon characters and backgrounds in his Alice Comedies .
BLUESCREEN Section::::Bluescreen .
The blue screen method was developed in the 1930s at RKO Radio Pictures .
At RKO , Linwood Dunn used an early version of the travelling matte to create " wipes " – where there were transitions like a windshield wiper in films such as Flying Down to Rio ( 1933 ) .
Credited to Larry Butler , a scene featuring a genie escaping from a bottle was the first use of a proper bluescreen process to create a traveling matte for The Thief of Bagdad ( 1940 ) , which won the Academy Award for Best Special Effects that year .
In 1950 , Warner Brothers employee and ex - Kodak researcher Arthur Widmer began working on an ultraviolet travelling matte process .
He also began developing bluescreen techniques : one of the first films to use them was the 1958 adaptation of the Ernest Hemingway novella , The Old Man and the Sea , starring Spencer Tracy .
Petro Vlahos was awarded an Academy Award for his refinement of these techniques in 1964 .
His technique exploits the fact that most objects in real - world scenes have a color whose blue - color component is similar in intensity to their green - color component .
Zbigniew Rybczyński also contributed to bluescreen technology .
An optical printer with two projectors , a film camera and a ' beam splitter ' , was used to combine the actor in front of a blue screen together with the background footage , one frame at a time .
In the early 1970s , American and British television networks began using green backdrops instead of blue for their newscasts .
During the 1980s , minicomputers were used to control the optical printer .
For the film The Empire Strikes Back , Richard Edlund created a ' quad optical printer ' that accelerated the process considerably and saved money .
He received a special Academy Award for his innovation .
For decades , travelling matte shots had to be done " locked - down " , so that neither the matted subject nor the background could shift their camera perspective at all .
Later , computer - timed , motion - control cameras alleviated this problem , as both the foreground and background could be filmed with the same camera moves .
Meteorologists on television often use a field monitor , to the side of the screen , to see where they are putting their hands against the background images .
A newer technique is to project a faint image onto the screen .
Some films make heavy use of chroma key to add backgrounds that are constructed entirely using computer - generated imagery ( CGI ) .
Performances from different takes can be composited together , which allows actors to be filmed separately and then placed together in the same scene .
Chroma key allows performers to appear to be in any location without leaving the studio .
Computer development also made it easier to incorporate motion into composited shots , even when using handheld cameras .
Reference - points can be placed onto the colored background ( usually as a painted grid , X 's marked with tape , or equally spaced tennis balls attached to the wall ) .
In post - production , a computer can use the references to compute the camera 's position and thus render an image that matches the perspective and movement of the foreground perfectly .
Modern advances in software and computational power have eliminated the need to accurately place the markers – the software figures out their position in space ( a disadvantage of this is that it requires a large camera movement , possibly encouraging modern film techniques where the camera is always in motion ) .
PROCESS
Section::::Process .
The principal subject is filmed or photographed against a background consisting of a single colour or a relatively narrow range of colours , usually blue or green because these colours are considered to be the farthest away from skin tone .
The portions of the video which match the pre - selected color are replaced by the alternate background video .
This process is commonly known as " keying " , " keying out " or simply a " key " .
PROCESSING A GREEN BACKDROP Section::::Processing a green backdrop .
Green is used as a backdrop for TV and electronic cinematography more than any other colour because television weathermen tended to wear blue suits .
When chroma keying first came into use in television production , the blue screen that was then the norm in the movie industry was used out of habit , until other practical considerations caused the television industry to move from blue to green screens .
Broadcast
quality color television cameras use separate red , green and blue image sensors , and early analog TV chroma keyers required RGB component video to work reliably .
From a technological perspective it was equally possible to use the blue or green channel , but because blue clothing was an ongoing challenge , the green screen came into common use .
Newscasters sometimes forget the chroma key dress code , and when the key is applied to clothing of the same color as the background , the person would seem to disappear into the key .
Because green clothing is less common than blue , it soon became apparent that it was easier to use a green matte screen than it was to constantly police the clothing choices of on - air talent .
Also , because the human eye is more sensitive to green wavelengths , which lie in the middle of the visible light spectrum , the green analog video channel typically carried more signal strength , giving a better signal to noise ratio compared to the other component video channels , so green screen keys could produce the cleanest key .
In the digital television and cinema age , much of the tweaking that was required to make a good quality key has been automated .
However , the one constant that remains is some level of color coordination to keep foreground subjects from being keyed out .
PROCESSING A BLUE BACKDROP
Section::::Processing a blue backdrop .
Before electronic chroma keying , compositing was done on ( chemical ) film .
The camera colour negative was printed onto high - contrast black and white film , using either a filter or the colour sensitivity of the black and white film to limit it to the blue channel .
Assuming this film was a negative it produced clear where the blue matte screen was , black elsewhere , except it also produced clear for any white objects ( since they also contained blue ) .
Removing these spots could be done by a suitable double - exposure with the colour positive , and many other techniques .
The end result was a clear background with an opaque shape of the subject in the middle .
This is called a female matte , similar to an alpha matte in digital keying .
Copying this film onto another high - contrast negative produced the opposite ' male matte ' .
The background negative was then packed with the female matte and exposed onto a final strip of film , then the camera negative was packed with the male matte was double - printed onto this same film .
These two images combined together creates the final effect .
MAJOR FACTORS Section::::Major factors .
The most important factor for a key is the colour separation of the foreground ( the subject ) and background ( the screen ) – a blue screen will be used if the subject is predominately green ( for example plants ) , despite the camera being more sensitive to green light .
In analog colour TV , colour is represented by the phase of the chroma subcarrier relative to a reference oscillator .
Chroma key is achieved by comparing the phase of the video to the phase corresponding to the pre - selected color .
In - phase portions of the video are replaced by the alternate background video .
In digital colour TV , colour is represented by three numbers ( red , green , blue intensity levels ) .
Chroma key is achieved by a simple numerical comparison between the video and the pre - selected color .
If the color at a particular point on the screen matches ( either exactly , or in a range ) , then the video at that point is replaced by the alternate background .
LIGHTING Section::::Lighting .
In order to create an illusion that characters and objects filmed are present in the intended background scene , the lighting in the two scenes must be a reasonable match .
For outdoor scenes , overcast days create a diffuse , evenly colored light which can be easier to match in the studio , whereas direct sunlight needs to be matched in both direction and overall color based on time of day .
A studio shot taken in front of a green screen will naturally have ambient light the same color as the screen , due to its light scattering .
This effect is known as spill .
This can look unnatural or cause portions of the characters to disappear , so must be compensated for , or avoided by using a larger screen placed far from the actors .
CAMERA Section::::Camera .
The depth of field used to record the scene in front of the coloured screen should match that of the background .
This can mean recording the actors with a larger depth of field than normal .
CLOTHING
Section::::Clothing .
A chroma key subject must avoid wearing clothes which are similar in color to the chroma key color(s ) ( unless intentional e.g. , wearing a green top to make it appear that the subject has no body ) , because the clothing may be replaced with the background image / video .
An example of intentional use of this is when an actor wears a blue covering over a part of his body to make it invisible in the final shot .
This technique can be used to achieve an effect similar to that used in the Harry Potter films to create the effect of an invisibility cloak .
The actor can also be filmed against a chroma - key background and inserted into the background shot with a distortion effect , in order to create a cloak that is marginally detectable .
Difficulties emerge with blue screen when a costume in an effects shot must be blue , such as Superman 's traditional blue outfit .
In the 2002 film Spider - Man , in scenes where both Spider - Man and the Green Goblin are in the air , Spider - Man had to be shot in front of the green screen and the Green Goblin had to be shot in front of a blue screen .
The color difference is because Spider - Man wears a costume which is red and blue in color and the Green Goblin wears a costume which is entirely green in color .
If both were shot in front of the same screen , parts of one character would be erased from the shot .
For a clean division of foreground from background , it is also important that clothing and hair in the foreground shot have a fairly simple silhouette , as fine details such as frizzy hair may not resolve properly .
Similarly , partially transparent elements of the costume cause problems .
BACKGROUND COLOR Section::::Background color .
Blue was originally used for TV chroma keying special effects because human skin tone contains very little blue , and because the film industry used blue backgrounds for similar purposes .
The color blue was tied to the blue emulsion layer of film having comparable grain and detail in comparison to the red and green layers of the emulsion .
In television and digital filmmaking , however , green has become the favored color because of some practical considerations , and because lossy compression algorithms used in both analog and digital TV distribution retain more detail in the green channel .
The choice of color is up to the effects artists and the needs of the specific shot .
Whereas the blue screen was introduced to the television industry by the film industry , the use of green screen visual effects has been introduced to the film industry as electronic imaging has augmented and replaced the use of chemical film stock in cinema .
Also , the green background is favored over blue for outdoor filming where the blue sky might appear in the frame and could accidentally be replaced in the process .
Although green and blue are the most common in part because red , green and blue components are used to encode the visible light spectrum , any key color can be used .
Red is avoided for human subjects due to its prevalence in white skin tones , but can be often used for objects and scenes which do not involve people .
So - called " yellow screen " is accomplished with a white backdrop .
Ordinary stage lighting is used in combination with a bright yellow sodium lamp .
The sodium light falls almost entirely in a narrow frequency band , which can then be separated from the other light using a prism , and projected onto a separate but synchronized film carrier within the camera .
This second film is high - contrast black and white , and is processed to produce the matte .
Occasionally , a magenta background is used , as in some software applications where the magenta or fuchsia is sometimes referred to as " magic pink " .
A newer technique is to use a retroreflective curtain in the background , along with a ring of bright LEDs around the camera lens .
This requires no light to shine on the background other than the LEDs , which use an extremely small amount of power and space unlike big stage lights , and require no rigging .
This advance was made possible by the invention in the 1990s of practical blue LEDs , which also allow for emerald green LEDs .
There is also a form of color keying that uses light spectrum invisible to human eye .
Called Thermo - Key , it uses infrared as the key color , which would not be replaced by background image during postprocessing .
For , an ultraviolet light matting process was proposed by Don Lee of CIS Hollywood and developed by Gary Hutzel and the staff of Image G.
This involved a fluorescent orange backdrop which made it easier to generate a holdout matte , thus allowing the effects team to produce effects in a quarter of the time needed for other methods .
In principle , any type of still background can be used as a chroma key instead of a solid color .
First the background is captured without actors or other foreground elements ; then the scene is recorded .
The image of the background is used to cancel the background in the actual footage ; for example in a digital image , each pixel will have a different chroma key .
This is sometimes referred to as a difference matte .
However , this makes it easy for objects to be accidentally removed if they happen to be similar to the background , or for the background to remain due to camera noise or if it happens to change slightly from the reference footage .
A background with a repeating pattern alleviates many of these issues , and can be less sensitive to wardrobe color than solid - color backdrops .
TOLERANCES
EVEN LIGHTING Section::::Tolerances .
Section::::Even lighting .
The biggest challenge when setting up a bluescreen or greenscreen is even lighting and the avoidance of shadow , because it is best to have as narrow a color range as possible being replaced .
A shadow would present itself as a darker color to the camera and might not register for replacement .
This can sometimes be seen in low - budget or live broadcasts where the errors can not be manually repaired .
The material being used affects the quality and ease of having it evenly lit .
Materials which are shiny will be far less successful than those that are not .
A shiny surface will have areas that reflect the lights making them appear pale , while other areas may be darkened .
A matte surface will diffuse the reflected light and have a more even color range .
In order to get the cleanest key from shooting greenscreen it is necessary to create a value difference between the subject and the greenscreen .
In order to differentiate the subject from the screen , a two - stop difference can be used , either by making the greenscreen two stops higher than the subject , or vice versa .
Sometimes a shadow can be used to create a visual effect .
Areas of the bluescreen or greenscreen with a shadow on them can be replaced with a darker version of the desired background video image , making it look like the person is casting a shadow on them .
Any spill of the chroma key color will make the result look unnatural .
A difference in the focal length of the lenses used can affect the success of chroma key .
EXPOSURE Section::::Exposure .
Another challenge for bluescreen or greenscreen is proper camera exposure .
Underexposing or overexposing a colored backdrop can lead to poor saturation levels .
In the case of video cameras , underexposed images can contain high amounts of noise , as well .
The background must be bright enough to allow the camera to create a bright and saturated image .
PROGRAMMING Section::::Programming .
There are several different quality- and speed - optimized techniques for implementing color keying in software .
In most versions , a function f(r , g , b ) → α is applied to every pixel in the image .
α ( alpha ) has a meaning similar to that in alpha compositing techniques .
α ≤ 0 means the pixel is fully in the green screen , α ≥ 1 means the pixel is fully in the foreground object , and intermediate values indicate the pixel is partially covered by the foreground object ( or it is transparent ) .
A further function g(r , g , b ) → ( r , g , b ) is needed to remove green spill on the foreground objects .
A very simple f ( ) function for green screen is A(r+b )
− Bg where A and B are user adjustable constants with a default value of 1.0 .
A very simple g ( ) is ( r , min(g , b ) , b ) .
This is fairly close to the capabilities of analog and film - based screen pulling .
Modern examples of these functions are best described by two closed nested surfaces in the 3-D rgb space , often quite complex .
Colors inside the inner surface are considered green screen .
Colors outside the outer surface are opaque foreground .
Colors between the surfaces are partially covered , they are more opaque
the closer they are to the outer surface .
Sometimes more closed surfaces are used to determine how to remove green spill .
It is also very common for f ( ) to depend on more than just the current pixel 's color , it may also use the ( x , y ) position , the values of nearby pixels , the value from reference images or a statistical color model of the scene , and values from user - drawn masks .
These produce closed surfaces in a space with more than three dimensions .
A different class of algorithm tries to figure out a 2D path that separates the foreground from the background .
This path can be the output , or the image can be drawn by filling the path with α = 1 as a final step .
An example of such an algorithm is the use of active contour .
Most research in recent years has been into these algorithms .
SEE ALSO
* Compositing * Drew Carey 's Green Screen Show * Federal Standard 1037C
* Filmmaking
* Film production
* Front projection effect * Live action
* Live action / Animation * Matte ( filmmaking )
* Motion control photography
* Muslin * Optical printer
* Primatte chromakey technology *
Rear projection effect *
Reverse bluescreen
* Schüfftan process
* Signal processing * Sodium vapor process
* Special effects
* Video switcher *
Virtual set REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* How Blue Screens Work
* Stargate Studios Virtual Backlot Reel 2009 – A demonstration of green screen scenes * ChromaKey SourceCode