GOOSE Geese are waterfowl of the family Anatidae .
This group comprises the genera Anser ( the grey geese ) and Branta ( the black geese ) .
Chen , a genus comprising ' white geese ' , is sometimes used to refer to a group of species that are more commonly placed within Anser .
Some other birds , mostly related to the shelducks , have " goose " as part of their names .
More distantly related members of the family Anatidae are swans , most of which are larger than true geese , and ducks , which are smaller .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word " goose " is a direct descendent of Proto - Indo - European root , ghans- .
In Germanic languages , the root gave Old English gōs with the plural gēs and gandres ( becoming Modern English goose , geese , gander , and gosling , respectively ) , Frisian goes , gies and guoske , New High German Gans , Gänse , and Ganter , and Old Norse gās .
This term also gave , ( goose , from Old Irish géiss ) , , Ancient ( khēn ) , , ( heron ) , Sanskrit hamsa and hamsi , , Avestan zāō , , , ( guska / gusak ) , ( gusyna / gus ) , , and ( ghāz ) .
The term goose applies to the female in particular , while gander applies to the male in particular .
Young birds before fledging are called goslings .
The collective noun for a group of geese on the ground is a gaggle ; when in flight , they are called a skein , a team , or a wedge ; when flying close together , they are called a plump .
TRUE GEESE AND THEIR RELATIVES Section::::True geese and their relatives .
The three living genera of true geese are : Anser , grey geese , including the greylag goose , and domestic geese ; Chen , white geese ( often included in Anser ) ; and Branta , black geese , such as the Canada goose .
Two genera of geese are only tentatively placed in the Anserinae ; they may belong to the shelducks or form a subfamily on their own : Cereopsis , the Cape Barren goose , and Cnemiornis , the prehistoric New Zealand goose .
Either these or , more probably , the goose - like Coscoroba swan is the closest living relative of the true geese .
Fossils of true geese are hard to assign to genus ; all that can be said is that their fossil record , particularly in North America , is dense and comprehensively documents many different species of true geese that have been around since about 10 million years ago in the Miocene .
The aptly named Anser atavus ( meaning " progenitor goose " )
from some 12 million years ago had even more plesiomorphies in common with swans .
In addition , some goose - like birds are known from subfossil remains found on the Hawaiian Islands .
Geese are monogamous , living in permanent pairs throughout the year ; however , unlike most other permanently monogamous animals , they are territorial only during the short nesting season .
Paired geese are more dominant and feed more , two factors that result in more young .
OTHER BIRDS CALLED
" GEESE " Section::::Other birds called " geese " .
Some mainly Southern Hemisphere birds are called " geese " , most of which belong to the shelduck subfamily Tadorninae .
These are : * Orinoco goose , Neochen jubata
* Egyptian goose , Alopochen aegyptiaca *
The South American sheldgeese , genus Chloephaga
*
The prehistoric Malagasy sheldgoose , Centrornis majori Others : * The spur - winged goose , Plectropterus gambensis , is most closely related to the shelducks , but distinct enough to warrant its own subfamily , the Plectropterinae .
* The blue - winged goose , Cyanochen cyanopterus , and the Cape Barren goose , Cereopsis novaehollandiae , have disputed affinities .
They belong to separate ancient lineages that may ally either to the Tadorninae , Anserinae , or closer to the dabbling ducks ( Anatinae ) .
* The three species of small waterfowl in the genus Nettapus are named " pygmy geese " .
They seem to represent another ancient lineage , with possible affinities to the Cape Barren goose or the spur - winged goose .
* A genus of prehistorically extinct seaducks , Chendytes , is sometimes called " diving - geese " due to their large size .
*
The unusual magpie goose is in a family of its own , the Anseranatidae .
* The northern gannet , a seabird , is also known as the " Solan goose " , although it is a bird unrelated to the true geese , or any other Anseriformes for that matter .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Well - known sayings about geese include : * To " have a gander " is to examine something in detail .
* " What 's sauce for the goose is sauce for the gander " or " What 's good for the goose is good for the gander " means that what is an appropriate treatment for one person is equally appropriate for someone else .
* Saying that someone 's " goose is cooked " means that they have suffered , or are about to suffer , a terrible setback or misfortune .
* The common phrase " silly goose " which is used when referring to someone who is acting particularly silly .
*
" Killing the goose that lays the golden eggs , " derived from an old fable , is a saying referring to any greed - motivated , unprofitable action that destroys or otherwise renders a favourable situation useless .
* " A wild goose chase " is a useless , futile waste of time and effort .
*
There is a legendary old woman called Mother Goose who wrote nursery rhymes for children .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * Angel wing , a disease common in geese * Domestic goose , which includes cooking and folklore *
Flying geese paradigm
* List of Anseriformes by population * List of goose breeds * Roast goose
* Waterfowl * Wildfowl REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Anatidae media on the Internet Bird Collection