RUBY
A ruby is a pink to blood - red colored gemstone , a variety of the mineral corundum ( aluminium oxide ) .
Other varieties of gem - quality corundum are called sapphires .
Ruby is one of the traditional cardinal gems , together with amethyst , sapphire , emerald , and diamond .
The word ruby comes from ruber , Latin for red .
The color of a ruby is due to the element chromium .
The quality of a ruby is determined by its color , cut , and clarity , which , along with carat weight , affect its value .
The brightest and most valuable shade of red called blood - red or pigeon blood , commands a large premium over other rubies of similar quality .
After color follows clarity : similar to diamonds , a clear stone will command a premium , but a ruby without any needle - like rutile inclusions may indicate that the stone has been treated .
Ruby is the traditional birthstone for July and is usually more pink than garnet , although some rhodolite garnets have a similar pinkish hue to most rubies .
The world 's most valuable ruby is the Sunrise Ruby .
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES Section::::Physical properties .
Rubies have a hardness of 9.0 on the Mohs scale of mineral hardness .
Among the natural gems only moissanite and diamond are harder , with diamond having a Mohs hardness of 10.0 and moissanite falling somewhere in between corundum ( ruby ) and diamond in hardness .
Sapphire , ruby , and pure corundum are α - alumina , the most stable form of AlO , in which 3 electrons leave each aluminum ion to join the regular octahedral group of six nearby O ions ; in pure corundum this leaves all of the aluminum ions with a very stable configuration of no unpaired electrons or unfilled energy levels , and the crystal is perfectly colorless .
When a chromium atom replaces an occasional aluminum atom , it too loses 3 electrons to become a chromium ion to maintain the charge balance of the AlO crystal .
However , the Cr ions are larger and have electron orbitals in different directions than aluminum .
The octahedral arrangement of the O ions is distorted , and the energy levels of the different orbitals of those Cr ions are slightly altered because of the directions to the O ions .
Those energy differences correspond to absorption in the ultraviolet , violet , and yellow - green regions of the spectrum .
If one percent of the aluminum ions are replaced by chromium in ruby , the yellow - green absorption results in a red color for the gem .
Additionally , absorption at any of the above wavelengths stimulates fluorescent emission of 694-nanometer - wavelength red light , which adds to its red color and perceived luster .
After absorbing short - wavelength light , there is a short interval of time when the crystal lattice of ruby is in an excited state before fluorescence occurs .
If 694-nanometer photons pass through the crystal during that time , they can stimulate more fluorescent photons to be emitted in - phase with them , thus strengthening the intensity of that red light .
By arranging mirrors or other means to pass emitted light repeatedly through the crystal , a ruby laser in this way produces a very high intensity of coherent red light .
All natural rubies have imperfections in them , including color impurities and inclusions of rutile needles known as " silk " .
Gemologists use these needle inclusions found in natural rubies to distinguish them from synthetics , simulants , or substitutes .
Usually , the rough stone is heated before cutting .
These days , almost all rubies are treated in some form , with heat treatment being the most common practice .
Untreated rubies of high quality command a large premium .
Some rubies show a three - point or six - point asterism or " star " .
These rubies are cut into cabochons to display the effect properly .
Asterisms are best visible with a single - light source and move across the stone as the light moves or the stone is rotated .
Such effects occur when light is reflected off the " silk " ( the structurally oriented rutile needle inclusions ) in a certain way .
This is one example where inclusions increase the value of a gemstone .
Furthermore , rubies can show color changes — though this occurs very rarely — as well as chatoyancy or the " cat 's eye " effect .
RUBY VS .
PINK SAPPHIRE Section::::Ruby vs. pink sapphire .
Generally , gemstone - quality corundum in all shades of red , including pink , are called rubies .
However , in the United States , a minimum color saturation must be met to be called a ruby ; otherwise , the stone will be called a pink sapphire .
Drawing a distinction between rubies and pink sapphires is relatively new , having arisen sometime in the 20th century .
Often , the distinction between ruby and pink sapphire is not clear and can be debated .
As a result of the difficulty and subjectiveness of such distinctions , trade organizations such as the International Colored Gemstone Association ( ICGA ) have adopted the broader definition for ruby which encompasses its lighter shades , including pink .
NATURAL OCCURRENCE Section::::Natural occurrence .
The Mogok Valley in Upper Myanmar ( Burma ) was for centuries the world 's main source for rubies .
That region has produced some exceptional rubies , however in recent years few good rubies have been found .
In central Myanmar , the area of Mong Hsu began producing rubies during the 1990s and rapidly became the world 's main ruby mining area .
The most recently found ruby deposit in Myanmar is in Namya ( Namyazeik ) located in the northern state of Kachin .
Historically , rubies have also been mined in Thailand , in the Pailin and Samlout District of Cambodia , as well as in Afghanistan , Australia , Brazil , Colombia , India , Namibia , Japan , and Scotland ; after the Second World War ruby deposits were found in Madagascar , Nepal , Pakistan , Tajikistan , Tanzania , and Vietnam .
In Sri Lanka , lighter shades of rubies ( often " pink sapphires " ) are more commonly found .
The Republic of Macedonia is the only country in mainland Europe to have naturally occurring rubies .
They can mainly be found around the city of Prilep .
Macedonian rubies have a unique raspberry color .
The ruby is also included on the Macedonian coat of arms .
A few rubies have been found in the U.S. states of Montana , North Carolina , South Carolina and Wyoming .
Spinel , another red gemstone , is sometimes found along with rubies in the same gem gravel or marble .
Red spinels may be mistaken for rubies by those lacking experience with gems .
However , the finest red spinels can have values approaching that of an average ruby .
FACTORS AFFECTING VALUE Section::::Factors affecting value .
Rubies , as with other gemstones , are graded using criteria known as the four Cs , namely color , cut , clarity and carat weight .
Rubies are also evaluated on the basis of their geographic origin .
Color :
In the evaluation of colored gemstones , color is the most important factor .
Color divides into three components : hue , saturation and tone .
Hue refers to color as we normally use the term .
Transparent gemstones occur in the pure spectral hues of red , orange , yellow , green , blue , violet .
In nature , there are rarely pure hues , so when speaking of the hue of a gemstone , we speak of primary and secondary and sometimes tertiary hues .
Ruby is defined to be red .
All other hues of the gem species corundum are called sapphire .
Ruby may exhibit a range of secondary hues , including orange , purple , violet , and pink .
TREATMENTS AND ENHANCEMENTS Section::::Treatments and enhancements .
Improving the quality of gemstones by treating them is common practice .
Some treatments are used in almost all cases and are therefore considered acceptable .
During the late 1990s , a large supply of low - cost materials caused a sudden surge in supply of heat - treated rubies , leading to a downward pressure on ruby prices .
Improvements used include color alteration , improving transparency by dissolving rutile inclusions , healing of fractures ( cracks ) or even completely filling them .
The most common treatment is the application of heat .
Most rubies at the lower end of the market are heat treated to improve color , remove purple tinge , blue patches , and silk .
These heat treatments typically occur around temperatures of 1800 ° C ( 3300 ° F ) .
Some rubies undergo a process of low tube heat , when the stone is heated over charcoal of a temperature of about 1300 ° C ( 2400 ° F ) for 20 to 30 minutes .
The silk is partially broken , and the color is improved .
Another treatment , which has become more frequent in recent years , is lead glass filling .
Filling the fractures inside the ruby with lead glass ( or a similar material ) dramatically improves the transparency of the stone , making previously unsuitable rubies fit for applications in jewelry .
The process is done in four steps :
* The rough stones are pre - polished to eradicate all surface impurities that may affect the process *
* The rough is cleaned with hydrogen fluoride
*
* The first heating process during which no fillers are added .
The heating process eradicates impurities inside the fractures .
Although this can be done at temperatures up to 1400 ° C ( 2500 ° F )
it most likely occurs at a temperature of around 900 ° C ( 1600 ° F ) since the rutile silk is still intact .
*
* The second heating process in an electrical oven with different chemical additives .
Different solutions and mixes have shown to be successful , however mostly lead - containing glass - powder is used at present .
The ruby is dipped into oils , then covered with powder , embedded on a tile and placed in the oven where it is heated at around 900 ° C ( 1600 ° F ) for one hour in an oxidizing atmosphere .
The orange colored powder transforms upon heating into a transparent to yellow - colored paste , which fills all fractures .
After cooling the color of the paste is fully transparent and dramatically improves the overall transparency of the ruby .
* If a color needs to be added , the glass powder can be " enhanced " with copper or other metal oxides as well as elements such as sodium , calcium , potassium etc .
The second heating process can be repeated three to four times , even applying different mixtures .
When jewelry containing rubies is heated ( for repairs )
it should not be coated with boracic acid or any other substance , as this can etch the surface ; it does not have to be " protected " like a diamond .
The treatment can identified by noting bubbles in cavities and fractures using a 10x loupe .
SYNTHETIC AND IMITATION RUBIES Section::::Synthetic and imitation rubies .
In 1837 , Gaudin made the first synthetic rubies by fusing potash alum at a high temperature with a little chromium as a pigment .
In 1847 , Ebelmen made white sapphire by fusing alumina in boric acid .
In 1877 , Frenic and Freil made crystal corundum from which small stones could be cut .
Frimy and Auguste Verneuil manufactured artificial ruby by fusing BaF and AlO with a little chromium at red heat .
In 1903 , Verneuil announced he could produce synthetic rubies on a commercial scale using this flame fusion process .
By 1910 , Verneuil 's laboratory had expanded into a 30 furnace production facility , with annual gemstone production having reached in 1907 .
Other processes in which synthetic rubies can be produced are through Czochralski 's pulling process , flux process , and the hydrothermal process .
Most synthetic rubies originate from flame fusion , due to the low costs involved .
Synthetic rubies may have no imperfections visible to the naked eye but magnification may reveal curves , striae and gas bubbles .
The fewer the number and the less obvious the imperfections , the more valuable the ruby is ; unless there are no imperfections ( i.e. , a perfect ruby ) , in which case it will be suspected of being artificial .
Dopants are added to some manufactured rubies so they can be identified as synthetic , but most need gemological testing to determine their origin .
Synthetic rubies have technological uses as well as gemological ones .
Rods of synthetic ruby are used to make ruby lasers and masers .
The first working laser was made by Theodore H. Maiman in 1960 .
Maiman used a solid - state light - pumped synthetic ruby to produce red laser light at a wavelength of 694 nanometers ( nm ) .
Ruby lasers are still in use .
Rubies are also used in applications where high hardness is required such as at wear exposed locations in modern mechanical clockworks , or as scanning probe tips in a coordinate measuring machine .
Imitation rubies are also marketed .
Red spinels , red garnets , and colored glass have been falsely claimed to be rubies .
Imitations go back to Roman times and already in
the 17th century techniques were developed to color foil red — by burning scarlet wool in the bottom part of the furnace — which was then placed under the imitation stone .
Trade terms such as balas ruby for red spinel and rubellite for red tourmaline can mislead unsuspecting buyers .
Such terms are therefore discouraged from use by many gemological associations such as the Laboratory Manual Harmonisation Committee ( LMHC ) .
RECORDS AND FAMOUS RUBIES
*
The Smithsonian 's National Museum of Natural History in Washington
, D.C. has some of the world 's largest and finest ruby gemstones .
The Burmese ruby , set in a platinum ring with diamonds , was donated by businessman and philanthropist Peter Buck in memory of his late wife Carmen Lúcia .
This gemstone displays a richly saturated red color combined with an exceptional transparency .
The finely proportioned cut provides vivid red reflections .
The stone was mined from the Mogok region of Burma ( now Myanmar ) in the 1930s .
*
In 2007 the London jeweler Garrard & Co featured on their website a heart - shaped 40.63-carat ruby .
*
On December 13/14 , 2011 Elizabeth Taylor 's complete jewellery collection was auctioned by Christie 's .
Several ruby - set pieces were included in the sale , notably a ring set with an 8.24 ct gem that broke the ' price - per - carat ' record for rubies ( $ 512,925 per carat , i.e. over $ 4.2 million in total ) , and a necklace that sold for over $ 3.7 million .
*
The Liberty Bell Ruby is the largest mined ruby in the world .
It was stolen in a heist in 2011 .
*
The Sunrise Ruby is the world 's most expensive ruby , most expensive coloured gemstone , and most expensive gemstone other than a diamond .
In May 2015 , it sold at auction in Switzerland to an anonymous buyer for US$ 30 million .
* A synthetic ruby crystal became the gain medium in the world 's first optical laser , conceived , designed and constructed by Theodore H. " Ted " Maiman , on the 16th of May , 1961 at Hughes Research Laboratories .
The concept of electromagnetic radiation amplification through the mechanism of stimulated emission had already been successfully demonstrated in the laboratory by way of the Maser , using other materials such as ammonia and , later , ruby , but the Ruby Laser was the first device to work at optical ( 694.3 nm ) wavelengths .
Maiman 's prototype laser is still in working order .
HISTORICAL AND CULTURAL REFERENCES
* An early recorded transport and trading of rubies arises in the literature on the North Silk Road of China , wherein about 200 BC rubies were carried along this ancient trackway moving westward from China .
*
Rubies have always been held in high esteem in Asian countries .
They were used to ornament armor , scabbards , and harnesses of noblemen in India and China .
Rubies were laid beneath the foundation of buildings to secure good fortune to the structure .
SEE ALSO
* Anyolite * List of gemstones * List of minerals
* Shelby Gem Factory * Verneuil process
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * International Colored Stone Association 's ruby overview page
*
Webmineral crystallographic and mineral info