BOURBON WHISKEY
Bourbon whiskey is a type of American whiskey , a barrel - aged distilled spirit made primarily from corn .
The name ultimately derives from the French Bourbon dynasty , although the precise inspiration for the whiskey 's name is uncertain ; contenders include Bourbon County in Kentucky and Bourbon Street in New Orleans , both of which are named after the dynasty .
Bourbon has been distilled since the 18th century .
The use of the term " bourbon " for the whiskey has been traced to the 1820s , with consistent use beginning in Kentucky in the 1870s .
Although bourbon may be made anywhere in the United States , it is strongly associated with the American South and with Kentucky in particular .
As of 2014 , distillers ' wholesale market revenue for bourbon sold within the U.S. was about $ 2.7 billion , and bourbon made up about two - thirds of the $ 1.6 billion of U.S. exports of distilled spirits .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Distilling was most likely brought to present - day Kentucky in the late 18th century by Scots , Scots - Irish , and other settlers ( including English , Irish , Welsh , German , and French ) who began to farm the area in earnest .
The origin of bourbon as a distinct form of whiskey is not well documented .
There are many conflicting legends and claims , some more credible than others .
For example , the invention of bourbon is often attributed to Elijah Craig , a Baptist minister and distiller credited with many Kentucky firsts ( e.g. , fulling mill , paper mill , ropewalk ) who is said to have been the first to age the product in charred oak casks , a process that gives bourbon its reddish color and distinctive taste .
Across the county line in Bourbon County , an early distiller named Jacob Spears is credited with being the first to label his product as Bourbon whiskey .
Spears ' home , known as Stone Castle , warehouse , and spring house survive .
The home is on Clay - Kiser Road .
Although still popular and often repeated , the Craig legend is apocryphal .
Similarly , the Spears story is a local favorite but is rarely repeated outside the county .
There likely was no single " inventor " of bourbon , which developed into its present form in the late 19th century .
Essentially , any type of grain can be used to make whiskey , and the practice of aging whiskey and charring the barrels for better flavor had been known in Europe for centuries .
The late date of the Bourbon County etymology has led Louisville historian Michael Veach to dispute its authenticity .
He proposes the whiskey was named after Bourbon Street in New Orleans , a major port where shipments of Kentucky whiskey sold well as a cheaper alternative to French cognac .
Another proposed origin of the name is the association with the geographic area known as Old Bourbon , consisting of the original Bourbon County in Virginia organized in 1785 .
This region included much of today 's Eastern Kentucky , including 34 of the modern counties .
It included the current Bourbon County in Kentucky , which became a county when Kentucky separated from Virginia as a new state in 1792 .
Although many distilleries operated in Bourbon County historically , no distilleries operated there between 1919 , when Prohibition began in Kentucky , and late 2014 , when a small distillery opened – a period of 95 years .
Prohibition was devastating to the bourbon industry .
With the ratification of the 18th amendment in 1919 , all distilleries were forced to stop operating , although a few were granted permits to bottle existing stocks of medicinal whiskey .
Later , a few were allowed to resume production when the stocks ran out .
Distilleries that were granted permits to produce or bottle medicinal whiskey included Brown - Forman , Frankfort Distillery , James Thompson and Brothers , American Medical Spirits , the Schenley Distillery ( modern - day Buffalo Trace Distillery ) , and the A. Ph . Stitzel Distillery .
A refinement often dubiously credited to James C. Crow is the sour mash process , which conditions each new fermentation with some amount of spent mash .
Spent mash is also known as spent beer , distillers ' spent grain , stillage , and slop or feed mash , so named because it is used as animal feed .
The acid introduced when using the sour mash controls the growth of bacteria that could taint the whiskey and creates a proper pH balance for the yeast to work .
A concurrent resolution adopted by the United States Congress in 1964 declared bourbon to be a " distinctive product of the United States " and asked " the appropriate agencies of the United States Government ... [ to ] take appropriate action to prohibit importation into the United States of whiskey designated as ' Bourbon Whiskey ' .
" Federal regulation now defines bourbon whiskey to only include bourbon produced in the United States .
In recent years , bourbon and Tennessee whiskey – sometimes regarded as a different type of spirit but generally meets the legal requirements to be called bourbon – have enjoyed significant growth in popularity .
The industry trade group Distilled Spirits Council of the United States tracks sales of bourbon and Tennessee whiskey together .
According to the Distilled Spirits Council , during 2009–2014 , the volume of 9-liter cases of whiskey increased by 28.5 % overall .
Higher - end bourbon and whiskeys experienced the greatest growth .
During 2009–14 , the volume of the value segment increased by 12.1 % , premium by 25.8 % , high - end premium by 27.8 % , and super - premium by 123.8 % .
Gross supplier revenues ( including federal excise tax ) for U.S. bourbon and Tennessee whiskey increased by 46.7 % over the 2009–14 period , with the greatest growth coming from high - end products ( 18.7 % growth for value , 33.6 % for premium , 44.5 % for high - end premium , and 137.2 % for super - premium ) .
In 2014 , more than 19 million nine - liter cases of bourbon and Tennessee whiskey were sold in the U.S. , generating almost $ 2.7 billion in wholesale distillery revenue .
U.S. exports of bourbon whiskey surpassed $ 1 billion for the first time in 2013 ; distillers hailed the rise of a " golden age of Kentucky bourbon " and predicted further growth .
In 2014 , it was estimated that U.S. bourbon whiskey exports surpassed $ 1 billion , making up the majority of the U.S. total of $ 1.6 billion in spirits exports .
Major export markets for U.S. spirits are , in descending order : Canada , the United Kingdom , Germany , Australia , and France .
The largest percentage increases in U.S. exports were , in descending order : Brazil , the Dominican Republic , Bahamas , Israel , and United Arab Emirates .
Key elements of growth in the markets showing the largest increases have been changes of law , trade agreements , and reductions of tariffs , as well as increased consumer demand for premium - category spirits .
LEGAL REQUIREMENTS Section::::Legal requirements .
Bourbon 's legal definition varies somewhat from country to country , but many trade agreements require the name bourbon to be reserved for products made in the United States .
The U.S. regulations for labeling and advertising bourbon apply only to products made for consumption within the United States ; they do not apply to distilled spirits made for export .
Canadian law requires products labeled bourbon to be made in the United States and also to conform to the requirements that apply within the United States .
But in countries other than the United States and Canada , products labeled bourbon may not adhere to the same standards .
For example , in the European Union , products labeled as bourbon are not required to conform to all the regulations that apply within the United States , although they still must be made in the U.S.
The Federal Standards of Identity for Distilled Spirits state that bourbon made for U.S. consumption must be :
* Produced in the United States *
Made from a grain mixture that is at least 51 %
corn
* Aged in new , charred oak containers
* Distilled to no more than 160 ( U.S. ) proof ( 80 % alcohol by volume ) *
Entered into the barrel for aging at no more than 125 proof ( 62.5 % alcohol by volume )
* Bottled ( like other whiskeys ) at 80 proof or more ( 40 % alcohol by volume ) Bourbon has no minimum specified duration for its aging period .
Products aged for as little as three months are sold as bourbon .
The exception is straight bourbon , which has a minimum aging requirement of two years .
In addition , any bourbon aged less than four years must include an age statement on its label .
Bourbon that meets the above requirements , has been aged for a minimum of two years , and does not have added coloring , flavoring , or other spirits
may be – but is not required to be – called straight bourbon .
* Bourbon that is labeled as straight that has been aged under four years must be labeled with the duration of its aging .
* Bourbon that has an age stated on its label must be labeled with the age of the youngest whiskey in the bottle ( not counting the age of any added neutral grain spirits in a bourbon that is labeled as blended , as neutral - grain spirits are not considered whiskey under the regulations and are not required to be aged at all ) .
Bottled - in - bond bourbon is a sub - category of straight bourbon and must be aged at least four years .
Bourbon that is labeled blended ( or as a blend ) may contain added coloring , flavoring , and other spirits , such as un - aged neutral grain spirits , but at least 51 % of the product must be straight bourbon .
Bourbon that has been aged for fewer than three years can not legally be referred to as whiskey ( or whisky ) in the EU .
GEOGRAPHIC ORIGIN Section::::Geographic origin .
On May 4 , 1964 , the United States Congress recognized bourbon whiskey as a " distinctive product of the United States " by concurrent resolution .
Bourbon may be produced anywhere in the United States where it is legal to distill spirits , but most brands are produced in Kentucky , where bourbon production has a strong historical association .
The filtering of iron - free water through the high concentrations of limestone that are unique to the area is often touted by bourbon distillers in Kentucky as a signature step in the bourbon - making process .
On August 2 , 2007 , the U.S. Senate passed a resolution sponsored by Senator Jim Bunning ( R - KY ) officially declaring September 2007 to be National Bourbon Heritage Month , commemorating the history of bourbon whiskey .
Notably , the resolution claimed that Congress had declared bourbon to be " America 's Native Spirit " in its 1964 resolution .
However , the 1964 resolution did not contain such a statement ; it declared bourbon to be a distinctive product identifiable with the United States ( in a similar way that Scotch is considered identifiable with Scotland ) .
The resolution was passed again in 2008 .
As of 2014 , approximately 95 % of all bourbon is produced in Kentucky , according to the Kentucky Distillers ' Association .
The state has more than 5.3 million barrels of bourbon that are aging – a number that exceeds the state 's population .
Bardstown , Kentucky , is home to the annual Bourbon Festival held each September .
It has been called the " Bourbon Capital of the World " by the Bardstown Tourism Commission and the Kentucky Bourbon Festival organizers who have registered the phrase as a trademark .
The Kentucky Bourbon Trail is the name of a tourism promotion program organized by the Kentucky Distillers ' Association that is aimed at attracting visitors to the distilleries in Kentucky , particularly Four Roses ( Lawrenceburg ) , Heaven Hill ( Bardstown ) , Jim Beam ( Clermont ) , Maker 's Mark ( Loretto ) , Town Branch ( Lexington ) , Wild Turkey ( Lawrenceburg ) , and Woodford Reserve ( Versailles ) .
Tennessee is home to other major bourbon makers , although most prefer to call their product " Tennessee whiskey " instead , including giant Jack Daniel 's .
It is legally defined under Tennessee House Bill 1084 , the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) , and at least one other international trade agreement as the recognized name for a straight bourbon whiskey produced in Tennessee .
It is also required to meet the legal definition of bourbon under Canadian law .
Although some Tennessee whiskey makers maintain that a state - mandated pre - aging filtration through chunks of maple charcoal , known as the Lincoln County Process , make its flavor distinct from bourbon , U.S. regulations defining bourbon neither require nor prohibit its use .
Prior to 2013 , the Lincoln County Process was not legally required for products identified as Tennessee whiskey .
Bourbon also was and is made in other U.S. states .
The largest bourbon distiller outside of Kentucky and Tennessee is MGP of Indiana , which primarily wholesales its spirits products to bottling companies that sell them under about 50 different brand names – in some cases , misleadingly marketed as " craft " whiskey , despite being produced at a large wholesaler 's factory .
PRODUCTION PROCESS Section::::Production process .
To be legally sold as bourbon , the whiskey 's mash bill requires a minimum of 51 % corn , with the remainder being any cereal grain .
A mash bill that contains wheat instead of rye produces what is known as a wheated bourbon .
The grain is ground and mixed with water .
Usually mash from a previous distillation is added to ensure consistency across batches , creating a sour mash .
Finally , yeast is added , and the mash is fermented .
It is distilled to ( typically ) between 65 % and 80 % alcohol using either a traditional alembic ( or pot still ) or the much less expensive continuous still .
Most modern bourbons are initially run off using a column still and then redistilled in a " doubler " ( alternatively known as a " thumper " or " retort " ) that is basically a pot still .
The resulting clear spirit , called " white dog " , is placed in charred new oak containers for aging .
In practice , these containers are generally barrels made from American white oak .
The spirit gains its color and much of its flavor from the caramelized sugars and vanillins in the charred wood .
Straight bourbon must be aged at least two years , and blended bourbon must contain at least 51 % straight bourbon on a proof gallon basis ( i.e. , most of the alcohol in the blend must be from straight bourbon ) .
The remainder of the spirits in a blended bourbon may be neutral grain spirits that are not aged at all .
If a product is labeled merely as bourbon whiskey rather than straight or blended , no specific minimum aging period is prescribed – only that the product has been " stored at not more than 62.5 % alcohol by volume ( 125 proof ) in charred new oak containers " .
Bourbons gain more color and flavor the longer they age in wood .
Changes to the spirit also occur due to evaporation and chemical processes such as oxidation .
Lower - priced bourbons tend to be aged relatively briefly .
Even for higher - priced bourbons , " maturity " rather than a particular age duration is often the goal , as over - aging bourbons can negatively affect the flavor of the bourbon ( making it taste woody , bitter , or unbalanced ) .
After maturing , bourbon is withdrawn from the barrel and is typically filtered and diluted with water .
It is then bottled at no less than 80 US proof ( 40 % abv ) .
Although most bourbon whiskey is sold at 80 US proof , other common proofs are 86 , 90 , and 100 .
All " bottled in bond " bourbon is 100 proof .
Some higher - proof bottlings are marketed as " barrel proof " , meaning they have not been diluted or have been only lightly diluted after removal from the barrels .
Bourbon whiskey may be sold at less than 80 proof but must be labeled as " diluted bourbon " .
After processing , barrels remain saturated with up to 10 gallons of bourbon , although two to three is the norm .
They may not be reused for bourbon , and most are sold to distilleries in Canada , Scotland , Ireland , Mexico , and the Caribbean for aging other spirits .
Some are employed in the manufacture of various barrel - aged products , including amateur and professionally brewed bourbon - barrel - aged beer , barbecue sauce , wine , hot sauce , and others .
Since 2011 , Jim Beam has employed barrel rinsing on a large scale to extract bourbon from its used barrels , mixing the extract with a 6-year - old Beam bourbon to create a 90-proof product that it sells as " Devil 's Cut " .
The bottling operation for bourbon is the process of filtering , mixing together straight whiskey from different barrels ( sometimes from different distilleries ) , diluting with water , blending with other ingredients ( if producing blended bourbon ) , and filling containers to produce the final product that is marketed to consumers .
By itself , the phrase " bottled by " means only that .
Only if the bottler operates the distillery that produced the whiskey may " distilled by " be added to the label .
Labeling requirements for bourbon and other alcoholic beverages ( including the requirements for what is allowed to be called bourbon under U.S. law ) are defined in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations .
No whiskey made outside the United States may be labeled bourbon or sold as bourbon inside the United States ( and in various other countries that have trade agreements with the United States to recognize bourbon as a distinctive product of the United States ) .
USES Section::::Uses .
Bourbon is served in a variety of manners , including neat , diluted with water , over ice ( " on the rocks " ) , with other beverages in simple mixed drinks , and in cocktails , including the Manhattan , the Old Fashioned , the whiskey sour , and the mint julep .
Bourbon is also used in cooking and was historically used for medicinal purposes .
SEE ALSO * American whiskey * American Whiskey Trail *
Bottled in bond * Bourbon Trail * Corn whiskey
* List of bourbon brands * List of cocktails with bourbon * List of maize dishes
* List of whisky brands
* Moonshine * Rye whiskey * Single barrel whiskey * Small batch
* Tennessee whiskey
REFERENCES
NOTES CITATIONS
FURTHER READING
* Carson , Gerald .
The Social History of Bourbon :
An Unhurried Account of Our Star - Spangled Drink ( Lexington , KY : University Press of Kentucky ) , 1963 . .
* Cowdery , Charles K. Bourbon , Straight : The Uncut and Unfiltered Story of American Whiskey ( Chicago : Made and Bottled in Kentucky ) , 2004 . .
* Crowgey , Henry G. Kentucky Bourbon : The Early Years of Whiskeymaking ( Lexington , KY : University Press of Kentucky ) , 1971 . .
* Regan , Gary and Mardee Haidin Regan .
The Bourbon Companion : A Connoisseur 's Guide ( Philadelphia , PA : Running Press ) , 1998 . .
EXTERNAL LINKS