GRAND UNION CANAL
The Grand Union Canal in England is part of the British canal system .
Its main line starts in London and ends in Birmingham , stretching for with 166 locks .
It has arms to places including Leicester , Slough , Aylesbury , Wendover and Northampton .
The Grand Union Canal was also the original name for part of what is now part of the Leicester Line of the modern Grand Union : this latter is now generally referred to as the Old Grand Union Canal to avoid ambiguity .
HISTORY Section::::History .
With competition from the railways having taken a large share of traffic in the second half of the 19th century , improvements in roads and vehicle technology in the early part of the 20th century meant that the lorry was also becoming a threat to the canals .
Tolls had been reduced to compete with the railways , but there was little scope for further reduction .
The Regent 's Canal and the Grand Junction Canal agreed that amalgamation and modernisation were the only way to remain competitive .
The Grand Union Canal in its current form came into being on 1 January 1929 , and was further extended in 1932 .
It was formed from the amalgamation of several different canals , and at ( when excluding the shared line with the Oxford Canal ) , is by far the longest merged canal in the UK , whilst the Leeds & Liverpool Canal for being and having parts of the now - extinct southern end of the Lancaster Canal , is considered the longest single Canal in the UK :
London area
* Regent 's Canal – original company
* Hertford Union Canal – bought by the Regent 's Canal in 1857 Main Line * Warwick and Napton Canal – bought by the Regent 's Canal in 1927 * Warwick and Birmingham Canal – bought by the Regent 's Canal in 1927
* Birmingham and Warwick Junction Canal – bought by the Regent 's Canal in 1927 * Grand Junction Canal – bought by the Regent 's Canal in 1927 Leicester Line * Old Grand Union Canal – bought by the Grand Junction in 1894
* Leicestershire and Northamptonshire Union Canal – bought by the Grand Junction in 1894 * Leicester Navigation – bought by the Grand Union in 1932 * Loughborough Navigation – bought by the Grand Union in 1932 * Erewash Canal – bought by the Grand Union in 1932 A 5-mile ( 8-km ) section of the Oxford Canal forms the main line of the Grand Union between Braunston and Napton .
Although the Grand Union intended to buy the Oxford Canal and Coventry Canal , this did not take place .
The section of the main line between Brentford and Braunston ( formerly the Grand Junction Canal ) , was built as a ' wide ' or ' broad ' canal – that is , its locks were wide enough to accommodate two narrowboats abreast ( side by side ) or a single wide barge up to in beam .
However , the onward sections from Braunston to Birmingham had been built as ' narrow ' canals – that is , the locks could accommodate only a single narrowboat .
An Act of Parliament of 1931 was passed authorising a key part of the modernisation scheme of the Grand Union , supported by Government grants .
The narrow locks ( and several bridges ) between Napton and Camp Hill Top Lock in Birmingham were rebuilt to take widebeam boats or barges up to in beam , or two narrowboats .
The canal was dredged and bank improvements carried out : the depth was increased to to allow heavier cargoes , and the minimum width increased to to enable two boats of 12 feet 6 inches to pass .
Lock works were completed in 1934 when the Duke of Kent opened the new broad locks at Hatton , and other improvements finished by 1937 .
However , these improvements to depth and width were never carried out between Braunston and London .
Camp Hill Locks in Birmingham were not widened , as it would have been very expensive and of little point , since they lead only to further flights of locks not in the ownership of the Grand Union .
A new basin and warehouse were constructed at Tyseley , above Camp Hill , to deal with this .
Although the Grand Union company had a number of broad boats built to take advantage of the improvements , they never really caught on and the canal continued to be operated largely by pairs of narrow boats , whose journeys were facilitated by the newly widened locks in which they could breast up .
The three sections between Norton junction and the River Trent ( collectively known as the ' Leicester line ' ) are mixed in size .
From Norton to Foxton , the route is a narrow canal .
From below Foxton to Leicester it is a wide canal .
From Leicester to the Trent , the route is effectively the River Soar and the locks and bridges are wide .
Another Act of 1931 authorised the widening of the locks at Watford and Foxton , but with Government grants for this section not forthcoming , the work was not carried out .
The Grand Union Canal was nationalised in 1948 , control transferring to the British Transport Commission , and in 1962 to the British Waterways Board , later British Waterways .
Commercial traffic continued to decline , effectively ceasing in the 1970s , though lime juice was carried from Brentford to Boxmoor until 1981 , and aggregates on the River Soar until 1996 .
However , leisure traffic took over , and the canal is now as busy as it ever was , with leisure boating complemented by fishing , towpath walking and gongoozling .
More recently freight traffic has returned with the carriage of aggregates from Denham to West Drayton in barges and narrow boats , and the opening of a new wharf for re - cyclables and aggregates at Old Oak Common .
BRENTFORD TO BRAUNSTON Section::::Brentford to Braunston .
One end of the Grand Union Canal ( Grand Junction Canal – Main Line ) is at Brentford on the River Thames in west London , where the canal follows the engineered course of the Brent .
The double Thames Lock at Brentford separates the Tideway administered by the Port of London Authority from the River Brent / Grand Union Canal , administered by the Canal & River Trust .
The locks on the canal are partially numbered : numbered consecutively south of its turn - off for Leicester , Braunston Junction .
Thames Lock is lock number 101 .
For more than upstream of Thames Lock , the canal and the Brent are one and the same , and the waterway is semi - tidal until the double Gauging Lock ( lock 100 ) at Brentford .
Just upstream of the Gauging Lock was a large canal basin , now known as Brentford Lock , from which the canal covers more distance passing through two more locks .
The river and canal part at the base of the Hanwell flight of locks ( 92–97 ) , before two more locks take the canal to Norwood Green .
It then heads westward over level ground through Southall , Hayes and West Drayton until it reaches the gentle valley of the Colne .
Three miles ( 5 km ) from Norwood on this long level is Bulls Bridge Junction , once the site of the Grand Union Canal Carrying Company 's main dockyard .
At Bulls Bridge , the Paddington Arm branches off to the north and runs to join the Regents Canal at Little Venice ( see below ) .
Just before Uxbridge is Cowley Peachey Junction , where the Slough Arm branches off westward .
At suburban Cowley , before the 1930s a rural village , the canal begins to climb the valley of the River Colne north north - west into the adjoining town of Uxbridge .
After Denham and Harefield villages , it passes to the south of Rickmansworth .
Here it merges with the Rivers Chess , Colne and Gade .
After Rickmansworth , the canal follows the valley of the Gade , passing the site of Croxley paper mill .
The canal skirts Watford through Cassiobury Park , passing under the M25 motorway as it approaches Kings Langley .
Locks become more frequent as the climb into the Chiltern Hills steepens .
The original four locks here were replaced in 1819 by five shallower ones to alleviate problems with water supply to the nearby paper mills .
This realigned the canal to the south of its former course ; the locks here are still referred to – without irony – as " The New ' Uns " by traditional boaters , and the term has been passed on to a new generation of canal users .
After Kings Langley and Apsley – the site of more former paper mills – the canal passes the town Hemel Hempstead and Boxmoor Common .
From here the canal follows the course of the River Bulbourne through Bourne End with the well - known swingbridge at Winkwell , and the " Port of Berkhamsted , a small compact town " .
At Cow Roast Lock the canal reaches the 3-mile ( 5-km ) summit at Tring in the Chiltern hills , having risen through 54 locks since Brentford .
At the north - west end of the summit level is Bulbourne Works , where lock gates were manufactured until 2003 for the southern canal network .
Half a mile ( 800 m ) further on , the canal reaches the top of the Marsworth flight of seven locks , which begin the descent to the Vale of Aylesbury .
A Wendover Arm branches off westwards from the summit level under a bridge adjacent to Marsworth Top Lock and is currently navigable for just over a mile to moorings and a winding hole ; it has restoration project to extend it back to Wendover .
This part of the canal in parlance used by natives and canal staff was " the withered arm " and in fact was only really " opened " to allow the pumping station there to pump water into the uppermost level .
A few hundred metres beyond the bottom lock of the flight , the Aylesbury Arm branches off to the south west .
The Grand Union crosses the wide valley gradually , descending by interspersed locks past the villages of Cheddington , Horton and Slapton until it reaches Leighton Buzzard .
Traditionally this section of the canal is called " Slapton Fields " or just " The Fields " by boaters .
A few miles further on
it enters Milton Keynes at the outskirts of Bletchley at Fenny Stratford Lock , which is unusual in lowering the level by only .
The next stretch of is on the level .
A 21st century plan ( see below ) to dig a new arm from here to the Great Ouse at Bedford .
North of the centre , it traverses the modern New Bradwell Aqueduct , the first on the Grand Union in over 100 years .
Leaving Milton Keynes at Wolverton , the canal runs on a high embankment before passing over the Great Ouse at Cosgrove " Iron Trunk " aqueduct .
After rising through Cosgrove Lock , ( and passing the start of the abandoned Buckingham Arm ) another long level section brings the canal to the bottom of the Stoke Bruerne flight of seven locks .
At the top of this flight is the Stoke Bruerne Canal Museum followed shortly by Blisworth Tunnel , at one of the longest of UK canals .
Once clear of the tunnel , the canal passes Blisworth village and reaches Gayton Junction where the Northampton Arm branches off to the east .
This arm has 17 narrow locks as it descends to join the navigable River Nene ( see below ) .
The long level stretch continues past several villages including Nether Heyford and Weedon Bec and is very rural in character .
At Whilton , the canal reaches the bottom of the Buckby flight of seven locks which raise it to Braunston summit the village of which parish is away .
Beyond the top lock is Norton Junction where the Leicester line ( not strictly a branch ) heads off north .
A few miles further on the canal passes through the 2040-yard ( 1865-m )
Braunston Tunnel , which pierces a low range of hills that are part of the Northamptonshire uplands .
The canal then drops down the Braunston flight of six locks until it reaches Braunston Junction having covered just over .
THE BIRMINGHAM " MAIN LINE " Section::::The Birmingham " main line " .
At Braunston Junction , the Oxford Canal diverges north and south .
The north section leads to Rugby and Coventry ; the southward fork carries both the Oxford Canal and the Grand Union for to Napton Junction .
Here , the Grand Union heads north towards Birmingham , while the Oxford Canal veers south towards Banbury and Oxford .
Shortly after Napton Junction , the Grand Union reaches three locks at Calcutt , which begin the descent to the Warwickshire River Avon .
After a 3-mile ( 5-km ) level , the canal descends into the valley of the River Leam by the Stockton flight of 10 locks ( often known as ' the Itchington Ten ' ) .
Above the eighth lock down the flight , a short arm ( now used as pleasure craft moorings ) used to serve Southam cement works .
From the bottom of the locks , a 3-mile ( 5-km ) level leads to the four Bascote locks .
The top two form a ' riser ' or staircase .
Six more interspersed locks lead to Radford , after which a 5-mile ( 8-km ) level takes the canal through Leamington Spa to Warwick .
Between these two towns , the canal crosses the River Avon and the former Great Western Railway on aqueducts .
At Warwick , the canal rises by two locks to Budbrooke Junction ( formerly the junction with the then - independent Warwick and Birmingham Canal ) .
To the left is the restored Saltisford Canal Arm , a short stretch that used to run under the railway to the original canal basin complex and terminus of the Warwick and Birmingham Canal – the basin was filled - in in the 1970s .
The canal used to serve the oldest gas works in the world and several unusual hexagonal buildings remain opposite Sainsbury 's .
After half a mile the mainline reaches the bottom of the Hatton flight of 21 locks that lift the canal up out of the Avon Valley .
The first 10 locks are spaced out but from the middle lock the flight is tightly spaced .
Three miles ( 5 km ) from
Hatton Top Lock the canal passes through Shrewley Tunnel , with its separate horse tunnel , and then passes Rowington village to Kingswood Junction where a short spur connects with the Stratford - upon - Avon Canal .
Another lead to the Knowle flight of five locks .
Finally , an 11-mile ( 18-km ) level takes the canal through Elmdon Heath , Solihull , Acocks Green and Tyseley to the heart of Birmingham .
The main line may be considered to terminate at Bordesley Junction .
From here , there are two routes , both part of the Grand Union Canal .
The original line of the Warwick and Birmingham Canal leads to the Digbeth Branch Canal of the Birmingham Canal Navigations at the Warwick Bar , while the later line of the Birmingham and Warwick Junction Canal leads to the Birmingham and Fazeley Canal ( and Tame Valley Canal ) at Salford Junction , which in turn has connections to the Coventry Canal and the Trent and Mersey Canal .
THE LEICESTER LINE Section::::The Leicester Line .
Formed by amalgamations of once - independent canals , the ' Leicester Line ' of the Grand Union Canal runs north from Norton Junction for about until it reaches Leicester , where it joins the River Soar to provide a link to the River Trent and to the Trent and Mersey Canal .
It includes tunnels south of Crick and north of Husbands Bosworth
The village of Crick is home to a popular annual boat show .
The stretch of the canal that passes through the centre of Leicester is known as the ' Mile Straight ' and is home to Leicester Rowing Club , a rowing and sculling club .
The club hosts regattas on a stretch co - running with the Soar , typically held in mid - April by over 100 crews over a course .
Also on this section are the Foxton Locks and Watford Locks , both staircase locks .
Beside Foxton locks is the site of a long - abandoned inclined plane boat lift .
This was constructed as part of a project to create a wide - beam canal route to connect the northern and southern parts of the canal system , something which does not exist to this day .
Funding to deal with the narrow locks at Watford was not forthcoming and the scheme was aborted .
The canal north of Foxton Junction is wide - beam to Leicester and onwards .
It was originally intended to build a canal at this width all the way to the River Nene at Northampton .
However , that canal never went further than the basin at Market
Harborough .
The Leicester Line continues along the River Soar Navigation , and reaches the River Trent at Soar Mouth , north of Ratcliffe - on - Soar .
It is possible to continue to the Trent and Mersey Canal , Coventry Canal and North Oxford Canal , to complete a circuit known as the Leicester Ring .
BRANCHES Section::::Branches .
The Grand Union Canal has six main branches , usually termed ' arms ' .
Paddington Arm or Branch
Five miles ( 8 km ) from Brentford , the Paddington Arm runs circuitously on the flat to a lock and a junction with the Regent 's Canal , the latter running north and east of Central London .
The triangular basin formed by the junction is called Little Venice , Maida Vale .
The Arm 's final 500 m runs south - east to Paddington Basin .
Slough Arm
From Cowley Peachey , the Slough Arm runs to the west .
Wendover and Aylesbury Arms From Marsworth , about by canal from Brentford , two arms diverge : one to Wendover ( currently in - part navigable as being restored by the Wendover Arm Trust ; ) the other descends through 16 narrow locks for to Aylesbury .
Northampton Arm From Gayton Junction , about from Brentford , the Northampton Arm links with the River Nene .
Saltisford Canal Arm , Warwick
At Warwick
the northern - most branch off of the Grand Union Canal ( also known by regular users as the " GU " ) , the Saltisford Canal Arm begins .
The restored arm is close to the centre of Warwick .
It was originally the main line of the Warwick and Birmingham Canal , 1799 , leading to the terminus and a basin with wharfs for timber .
When the Warwick and Napton Canal opened , this bypassed channel remained as the town 's wharf .
The Saltisford Canal Trust have restored most of the surviving canal , 1990 - 2015 , such as installing long lengths of sheet piling and restoring a warehouse in 2007 .
Its last were lost in the 1970s saving a disused road bridge that stands isolated in a car park .
Warwick 's narrowboat moorings are on the Arm by a public park partly in view of the Castle .
Over 800 visiting narrowboats cruise to Warwick each year and moor on the arm .
The Leicester Line has two modest arms of its own , see Grand Union Canal ( old ) .
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS BEDFORD & MILTON KEYNES WATERWAY Section::::Current developments .
Section::::Bedford & Milton Keynes Waterway .
The Bedford and Milton Keynes Partnership ( B&MK ) plans to build a canal connecting the Grand Union at Milton Keynes to the River Great Ouse at Bedford at an estimated cost of £ 170 million .
The project is supported by British Waterways ( and its successor , the Canal & River Trust ) , the Bedford & Milton Keynes Waterway Trust , other waterways campaign groups , and also local councils .
The first element of the canal is an underpass under the A421 , completed in 2009 and efforts are continuing to obtain funding to complete the scheme in ' bite - size chunks ' .
The new waterway would create a new cruising ring connecting through from the Grand Union to the waterways of East Anglia which are beneficial to leisure cruising as boat hirers are able to take circular routes .
The project was first discussed in 1810 when its promoters included Samuel Whitbread .
From Milton Keynes , the canal is planned to pass beneath the M1 utilising an existing cattle creep , then cross over Brogborough Hill , and across the Marston Vale through to the River Great Ouse in Kempston .
BUCKINGHAM ARM RESTORATION
Section::::Buckingham Arm restoration .
The Buckingham Arm once ran from Cosgrove , Northamptonshire to Buckingham .
It was built as an arm of the Grand Junction Canal , in two separate phases , opening in 1800 and 1801 .
It was disused from 1932 , but was not finally abandoned until 1964 .
It is now the subject of a restoration project .
SLOUGH - ETON CANAL Section::::Slough - Eton canal .
The predecessor to the Canal and River Trust , British Waterways , received mild financial support indications from the two local authorities covering Slough and Eton , Berkshire to extend the Slough Arm to join the Thames , via any course i.e. covering a minimum ; the 2008-estimated cost was £ 30 million .
The trust confirmed in 2012 this remains a long - term objective , to be actioned when the economic conditions allow .
GALLERY SEE
ALSO
* List of canals of the United Kingdom * Grand Union Canal 145 mile
Race
*
Wendover Arm Canal REFERENCES AND NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS