LEANING TOWER OF PISA
The Leaning Tower of Pisa ( ) or simply the Tower of Pisa ( Torre di Pisa ) is the campanile , or freestanding bell tower , of the cathedral of the Italian city of Pisa , known worldwide for its unintended tilt .
The tower is situated behind the Pisa Cathedral and is the third oldest structure in the city 's Cathedral Square ( Piazza del Duomo ) , after the cathedral and the Pisa Baptistry .
The tower 's tilt began during construction in the 12th century , caused by an inadequate foundation on ground too soft on one side to properly support the structure 's weight .
The tilt increased in the decades before the structure was completed in the 14th century .
It gradually increased until the structure was stabilized ( and the tilt partially corrected ) by efforts in the late 20th and early 21st centuries .
The height of the tower is from the ground on the low side and on the high side .
The width of the walls at the base is .
Its weight is estimated at .
The tower has 296 or 294 steps ; the seventh floor has two fewer steps on the north - facing staircase .
In 1990 the tower leaned at an angle of 5.5 degrees , but following remedial work between 1993 and 2001
this was reduced to 3.97 degrees , reducing the overhang by 45 cm at a cost of £ 200 m .
It lost a further 4 cm of tilt in the two decades to 2018 .
ARCHITECT Section::::Architect .
There has been controversy about the real identity of the architect of the Leaning Tower of Pisa .
For many years , the design was attributed to Guglielmo and Bonanno Pisano , a well - known 12th - century resident artist of Pisa , known for his bronze casting , particularly in the Pisa Duomo .
Pisano left Pisa in 1185 for Monreale , Sicily , only to come back and die in his home town .
A piece of cast bearing his name was discovered at the foot of the tower in 1820 , but this may be related to the bronze door in the façade of the cathedral that was destroyed in 1595 .
A 2001 study seems to indicate Diotisalvi was the original architect , due to the time of construction and affinity with other Diotisalvi works , notably the bell tower of San Nicola and the Baptistery , both in Pisa .
CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
Construction of the tower occurred in three stages over 199 years .
Work on the ground floor of the white marble campanile began on August 14 , 1173 during a period of military success and prosperity .
This ground floor is a blind arcade articulated by engaged columns with classical Corinthian capitals .
The tower began to sink after construction had progressed to the second floor in 1178 .
This was due to a mere three - metre foundation , set in weak , unstable subsoil , a design that was flawed from the beginning .
Construction was subsequently halted for almost a century , because the Republic of Pisa was almost continually engaged in battles with Genoa , Lucca , and Florence .
This allowed time for the underlying soil to settle .
Otherwise , the tower would almost certainly have toppled .
In 1272 , construction resumed under Giovanni di Simone , architect of the Camposanto .
In an effort to compensate for the tilt , the engineers built upper floors with one side taller than the other .
Because of this , the tower is curved .
Construction was halted again in 1284 when the Pisans were defeated by the Genoans in the Battle of Meloria .
The seventh floor was completed in 1319 .
The bell - chamber was finally added in 1372 .
It was built by Tommaso di Andrea Pisano , who succeeded in harmonizing the Gothic elements of the bell - chamber with the Romanesque style of the tower .
There are seven bells , one for each note of the musical major scale .
The largest one was installed in 1655 .
After a phase ( 1990–2001 ) of structural strengthening , the tower is currently undergoing gradual surface restoration , in order to repair visible damage , mostly corrosion and blackening .
These are particularly pronounced due to the tower 's age and its exposure to wind and rain .
TIMELINE
*
On January 5 , 1172 , Donna Berta di Bernardo , a widow and resident of the house of dell'Opera di Santa Maria , bequeathed sixty soldi to the Opera Campanilis petrarum Sancte Marie .
The sum was then used toward the purchase of a few stones which still form the base of the bell tower .
*
On August 9 , 1173 , the foundations of the tower were laid .
* Nearly four centuries later Giorgio Vasari wrote : "
Guglielmo , according to what is being said , in [ this ] year 1174 with Bonanno as sculptor , laid the foundations of the bell tower of the cathedral in Pisa . "
*
On December 27 , 1233 , the worker Benenato , son of Gerardo Bottici , oversaw the continuation of the construction of the bell tower .
*
On February 23 , 1260 , Guido Speziale , son of Giovanni , a worker on the cathedral Santa Maria Maggiore , was elected to oversee the building of the tower .
*
On April 12 , 1264 , the master builder Giovanni di Simone and 23 workers went to the mountains close to Pisa to cut marble .
The cut stones were given to Rainaldo Speziale , worker of St. Francesco .
* Giorgio Vasari indicated that Tommaso di Andrea Pisano was the designer of the belfry between 1360 and 1370 .
BUILDERS
* One possible known builder of Pisa Tower was Gerardo di Gerardo .
His name appears as a witness to the above legacy of Berta di Bernardo as " Master Gerardo " , and as a worker whose name was Gerardo .
* A more probable builder was Diotisalvi , because of the construction period and the structure 's affinities with other buildings in Pisa , but he usually signed his works , and there is no signature by him in the bell tower .
* Giovanni di Simone was known to be heavily involved in the completion of the tower , under the direction of Giovanni Pisano , who at the time was master builder of the Opera di Santa Maria Maggiore .
Di Simone could be the same Giovanni Pisano who completed the belfry tower .
HISTORY FOLLOWING CONSTRUCTION Section::::History following construction .
Galileo Galilei is said to have dropped two cannonballs of different masses from the tower to demonstrate that their speed of descent was independent of their mass .
However , the only primary source for this is the biography Racconto istorico della vita di Galileo Galilei ( Historical Account of the Life of Galileo Galilei ) , written by Galileo 's secretary Vincenzo Viviani and published in 1717 , long after Viviani 's death .
During World War II , the Allies suspected that the Germans were using the tower as an observation post .
A U.S. Army sergeant sent to confirm the presence of German troops in the tower was impressed by the beauty of the cathedral and its campanile , and thus refrained from ordering an artillery strike , sparing it from destruction .
Numerous efforts have been made to restore the tower to a vertical orientation or at least keep it from falling over .
Most of these efforts failed ; some worsened the tilt .
On February 27 , 1964 , the government of Italy requested aid in preventing the tower from toppling .
It was , however , considered important to retain the current tilt , due to the role that this element played in promoting the tourism industry of Pisa .
A multinational task force of engineers , mathematicians , and historians gathered on the Azores islands to discuss stabilisation methods .
It was found that the tilt was increasing in combination with the softer foundations on the lower side .
Many methods were proposed to stabilise the tower , including the addition of 800 tonnes of lead counterweights to the raised end of the base .
The tower and the neighbouring cathedral , baptistery , and cemetery are included in the Piazza del Duomo UNESCO World Heritage Site , which was declared in 1987 .
The tower was closed to the public on January 7 , 1990 , after more than two decades of stabilisation studies and spurred by the abrupt collapse of the Civic Tower of Pavia in 1989 .
The bells were removed to relieve some weight , and cables were cinched around the third level and anchored several hundred meters away .
Apartments and houses in the path of the tower were vacated for safety .
The solution chosen to prevent the collapse of the tower was to slightly straighten it to a safer angle by removing of soil from underneath the raised end .
The tower was straightened by , returning to its 1838 position .
After a decade of corrective reconstruction and stabilization efforts , the tower was reopened to the public on December 15 , 2001 and was declared stable for at least another 300 years .
In total , of earth were removed .
In May 2008 , engineers announced that the tower had been stabilized such that it had stopped moving for the first time in its history .
They stated that it would be stable for at least 200 years .
SURVIVING EARTHQUAKES
Section::::Surviving earthquakes .
At least four strong earthquakes hit the region since 1280 , but the apparently vulnerable Tower survived .
The reason was not understood until a research group of 16 engineers investigated .
The researchers concluded that the Tower was able to withstand the tremors because of dynamic soil - structure interaction ( DSSI ) : the height and stiffness of the Tower together with the softness of the foundation soil influences the vibrational characteristics of the structure in such a way that the Tower does not resonate with earthquake ground motion .
The same soft soil that caused the leaning , and brought the Tower to the verge of collapse helped it survive .
GUINNESS WORLD RECORDS Section::::Guinness World Records .
Two German churches have challenged the tower 's status as the world 's most lop - sided building : the 15th - century square Leaning Tower of Suurhusen and the 14th - century bell tower in the town of Bad Frankenhausen .
Guinness World Records measured the Pisa and Suurhusen towers , finding the former 's tilt to be 3.97 degrees .
In June 2010 , Guinness World Records certified the Capital Gate building in Abu Dhabi , UAE as the " World 's Furthest Leaning Man - made Tower " ; it has an 18-degree slope , almost five times more than the Pisa Tower , but was deliberately engineered to slant .
The Leaning Tower of Wanaka in New Zealand , also deliberately built , leans at 53 degrees to the ground .
TECHNICAL INFORMATION
* Elevation of Piazza del Duomo : about 2 metres ( 6 feet , DMS ) *
Height from the ground floor : 55.863 metres ( 183 ft 3 in ) , 8 stories * Height from the foundation floor : * Outer diameter of base : * Inner diameter of base : * Angle of slant : 3.97 degrees or from the vertical * Weight : * Thickness of walls at the base : * Total number of bells : 7 , tuned to musical scale , clockwise * 1st bell : L'Assunta , cast in 1654 by Giovanni Pietro Orlandi , weight
* 2nd bell : Il Crocifisso , cast in 1572 by Vincenzo Possenti , weight * 3rd bell : San Ranieri , cast in 1719–1721 by Giovanni Andrea Moreni , weight * 4th bell :
La Terza ( 1st small one ) , cast in 1473 ,
weight * 5th bell : La Pasquereccia or La Giustizia , cast in 1262 by Lotteringo , weight * 6th bell : Il Vespruccio ( 2nd small one ) , cast in the 14th century and again in 1501 by Nicola di Jacopo , weight * 7th bell : Dal Pozzo , cast in 1606 and again in 2004 , weight * Number of steps to the top : 296 Section::::Technical information .
About the 5th bell : The name Pasquareccia comes from Easter , because it used to ring on Easter day .
However , this bell is older than the bell - chamber itself , and comes from the tower Vergata in Palazzo Pretorio in Pisa , where it was called La Giustizia ( The Justice ) .
The bell was tolled to announce executions of criminals and traitors , including Count Ugolino in 1289 .
A new bell was installed in the bell tower at the end of the 18th century to replace the broken Pasquareccia .
The circular shape and great height
( currently on the lowest side and m on the highest ) of the campanile were unusual for their time , and the crowning belfry is stylistically distinct from the rest of the construction .
This belfry incorporates a correction for the inclined axis below .
The siting of the campanile within the Piazza del Duomo diverges from the axial alignment of the cathedral and baptistery of the Piazza del Duomo .
GALLERY
SEE
ALSO
* Leaning Temple of Huma —
Only leaning temple in the world
* List of leaning towers * Leaning Tower of Niles , a replica of the Tower of Pisa
* Leaning Tower of Zaragoza , was a famous European leaning tower * Great Mosque of al - Nuri ( Mosul ) , an ancient leaning tower that stood until 2017
* Machang , Kelantan — home to another leaning tower
* Round tower ( disambiguation ) , for other types of round towers * The Greyfriars Tower — the remains of a Franciscan monastery in King 's Lynn , nicknamed " The Leaning Tower of Lynn " * Torre delle Milizie , a tilting medieval tower in Rome * Tour de Pise , a rock dome in Antarctica , was named after this tower
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Opera della Primaziale Pisana — official site
*
Piazza dei
Miracoli digital media archive ( Creative Commons – licensed photos , laser scans , panoramas ) , data from a University of Ferrara / CyArk research partnership , includes 3D scan data from Leaning Tower .