HEAT ( 1995 FILM )
Heat is a 1995 American crime film written , co - produced and directed by Michael Mann , and starring Al Pacino , Robert De Niro and Val Kilmer .
De Niro plays Neil McCauley , a professional thief , while Pacino plays Lt . Vincent Hanna , an LAPD robbery - homicide detective tracking down McCauley 's crew .
The story is based on the former Chicago police officer Chuck Adamson 's pursuit during the 1960s of a criminal named McCauley , after whom De Niro 's character is named .
Heat is a remake by Mann of an unproduced television series he had worked on , the pilot of which was released as the TV movie L.A. Takedown in 1989 .
Heat was a critical and commercial success , grossing $ 67 million in the United States and $ 187 million worldwide ( about $ million in 2019 ) against a $ 60 million budget .
It was well received by critics .
The film - critic aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports 86 % positive reviews , calling the film " an engrossing crime drama that draws compelling performances from its stars and confirms Michael Mann 's mastery of the genre . "
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Neil McCauley ( De Niro ) , a highly skilled career criminal , and his crew – Chris Shiherlis ( Kilmer ) , Michael Cheritto ( Sizemore ) , and Trejo – hire Waingro ( Gage ) to help them rob $ 1.6 million in bearer bonds from an armored car .
During the heist , Waingro impulsively kills one guard , prompting another to reach for his concealed pistol , forcing the crew to kill him as well .
McCauley gives the order to kill the third guard so as not to leave an eyewitness , but is furious with Waingro for the unnecessary escalation .
The crew attempts to kill Waingro , but he escapes .
McCauley 's fence , Nate ( Voight ) , suggests he sell the stolen bonds back to their original owner , money launderer Roger Van Zant ( Fichtner ) , who could profit by claiming the insurance on the bonds .
Van Zant agrees , but instructs his men to ambush McCauley at the meeting .
McCauley survives the ambush and vows revenge against Van Zant .
LAPD Major Crimes Unit Lieutenant Vincent Hanna ( Pacino ) is called in to investigate the robbery , along with Sergeant Drucker ( Williamson ) and Detectives Casals ( Studi ) , Bosko ( Levine ) , and Schwartz ( Trimble ) .
An informant connects Cheritto to the robbery , and Hanna 's team surveils him , leading them to the rest of the crew .
When Hanna 's team discovers that the crew 's next target is a precious metals depository , they set up a stake out , but their presence is detected by McCauley and the crew abandons the job .
Hanna opts to let them go so that he can continue gathering evidence against the crew rather than arresting them on a minor breaking and entering charge .
Despite the increased police surveillance , McCauley 's crew agrees to one last brazen bank robbery worth $ 12.2 million to secure their financial futures .
Hanna pulls over McCauley on the 105 Freeway and invites him to coffee .
Face - to - face , the aging professionals realize that they 've both prioritized excellence in their fields at the expense of their personal lives .
Hanna admits that his third marriage with Justine ( Venora ) is near failure and the toll this takes on his step - daughter Lauren ( Portman ) .
McCauley confides that his solitary lifestyle has prevented him from finding a romantic partner , and that he does n't know how to reconcile this with his feelings for his new girlfriend , Eady ( Brenneman ) .
Despite their mutual respect for one another 's skill , they both acknowledge that they will not hesitate to kill the other if necessary .
When he returns to his office , Hanna realizes that McCauley 's crew have all slipped their surveillance .
Waingro threatens information out of Trejo , having made a deal with Van Zant to help eliminate McCauley 's crew .
Acting on a tip from Van Zant 's bodyguard Hugh Benny ( Rollins ) , the LAPD intercept the crew just as they are leaving the bank , resulting in a massive shootout in Downtown Los Angeles .
Bosko is killed and many police officers are also killed or wounded , while McCauley loses Cheritto and his alternate driver Donald Breeden ( Haysbert ) , and Shiherlis is wounded .
McCauley subsequently arrives at Trejo 's house to find his wife dead .
A dying Trejo reveals Waingro 's betrayal , prompting McCauley to kill Van Zant .
Eady realizes that he is a criminal but ultimately agrees to flee the country with him .
Shiherlis attempts to reconnect with his wife Charlene ( Judd ) , who is helping the LAPD with a sting operation .
She changes her mind and helps him escape , albeit without a way to keep their son Dominic in his life .
Hanna finds Lauren 's body in the bathtub after a suicide attempt and rushes her to the hospital .
He and Justine agree to go their separate ways after learning that she has survived .
Meanwhile , McCauley is free to leave the country with Eady , but learns of Waingro 's location and abandons his usual caution to seek revenge .
The LAPD , acting on information from Benny , learns of McCauley 's presence at Waingro 's hotel .
McCauley kills Waingro , but before he can return to Eady and escape , he is spotted by the arriving Hanna and forced to flee on foot , leaving her behind .
Hanna pursues McCauley onto the tarmac at LAX and mortally wounds him .
Hanna takes his hand as McCauley succumbs to his injuries .
CAST * Al Pacino as Lt .
Vincent Hanna
* Robert De Niro as Neil McCauley
* Val Kilmer as Chris Shiherlis
* Jon Voight as Nate * Tom Sizemore as Michael Cheritto * Diane Venora as Justine Hanna
* Amy Brenneman as Eady * Ashley Judd as Charlene Shiherlis
* Mykelti Williamson as Detective Sgt .
Drucker * Wes Studi as Detective Sammy Casals
* Ted Levine as Detective Mike Bosko
* Dennis Haysbert as Donald Breedan
* William Fichtner as Roger Van Zant * Natalie Portman as Lauren Gustafson
* Tom Noonan as Kelso * Kevin Gage as Waingro
* Hank Azaria as Alan Marciano * Susan Traylor as Elaine Cheritto * Danny Trejo as Trejo * Henry Rollins as Hugh Benny * Jerry Trimble as Sgt .
Danny Schwartz * Ricky Harris as Albert Torena * Tone Lōc as Richard Torena
* Jeremy Piven as Dr. Bob * Xander Berkeley as Ralph De Niro was the first cast member to get the film script , showing it to Pacino who also wanted to be a part of the film .
De Niro believed Heat was a " very good story , had a particular feel to it , a reality and authenticity . "
Xander Berkeley had played Waingro in L.A. Takedown , an earlier rendition of Mann 's script for Heat .
He was cast in a minor role in Heat .
In 2016 , Pacino revealed that his character was under the influence of cocaine throughout the whole film .
Section::::Cast .
In order to prepare the actors for the roles of McCauley 's crew , Mann took Kilmer , Sizemore and De Niro to Folsom State Prison to interview actual career criminals .
While researching her role , Ashley Judd met several former prostitutes who became housewives .
DEVELOPMENT FACTUAL BASIS Section::::Development .
Section::::Factual basis .
Heat is based on the true story of a real Neil McCauley , a calculating criminal and ex - Alcatraz inmate who was tracked down by Detective Chuck Adamson in 1964 .
Neil McCauley was raised in Wisconsin where his father worked as steam fitter to provide his family with a middle - class life .
The normalcy of Neil 's youth faded following the adoption of another child and his father 's death in 1928 .
At 14 , he quit school to find work to support his mother and five siblings .
The McCauleys soon relocated to Chicago .
In Chicago , McCauley began his criminal career after his mother began drinking heavily .
By the time he was 20 , he had already done three stints in county jail for larceny .
In 1961 , McCauley was transferred from Alcatraz to McNeil , as mentioned in the film , and he was released in 1962 .
Upon his release , he immediately began planning new heists .
With ex - cons Michael Parille and William Pinkerton they used bolt cutters and drills to burglarize a manufacturing company of diamond drill bits , a scene which is closely recreated in the film .
Detective Chuck Adamson , upon whom Al Pacino 's character is largely based , began keeping tabs on McCauley 's crew around this time , knowing that he had become active again .
The two even met for coffee once , just as portrayed in the film .
Their dialogue in the script was almost exactly word for word the conversation that McCauley and Adamson had .
The next time the two would meet , guns would be drawn , just as the movie portrays .
On March 25 , 1964 , McCauley and members of his regular crew followed an armored car that delivered money to a National Tea grocery store at 4720 S. Cicero Avenue , Chicago .
Once the drop was made , three of the robbers entered the store .
They threatened the clerks and stole money bags worth $ 13,137 ( equivalent to $ in ) before they sped off in a rainstorm amid a hail of police gunfire .
McCauley 's crew was unaware that Adamson and eight other detectives had blocked off all potential exits , and when the getaway car turned down an alley and the bandits saw the blockade , they realized they were trapped .
All four suspects exited the vehicle and began firing .
Two of his crew , Russell Bredon ( Breaden ) and Parille , were slain in an alley while a third man , Miklos Polesti ( on whom Chris Shiherlis is very loosely based ) , shot his way out and escaped .
McCauley was shot to death on the lawn of a nearby home .
He was 50 years old and the prime suspect in several burglaries .
Polesti was caught days later and sent to prison .
As of 2011 Polesti was still alive .
Adamson went on to a successful career as a television and film producer , and died in 2008 at age 71 .
Michael Mann 's 2009 film Public Enemies stated in its end credits " In memory of Chuck Adamson " .
As an additional inspiration for Hanna , in a 1995 interview Mann cited an unnamed man working internationally against drug cartels .
Additionally , the character of Nate , played by Jon Voight , is closely based on real - life former career criminal and fence turned writer Edward Bunker , who served as a consultant to Mann on the film .
CANCELED TV SERIES Section::::Canceled TV series .
In 1979 , Mann wrote a 180-page draft of Heat .
He re - wrote it after making Thief in 1981 hoping to find a director to make it and mentioning it publicly in a promotional interview for his 1983 film The Keep .
In the late 1980s , he offered the film to his friend , film director Walter Hill , who turned him down .
Following the success of Miami Vice and Crime Story , Mann was to produce a new crime television show for NBC .
He turned the script that would become Heat into a 90-minute pilot for a television series featuring the Los Angeles Police Department Robbery –
Homicide division , featuring Scott Plank in the role of Hanna and Alex McArthur playing the character of Neil McCauley , renamed to Patrick McLaren .
The pilot was shot in only nineteen days , atypical for Mann .
The script was abridged down to almost a third of its original length , omitting many subplots that made it into Heat .
The network was unhappy with Plank as the lead actor , and asked Mann to recast Hanna 's role .
Mann declined and the show was cancelled and the pilot aired on August 27 , 1989 as a television film entitled L.A. Takedown .
which was later released on VHS and DVD in Europe .
PRODUCTION PRE - PRODUCTION
Section::::Production . Section::::Pre - production .
In April 1994 , Mann was reported to have abandoned his earlier plan to shoot a biopic of James Dean in favor of directing Heat , producing it with Art Linson .
The film was marketed as the first on - screen appearance of Al Pacino and Robert De Niro together in the same scene – both actors had previously starred in The Godfather Part II , but owing to the nature of their roles , they were never seen in the same scene .
Pacino and De Niro were Mann 's first choices for the roles of Hanna and McCauley , respectively , and they both immediately agreed to act .
Mann assigned Janice Polley , a former collaborator on The Last of the Mohicans , as the film 's location manager .
Scouting locations lasted from August to December 1994 .
Mann requested locations which did not appear on film before , in which Polley was successful – fewer than 10 of the 85 filming locations were previously used .
The most challenging shooting location proved to be Los Angeles International Airport , with the film crew almost missing out due to a threat to the airport by the Unabomber .
To make the long shootout more realistic they hired British ex - Special Air Service special forces sergeant Andy McNab as a technical weapons trainer and adviser .
He designed a weapons training curriculum to train the actors for three months using live ammunition before shooting with blanks for the actual take and worked with training them for the bank robbery .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography for Heat lasted 107 days .
All of the shooting was done on location , Mann deciding not to use a soundstage .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
Heat was released on December 15 , 1995 , and opened # 3 in the box office with $ 8,445,656 opening weekend in 1,325 theaters ( behind Jumanji and Toy Story respectively ) .
It grossed $ 67,436,818 in United States box offices , and $ 120 million in foreign box offices .
Heat was ranked the # 25 highest - grossing film of 1995 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Heat was released on VHS in June 1996 .
Due to its running time , the film had to be released on two cassettes .
A DVD release followed in 1999 .
A two - disc special - edition DVD was released in 2005 , featuring an audio commentary by Michael Mann , deleted scenes , and numerous documentaries detailing the film 's production .
This edition contains the original theatrical cut .
The initial Blu - ray Disc was released on November 10 , 2009 , featuring a high - definition film transfer , supervised by Mann .
Among the disc extras were Mann 's audio commentary , a one - hour documentary about the making of the film and ten minutes worth of scenes cut from the film .
As well as approving the look of the transfer , Mann also recut two scenes slightly differently , referring to them as " new content changes " .
A Director 's Definitive Edition Blu - Ray was released on May 9 , 2017 by 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment , who acquired the distribution rights to the film through their part - ownership of Regency back in 2015 .
Sourced from a 4 K remaster of the film supervised by Mann , the two disc set contains all the extras from the 2009 Blu - ray , along with two filmmakers panels from 2015 and 2016 discussing the movie with the filmmakers .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Metacritic gives the film a score of 76 out of 100 , based on 22 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews .
"
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A- " on an A+ to F scale .
Critics at Rotten Tomatoes give the film a rating of 86 % , based on 79 reviews , with a critics consensus that " Heat is an engrossing crime drama that draws compelling performances from its stars . "
Roger Ebert gave the film stars out of 4 .
He described Mann 's script as " uncommonly literate " , with a psychological insight into the symbiotic relationship between police and criminals , and the fractured intimacy between the male and female characters : " It 's not just an action picture .
Above all , the dialogue is complex enough to allow the characters to say what they 're thinking : They are eloquent , insightful , fanciful , poetic when necessary .
They 're not trapped with cliches .
Of the many imprisonments possible in our world , one of the worst must be to be inarticulate — to be unable to tell another person what you really feel . "
Simon Cote of The Austin Chronicle called the film " one of the most intelligent crime - thrillers to come along in years " , and said Pacino and De Niro 's scenes together were " poignant and gripping . "
Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times called the film a " sleek , accomplished piece of work , meticulously controlled and completely involving .
The dark end of the street does n't get much more inviting than this . "
Todd McCarthy of Variety wrote , " Stunningly made and incisively acted by a large and terrific cast , Michael Mann 's ambitious study of the relativity of good and evil stands apart from other films of its type by virtue of its extraordinarily rich characterizations and its thoughtful , deeply melancholy take on modern life . "
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave it a B− rating , saying that " Mann 's action scenes ... have an existential , you - are - there jitteriness , " but called the heist - planning and Hanna 's investigation scenes " dry , talky . "
IMPACT
Section::::Impact .
The explicit nature of several of the film 's scenes was cited as the model of a spate of robberies since its release .
This included armored car robberies in South Africa , Colombia , Denmark , and Norway and most famously the 1997 North Hollywood shootout , in which Larry Phillips , Jr. and Emil Mătăsăreanu robbed the North Hollywood branch of the Bank of America and , similarly to the film , were confronted by the LAPD as they left the bank .
Phillips did have a copy of the movie where he lived .
This shootout is considered one of the longest and bloodiest events of its type in American police history .
Both robbers were killed , and eleven police officers and seven civilians were injured during the shootout .
Heat was widely referenced during the coverage of the shootout .
For his film The Dark Knight , director Christopher Nolan drew inspiration in his portrayal of Gotham City from Heat in order " to tell a very large , city story or the story of a city " .
In 2016 , a year after its 20th anniversary , Nolan moderated a Q&A session with Michael Mann and cast and crew at the Academy .
Heat was one of the inspirations behind the video game Grand Theft Auto V , notably the mission " Blitz Play " where the crew blocks and then knocks over an armored car in order to rob it .
In March 2016 , Mann announced that he is developing a Heat prequel novel as part of launching his company Michael Mann Books .
SOUNDTRACK ALBUM
Section::::Soundtrack album .
On December 19 , 1995 , Warner Bros. Records released a soundtrack album on cassette and CD to accompany the film , entitled Heat : Music from the Motion Picture .
The album was produced by Matthias Gohl .
It contains a 29-minute selection of the film score composed by Elliot Goldenthal , as well as songs by other artists such as U2 and Brian Eno ( collaborating as Passengers ) , Terje Rypdal , Moby , and Lisa Gerrard .
Heat used an abridged instrumental rendition of the Joy Division song " New Dawn Fades " by Moby , which also features in the same form on the soundtrack album .
Mann reused the Einstürzende Neubauten track " Armenia " in his 1999 film The Insider .
The film ends with Moby 's " God Moving Over the Face of the Waters " , a different version of which was included at the end of the soundtrack album .
Mann and Goldenthal decided on an atmospheric situation for the film soundtrack .
Goldenthal used a setup consisting of multiple guitars , which he termed " guitar orchestra " , and thought it brought the film score closer to a European style .
The soundtrack was noted for lack of a central theme .
Christian Clemmensen of Filmtracks.com criticized the omission from the album of much music heard in the film due to the film 's length , but praised the album as a decent listening experience , and Goldenthal 's score as " psychologically engaging and intellectually challenging " , believing it to be one of Goldenthal 's best .
AllMusic called it a " soundtrack for the mind ... full of twists and turns " .
Musicfromthemovies.com thought of the album as uncharacteristic for Goldenthal 's style , calling the atmosphere " absolutely electrifying " .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
A video game based on the film was announced at E3 2006 , under development by Gearbox Software for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 .
During E3 2009 , it was revealed that Gearbox did not have the license of the film to make the game , as this was being optioned to be sold .
Michael Mann , director of the film , was reported to be involved with the game .
In a 2009 interview Randy Pitchford , President , CEO , and co - founder of Gearbox Software , said that development of the game had been halted and the IP could potentially be available to another developer saying : In a nutshell , we 're nowhere .
We have passionate game makers that would love to do it .
We 've got filmmakers that think it 's a great idea that would love to see it done .
We have publishing partners that would love to publish it .
But we have no time .
That 's the limiting factor .
Because of the situation , we 're not keeping the IP locked down anymore .
So if somebody else were in a spot where they could do it , and everybody was comfortable with that , then conceivably that could happen .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Heat .
Work and genre Jump Cut magazine , by J. A. Lindstrom , no . 43 , July 2000 , pp .
21–37
* De Niro and Pacino Star in a Film .
Together , from The New York Times