PHYTOPLANKTON
Phytoplankton are the autotrophic ( self - feeding ) components of the plankton community and a key part of oceans , seas and freshwater basin ecosystems .
The name comes from the Greek words φυτόν ( phyton ) , meaning " plant " , and πλαγκτός ( planktos ) , meaning " wanderer " or " drifter " .
Most phytoplankton are too small to be individually seen with the unaided eye .
However , when present in high enough numbers , some varieties may be noticeable as colored patches on the water surface due to the presence of chlorophyll within their cells and accessory pigments ( such as phycobiliproteins or xanthophylls ) in some species .
ECOLOGY CARBON Section::::Ecology .
Section::::Carbon .
Phytoplankton are photosynthesizing microscopic biotic organisms that inhabit the upper sunlit layer of almost all oceans and bodies of fresh water on Earth .
They are agents for " primary production , " the creation of organic compounds from carbon dioxide dissolved in the water , a process that sustains the aquatic food web .
Phytoplankton obtain energy through the process of photosynthesis and must therefore live in the well - lit surface layer ( termed the euphotic zone ) of an ocean , sea , lake , or other body of water .
Phytoplankton account for about half of all photosynthetic activity on Earth .
Their cumulative energy fixation in carbon compounds ( primary production ) is the basis for the vast majority of oceanic and also many freshwater food webs ( chemosynthesis is a notable exception ) .
While almost all phytoplankton species are obligate photoautotrophs , there are some that are mixotrophic and other , non - pigmented species that are actually heterotrophic ( the latter are often viewed as zooplankton ) .
Of these , the best known are dinoflagellate genera such as Noctiluca and Dinophysis , that obtain organic carbon by ingesting other organisms or detrital material .
OXYGEN PRODUCTION
Section::::Oxygen production .
Phytoplankton absorb energy from the Sun and nutrients from the water to produce their own food .
In the process of photosynthesis , phytoplankton release molecular oxygen ( ) into the water .
It is estimated that between 50 % and 85 % of the world 's oxygen is produced via phytoplankton photosynthesis .
The rest is produced via photosynthesis on land by plants .
Furthermore , phytoplankton photosynthesis has controlled the atmospheric / balance since the early Precambrian Eon .
( See Biological pump . )
MINERALS Section::::Minerals .
Phytoplankton are crucially dependent on minerals .
These are primarily macronutrients such as nitrate , phosphate or silicic acid , whose availability is governed by the balance between the so - called biological pump and upwelling of deep , nutrient - rich waters .
However , across large regions of the World Ocean such as the Southern Ocean , phytoplankton are also limited by the lack of the micronutrient iron .
This has led to some scientists advocating iron fertilization as a means to counteract the accumulation of human - produced carbon dioxide ( CO ) in the atmosphere .
Large - scale experiments have added iron ( usually as salts such as iron sulphate ) to the oceans to promote phytoplankton growth and draw atmospheric CO into the ocean .
However , controversy about manipulating the ecosystem and the efficiency of iron fertilization has slowed such experiments .
VITAMIN B
Section::::Vitamin B. Phytoplankton depend on Vitamin B for survival .
Areas in the ocean have been identified as having a major lack of Vitamin B , and correspondingly , phytoplankton .
TEMPERATURE Section::::Temperature .
The effects of anthropogenic warming on the global population of phytoplankton is an area of active research .
Changes in the vertical stratification of the water column , the rate of temperature - dependent biological reactions , and the atmospheric supply of nutrients are expected to have important effects on future phytoplankton productivity .
PH Section::::pH.
The effects of anthropogenic ocean acidification on phytoplankton growth and community structure has also received considerable attention .
Phytoplankton such as coccolithophorids contain calcium carbonate cell walls that are sensitive to ocean acidification .
Because of their short generation times , evidence suggests some phytoplankton can adapt to changes in pH induced by increased carbon dioxide on rapid time - scales ( months to years ) .
FOOD
WEB
Section::::Food Web .
Phytoplankton serve as the base of the aquatic food web , providing an essential ecological function for all aquatic life .
Under future conditions of anthropogenic warming and ocean acidification , changes in phytoplankton mortality due to rates of zooplankton grazing may be significant .
As a side note , one of the more remarkable food chains in the ocean – remarkable because of the small number of links – is that of phytoplankton - feeding krill ( a crustacean similar to a tiny shrimp ) feeding baleen whales .
STRUCTURAL AND FUNCTIONAL DIVERSITY Section::::Structural and Functional Diversity .
The term phytoplankton encompasses all photoautotrophic microorganisms in aquatic food webs .
However , unlike terrestrial communities , where most autotrophs are plants , phytoplankton are a diverse group , incorporating protistan eukaryotes and both eubacterial and archaebacterial prokaryotes .
There are about 5,000 known species of marine phytoplankton .
How such diversity evolved despite scarce resources ( restricting niche differentiation ) is unclear .
In terms of numbers , the most important groups of phytoplankton include the diatoms , cyanobacteria and dinoflagellates , although many other groups of algae are represented .
One group , the coccolithophorids , is responsible ( in part ) for the release of significant amounts of dimethyl sulfide ( DMS ) into the atmosphere .
DMS is oxidized to form sulfate which , in areas where ambient aerosol particle concentrations are low , can contribute to the population of cloud condensation nuclei , mostly leading to increased cloud cover and cloud albedo according to the so - called CLAW Hypothesis .
Different types of phytoplankton support different trophic levels within varying ecosystems .
In oligotrophic oceanic regions such as the Sargasso Sea or the South Pacific Gyre , phytoplankton is dominated by the small sized cells , called picoplankton and nanoplankton ( also referred to as picoflagellates and nanoflagellates ) , mostly composed of cyanobacteria ( Prochlorococcus , Synechococcus ) and picoeucaryotes such as Micromonas .
Within more productive ecosystems , dominated by upwelling or high terrestrial inputs , larger dinoflagellates are the more dominant phytoplankton and reflect a larger portion of the biomass .
GROWTH STRATEGY Section::::Growth strategy .
In the early twentieth century , Alfred C. Redfield found the similarity of the phytoplankton 's elemental composition to the major dissolved nutrients in the deep ocean .
Redfield proposed that the ratio of carbon to nitrogen to phosphorus ( 106:16:1 ) in the ocean was controlled by the phytoplankton 's requirements , as phytoplankton subsequently release nitrogen and phosphorus as they are remineralized .
This so - called " Redfield ratio " in describing stoichiometry of phytoplankton and seawater has become a fundamental principle to understand marine ecology , biogeochemistry and phytoplankton evolution .
However , the Redfield ratio is not a universal value and it may diverge due to the changes in exogenous nutrient delivery and microbial metabolisms in the ocean , such as nitrogen fixation , denitrification and anammox .
The dynamic stoichiometry shown in unicellular algae reflects their capability to store nutrients in an internal pool , shift between enzymes with various nutrient requirements and alter osmolyte composition .
Different cellular components have their own unique stoichiometry characteristics , for instance , resource ( light or nutrients ) acquisition machinery such as proteins and chlorophyll contain a high concentration of nitrogen but low in phosphorus .
Meanwhile , growth machinery such as ribosomal RNA contains high nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations .
Based on allocation of resources , phytoplankton is classified into three different growth strategies , namely survivalist , bloomer and generalist .
Survivalist phytoplankton has a high ratio of N : P ( > 30 ) and contains an abundance of resource - acquisition machinery to sustain growth under scarce resources .
Bloomer phytoplankton has a low N :
P ratio ( < 10 ) , contains a high proportion of growth machinery , and is adapted to exponential growth .
Generalist phytoplankton has similar N : P to the Redfield ratio and contain relatively equal resource - acquisition and growth machinery .
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROVERSY
Section::::Environmental controversy .
A 2010 study published in Nature reported that marine phytoplankton had declined substantially in the world 's oceans over the past century .
Phytoplankton concentrations in surface waters were estimated to have decreased by about 40 % since 1950 , at a rate of around 1 % per year , possibly in response to ocean warming .
The study generated debate among scientists and led to several communications and criticisms , also published in Nature .
In a 2014 follow - up study , the authors used a larger database of measurements and revised their analysis methods to account for several of the published criticisms , but ultimately reached similar conclusions to the original Nature study .
These studies and the need to understand the phytoplankon in the ocean led to the creation of the Secchi Disk Citizen Science study in 2013 .
The Secchi Disk study is a global study of phytoplankton conducted by seafarers ( sailors , anglers , divers ) involving a Secchi Disk and a smartphone app .
Estimates of oceanic phytoplankton change are highly variable .
One global ocean primary productivity study found a net increase in phytoplankton , as judged from measured chlorophyll , when comparing observations in 1998–2002 to those conducted during a prior mission in 1979–1986 .
Chlorophyll are photosynthetic pigments that are often used as an indicator of phytoplankton biomass .
However , using the same database of measurements , other studies concluded that both chlorophyll and primary production had declined over this same time interval .
The airborne fraction of CO from human emissions , the percentage neither sequestered by photosynthetic life on land and sea nor absorbed in the oceans abiotically , has been almost constant over the past century , and that suggests a moderate upper limit on how much a component of the carbon cycle as large as phytoplankton have declined .
In the northeast Atlantic , where a relatively long chlorophyll data series is available , and the site of the Continuous Plankton Recorder ( CPR ) survey , a net increase was found from 1948 to 2002 .
During 1998–2005 , global ocean net primary productivity rose in 1998 , followed by a decline during the rest of that period , yielding a small net increase .
Using six climate model simulations , a large multi - university study of ocean ecosystems predicted that " a global increase in primary production of 0.7 % at the low end to 8.1 % at the high end , " by 2050 although with " very large regional differences " including " a contraction of the highly productive marginal sea ice biome by 42 % in the Northern Hemisphere and 17 % in the Southern Hemisphere . " A more recent multi - model study estimated that primary production would decline by 2 - 20 % by 2100 A.D.
Despite substantial variation in both the magnitude and spatial pattern of change , the majority of published studies predict that phytoplankton biomass and/or primary production will decline over the next century .
Researchers at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution have found phytoplankton to be a major source of methanol ( ) in the ocean in quantities that could rival or exceed that which is produced on land .
AQUACULTURE
Section::::Aquaculture .
Phytoplankton are a key food item in both aquaculture and mariculture .
Both utilize phytoplankton as food for the animals being farmed .
In mariculture , the phytoplankton is naturally occurring and is introduced into enclosures with the normal circulation of seawater .
In aquaculture , phytoplankton must be obtained and introduced directly .
The plankton can either be collected from a body of water or cultured , though the former method is seldom used .
Phytoplankton is used as a foodstock for the production of rotifers , which are in turn used to feed other organisms .
Phytoplankton is also used to feed many varieties of aquacultured molluscs , including pearl oysters and giant clams .
A 2018 study estimated the nutritional value of natural phytoplankton in terms of carbohydrate , protein and lipid across the world ocean using ocean - colour data from satellites , and found the calorific value of phytoplankton to vary considerably across different oceanic regions and between different time of the year .
The production of phytoplankton under artificial conditions is itself a form of aquaculture .
Phytoplankton is cultured for a variety of purposes , including foodstock for other aquacultured organisms , a nutritional supplement for captive invertebrates in aquaria .
Culture sizes range from small - scale laboratory cultures of less than 1L to several tens of thousands of liters for commercial aquaculture .
Regardless of the size of the culture , certain conditions must be provided for efficient growth of plankton .
The majority of cultured plankton is marine , and seawater of a specific gravity of 1.010 to 1.026 may be used as a culture medium .
This water must be sterilized , usually by either high temperatures in an autoclave or by exposure to ultraviolet radiation , to prevent biological contamination of the culture .
Various fertilizers are added to the culture medium to facilitate the growth of plankton .
A culture must be aerated or agitated in some way to keep plankton suspended , as well as to provide dissolved carbon dioxide for photosynthesis .
In addition to constant aeration , most cultures are manually mixed or stirred on a regular basis .
Light must be provided for the growth of phytoplankton .
The colour temperature of illumination should be approximately 6,500 K , but values from 4,000 K to upwards of 20,000 K have been used successfully .
The duration of light exposure should be approximately 16 hours daily ; this is the most efficient artificial day length .
SEE ALSO
* Algae * Algae culture * AlgaeBase * Bacterioplankton
* Biological pump
* CLAW hypothesis
* Cyanobacteria
* Freshwater phytoplankton
* Iron fertilization * Microphyte ( microalgae )
* Ocean acidification
* Paradox of the plankton *
Photosynthetic picoplankton
* Plankton * Zooplankton REFERENCES FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Secchi Disk and Secchi app , a citizen science project to study the phytoplankton * Ocean Drifters , a short film narrated by David Attenborough about the varied roles of plankton * Plankton Chronicles , a short documentary films & photos * DMS and Climate , NOAA
* Plankton*Net , images of planktonic species