CHEETAH
The cheetah (; Acinonyx jubatus ) is a large cat of the subfamily Felinae that occurs in Southern , North and East Africa , and a few localities in Iran .
The species is IUCN Red Listed as vulnerable , as it suffered a substantial decline in its historic range in the 20th century due to habitat loss , poaching , illegal pet trade , and conflict with humans .
By 2016 , the global cheetah population has been estimated at approximately 7,100 individuals in the wild .
Several African countries have taken steps to improve cheetah conservation measures .
It is the fastest land animal .
The only extant member of the genus Acinonyx , the cheetah was formally described by Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in 1775 .
The cheetah is characterised by a slender body , deep chest , spotted coat , small rounded head , black tear - like streaks on the face , long thin legs and long spotted tail .
Its lightly built , slender form is in sharp contrast with the robust build of the big cats , making it more similar to the cougar .
The cheetah reaches at the shoulder , and weighs .
Although taller than the leopard , it is notably smaller than the lion .
Typically yellowish tan or rufous to greyish white , the coat is uniformly covered with nearly 2,000 solid black spots .
Cheetahs are active mainly during the day , with hunting their major activity .
Adult males are sociable despite their territoriality , forming groups called coalitions .
Females are not territorial ; they may be solitary or live with their offspring in home ranges .
Carnivores , cheetah mainly prey upon antelopes and gazelles .
They will stalk their prey to within , charge towards it and kill it by tripping it during the chase and biting its throat to suffocate it to death .
Cheetahs can reach speeds of in short bursts , but the top end speed of the cheetah is disputed by more recent measurements .
The average speed of a cheetah while hunting is about .
Cheetahs are induced ovulators , breeding throughout the year .
Gestation is nearly three months long , resulting in a litter of typically three to five cubs ( the number can vary from one to eight ) .
Weaning occurs at six months ; siblings tend to stay together for some time .
Cheetah cubs face higher mortality than most other mammals , especially in the Serengeti region .
Cheetahs inhabit a variety of habitatsdry forests , scrub forests , and savannahs .
Because of its prowess at hunting , the cheetah was tamed and used to kill game at hunts in the past .
The animal has been widely depicted in art , literature , advertising and animation .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The vernacular name " cheetah " is derived from cītā ( ) , which in turn comes from the Sanskrit word ( चित्रकायः ) meaning " bright " or " variegated " .
The first recorded use of this word has been dated back to 1610 .
An alternative name for the cheetah is " hunting leopard " .
The scientific name of the cheetah is Acinonyx jubatus .
The generic name Acinonyx originated from the combination of two Greek words : akinetos means motionless , and onyx means claw .
A rough translation of the word would be " non - moving claws " , a reference to the limited retractability ( capability of being drawn inside the paw ) of the claws of the cheetah relative to other cats ' .
The specific name jubatus means " maned " in Latin , referring to the dorsal crest of this animal .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The cheetah is the only extant species of the genus Acinonyx .
It belongs to Felinae , the subfamily of Felidae that also includes lynxes , wildcats , and the puma .
The species was first described by German naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber in his 1775 publication Die Säugethiere in Abbildungen
nach der Natur mit Beschreibungen .
The cheetah 's closest relatives are the cougar ( Puma concolor ) and the jaguarundi ( Herpailurus yagouaroundi ) .
These three species together form the Puma lineage , one of the eight lineages of Felidae .
The sister group of the Puma lineage is a clade of smaller Old World cats that includes the genera Felis , Otocolobus and Prionailurus .
Although the cheetah is an Old World cat , molecular evidence indicates that the three species of the Puma lineage evolved in North America two to three million years ago , where they possibly had a common ancestor during the Miocene .
They possibly diverged from this ancestor 8.25 million years ago .
The cheetah diverged from the puma and the jaguarundi around 6.7 million years ago .
A genome study suggests that cheetahs experienced two genetic bottlenecks in their history , the first about 100,000 years ago and the second about 12,000 years ago , greatly lowering their genetic variability .
These bottlenecks may have been associated with migrations across Asia and into Africa ( with the current African population founded about 12,000 years ago ) , and/or with a depletion of prey species at the end of the Pleistocene .
Cheetah fossils found in the lower beds of the Olduvai Gorge site in northern Tanzania date back to the Pleistocene .
The extinct species of Acinonyx are older than the cheetah , with the oldest known from the late Pliocene ; these fossils are about three million years old .
These species include Acinonyx pardinensis ( Pliocene epoch ) , notably larger than the modern cheetah , and A.intermedius ( mid - Pleistocene period ) .
While the range of A.intermedius stretched from Europe to China , Apardinensis spanned over Eurasia as well as eastern and southern Africa .
A variety of larger cheetah believed to have existed in Europe fell to extinction around half a million years ago .
Extinct North American cats resembling the cheetah had historically been assigned to Felis , Puma or Acinonyx .
However , a phylogenetic analysis in 1990 placed these species under the genus Miracinonyx .
Miracinonyx exhibited a high degree of similarity with the cheetah .
However , in 1998 , a DNA analysis showed that Miracinonyx inexpectatus , M.studeri , and M.trumani ( early to late Pleistocene epoch ) , found in North America , are more closely related to the cougar than modern cheetahs .
SUBSPECIES Section::::Subspecies .
In 1775 , Schreber described a stuffed cheetah skin from the Cape of Good Hope .
In the 19th and 20th centuries , several cheetah specimen were described and proposed as subspecies .
The following table is based on the classification of the species provided in Mammal Species of the World .
It also reflects the classification used by IUCN Red List assessors and the revision by the Cat Classification Task Force :
The Cat Classification Task Force have added that the divergence between soemmeringii , jubatus and venaticus is very recent , and these may represent a single subspecies , and that further study may reveal there are only two or even a single subspecies . !
Subspecies ! !
Distribution ! !
Image Southeast African cheetah ( A. j. jubatus ) , syn .
A. j. raineyi
This is the nominate cheetah subspecies .
It occurs in Southern and East African countries including Namibia , Botswana , South Africa , Zimbabwe , Zambia , Mozambique , Kenya , Tanzania and Uganda .
It is regionally extinct in Democratic Republic of the Congo , Rwanda and Burundi .
In 2007 , the Southern African population was roughly estimated at less than 5,000 to maximum 6,500 adult individuals .
In 2010 , it was reported to persist in Iona National Park in southwestern Angola .
It was introduced in the Hlane Royal National Park of Swaziland and reintroduced in Malawi 's Liwonde National Park .
Since 1999 , the population suffered a massive decline in Zimbabwe .
as well as in Mozambique following the civil wars during 1980s and 1990s .
It is thought to have been separated from the Asiatic cheetah nearly 0.32–0.67 million years ago .
Asiatic cheetah ( A. j. venaticus )
This subspecies is confined to Iran , and is thus the only surviving cheetah population in Asia .
It has been classified as Critically Endangered .
In 2007 , the total population was estimated at 60 to 100 individuals including juveniles .
In 2017 , fewer than 50 individuals were thought to be remaining in three subpopulations that are scattered over in Iran 's central plateau .
It used to occur from the Arabian Peninsula and to Turkey , Central Asia , Afghanistan and Pakistan to India .
Northeast African cheetah ( A. j. soemmeringii )
This subspecies occurs in South Sudan , Ethiopia and Eritrea .
It is closely related to A. j. jubatus .
Results of a phylogeographic analysis indicate that the two subspecies diverged between 16,000 and 72,000 years ago .
Northwest African cheetah ( A. j. hecki )
This subspecies occurs in Northwestern Africa including Algeria , Benin , Burkina Faso and Niger .
Small populations are known to exist in the Ahaggar and Tassili N'Ajjer National Parks .
In 2003 , a population of 20 to 40 individuals was estimated to survive in Ahaggar National Park .
In Niger , cheetahs have been recorded in the Aïr Mountains , Ténéré , Termit Massif , Talak and Azaouak valley .
In 1993 , a population of 50 individuals were estimated in Ténéré .
In Benin , the cheetah occurs in Pendjari National Park and W National Park .
Its status is obscure in Burkina Faso , where individuals may be confined to the southeastern region .
With the total population estimated at less than 250 mature individuals , it is listed as Critically Endangered .
GENETICS Section::::Genetics .
The diploid number of chromosomes in the cheetah is 38 , the same as in most other felids ( though for the ocelot and the margay the number is 36 ) .
A remarkable feature of the cheetah is its unusually low genetic variability in comparison to other felids .
Consequently , individuals show considerable genetic similarity to one another , as illustrated by skin grafts , electrophoretic evidence and reproductive surveys .
A prolonged period of inbreeding , following a genetic bottleneck during the last ice age , is believed to be the reason behind this anomaly .
The consequences of such genetic uniformity might include a low sperm count , decreased sperm motility , deformed flagella , difficulty in captive breeding and susceptibility to disease .
KING CHEETAH
Section::::King cheetah .
The king cheetah is a variety of cheetah with a rare mutation for cream - coloured fur marked with large , blotchy spots and three dark , wide stripes extending from their neck to the tail .
In 1926 Major A.Cooper wrote about an animal he had shot near modern - day Harare .
Describing the animal , he noted its remarkable similarity to the cheetah , but the body of this individual was covered with fur as thick as that of a snow leopard and the spots merged to form stripes .
He suggested that it could be a cross between a leopard and a cheetah .
After further similar animals were discovered , it was established that they had non - retractable clawsa characteristic feature of the cheetah .
English zoologist Reginald Innes Pocock described it as a new species by the name of Acinonyx rex ( " rex " being Latin for " king " , the name translated to " king cheetah " ) ; However , he changed his position on its species status in 1939 .
English hunter - naturalist Abel Chapman considered it to be a colour morph of the spotted cheetah .
Since 1927 the king cheetah has been reported five more times in the wild ; an individual was photographed in 1975 .
In May 1981 two spotted sisters gave birth at the De Wildt Cheetah and Wildlife Centre ( South Africa ) , and each litter contained one king cheetah .
Each sister had mated with a wild male from the Transvaal region ( where king cheetahs had been recorded ) .
Further king cheetahs were later born at the Centre .
They have been known to exist in Zimbabwe , Botswana and northern Transvaal .
In 2012 the cause of this alternative coat pattern was found to be a mutation in the gene for transmembrane aminopeptidaseQ
( Taqpep ) , the same gene responsible for the striped " mackerel " versus blotchy " classic " patterning seen in tabby cats .
Hence , genetically the king cheetah is simply a variety of the common cheetah and not a separate species .
This case is similar to that of the black panthers .
The appearance is caused by reinforcement of a recessive allele .
As a result , if two mating cheetahs carry the mutated allele , then a quarter of their offspring can be expected to be king cheetahs .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
The cheetah is a felid with several distinctive featuresa slender body , deep chest , spotted pelage , a small rounded head , black tear - like streaks on the face , long thin legs and a long spotted tail .
Its lightly built , slender form is in sharp contrast with the robust build of the big cats .
The head - and - body length ranges from .
Adult cheetahs average at the shoulder , and weigh .
It is taller than the leopard , which stands nearly at the shoulder .
The weight range of the cheetah overlaps with that of the leopard , which weighs .
On the other hand , the cheetah is significantly shorter than the lion , whose average height is nearly .
Moreover , it is much lighter than the lion , among which females weigh and the much heavier males weigh .
Based on measurements , the smallest cheetahs have been reported from the Sahara , northeastern Africa and Iran .
A sexually dimorphic species , males are generally larger than females .
The head is small and rounded .
Saharan cheetah have narrow canine faces .
Small , short , and rounded , the ears are marked by black patches on the back ; the edges and base of the ears are tawny .
The high - set eyes have round pupils .
The whiskers , shorter and fewer in number than those of other felids , are fine and inconspicuous .
The pronounced tear streaks are unique to the cheetah .
These streaks originate from the corner of the eyes and run down the nose to the mouth .
Their role is obscurethey may be serving as a shield for the eyes against the sun 's glare , a helpful feature as the cheetah hunts mainly during the day ; another purpose could be to define facial expressions .
Basically yellowish tan or rufous to greyish white , the coat of the cheetah is uniformly covered with nearly 2,000 solid black spots .
The upper parts are in stark contrast to the underbelly , which is completely white .
Each spot measures nearly across .
Every cheetah has a unique pattern of spots on its coat ; hence , this serves as a distinct identity for each individual .
Cheetah fur is short and often coarse .
Fluffy fur covers the chest and the ventral side .
Several colour morphs of the cheetah have been identified , including melanistic and albino forms .
Black cheetah have been observed in Kenya and Zambia .
In 1877–1878 , English zoologist Philip Sclater described two partially albino specimens from South Africa .
A ticked ( tabby ) cheetah was photographed in Kenya in 2012 .
Juveniles are typically dark with long , loose , blue to grey hair .
A short mane , about long , on the neck and the shoulders , is all that remains of the cape in adults .
The exceptionally long and muscular tail measures , and ends in a bushy white tuft .
While the first two - thirds of the tail are covered in spots , the final part is marked with four to six dark rings or stripes .
The arrangement of the terminal stripes of the tail differs among individuals , but the stripe patterns of siblings are very similar .
In fact , the tail of an individual will typically resemble its siblings ' to a greater extent than it resembles its mother 's or any other individual 's .
The cheetah is sometimes confused with the leopard , and can be distinguished by its small round spots in contrast to the leopard 's rosettes in addition , the leopard lacks the tear streaks of the cheetah .
The cougar possesses neither the tear streaks nor the spotted coat pattern of the cheetah .
The serval has a form very similar to that of the cheetah but is significantly smaller .
Moreover , it has a shorter tail and spots that fuse to form stripes on the back .
ANATOMY Section::::Anatomy .
Being in the genus Acinonyx , the morphology of the cheetah differs notably from the big cats ( genus Panthera ) .
The face and the jaw are unusually shortened and the sagittal crest is poorly developed , possibly to reduce weight and enhance speed .
In fact , the skull resembles that of the smaller cats .
Another point of similarity to the small cats is the long and flexible spine , in contrast to the stiff and short one of other large felids .
A 2001 study of felid morphology stated that the truncation of the development of the middle phalanx bone in the cheetah at a relatively younger age than other felids could be a major reason for the peculiar morphology of the cheetah .
The cheetah appears to show convergent evolution with canids in morphology as well as behaviour .
For example , the cheetah has a relatively long snout , long legs and deep chest , tough foot pads and blunt , semi - retractable claws ; moreover , its hunting behaviour resembles that of canids .
In the 2001 study , it was observed that the claws of cheetah have features intermediate between those of felids and the wolf .
In the Puma lineage , the cheetah 's skull morphology is similar to that of the pumaboth have short , wide skullswhile that of the jaguarundi is different .
The cheetah has a total of 30 teeth ; the dental formula is .
The deciduous dentition is .
The sharp , narrow cheek teeth help in tearing flesh , whereas the small and flat canine teeth bite the throat of the prey to suffocate it .
Males have slightly bigger heads with wider incisors and longer mandibles than females .
The muscles between the skull and jaw are short , and thus do not allow the cheetah to open its mouth as much as other cats .
Digitigrade animals , the cheetah have tough foot pads that make it convenient to run on firm ground .
The hind legs are longer than the forelegs .
The relatively longer metacarpals , metatarsals ( of the lower leg ) , radius , ulna , tibia , and fibula increase the length of each jump .
The straightening of the flexible vertebral column also adds to the length .
Cheetahs have a high concentration of nerve cells , arranged in a band in the centre of the eyes .
This arrangement , called a " visual streak " , significantly enhances the sharpness of the vision .
Among the felids , the visual streak is most concentrated and efficient in the cheetah .
The nasal passages are short and large ; the smallness of the canines helps to accommodate the large nostrils .
The cheetah is unable to roar due to the presence of a sharp - edged vocal fold within the larynx .
The paws of the cheetah are narrower than those of other felids .
The slightly curved claws lack a protective sheath and are weakly retractable ( semi - retractable ) .
This is a major point of difference between the cheetah and the big cats , which have fully retractable claws , and a similarity to canids .
Additionally , the claws of the cheetah are shorter as well as straighter than those of other cats .
Absence of protection makes the claws blunt ; however , the large and strongly curved dewclaw is remarkably sharp .
ECOLOGY AND BEHAVIOUR Section::::Ecology and behaviour .
Cheetahs are diurnal ( active mainly during the day ) , whereas leopards , tigers , and lions are nocturnal ( active mainly at night ) ; diurnality allows better observation and monitoring of the animal .
Hunting is the major activity throughout the day ; peaks are observed during dawn and dusk indicating crepuscular tendencies .
Groups rest in grassy clearings after dusk , though males and juveniles often roam around at night .
The cheetah is an alert animal ; individuals often inspect their vicinity at observation points such as elevations .
Even while resting , they take turns at keeping a lookout .
SOCIAL ORGANISATION Section::::Social organisation .
Apart from the lion , the cheetah is the only cat that is gregarious ; however , female cheetahs tend to remain solitary .
Tim Caro , of the University of California , Davis , identified the various social classes and their longevity .
Pregnant and nursing females , a few adolescents , and males who have not joined any groups are typically solitary .
Non - lactating females , their cubs , adolescent siblings , and several males will form their own groups .
A loose association between individuals of the opposite sex can be observed during the breeding season .
These social groups typically keep away from one another .
Adult males are typically gregarious despite their territoriality , and may group together for life and form " coalitions " .
These groups collectively defend their territories .
In most cases , a coalition will comprise brothers born in the same litter who stayed together after weaning .
However , if a cub is the only male in the litter , then two or three lone males may form a small group , or a lone male may join an existing group .
Males in coalitions establish territories that ensure maximum access to females .
Solitary males may or may not be territorial .
Some males alternate between solitude and coalitions , whichever ensures encounters with a greater number of females .
Although a coalition , due to its larger membership , demands a greater amount of resources than do the solitary males or their groups , the coalition has a greater chance of encountering and acquiring females for mating .
Females are not territorial , and live alone or with their offspring .
Juveniles form mixed - sex groups after weaning , but most of the young females stay back with their mother , with whom they do not show any significant interaction .
Males eventually mature and try to acquire territories .
HOME RANGES AND TERRITORIES Section::::Home ranges and territories .
Males in coalitions establish territories in locations that ensure maximum access to females .
Males exhibit marking behaviourterritories , termite mounds , trees , common tracks and junctions , and trees are marked by urine , faeces , and claw scratches .
The sizes can be location specific .
For example , territories range from in the Serengeti , while in the Phinda Private Game Reserve , the size can be .
Territorial solitary males establish considerably larger territories , as large as in the Serengeti or in central Namibia .
A 1987 study of the social organisation in males showed that territoriality depends on the size and age of the males and the membership of the coalition .
It concluded that solitary as well as grouped males have a nearly equal chance of coming across females , but the males in coalitions are notably healthier and have better chances of survival than their solitary counterparts .
In the Serengeti , only 4 % of the solitary males hold territories , while those who joined coalitions were far more successful .
The average period for which territories are held is four months for singletons , seven - and - a - half months for pairs , and 22 months for trios .
Males exhibit pronounced marking behaviourterritories , termite mounds , trees , common tracks , and junctions are marked by urine , faeces , and claw scratches .
Males marking their territory by urination stand less than a metre away from a tree or rock surface with the tail raised , pointing the penis either horizontally backward or 60 ° upward .
Territorial clashes can take place between two coalitions , or coalitions and solitary males ; fights , however , are rarely gruesome .
Another major reason for fights is to acquire dominance in the breeding season .
These can even involve cannibalism .
Unlike male and other felines , female cheetahs do not establish territories .
Instead , they live in unguarded areas , known as " home ranges " .
Although home ranges often overlap , there is hardly any interaction between the females .
Females are regular visitors to male territories .
The size of a home range depends mainly on the availability of prey .
The greater the density of prey animals in an area , the smaller the home range of a female cheetah there .
In areas with nomadic prey animals ( such as the Thomson 's gazelle in the Serengeti and the springbok in the Kalahari Desert ) , the home ranges cover hundreds of square kilometres .
In contrast , home ranges are merely large where sedentary prey , such as the impala in the Kruger National Park , is available .
VOCALISATIONS Section::::Vocalisations .
The cheetah is a vocal felid .
A wide variety of cheetah vocalisations have been identified by several terms , but most of these lack a detailed acoustic description , which makes it difficult to assess reliably which term denotes which sound .
In 2010 Robert Eklund ( of the University of Göteborg , Sweden ) and colleagues published a detailed report on the purring of the cheetah and compared it with that observed in other felids .
The cheetah purrs when content , or to greet known individuals .
A characteristic of purring is that it is realised on both egressive and ingressive airstreams .
Other vocalisations Eklund identified include : *
Growling : Often accompanied by hissing and spitting , the cheetah growls to show its annoyance , or when faced with danger .
A study showed that growls consist of numerous short pulses with a combined duration of up to five seconds .
* Moaning or yowling : This is an escalated version of growling and is often combined with it .
It is typically displayed when the danger increases .
A study found that yowls could last as long as two seconds .
* Agonistic vocalisations : Eklund used this term as a reference to a combination of growls , moans , and hisses that is followed by spitting , a feature more conspicuous in cheetah than in other cats .
In addition to spitting , the cheetah will hit the ground with its front paws .
R. D. Estes has listed , in addition to the aforementioned vocalisations , some other sounds made by the cheetah : * Bleating : Similar to the meow of the domestic cat , the cheetah can bleat , and sometimes moan , when a larger predator deprives it of its prey .
*
Chirping or stutter - barking :
A cheetah chirps when excited ( for instance , when gathered around a kill ) .
This vocalisation can also be used at social meetings , during courtship , or in attempting to find another ; the chirp of a mother searching for her cubs , which sounds more like the yelp of a dog than the chirp of a bird , can be heard up to away .
A study estimated the chirp 's total duration as 0.09 to 0.5 seconds .
* Churring : The purpose of this sound is similar to that of the chirp .
It may resemble a growl .
Zoologist Jonathan Kingdon considered the chirp of the cheetah as similar to the soft roar of the lion , and its churr as the latter 's loud roar .
The churr , is staccato and has a shorter range than the chirp .
A study showed that churrs comprise 3to 15 separate pulses and last 0.1to 1.3 seconds .
* Mother - cub vocalisations :
Apart from chirping , mothers use some other sounds to interact with their cubs .
A repeated ihn ihn is used to gather the cubs , while a prr prr is used to guide them on a journey .
A low - pitched alarm call is used to warn the cubs to stand still in the presence of danger .
* Whirring : This sound is produced by cubs bickering over a kill ; the pitch rises with the intensity of the quarrel , and ends on a harsh note .
OTHER METHODS
Section::::Other methods .
Scent plays a significant role in olfactory communication .
Cheetahs often investigate urine - marked places ( territories or common landmarks ) for a long time by crouching on their forelegs and carefully smelling the place .
Then the male will itself urinate there and sniff at its own scent before leaving .
Other observing individuals will repeat the ritual .
Females may also show marking behaviour but less prominently than the males .
Females in oestrus will show maximum urine - marking , and her excrement can attract males from far off .
Social meetings are marked by mutual sniffing in oral and genital areas , grooming one another , rubbing the cheeks , and face - licking .
Further physical contact has not been observed .
The tear streaks are a means of visual communication .
The tear streaks combined with the black lips and the contrasting white fur give the face a striking appearance and form clear expressions when viewed from a close range .
The ears and the face are obscure from a distance , and so are the expressions .
On the other hand , the tail is quite conspicuous and is probably used by mothers to direct juveniles to follow them .
DISPLAY BEHAVIOUR
Section::::Display behaviour .
Cheetahs engage in several displays during fights , hunting , or self - defence .
Prior to a sprint , the cheetah will hold its head down , with aggression on its face , and approach the target in a stiff gait .
The aggressive expression is maintained during the run .
To defend itself or its prey , a cheetah will hold its body low to the ground , and produce a snarl with its mouth wide open , the eyes staring threateningly ahead and the ears folded backward .
This may be accompanied by moans , hisses , and growls .
In more severe cases , the ground is hit with the paws .
Fights are characterised by biting , tearing out the fur and attempts at strangling on both sides .
HUNTING AND COMPETITORS Section::::Hunting and competitors .
The cheetah is a carnivore that prefers medium - sized prey with a body mass ranging from .
Blesbok , duiker , Grant 's gazelle , impala , reedbuck , springbok , and Thomson 's gazelle are some of the common targets of the cheetah .
Other prey animals include the bat - eared fox , bushbuck , kudu , hartebeest , nyala , oribi , roan antelope , steenbok , sable antelope , and waterbuck ; they prey less frequently on the African buffalo , gemsbok , giraffe , ostrich , warthog , wildebeest , and zebra .
A study showed that a major proportion of the diet of Asiatic cheetahs consists of livestock ; local species such as chinkara , desert hare , goitered gazelle , ibex , rodents , and wild sheep are also hunted .
Generally , only groups of cheetahs will attempt to kill large animals such as hartebeest , although mothers with young cubs will attempt to secure a large prey all by themselves .
There are no records of cheetah killing human beings .
The diet of a cheetah depends on the area in which it lives .
For example , on the East African plains , its preferred prey is the Thomson 's gazelle , somewhat smaller than the cheetah .
In contrast , in Kwa - Zulu Natal the preferred prey is the significantly larger nyala , males of which can weigh up to .
They do , however , opt for young and adolescent targets , which make up about 50 % of the cheetah diet despite constituting only a small portion of the prey population .
Cheetahs hunt primarily throughout the day , but geographical variations exist .
For instance , cheetahs in the Sahara and the Masai Mara hunt after sunset to escape the high temperatures of the day .
In the Serengeti they hunt when the lions and hyenas are inactive .
A study in Nairobi National Park in Kenya showed that the success of the hunt depends on the species , age , sex , and habitat of the prey , and the size of the hunting herd or the efficiency of the hunting individual .
Cheetahs hunt by vision rather than by scent .
Prey is located from observation points or while roaming .
Animals toward the edges of the herd are preferred .
The cheetah will stalk their prey to within ; it will try to approach it as closely as possible while concealing itself in cover , sometimes even up to within of the prey .
The cheetah will crouch and move slowly while stalking , occasionally becoming motionless .
The chase usually lasts less than a minute ; if the cheetah fails to make a kill quickly , it will give up .
Cheetahs have an average hunting success rate of 40 to 50 % .
Cheetahs kill their prey by tripping it during the chase ; the cheetah can use its strong dewclaw to knock the prey off its balance .
To kill medium- to large - sized prey , the cheetah bites the prey 's throat to suffocate it .
A bite on the back of the neck or the snout is enough to kill smaller prey .
The prey is then taken to a shaded place ; the cheetah , highly exhausted after the chase , rests beside the kill and pants heavily for nearly five to 55 minutes .
Groups of cheetah devour the kill peacefully , though minor growling may be observed .
Cheetahs not involved in hunting will immediately start eating .
Cheetahs can consume large quantities of food .
In a study at the Etosha National Park ( Namibia ) , the cheetah consumed as much as within two hours and stayed close to the remains for 11hours .
Cheetahs move their heads from side to side so that the sharp carnassial teeth effectively tear the flesh , which can then be swallowed without chewing .
They typically begin with the hindquarters , and then progress toward the abdomen and the spine .
Rib bones are chewed on at the ends , and the limbs are not generally torn apart while eating .
The cheetah , especially mothers with young cubs , are highly vigilant ; they need to remain on a lookout for large carnivores who might steal the prey or harm the cubs , and for any potential prey .
In Africa , the cheetah surrenders its kill to sturdier carnivores such as lions , leopards , spotted and brown hyenas , and wild dogs .
Cheetahs lose around 10 to 15 % of their kills to other predators ; the percentage was found to be as high as 50 % in a 1986 study .
Cheetahs have rarely been observed to feed on the kills of other carnivores ; this may be due to vultures and spotted hyena adroitly capturing and consuming heavy carcasses within a short time .
In Central Asia , the cheetah competed with grey wolf , and to a lesser extent also with striped hyena , leopard and caracal .
SPEED AND ACCELERATION
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Speed and acceleration .
Section::::Adaptations .
The cheetah 's thin and light body makes it well - suited to short , explosive bursts of speed , rapid acceleration , and an ability to execute extreme changes in direction while moving at high speed .
These adaptations account for much of the cheetah 's ability to catch fast - moving prey .
The cheetah is the fastest land animal .
It was called the " felid version of the greyhound " , as both have similar morphology and the ability to reach tremendous speeds in a shorter time than other mammals .
The large nasal passages ensure fast flow of sufficient air , and the enlarged heart and lungs allow the enrichment of blood with oxygen in a short time .
This allows cheetahs to rapidly regain their stamina after a chase .
During a typical chase , their respiratory rate increases from 60 to 150 breaths per minute .
While running , in addition to having good traction due to their semi - retractable claws , cheetahs use their tail as a rudder - like means of steering that enables them to make sharp turns , necessary to outflank antelopes that often change direction to escape during a chase .
The protracted claws increase grip over the ground , while foot pads make the sprint more convenient over tough ground .
The tight binding of the tibia and the fibula restrict rotation about the lower leg , thus stabilising the animal throughout the sprint ; the downside , however , is that this reduces climbing efficiency .
The pendulum - like motion of the scapula increases the stride length and assists in shock absorption .
The extension of the vertebral column can add as much as to the length of a stride .
During more than half of the time of the sprint , the animal has all four limbs in the air ; this also contributes to the stride length .
The cheetah runs no more than at the speed of ; it very rarely runs at this high speed as most chases are within .
By 1973 , cheetah sprinting distance was thought to be limited by the building up of excessive body heat .
A biologging study with six free - living cheetahs in Namibia revealed that their elevated body temperature did not compromise their chasing prey .
After successful hunts , they had a 0.6 to 0.8 ° C higher body temperature than after unsuccessful chases .
RECORDED VALUES Section::::Recorded values .
In general , the speed of a hunting cheetah averages during a chase , interspersed with a few short bursts when the speed may vary between ; the most reliable measurement of the typical speed during a short chase is .
However , this value of the maximum speed , first measured in 1957 by Kurt Severin , is disputed , with more recent measurements using solar - powered GPS collars in 367 hunts showing a maximum speed of while hunting .
The speeds attained by the cheetah may be only slightly greater than those achieved by the pronghorn and the springbok .
Yet the cheetah has a greater probability of succeeding in the chase due to its exceptional accelerationit can attain a speed of in just two seconds .
One stride or jump of a galloping cheetah averages .
Similarly , the ability to change direction rapidly is pivotal in ensuring hunting success .
Cheetahs typically walk at .
Speed and acceleration values for the hunting cheetah may be different from those for the non - hunting because , while engaged in the chase , the cheetah is more likely to be twisting and turning and may be running through vegetation .
In 2012 an 11-year - old cheetah from the Cincinnati Zoo named Sarah made a world record by running in 5.95 seconds over a set run , during which she ran a recorded maximum speed of .
A study of five wild cheetahs ( three females , two males ) during hunting reported a maximum speed of , with an average of .
Speed can be increased by almost in a single stride .
The average chase is and the maximum ranges from .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Cheetahs breed throughout the year ; they are induced ovulators .
Females become sexually mature at 21 to 22 months of age .
Females are polyoestrusthey have an oestrus ( " heat " ) cycle
every 12days
( this can vary from 10to 20 days ) , each oestrus lasting one to three days .
A female can give birth again after 17 to 20 months ; however , on the loss of a whole litter mothers can mate again .
Urine - marking in males becomes more pronounced when a female in their vicinity comes into oestrus .
Males fight among one another to secure access to the female ; even males in a coalition may show some aggression toward one another on approaching a female .
One male eventually wins dominance over the others .
Mating , observed mainly at night , begins with the male approaching the female , who lies down on the ground .
No courtship behaviour is observed ; the male immediately secures hold of the female 's nape and copulation takes place .
The pair then ignore each other and part ways .
However , they meet and copulate a few more times within the next few days .
Polyandrous , females can mate with several males .
The mean number of motile sperm in a single ejaculation is nearly 25.3million .
Gestation lasts nearly three months .
The number of cubs born can vary from one to eight , though the common number is three to five .
Birth takes place in a sheltered place such as thick vegetation .
Each cub weighs nearly at birth ; the eyes , shut at birth , open in fourto 11 days .
Newborn cubs can crawl and spit ; they start walking by the age of two weeks .
Their nape , shoulders and back are thickly covered with long bluish grey hair .
This downy underlying fur , called a " mantle " , gives them a Mohawk - type appearance ; this fur is shed as the cheetah grows older .
It has been suggested that this mane gives a cheetah cub the appearance of the honey badger , and could act as a camouflage in both animals .
Cheetah cubs are highly vulnerable during the first few weeks of their life ; mothers keep their cubs hidden in dense vegetation for the first month .
Generation length of the cheetah is six years .
Cubs start following their mothers at six weeks .
The mother frequently shifts the cubs to new locations .
A study of play behaviour of cheetah cubs showed that cubs tend to play after nursing or while they are on the move with their mothers .
Play involves plenty of agility ; attacks are seldom lethal .
Playing cubs stay near their mothers .
The study further revealed that while the cubs showed improvement in catching each other as they grew up , the ability to crouch and hide did not develop remarkably .
Thus , it was suggested that play helps develop only certain aspects of predator defence .
Weaning occurs at three to six months of age .
The mother brings kills to her cubs ; the cubs might purr as the mother licks them clean after the meal .
Cubs as young as six months try to capture small prey like hares and juvenile gazelles .
However , they may have to wait until as long as 15 months of age to make a successful kill on their own .
The offspring may stay with the mother for 13 to 20 months , associating with one another and feeding on kills together .
After weaning , juveniles may form mixed - sex herds ; young females may stay back with their mother , but there is hardly any interaction between the mother and daughters .
The females in the mixed - sex herd gradually move out as they near sexual maturity .
In the Serengeti , average age of independence of 70 observed litters was 17.1 months .
Young females had their first litters at the age of about 2.4 years and subsequent litters about 20 months later .
The lifespan of wild cheetahs is 14 to 15 years for females ; their reproductive cycle typically ends by 12 years of age .
Males generally live as long as 10 years .
MORTALITY Section::::Mortality .
High mortality rates have been recorded in the Serengeti .
In a 1994 study , nearly 77 % of litters died before eight weeks of birth , and nearly 83 % of those alive could not make it to adolescence ( 14weeks ) .
Lions emerged as the major predator of juveniles , accounting for nearly 78 % of the deaths .
The study concluded that the survival rate of cubs until weaning was a mere 4.8 % .
This was attributed to the open terrain of the region , which does not allow cheetahs to conceal themselves .
Cheetah cubs face higher mortality than most other large mammals .
It has been suggested that the significant lack of genetic diversity in cheetahs is a cause of poor quality and production of sperm , and birth defects such as cramped teeth , kinked tails , and bent limbs .
Cheetahs do have low fertility rates , but they appear to have flourished for thousands of years with these low levels of genetic variance .
Cheetah expert Laurie Marker points out that the high level of genetic uniformity would mean that if an infectious disease surfaced in a population , all of them have ( or lack ) the same level of immunity .
In 1982 , 60 % of the cheetah population in the Wildlife Safari ( Oregon , United States ) died due to a peritonitis epidemic .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
The cheetah inhabits a variety of habitats .
In Africa , it has been observed in dry forests , scrub forests , and savannahs .
In prehistoric times , the cheetah was distributed throughout Asia , Africa , and Europe .
Gradually , it vanished from Europe .
Nearly 500 years ago , the cheetah was still common throughout Africa , though it avoided deserts and tropical forests .
In Eurasia , Afghanistan , Iran , Iraq , Palestine , Syria , and the Ganga and Indus river valleys in South Asia sheltered large numbers of cheetahs .
However , today the cheetah has been exterminated from the majority of its earlier range .
The IUCN estimates that the total expanse of the range of the cheetah in earlier times was approximately ; the range ( ) has since then reduced to , a substantial decline of 89 % .
AFRICA Section::::Africa .
The African cheetah is found mainly in the eastern and southern regions ; its presence across the continent has declined to a mere 10 % of the historical range .
The range in eastern Africa has reduced to 6 % of its original extent , so that presently it is distributed in an area of .
In the Horn of Africa , the cheetah occurs in Ethiopia , Kenya , South Sudan , Tanzania , and Uganda .
The range has not reduced as much in the southern part of the continent , where it occurs in an area of , 22 % of its original range .
Significant populations thrive in south - western Angola , Botswana , Malawi , south - western Mozambique , Namibia , northern South Africa , southern Zambia , and Zimbabwe .
Very few isolated populations occur in the Sahara ; the population density in this region is as low as two to three individuals per .
They occur in very low numbers in northern and western Africa .
The distribution of prey may influence habitat preferences ; in a study in the Kruger National Park , female cheetahs were found to spend a significant amount of time in woodlands , where impala occurred .
It was suggested that though the forested area was unsuitable for hunting , the females preferred woodlands to encounter more impala .
Male coalitions , on the other hand , shunned dense habitats and spent most of the time in open savannahs .
An explanation given for this was that the coalitions prefer larger prey than impala .
Although they do not prefer montane regions , cheetahs can occur at elevations as high as .
An open area with some cover , such as diffused bushes , is probably ideal for the cheetah because it needs to stalk and pursue its prey over a distance , exploiting its speed .
This also minimises the risk of encountering larger carnivores .
Complete lack of cover , however , can be a cause of prey loss and mortality .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
In the past , the cheetah ranged across vast stretches in Asia , from the Arabian Peninsula in the west to the Indian subcontinent in the east , and as far north as the Caspian and Aral Seas .
Today , the cheetah has been extirpated in the majority of its historic range , except Iran and possibly a few areas in Afghanistan and Turkmenistan .
STATUS AND THREATS Section::::Status and threats .
The cheetah has been classified as Vulnerable by the IUCN ; it is listed under AppendixI of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals ( CMS ) and AppendixI of CITES ( Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species ) .
In 2014 the CITES Standing Committee recognised the cheetah as a " species of priority " in their strategies in northeastern Africa to counter wildlife trafficking .
, the IUCN gives the total number of surviving individuals as nearly 6,700 .
Regional estimates have been given as : 1,960 in eastern Africa ( ) ; 4,190 in southern Africa ( ) ; and 440 in western , central , and northern Africa ( ) .
The southern half of the continent , therefore , is home to the largest number of cheetah .
29sub - populations have been identified , of which most consist of no more than 500 individuals .
A small population of 60 to 100 individuals was reported from Iran in 2007 .
Populations are feared to be declining , especially those of adults .
The cheetah is threatened by habitat loss through agricultural and industrial expansion ; moreover , the species apparently requires a large area to live in as indicated by its low population densities .
It appears to be less capable of coexisting with humans than the leopard .
Human interference disturbs hunting and feeding of cheetah .
With 76 % of its range consisting of unprotected land , the cheetah is often targeted by farmers and pastoralists who attempt to protect their livestock .
However , cheetah is not known to prey on livestock .
Game hunters may also try to harm cheetahs as they deprive them of valuable game .
Roadkill is another threat , especially in areas where roads have been constructed near natural habitat or protected areas .
Cases of roadkill involving cheetahs have been reported from Kalmand , Iran , Touran National Park , and Bafq .
The threat posed by infectious diseases may be minor , given the low population densities and hence the reduced chance of infection .
In 2016 , it was estimated that there are just 7,100 cheetahs remaining in the wild , and simulation modelling suggested that they are at risk of extinction .
The authors suggested a re - categorisation on the IUCN Red List for the species from vulnerable to endangered .
CONSERVATION MEASURES Section::::Conservation measures .
The IUCN has recommended co - operation between countries across the cheetah 's range to minimise the conflict between cheetahs and human beings .
A 2016 study showed that ecotourism can have a significantly positive impact on the conservation of the cheetah .
Although the requirement of space for the habitat would have to be compromised in most cases , establishment of private reserves for cheetahs and ensuring the absence of predators and poachers could be a successful conservation measure .
Additionally , the financial benefits accrued and the awareness generated can further aid the cause of the cheetah .
At the same time , the animals should not be unnecessarily handled or disturbed , as cheetahs are particularly sensitive to human interference .
IN AFRICA Section::::In Africa .
The Range Wide Conservation Program for Cheetah and African Wild Dogs ( RWCP ) , the brainchild of Sarah Durant and Rosie Woodroffe ( of the Zoological Society of London ) , was started in 2007 with the primary aim of ensuring better conservation measures for the cheetah and the wild dogtwo species with very low population densities .
A joint initiative by the ZSL , the Wildlife Conservation Society , and the IUCN Cat Specialist Group , the program has among its major goals a review of the conservation policies adopted by the South African countries , and study and action on illegal hunting and trade of the cheetah .
In a 2007 publication , Durant emphasised the role of land management and improvement in connectivity across the range in cheetah conservation , in the lack of which the populations might face severe fragmentation .
Benin ( 2014 ) , Botswana ( 2007 ) , Chad ( 2015 ) , Ethiopia ( 2010 ) , Kenya ( 2007 ) , Mozambique ( 2010 ) , Namibia ( 2013 ) ,
Niger ( 2012 ) , South Africa ( 2009 ) , South Sudan ( 2009 ) , Tanzania ( 2013 ) , Zambia ( 2009 ) , and Zimbabwe ( 2009 ) have formulated action plans for the conservation of the cheetah ( the years in which the workshops were held are given in brackets ) .
IN ASIA Section::::In
Asia .
In the 20th century , the populations of cheetah in India saw a drastic fall .
The last physical evidence of the cheetah in India was thought to be three individuals , all shot by the Maharajah of Surguja ( a man also noted for holding a record for shooting 1,360 tigers ) , in 1947 in eastern Madhya Pradesh , but a female was sighted in Koriya district , present - day Chhattisgarh , in 1951 .
During the early 2000s , scientists from the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology ( CCMB ) , Hyderabad , proposed a plan to clone Asiatic cheetahs obtained from Iran .
India asked Iran to transport one live pair to India , or , if that was not possible , allow them to collect sperm and eggs of the cheetah pair in Iran itself .
However , Iran rejected both proposals .
In September 2009 , the then Minister of Environment and Forests , Jairam Ramesh , assigned the Wildlife Trust of India and the Wildlife Institute of India with the task of examining the potential of cheetah reintroduction in the nation .
The report , submitted in 2010 , showed that the Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary and Nauradehi Wildlife Sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh , and Shahgarh Landscape and Desert National Park in Rajasthan have a high potential to support reintroduced cheetah populations .
These areas were found to be spacious ; of these four areas , the Kuno Wildlife Sanctuary had the largest available area , .
Moreover , these were rich in prey availability .
The Sanjay National Park , though comprising an area of and having supported cheetah populations before the independence of India in 1947 , is no longer suitable for the cheetah due to low prey density and risks of poaching .
In 2001 the Iranian government collaborated with the Cheetah Conservation Fund , the IUCN , Panthera , United Nations Development Programme ( UNDP ) , and the Wildlife Conservation Society on the Conservation of Asiatic Cheetah Project ( CACP ) to protect the natural habitat of the Asiatic cheetah and its prey , to ensure that development projects do not hamper its survival , and to highlight the plight of the Asiatic cheetah .
Iran declared 31August as National Cheetah Day in 2006 .
INTERACTION
WITH HUMAN BEINGS TAMING Section::::Interaction with human beings .
Section::::Taming .
The cheetah shows little aggression toward human beings , and can be easily tamed , as it has been since antiquity .
Reliefs in the Deir el - Bahari temple complex tell of an expedition by Egyptians to the Land of Punt during the reign of the pharaoh Hatshepsut ( 1507–1458BC ) that fetched , among other things , animals called " panthers " for Egypt .
Two types of " panthers " were depicted in these sculptures :
leashed cheetahs , referred to as " panthers of the north " , and sturdy leopards , referred to as " panthers of the south " .
During the New Kingdom ( 16th to 11th centuriesBC ) , cheetahs were common pet animals for the royalty , who adorned the animals with ornate collars and leashes .
The Egyptians would use their dogs to bring the concealed prey out in the open , after which a cheetah would be set upon it to kill it .
A Sumerian seal dating back to nearly 3000BC , featuring a leashed animal resembling a cheetah , has fuelled speculation that the cheetah might have been first domesticated and used for hunting in Sumer ( Mesopotamia ) .
However , Thomas T. Allsen ( of The College of New Jersey ) argues that the depicted animal might not be a cheetah given its largely dog - like features ; moreover , the background gives an impression of a montane area , which the cheetah does not typically inhabit .
Mainly two kinds of theories have been put forth to explain the subsequent expansion of the cheetah into Asia , Europe , and the rest of Africa .
Historians who accept the Sumerian origin of the domesticated cheetahsuch as Heinz F. Friederichs and Burchard Brentjeshold that the animal gradually spread out to central and northern Africa , from where it reached India .
On the other hand , historians such as Frederick E. Zeuner accept the Egyptian origin and state that the cheetah gradually spread into central Asia , Iran , and India .
In the third centuryAD , Roman author Claudius Aelianus wrote of tame panthers in India and " smaller lions " that would be used for tracking and hunting ; the account can not be very reliable as Roman , as well as Greek , literature is not generally clear in its references to different types of cats .
Hunting with cheetahs became more prevalent toward the seventh centuryAD .
The 11th - century Clephane Horn , possibly of Byzantine origin , is believed to depict domesticated hunting cheetahs .
In the Middle East , the cheetah would accompany the nobility to hunts in special seats behind saddles .
Cheetahs continued to be associated with royalty and elegance in western Asia until as late as the 19th century .
The first phase of taming would take several weeks , in which the cheetah would be kept tethered and made to get accustomed to human beings .
Next , the cheetah would be tempted with food and trained to mount horses .
Finally , its hunting instincts would be aroused by slaughtering animals before it .
The whole process could take as long as a year to complete .
In eastern Asia , the records are confusing as regional names for the leopard and the cheetah may be used interchangeably .
The earliest depiction of cheetahs from eastern Asia dates back to the Tang dynasty ( 7th to 10th centuriesAD ) ; paintings depict tethered cheetahs as well as cheetahs mounted on horses .
Chinese emperors would use cheetahs , as well as caracals , as gifts .
In the 13th and the 14th centuries , the Yuan rulers bought numerous caracals , cheetahs , and tigers from the western parts of the empire and Muslim merchants , in return for gold , silver , cash , and silk .
According to the Ming Shilu , the subsequent Ming dynasty ( 14th to 17th centuries ) continued this practice .
The cheetah gradually entered Eurasia toward the 14th century , though they never became as popular as they had in the Middle East .
The Mughal ruler Akbar
the Great ( 1556–1605 ) is said to have kept as many as 1000 cheetahs .
However , his son Jahangir wrote in his memoirs , Tuzk - e - Jahangiri , that only one of them gave birth to cubs .
Mughal rulers trained cheetahs as well as caracals in a similar way as the West Asians , and used them to hunt gameespecially blackbuck .
The rampant hunting severely affected the populations of wild animals .
IN CAPTIVITY Section::::In captivity .
Mortality under captivity is generally high ; reasons include stillbirths , birth defects , cannibalism , hypothermia , neglect of cubs by mothers , and infectious diseases .
A study comparing the health of captive and wild cheetahs noted that despite having similar genetic make - up , wild cheetahs are far healthier than their captive counterparts .
The study identified possible stress factors such as restricted habitat and interaction with human beings and other carnivores , and recommended private and spacious areas for captive cheetahs .
A study of diseases suffered by captive cheetahs in the period 1989–92 in several North American zoos showed that hepatic veno - occlusive disease , a disease of the liver , had affected 82 % of the deceased cheetahs , caused nine deaths , and occurred in 51 % of living females .
Chronic gastritis was detected in 91 % of the population .
Glomerulosclerosis , a disease of the kidneys , emerged as another significant disease , affecting 84 % of the cheetahs ; another renal disease , nephrosclerosis , affected 39 % of the cheetahs .
Feline infectious peritonitis caused two deaths .
Pneumonia was a major cause for juvenile deaths .
Another study concluded that excess of vitaminA in their diets could result in veno - occlusive disease in their livers .
Moreover , cheetahs are poor breeders in captivity , while wild individuals are far more successful .
In a 1992 study , females in Serengeti were found to have 95 % success rate in breeding .
In contrast , only 20 % of the North American captive cheetahs bred successfully in 1991 .
Studies have shown that in - vitro fertilisation in cheetah poses more difficulties than are faced in the case of other cats .
IN CULTURE Section::::In culture .
The cheetah has been widely portrayed in a variety of artistic works .
In Bacchus and Ariadne , an oil painting by the 16th - century Italian painter Titian , the chariot of the Greek god Dionysus ( Bacchus ) is depicted as being drawn by two cheetahs .
The cheetahs in the painting were previously considered to be leopards .
In 1764 English painter George Stubbs commemorated the gifting of a cheetah to George III by the English Governor of Madras , Sir George Pigot in his painting Cheetah with Two Indian Attendants and a Stag .
The painting depicts a cheetah , hooded and collared by two Indian servants , along with a stag it was supposed to prey upon .
The 1896 painting The Caress , by the 19th - century Belgian symbolist painter Fernand Khnopff , is a representation of the myth of Oedipus and the Sphinx .
It portrays a creature with a woman 's head and a cheetah 's body ( often misidentified as a leopard 's ) .
The Bill Thomas Cheetah American sports / racing car , a Chevrolet - based coupe first designed and driven in 1963 , was an attempt to challenge Carroll Shelby 's Shelby Cobra in American sports car competition of the 1960s era .
Due to only two dozen or fewer chassis ever being built , with only a dozen of these being complete cars , the Cheetah was never homologated for competition beyond prototype status , with its production ending in 1966 .
A variety of literature mentions the cheetah .
In 1969 author Joy Adamson , of Born Free fame , wrote The Spotted Sphinx , a biography of her pet cheetah Pippa .
Hussein , An Entertainment , a novel by Patrick O'Brian set in the British Raj period in India , illustrates the practice of royalty keeping and training cheetahs to hunt antelopes .
The book How It Was with Dooms tells the true story of a family raising an orphaned cheetah cub named Dooms in Kenya .
The 2005 film Duma was loosely based on this book .
The cheetah has often been featured in marketing and animation .
In 1986 Frito - Lay introduced the Chester Cheetah , an anthropomorphic cheetah , as the mascot for their Cheetos .
The first release of Apple Inc. 's Mac OS X , the Mac OS X 10.0 , was code - named " Cheetah " ; the subsequent versions released before 2013 were all named after cats .
The animated series ThunderCats had a character named " Cheetara " , an anthropomorphic cheetah , voiced by Lynne Lipton .
Comic book superheroine Wonder Woman 's chief adversary is Dr .
Barbara Ann Minerva , alias The Cheetah .
SEE ALSO
*
Acinonychini * Giant cheetah
REFERENCES FURTHER READING * Great Cats , Majestic Creatures of the Wild , ed .
John Seidensticker , illus .
Frank Knight , ( Rodale Press , 1991 ) ,
* Cheetah , Katherine ( or Kathrine ) and Karl Ammann , Arco Pub , ( 1985 ) , .
* Science ( vol 311 , p. 73 )
EXTERNAL LINKS * IUCN / SSC Cat Specialist Group :
Cheetah Acinonyx jubatus
* Biodiversity Heritage Library bibliography for Acinonyx jubatus
* Cheetah Conservation Fund
* De Wildt Cheetah and Wildlife Trust
*
On the Chase With Cheetahs – slideshow by Life magazine * Fake Flies and Cheating Cheetahs : measuring the speed of a cheetah