MULE
A mule is the offspring of a male donkey ( jack ) and a female horse ( mare ) .
Horses and donkeys are different species , with different numbers of chromosomes .
Of the two F1 hybrids ( first generation hybrids ) between these two species , a mule is easier to obtain than a hinny , which is the offspring of a female donkey ( jenny ) and a male horse ( stallion ) .
The size of a mule and work to which it is put depend largely on the breeding of the mule 's female parent ( dam ) .
Mules can be lightweight , medium weight or when produced from draft horse mares , of moderately heavy weight .
Mules are reputed to be more patient , hardy and long - lived than horses and are described as less obstinate and more intelligent than donkeys .
BIOLOGY Section::::Biology .
The mule is valued because , while it has the size and ground - covering ability of its dam , it is stronger than a horse of similar size and inherits the endurance and disposition of the donkey sire , tending to require less food than a horse of similar size .
Mules also tend to be more independent than most domesticated equines other than its parental species , the donkey .
The median weight range for a mule is between about .
While a few mules can carry live weight up to , the superiority of the mule becomes apparent in their additional endurance .
In general , a mule can be packed with dead weight of up to 20 % of its body weight , or approximately .
Although it depends on the individual animal , it has been reported that mules trained by the Army of Pakistan can carry up to and walk without resting .
The average equine in general can carry up to approximately 30 % of its body weight in live weight , such as a rider .
A female mule that has estrus cycles and thus , in theory , could carry a fetus , is called a " molly " or " Molly mule " , though the term is sometimes used to refer to female mules in general .
Pregnancy is rare , but can occasionally occur naturally as well as through embryo transfer .
A male mule is properly called a horse mule , though often called a john mule , which is the correct term for a gelded mule .
A young male mule is called a mule colt , and a young female is called a mule filly .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
With its short thick head , long ears , thin limbs , small narrow hooves , and short mane , the mule shares characteristics of a donkey .
In height and body , shape of neck and rump , uniformity of coat , and teeth , it appears horse - like .
The mule comes in all sizes , shapes and conformations .
There are mules that resemble huge draft horses , sturdy quarter horses , fine - boned racing horses , shaggy ponies and more .
The mule is an example of hybrid vigor .
Charles Darwin wrote : " The mule always appears to me a most surprising animal .
That a hybrid should possess more reason , memory , obstinacy , social affection , powers of muscular endurance , and length of life , than either of its parents , seems to indicate that art has here outdone nature . "
The mule inherits from its sire the traits of intelligence , sure - footedness , toughness , endurance , disposition , and natural cautiousness .
From its dam it inherits speed , conformation , and agility .
Mules are reputed to exhibit a higher cognitive intelligence than their parent species .
That said , there is a lack of robust scientific evidence to back up these claims .
There is preliminary data from at least two evidence based studies , but they rely on a limited set of specialized cognitive tests and a small number of subjects .
Mules are generally taller at the shoulder than donkeys and have better endurance than horses , although a lower top speed .
Handlers of working animals generally find mules preferable to horses : mules show more patience under the pressure of heavy weights , and their skin is harder and less sensitive than that of horses , rendering them more capable of resisting sun and rain .
Their hooves are harder than horses ' , and they show a natural resistance to disease and insects .
Many North American farmers with clay soil found mules superior as plow animals .
A mule does not sound exactly like a donkey or a horse .
Instead , a mule makes a sound that is similar to a donkey 's but also has the whinnying characteristics of a horse ( often starts with a whinny , ends in a hee - haw ) .
Mules sometimes whimper .
COLOR AND SIZE
VARIETY Section::::Color and size variety .
Mules come in a variety of shapes , sizes and colors , from minis under to maxis over , and in many different colors .
The coats of mules come in the same varieties as those of horses .
Common colors are sorrel , bay , black , and grey .
Less common are white , roans , palomino , dun , and buckskin .
Least common are paint mules or tobianos .
Mules from Appaloosa mares produce wildly colored mules , much like their Appaloosa horse relatives , but with even wilder skewed colors .
The Appaloosa color is produced by a complex of genes known as the Leopard complex ( Lp ) .
Mares homozygous for the Lp gene bred to any color donkey will produce a spotted mule .
DISTRIBUTION AND USE Section::::Distribution and use .
Mules historically were used by armies to transport supplies , occasionally as mobile firing platforms for smaller cannons , and to pull heavier field guns with wheels over mountainous trails such as in Afghanistan during the Second Anglo - Afghan War .
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) reports that China was the top market for mules in 2003 , closely followed by Mexico and many Central and South American nations .
FERTILITY Section::::Fertility .
Mules and hinnies have 63 chromosomes , a mixture of the horse 's 64 and the donkey 's 62 .
The different structure and number usually prevents the chromosomes from pairing up properly and creating successful embryos , rendering most mules infertile .
There are no recorded cases of fertile mule stallions .
A few mare mules have produced offspring when mated with a purebred horse or donkey .
Herodotus gives an account of such an event as an ill omen of Xerxes ' invasion of Greece in 480 BC : " There happened also a portent of another kind while he was still at Sardis,—a mule brought forth young and gave birth to a mule " ( Herodotus The Histories 7:57 ) , and a mule 's giving birth was a frequently recorded portent in antiquity , although scientific writers also doubted whether the thing was really possible ( see e.g. Aristotle , Historia animalium , 6.24 ; Varro , De re rustica , 2.1.28 ) .
As of October 2002 , there had been only 60 documented cases of mules birthing foals since 1527 .
In China in 2001 , a mare mule produced a filly .
In Morocco in early 2002 and Colorado in 2007 , mare mules produced colts .
Blood and hair samples from the Colorado birth verified that the mother was indeed a mule and the foal was indeed her offspring .
A 1939 article in the Journal of Heredity describes two offspring of a fertile mare mule named " Old Bec " , which was owned at the time by the A&M College of Texas ( now Texas A&M University ) in the late 1920s .
One of the foals was a female , sired by a jack .
Unlike its mother , it was sterile .
The other , sired by a five - gaited Saddlebred stallion , exhibited no characteristics of any donkey .
That horse , a stallion , was bred to several mares , which gave birth to live foals that showed no characteristics of the donkey .
MODERN USAGE Section::::Modern usage .
In the second half of the 20th century , widespread usage of mules declined in industrialized countries .
The use of mules for farming and transportation of agricultural products largely gave way to steam then gasoline powered tractors and trucks .
However , in the United States , a dedicated number of mule breeders continued the tradition as a hobby and continued breeding the great lines of American Mammoth Jacks started in the United States by George Washington with the gift from the King of Spain of two Zamorano - Leonés donkeys .
These hobby breeders began to utilize better mares for mule production until today 's modern saddle mule emerged .
Exhibition shows where mules pulled heavy loads have now been joined with mules competing in Western and English pleasure riding , as well as dressage and show jumping competition .
There is now a cable TV show dedicated to the training of donkeys and mules .
Mules , once snubbed at traditional horse shows , have been accepted for competition at the most exclusive horse shows in the world in all disciplines .
Mules are still used extensively to transport cargo in rugged roadless regions , such as the large wilderness areas of California 's Sierra Nevada mountains or the Pasayten Wilderness of northern Washington state .
Commercial pack mules are used recreationally , such as to supply mountaineering base camps , and also to supply trail building and maintenance crews , and backcountry footbridge building crews .
As of July 2014 , there are at least sixteen commercial mule pack stations in business in the Sierra Nevada .
The Angeles chapter of the Sierra Club has a Mule Pack Section that organizes hiking trips with supplies carried by mules .
Amish farmers , who reject tractors and most other modern technology for religious reasons , commonly use teams of six or eight mules to pull plows , disk harrows , and other farm equipment , though they use horses for pulling buggies on the road .
During the Soviet – Afghan War , the United States used large numbers of mules to carry weapons and supplies over Afghanistan 's rugged terrain to the mujahideen .
Use of mules by U.S. forces has continued during the War in Afghanistan ( 2001–2014 ) , and the United States Marine Corps has conducted an 11-day Animal Packers Course since the 1960s at its Mountain Warfare Training Center located in the Sierra Nevada near Bridgeport , California .
TRAINS Section::::Trains .
A mule train is a connected or unconnected line of pack mules , usually carrying cargo .
Because of the mule 's ability to carry at least as much as a horse , their trait of being sure - footed along with their tolerance of poorer coarser foods and abilities to tolerate arid terrains , mule trains were common caravan organized means of animal powered bulk transport back into pre - classical times .
In many climate and circumstantial instances , an equivalent string of pack horses would have to carry more fodder and sacks of high energy grains such as oats , so could carry less cargo .
In modern times , strings of sure footed mules have been used to carry riders in dangerous but scenic back country terrain such as excursions into canyons .
Pack trains were instrumental in opening up the American West as the sure footed animals could carry up to , survive on rough forage , did not require feed , and could operate in the arid higher elevations of the Rockies , serving as the main cargo means to the west from Missouri during the heyday of the North American fur trade .
Their use antedated the move west into the Rockies as colonial Americans sent out the first fur trappers and explorers past the Appalachians who were then followed west by high - risk - taking settlers by the 1750s ( such as Daniel Boone ) who led an increasing flood of emigrants that began pushing west over into southern New York , and through the gaps of the Allegheny into the Ohio Country ( the lands of western Province of Virginia and the Province of Pennsylvania ) , into Tennessee and Kentucky before and especially after the American Revolution .
Mule trains have been part of working portions of transportation links as recently as 2005 by the World Food Programme .
In the nineteenth century , twenty - mule teams , for instance , were teams of eighteen mules and two horses attached to large wagons that ferried borax out of Death Valley from 1883 to 1889 .
The wagons were among the largest ever pulled by draft animals , designed to carry 10 short tons ( 9 metric tons ) of borax ore at a time .
CLONE
Section::::Clone .
In 2003 , researchers at University of Idaho and Utah State University produced the first mule clone as part of Project Idaho .
The research team included Gordon Woods , professor of animal and veterinary science at the University of Idaho ; Kenneth L. White , Utah State University professor of animal science ; and Dirk Vanderwall , University of Idaho assistant professor of animal and veterinary science .
The baby mule , Idaho Gem , was born May 4 .
It was the first clone of a hybrid animal .
Veterinary examinations of the foal and its surrogate mother showed them to be in good health soon after birth .
The foal 's DNA comes from a fetal cell culture first established in 1998 at the University of Idaho .
SEE ALSO
* African wild ass * Forty acres and a mule *
No Mule 's Fool * Headless Mule , a cursed woman in Brazilian folklore *
Hinny , the reciprocal cross to the mule
* Zebroid * Jennet , a small Spanish horse * Kiang , the Tibetan ass
* Onager , the Asiatic wild ass
* List of genetic hybrids NOTES REFERENCES SOURCES FURTHER READING *
Arnold , Watson C.
" The Mule : The Worker that ' Ca n't Get No Respect , ' " Southwestern Historical Quarterly ( 2008 )
112#1
pp : 34 - 50 .
online
* Ellenberg , George B. Mule South to Tractor South :
Mules , Machines , and the Transformation of the Cotton South ( University of Alabama Press .
2007 )
219pp
*
* Hosted by the UNT Digital Library .
Originally published by the U.S. Government Printing Office .
EXTERNAL LINKS * American Donkey and Mule Society * American Mule Association * British Mule Society * Canadian Donkey & Mule Association