QUEEN ( BAND ) Queen are a British rock band that formed in London in 1970 .
Their classic line - up was Freddie Mercury ( lead vocals and piano ) , Brian May ( lead guitar and vocals ) , Roger Taylor ( drums and vocals ) , and John Deacon ( bass guitar ) .
Their earliest works were influenced by progressive rock , hard rock and heavy metal , but the band gradually ventured into more conventional and radio - friendly works by incorporating further styles , such as arena rock and pop rock , into their music .
Before forming Queen , May and Taylor had played together in the band Smile .
Mercury , then known by his birth name , Farrokh Bulsara , was a fan of Smile and encouraged them to experiment with more elaborate stage and recording techniques .
Mercury joined in 1970 , suggested the name " Queen " , and adopted his familiar stage name .
Deacon was recruited before the band recorded their eponymous debut album in 1973 .
Queen first charted in the UK with their second album , Queen II , in 1974 , but it was the release of Sheer Heart Attack later that year and A Night at the Opera in 1975 which brought them international success .
The latter featured " Bohemian Rhapsody " , which stayed at number one in the UK for nine weeks and also helped to popularise the music video .
The band 's 1977 album News of the World contained " We Will Rock You " and " We Are the Champions " , which have become anthems at sporting events .
By the early 1980s , Queen were one of the biggest stadium rock bands in the world . "
Another One Bites the Dust " ( 1980 ) became their best - selling single , while their 1981 compilation album Greatest Hits is the best - selling album in the UK and is certified eight times platinum in the US .
Their performance at the 1985 Live Aid concert has been ranked among the greatest in rock history by various music publications .
The last concert featuring their classic line up – the final live performance of Mercury – took place at Knebworth , England , in August 1986 .
In 1991 , Mercury died of bronchopneumonia , a complication of AIDS , and Deacon retired in 1997 .
May and Taylor have performed under the Queen name with Paul Rodgers and Adam Lambert as vocalists on tours since .
Estimates of their record sales range from 170 million to 300 million records , making them one of the world 's best - selling music artists .
Queen received the Outstanding Contribution to British Music Award from the British Phonographic Industry in 1990 .
They were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2001 .
Each member of Queen has composed multiple hit singles , and all four band members were inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2003 .
In 2005 , the band received the Ivor Novello Award for Outstanding Song Collection from the British Academy of Songwriters , Composers , and Authors , and in 2018 they were presented the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award .
HISTORY 1968–1974
: EARLY ERA Section::::History .
Section::::1968–1974 :
Early era .
In 1968 , guitarist Brian May , a student at London 's Imperial College , and bassist Tim Staffell decided to form a band .
May placed an advertisement on a college notice board for a " Mitch Mitchell / Ginger Baker type " drummer ; Roger Taylor , a young dental student , auditioned and got the job .
The group called themselves Smile .
While attending Ealing Art College , Tim Staffell became friends with Farrokh Bulsara , a fellow student who had assumed the English name of Freddie .
Bulsara felt that he and the band had the same tastes and soon became a keen fan of Smile .
In 1970 , after Staffell left to join the band Humpy Bong , the remaining Smile members , encouraged by now - member Bulsara , changed their name to " Queen " and performed their first gig on 18 July .
The band had a number of bass players during this period who did not fit with the band 's chemistry .
It was not until February 1971 that they settled on John Deacon and began to rehearse for their first album .
They recorded four of their own songs , " Liar " , " Keep Yourself Alive " , " The Night Comes Down " and " Jesus " , for a demo tape ; no record companies were interested .
It was also around this time Freddie changed his surname to " Mercury " , inspired by the line " Mother Mercury , look what they 've done to me " in the song " My Fairy King " .
On 2 July 1971 , Queen played their first show in the classic line - up of Mercury , May , Taylor and Deacon at a Surrey college outside London .
Having attended art college , Mercury also designed Queen 's logo , called the Queen crest , shortly before the release of the band 's first album .
The logo combines the zodiac signs of all four members : two lions for Leo ( Deacon and Taylor ) , a crab for Cancer ( May ) , and two fairies for Virgo ( Mercury ) .
The lions embrace a stylised letter Q , the crab rests atop the letter with flames rising directly above it , and the fairies are each sheltering below a lion .
There is also a crown inside the Q and the whole logo is over - shadowed by an enormous phoenix .
The whole symbol bears a passing resemblance to the Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom , particularly with the lion supporters .
The original logo , as found on the reverse - side of the cover of the band 's first album , was a simple line drawing .
Later sleeves bore more intricate - coloured versions of the logo .
In 1972 , Queen entered discussions with Trident Studios after being spotted at De La Lane Studios by John Anthony .
After these discussions , Norman Sheffield offered the band a management deal under Neptune Productions , a subsidiary of Trident , to manage the band and enable them to use the facilities at Trident to record new material , whilst the management searched for a record label to sign Queen .
This suited both parties , as Trident were expanding into management , and under the deal , Queen were able to make use of the hi - tech recording facilities used by other musicians such as the Beatles and Elton John to produce new material .
Roger Taylor later described these early off - peak studio hours as " gold dust " .
In 1973 , Queen signed to a deal with Trident / EMI .
By July of that year , they released their eponymous debut album , an effort influenced by heavy metal and progressive rock .
The album was received well by critics ; Gordon Fletcher of Rolling Stone called it " superb " , and Chicago 's Daily Herald called it an " above average debut " .
However , it drew little mainstream attention , and the lead single " Keep Yourself Alive " sold poorly .
Retrospectively , it is cited as the highlight of the album , and in 2008 Rolling Stone ranked it 31st in the " 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time " , describing it as " an entire album 's worth of riffs crammed into a single song " .
The album was certified gold in the UK and the US .
The group 's second LP , Queen II , was released in 1974 , and features rock photographer Mick Rock 's iconic image of the band on the cover .
This image would be used as the basis for the 1975 " Bohemian Rhapsody " music video production .
The album reached number five on the British album chart and became the first Queen album to chart in the UK .
The Freddie Mercury - written lead single " Seven Seas of Rhye " reached number ten in the UK , giving the band their first hit .
The album is the first real testament to the band 's distinctive layered sound , and features long complex instrumental passages , fantasy - themed lyrics , and musical virtuosity .
Aside from its only single , the album also included the song " The March of the Black Queen " , a six - minute epic which lacks a chorus .
The Daily Vault described the number as " menacing " .
Critical reaction was mixed ; the Winnipeg Free Press , while praising the band 's debut album , described Queen II as an " over - produced monstrosity " .
Allmusic has described the album as a favourite among the band 's hardcore fans , and it is the first of three Queen albums to feature in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die .
1974–1976 :
SHEER HEART ATTACK TO A NIGHT
AT THE OPERA Section::::1974–1976 :
Sheer Heart Attack to A Night at the Opera .
In May 1974 , a month into the band 's first US tour opening for Mott the Hoople , Brian May collapsed and was diagnosed with hepatitis , forcing the cancellation of their remaining dates .
While recuperating , May was initially absent when the band started work on their third album , but he returned midway through the recording process .
Released in 1974 , Sheer Heart Attack reached number two in the United Kingdom , sold well throughout Europe , and went gold in the United States .
It gave the band their first real experience of international success , and was a hit on both sides of the Atlantic .
The album experimented with a variety of musical genres , including British music hall , heavy metal , ballads , ragtime , and Caribbean .
At this point , Queen started to move away from the progressive tendencies of their first two releases into a more radio - friendly , song - orientated style .
Sheer Heart Attack introduced new sound and melody patterns that would be refined on their next album , A Night at the Opera .
The single " Killer Queen " from Sheer Heart Attack reached number two on the British charts , and became their first US hit , reaching number 12 on the Billboard Hot 100 .
It combines camp , vaudeville , and British music hall with May 's guitar virtuosity .
The album 's second single , " Now I 'm Here " , a more traditional hard rock composition , was a number eleven hit in Britain , while the high speed rocker " Stone Cold Crazy " featuring May 's uptempo riffs is a precursor to speed metal .
In recent years , the album has received acclaim from music publications : In 2006 , Classic Rock ranked it number 28 in " The 100 Greatest British Rock Albums Ever " , and in 2007 , Mojo ranked it No.88 in " The 100 Records That Changed the World " .
It is also the second of three Queen albums to feature in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die .
In January 1975 , the band left for a world tour with each member in Zandra Rhodes - created costumes and accompanied with banks of lights and effects .
They toured the US as headliners , and played in Canada for the first time , after that they played in seven cities of Japan from mid - April to the start of May.
In September , after an angry split with Trident , the band negotiated themselves out of their Trident Studios contract and searched for new management .
One of the options they considered was an offer from Led Zeppelin 's manager , Peter Grant .
Grant wanted them to sign with Led Zeppelin 's own production company , Swan Song Records .
The band found the contract unacceptable and instead contacted Elton John 's manager , John Reid , who accepted the position .
In late 1975 , Queen recorded and released A Night at the Opera , taking its name from the popular Marx Brothers movie .
At the time , it was the most expensive album ever produced .
Like its predecessor , the album features diverse musical styles and experimentation with stereo sound .
In " The Prophet 's Song " , an eight - minute epic , the middle section is a canon , with simple phrases layered to create a full - choral sound .
The Mercury penned ballad , " Love of My Life " , featured a harp and overdubbed vocal harmonies .
The album was very successful in Britain , and went triple platinum in the United States .
The British public voted it the 13th greatest album of all time in a 2004 Channel 4 poll .
It has also ranked highly in international polls ; in a worldwide Guinness poll , it was voted the 19th greatest of all time , while an ABC poll saw the Australian public vote
it the 28th greatest of all time .
A Night at the Opera has frequently appeared in " greatest albums " lists reflecting the opinions of critics .
Among other accolades , it was ranked number 16 in Q Magazine 's " The 50 Best British Albums Ever " in 2004 , and number 11 in Rolling Stone 's " The 100 Greatest Albums of All Time " as featured in their Mexican edition in 2004 .
It was also placed at No . 230 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " in 2003 .
A Night at the Opera is the third and final Queen album to be featured in the book 1001 Albums
You Must Hear Before You Die .
The album also featured the hit single " Bohemian Rhapsody " , which was number one in the UK for nine weeks .
Mercury 's close friend and advisor , Capital London radio DJ Kenny Everett , played a pivotal role in giving the single exposure .
It is the third - best - selling single of all time in the UK , surpassed only by Band Aid 's "
Do They Know
It 's Christmas ? "
and Elton John 's " Candle in the Wind 1997 " , and is the best - selling commercial single ( i.e. not for - charity ) in the UK .
It also reached number nine in the United States ( a 1992 re - release reached number two on the Billboard Hot 100 for five weeks ) .
It is the only single ever to sell a million copies on two separate occasions , and became the Christmas number one twice in the UK , the only single ever to do so . "
Bohemian Rhapsody " has also been voted the greatest song of all time in three different polls .
The band decided to make a video to help go with the single and hired Trilion , a subsidiary of the former management company Trident Studios , using new technology to create the video ; the result is generally considered to have been the first " true " music video ever produced , and popularised the medium .
Although other bands , including the Beatles , had made short promotional films or videos of songs before , most of those were made to be aired on specific television shows .
On the impact of " Bohemian Rhapsody " , Rolling Stone states : " Its influence can not be overstated , practically inventing the music video seven years before MTV went on the air . "
Ranking it number 31 on their list of the 50 key events in rock music history , The Guardian stated it ensured " videos would henceforth be a mandatory tool in the marketing of music " .
The album 's first track " Death on Two Legs " is said to have been written by Mercury about Norman Sheffield ( and the former management at Trident who helped make the video so popular ) because the band was broke despite the success of the previous album .
The second single from the album , " You 're My Best Friend " , the second song composed by John Deacon , and his first single , peaked at number sixteen in the United States and went on to become a worldwide Top Ten hit .
The band 's A Night at the Opera Tour began in November 1975 , and covered Europe , the United States , Japan , and Australia .
1976–1979
: A DAY AT THE RACES TO LIVE KILLERS
Section::::1976–1979 : A Day at the Races to Live Killers .
By 1976 , Queen were back in the studio recording A Day at the Races , which is often regarded as a sequel album to A Night at the Opera .
It again borrowed the name of a Marx Brothers movie , and its cover was similar to that of A Night at the Opera , a variation on the same Queen Crest .
The most recognisable of the Marx Brothers , Groucho Marx , invited Queen to visit him in his Los Angeles home in March 1977 ; there the band thanked him in person , and performed " ' 39 " a cappella .
Musically , A Day at the Races was by both fans ' and critics ' standards a strong effort , reaching number one in the UK and Japan , and number five in the US .
The major hit on the album was " Somebody to Love " , a gospel - inspired song in which Mercury , May , and Taylor multi - tracked their voices to create a 100-voice gospel choir .
The song went to number two in the UK , and number thirteen in the US .
The album also featured one of the band 's heaviest songs , May 's " Tie Your Mother Down " , which became a staple of their live shows .
During 1976 , Queen played one of their most famous gigs , a free concert in Hyde Park , London .
A concert organised by the entrepreneur Richard Branson , it set an attendance record with 150,000 people confirmed in the audience .
On 1 December 1976 , Queen were the intended guests on London 's early evening
Today programme , but they pulled out at the last - minute , which saw their late replacement on the show , EMI labelmate the Sex Pistols , give their infamous expletive - strewn interview with Bill Grundy .
During the A Day at the Races Tour in 1977 , Queen performed sold - out shows at Madison Square Garden , New York , in February , and Earls Court , London , in June .
The band 's sixth studio album News of the World was released in 1977 , which has gone four times platinum in the United States , and twice in the UK .
The album contained many songs tailor - made for live performance , including two of rock 's most recognisable anthems , " We Will Rock You " and the rock ballad "
We Are the Champions " , both of which became enduring international sports anthems , and the latter reached number four in the US .
Queen commenced the News of the World Tour in October 1977 , and Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times called this concert tour the band 's " most spectacularly staged and finely honed show " .
In 1978 , Queen toured the US and Canada , and spent much of 1979 touring in Europe and Japan .
They released their first live album , Live Killers , in 1979 ; it went platinum twice in the US .
Queen also released the very successful single " Crazy Little Thing Called Love " , a rockabilly inspired song done in the style of Elvis Presley .
The song made the top 10 in many countries , topped the Australian ARIA Charts for seven consecutive weeks , and was the band 's first number one single in the United States where it topped the Billboard Hot 100 for four weeks .
Having written the song on guitar and played rhythm on the record , Mercury played rhythm guitar while performing the song live , which was the first time he ever played guitar in concert .
In December 1979 , Queen played the opening night at the Concert for the People of Kampuchea in London , having accepted a request by the event 's organiser Paul McCartney .
1980–1984 : THE GAME TO THE WORKS
Section::::1980–1984 :
The Game to The Works .
Queen began their 1980s career with The Game .
It featured the singles " Crazy Little Thing Called Love " and " Another One Bites the Dust " , both of which reached number one in the US .
After attending a Queen concert in Los Angeles , Michael Jackson suggested to Mercury backstage that " Another One Bites the Dust " be released as a single , and in October 1980 it spent three weeks at number one .
The album topped the Billboard 200 for five weeks , and sold over four million copies in the US .
It was also the first appearance of a synthesiser on a Queen album .
Heretofore , their albums featured a distinctive " No Synthesisers ! "
sleeve note .
The note is widely assumed to reflect an anti - synth , pro-"hard"-rock stance by the band , but was later revealed by producer Roy Thomas Baker to be an attempt to clarify that those albums ' multi - layered solos were created with guitars , not synths , as record company executives kept assuming at the time .
In September 1980 , Queen performed three sold - out shows at Madison Square Garden .
In 1980 , Queen also released the soundtrack they had recorded for Flash Gordon .
At the 1981 American Music Awards in January , " Another One Bites the Dust " won the award for Favorite Pop / Rock Single , and Queen were nominated for Favorite Pop / Rock Band , Duo , or Group .
In February 1981 , Queen travelled to South America as part of The Game Tour , and became the first major rock band to play in Latin American stadiums .
The tour included five shows in Argentina , one of which drew the largest single concert crowd in Argentine history with an audience of 300,000 in Buenos Aires and two concerts at the Morumbi Stadium in São Paulo , Brazil , where they played to an audience of more than 131,000 people in the first night ( then the largest paying audience for a single band anywhere in the world ) and more than 120,000 people the following night .
In October of the same year , Queen performed for more than 150,000 fans on 9 October at Monterrey ( Estadio Universitario ) and 17 and 18 at Puebla ( Estadio Zaragoza ) , Mexico .
On 24 and 25 November , Queen played two sell out nights at the Montreal Forum , Quebec , Canada .
One of Mercury 's most notable performances of The Game 's final track , " Save Me " , took place in Montreal , and the concert is recorded in the live album , Queen Rock Montreal .
Queen worked with David Bowie on the single " Under Pressure " .
The first - time collaboration with another artist was spontaneous , as Bowie happened to drop by the studio while Queen were recording .
Upon its release , the song was extremely successful , reaching number one in the UK and featuring at number 31 on VH1 's 100 Greatest Songs of the ' 80s .
In October that year , Queen released their first compilation album , titled Greatest Hits , which showcased the group 's highlights from 1974 to 1981 .
It is the best - selling album in UK Chart history , and has spent 450 weeks in the UK Album Chart .
The album is certified eight times platinum in the United States , and has sold over 25 million copies worldwide .
Taylor became the first member of the band to release his own solo album in 1981 , titled Fun in Space .
In 1982 , the band released the album Hot Space , a departure from their trademark seventies sound , this time being a mixture of rock , pop rock , dance , funk , and
R&B. Most of the album was recorded in Munich during the most turbulent period in the band 's history , and Taylor and May lamented the new sound , with both being very critical of the influence Mercury 's personal manager Paul Prenter had on the singer .
May was also scathing of Prenter , who was Mercury 's manager from the early 1980s to 1984 , for being dismissive of the importance of radio stations , such as the US networks , and their vital connection between the artist and the community , and for denying them access to Mercury .
Q magazine would list Hot Space as one of the top fifteen albums where great rock acts lost the plot .
On 14 and 15 September 1982 , the band performed their last two gigs in the US with Mercury on lead vocals , those concerts were held at The Forum in Inglewood , California .
The band stopped touring North America after their Hot Space Tour , as their success there had waned , although they would perform on American television for the only time during the eighth - season premiere of Saturday Night Live on 25 September of the same year ; it became the final public performance of the band in North America before the death of their frontman .
Queen left Elektra Records , their label in the US , Canada , Japan , Australia , and New Zealand , and signed onto EMI / Capitol Records .
After working steadily for over ten years , Queen decided that they would not perform any live shows in 1983 .
During this time , they recorded a new album at the Record Plant Studios , Los Angeles and Musicland Studios , Munich , and several members of the band explored side projects and solo work .
Taylor released his second solo album , Strange Frontier .
May released the mini - album Star Fleet Project , collaborating with Eddie Van Halen .
In February 1984 , Queen released their eleventh studio album , The Works , which included the successful singles " Radio Ga Ga " , " Hammer to Fall " and " I Want to Break Free " .
Despite these hit singles , the album failed to do well in the US , while in the UK it went triple platinum and remained in the albums chart for two years .
That year , Queen began The Works Tour , the first tour to feature keyboardist Spike Edney as an extra live musician .
The tour featured nine sold - out dates in October in Bophuthatswana , South Africa , at the arena in Sun City .
Upon returning to England , they were the subject of outrage , having played in South Africa during the height of apartheid and in violation of worldwide divestment efforts and a United Nations cultural boycott .
The band responded to the critics by stating that they were playing music for fans in South Africa , and they also stressed that the concerts were played before integrated audiences .
Queen donated to a school for the deaf and blind as a philanthropic gesture but were fined by the British Musicians ' Union and placed on the United Nations ' blacklisted artists .
1985–1988 :
LIVE AID AND LATER YEARS
Section::::1985–1988 :
Live Aid and later years .
In January 1985 , the band headlined two nights of the first Rock in Rio festival at Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , and played in front of over 300,000 people each night .
The Boston Globe described it as a " mesmerising performance " .
A selection of highlights of both nights was released on VHS with the title Queen : Live in Rio , and was later broadcast on MTV in the US .
In April and May 1985 , Queen completed the Works Tour with sold - out shows in Australia and Japan .
At Live Aid , held at Wembley on 13 July 1985 , in front of the biggest - ever TV audience of 1.9 billion , Queen performed some of their greatest hits , during which the sold - out stadium audience of 72,000 people clapped , sang , and swayed in unison .
The show 's organisers Bob Geldof and Midge Ure , other musicians such as Elton John , Cliff Richard and Dave Grohl , and music journalists writing for the BBC , CNN , Rolling Stone , MTV , The Telegraph among others , stated that Queen stole the show .
An industry poll in 2005 ranked it the greatest rock performance of all time .
Mercury 's powerful , sustained note during the a cappella section came to be known as " The Note Heard Round the World " .
When interviewed for Mojo magazine the band said the most amazing sight at Live Aid was to see the audience clapping to " Radio Ga Ga " .
Brian May stated : " I 'd never seen anything like that in my life and it was n't calculated either .
We understood our audience and played to them
but that was one of those weird accidents because of the ( music ) video .
I remember thinking ' oh great , they 've picked it up ' and then I thought ' this is not a Queen audience ' .
This is a general audience who 've bought tickets before they even knew we were on the bill .
And they all did it .
How did they know ?
Nobody told them to do it . "
The band , now revitalised by the response to Live Aid – a " shot in the arm " Roger Taylor called it , — and the ensuing increase in record sales , ended 1985 by releasing the single " One Vision " , which was the third time after " Stone Cold Crazy " and " Under Pressure ( with David Bowie ) " that all four bandmembers received a writing credit for the one song .
Also , a limited - edition boxed set containing all Queen albums to date was released under the title of The Complete Works .
The package included previously unreleased material , most notably Queen 's non - album single of Christmas 1984 , titled " Thank God
It 's Christmas " .
In early 1986 , Queen recorded the album A Kind of Magic , containing several reworkings of songs written for the fantasy action film Highlander .
The album was very successful , producing a string of hits , including the title track , " A Kind of Magic " .
Also charting from the album were " Who Wants to Live Forever " ( featuring an orchestra conducted by Michael Kamen ) , " Friends Will Be Friends " , and the de facto theme from Highlander , " Princes of the Universe " .
In summer of 1986 , Queen went on their final tour with Freddie Mercury .
A sold - out tour in support of A Kind of Magic , once again they hired Spike Edney .
The Magic Tour 's highlight was at Wembley Stadium in London and resulted in the live double album Queen at Wembley , released on CD and as a live concert VHS / DVD , which has gone five times platinum in the US and four times platinum in the UK .
Queen could not book Wembley for a third night , but they did play at Knebworth Park .
The show sold out within two hours and over 120,000 fans packed the park for what was Queen 's final live performance with Mercury .
Queen began the tour at the Råsunda Stadium in Stockholm , Sweden , and during the tour the band performed a concert at Slane Castle , Ireland , in front of an audience of 95,000 , which broke the venue 's attendance record .
The band also played behind the Iron Curtain when they performed to a crowd of 80,000 at the Népstadion in Budapest , in what was one of the biggest rock concerts ever held in Eastern Europe .
More than one million people saw Queen on the tour—400,000 in the UK alone , a record at the time .
After working on various solo projects during 1988 ( including Mercury 's collaboration with Montserrat Caballé , Barcelona ) , the band released The Miracle in 1989 .
The album continued the direction of A Kind of Magic , using a pop - rock sound mixed with a few heavy numbers .
It spawned the European hits
" I Want It All " , " Breakthru " , " The Invisible Man " , " Scandal " , and " The Miracle " .
The Miracle also began a change in direction of Queen 's songwriting philosophy .
Since the band 's beginning , nearly all songs had been written by and credited to a single member , with other members adding minimally .
With The Miracle , the band 's songwriting became more collaborative , and they vowed to credit the final product only to Queen as a group .
1988–1992
: MERCURY : ILLNESS , DEATH , AND TRIBUTE Section::::1988–1992
: Mercury : illness , death , and tribute .
After fans noticed Mercury 's increasingly gaunt appearance in 1988 , the media reported that Mercury was seriously ill , with AIDS frequently being mentioned as a likely illness .
Mercury flatly denied this , insisting he was merely " exhausted " and too busy to provide interviews ; he was now 42 years old and had been heavily involved in music for nearly two decades .
Mercury had in fact been diagnosed as being HIV positive during 1987 , but did not make his illness public and denied that anything was wrong .
In spite of Mercury 's illness , the band decided to continue making albums , starting with The Miracle ( released in the summer of 1989 ) and continuing with Innuendo ( released at the beginning of 1991 ) .
Despite his deteriorating health , the lead singer continued to contribute .
For the last two albums made while Mercury was still alive , the band credited all songs to Queen , rather than specific members of the group , freeing them of internal conflict and differences .
In 1990 , Queen ended their contract with Capitol and signed with Hollywood Records ; through the deal , Disney acquired the North American distribution rights to Queen 's entire catalogue for $ 10 million , and has since remained the group 's music catalogue owner and distributor in the United States and Canada .
In February that year , Mercury made his final public appearance when he joined the rest of Queen to collect the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to British Music .
Throughout 1990 , media reports persisted that Mercury was seriously ill , but the singer continued to deny that these reports were true .
Innuendo was released in early 1991 with an eponymous number 1 UK hit and other charting singles released later in the year , which included " The Show Must Go On " .
This song , released as a forerunner to Greatest Hits II in October 1991 , featured archive footage of Queen 's performances between 1981 and 1989 , and along with the manner of its lyrics , this continued to fuel the media reports that Mercury was dying , although this was still officially denied .
Mercury was increasingly ill and could barely walk when the band recorded "
The Show Must Go On " in 1990 .
Because of this , May had concerns about whether he was physically capable of singing it .
Recalling Mercury 's successful performance May states ; " he went in and killed it , completely lacerated that vocal " .
The rest of the band were ready to record when Mercury felt able to come into the studio , for an hour or two at a time .
May says of Mercury : " He just kept saying . ' Write me more .
Write me stuff .
I want to just sing this and do it
and when I am gone you can finish it off . '
He had no fear , really . "
The band 's second greatest hits compilation , Greatest Hits II , followed in October 1991 ; it is the eighth best - selling album of all time in the UK and has sold 16 million copies worldwide .
On 23 November 1991 , in a prepared statement made on his deathbed , Mercury confirmed that he had AIDS .
Within 24 hours of the statement , he died of bronchial pneumonia , which was brought on as a complication of AIDS .
His funeral service on 27 November in Kensal Green , West London was private , and held in accordance with the Zoroastrian religious faith of his family .
"
Bohemian Rhapsody " was re - released as a single shortly after Mercury 's death , with " These Are the Days of Our Lives " as the double A - side .
The music video for " These Are the Days of Our Lives " contains Mercury 's final scenes in front of the camera .
This track had featured at the beginning of the year on the Innuendo album , and the video for it was recorded in May 1991 ( which proved to be Mercury 's final work with Queen ) .
The single went to number one in the UK , remaining there for five weeks – the only recording to top the Christmas chart twice and the only one to be number one in four different years ( 1975 , 1976 , 1991 , and 1992 ) .
Initial proceeds from the single – approximately £ 1,000,000 – were donated to the Terrence Higgins Trust , an AIDS charity .
Queen 's popularity was stimulated in North America when " Bohemian Rhapsody " was featured in the 1992 comedy film Wayne 's World .
Its inclusion helped the song reach number two on the Billboard Hot 100 for five weeks in 1992 ( including its 1976 chart run , it remained in the Hot 100 for a combined 41 weeks ) , and won the band an MTV Award at the 1992 MTV Video Music Awards .
The compilation album Classic Queen also reached number four on the Billboard 200 , and is certified three times platinum in the US .
Wayne 's World footage was used to make a new music video for " Bohemian Rhapsody " , with which the band and management were delighted .
On 20 April 1992 , The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert was held at London 's Wembley Stadium to a 72,000-strong crowd .
Performers , including Def Leppard , Robert Plant , Guns N ' Roses , Elton John , David Bowie , George Michael , Annie Lennox , Seal , Extreme , and Metallica performed various Queen songs along with the three remaining Queen members ( and Spike Edney . )
The concert is listed in the Guinness Book of Records as " The largest rock star benefit concert " , as it was televised to over 1.2 billion viewers worldwide , and raised over £ 20,000,000 for AIDS charities .
1995–2003 : MADE IN HEAVEN TO 46664 CONCERT Section::::1995–2003 : Made in Heaven to 46664 Concert .
Queen 's last album featuring Mercury , titled Made in Heaven , was finally released in 1995 , four years after his death .
Featuring tracks such as " Too Much Love Will Kill You " and " Heaven for Everyone " , it was constructed from Mercury 's final recordings in 1991 , material left over from their previous studio albums and re - worked material from May , Taylor , and Mercury 's solo albums .
The album also featured the song " Mother Love " , the last vocal recording Mercury made , which he completed using a drum machine , over which May , Taylor and Deacon later added the instrumental track .
After completing the penultimate verse , Mercury had told the band he " was n't feeling that great " and stated , " I will finish it when I come back , next time " ; however , he never made it back into the studio , so May later recorded the final verse of the song .
Both stages of recording , before and after Mercury 's death , were completed at the band 's studio in Montreux , Switzerland .
The album reached No . 1 in the UK following its release , their ninth number one album , and sold 20 million copies worldwide .
On 25 November 1996 , a statue of Mercury was unveiled in Montreux overlooking Lake Geneva , almost five years to the day since his death .
In 1997 , Queen returned to the studio to record " No - One
but You ( Only the Good Die Young ) " , a song dedicated to Mercury and all those who die too soon .
It was released as a bonus track on the Queen Rocks compilation album later that year .
In January 1997 , Queen performed " The Show Must Go On " live with Elton John and the Béjart Ballet in Paris on a night Mercury was remembered , and it marked the last performance and public appearance of John Deacon , who chose to retire .
The Paris concert was only the second time Queen had played live since Mercury 's death , prompting Elton John to urge them to perform again .
Brian May and Roger Taylor performed together at several award ceremonies and charity concerts , sharing vocals with various guest singers .
During this time , they were billed as Queen + followed by the guest singer 's name .
In 1998 , the duo appeared at Luciano Pavarotti 's benefit concert with May performing " Too Much Love Will Kill You " with Pavarotti , later playing " Radio Ga Ga " , " We Will Rock You " , and
" We Are the Champions " with Zucchero .
They again attended and performed at Pavarotti 's benefit concert in Modena , Italy in May 2003 .
Several of the guest singers recorded new versions of Queen 's hits under the Queen + name , such as Robbie Williams providing vocals for
" We Are the Champions " for the soundtrack of A Knight 's Tale ( 2001 ) .
In 1999 , a Greatest Hits III album was released .
This featured , among others , " Queen + Wyclef Jean " on a rap version of " Another One Bites the Dust " .
A live version of " Somebody to Love " by George Michael and a live version of " The Show Must Go On " with Elton John were also featured in the album .
By this point , Queen 's vast amount of record sales made them the second best selling artist in the UK of all time , behind the Beatles .
On 18 October 2002 , Queen were awarded the 2,207th star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame , for their work in the music industry , which is located at 6358 Hollywood Blvd .
On 29 November 2003 , May and Taylor performed at the 46664 Concert hosted by Nelson Mandela at Green Point Stadium , Cape Town , to raise awareness of the spread of HIV / AIDS in South Africa .
A new song , " Invincible Hope " , featuring Mandela 's speech and credited to Queen + Nelson Mandela , was performed during the concert and later released on the 46664 :
One Year On EP .
During that period May and Taylor spent time at Mandela 's home , discussing how Africa 's problems might be approached , and two years later the band were made ambassadors for the 46664 cause .
2004–2009
: QUEEN + PAUL RODGERS Section::::2004–2009 :
Queen + Paul Rodgers .
At the end of 2004 , May and Taylor announced that they would reunite and return to touring in 2005 with Paul Rodgers ( founder and former lead singer of Free and Bad Company ) .
Brian May 's website also stated that Rodgers would be " featured with " Queen as " Queen + Paul Rodgers " , not replacing Mercury .
The retired John Deacon would not be participating .
In November 2004 , Queen were among the inaugural inductees into the UK Music Hall of Fame , and the award ceremony was the first event at which Rodgers joined May and Taylor as vocalist .
Between 2005 and 2006 , Queen + Paul Rodgers embarked on a world tour , which was the first time Queen toured since their last tour with Freddie Mercury in 1986 .
The band 's drummer Roger Taylor commented ; " We never thought we would tour again , Paul [ Rodgers ] came along by chance and we seemed to have a chemistry .
Paul is just such a great singer .
He 's not trying to be Freddie .
" The first leg was in Europe , the second in Japan , and the third in the US in 2006 .
Queen received the inaugural VH1 Rock Honors at the Mandalay Bay Events Center in Las Vegas , Nevada , on 25 May 2006 .
The Foo Fighters paid homage to the band in performing " Tie Your Mother Down " to open the ceremony before being joined on stage by May , Taylor , and Paul Rodgers , who played a selection of Queen hits .
On 15 August 2006 , Brian May confirmed through his website and fan club that Queen + Paul Rodgers would begin producing their first studio album beginning in October , to be recorded at a " secret location " .
Queen + Paul Rodgers performed at the Nelson Mandela 90th Birthday Tribute held in Hyde Park , London on 27 June 2008 , to commemorate Mandela 's ninetieth birthday , and again promote awareness of the HIV / AIDS pandemic .
The first Queen + Paul Rodgers album , titled The Cosmos Rocks , was released in Europe on 12 September 2008 and in the United States on 28 October 2008 .
Following the release of the album , the band again went on a tour through Europe , opening on Kharkiv 's Freedom Square in front of 350,000 Ukrainian fans .
The Kharkiv concert was later released on DVD .
The tour then moved to Russia , and the band performed two sold - out shows at the Moscow Arena .
Having completed the first leg of its extensive European tour , which saw the band play 15 sold - out dates across nine countries , the UK leg of the tour sold out within 90 minutes of going on sale and included three London dates , the first of which was the O Arena on 13 October .
The last leg of the tour took place in South America , and included a sold - out concert at the Estadio José Amalfitani , Buenos Aires .
Queen and Paul Rodgers officially split up without animosity on 12 May 2009 .
Rodgers stated : " My arrangement with [ Queen ] was similar to my arrangement with Jimmy [ Page ] in The Firm in that it was never meant to be a permanent arrangement " .
Rodgers did not rule out the possibility of working with Queen again .
2009–2011 :
DEPARTURE FROM EMI , 40TH
ANNIVERSARY Section::::2009–2011 : Departure from EMI , 40th anniversary .
On 20 May 2009 , May and Taylor performed " We Are the Champions " live on the season finale of American Idol with winner Kris Allen and runner - up Adam Lambert providing a vocal duet .
In mid-2009 , after the split of Queen + Paul Rodgers , the Queen online website announced a new greatest hits compilation named Absolute Greatest .
The album was released on 16 November and peaked at number 3 in the official UK Chart .
The album contains 20 of Queen 's biggest hits spanning their entire career and was released in four different formats : single disc , double disc ( with commentary ) , double disc with feature book , and a vinyl record .
Before its release , Queen ran an online competition to guess the track listing as a promotion for the album .
On 30 October 2009 , May wrote a fanclub letter on his website stating that Queen had no intentions to tour in 2010 but that there was a possibility of a performance .
He was quoted as saying , " The greatest debate , though , is always about when we will next play together as Queen .
At the moment , in spite of the many rumours that are out there , we do not have plans to tour in 2010 .
The good news , though , is that Roger and I have a much closer mutual understanding these days — privately and professionally ... and all ideas are carefully considered .
Music is never far away from us .
As I write , there is an important one - off performance on offer , in the USA , and it remains to be decided whether we will take up this particular challenge .
Every day , doors seem to open , and every day , we interact , perhaps more than ever before , with the world outside .
It is a time of exciting transition in Rock music and in ' The Business ' .
It 's good that the pulse still beats " .
On 15 November 2009 , May and Taylor performed " Bohemian Rhapsody " live on the British TV show The X Factor alongside the finalists .
On 7 May 2010 , May and Taylor announced that they were quitting their record label , EMI , after almost 40 years .
On 20 August 2010 , Queen 's manager Jim Beach put out a Newsletter stating that the band had signed a new contract with Universal Music .
During an interview for HARDtalk on the BBC on 22 September , May confirmed that the band 's new deal was with Island Records , a subsidiary of Universal Music Group .
Hollywood Records remained as the group 's label in the United States and Canada , however .
As such , for the first time since the late 1980s , Queen 's catalogue now has the same distributor worldwide , as Universal distributes for both the Island and Hollywood labels ( for a time in the late 1980s , Queen was on EMI - owned Capitol Records in the US ) .
On 14 March 2011 , which marked the band 's 40th anniversary , Queen 's first five albums were re - released in the UK and some other territories as remastered deluxe editions ( the US versions were released on 17 May ) .
The second five albums of Queen 's back catalogue were released worldwide on 27 June , with the exception of the US and Canada ( 27 September ) .
The final five were released in the UK on 5 September .
In May 2011 , Jane 's Addiction vocalist Perry Farrell noted that Queen are currently scouting their once former and current live bassist Chris Chaney to join the band .
Farrell stated : " I have to keep Chris away from Queen , who want him and they 're not gon na get him unless we 're not doing anything .
Then they can have him . "
In the same month , Paul Rodgers stated he may tour with Queen again in the near future .
At the 2011 Broadcast Music , Incorporated ( BMI ) Awards held in London on 4 October , Queen received the BMI Icon Award in recognition for their airplay success in the US .
At the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards on 6 November , Queen received the Global Icon Award , which Katy Perry presented to
Brian May. Queen closed the awards ceremony , with Adam Lambert on vocals , performing " The Show Must Go On " , " We Will Rock You " and " We Are the Champions " .
The collaboration garnered a positive response from both fans and critics , resulting in speculation about future projects together .
2011–PRESENT
: QUEEN + ADAM LAMBERT , QUEEN FOREVER Section::::2011–present : Queen + Adam Lambert , Queen Forever .
On 25 and 26 April , May and Taylor appeared on the eleventh series of American Idol at the Nokia Theatre , Los Angeles , performing a Queen medley with the six finalists on the first show , and the following day performed " Somebody to Love " with the ' Queen Extravaganza ' band .
Queen were scheduled to headline Sonisphere at Knebworth on 7 July 2012 with Adam Lambert before the festival was cancelled .
Queen 's final concert with Freddie Mercury was in Knebworth in 1986 .
Brian May commented , " It 's a worthy challenge for us , and I 'm sure Adam would meet with Freddie 's approval .
"
Queen expressed disappointment at the cancellation and released a statement to the effect that they were looking to find another venue .
Queen + Adam Lambert played two shows at the Hammersmith Apollo , London on 11 and 12 July 2012 .
Both shows sold out within 24 hours of tickets going on open sale .
A third London date was scheduled for 14 July .
On 30 June , Queen + Lambert performed in Kiev , Ukraine at a joint concert with Elton John for the Elena Pinchuk ANTIAIDS Foundation .
Queen also performed with Lambert on 3 July 2012 at Moscow 's Olympic Stadium , and on 7 July 2012 at the Municipal Stadium in Wroclaw , Poland .
On 12 August 2012 , Queen performed at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London .
The performance at London 's Olympic Stadium opened with a special remastered video clip of Mercury on stage performing his call and response routine during their 1986 concert at Wembley Stadium .
Following this , May performed part of the " Brighton Rock " solo before being joined by Taylor and solo artist Jessie J for a performance of " We Will Rock You " .
On 20 September 2013 , Queen + Adam Lambert performed at the iHeartRadio Music Festival at the MGM Grand Hotel & Casino in Las Vegas .
Queen + Adam Lambert toured North America in Summer 2014 and Australia and New Zealand in August / September 2014 .
In an interview with Rolling Stone , May and Taylor said that although the tour with Lambert is a limited thing , they are open to him becoming an official member , and cutting new material with him .
In November 2014 Queen released a new album Queen Forever .
The album is largely a compilation of previously - released material but features three new Queen tracks featuring vocals from Mercury with backing added by the surviving members of Queen .
One new track , " There Must Be More To Life Than This " , is a duet between Mercury and Michael Jackson .
In 2016 , the group embarked across Europe and Asia on the Queen
+
Adam Lambert
2016 Summer Festival Tour .
This included closing the Isle of Wight Festival in England on 12 June where they performed " Who Wants to Live Forever " as a tribute to the victims of the mass shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando , Florida earlier that day .
On 12 September they performed at the Park Hayarkon in Tel - Aviv , Israel for the first time in front of 58,000 people .
As part of the Queen + Adam Lambert
Tour 2017–2018 , the band toured North America in the summer of 2017 , toured Europe in late 2017 , before playing dates in Australia and New Zealand in February and March 2018 .
Queen + Adam Lambert will perform in North America during The Rhapsody Tour in July and August 2019 .
MUSIC STYLE AND INFLUENCES Section::::Music style and influences .
Queen drew artistic influence from British rock acts of the 1960s and early 1970s , such as the Beatles , the Kinks , Cream , Led Zeppelin , Pink Floyd , the Who , Black Sabbath , Slade , Deep Purple , David Bowie , Genesis and Yes , in addition to American guitarist Jimi Hendrix , with Mercury also inspired by the gospel singer Aretha Franklin .
May referred to the Beatles as being " our bible in the way they used the studio and they painted pictures and this wonderful instinctive use of harmonies .
" At their outset in the early 1970s , Queen 's music has been characterised as " Led Zeppelin meets Yes " due to its combination of " acoustic / electric guitar extremes and fantasy - inspired multi - part song epics " .
Queen composed music that drew inspiration from many different genres of music , often with a tongue - in - cheek attitude .
The genres they have been associated with include progressive rock , symphonic rock , art rock , glam rock , hard rock , arena rock , heavy metal , pop rock , and psychedelic rock .
Queen also wrote songs that were inspired by diverse musical styles which are not typically associated with rock groups , such as opera , music hall , folk music , gospel , ragtime , and dance / disco .
Their 1980 single " Another One Bites the Dust " became a major hit single in the funk rock genre .
Several Queen songs were written with audience participation in mind , such as " We Will Rock You " and " We Are the Champions " .
Similarly , " Radio Ga Ga " became a live favourite because it would have " crowds clapping
like they were at a Nuremberg rally " .
In 1963 , the teenage Brian May and his father custom - built his signature guitar Red Special , which was purposely designed to feedback .
May has used Vox AC30 amplifiers almost exclusively since a meeting with his long - time hero Rory Gallagher at a gig in London during the late 1960s / early 1970s .
Sonic experimentation figured heavily in Queen 's songs .
A distinctive characteristic of Queen 's music are the vocal harmonies which are usually composed of the voices of May , Mercury , and Taylor best heard on the studio albums A Night at the Opera and A Day at the Races .
Some of the ground work for the development of this sound can be attributed to the producer Roy Thomas Baker and engineer Mike Stone .
Besides vocal harmonies , Queen were also known for multi - tracking voices to imitate the sound of a large choir through overdubs .
For instance , according to Brian May , there are over 180 vocal overdubs in " Bohemian Rhapsody " .
The band 's vocal structures have been compared with the Beach Boys , but May stated they were not " much of an influence " .
David Mallet directed a number of their music videos , some of which use footage from classic films : " Under Pressure " incorporates 1920s silent films , Sergei Eisenstein 's Battleship Potemkin and F. W. Murnau 's Nosferatu , the 1984 video for " Radio Ga Ga " includes footage from Fritz Lang 's Metropolis ( 1927 ) , while the 1995 video " Heaven for Everyone " shows footage from Georges Méliès ' A Trip to the Moon ( 1902 ) and The Impossible Voyage ( 1904 ) .
The first part of Mallet 's music video for " I Want to Break Free " spoofed the popular long - running British soap opera Coronation Street .
The music video for " Innuendo " combines stop motion animation with rotoscoping and band members appear as illustrations and images taken from earlier Queen music videos on a cinema screen in the same manner as in the British film Nineteen Eighty - Four .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
In 2002 , Queen 's " Bohemian Rhapsody " was voted " the UK 's favourite hit of all time " in a poll conducted by the Guinness World Records British Hit Singles Book .
In 2004 , the song was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame .
Many scholars consider the " Bohemian Rhapsody " music video ground - breaking , crediting it with popularising the medium .
Rock historian Paul Fowles stated that the song is " widely credited as the first global hit single for which an accompanying video was central to the marketing strategy " .
It has been hailed as launching the MTV age .
In December 2018 , " Bohemian Rhapsody " became the most - streamed song from the 20th century , and the most - streamed classic rock song of all time .
The number of downloads of the song and original video exceeded 1.6 billion across global on - demand streaming services .
Acclaimed for their stadium rock , in 2005 an industry poll ranked Queen 's performance at Live Aid in 1985 as the best live act in history .
In 2007 , they were also voted the greatest British band in history by BBC Radio 2 listeners .
As of 2005 , according to the Guinness Book of World Records , Queen albums have spent a total of 1,322 weeks ( twenty - six years ) on the UK Album Charts , more time than any other act .
Also in 2005 , with the release of their live album with Paul Rodgers , Queen moved into third place on the list of acts with the most aggregate time spent on the British record charts .
In 2006 , the Greatest Hits album was the all - time best - selling album in UK Chart history , with sales of 5,407,587 copies , over 604,295 more copies than its nearest competitor , the Beatles ' Sgt .
Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band .
Their Greatest Hits II album is the tenth best seller , with sales of 3,746,404 copies .
The band have released a total of eighteen number one albums , eighteen number one singles , and ten number one DVDs worldwide , making them one of the world 's best - selling music artists .
Queen have sold over 170 million records , with some estimates in excess of 300 million records worldwide , including 34.5 million albums in the US as of 2004 .
Inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2001 , the band is the only group in which every member has composed more than one chart - topping single , and all four members were inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2003 .
In 2009 , " We Will Rock You " and " We Are the Champions " were inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame , and the latter was voted the world 's favourite song in a 2005 Sony Ericsson global music poll .
The band received Ivor Novello Awards for Outstanding Contribution to British Music , in 1987 , and Outstanding Song Collection , in 2005 , from the British Academy of Songwriters , Composers , and Authors .
In 2018 they were presented the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award .
Queen are one of the most bootlegged bands ever , according to Nick Weymouth , who manages the band 's official website .
A 2001 survey discovered the existence of 12,225 websites dedicated to Queen bootlegs , the highest number for any band .
Bootleg recordings have contributed to the band 's popularity in certain countries where Western music is censored , such as Iran .
In a project called Queen : The Top 100 Bootlegs , many of these have been made officially available to download for a nominal fee from Queen 's website , with profits going to the Mercury Phoenix Trust .
Rolling Stone ranked Queen at number 52 on its list of the " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " , while ranking Mercury the 18th greatest singer , and May the twenty - sixth greatest guitarist .
Rolling Stone readers voted Mercury the second greatest frontman .
Queen were named 13th on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of Hard Rock list , and in 2010 were ranked 17th on VH1 's 100 Greatest Artists of All Time list .
In 2012 , Gigwise readers named Queen the best band of the past 60 years .
INFLUENCE Section::::Influence .
Queen have been recognised as having made significant contributions to such genres as hard rock , and heavy metal , among others .
Hence , the band have been cited as an influence by many other musicians .
Moreover , like their music , the bands and artists that have claimed to be influenced by Queen and have expressed admiration for them are diverse , spanning different generations , countries , and genres , including heavy metal : Judas Priest , Iron Maiden , Metallica , Dream Theater , Trivium , Megadeth , Anthrax , Faith
No More , Melvins , Slipknot and Rage Against the Machine ; hard rock : Guns N ' Roses , Def Leppard , Van Halen , Mötley Crüe , Steve Vai , the Cult , the Darkness , Kid Rock and Foo Fighters ; alternative rock : Nirvana , Radiohead , Trent Reznor , Muse , Red Hot Chili Peppers , Jane 's Addiction , the Flaming Lips , and The Smashing Pumpkins ; shock rock : Marilyn Manson ; pop rock : Meat Loaf , The Killers , My Chemical Romance , Fall Out Boy and Panic !
at the Disco ; and pop : Michael Jackson , George Michael , Robbie Williams , Adele , Lady Gaga , Katy Perry , Kesha , Grimes , and Psy .
In the early 1970s , Queen helped spur the heavy metal genre 's evolution by discarding much of its blues influence .
Queen 's 1974 song " Stone Cold Crazy " has been cited as a precursor of speed metal .
Metallica recorded a cover version of " Stone Cold Crazy " , which first appeared on the album in 1990 , and won their second Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 1991 .
Thom Yorke of Radiohead received his first guitar at 7 years old , encouraged after seeing Brian May in a broadcast of a Queen concert .
At 10 years old , Yorke made his own homemade guitar , trying to imitate what May had done with his Red Special , but he was not satisfied with the result .
Subsequently , Queen was one of the first influences in the music of Radiohead .
IN OTHER MEDIA MUSICAL THEATRE Section::::In other media .
Section::::Musical theatre .
In May 2002 , a musical or " rock theatrical " based on the songs of Queen , titled We Will Rock You , opened at the Dominion Theatre on London 's West End .
The musical was written by British comedian and author Ben Elton in collaboration with Brian May and Roger Taylor , and produced by Robert De Niro .
It has since been staged in many cities around the world .
The launch of the musical coincided with Queen Elizabeth II 's Golden Jubilee .
As part of the Jubilee celebrations , Brian May performed a guitar solo of " God Save the Queen " , as featured on Queen 's A Night at the Opera , from the roof of Buckingham Palace .
The recording of this performance was used as video for the song on the 30th Anniversary DVD edition of A Night at the Opera .
Following the Las Vegas premiere on 8 September 2004 , Queen were inducted into the Hollywood RockWalk in Sunset Boulevard , Los Angeles .
The original London production was scheduled to close on Saturday , 7 October 2006 , at the Dominion Theatre , but due to public demand , the show ran until May 2014 .
We Will Rock
You has become the longest running musical ever to run at this prime London theatre , overtaking the previous record holder , the musical Grease .
Brian May stated in 2008 that they were considering writing a sequel to
We Will Rock You .
The musical toured around the UK in 2009 , playing at Manchester Palace Theatre , Sunderland Empire , Birmingham Hippodrome , Bristol Hippodrome , and Edinburgh Playhouse .
Sean Bovim created " Queen at the Ballet " , a tribute to Mercury , which uses Queen 's music as a soundtrack for the show 's dancers , who interpret the stories behind tracks such as " Bohemian Rhapsody " , " Radio Ga Ga " , and " Killer Queen " .
Queen 's music also appears in the Off - Broadway production Power Balladz , most notably the song "
We Are the Champions " , with the show 's two performers believing the song was " the apex of artistic achievement in its day " .
DIGITAL REALM Section::::Digital realm .
In conjunction with Electronic Arts , Queen released the computer game in 1998 .
The music itself — tracks from Queen 's vast catalogue , in many cases remixed into new instrumental versions — was by and large well received , but the game experience was hampered by poor gameplay .
Adding to the problem was an extremely long development time , resulting in graphic elements that already seemed outdated by the time of release .
Under the supervision of May and Taylor , numerous restoration projects have been under way involving Queen 's lengthy audio and video catalogue .
DVD releases of their 1986 Wembley concert ( titled Live at Wembley Stadium ) ,
1982 Milton Keynes concert ( Queen on Fire – Live at the Bowl ) , and two Greatest Video Hits ( Volumes 1 and 2 , spanning the 1970s and 1980s )
have seen the band 's music remixed into 5.1 and DTS surround sound .
So far , only two of the band 's albums , A Night at the Opera and The Game , have been fully remixed into high - resolution multichannel surround on DVD - Audio .
A Night at the Opera was re - released with some revised 5.1 mixes and accompanying videos in 2005 for the 30th anniversary of the album 's original release ( CD+DVD - Video set ) .
In 2007 , a Blu - ray edition of Queen 's previously released concerts , Queen Rock Montreal & Live Aid , was released , marking their first project in 1080p HD .
Queen have been featured multiple times in the Guitar Hero franchise : a cover of " Killer Queen " in the original Guitar Hero ,
" We Are The Champions " , " Fat Bottomed Girls " , and the Paul Rodgers collaboration " C - lebrity " in a track pack for Guitar Hero World Tour , " Under Pressure " with David Bowie in Guitar Hero 5 , " I Want It All " in , " Stone Cold Crazy " in , and " Bohemian Rhapsody " in .
On 13 October 2009 , Brian May revealed there was " talk " going on " behind the scenes " about a dedicated Queen Rock Band game .
Queen have also been featured multiple times in the Rock Band franchise : a track pack of 10 songs which are compatible with Rock Band , Rock Band 2 , and Rock Band 3 ( three of those are also compatible with Lego Rock Band ) .
Their hit " Bohemian Rhapsody " was featured in Rock Band 3 with full harmony and keys support .
The band also appeared in the video game Lego Rock Band as playable Lego avatars .
In March 2009 , Sony Computer Entertainment released a Queen branded version of the company 's karaoke franchise , SingStar .
The game , which is available on PlayStation 2 and PlayStation 3 , is titled SingStar Queen and has 25 songs on the PS3 and 20 on the PS2 .
" We Will Rock You " and other songs by Queen also appear in DJ Hero .
" One Vision " was featured on the successful video game Grand Theft Auto IV on the fictional radio station Liberty Rock Radio 97.8 , while " Radio Ga Ga " features on Grand Theft Auto V character trailer for Michael and the game 's soundtrack .
FILM AND TELEVISION Section::::Film and television .
The soundtrack for the film Flash Gordon ( 1980 ) was by Queen .
The band also contributed music to Highlander ( the original 1986 film ) , with " A Kind of Magic " , " One Year of Love " , " Who Wants to Live Forever " , " Hammer to Fall " , and the theme " Princes of the Universe " , which was also used as the theme of the ( 1992–1998 ) .
In the United States , " Bohemian Rhapsody " was re - released as a single in 1992 after appearing in the comedy film Wayne 's World .
The single subsequently reached number two on the Billboard Hot 100 ( with " The Show Must Go On " as the first track on the single ) and helped rekindle the band 's popularity in North America .
Several films have featured their songs performed by other artists .
A version of " Somebody to Love " by Anne Hathaway was in the 2004 film Ella Enchanted .
In 2006 , Brittany Murphy also recorded a cover of the same song for the 2006 film Happy Feet .
In 2001 , a version of " The Show Must Go On " was performed by Jim Broadbent and Nicole Kidman in the film musical Moulin Rouge ! .
The 2001 film A Knight 's Tale has a version of " We Are the Champions " performed by Robbie Williams and Queen ; the film also features "
We Will Rock
You " played by the medieval audience .
" I Was Born to Love
You " was used as the theme song of the Japanese television drama Pride on Fuji Television in 2004 , starring Takuya Kimura and Yūko Takeuchi .
The show 's soundtrack also contained other songs by Queen . "
Do n't Stop Me Now " has featured in the BBC television show Top Gear , and in 2005 the song was voted as " The Greatest Driving Song Ever " by the series ' viewers .
Keeping in a tradition of naming each season 's episodes after songs by 1970s rock bands , the eighth and final season of That
' 70s Show had episodes named after Queen songs . "
Bohemian Rhapsody " served as the season premiere .
The Simpsons has made storylines which have featured Queen songs such as " We Will Rock You " , "
We Are the Champions " ( both sung by Homer ) , and " You 're My Best Friend " .
On 11 April 2006 , Brian May and Roger Taylor appeared on the American singing contest television show American Idol .
Each contestant was required to sing a Queen song during that week of the competition .
Songs which appeared on the show included " Bohemian Rhapsody " , " Fat Bottomed Girls " , " The Show Must Go On " , "
Who Wants to Live Forever " , and " Innuendo " .
Brian May later criticised the show for editing specific scenes , one of which made the group 's time with contestant Ace Young look negative , despite it being the opposite .
Taylor and May again appeared on the American Idol season 8 finale in May 2009 , performing " We Are the Champions " with finalists Adam Lambert and Kris Allen .
On 15 November 2009 , Brian May and Roger Taylor appeared on the singing contest television show The X Factor in the UK .
In the autumn of 2009 , Glee featured the fictional high school 's show choir singing " Somebody to Love " as their second act performance in the episode " The Rhodes Not Taken " .
The performance was included on the show 's soundtrack CD .
In June 2010 , the choir performed " Another One Bites the Dust " in the episode " Funk " .
The following week 's episode , " Journey to Regionals " , features a rival choir performing " Bohemian Rhapsody " in its entirety .
The song was featured on the .
In May 2012 , the choir performed " We Are the Champions " in the episode " Nationals " , and the song features in .
Bohemian Rhapsody
In a September 2010 BBC interview , Brian May announced in that Sacha Baron Cohen was to play Mercury in a biographical film about the band .
Time commented with approval on his singing ability and visual similarity to Mercury .
However , in July 2013 , Baron Cohen dropped out of the role due to " creative differences " between him and the surviving band members .
In December 2013 , it was announced that Ben Whishaw , known for playing Q in the James Bond film Skyfall , was a possible replacement for Baron Cohen in the role of Mercury , but Whishaw pulled out a few months later amidst uncertainty about how the film was progressing .
The project regained momentum in 2016 .
It was announced on 4 November that the film had secured the backing of 20th Century Fox , New Regency and GK Films .
By this time , the film 's working title was Bohemian Rhapsody , after the band 's song of the same name .
Freddie Mercury was to be played by Rami Malek , and shooting was scheduled to begin in early 2017 .
The motion picture was written by Anthony McCarten , with a story by McCarten and Peter Morgan , who received Oscar nominations for his screenplays The Queen and Frost / Nixon .
Released in October 2018 , Bohemian Rhapsody focuses on Queen 's formative years and the period leading up to the celebrated performance at the 1985 Live Aid concert .
The film has grossed over $ 635 million worldwide , making it the highest - grossing musical biographical film of all time .
Critically , it received mixed reviews , with Malek 's portrayal of Mercury lauded more than the rest of the film and cast .
While the Live Aid segment was praised , criticism came from not exploring more complex themes involving Mercury , with the New York Post 's Johnny Oleksinski stating , " What we ultimately wanted from Bohemian Rhapsody was not carbon - copied concerts , but behind - closed - doors insight into a deeply private , complicated , internationally beloved superstar . "
After the release of the film , " Bohemian Rhapsody " re - entered the US Billboard Hot 100 for the third time ( having previously charted in 1976 and 1992 ) , charting at number 33 on 12 November 2018 .
BAND MEMBERS Section::::Band members .
Current members * Brian May – guitar , keyboards , vocals * Roger Taylor – drums , guitar , keyboards , vocals
Former members
* Freddie Mercury – lead vocals , keyboards , guitar * John Deacon – bass , guitar , keyboards Long - term Queen + vocalists
* Paul Rodgers * Adam Lambert Current touring members
* Spike Edney – keyboards , piano , rhythm guitar , backing vocals
* Neil Fairclough – bass guitar , backing vocals
* Tyler Warren – percussion , drums , backing vocals
Former touring members
* Morgan Fisher – keyboards , piano * Fred Mandel – keyboards , piano * David Grosman –
bass guitar *
Jamie Moses – rhythm guitar , backing vocals
* Danny Miranda – bass guitar , backing vocals * Rufus Tiger Taylor – percussion , drums , backing vocals
Early members
*
Mike Grose – bass * Barry Mitchell – bass * Doug Bogie – bass TIMELINE AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
TOURS
*
Queen
I Tour
( 1973–74 ) * Queen II Tour ( 1974 )
* Sheer Heart Attack Tour ( 1974–75 ) * A Night at the Opera Tour ( 1975–76 ) * Summer Gigs 1976 ( 1976 ) * A Day at the Races Tour ( 1977 )
* News of the World Tour ( 1977–78 )
* Jazz Tour ( 1978–79 )
* Crazy Tour ( 1979 )
* The Game Tour ( 1980–81 ) * Hot Space Tour ( 1982 )
* The Works Tour ( 1984–85 ) * The Magic Tour ( 1986 )
* Queen + Paul Rodgers Tour ( 2005–06 )
* Rock the Cosmos Tour ( 2008 ) * Queen +
Adam Lambert Tour 2012 ( 2012 )
* Queen + Adam Lambert Tour 2014–2015
( 2014–15 )
* Queen + Adam Lambert
2016 Summer Festival Tour ( 2016 )
* Queen + Adam Lambert
Tour 2017–2018
( 2017–18 )
*
The Rhapsody Tour ( 2019 )
DISCOGRAPHY * Queen ( 1973 ) * Queen II ( 1974 )
* Sheer Heart Attack ( 1974 )
* A Night at the Opera ( 1975 ) * A Day at the Races ( 1976 )
* News of the World ( 1977 ) * Jazz ( 1978 )
* The Game ( 1980 )
* Flash Gordon ( Original Soundtrack ) ( 1980 )
* Hot Space ( 1982 )
* The Works ( 1984 )
* A Kind of Magic ( 1986 )
* The Miracle ( 1989 )
* Innuendo ( 1991 ) * Made in Heaven ( 1995 ) REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS