BEEFALO Beefalo , also referred to as cattalo or the Canadian hybrid , are a fertile hybrid offspring of domestic cattle ( Bos taurus ) , usually a male in managed breeding programs , and the American bison ( Bison bison ) , usually a female in managed breeding programs .
The breed was created to combine the characteristics of both animals for beef production .
Beefalo are primarily cattle in genetics and appearance , with the breed association defining a full Beefalo as one with three - eighths ( 37.5 % ) bison genetics , while animals with higher percentages of bison genetics are called " bison hybrids " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Accidental crosses were noticed as long ago as 1749 in the southern English colonies of North America .
Beef and bison were first intentionally crossbred during the mid-19th century .
The first deliberate attempts to cross breed bison with cattle was made by Colonel Samuel Bedson , warden of Stoney Mountain Penitentiary , Winnipeg , in 1880 .
Bedson bought eight bison from a captive herd of James McKay and inter - bred them with Durham cattle .
The hybrids raised by Bedson were described by naturalist Ernest Thompson Seton : After seeing thousands of cattle die in a Kansas blizzard in 1886
, Charles " Buffalo " Jones , a co - founder of Garden City , Kansas , also worked to cross bison and cattle at a ranch near the future Grand Canyon National Park , with the hope the animals could survive the harsh winters .
He called the result " cattalo " in 1888 .
Mossom Martin Boyd of Bobcaygeon , Ontario first started the practice in Canada , publishing about some of his outcomes in the Journal of Heredity .
After his death in 1914 , the Canadian government continued experiments in crossbreeding up to 1964 , with little success .
For example , in 1936 the Canadian government had successfully cross - bred only 30 cattalos .
Lawrence Boyd continues the crossbreeding work of his grandfather on a farm in Alberta .
It was found early on that crossing
a male bison with a domestic cow would produce few offspring , but that crossing a domestic bull with a bison cow apparently solved the problem .
The female offspring proved fertile , but rarely so for the males .
Although the cattalo performed well , the mating problems meant the breeder had to maintain a herd of wild and difficult - to - handle bison cows .
In 1965 , Jim Burnett of Montana produced a hybrid bull that was fertile .
Soon after , Cory Skowronek of California formed the World Beefalo Association and began marketing the hybrids as a new breed .
The new name , Beefalo , was meant to separate this hybrid from the problems associated with the old cattalo hybrids .
The breed was eventually set at being genetically at least five - eighths Bos taurus and at most three - eighths Bison bison .
NUTRITION CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Nutrition characteristics .
A United States Department of Agriculture study found Beefalo meat , like bison meat , to be lower in fat and cholesterol than standard beef cattle .
The American Beefalo Association states that Beefalo are better able to tolerate cold and need less assistance calving than cattle , while retaining domestic cattle 's docile nature and fast growth rate .
They damage rangeland less than cattle .
They also state that Beefalo meat contains 4 to 6 % more protein and is more tender , flavorful , and nutritious than a standard steer .
Beefalo has significantly less calories , fat , and cholesterol , than beef cattle , chicken , and cod .
The American Beefalo Association states that the " crossbreeds are hardier , are more economical ( and less care - intensive ) to nurture , and produce meat that 's superior to that of the common cow . "
REGISTRATION Section::::Registration .
In 1983 , the three main Beefalo registration groups reorganized under the American Beefalo World Registry .
Until November 2008 , there were two Beefalo associations , the American Beefalo World Registry and American Beefalo International .
These organizations jointly formed the American Beefalo Association , Inc. , which currently operates as the registering body for Beefalo in the United States .
EFFECT ON BISON CONSERVATION Section::::Effect on bison conservation .
Most current bison herds are genetically polluted or partly crossbred with cattle .
There are only four genetically unmixed American bison herds left , and only two that are also free of brucellosis : the Wind Cave bison herd that roams Wind Cave National Park , South Dakota ; and the Henry Mountains herd in the Henry Mountains of Utah .
A herd on Catalina Island , California is not genetically pure or self - sustaining .
Dr. Dirk Van Vuren , formerly of the University of Kansas , however , points out that " The bison today that carry cattle DNA look exactly like bison , function exactly like bison and in fact are bison .
For conservation groups , the interest is that they are not totally pure . "
CATTALO Section::::Cattalo .
The term " cattalo " is defined by United States law as a cross of bison and cattle which have a bison appearance ; in Canada , however , the term is used for hybrids of all degrees and appearance .
In some U.S. states , cattalo are regulated as " exotic animals " , along with pure bison and deer .
However , in most states , bison and hybrids which are raised solely for livestock ( meat and sale ) purposes similar to cattle , are considered domestic animals like cattle , and do not require special permits .
SEE ALSO
* American cattle
* Hybridmaster * Bovid hybrid * Haldane 's rule
*
Żubroń
* Wind Cave bison herd * Antelope Island bison herd
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Kansas State Historical Society
* The Story of Cattalo .
Canadian Geographic