THE THREE LITTLE PIGS
The Three Little Pigs is a fable about three pigs who build three houses of different materials .
A Big Bad Wolf blows down the first two pigs ' houses , made of straw and sticks respectively , but is unable to destroy the third pig 's house , made of bricks .
Printed versions date back to the 1840s , but the story itself is thought to be much older .
The phrases used in the story , and the various morals drawn from it , have become embedded in Western culture .
Many versions of The Three Little Pigs have been recreated or have been modified over the years , sometimes making the wolf a kind character .
It is a type B124 folktale in the Aarne – Thompson classification system .
TRADITIONAL VERSIONS
Section::::Traditional versions .
The Three Little Pigs was included in The Nursery Rhymes of England ( London and New York , c.1886 ) , by James Halliwell - Phillipps .
The story in its arguably best - known form appeared in English Fairy Tales by Joseph Jacobs , first published on June 19 , 1890 and crediting Halliwell as his source .
The story begins with the title characters being sent out into the world by their mother , to " seek out their fortune " .
The first little pig builds a house of straw , but a wolf blows it down and devours him .
The second little pig builds a house of sticks , which the wolf also blows down , and the second little pig is also devoured .
Each exchange between wolf and pig features ringing proverbial phrases , namely :
The third little pig builds a house of bricks .
The wolf fails to blow down the house .
He then attempts to trick the pig out of the house by asking to meet him at various places , but he is outwitted each time .
Finally , the wolf resolves to come down the chimney , whereupon the pig catches the wolf in a cauldron of boiling water , slams the lid on , then cooks and eats him .
In some versions , the first and second little pigs are not eaten by the wolf after he demolishes their homes , but instead run to their brother 's house , and after the wolf goes down the chimney he either dies like in the original , or runs away and never returns to eat the three little pigs , who all survive in either case .
The story uses the literary rule of three , expressed in this case as a " contrasting three " , as the third pig 's brick house turns out to be the only one which is adequate to withstand the wolf .
Variations of the tale appeared in Uncle Remus : His Songs and Sayings in 1881 .
The story also made an appearance in Nights with Uncle Remus in 1883 , both by Joel Chandler Harris , in which the pigs were replaced by Brer Rabbit .
Andrew Lang included it in The Green Fairy Book , published in 1892 , but did not cite his source .
In contrast to Jacobs 's version , which left the pigs nameless , Lang 's retelling cast the pigs as Browny , Whitey , and Blacky .
It also set itself apart by exploring each pig 's character and detailing interaction between them .
The antagonist of this version is a fox , not a wolf .
The pigs ' houses are made either of mud , cabbage , or brick .
Blacky , the third pig , rescues his brother and sister from the fox 's den after the fox has been defeated .
LATER ADAPTATIONS DISNEY CARTOON Section::::Later adaptations .
Section::::Disney cartoon .
The most well - known version of the story is the award - winning 1933 Silly Symphony cartoon , which was produced by Walt Disney .
The production cast the title characters as Fifer Pig , Fiddler Pig , and Practical Pig .
The first two are depicted as both frivolous and arrogant .
The story has been somewhat softened .
The first two pigs still get their houses blown down , but escape from the wolf .
Also , the wolf is not boiled to death but simply burns his behind and runs away .
Three sequels soon followed in 1934 , 1936 and 1939 respectively as a result of the short 's popularity .
Fifer Pig , Fiddler Pig , Practical Pig and the Big Bad Wolf appeared in the 2001 series Disney 's House of Mouse in many episodes , and again in .
The three pigs can be seen in Walt Disney Parks and Resorts as greetable characters .
WARNER BROTHERS AND MGM VERSIONS
Section::::Warner Brothers and MGM versions .
In 1942 , there was a Merrie Melodies version , Pigs in a Polka , which was a serious musical treatment , plus the usual Friz Freleng visual humor .
It parodies both the Disney version , and Fantasia itself .
Other versions of the tale were also made .
One was an MGM Tex Avery cartoon named Blitz Wolf , a 1942 wartime version with the Wolf as a Nazi .
Another animated spoof was a 1952 Warner Brothers cartoon called The Turn - Tale Wolf , directed by Robert McKimson .
This cartoon tells the story from the wolf 's point of view and makes the pigs out to be the villains .
Another Warner Brothers spoof was Friz Freleng 's The Three Little Bops ( 1957 ) , which depicts the three little pigs as jazz musicians who refuse to let the wolf join their band .
SINGLISH VERSION Section::::Singlish version .
In 2013 , Singaporean artist Casey Chen re - wrote the story with the Singlish accent and published it as " The Three Little Pigs Lah ! " .
The storyline largely remains the same , but is set in Singapore and comes with visual hints of the country placed subtly in the illustrations found throughout the book .
" The Three Little Pigs Lah ! " represents an expression of the Singaporean identity , and has received a generally positive response from locals .
SUBSEQUENT RETELLINGS
Section::::Subsequent retellings .
In 1953 , Tex Avery did a Droopy cartoon , " The Three Little Pups " .
In it , the wolf is a Southern - accented dog catcher ( voiced by Daws Butler ) trying to catch Droopy and his brothers , Snoopy and Loopy , to put in the dog pound .
Though successfully blowing the first two houses down , he meets his match when he fails to blow down Droopy 's house of bricks .
The dog catcher makes several failed attempts to destroy the house and catch the pups .
His last failed attempt ended with him " going to television " where he is playing a cowboy on the TV show the pups were watching .
The 1989 parody The True Story of the 3 Little Pigs !
is presented as a first - person narrative by the wolf , who portrays the entire incident as a misunderstanding ; he had gone to the pigs to borrow some sugar , had destroyed their houses in a sneezing fit , ate the first two pigs to not waste food ( since they 'd died in the house collapse anyway ) , and was caught attacking the third pig 's house after the pig had continually insulted him .
The 1992 Green Jellö song , Three Little Pigs ( and its claymation music video ) sets the story in Los Angeles .
The wolf drives a Harley Davidson motorcycle , the first little pig is an aspiring guitarist , the second is a cannabis smoking , dumpster diving evangelist and the third holds a Master of Architecture degree from Harvard University .
In the end , with all three pigs barricaded in the brick house , the third pig calls 9 - 1 - 1 .
John Rambo is dispatched to the scene , and kills the wolf with a machine gun .
The 1993 children 's book
The Three Little Wolves and the Big Bad Pig inverts the cast and makes a few changes to the plot : the wolves build a brick house , then a concrete house , then a steel house , and finally a house of flowers .
The pig is unable to blow the houses down , destroying them by other means , but eventually gives up his wicked ways when he smells the scent of the flower house , and becomes friends with the wolves .
In one Shining Time Station episode , Schemer 's Alone , Midge Smoot reads a version of this story to Schemer who paid her an IOU instead of real money , despite the fact that he 's tricking his friends .
The three pigs and the wolf appear in the four Shrek films , and the specials Shrek the Halls and Scared Shrekless .
In 2003 , the Flemish company Studio 100 created a musical called Three Little Pigs ( ) , which follows the three daughters of the pig with the house of stone with new original songs , introducing a completely new story loosely based on the original story .
The musical was specially written for the band K3 , who play the three little pigs , Pirky , Parky and Porky ( ) .
In 2014 , Peter Lund let the three little pigs live together in a village in the musical Grimm with Little Red Riding Hood and other fairy tale characters .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The nursery rhymes of England By James Orchard Halliwell - Phillipps , pp .
37–41 on books.google.com * The Story of the Three Little Pigs in The nursery rhymes of England , by Halliwell , pp .
37–41 on Archive.org
* The Three Little Pigs : Pleasure principle versus reality principle , from : The Uses of Enchantment , The Meaning and Importance of Fairy Tales , by Bruno Bettelheim , Vintage Books , NY , 1975
* 19th century versions of the Three Little Pigs story
* The Golden Goose Book : The Story of the Three Little Pigs from Google books
* MP3 of the song "
Who 's Afraid of the Big Bad Wolf "