I AM LEGEND ( NOVEL )
I Am Legend
is a 1954 science fiction horror novel by American writer Richard Matheson .
It was influential in the development of the zombie - vampire genre and in popularizing the concept of a worldwide apocalypse due to disease .
The novel was a success and was adapted into the films The Last Man on Earth ( 1964 ) , The Omega Man ( 1971 ) , I Am Legend ( 2007 ) , and the direct - to - video production I Am Omega ( 2007 ) .
It was also an inspiration behind Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ) .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Robert Neville is the apparent sole survivor of a pandemic whose symptoms resemble vampirism .
It is said that the pandemic was caused by a war , and that it was spread by dust storms in the cities and an explosion in the mosquito population .
The narrative details Neville 's daily life in Los Angeles as he attempts to comprehend , research , and possibly cure the disease , to which he is immune .
Neville 's past is revealed through flashbacks ; the disease claimed his wife and daughter , and he was forced to kill his wife after she seemingly rose from the dead as a vampire and attacked him .
Before he killed her , Neville says he did try to keep her with him but gives no details about this .
Neville survives by barricading himself inside his house after sunset , and he is further protected by garlic , mirrors , and crucifixes .
Swarms of vampires , led by Neville 's neighbor , Ben Cortman , regularly surround his house , trying to find ways to get inside .
During the day , he scavenges for supplies and searches out the inactive vampires , driving stakes into their hearts to kill them .
He finds brief solace in a stray dog that finds its way to his house .
Desperate for company , Neville slowly earns the dog 's trust with food and brings it into the house .
Despite his efforts , the dog proves to be infected and dies a week later .
After bouts of depression and alcoholism , Neville decides to find out the scientific cause of the pandemic .
He obtains books and other research materials from a library , and through painstaking research discovers the root of the disease in a strain of bacteria capable of infecting both deceased and living hosts .
His experiments also reveals that the infection creates an allergic reaction to garlic in the host .
He further discovers that the vampires are affected by mirrors and crosses because of " hysterical blindness " , the result of previous psychological conditioning of the infected .
Driven insane by the disease , the infected now react as they believe they should when confronted with these items .
Even then , their reaction is constrained to the beliefs of the particular person ; for example , a Christian vampire would fear the cross , but a Jewish vampire would not .
Neville also discovers more efficient means of killing the vampires , other than just driving a stake into their hearts .
This includes exposing them to direct sunlight ( which kills the bacteria ) or inflicting deep wounds on their bodies so that the bacteria switch from being anaerobic symbionts to aerobic parasites , rapidly consuming their hosts when exposed to air .
He is now killing such large numbers of vampires in his daily forays that his nightly visitors have diminished significantly .
After three years , Neville sees an apparently uninfected woman , Ruth , in broad daylight , and captures her .
After some convincing , Ruth tells him her story of how she and her husband survived the pandemic ( though her husband was killed two weeks earlier ) .
Neville is puzzled by the fact that she is upset when he speaks of killing vampires ; he thinks that if her story of survival was true , she would have become hardened to the act .
He attempts to test whether she is a vampire by exposing her to garlic , which causes her to recoil violently .
At night Neville is startled awake and finds Ruth fully clothed at the front door of the house .
Suspicious , he questions her motives , but relates the trauma of his past , whereupon they comfort each other .
Ruth reluctantly allows him to take a blood sample but knocks him unconscious when the sample reveals that she is infected .
When he wakes , Neville discovers a note from Ruth confessing that she is actually infected and that Neville was responsible for her husband 's death .
Ruth admits that she was sent to spy on him .
It turns out that only the infected created from reanimated corpses are utterly feral , but not those who were alive when they were infected .
The living - infected have slowly overcome their disease until they can spend short periods of time in sunlight , and are attempting to build a new society .
They have developed medication which helps them to overcome the most severe symptoms of the infection .
Ruth warns Neville that her people will attempt to capture him , and that he should leave his house and escape to the mountains .
Neville can not bring himself to leave his house , however , and assumes that he will be captured and treated fairly by the new society .
Infected members of the new society eventually attack the house .
During the attack , the members of the new society violently dispatch the feral vampires outside the house , and Neville becomes alarmed at the grim enjoyment they appear to take from this task .
Realising that the intention of the attackers may be to kill him rather than to capture him , he tries to defend himself with a pistol , leading to one of the infected shooting and badly injuring him .
Neville wakes in a barred cell where he is visited by Ruth , who informs him that she is a ranking member of the new society but , unlike the others , does not resent him .
Ruth attempts to present a façade of indifference to Neville , but is unable to maintain it during her discussion with him .
After discussing the effects of Neville 's vampire - killing activities on the new society , she acknowledges the need for Neville 's execution and gives him pills , claiming they will " make it easier " .
Fatally injured , Neville accepts his fate and asks Ruth not to let this society become heartless .
Ruth kisses him and leaves .
Neville goes to his prison window and sees the infected waiting for his execution .
He now sees that the infected view him with the same hatred and fear that he once felt for the vampires ; he realizes that he , a remnant of old humanity , is now a legend to the new race born of the infection : Just as vampires are monsters that hunt humans during the time of day they are not active ( night ) , he is a feared monster that hunts the vampires during the daylight hours when they are asleep .
He recognizes that their desire to kill him is not something he can condemn .
As the pills take effect , he thinks : " [ I am ] a new superstition entering the unassailable fortress of forever .
I am legend . "
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception . As related from In Search of Wonder ( 1956 )
, Damon Knight wrote : The book is full of good ideas , every other one of which is immediately dropped and kicked out of sight .
The characters are child 's drawings , as blank - eyed and expressionless as the author himself in his back - cover photograph .
The plot limps .
All the same , the story could have been an admirable minor work in the tradition of Dracula , if only the author , or somebody , had not insisted on encumbering it with the year 's most childish set of ' scientific ' rationalizations .
Galaxy reviewer Groff Conklin described Legend as " a weird [ and ] rather slow - moving first novel ...
a horrid , violent , sometimes exciting but too often overdone tour de force .
"
Anthony Boucher praised the novel , saying " Matheson has added a new variant on the Last Man theme ... and has given striking vigor to his invention by a forceful style of storytelling which derives from the best hard - boiled crime novels " .
Dan Schneider from International Writers Magazine :
Book Review wrote in 2005 : ... despite having vampires in it , [ the novel ] is not a novel on vampires , nor even a horror nor sci - fi novel at all , in the deepest sense .
Instead , it is perhaps the greatest novel written on human loneliness .
It far surpasses Daniel Defoe 's Robinson Crusoe in that regard .
Its insights into what it is to be human go far beyond genre , and is all the more surprising because , having read his short stories -- which range from competent but simplistic , to having classic Twilight Zone twists ( he was a major contributor to the original TV series)--there is nothing within those short stories that suggests the supreme majesty of the existential masterpiece I Am
Legend was aborning .
In 2012 , the Horror Writers Association gave I Am Legend the special Vampire Novel of the Century Award .
INFLUENCE Section::::Influence .
Although Matheson calls the assailants in his novel " vampires " , and though their condition is transmitted through blood and garlic is an apotropaic - like repellant , there is little similarity between them and vampires as developed by John William Polidori and his successors , who come straight out of the gothic fiction tradition .
In I Am Legend , the " vampires " share more similarities with zombies , and the novel influenced the zombie genre and popularized the concept of a worldwide zombie apocalypse .
Although the idea has now become commonplace , a scientific origin for vampirism or zombies was fairly original when written .
According to Clasen : Though referred to as " the first modern vampire novel " , it is as a novel of social theme that I Am Legend made a lasting impression on the cinematic zombie genre , by way of director George A. Romero , who acknowledged its influence and that of its 1964 adaptation , The Last Man on Earth , upon his seminal film Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ) .
Discussing the creation of Night of the Living Dead , Romero remarked , " I had written a short story , which I basically had ripped off from a Richard Matheson novel called I Am Legend . "
Moreover , film critics noted similarities between Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ) and The Last Man on Earth ( 1964 ) .
Stephen King said , " Books like I Am Legend were an inspiration to me " .
Film critics noted that the British film 28 Days Later ( 2002 ) and its sequel
28 Weeks Later both feature a rabies - type plague ravaging Great Britain , analogous to I Am Legend .
Tim Cain , the producer , lead programmer and one of the main designers of the 1997 computer game Fallout , said : This book was how a [ sic ] individual would handle thinking that he was the last survivor on Earth .
This is why in Fallout 1 when you 're voted to leave the Vault , we really wanted that sense of isolationism ; that sense of :
You are the only person out here on the Wasteland who is , quote , " a normal person " , and we wanted you to feel , like , special in that way .
ADAPTATIONS COMICS Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Comics .
The book has also been adapted into a comic book miniseries titled Richard Matheson 's I Am Legend by Steve Niles and Elman Brown .
It was published in 1991 by Eclipse Comics and collected into a trade paperback by IDW Publishing .
An unrelated film tie - in was released in 2007 as a one - shot
I Am Legend :
Awakening published in a San Diego Comic - Con special by Vertigo .
RADIO PLAY Section::::Radio play .
A nine - part abridged reading of the novel performed by Angus MacInnes was originally broadcast on BBC Radio 7 in January 2006 and repeated in January 2018 .
FILMS
Section::::Films .
I Am
Legend has been adapted to a feature - length film four times ( one of which does not credit Matheson as the source ) .
Differing from the book , each of them portrays the Neville character as an accomplished scientist .
The first three adaptations show him finding a remedy and passing it on .
Adaptations differ from the novel by setting the events three years after the disaster , instead of happening " in the span of " three years .
Also adaptations are set in the near future , a few years after the film 's release , while the novel is set twenty years after its publication date .
THE LAST MAN ON EARTH Section::::The
Last Man on Earth .
In 1964 , Vincent Price starred as Dr. Robert Morgan ( rather than " Neville " ) in The Last Man on Earth ( the original title of this Italian production was L'ultimo uomo della Terra ) .
Matheson wrote the original screenplay for this adaptation , but due to later rewrites did not wish his name to appear in the credits ; as a result , Matheson is credited under the pseudonym " Logan Swanson " .
THE OMEGA MAN Section::::The Omega Man .
In 1971 , a far different version was produced , titled The Omega Man .
It starred Charlton Heston ( as Robert Neville ) and Anthony Zerbe .
Matheson had no influence on the screenplay for this film , and although the premise remains , it deviates from the novel in several ways , removing the infected people 's vampiric characteristics , except their sensitivity to light .
In this version , the infected are portrayed as nocturnal , black - robed , albino mutants , known as The Family .
Though intelligent , they eschew modern technology , believing it ( and those who use it , such as Neville ) to be evil and the cause of humanity 's downfall .
I AM
LEGEND
Section::::I Am Legend .
In 2007 , a third adaptation of the novel was produced , this time titled I Am Legend .
Directed by Francis Lawrence and starring Will Smith as Robert Neville , this film uses both Matheson 's novel and the 1971 Omega Man film as its sources .
This adaptation also deviates significantly from the novel .
In this version , the infection is caused by a virus originally intended to cure cancer .
Some vampiric elements are retained , such as sensitivity to UV light and attraction to blood .
The infected are portrayed as nocturnal , feral creatures of limited intelligence who hunt the uninfected with berserker - like rage .
Other creatures , such as dogs , are also infected by the virus .
The ending of the film was also altered to portray Neville as sacrificing his life to save humanity , rather than being executed for crimes against the surviving vampiric humans , although a deleted ending for the film was closer in spirit to the book .
The film takes place in New York City in the years 2009 and 2012 rather than Los Angeles in 1975–1977 .
I AM OMEGA Section::::I
Am Omega .
The Asylum production I Am Omega is a 2007 American feature length direct - to - video release starring Mark Dacascos .
The film takes place in a post - apocalyptic Los Angeles , which is overrun by savage , cannibalistic humans who have degenerated into a feral subspecies as the result of a genetic virus .
Once again , the adaption deviates from the novel and does not credit Matheson .
In this adaption , " Renchard " has been forced to live in a daily struggle for survival against the mutants .
Renchard is contacted via webcam by Brianna ( Jennifer Lee Wiggins ) , another survivor who was stranded in Los Angeles while trying to find Antioch , a community of survivors .
Renchard is forced to aid her and two others escape the city in which he has strategically placed time bombs , set to go off in 24 hours .
This film was rushed into production by The Asylum and released a month prior to the bigger budget Francis Lawrence project .
SEE ALSO
* Apocalyptic and post - apocalyptic fiction *
The Last Man * Survivalism
* Vampire literature * Zombie REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The I Am Legend Book Archive