SHORTCRUST PASTRY
Shortcrust pastry is a type of pastry often used for the base of a tart , quiche or pie .
Shortcrust pastry can be used to make both sweet and savory pies such as apple pie , quiche , lemon meringue or chicken pie .
PROPORTIONS Section::::Proportions .
Shortcrust pastry recipes usually call for twice as much flour as fat by weight .
Fat ( lard , shortening , butter or full - fat margarine ) is rubbed into plain flour to create a loose mixture that is then bound using a small amount of ice water , rolled out , then shaped and placed to create the top or bottom of a flan or meat pie .
Often , equal amounts of butter and lard are used to make the pastry , ensuring that the ratio of the two fat products is half that of the flour .
The butter is employed to give the pastry a rich flavor , while the lard ensures optimum texture .
TYPES
*
Pâte à foncer is French shortcrust pastry that includes egg .
Egg and butter are worked together with a small quantity of sugar and salt before the flour is drawn into the mixture and cold water added to bind it .
* Pâte brisée is similar to pâte
à foncer , but is lighter and more delicate due to an increased quantity of butter — up to three fifths the quantity of flour .
Very often is made with no sugar , as a savoury crust for pies .
* Pâte sucrée ( sweetcrust pastry , sweet dough , or sweet paste ) is made with the addition of sugar , which sweetens the mix and impedes the gluten strands , creating a pastry that breaks up easily in the mouth .
An alternative is gluten - free pastry .
* Pâte Sablée same ingredients as pâte sucrée , but the butter is creamed with the sugar and the eggs before the flour is folded in .
This mixes the butter more evenly , which makes the dough puff much less , creating a more " snappy " and dry pastry , instead of the crumbly texture of the previous doughs .
Sablé works better for sweet tarts , tea biscuits , and piped shapes than other short doughs , as they hold their shape much more efficiently , and are the basis for gingerbread and sandwich biscuits .
No water is needed , neither is the dough particularly temperature - sensitive .
TECHNIQUES Section::::Techniques .
In preparing a shortcrust , the fat and flour are " cut " into each other , rather than blended , and the ingredients are kept cold .
This ensures that the fat remains distinct in the crust , and when it heats during baking , steam is released , resulting in the pockets that make a flaky crust .
Water is only added once the fat and flour are thoroughly combined .
This ensures that the flour granules are adequately coated with fat and are less likely to develop gluten .
This may be achieved with the use of a food processor , a specialized kitchen utensil called a pastry blender , or through various alternatives , like a pair of table knives held in one hand .
Overworking the dough is also a hazard .
Overworking elongates the gluten strands , creating a product that is tough , rather than light and crumbly or flaky .
SEE ALSO
* List of pastries REFERENCES