PRINCESS
LEIA Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan ( also Senator Leia Organa or General Leia Organa ) is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise , portrayed in films by Carrie Fisher .
Introduced in the original Star Wars film in 1977 , Leia is princess of the planet Alderaan , a member of the Imperial Senate and an agent of the Rebel Alliance .
She thwarts the sinister Sith Lord Darth Vader and helps bring about the destruction of the Empire 's cataclysmic superweapon , the Death Star .
In The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) , Leia commands a Rebel base and evades Vader as she falls in love with the smuggler , Han Solo .
In Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) , Leia leads the operation to rescue Han from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt , and is revealed to be Vader 's daughter and the twin sister of Luke Skywalker .
The prequel film ( 2005 ) establishes that the twins ' mother is Senator ( and former queen )
Padmé Amidala of Naboo , who dies after childbirth .
Leia is adopted by Senator Bail and Queen Breha Organa of Alderaan .
In ( 2015 ) and ( 2017 ) , Leia is the founder and General of the Resistance against the First Order .
She and Han have a son named Ben , who adopted the name Kylo Ren after turning to the dark side of the Force .
In the Star Wars Legends series of novels , comics and video games ( 1977–2014 ) , which are set in an alternate continuity , Leia continues her adventures with Han and Luke after Return of the Jedi , fighting Imperial resurgences and new threats to the galaxy .
She becomes the Chief of State of the New Republic and a Jedi Master , and is the mother to three children by Han : Jaina , Jacen and Anakin Solo .
One of the more popular Star Wars characters , Leia has been called a 1980s icon , a feminist hero and model for other adventure heroines .
She has appeared in many derivative works and merchandising , and has been referenced or parodied in several TV shows and films .
Her " cinnamon buns " hairstyle from Star Wars ( 1977 ) and metal bikini from Return of the Jedi have become cultural icons .
CREATION AND CASTING Section::::Creation and casting .
Leia was created by Star Wars creator George Lucas , who in 1999 explained his early development of the main characters :
In the rough draft of Star Wars , Leia is the spoiled teenage daughter of King Kayos and Queen Breha of Aquilae , with two brothers , Biggs and Windy ; Biggs returned to the fourth draft as a childhood friend of Luke .
Leia was at one point " the daughter of Owen Lars and his wife Beru ...
Luke 's cousin
– together they visit the grave of his mother , who perished with his father on a planet destroyed by the Death Star .
"
A later story synopsis establishes Leia as " Leia Antilles " , the daughter of Bail Antilles from the peaceful world of Organa Major .
In the fourth draft it was established that " Leia Organa " came instead from Alderaan .
Fisher was 19 when she was cast as Princess Leia , with actresses including Amy Irving , Cindy Williams and Jodie Foster also up for the role .
In 2014 , InkTank reported that the extended list of " more than two dozen actresses " who had auditioned for Leia included Glenn Close , Farrah Fawcett , Jessica Lange , Sissy Spacek , Sigourney Weaver , Cybill Shepherd , Jane Seymour , Anjelica Huston , Kim Basinger , Kathleen Turner , Geena Davis and Meryl Streep .
Asked about Streep in 2015 , Fisher said , " I 've never heard that one .
But Jodie Foster was up for it ...
that one I knew the most .
Amy Irving and Jodie .
And I got it . "
The second draft of the Return of the Jedi screenplay contained dialogue in which Obi - Wan tells Luke he has a twin sister .
She and their mother were " sent to the protection of friends in a distant system .
The mother died shortly thereafter , and Luke 's sister was adopted by Ben 's friends , the governor of Alderaan and his wife . "
Fisher explained in 1983 : " Leia 's real father left her mother when she was pregnant , so her mother married this King Organa .
I was adopted and grew up set apart from other people because I was a princess . "
Composer John Williams created a musical leitmotif for Leia which recurs throughout the Star Wars saga . "
Princess Leia 's Theme " was recorded as a concert suite ( 4:18 length ) for the score of the 1977 film .
CHARACTER Section::::Character .
Anthony Breznican of Entertainment Weekly describes Leia as a " diplomat , spy , warrior , undercover agent " .
Mark Edlitz calls her " a smart , feisty , brave diplomat and warrior " in The Huffington Post .
Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1983 :
She said in 2014 :
APPEARANCES FEATURE FILMS
STAR WARS
Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Feature films .
Section::::Star Wars .
Introduced in the original 1977 film Star Wars , Princess Leia Organa of Alderaan is a member of the Imperial Senate .
She is captured by Darth Vader on board
the ship Tantive IV , where she is acting as a spy for the Rebel Alliance .
Leia has secretly hidden the blueprints for the Death Star , the Empire 's moon - sized battle station , inside the astromech droid R2-D2 and has sent it to find one of the last remaining Jedi , Obi - Wan Kenobi , on the nearby planet of Tatooine .
Vader arrests Leia and has her tortured , but she resists revealing anything .
Death Star commander Grand Moff Tarkin threatens to destroy her home planet Alderaan with the Death Star unless she reveals the location of the hidden Rebel base .
She provides the location of an old , abandoned base on the planet Dantooine , but Tarkin orders Alderaan to be destroyed anyway .
Leia is rescued by Luke Skywalker and Han Solo , and they escape aboard Han 's ship , the Millennium Falcon .
After analyzing the Death Star 's schematics , the Rebels find a tiny weakness in the battle station , which Luke uses to destroy it in his X - wing fighter .
In the aftermath of the victory , Leia bestows medals on the heroes at the hidden Rebel base on Yavin 4 .
Alyssa Rosenberg of The Washington Post writes of Leia in the film :
Rosenberg also notes that , though Han is almost immediately attracted to Leia , they conflict because she insists on asserting command and he automatically resists , even as she proves herself to be worthy of it .
And despite her initial disdain for the smuggler , whom she sees as selfish , Leia later acknowledges " I knew there was more to you than money " when Han comes through for the Rebellion .
Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1980 that in the original script , when Luke and Han come to rescue a captured Leia , " I was hanging upside down with yellow eyes , like in The Exorcist ...
Some form of radar torture was done to me
and I was in a beam , bruised and beaten up , suspended in midair .
The reason it was cut from the film was because I was unconscious and the Wookiee would have had to carry me for , like , the next fifteen minutes . "
THE EMPIRE STRIKES BACK Section::::The Empire Strikes Back .
In The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) , Leia is at the Rebel base on Hoth .
She leads its evacuation during an Imperial attack , and then flees with Han , Chewbacca and C-3PO on Han 's ship , the Millennium Falcon .
They dodge pursuing Imperial TIE fighters by flying into an asteroid field when the Falcon hyperdrive breaks down , with Leia piloting the ship at one point .
Romance blossoms between Leia and Han during their flight from the Empire ; while hiding in the stomach of a space slug , they finally share a kiss .
With his ship needing repairs , Han seeks out his old friend Lando Calrissian in Cloud City , the floating city over Bespin .
Though he welcomes them graciously , Lando soon turns them over to a newly arrived Darth Vader , who hopes to use them as bait to capture Luke .
Leia confesses her love for Han as he is frozen in carbonite and then handed over to bounty hunter Boba Fett , who is charged with bringing him to the crime lord Jabba the Hutt .
Lando helps Leia , Chewbacca and the two droids escape .
Leia senses that Luke is in trouble , and goes back to save him after he is nearly killed during a lightsaber duel and confrontation with Vader .
Rosenberg notes : RETURN OF THE JEDI Section::::Return of the Jedi .
In Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) , Leia infiltrates Jabba the Hutt 's palace on Tatooine disguised as the Ubese bounty hunter Boushh , and brings a captive Chewbacca with her as part of the ruse .
She frees Han from the carbonite , but they are recaptured by Jabba .
Leia is now chained to Jabba as his slave , outfitted in a metal bikini .
After Luke arrives and kills Jabba 's Rancor , Jabba sentences Luke , Han and Chewbacca to be fed to the Sarlacc .
Lando ( disguised as a guard ) helps them overpower their captors , and Leia seizes the moment to strangle Jabba with her chain .
Luke and Leia swing to safety , blowing up Jabba 's barge behind them .
Later , the heroes go to the forest moon of Endor to prepare for a battle with the Empire .
There , Luke reveals to Leia that she is his twin sister and that Vader is their father .
Leia joins Han in leading the Rebels in battle with Imperial troops as the Rebel Fleet attacks the second Death Star .
Leia is slightly injured , but the Rebels , with help from the Ewoks , ultimately defeat the forces of the Empire , with the Death Star destroyed once more .
Fisher told Rolling Stone in 1983 , " In Return of the Jedi , [ Leia ] gets to be more feminine , more supportive , more affectionate .
But let 's not forget that these movies are basically boys ' fantasies .
So the other way they made her more female in this one was to have her take off her clothes .
"
Rosenberg writes of Han and Leia :
In the film , Leia says that she has vague memories of her real mother , who she describes as " kind ... but sad " .
Bouzereau quoted Lucas in 1997 : REVENGE OF THE SITH Section::::Revenge of the Sith .
In the prequel film ( 2005 ) , Padmé Amidala is pregnant with Anakin Skywalker 's twins near the end of the Clone Wars .
After Anakin turns to the dark side of the Force and becomes Darth Vader , Padmé gives birth to Luke and Leia on Polis Massa and then dies .
Leia is adopted by Senator Bail Organa and his wife Queen Breha of Alderaan .
Film critic Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote , " As we watch Anakin nearly melt in the lava , only to be put together , Frankenstein style , in a lab while Lucas intercuts scenes of Padme giving birth to the twins Luke and Leia , a link to genuine feeling is established at last . "
THE FORCE AWAKENS Section::::The Force Awakens .
In March 2013 , Fisher confirmed that she would reprise her role as Leia in .
Set 30 years after Return of the Jedi , The Force Awakens reintroduces a Leia who is " a little more battle weary , a little more broken hearted " .
In November 2015 , director J.J. Abrams said of Leia , " She 's referred to as General
but ... there 's a moment in the movie where a character sort of slips and calls her ' Princess . '
" Commenting on the story he added , " The stakes are pretty high in the story for her , so there 's not much goofing around where Leia 's concerned .
"
Asked how Leia is handling things in the film , Fisher said , " Not easily ...
[ she is ] solitary .
Under a lot of pressure .
Committed as ever to her cause , but I would imagine feeling somewhat defeated , tired , and pissed . "
In the film , Leia is the leader of the Resistance , a group formed by the New Republic to fight a proxy war with the First Order ( a group formed by the remnants of the Empire ) and trying to find Luke , who disappeared years earlier .
When her forces foil a First Order attack searching for the Resistance astromech droid BB-8 , Leia is reunited with Han , who has helped the renegade stormtrooper Finn and orphaned scavenger
Rey bring the droid this far .
Han and Leia have been estranged for many years ; their marriage fell apart after their son , Ben Solo , fell to the dark side and became the First Order commander Kylo Ren .
Leia believes Ben can still be brought back to the light side .
Han volunteers for a mission to infiltrate the First Order 's Starkiller Base to disable its defensive shields .
Confronting Ren , Han tries to convince his son to leave the First Order , but Ren instead impales his father on his lightsaber , although hesitant to do so .
Leia senses Han 's death through the Force , and later shares a moment of grief with Rey , who had thought of Han as a mentor .
Leia sees Rey , Chewbacca , and R2-D2 off when they depart to locate Luke , saying , " may the Force be with you " .
Asked why Leia is not shown to be a Jedi in The Force Awakens ( as she is in the Star Wars expanded universe works ) , Abrams told IGN , " It was a great question , and one that we talked about quite a bit , even with Carrie [ Fisher ] .
Why did she not take advantage of this natural Force strength that this character had .
And one of the answers was that it was simply a choice that she made , that her decision to run the Rebellion , and ultimately this Resistance , and consider herself a General , as opposed to a Jedi .
It was simply a choice that she took " .
He also added , " I would like to think that there really is n't much of a ticking clock , and it 's never too late ...
clearly we 've seen , and we do again , that she still is Force strong .
And it 's something that I think is an intrinsic piece of her character .
Fisher was nominated for a 2016 Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress for her portrayal .
THE LAST JEDI Section::::The
Last Jedi .
In December 2015 , producer Kathleen Kennedy confirmed that Fisher would reprise the role of Leia in the next installment , then known as Star Wars : Episode VIII , but later named .
Fisher died on December 27 , 2016 , after going into cardiac arrest .
It was confirmed that she had completed filming her role in the film shortly before her death .
In the film , Leia is among those on the bridge of her flagship , the Raddus , who are expelled into space when the ship is attacked by the First Order .
Leia uses the Force to pull herself back to the ship .
After recovering , she shoots and stuns Poe Dameron , who has mutinied against her successor , Vice Admiral Holdo .
From his solitude on Ahch - To , Luke projects himself through the Force to the Resistance stronghold on Crait and reunites with Leia , apologizing for what happened to Ben .
Leia replies that she knows her son is gone , but Luke reassures her that " no one 's ever really gone " .
While Luke distracts Kylo and his attacking First Order troops , Leia is among the remaining Resistance forces who escape from Crait in the Millennium Falcon .
EPISODE IX Section::::Episode IX .
Following Fisher 's death , Variety reported that she was slated to appear in and speculated that Lucasfilm would need to find a way to address her death and what would become of her character .
Filming began on August 1 , 2018 .
Lucasfilm announced in January 2017 that they had " no plans to digitally recreate Carrie Fisher 's performance as Princess or General Leia Organa " .
In April 2017 , Fisher 's family granted Disney and Lucasfilm the rights to use recent footage of the late actress in Episode IX .
However , Kennedy subsequently said that Fisher would not appear in the film .
In July 2018 , it was announced that Fisher will indeed be appearing as Leia in Episode IX , using unseen footage from and .
ANTHOLOGY FILMS
ROGUE ONE : A STAR WARS STORY Section::::Anthology films .
Section::::Rogue
One :
A Star Wars Story .
Leia makes a brief appearance in the final scene of the 2016 film Rogue One , receiving the plans for the Death Star as a lead - up to the beginning of A New Hope .
Since this movie takes place prior to the original Star Wars trilogy , a very young Leia was required .
To achieve that effect , a computer - generated image of a young Carrie Fisher was superimposed over Norwegian actress Ingvild Deila 's face ; archival audio of Fisher saying " Hope " was used to voice the character .
NOVELS Section::::Novels .
Leia makes her first literary appearance in , the novelization of the original 1977 film Star Wars , which was released six months before the film in November 1976 .
Credited to Lucas but ghostwritten by Alan Dean Foster , the novel was based on Lucas ' screenplay .
Leia later appeared in the novelizations The Empire Strikes Back ( 1980 ) by Donald F. Glut and Return of the Jedi ( 1983 ) by James Kahn .
She is also a point of view character in the of The Force Awakens by Foster .
Foster 's 1978 novel Splinter of the Mind 's Eye was commissioned by Lucas as the basis for a potential low - budget sequel to Star Wars should the film prove unsuccessful .
In the story , Luke and Leia seek a crystal on a swampy planet and eventually face Vader in combat .
Leia also appears in the line of novels and comic books , introduced in conjunction with The Force Awakens to connect the film with previous installments .
She is the lead character in the young adult novel Moving Target : A Princess Leia Adventure ( 2015 ) by Cecil Castellucci and Jason Fry , which is set between The Empire Strikes Back and Return of the Jedi , and Claudia Gray 's novels ( 2016 ) and ( 2017 ) .
The former is set six years before The Force Awakens , while the latter features a 16-year - old Leia before the events of A New Hope .
COMICS Section::::Comics .
Leia is the lead character in the five - part comic limited series ( 2015 ) , set between Episode IV :
A New Hope and The Empire Strikes Back .
She is featured prominently in the four - part comic limited series ( 2015 ) , set immediately after Return of the Jedi .
In Princess Leia # 2 and Shattered Empire , Leia is seen using her Force sensitivities to sense the past , and in Star Wars # 12 , she uses a lightsaber as a weapon for the first time canonically .
Princess Leia reveals Leia to have had royal training in martial arts and explores her reaction to the destruction of Alderaan , while Shattered Empire also portrays her as a skilled pilot who undertakes a dangerous mission alongside Poe Dameron 's mother .
TELEVISION STAR WARS
HOLIDAY SPECIAL
Section::::Television .
Section::::Star Wars Holiday Special .
Leia appears briefly in the 1978 Star Wars Holiday Special TV film as a leader and administrator of the new Rebel Alliance base .
She and C-3PO contact Chewbacca 's wife Mallatobuck for assistance in finding Chewbacca and Han .
Leia also appears in the cartoon segment at a different Rebel Base , located in an asteroid field , and at the Life Day ceremony at the end of the film .
Fisher also appeared in and hosted the November 18 , 1978 episode of Saturday Night Live that aired one day after the holiday special .
The Summer 1983 issue of Rolling Stone magazine poked fun at this appearance .
STAR WARS REBELS
Section::::Star Wars Rebels .
A teenage version of Princess Leia , voiced by Julie Dolan , appears in a 2016 episode of the animated series Star Wars Rebels , which is set between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope .
In the episode , Leia is sent on a secret mission to assist the titular rebels .
Executive producer Dave Filoni said of the appearance :
STAR WARS : FORCES OF DESTINY Section::::Star Wars : Forces of Destiny .
Leia appears in the animated series , voiced by Shelby Young .
STAR WARS
RESISTANCE Section::::Star Wars Resistance .
Leia appears in the animated series Star Wars Resistance , voiced by Rachel Butera and Carolyn Hennesy .
Acknowledging the opinion of some that the " Slave Leia " iconography tarnishes the character 's position as " feminist hero " , Rosenberg argues : Science fiction filmmaker Letia Clouston concurs , saying " Sci - fi has had a long history of strong female characters .
Yes , Princess Leia was in a gold bikini , but she was also the one who single - handedly killed Jabba .
When you take into account movies and TV shows like Terminator , Aliens , Battlestar Galactica , and even video games like Metroid , you can see sci - fi has consistently promoted the strength of women more than any other genre . "
FAMILY TREE
SEE ALSO
* List of Kenner Star Wars action figures
* Solo family
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Leia Organa on IMDb