STATE LEGISLATURE ( UNITED STATES )
A state legislature in the United States is the legislative body of any of the 50 U.S. states .
The formal name varies from state to state .
In 25 states , the legislature is simply called the Legislature , or the State Legislature , while in 19 states , the legislature is called the General Assembly .
In Massachusetts and New Hampshire , the legislature is called the General Court , while North Dakota and Oregon designate the legislature the Legislative Assembly .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Every state except Nebraska has a bicameral legislature , meaning that the legislature consists of two separate legislative chambers or houses .
In each case the smaller chamber is called the Senate and is usually referred to as the upper house .
This chamber typically , but not always , has the exclusive power to confirm appointments made by the governor and to try articles of impeachment .
( In a few states , a separate Executive Council , composed of members elected from large districts , performs the confirmation function . )
Members of the smaller chamber represent more citizens and usually serve for longer terms than members of the larger chamber , generally four years .
In 41 states , the larger chamber is called the House of Representatives .
Five states designate the larger chamber the Assembly and three states call it the House of Delegates .
Members of the larger chamber usually serve for terms of two years .
The larger chamber customarily has the exclusive power to initiate taxing legislation and articles of impeachment .
Prior to United States Supreme Court decisions Reynolds v. Sims and Baker v. Carr in the 1960s , the basis of representation in most state legislatures was modeled on that of the U.S. Congress : the state senators represented geographical units while members of the larger chamber represented population .
In 1964 , the United States Supreme Court announced the one man , one vote standard and invalidated state legislative representation based on geography .
( The ruling does not affect the U.S. Senate because that chamber 's makeup is prescribed by the U.S. Constitution . )
Nebraska originally had a bicameral legislature like the other states , but the lower house was abolished following a referendum , effective with the 1936 elections .
The remaining unicameral ( one - chamber ) legislature is called the Nebraska Legislature , but its members continue to be called senators .
DUTIES AND INFLUENCE Section::::Duties and influence .
As a legislative branch of government , a legislature generally performs state duties for a state in the same way that the United States Congress performs national duties at the national level .
Generally , the same system of checks and balances that exists at the Federal level also exists between the state legislature , the state executive officer ( governor ) and the state judiciary , though the degree to which this is so varies from one state to the next .
During a legislative session , the legislature considers matters introduced by its members or submitted by the governor .
Businesses and other special interest organizations often lobby the legislature to obtain beneficial legislation , defeat unfavorably perceived measures , or influence other legislative action .
A legislature also approves the state 's operating and capital budgets , which may begin as a legislative proposal or a submission by the governor .
Under the terms of Article V of the U.S. Constitution , state lawmakers retain the power to ratify Constitutional amendments which have been proposed by both houses of Congress and they also retain the ability to call for a national convention to propose amendments to the U.S. Constitution .
After the convention has concluded its business 75 % of the states will then be required to ratify what the convention has proposed .
Under Article II , state legislatures choose the manner of appointing the state 's presidential electors .
Formerly , state legislatures appointed the U.S. Senators from their respective states until the ratification of the 17th Amendment in 1913 required the direct election of Senators by the state 's voters .
LAWMAKING PROCESS
Section::::Lawmaking process .
Generally , the legislative bodies and their committees use either Mason 's Manual of Legislative Procedure or an amended form thereof .
During official meetings , a professional parliamentarian is available to ensure that legislation and accompanying discussion proceed as orderly as possible without bias .
BEGINNINGS Section::::Beginnings .
The lawmaking process begins with the introduction of a bill in either the House of Representatives or the Senate .
Bills may be introduced in either house , sometimes with the exception of bills increasing or decreasing revenue , which must originate in the House of Representatives .
The order of business in each house provides a proper time for the introduction of bills .
Bills are usually assigned consecutive numbers , given in the order of their introduction , to facilitate identification .
Usually a bill can not become enacted until it has been read on a certain number of days in each house .
Upon introduction , a bill is usually read by its title only , constituting the first reading of the bill .
Because a bill is usually read by title
only , it is important that the title give the members notice of the subject matter contained in the bill .
COMMITTEES GENERAL INFORMATION Section::::Committees .
Section::::General information .
As with other legislative bodies throughout the world , U. S. state legislatures operate mainly through committees when considering proposed bills .
Thus , committee action is probably the most important phase of the legislative process .
Most bills can not be enacted into law until it has been referred to , acted upon by , and returned from , a standing committee in each house .
Reference to committee usually follows the first reading of the bill .
Each committee is set up to consider bills relating to a particular subject .
Standing committees are charged with the important responsibility of examining bills and recommending action to the Senate or House .
Often on days when a legislature is not in session , the committees of each house meet and consider the bills that have been referred to them to decide if the assigned bills should be reported for further action .
For most bills , the recommendations of the committee are followed , although either house is free to accept or reject the action of the committee .
Bills reported favorably by a committee may be placed on a regular calendar ( the agenda of the deliberative body ) .
Most of the work of the legislature is done by committees .
The legislature as a whole relies on its committees to report out only those bills deserving the consideration of the entire house .
Through standing committees , each bill is addressed by a group of members who have special knowledge of its subject .
Some members of the legislature have expert knowledge of particular subjects of legislation , and these members are usually placed on committees to take full advantage of this specialized knowledge .
For this reason , the legislature often accepts the final recommendations of its standing committees .
As has been noted , however , the legislature does not completely abdicate its responsibility for the consideration of pending bills .
If the need arises , the members of either house can force a committee to take action on a bill , or they can ignore the committee 's recommendations .
POST - COMMITTEE REPORTS OF COMMITTEE Section::::Post - committee .
Section::::Reports of Committee .
After a committee has completed work on a bill , it reports the bill to the appropriate house during the " reports of committees " in the daily order of business .
Reported bills are immediately given a second reading .
The houses do not vote on a bill at the time it is reported ; however , reported bills are placed on the calendar for the next legislative day .
This second reading is made by title only .
The regular calendar is a list of bills that have been favorably reported from committee and are ready for consideration by the membership of the entire house .
THIRD READING
Section::::Third reading .
Regardless of how a bill is placed on the calendar , once the bill is considered and adopted , this is called the third reading .
It is at this third reading of the bill that the entire legislature gives consideration to its passage .
At this time , the bill may be studied in detail , debated , amended , and read at length before final passage .
If the majority vote in favor of the bill , it is recorded as passed .
TRANSMISSION TO SECOND HOUSE Section::::Transmission to second house .
A bill that is passed in one house is transmitted , along with a formal message , to the other house .
If the bill is not reported from committee or is not considered by the full house , the bill is defeated .
The house of origin , upon return of its amended bill , may take any one of several courses of action .
It may concur in the amendment by the adoption of a motion to that effect ; then the bill , having been passed by both houses in identical form , is ready for enrollment .
Another possibility is that the house of origin may adopt a motion to non - concur in the amendment , at which point the bill dies .
Finally , the house of origin may refuse to accept the amendment but request that a conference committee be appointed .
The other house usually agrees to the request , and the presiding officer of each house appoints members to the conference committee .
CONFERENCE COMMITTEES Section::::Conference committees .
A conference committee is often empaneled to discuss the points of difference between the two houses ' versions of the same bill , and tries to reach an agreement between them so that the identical bill can be passed by both houses .
If an agreement is reached and if both houses adopt the conference committee 's report , the bill is passed .
If either house refuses to adopt the report of the conference committee , a motion may be made for further conference .
If a conference committee is unable to reach an agreement , it may be discharged , and a new conference committee may be appointed .
Some highly controversial bills may be referred to several different conference committees .
If an agreement is never reached in conference prior to the end of the legislative session , the bill is lost .
When a bill has passed both houses in identical form , it is then ready for transmittal to the Governor .
PRESENTATION TO THE GOVERNOR Section::::Presentation to the governor .
Once a bill reaches the governor , he or she may sign it , which completes its enactment into law .
From this point , the bill becomes an act , and remains the law of the state unless repealed by legislative action , or overturned by a court decision .
If the governor does not approve of the bill , he or she may veto it .
In the event of a veto , the governor returns the bill to the house in which it originated , with a message explaining his or her objections and suggesting any amendments ( if applicable ) which might remove those objections .
The bill is then reconsidered , and if a simple majority of the members of both houses agrees to the proposed executive amendments , it is returned to the Governor , as he or she revised it , for his or her signature .
On the other hand , a simple majority of the members of each house can choose to approve a vetoed bill precisely as the Legislature originally passed it , in which case it becomes a law over the governor 's veto .
This is in contrast to the practice in most states and the federal government , which require a two - thirds majority in both houses to override a governor 's veto .
If the Governor fails to return a bill to the legislative house in which it originated within a specified number of days after it was presented to him or her , it becomes a law without their signature .
The bills that reach the Governor less than a specified number of days before the end of the session may be approved by him or her within ten days after adjournment .
The bills not approved within that time do not become law .
This is known as a " pocket veto " .
This is the most conclusive form of veto , for the Legislature ( having adjourned ) has no chance to reconsider the vetoed measure .
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS Section::::Constitutional amendments .
Sometimes what the legislature wishes to accomplish can not be done simply by the passage of a bill , but rather requires amending the state constitution .
Each state has specified steps intended to make it difficult to alter the constitution without the sufficient support of either the legislature , or the people , or both .
ASPECTS OF THE CAREER OF THE STATE
LEGISLATOR Section::::Aspects of the career of the state legislator .
In most states , a new state legislature convenes in January of the odd - numbered year after the election of members to the larger chamber .
The period during which the legislature remains in session varies .
In states where the legislature is considered part - time , a session may last several months ; where the legislature is considered full - time , the session may last all year , with periodic breaks for district work .
Currently , there are 7,383 state legislators in the United States .
They are usually assisted by staff aides to help prepare and analyze legislation , to review and amend submitted budgets , and to help solve constituents ' grievances with the state government .
Many state legislators meet every year at the National Conference of The Council of State Governments ( CSG ) , headquartered in Lexington , Kentucky , with offices in Washington , DC , New York City , Chicago , Atlanta and Sacramento , and at the annual meetings of CSG 's regions , The Southern Legislative Conference , The Midwestern Legislative Conference , the Eastern Regional Conference and CSG West , and at the Legislative Summit of the National Conference of State Legislatures , which is headquartered in Denver , Colorado and has a lobbying office in Washington ,
D.C. The American Legislative Exchange Council ( ALEC ) , a conservative organization funded by the private sector focusing on state legislatures , also has an annual meeting attracting many legislators .
SEE ALSO
* List of United States state legislatures * List of current U.S. state legislators * Comparison of U.S. state governments * United States state legislatures ' partisan trend * Legislative Assemblies of Canada 's provinces and territories
* Parliaments of the Australian states and territories * American Legislative Exchange Council members REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* National Conference of State Legislatures
* Women in State Legislatures