PAWN ( CHESS )
The pawn ( ♙ , ♟ ) is the most numerous piece in the game of chess , and in most circumstances , also the weakest .
It historically represents infantry , or more particularly , armed peasants or pikemen .
Each player begins a game with eight pawns , one on each square of the immediately in front of the other pieces .
( The white pawns start on a2 , b2 , c2 , d2 , e2 , f2 , g2 , h2 ; the black pawns start on a7 , b7 , c7 , d7 .
e7 , f7 , g7 , h7 . )
Individual pawns are referred to by the on which they stand .
For example , one speaks of " White 's f - pawn " or " Black 's b - pawn " .
Alternatively , they can be referred to by the piece which stood on that file at the beginning of the game , e.g. " White 's king bishop 's pawn " or " Black 's queen knight 's pawn " .
It is also common to refer to a ' , meaning any pawn on the a- or h - files ,
a ' ( on the b- or g - files ) , a ' ( on the c- or f - files ) , a ' ( on the d - file ) , a ' ( on the e - file ) , and a ' ( on the d- or e - files ) .
MOVEMENT Section::::Movement .
Unlike the other pieces , pawns can not move backwards .
Normally a pawn moves by advancing a single square , but the first time a pawn moves , it has the option of advancing two squares .
Pawns may not use the initial two - square advance to jump over an occupied square , or to capture .
Any piece immediately in front of a pawn , friend or foe , blocks its advance .
In the diagram , the pawn on c4 can move to c5 , while the pawn on e2 can move to either e3 or e4 .
CAPTURING
Section::::Capturing .
Unlike other pieces , the pawn does not capture in the same direction as it moves .
A pawn captures diagonally forward one square to the left or right ( see diagram ) .
Another unusual rule is the en passant capture .
It can occur after a pawn advances two squares using its initial two - step move option , and the square passed over is attacked by an enemy pawn .
The enemy pawn is entitled to capture the moved pawn " in passing " – as if it had advanced only one square .
The capturing pawn moves to the square over which the moved pawn passed ( see diagram ) , and the moved pawn is removed from the board .
The option to capture en passant must be exercised on the move immediately following the double - step pawn advance , or it is lost for the remainder of the game .
En passant was added in the 15th century to compensate for the then newly added two - square initial move rule ( Hooper & Whyld 1992:124 ) .
Without en passant , a pawn on its initial square could safely bypass a square controlled by an advanced enemy pawn .
PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
A pawn that advances all the way to the opposite side of the board ( the opposing player 's first rank ) is promoted to another piece of that player 's choice : a queen , rook , bishop , or knight of the same color .
The pawn is immediately ( before the opposing player 's next move ) replaced by the new piece .
Since it is uncommon for a piece other than a queen to be chosen , promotion is often called " queening " .
When some other piece is chosen it is known as underpromotion , and the piece selected is most often a knight , used to execute a checkmate or a fork giving the player a net increase in material compared to promoting to a queen .
Underpromotion is also used in situations where promoting to a queen would give immediate stalemate .
The choice of promotion is not limited to pieces that have been captured .
Thus a player could in theory have as many as ten knights , ten bishops , ten rooks or nine queens on the board at the same time .
While this extreme would almost never occur in practice , in game 11 of their 1927 world championship match , José Raúl Capablanca and Alexander Alekhine each had two queens in play at once ( from move 65 through the end on move 66 ) .
While some finer sets do include an extra queen of each color , most standard chess sets do not come with additional pieces , so the physical piece used to replace a promoted pawn on the board is usually one that was previously captured .
When the correct piece is not available , some substitute is used : a second queen is often indicated by inverting a previously captured rook , or a piece is borrowed from another set .
STRATEGY Section::::Strategy .
The pawn structure , the configuration of pawns on the chessboard , mostly determines the strategic flavor of a game .
While other pieces can usually be moved to more favorable positions if they are temporarily badly placed , a poorly positioned pawn is limited in its movement and often can not be so relocated .
Because pawns capture diagonally and can be blocked from moving straight forward , opposing pawns can become locked in diagonal of two or more pawns of each color , where each player controls squares of one color .
In the diagram , Black and White have locked their d- and e - pawns .
Here , White has a long - term advantage .
White will have an easier time than Black in finding good squares for his pieces , particularly with an eye to the .
Black , in contrast , suffers from a on c8 , which is prevented by the black pawns from finding a good square or helping out on the kingside .
On the other hand , White 's central pawns are somewhat and vulnerable to attack .
Black can undermine the white pawn chain with an immediate ... c5 and perhaps a later ... f6 .
ISOLATED PAWN Section::::Isolated pawn .
Pawns on adjacent files can support each other in attack and defense .
A pawn which has no friendly pawns in adjacent files is an isolated pawn .
The square in front of an isolated pawn may become an enduring weakness .
Any piece placed directly in front not only blocks the advance of that pawn , but can not be driven away by other pawns .
In the diagram , Black has an isolated pawn on d5 .
If all the pieces except the kings and pawns were removed , the weakness of that pawn might prove fatal to Black in the endgame .
In the middlegame , however , Black has slightly more freedom of movement than White , and may be able to trade off the isolated pawn before an endgame ensues .
PASSED PAWN
Section::::Passed pawn .
A pawn which can not be blocked or captured by enemy pawns in its advance to promotion is a passed pawn .
In the diagram , White has a protected passed pawn on c5 and Black has an outside passed pawn on h5 .
Because endgames are often won by the player who can promote a pawn first , having a passed pawn in an endgame can be decisive – especially a protected passed pawn ( a passed pawn that is protected by a pawn ) .
In this vein , a pawn majority , a greater number of pawns belonging to one player on one side of the chessboard , is strategically important because it can often be converted into a passed pawn .
The diagrammed position might appear roughly equal , because each side has a king and three pawns , and the positions of the kings are about equal .
In truth , White wins this endgame on the strength of the protected passed pawn , regardless which player moves first .
The black king can not be on both sides of the board at once – to defend the isolated h - pawn and to stop White 's c - pawn from advancing to promotion .
Thus White can capture the h - pawn and then win the game .
DOUBLED PAWN Section::::Doubled pawn .
After a capture with a pawn , a player may end up with two pawns on the same , called doubled pawns .
Doubled pawns are substantially weaker than pawns which are side by side , because they can not defend each other , they usually can not both be defended by adjacent pawns , and the front pawn blocks the advance of the back one .
In the diagram , Black is playing at a strategic disadvantage due to the doubled c - pawns .
There are situations where doubled pawns confer some advantage , typically when the guarding of consecutive squares in a file by the pawns prevents an invasion by the opponent 's pieces .
Pawns which are both doubled and isolated are typically a tangible weakness .
A single piece or pawn in front of doubled isolated pawns blocks both of them , and can not be easily dislodged .
It is rare for a player to have three pawns in a file , i.e. tripled pawns .
WRONG ROOK PAWN
Section::::Wrong rook pawn .
In chess endgames with a bishop , a may be the wrong rook pawn , depending on the square - color of the bishop .
This causes some positions to be draws that would otherwise be wins .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The pawn has its origins in the oldest version of chess , chaturanga , and it is present in all other significant versions of the game as well .
In chaturanga , this piece moved directly forward , capturing to the sides ( one square diagonally forward to the left or right ) .
In medieval chess , an attempt was made to make the pieces more interesting , each file 's pawn being given the name of a commoner 's occupation .
On the board , from left to right , those titles were : * Gambler and other " lowlifes " , also messengers ( in the left - most file , that direction being literally sinister )
* City guard or policeman ( in front of a knight , as they trained city guards in real life )
* Innkeeper ( bishop ) * Doctor ( always the queen 's pawn ) * Merchant / Moneychanger ( always before the king , whether or not he is to the left or right of the queen , which depends on the color of the pieces )
* Weaver / Clerk ( in front of the bishop , for whom they wove or clericked ) * Blacksmith ( in front of a knight , as they care for the horses ) * Worker / Farmer ( in front of a castle , for which they worked )
The most famous example of this is found in the second book ever printed in the English language , The Game and Playe of the Chesse .
Purportedly , this book , printed by William Caxton , was viewed to be as much a political commentary on society as a chess book .
The ability to move two spaces , and the related ability to capture en passant , were introduced in 15th - century Europe ( see En passant § Historical context ) .
The rule for promotion has changed through history ( see History of the promotion rule ) .
ETYMOLOGY AND WORD USAGE Section::::Etymology and word usage .
Although the name origin of most other chess pieces is obvious , the etymology of pawn is fairly obscure .
It is derived from the Old French word paon , which comes from the Medieval Latin term for " foot soldier " and is cognate with peon .
In most other languages , the word for pawn is similarly derived from paon , its Latin ancestor or some other word for foot soldier .
In some languages the pawn is named after a term for " peasant " or " farmer " , reflecting how the lower orders were conscripted as footsoldiers in wartime :
Hungarian paraszt , Slovene kmet , German Bauer , Danish / Norwegian / Swedish bonde , Luxembourgish bauer , Latvian bandinieks .
In Irish the term fichillín , a diminutive of ficheall ( " chess " ) is used , while in Thai the pawn is called เบี้ย ( bîia ) , which signifies a cowrie shell or a coin of little value .
In Turkish pawn is called piyon , borrowed from the French word in the 19th century .
Pawn is often taken to mean " one who is easily manipulated " or " one who is sacrificed for a larger purpose " .
Because the pawn is the weakest piece , it is often used metaphorically to indicate unimportance or outright disposability ; for example , " She 's only a pawn in their game . "
QUOTATIONS
*
" The pawn is the soul of chess . ...
the Pawns .
They are the very Life of the Game .
They alone form the Attack and the Defense ; on their good or bad Situation depends the Gain or Loss of the Party .
"
François - André Danican Philidor , 1749 .
UNICODE Section::::Unicode .
Unicode defines two codepoints for pawn : ♙ U+2659 White Chess Pawn ( HTML ♙ ) ♟
U+265F Black Chess Pawn ( HTML ♟ )
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Bibliography
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Piececlopedia : Pawn by Hans Bodlaender and Fergus Duniho , The Chess Variant Pages