BLACK PANTHER
A black panther is the melanistic color variant of any big cat species .
Black panthers in Asia and Africa are leopards ( Panthera pardus ) , and those in the Americas are black jaguars ( Panthera onca ) .
MELANISM IN THE GENUS PANTHERA Section::::Melanism in the genus Panthera .
Melanism in the jaguar is conferred by a dominant allele , and in the leopard ( Panthera pardus ) by a recessive allele .
Close examination of the color of these black cats will show that the typical markings are still present , but are hidden by the excess black pigment melanin , giving an effect similar to that of printed silk .
This is called " ghost striping " .
Melanistic and non - melanistic animals can be littermates .
It is thought that melanism may confer a selective advantage under certain conditions since it is more common in regions of dense forest , where light levels are lower .
Recently , preliminary studies also suggest that melanism might be linked to beneficial mutations in the immune system .
LEOPARD
Section::::Leopard .
Data on the distribution of leopard populations indicates that melanism occurs in seven subspecies : Javan leopard ( P. p. melas ) , African leopard ( P. p. pardus ) , Indian leopard ( P. p. fusca ) , Indochinese leopard ( P. p. delacouri ) , Sri Lankan leopard ( P. p. kotiya ) , Arabian leopard and Amur leopard ( P. p. orientalis ) .
Black leopards are common in the equatorial rainforest of the Malay Peninsula and the tropical rainforest on the slopes of some African mountains such as Mount Kenya .
Melanistic leopards are common in Java , and are reported from densely forested areas in southwestern China , Myanmar , Assam and Nepal , from Travancore and some parts of southern India where they may be more numerous than spotted leopards .
In North Africa , dark leopards have been reported in the Atlas Mountains .
Melanistic leopards occur in Ethiopia and in the Aberdare Mountains in Kenya .
Unconfirmed reports of black leopards exist also in South Africa and in northern Iran .
Based on records from camera - traps , melanistic leopards occur foremost in tropical and subtropical moist forests , but have not been recorded in open and arid habitats .
The taxonomic status of captive black leopards and the extent of hybridization between different subspecies is uncertain .
Therefore , coordinated breeding programs for black leopards do not exist in European and North American zoos .
Black leopards occupy space needed for breeding of endangered leopard subspecies and are not kept within the North American Species Survival Plan .
A pseudo - melanistic leopard has a normal background color , but the spots are more densely packed than normal and merge to obscure the golden - brown background color .
Any spots on the flanks and limbs that have not merged into the mass of swirls and stripes are unusually small and discrete , rather than forming rosettes .
The face and underparts are paler and dappled like those of ordinary spotted leopards .
JAGUAR Section::::Jaguar .
In jaguars , the melanism allele is dominant .
Consequently , black jaguars may produce either black or spotted cubs , but a pair of spotted jaguars can only produce spotted cubs .
Individuals with two copies of the allele are darker ( the black background colour is more dense ) than ones with just one copy , whose background colour may appear to be dark charcoal rather than black .
The black jaguar was considered a separate species by indigenous peoples .
English naturalist W. H. Hudson wrote : JAGUAR X LION Section::::Jaguar x lion .
A black jaguar named " Diablo " was inadvertently crossed with a lioness named " Lola " at the Bear Creek Wildlife Sanctuary in Barrie , Ontario , Canada .
UNCONFIRMED CASES
COUGAR
Section::::Unconfirmed cases .
Section::::Cougar .
There are no authenticated cases of truly melanistic cougars .
Melanistic cougars have never been photographed or killed in the wild , and none have ever been bred .
Unconfirmed sightings , known as the " North American black panther " , are currently attributed to errors in species identification by non - experts , and by the mimetic exaggeration of size .
Black panthers in the American Southeast feature prominently in Choctaw folklore where , along with the owl , they are often thought to symbolize Death .
In his Histoire Naturelle ( 1749 ) , French naturalist Georges - Louis Leclerc , Comte de Buffon , wrote of the " Black Cougar " :
This " black cougar " was most likely a margay or ocelot , which are under in weight , live in trees , and do have melanistic phases .
Another description of a black cougar was provided by Thomas Pennant :
According to his translator Smellie ( 1781 ) , the description was taken from two black jaguars exhibited in London some years previously .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Black panther sightings are frequently recorded in rural Victoria and New South Wales , and Western Australia .
The Australian " phantom panthers " are said to be responsible for the disappearances and deaths of numerous cats , dogs and livestock .
CULTURE AND LITERATURE
* Bagheera in The Jungle Book by Rudyard Kipling is a panther that mentors the human character Mowgli .
* The Black Panther Party was an African - American political organization .
*
The Black Panther is a Marvel Comics superhero based in the fictional African country of Wakanda .
* The NFL football team the Carolina Panthers is named after the black panther , with a logo resembling the animal .
SEE ALSO
* Black cat
* Black tiger ( animal ) * Melanistic Asiatic lion
* Keimu * Large panther from North Africa
* Pogeyan * White panther
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Photographs of a melanistic bobcat and a melanistic jaguar – Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission
* Mutant Leopards , Mutant Jaguars and Mutant Pumas ( text licensed under GFDL )
* Photograph of a black or dark cougar