THE BRIDGE ON THE RIVER KWAI
The Bridge on the River Kwai is a 1957 British - American epic war film directed by David Lean and based on the novel Le Pont de la Rivière Kwaï ( 1952 ) by Pierre Boulle .
The film uses the historical setting of the construction of the Burma Railway in 1942–1943 .
The cast included William Holden , Jack Hawkins , Alec Guinness , and Sessue Hayakawa .
It was initially scripted by screenwriter Carl Foreman , who was later replaced by Michael Wilson .
Both writers had to work in secret , as they were on the Hollywood blacklist and had fled to England in order to continue working .
As a result , Boulle , who did not speak English , was credited and received the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay ; many years later , Foreman and Wilson posthumously received the Academy Award .
The film was widely praised , winning seven Academy Awards ( including Best Picture ) at the 30th Academy Awards .
It used lush colour to bring out the British stiff upper lip of the colonel , played by Alec Guinness in an Oscar - winning performance .
In 1997 , the film was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " and selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress .
It has been included on the American Film Institute 's list of best American films ever made .
In 1999 , the British Film Institute voted The Bridge on the River Kwai the 11th greatest British film of the 20th Century .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In early 1943 , British POWs arrive by train at a Japanese prison camp in Burma .
The commandant , Colonel Saito , informs them that all prisoners , regardless of rank , are to work on the construction of a railway bridge over the River Kwai that will connect Bangkok and Rangoon .
The senior British officer , Lieutenant Colonel Nicholson , informs Saito that the Geneva Conventions exempt officers from manual labour .
Nicholson later forbids any escape attempts because they had been ordered by headquarters to surrender , and escapes could be seen as defiance of orders .
At the morning assembly , Nicholson orders his officers to remain behind when the enlisted men march off to work .
Saito threatens to have them shot , but Nicholson refuses to back down .
When Major Clipton , the British medical officer , warns Saito there are too many witnesses for him to get away with murder , Saito leaves the officers standing all day in the intense heat .
That evening , the officers are placed in a punishment hut , while Nicholson is locked in an iron box .
Meanwhile , three prisoners attempt to escape .
Two are shot dead , but United States Navy Commander Shears gets away , although badly wounded .
He stumbles into a village of natives , who nurse him back to health and then help him leave by boat .
Meanwhile , the prisoners work as little as possible and sabotage whatever they can .
Should Saito fail to meet his deadline , he would be obliged to commit ritual suicide .
Desperate , he uses the anniversary of Japan 's victory in the Russo - Japanese War as an excuse to save face and announces a general amnesty , releasing Nicholson and his officers and exempting them from manual labour .
Nicholson is shocked by the poor job being done by his men .
Over the protests of some of his officers , he orders Captain Reeves and Major Hughes to design and build a proper bridge to maintain his men 's morale .
As the Japanese engineers had chosen a poor site , the original construction is abandoned and a new bridge begun downstream .
Shears is enjoying his hospital stay in Ceylon when British Major Warden invites him to join a mission to destroy the bridge before it is completed .
Shears is so appalled , he confesses he is not an officer ; he impersonated one , expecting better treatment from the Japanese .
Warden responds that he already knew and that the American Navy agreed to transfer him to the British to avoid embarrassment .
Realising he has no choice , Shears volunteers .
Meanwhile , Nicholson drives his men hard to complete the bridge on time .
For him , its completion will exemplify the ingenuity and hard work of the British Army long after the war 's end .
When he asks that their Japanese counterparts pitch in as well , a resigned Saito replies that he has already given the order .
Clipton expresses grave doubts about the sanity of Colonel Nicholson 's efforts to build the bridge in order to show up his Japanese captors .
The four commandos parachute in , though one is killed on landing .
Later , Warden is wounded in an encounter with a Japanese patrol and has to be carried on a litter .
He , Shears , and Canadian Lieutenant Joyce reach the river in time with the assistance of Siamese women bearers and their village chief , Khun Yai .
Under cover of darkness , Shears and Joyce plant explosives on the bridge towers below the water line .
A train carrying important dignitaries and soldiers is scheduled to be the first to cross the bridge the following day , so Warden waits to destroy both .
However , by daybreak the water level has dropped , exposing the wire connecting the explosives to the detonator .
Nicholson spots the wire and brings it to Saito 's attention .
As the train approaches , they hurry down to the riverbank to investigate .
Joyce , manning the detonator , breaks cover and stabs Saito to death .
Nicholson yells for help , while attempting to stop Joyce from reaching the detonator .
When Joyce is mortally wounded by Japanese fire , Shears swims across the river , but is himself shot .
Recognising the dying Shears , Nicholson exclaims , " What have I done ? "
Warden fires a mortar , wounding Nicholson .
The dying colonel stumbles towards the detonator and collapses on the plunger just in time to blow up the bridge and send the train hurtling into the river below .
Warden turns toward the only survivors of the commando raid , the women bearers , and begs their forgiveness for having to kill Joyce and Shears , and throws the mortar launcher away in disgust , and prepares to leave .
Clipton , observing the carnage , shakes his head muttering , " Madness ! , Madness ! " .
CAST
PRODUCTION
SCREENPLAY Section::::Production .
Section::::Screenplay .
The screenwriters , Carl Foreman and Michael Wilson , were on the Hollywood blacklist and , even though living in exile in England , could only work on the film in secret .
The two did not collaborate on the script ; Wilson took over after Lean was dissatisfied with Foreman 's work .
The official credit was given to Pierre Boulle ( who did not speak English ) , and the resulting Oscar for Best Screenplay ( Adaptation ) was awarded to him .
Only in 1984 did the Academy rectify the situation by retroactively awarding the Oscar to Foreman and Wilson , posthumously in both cases .
Subsequent releases of the film finally gave them proper screen credit .
David Lean himself also claimed that producer Sam Spiegel cheated him out of his rightful part in the credits since he had had a major hand in the script .
The film was relatively faithful to the novel , with two major exceptions .
Shears , who is a British commando officer like Warden in the novel , became an American sailor who escapes from the POW camp .
Also , in the novel , the bridge is not destroyed : the train plummets into the river from a secondary charge placed by Warden , but Nicholson ( never realising " what have I done ? " ) does not fall onto the plunger , and the bridge suffers only minor damage .
Boulle nonetheless enjoyed the film version though he disagreed with its climax .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Many directors were considered for the project , among them John Ford , William Wyler , Howard Hawks , Fred Zinnemann , and Orson Welles ( who was also offered a starring role ) .
The film was an international co - production between companies in Britain and the United States .
Director David Lean clashed with his cast members on multiple occasions , particularly Alec Guinness and James Donald , who thought the novel was anti - British .
Lean had a lengthy row with Guinness over how to play the role of Nicholson ; Guinness wanted to play the part with a sense of humour and sympathy , while Lean thought Nicholson should be " a bore .
" On another occasion , they argued over the scene where Nicholson reflects on his career in the army .
Lean filmed the scene from behind Guinness and exploded in anger when Guinness asked him why he was doing this .
After Guinness was done with the scene , Lean said , " Now you can all fuck off and go home , you English actors .
Thank God that I 'm starting work tomorrow with an American actor ( William Holden ) . "
The film was made in Ceylon ( now Sri Lanka ) .
The bridge in the film was near Kitulgala .
Guinness later said that he subconsciously based his walk while emerging from " the Oven " on that of his eleven - year - old son Matthew , who was recovering from polio at the time , a disease that left him temporarily paralyzed from the waist down .
Guinness later reflected on the scene , calling it the " finest piece of work " he had ever done .
Lean nearly drowned when he was swept away by the river current during a break from filming .
The filming of the bridge explosion was to be done on 10 March 1957 , in the presence of S.W.R.D. Bandaranaike , then Prime Minister of Ceylon , and a team of government dignitaries .
However , cameraman Freddy Ford was unable to get out of the way of the explosion in time , and Lean had to stop filming .
The train crashed into a generator on the other side of the bridge and was wrecked .
It was repaired in time to be blown up the next morning , with Bandaranaike and his entourage present .
The producers nearly suffered a catastrophe following the filming of the bridge explosion .
To ensure they captured the one - time event , multiple cameras from several angles were used .
Ordinarily , the film would have been taken by boat to London , but due to the Suez crisis this was impossible ; therefore the film was taken by air freight .
When the shipment failed to arrive in London , a worldwide search was undertaken .
To the producers ' horror , the film containers were found a week later on an airport tarmac in Cairo , sitting in the hot sun .
Although it was not exposed to sunlight , the heat - sensitive colour film stock should have been hopelessly ruined ; however , when processed the shots were perfect and appeared in the film .
MUSIC AND SOUNDTRACK Section::::Music and soundtrack .
British composer Malcolm Arnold recalled that he had " ten days to write around forty - five minutes worth of music " - much less time than he was used to .
He described the music for The Bridge on the River Kwai as the " worst job I ever had in my life " from the point of view of time .
A memorable feature of the film is the tune that is whistled by the POWs — the first strain of the march " Colonel Bogey"—when they enter the camp .
Gavin Young recounts meeting Donald Wise , a former prisoner of the Japanese who had worked on the Burma Railway .
Young : " Donald , did anyone whistle Colonel Bogey ... as they did in the film ?
"
Wise : " I never heard it in Thailand .
We had n't much breath left for whistling .
But in Bangkok I was told that David Lean , the film 's director , became mad at the extras who played the prisoners — us — because they could n't march in time .
Lean shouted at them , ' For God 's sake , whistle a march to keep time to . '
And a bloke called George Siegatz ... — an expert whistler — began to whistle Colonel Bogey , and a hit was born .
"
The march was written in 1914 by Kenneth J. Alford , a pseudonym of British Bandmaster Frederick J. Ricketts .
The Colonel Bogey strain was accompanied by a counter - melody using the same chord progressions , then continued with film composer Malcolm Arnold 's own composition , " The River Kwai March , " played by the off - screen orchestra taking over from the whistlers , though Arnold 's march was not heard in completion on the soundtrack .
Mitch Miller had a hit with a recording of both marches .
In many tense , dramatic scenes , only the sounds of nature are used .
An example of this is when commandos Warden and Joyce hunt a fleeing Japanese soldier through the jungle , desperate to prevent him from alerting other troops .
Arnold won an Academy Award for the film 's score .
HISTORICAL ACCURACY Section::::Historical accuracy .
Many historical inaccuracies in the film have often been noted by eyewitnesses to the building of the real Burma Railway and historians .
The plot and characters of Boulle 's novel and the screenplay were almost entirely fictional .
The conditions to which POW and civilian labourers were subjected were far worse than the film depicted .
According to the Commonwealth War Graves Commission : The notorious Burma - Siam railway , built by Commonwealth , Dutch and American prisoners of war , was a Japanese project driven by the need for improved communications to support the large Japanese army in Burma .
During its construction , approximately 13,000 prisoners of war died and were buried along the railway .
An estimated 80,000 to 100,000 civilians also died in the course of the project , chiefly forced labour brought from Malaya and the Dutch East Indies , or conscripted in Siam ( Thailand ) and Burma .
Two labour forces , one based in Siam and the other in Burma , worked from opposite ends of the line towards the centre .
Lieutenant Colonel Philip Toosey of the British Army was the real senior Allied officer at the bridge in question .
Toosey was very different from Nicholson and was certainly not a collaborator who felt obliged to work with the Japanese .
Toosey in fact did as much as possible to delay the building of the bridge .
While Nicholson disapproves of acts of sabotage and other deliberate attempts to delay progress , Toosey encouraged this : termites were collected in large numbers to eat the wooden structures , and the concrete was badly mixed .
Some consider the film to be an insulting parody of Toosey .
On a BBC Timewatch programme , a former prisoner at the camp states that it is unlikely that a man like the fictional Nicholson could have risen to the rank of lieutenant colonel , and , if he had , due to his collaboration he would have been " quietly eliminated " by the other prisoners .
Julie Summers , in her book The Colonel of Tamarkan , writes that Boulle , who had been a prisoner of war in Thailand , created the fictional Nicholson character as an amalgam of his memories of collaborating French officers .
He strongly denied the claim that the book was anti - British , although many involved in the film itself ( including Alec Guinness ) felt otherwise .
Ernest Gordon , a survivor of the railway construction and POW camps described in the novel / film , stated in a 1962 book , Through the Valley of the Kwai : " In Pierre Boulle 's book The Bridge over the River Kwai and the film which was based on it , the impression was given that British officers not only took part in building the bridge willingly , but finished in record time to demonstrate to the enemy their superior efficiency .
This was an entertaining story .
But I am writing a factual account , and in justice to these men — living and dead — who worked on that bridge
, I must make it clear that we never did so willingly .
We worked at bayonet point and under bamboo lash , taking any risk to sabotage the operation whenever the opportunity arose . "
A 1969 BBC - TV documentary , Return to the River Kwai , made by former POW John Coast , sought to highlight the real history behind the film ( partly through getting ex - POWs to question its factual basis , for example Dr Hugh de Wardener and Lt - Col Alfred Knights ) , which angered many former POWs .
The documentary itself was described by one newspaper reviewer when it was shown on Boxing Day 1974 ( The Bridge on the River Kwai had been shown on BBC1 on Christmas Day 1974 ) as " Following the movie , this is a rerun of the antidote . "
Some of the characters in the film use the names of real people who were involved in the Burma Railway .
Their roles and characters , however , are fictionalised .
For example , a Sergeant - Major Risaburo Saito was in real life second in command at the camp .
In the film , a Colonel Saito is camp commandant .
In reality , Risaburo Saito was respected by his prisoners for being comparatively merciful and fair towards them .
Toosey later defended him in his war crimes trial after the war , and the two became friends .
The major railway bridge described in the novel and film did n't actually cross the river known at the time as the Kwai .
However , in 1943 a railway bridge was built by Allied POWs over the Mae Klong river – renamed as a result of the film Khwae Yai in the 1960s – at Tha Ma Kham , five kilometres from Kanchanaburi , Thailand .
Boulle had never been to the bridge .
He knew that the railway ran parallel to the Kwae for many miles , and he therefore assumed that it was the Kwae which it crossed just north of Kanchanaburi .
This was an incorrect assumption .
The destruction of the bridge as depicted in the film is also entirely fictional .
In fact , two bridges were built : a temporary wooden bridge and a permanent steel / concrete bridge a few months later .
Both bridges were used for two years , until they were destroyed by Allied bombing .
The steel bridge was repaired and is still in use today .
Japanese views of the novel & film Japanese viewers disliked the film 's " glorification " of a fictitious and indemonstrable " superiority of Western civilization " .
In particular , they resented the implication in the film that Japanese military engineers were less capable than their British counterparts .
In fact , Japanese engineers had been surveying the route of the railway since 1937 and were highly organized .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE PERFORMANCE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office performance .
Variety reported that this film was the No .
1 moneymaker of 1958 , with a US take of $ 18,000,000 .
The second highest moneymaker of 1958 was Peyton Place at $ 12,000,000 ; in third place was Sayonara at $ 10,500,000 .
The film was re - released in 1964 and earned an estimated $ 2.6 million in North American rentals .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film initially received generally positive reviews , with Guinness being widely praised for his performance .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film received an approval rating of 94 % based on 53 reviews , with an average rating of 9.3/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " This complex war epic asks hard questions , resists easy answers , and boasts career - defining work from star Alec Guinness and director David Lean .
" On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 87 out of 100 based on 14 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Roger Ebert gives the film four out of four stars .
The critic notes that the film is one of the few war movies that " focuses not on larger rights and wrongs but on individuals " , but commented that the viewer is not certain what is intended by the final dialogue due to the film 's shifting points of view .
Slant Magazine also gave the film four out of five stars .
Slant stated that " the 1957 epic subtly develops its themes about the irrationality of honor and the hypocrisy of Britain 's class system without ever compromising its thrilling war narrative " , and in comparing to other films of the time said that Bridge on the River Kwai " carefully builds its psychological tension until it erupts in a blinding flash of sulfur and flame . " .
Variety gave high praise for the movie saying that it is " a gripping drama , expertly put together and handled with skill in all departments . " .
Significant praise was also given to the actors especially Alec Guinness , Variety said that " the film is unquestionably Guinness ' " .
William Holden was also credited for his acting , he was said to give a solid characterization and was " easy , credible and always likeable in a role that is the pivot point of the story " .
Balu Mahendra , the Tamil film director , saw the shooting of this film at Kitulgala , Sri Lanka during his school trip and was inspired to become a film director .
ACCOLADES Academy Awards !
scope = row
rowspan="3 " British Academy Film Awards !
scope = row rowspan="1
" Directors Guild of America !
scope
= row rowspan="4
" Golden Globe Awards !
scope = row rowspan="1 " Grammy Awards !
scope
= row
rowspan="3
" New York Film Critics Circle Awards American Film Institute * 1998 — AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies — # 13 * 2001 — AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills — # 58 * 2006 — AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers — # 14
* 2007
— AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) —
# 36
The film has been selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry .
The British Film Institute placed The Bridge on the River Kwai as the 11th greatest British film .
FIRST TV BROADCAST Section::::First TV broadcast .
The 167-minute film was first telecast , uncut , by ABC - TV in color on the evening of 25 September 1966 , as a three hours - plus ABC Movie Special .
The telecast of the film lasted more than three hours because of the commercial breaks .
It was still highly unusual at that time for a television network to show such a long film in one evening ; most films of that length were still generally split into two parts and shown over two evenings .
But the unusual move paid off for ABC — the telecast drew huge ratings .
On the evenings of 28 and 29 January 1973 , ABC broadcast another David Lean colour spectacular , Lawrence of Arabia , but that broadcast was split into two parts over two evenings , due to the film 's nearly four - hour length .
RESTORATIONS Section::::Restorations .
The film was restored in 1992 by Columbia Pictures .
The separate dialogue , music and effects were located and remixed with newly recorded " atmospheric " sound effects .
The image was restored by OCS , Freeze Frame , and Pixel Magic with George Hively editing .
On 2 November 2010 Columbia Pictures released a newly restored The Bridge on the River Kwai for the first time on Blu - ray .
According to Columbia Pictures , they followed an all - new 4 K digital restoration from the original negative with newly restored 5.1 audio .
The original negative for the feature was scanned at 4k ( roughly four times the resolution in High Definition ) , and the colour correction and digital restoration were also completed at 4k .
The negative itself manifested many of the kinds of issues one would expect from a film of this vintage : torn frames , embedded emulsion dirt , scratches through every reel , colour fading .
Unique to this film , in some ways , were other issues related to poorly made optical dissolves , the original camera lens and a malfunctioning camera .
These problems resulted in a number of anomalies that were very difficult to correct , like a ghosting effect in many scenes that resembles colour mis - registration , and a tick - like effect with the image jumping or jerking side - to - side .
These issues , running throughout the film , were addressed to a lesser extent on various previous DVD releases of the film and might not have been so obvious in standard definition .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
In the Jerry Lewis comedy
The Geisha Boy , Sessue Hayakawa lampoons his role in The Bridge on the River Kwai .
His workers are building a small bridge in his garden that greatly resembles the one in that film and whistling the familiar Colonel Bogey March .
When Lewis stares in wonder at Hayakawa and the bridge he is building in his backyard , Hayakawa acknowledges that others have mistaken him for " the actor " and then says , " I was building bridges long before he was .
" This is followed by a brief clip of Alec Guinness from the film .
*
In 1962 , Spike Milligan and Peter Sellers , with Peter Cook and Jonathan Miller , released the LP record Bridge On the River Wye ( Parlophone LP PMC 1190 , PCS 3036 ( November 1962 ) ) .
This spoof of the film was based on the script for the 1957 Goon Show episode " An African Incident " .
Shortly before its release , for legal reasons , producer George Martin edited out the ' K ' every time the word ' Kwai ' was spoken .
* The comedy team of Wayne and Shuster performed a sketch titled " Kwai Me a River " on their 27 March 1967 TV show , in which an officer in the British Dental Corps is captured by the Japanese and , despite being comically unintimidated by any abuse the commander of the POW camp inflicts on him , is forced to build a ( dental ) " bridge on the river Kwai " for the commander and plans to include an explosive in the appliance to detonate in his mouth .
*
In the 1984 teen movie , " The Breakfast Club , " high school students carry out a detention together on a Saturday in the schools library .
At one point , bored and feeling slave driven by a tyrannical principal , they all join in on their own version of the whistling March theme .
SEE ALSO
* BFI Top 100 British films
* List of American films of 1957
* List of historical drama films * List of historical drama films of Asia * To End All Wars ( film )
* Return from the River Kwai ( 1989 film )
* Siam - Burma Death Railway ( film ) REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS