CRAYFISH Crayfish , also known as crawfish , crawdads , crawlfish , crawldads , freshwater lobsters , mountain lobsters , mudbugs or yabbies , are freshwater crustaceans resembling small lobsters ( to which they are related ) .
Taxonomically , they are members of the superfamilies Astacoidea and Parastacoidea .
They breathe through feather - like gills .
Some species are found in brooks and streams where there is running fresh water , while others thrive in swamps , ditches , and paddy fields .
Most crayfish can not tolerate polluted water , although some species such as Procambarus clarkii are hardier .
Crayfish feed on animals and plants , either living or decomposing , and detritus .
NAMES Section::::Names .
The name " crayfish " comes from the Old French word ' ( Modern French ' ) .
The word has been modified to " crayfish " by association with " fish " ( folk etymology ) .
The largely American variant " crawfish " is similarly derived .
Some kinds of crayfish are known locally as lobsters , crawdads , mudbugs , and yabbies .
In the Eastern United States , " crayfish " is more common in the north , while " crawdad " is heard more in central and southwestern regions , and " crawfish " further south , although there are considerable overlaps .
The study of crayfish is called astacology .
OTHER ANIMALS
Section::::Other animals .
In Australia ( on the eastern seaboard ) , New Zealand and South Africa , the term crayfish or cray generally refers to a saltwater spiny lobster , of the genus Jasus that is indigenous to much of southern Oceania , while the freshwater species are usually called yabby or , from the indigenous Australian and Māori names for the animal respectively , or by other names specific to each species .
Exceptions include western rock lobster ( of the Palinuridae family ) found on the west coast of Australia ; the Tasmanian giant freshwater crayfish ( from the Parastacidae family ) found only in Tasmania ; and the Murray crayfish found along Australia 's Murray River .
In Singapore , the term crayfish typically refers to Thenus orientalis , a seawater crustacean from the slipper lobster family .
True crayfish are not native to Singapore , but are commonly found as pets , or as an invasive species ( Cherax quadricarinatus ) in the many water catchment areas , and are alternatively known as freshwater lobsters .
ANATOMY Section::::Anatomy .
The body of a decapod crustacean , such as a crab , lobster , or prawn ( shrimp ) , is made up of twenty body segments grouped into two main body parts , the cephalothorax and the abdomen .
Each segment may possess one pair of appendages , although in various groups these may be reduced or missing .
On average , crayfish grow to in length , but some grow larger .
Walking legs have a small claw at the end .
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION AND CLASSIFICATION Section::::Geographical distribution and classification .
There are three families of crayfish , two in the Northern Hemisphere and one in the Southern Hemisphere .
The Southern Hemisphere ( Gondwana - distributed )
family Parastacidae lives in South America , Madagascar and Australasia , and is distinguished by the lack of the first pair of pleopods .
Of the other two families , members of the Astacidae live in western Eurasia and western North America and members of the family Cambaridae live in eastern Asia and eastern North America .
Madagascar has an endemic genus , Astacoides , containing seven species .
Europe is home to seven species of crayfish in the genera Astacus and Austropotamobius .
Cambaroides is native to Japan and eastern mainland Asia .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
The greatest diversity of crayfish species is found in southeastern North America , with over 330 species in nine genera , all in the family Cambaridae .
A further genus of astacid crayfish is found in the Pacific Northwest and the headwaters of some rivers east of the Continental Divide .
Many crayfish are also found in lowland areas where the water is abundant in calcium , and oxygen rises from underground springs .
In 1983 , Louisiana designated the crayfish , or crawfish as they are commonly referred , as their official state crustacean .
Louisiana produces 100 million pounds of crawfish per year with the red swamp and white river crawfish being the two most popular species to harvest .
Crawfish are a special part of Cajun culture dating back hundreds of years .
A variety of cottage industries have developed as a result of commercialized crawfish iconology , such as products with crawfish attached to wooden plaques , T - shirts with crawfish logos , and crawfish pendants , earrings and necklaces made of gold or silver .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Australia has over 100 species in a dozen genera .
In Australia , many of the better - known crayfish are of the genus Cherax , and include the marron from Western Australia ( now believed to be two species , Cherax tenuimanus and C. cainii ) , red - claw crayfish ( Cherax quadricarinatus ) , common yabby ( Cherax destructor ) and western yabby
( Cherax preissii ) .
The marron are some of the largest crayfish in the world .
They grow up to several pounds in size .
C. tenuimanus is critically endangered , while other large Australasian crayfish are threatened or endangered .
Australia is home to the world 's two largest freshwater crayfish – the Tasmanian giant freshwater crayfish Astacopsis gouldi , which can achieve a mass of over and is found in rivers of northern Tasmania , and the Murray crayfish Euastacus armatus , which can reach and is found in much of the southern Murray - Darling basin .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
In New Zealand , two species of Paranephrops are endemic , and are known by the Māori name .
FOSSIL RECORD
Section::::Fossil record .
Fossil records of crayfish older than 30 million years are rare , but fossilised burrows have been found from strata as old as the late Palaeozoic or early Mesozoic .
The oldest records of the Parastacidae are in Australia , and are 115 million years old .
CRAYFISH
PLAGUE Section::::Crayfish plague .
Some crayfish suffer from a disease called crayfish plague , caused by the North American water mould Aphanomyces astaci which was transmitted to Europe when North American species of crayfish were introduced there .
Species of the genus Astacus are particularly susceptible to infection , allowing the plague - coevolved signal crayfish to invade parts of Europe .
USES FOOD Section::::Uses .
Section::::Food .
Crayfish are eaten worldwide .
Like other edible crustaceans , only a small portion of the body of a crayfish is eaten .
In most prepared dishes , such as soups , bisques and étouffées , only the tail portion is served .
At crawfish boils or other meals where the entire body of the crayfish is presented , other portions , such as the claw meat , may be eaten .
Like all crustaceans , crayfish are not kosher because they are aquatic animals that do not have both fins and scales .
They are therefore not eaten by observant Jews .
As of 2005 , Louisiana supplies 95 % of the crayfish harvested in the US .
In 1987 , Louisiana produced 90 % of the crayfish harvested in the world , 70 % of which were consumed locally .
In 2007 , the Louisiana crawfish harvest was about 54,800 tons , almost all of it from aquaculture .
About 70%–80 % of crayfish produced in Louisiana are Procambarus clarkii ( red swamp crawfish ) , with the remaining 20%–30 % being Procambarus zonangulus ( white river crawfish ) .
BAIT Section::::Bait .
Crayfish are preyed upon by a variety of ray - finned fishes , and are commonly used as bait , either live or with only the tail meat .
They are a popular bait for catching catfish , largemouth bass , smallmouth bass , striped bass , perch , pike and muskie .
When using live crayfish as bait , anglers prefer to hook them between the eyes , piercing through their hard , pointed beak which causes them no harm ; therefore , they remain more active .
When using crayfish as bait , it is important to fish in the same environment where they were caught .
An Illinois State University report that focused on studies conducted on the Fox River and Des Plaines River watershed stated that rusty crayfish , initially caught as bait in a different environment , were dumped into the water and " outcompeted the native clearwater crayfish .
"
Other studies confirmed that transporting crayfish to different environments have led to various ecological problems , including the elimination of native species .
Transporting crayfishes as live bait has also contributed to the spread of zebra mussels in various waterways throughout Europe and North America , as they are known to attach themselves to exoskeleton of crayfishes .
PETS Section::::Pets .
Crayfish are kept as pets in freshwater aquariums , typically with bluegill or bass , rather than goldfish or tropical or subtropical fish .
They prefer foods like shrimp pellets or various vegetables , but will also eat tropical fish food , regular fish food , algae wafers , and small fish that can be captured with their claws .
A report by the National Park Service as well as video and anecdotal reports by aquarium owners indicate that crayfish will eat their molted exoskeleton " to recover the calcium and phosphates contained in it . "
As omnivores , crayfish will eat almost anything ; therefore , they may explore the edibility of aquarium plants in a fish tank .
However , most species of dwarf crayfish , such as Cambarellus patzcuarensis , will not destructively dig or eat live aquarium plants .
They are also relatively non - aggressive and can be kept safely with dwarf shrimp .
In some nations , such as the United Kingdom , United States , Australia , and New Zealand , imported alien crayfish are a danger to local rivers .
The three species commonly imported to Europe from the Americas are Orconectes limosus , Pacifastacus leniusculus and Procambarus clarkii .
Crayfish may spread into different bodies of water because specimens captured for pets in one river are often released into a different catchment .
There is a potential for ecological damage when crayfish are introduced into non - native bodies of water : e.g. , crayfish plague in Europe , or the introduction of the common yabby ( Cherax destructor ) into drainages east of the Great Dividing Range in Australia .
SEE ALSO
* Pain in crustaceans REFERENCES FURTHER READING *
Regional European Crayfish Workshop : Future of Native Crayfish in Europe .
Knowledge and Management of Aquatic Ecosystems .
No . 394 - 395 ( 2009 ) EXTERNAL LINKS * International Association of Astacology ( IAA ) * America 's Crayfish : Crawling In Troubled Waters
* Louisiana Crawfish Research and Promotion Board