SHALLOT
The shallot is a type of onion , specifically a botanical variety of the species Allium cepa .
The shallot was formerly classified as a separate species , A. ascalonicum , a name now considered a synonym of the currently accepted name .
Its close relatives include the garlic , leek , chive , and Chinese onion .
NAMES Section::::Names .
Shallots probably originated in Central or Southwest Asia , travelling from there to India and the eastern Mediterranean .
The name " shallot " comes from Ashkelon , an ancient Canaanite city , where people in classical Greek times believed shallots originated .
The name shallot is also used for the Persian shallot ( A. stipitatum ) , from the Zagros Mountains in Iran and Iraq .
The term shallot is further used for the French red shallot ( Allium cepa var .
aggregatum , or the A. cepa Aggregatum Group ) and the French gray shallot or griselle ( Allium oschaninii ) , a species referred to as " true shallot "
; it grows wild from Central to Southwest Asia .
The name shallot is also used for a scallion in New Orleans and among English - speaking people in Quebec while the term French shallot refers to the plant referred to on this page .
Anglophone Quebecers and British English speakers stress the second syllable of shallot .
The term eschalot , derived from the French word échalote , can also be used to refer to the shallot .
DESCRIPTION AND CULTIVATION Section::::Description and cultivation .
Like garlic , shallots are formed in clusters of offsets with a head composed of multiple cloves .
The skin colour of shallots can vary from golden brown to gray to rose red , and their off - white flesh is usually tinged with green or magenta .
Shallots are extensively cultivated for culinary uses , propagated by offsets .
In some regions ( " long - season areas " ) , the offsets are usually planted in autumn ( September or October in the Northern Hemisphere ) .
In some other regions , the suggested planting time for the principal crop is early spring ( typically in February or the beginning of March in the Northern Hemisphere ) .
In planting , the tops of the bulbs should be kept a little above ground , and the soil surrounding the bulbs is often drawn away when the roots have taken hold .
They come to maturity in summer , although fresh shallots can now be found year - round in supermarkets .
Shallots should not be planted on ground recently manured .
In Africa , shallots are grown in the area around Anloga in southeastern Ghana .
Shallots suffer damage from leek
moth larvae , which mine into the leaves or bulbs of the plant .
CULINARY USES Section::::Culinary uses .
Shallots are used in cooking .
They may be pickled .
Finely - sliced deep - fried shallots are used as a condiment in Asian cuisine , often served with porridge .
As a species of Allium , shallots taste somewhat like a common onion , but have a milder flavor .
Like onions , when sliced , raw shallots release substances that irritate the human eye , resulting in production of tears .
Shallots appear to contain more flavonoids and phenols than other members of the onion genus .
Fresh shallots can be stored in cool , dry area ( 0 to 4 ° C , 32 to 40 ° F , 60 to 70 % RH ) for six months or longer .
Chopped , dried shallots are available .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
In Europe , the Pikant , Atlas , and Ed 's Red types of shallots are the most common .
In parts of southern France , the grey type is grown widely .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
In most Indian cuisines , the distinction between onions and shallots is weak ; larger varieties of shallot are sometimes confused with small red onions and used interchangeably .
Indeed , most parts of India use the regional name for onion interchangeably with shallot ( Maharashtra , for instance , where both are called kanda ) .
The southern regions of India distinguish shallots from onions in recipes more often , especially the much loved tiny varieties ( about the width of a finger ) ; these are widely used in curries and different types of sambar , a lentil - based dish .
Shallots pickled in red vinegar are common in many Indian restaurants , served along with sauces and papad on the condiments tray .
Indians also use it as a home remedy for sore throats , mixed with jaggery or sugar .
In Nepal , shallots are used as one of the ingredients for making momo .
In Kashmir shallots are widely used in preparation of Wazwan Kashmiri cuisine , as they add distinct flavor and prevent curry from becoming black , which is common with onions .
In Iran shallots , called mousir ( موسیر ) , are used in various ways , the most common being grated shallot mixed into dense yogurt , a combination served in almost every restaurant when one orders grills or kebabs .
Shallots are also used to make different types of torshi ( ترشی ) , a sour Iranian side dish consisting of a variety of vegetables under vinegar , eaten with main dishes in small quantities .
Shallot is also pickled — called shour ( شور ) in Persian — along with other vegetables to be served as torshi .
In Southeast Asian cuisines , such as those of Indonesia , Vietnam , Thailand , Cambodia , Malaysia , Philippines , Singapore and Brunei , both shallots and garlic ( bawang putih , white onions ) are often used as elementary spices .
Raw shallots can also accompany cucumbers when pickled in mild vinegar solution .
They are also often chopped finely , then fried until golden brown , resulting in tiny crispy shallot chips called bawang goreng ( fried onions ) in Indonesian , which can be bought ready - made from groceries and supermarkets .
Shallots enhance the flavor of many Southeast Asian dishes , such as fried rice variants .
Crispy shallot chips are also used in southern Chinese cuisine .
In Indonesia , shallots are sometimes made into pickles that are added to several traditional foods ; the pickles ' sourness is thought to increase the appetite .
SEE ALSO * Scallion REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS