ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE
Atmospheric pressure , sometimes also called barometric pressure ( after the sensor ) , is the pressure within the atmosphere of Earth ( or that of another planet ) .
The standard atmosphere ( symbol : atm ) is a unit of pressure defined as , equivalent to 760mmHg ( torr ) , 29.92inchesHg , or 14.696psi .
The atm unit is roughly equivalent to the mean sea - level atmospheric pressure on Earth .
In most circumstances atmospheric pressure is closely approximated by the hydrostatic pressure caused by the weight of air above the measurement point .
As elevation increases , there is less overlying atmospheric mass , so that atmospheric pressure decreases with increasing elevation .
Pressure measures force per unit area , with SI units of Pascals ( 1 pascal = 1 newton per square metre , 1N / m ) .
On average , a column of air with a cross - sectional area of 1 square centimetre ( cm ) , measured from mean ( average ) sea level to the top of Earth 's atmosphere , has a mass of about 1.03 kilogram and exerts a force or " weight " of about 10.1 newtons or 2.37 lb , resulting in a pressure at sea level of about 10.1 N / cm or 101kN / m ( 101 kilopascals , kPa ) .
A column of air with a cross - sectional area of 1 in ( 6.45 cm ) would have a mass of about 6.65 kg and a weight of about 65.4N or 14.7 lb , resulting in a pressure of 10.1N / cm or 14.7lb / in .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
Atmospheric pressure is caused by the gravitational attraction of the planet on the atmospheric gases above the surface , and is a function of the mass of the planet , the radius of the surface , and the amount and composition of the gases and their vertical distribution in the atmosphere .
It is modified by the planetary rotation and local effects such as wind velocity , density variations due to temperature and variations in composition .
MEAN
SEA - LEVEL PRESSURE
Section::::Mean sea - level pressure .
The mean sea - level pressure ( MSLP ) is the average atmospheric pressure at mean sea level .
This is the atmospheric pressure normally given in weather reports on radio , television , and newspapers or on the Internet .
When barometers in the home are set to match the local weather reports , they measure pressure adjusted to sea level , not the actual local atmospheric pressure .
The altimeter setting in aviation is an atmospheric pressure adjustment .
Average sea - level pressure is .
In aviation , weather reports ( METAR ) , QNH is transmitted around the world in millibars or hectopascals ( 1 hectopascal = 1 millibar ) , except in the United States , Canada , and Colombia where it is reported in inches ( to two decimal places ) of mercury .
The United States and Canada also report sea - level pressure SLP , which is adjusted to sea level by a different method , in the remarks section , not in the internationally transmitted part of the code , in hectopascals or millibars .
However , in Canada 's public weather reports , sea level pressure is instead reported in kilopascals .
In the US weather code remarks , three digits are all that are transmitted ; decimal points and the one or two most significant digits are omitted : is transmitted as 132 ; is transmitted as 000 ; 998.7 mbar is transmitted as 987 ; etc .
The highest sea - level pressure on Earth occurs in Siberia , where the Siberian High often attains a sea - level pressure above , with record highs close to .
The lowest measurable sea - level pressure is found at the centers of tropical cyclones and tornadoes , with a record low of ( see Atmospheric pressure records ) .
SURFACE PRESSURE Section::::Surface pressure .
Surface pressure is the atmospheric pressure at a location on Earth 's surface ( terrain and oceans ) .
It is directly proportional to the mass of air over that location .
For numerical reasons , atmospheric models such as general circulation models ( GCMs ) usually predict the nondimensional logarithm of surface pressure .
The average value of surface pressure on Earth is 985 hPa .
This is in contrast to mean sea - level pressure , which involves the extrapolation of pressure to sea - level for locations above or below sea - level .
The average pressure at mean sea - level ( MSL ) in the International Standard Atmosphere ( ISA ) is 1013.25 hPa , or 1 atmosphere ( Atm ) , or 29.92 inches of mercury .
Pressure ( P ) , mass ( m ) , and the acceleration due to gravity ( g ) , are related by P = F / A =
( m*g)/A , where A is surface area .
Atmospheric pressure is thus proportional to the weight per unit area of the atmospheric mass above that location .
ALTITUDE VARIATION
Section::::Altitude variation .
Pressure on Earth varies with the altitude of the surface ; so air pressure on mountains is usually lower than air pressure at sea level .
Pressure varies smoothly from the Earth 's surface to the top of the mesosphere .
Although the pressure changes with the weather , NASA has averaged the conditions for all parts of the earth year - round .
As altitude increases , atmospheric pressure decreases .
One can calculate the atmospheric pressure at a given altitude .
Temperature and humidity also affect the atmospheric pressure , and it is necessary to know these to compute an accurate figure .
The graph at right was developed for a temperature of 15 ° C and a relative humidity of 0 % .
At low altitudes above sea level , the pressure decreases by about 1.2 kPa for every 100 metres .
For higher altitudes within the troposphere , the following equation ( the barometric formula ) relates atmospheric pressure p to altitude h where the constant parameters are as described below : !
Parameter ! !
Description ! !
Value
LOCAL
VARIATION
Section::::Local variation .
Atmospheric pressure varies widely on Earth , and these changes are important in studying weather and climate .
See pressure system for the effects of air pressure variations on weather .
Atmospheric pressure shows a diurnal or semidiurnal ( twice - daily ) cycle caused by global atmospheric tides .
This effect is strongest in tropical zones , with an amplitude of a few millibars , and almost zero in polar areas .
These variations have two superimposed cycles , a circadian ( 24 h ) cycle and semi - circadian ( 12 h ) cycle .
RECORDS Section::::Records .
The highest adjusted - to - sea level barometric pressure ever recorded on Earth ( above 750 meters ) was measured in Tosontsengel , Mongolia on 19 December 2001 .
The highest adjusted - to - sea level barometric pressure ever recorded ( below 750 meters ) was at Agata in Evenk Autonomous Okrug , Russia ( 66 °
53'N , 93 °
28'E , elevation : ) on 31 December 1968 of .
The discrimination is due to the problematic assumptions ( assuming a standard lapse rate ) associated with reduction of sea level from high elevations .
The Dead Sea , the lowest place on Earth at below sea level , has a correspondingly high typical atmospheric pressure of 1065 hPa .
The lowest non - tornadic atmospheric pressure ever measured was 870 hPa ( 0.858 atm ; 25.69 inHg ) , set on 12 October 1979 , during Typhoon Tip in the western Pacific Ocean .
The measurement was based on an instrumental observation made from a reconnaissance aircraft .
MEASUREMENT BASED
ON DEPTH OF WATER Section::::Measurement based on depth of water .
One atmosphere ( 101.325 kPa or 14.7 psi ) is also the pressure caused by the weight of a column of fresh water of approximately 10.3 m ( 33.8 ft ) .
Thus , a diver 10.3 m underwater experiences a pressure of about 2 atmospheres ( 1 atm of air plus 1 atm of water ) .
Conversely , 10.3 m is the maximum height to which water can be raised using suction under standard atmospheric conditions .
Low pressures such as natural gas lines are sometimes specified in inches of water , typically written as w.c .
( water column ) gauge or w.g . ( inches water gauge ) .
A typical gas - using residential appliance in the US is rated for a maximum of 14 w.g . , which is approximately 1048.37 hPa .
Similar metric units with a wide variety of names and notation based on millimetres , centimetres or metres are now less commonly used .
BOILING POINT OF WATER
Section::::Boiling point of water .
Pure water boils at at earth 's standard atmospheric pressure .
The boiling point is the temperature at which the vapor pressure is equal to the atmospheric pressure around the water .
Because of this , the boiling point of water is lower at lower pressure and higher at higher pressure .
Cooking at high elevations , therefore , requires adjustments to recipes or pressure cooking .
A rough approximation of elevation can be obtained by measuring the temperature at which water boils ; in the mid-19th century , this method was used by explorers .
MEASUREMENT AND MAPS Section::::Measurement and maps .
An important application of the knowledge that atmospheric pressure varies directly with altitude was in determining the height of hills and mountains thanks to the availability of reliable pressure measurement devices .
While in 1774 , Maskelyne was confirming Newton 's theory of gravitation at and on Schiehallion in Scotland ( using plumb bob deviation to show the effect of gravity ) and accurately measure elevation , William Roy using barometric pressure was able to confirm his height determinations , the agreement being to within one meter ( 3.28 feet ) .
This method became and continues to be useful for survey work and map making .
This early application of science gave people insight into how science could easily be put to practical use .
SEE ALSO
* – physical damage to body tissues caused by a difference in pressure between an air space inside or beside the body and the surrounding gas or liquid .
* , a tabulation of typical variation of principal thermodynamic variables of the atmosphere ( pressure , density , temperature , etc . )
with altitude , at middle latitudes .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * 1976 Standard Atmosphere from NASA
* Source code and equations for the 1976 Standard Atmosphere * A mathematical model of the 1976 U.S. Standard Atmosphere * Calculator using multiple units and properties for the 1976 Standard Atmosphere * Calculator giving standard air pressure at a specified altitude , or altitude at which a pressure would be standard * Current map of global mean sea - level pressure * Atmospheric calculator and Geometric to
Pressure altitude converter
EXPERIMENTS
* Movies on atmospheric pressure experiments from Georgia State University 's HyperPhysics website – requires QuickTime * Test showing a can being crushed after boiling water inside it , then moving it into a tub of ice cold water .