QUEEN ( CHESS )
The queen ( ♕ , ♛ ) is the most powerful piece in the game of chess , able to move any number of squares vertically , horizontally or diagonally .
Each player starts the game with one queen , placed in the middle of the first next to the king .
Because the queen is the strongest piece , a pawn is promoted to a queen in the vast majority of cases .
In the game shatranj , the ancestor of chess that included only male figures , the closest thing to the queen was the vizier , a weak piece only able to move or capture one step diagonally and not at all in any other direction .
The modern chess queen gained power in the 15th century .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
In most languages the piece is known as " queen " or " lady " ( e.g. Italian donna ) .
Asian and Eastern European languages tend to refer to it as vizier , minister or advisor
( e.g. Persian وزیر wazir , Russian ферзь ferz ) .
In Polish it is known as the hetman – the name of a major historical military - political office , while in Estonian it is called lipp ( " flag " , " standard " ) .
PLACEMENT AND MOVEMENT Section::::Placement and movement .
The white queen starts on d1 , while the black queen starts on d8 .
With the chessboard oriented correctly , the white queen starts on a white square and the black queen starts on a black square — thus the mnemonics " queen gets her color " , " queen on [ her ] [ own ] color " , or " the dress [ queen piece ] matches the shoes [ square ] "
( Latin : servat rēgīna colōrem ) .
The queen can be moved any number of unoccupied squares in a straight line vertically , horizontally , or diagonally , thus combining the moves of the rook and bishop .
The queen captures by occupying the square on which an enemy piece sits .
Although both players start with one queen each , a player can promote a pawn to any of several types of pieces , including a queen , when the pawn is moved to the player 's furthest rank ( the opponent 's first rank ) .
Such a queen created by promotion can be an additional queen , or if the player 's queen has been captured , a replacement queen .
Pawn promotion to a queen is colloquially called queening , which is by far the most common type of piece a pawn is promoted to because of the relative power of a queen .
PIECE VALUE Section::::Piece value .
Ordinarily , the queen is slightly stronger than a rook and a bishop together , while slightly less strong than two rooks .
It is almost always disadvantageous to exchange the queen for a single piece other than the enemy 's queen .
The reason that the queen is stronger than a combination of a rook and bishop , even though they control the same number of squares , is twofold .
First , the queen is a more mobile unit than the rook and the bishop , as the entire power of the queen can be transferred to another location in one move , while transferring the entire firepower of a rook and bishop requires two moves , the bishop always being restricted to squares of one color .
Second , the queen is not hampered by the bishop 's inability to control squares of the opposite color to the square on which it stands .
A factor in favor of the rook and bishop is that they can attack ( or defend ) a square twice , while a queen can only do so once .
However , experience has shown that this factor is usually less significant than the points favoring the queen .
The queen is strongest when the board is open , when the enemy king is poorly defended , or when there are loose ( i.e. undefended ) pieces in the enemy camp .
Because of her long range and ability to move in multiple directions , the queen is well equipped to execute forks .
Compared to other long range pieces ( i.e. rooks and bishops ) , the queen is less restricted and stronger in closed positions .
STRATEGY Section::::Strategy .
Beginners often the queen early in the game , hoping to plunder the enemy position and deliver an early checkmate such as Scholar 's mate .
This can expose the easily harassed queen to attacks by weaker pieces causing the player to lose time .
Experienced players generally prefer to delay developing the queen , and instead develop minor pieces in the opening .
Early queen attacks are rare in high level chess , but there are some openings with early queen development that are used by high level players .
For example , the Scandinavian Defense ( 1.e4 d5 ) , which often features queen moves by Black on the second and third moves is considered sound , and has been played at the world championship level .
Some less common examples have also been observed in high level games .
The Danvers Opening ( 1.e4 e5 2.Qh5 ) , which is widely characterized as a beginner 's opening , has occasionally been played by the strong American grandmaster Hikaru Nakamura .
A queen exchange often marks the beginning of the endgame , but there are queen endgames , and sometimes queens are exchanged in the opening , long before the endgame .
A common goal in the endgame is to promote a pawn to a queen .
As the queen has the largest range and mobility , queen and king vs. lone king is an easy win when compared to some other basic mates .
QUEEN SACRIFICE
Section::::Queen sacrifice .
A queen sacrifice is the deliberate sacrifice of a queen in order to gain a more favorable tactical position .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The queen was originally the counsellor or prime minister or vizier ( Sanskrit mantri , Persian farzīn , Arabic firzān or firz ) .
Initially it could move only one square diagonally .
Around 1300 CE its move was enhanced to allow it to move two squares with jump onto a same - colored square for its first move , to help the sides to come into contact sooner .
The fers changed into the queen over time .
The first surviving mention of this piece as a queen or similar was " regina " in the Einsiedeln Poem , written in Latin around 997 and preserved in a monastery at Einsiedeln in Switzerland .
Some surviving early medieval pieces depict the piece as a queen , and the word fers became grammatically feminized in several languages , for example alferza in Spanish and fierce or fierge in French , before it was replaced with names such as reine or dame ( lady ) .
The Carmina Burana also refer to the queen as femina ( woman ) and coniunx ( spouse ) , and the name Amazon has sometimes been seen .
In Russian it keeps its Persian name of ferz ; koroleva ( queen ) is colloquial and is never used by professional chess players .
However , the names korolevna ( king 's daughter ) , tsaritsa ( tsar 's wife ) , and baba ( old woman ) are attested as early as 1694 .
In Arabic countries the queen remains termed , and in some cases depicted as a vizier .
Historian Marilyn Yalom proposes that the prominence of medieval queens such as Eleanor of Aquitaine and Blanche of Castile and Isabella
I of Castile , the cult of the Virgin Mary , and the power ascribed to women in the troubadour tradition of courtly love , might have been partly responsible for influencing the piece towards its identity as a queen and later its modern great power on the board , as might the medieval popularity of chess as a game particularly suitable for women to play on equal terms with men .
She points to medieval poetry depicting the Virgin as the chess - queen of God or Fierce Dieu .
Significantly , the earliest surviving treatise to describe the modern movement of the queen ( as well as the bishop and pawn ) , Repetición de amores e arte de axedres con CL iuegos de partido ( Discourses on Love and the Art of Chess with 150 Problems ) by Luis Ramírez de Lucena , was published during the reign of Isabella I of Castile .
Even before that , the Valencian poem Scachs d'amor ( " Chess of Love " ) depicted a chess game between Francesc de Castellví and Narcís de Vinyoles and commented on by Bernat Fenollar , which clearly had the modern moves of the queen and the bishop .
Well before the queen 's powers expanded , it was already being romantically described as essential to the king 's survival , so that when the queen was lost , there was nothing more of value on the board .
Marilyn Yalom wrote that : * The chess queen , rather than ferz or similar , is known of in what is now Spain and Portugal only from the 12th century , but started sooner elsewhere .
*
The modern move of the Queen started in Spain during Isabella I 's reign , perhaps inspired by her great political power , and spread from there , perhaps being spread by the invention of printing and the 1492 Expulsion from Spain of the Jews who carried the new chess rule with them as they fled .
During the 15th century the queen 's move took its modern form as a combination of the move of the rook and the current move of the bishop .
Starting from Spain , this new version – called " queen 's chess " ( scacchi de la donna ) , or pejoratively " madwoman 's chess " ( scacchi alla rabiosa ) – spread throughout Europe rapidly , partly due to the advent of the printing press and the popularity of new books on chess .
The new rules faced a backlash in some quarters , ranging from anxiety over a powerful female warrior figure to frank abuse against women in general .
At various times , the ability of pawns to be queened was restricted while the original queen was still on the board , so as not to cause scandal by providing the king with more than one queen .
An early 12th - century Latin poem refers to a queened pawn as a ferzia , as opposed to the original queen or regina , to account for this .
When the queen was attacked , it was customary to warn the opponent by announcing " gardez la reine " or simply " gardez " , similar to the announcement of " check " .
Some published rules even required this announcement before the queen could be legally captured .
This custom was largely abandoned in the 19th century .
In Russia for a long time the queen could also move like a knight ; some players disapproved of this ability to " gallop like the horse " ( knight ) .
The book A History of Chess by H.J.R. Murray , page 384 , says that William Coxe who was in Russia in 1772 saw chess played with the queen also moving like a knight .
Such an augmented queen piece is now known as the fairy chess piece amazon .
Around 1230 the queen was also independently invented as a piece in Japan where it formed part of the game of dai shogi , and was retained in its later form , the smaller chu shogi .
UNICODE Section::::Unicode .
Unicode defines two codepoints for queen :
♕ U+2655 White Chess Queen ( HTML ♕ )
♛
U+265B Black Chess Queen ( HTML ♛ )
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS * Queen and King vs King Endgame Practice * 5 Queens Puzzle Game
* Piececlopedia : Queen by Fergus Duniho and Hans Bodlaender , The Chess Variant Pages