VACUUM CLEANER A vacuum cleaner , also known as a sweeper or hoover , is a device that uses an air pump ( a centrifugal fan in all but some of the very oldest models ) , to create a partial vacuum to suck up dust and dirt from floors and from other surfaces such as upholstery and draperies .
The dirt is collected by either a dustbag or a cyclone for later disposal .
Vacuum cleaners , which are used in homes as well as in industry , exist in a variety of sizes and models — small battery - powered hand - held devices , wheeled canister models for home use , domestic central vacuum cleaners , huge stationary industrial appliances that can handle several hundred litres of dust before being emptied , and self - propelled vacuum trucks for recovery of large spills or removal of contaminated soil .
Specialized shop vacuums can be used to suck up both dust and liquids .
NAME Section::::Name .
Although vacuum cleaner and the short form vacuum are neutral names , in some countries ( UK , Ireland ) hoover is used instead as a genericized trademark , and as a verb .
The name comes from the Hoover Company , one of the first and more influential companies in the development of the device .
The device is also sometimes called a sweeper although the same term also refers to a carpet sweeper , a similar invention .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The vacuum cleaner evolved from the carpet sweeper via manual vacuum cleaners .
The first manual models , using bellows , were developed in the 1860s , and the first motorized designs appeared at the turn of the 20th century , with the first decade being the boom decade .
MANUAL VACUUMS Section::::Manual vacuums .
In 1860 a carpet sweeper was invented by Daniel Hess of West Union , Iowa that gathered dust with a rotating brush and a bellows for generating suction .
Another early model ( 1869 ) was the " Whirlwind " , invented in Chicago in 1868 by Ives W. McGaffey .
The bulky device worked with a belt driven fan cranked by hand that made it awkward to operate , although it was commercially marketed with mixed success .
A similar model was constructed by Melville R. Bissell of Grand Rapids , Michigan in 1876 , who also manufactured carpet sweepers .
The company later added portable vacuum cleaners to its line of cleaning tools .
POWERED VACUUM CLEANERS Section::::Powered vacuum cleaners .
The end of the 19th century saw the introduction of powered cleaners , although early types used some variation of blowing air to clean instead of suction .
One appeared in 1898 when John S. Thurman of St. Louis , Missouri submitted a patent ( US No . 634,042 ) for a " pneumatic carpet renovator " which blew dust into a receptacle .
Thurman 's system , powered by an internal combustion engine , traveled to the customers residence on a horse - drawn wagon as part of a door to door cleaning service .
Corrine Dufour of Savannah , Georgia received two patents in 1899 and 1900 for another blown air system that seems to have featured the first use of an electric motor .
In 1901 powered vacuum cleaners using suction were invented independently by British engineer Hubert Cecil Booth and American inventor David T. Kenney .
Booth also may have coined the word " vacuum cleaner " .
Booth 's horse drawn combustion engine powered " Puffing Billy " , maybe derived from Thurman 's blown air design , " relied upon just suction with air pumped through a cloth filter and was offered as part of his cleaning services .
Kenney 's was a stationary 4,000 lb . steam engine powered system with pipes and hoses reaching into all parts of the building .
DOMESTIC VACUUM CLEANER Section::::Domestic vacuum cleaner .
The first vacuum - cleaning device to be portable and marketed at the domestic market was built in 1905 by Walter Griffiths , a manufacturer in Birmingham , England .
His Griffith 's Improved Vacuum Apparatus for Removing Dust from Carpets resembled modern - day cleaners ; – it was portable , easy to store , and powered by " any one person ( such as the ordinary domestic servant ) " , who would have the task of compressing a bellows - like contraption to suck up dust through a removable , flexible pipe , to which a variety of shaped nozzles could be attached .
In 1906 James B. Kirby developed his first of many vacuums called the " Domestic Cyclone " .
It used water for dirt separation .
Later revisions came to be known as the Kirby Vacuum Cleaner .
In 1907 department store janitor James Murray Spangler ( 1848 - 1915 ) of Canton , Ohio invented the first portable electric vacuum cleaner , obtaining a patent for the Electric Suction Sweeper on June 2 , 1908 .
Crucially , in addition to suction from an electric fan that blew the dirt and dust into a soap box and one of his wife 's pillow cases , Spangler 's design utilized a rotating brush to loosen debris .
Unable to produce the design himself due to lack of funding , he sold the patent in 1908 to local leather goods manufacturer William Henry Hoover ( 1849 - 1932 ) , who had Spangler 's machine redesigned with a steel casing , casters , and attachments , founding the company that in 1922 was renamed the Hoover Company .
Their first vacuum was the 1908 Model O , which sold for $ 60 .
Subsequent innovations included the beater bar in 1919 ( " It beats as it sweeps as it cleans " ) , disposal filter bags in the 1920s , and an upright vacuum cleaner in 1926 .
In Continental Europe , the Fisker and Nielsen company in Denmark was the first to sell vacuum cleaners in 1910 .
The design weighed just and could be operated by a single person .
The Swedish company Electrolux launched their Model V in 1921 with the innovation of being able to lie on the floor on two thin metal runners .
In the 1930s the Germany company Vorwerk started marketing vacuum cleaners of their own design which they sold through direct sales .
POST - SECOND WORLD WAR Section::::Post - Second World War .
For many years after their introduction , vacuum cleaners remained a luxury item , but after the Second World War , they became common among the middle classes .
Vacuums tend to be more common in Western countries because in most other parts of the world , wall - to - wall carpeting is uncommon and homes have tile or hardwood floors , which are easily swept , wiped or mopped manually without power assist .
The last decades of the 20th century saw the more widespread use of technologies developed earlier , including filterless cyclonic dirt separation , central vacuum systems and rechargeable hand - held vacuums .
In addition , miniaturized computer technology and improved batteries allowed the development of a new type of machine — the autonomous robotic vacuum cleaner .
In 1997 Electrolux of Sweden demonstrated the Electrolux Trilobite , the first autonomous cordless robotic vacuum cleaner on the BBC - TV program
Tomorrow ' World , introducing it to the consumer market in 2001 .
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Recent developments .
In 2004 a British company released Airider , a hovering vacuum cleaner that floats on a cushion of air , similar to a hovercraft .
It has claimed to be light - weight and easier to maneuver ( compared to using wheels ) , although it is not the first vacuum cleaner to do this — the Hoover Constellation predated it by at least 35 years .
A British inventor has developed a new cleaning technology known as Air Recycling Technology , which , instead of using a vacuum , uses an air stream to collect dust from the carpet .
This technology was tested by the Market Transformation Programme ( MTP ) and shown to be more energy - efficient than the vacuum method .
Although working prototypes exist , Air Recycling Technology is not currently used in any production cleaner .
MODERN CONFIGURATIONS Section::::Modern configurations .
A wide variety of technologies , designs , and configurations are available for both domestic and commercial cleaning jobs .
UPRIGHT
Section::::Upright .
Upright vacuum cleaners are popular in the United States , Britain and numerous Commonwealth countries , but unusual in some Continental European countries .
They take the form of a cleaning head , onto which a handle and bag are attached .
Upright designs generally employ a rotating brushroll or beater bar , which removes dirt through a combination of sweeping and vibration .
There are two types of upright vacuums ; dirty - air / direct fan ( found mostly on commercial vacuums ) , or clean - air / fan - bypass ( found on most of today 's domestic vacuums ) .
The older of the two designs , direct - fan cleaners have a large impeller ( fan ) mounted close to the suction opening , through which the dirt passes directly , before being blown into a bag .
The motor is often cooled by a separate cooling fan .
Because of their large - bladed fans , and comparatively short airpaths , direct - fan cleaners create a very efficient airflow from a low amount of power , and make effective carpet cleaners .
Their " above - floor " cleaning power is less efficient , since the airflow is lost when it passes through a long hose , and the fan has been optimized for airflow volume and not suction .
Fan - bypass uprights have their motor mounted after the filter bag .
Dust is removed from the airstream by the bag , and usually a filter , before it passes through the fan .
The fans are smaller , and are usually a combination of several moving and stationary turbines working in sequence to boost power .
The motor is cooled by the airstream passing through it .
Fan - bypass vacuums are good for both carpet and above - floor cleaning , since their suction does not significantly diminish over the distance of a hose , as it does in direct - fan cleaners .
However , their air - paths are much less efficient , and can require more than twice as much power as direct - fan cleaners to achieve the same results .
The most common upright vacuum cleaners use a drive - belt powered by the suction motor to rotate the brush - roll .
However , a more common design of dual motor upright is available .
In these cleaners , the suction is provided via a large motor , while the brushroll is powered by a separate , smaller motor , which does not create any suction .
The brush - roll motor can sometimes be switched off , so hard floors can be cleaned without the brush - roll scattering the dirt .
It may also have an automatic cut - off feature which shuts the motor off if the brush - roll becomes jammed , protecting it from damage .
CANISTER
Section::::Canister .
Canister models ( in the UK also often called cylinder models ) dominate the European market .
They have the motor and dust collector ( using a bag or bagless ) in a separate unit , usually mounted on wheels , which is connected to the vacuum head by a flexible hose .
Their main advantage is flexibility , as the user can attach different heads for different tasks , and maneuverability ( the head can reach under furniture and makes it very easy to vacuum stairs and vertical surfaces ) .
Many cylinder models have power heads as standard or add - on equipment containing the same sort of mechanical beaters as in upright units , making them as efficient on carpets as upright models .
Such beaters are driven by a separate electric motor or a turbine which uses the suction power to spin the brushroll via a drive belt .
DRUM Section::::Drum .
Drum or shop vac models are essentially heavy - duty industrial versions of cylinder vacuum cleaners , where the canister consists of a large vertically positioned drum which can be stationary or on wheels .
Smaller versions , for use in garages or small workshops , are usually electrically powered .
Larger models , which can store over , are often hooked up to compressed air , utilizing the Venturi effect to produce a partial vacuum .
Built - in dust collection systems are also used in many workshops .
WET / DRY Section::::Wet / dry .
Wet or wet / dry vacuum cleaners are a specialized form of the cylinder / drum models that can be used to clean up wet or liquid spills .
They are generally designed to be used both indoors and outdoors and to accommodate both wet and dry debris ; some are also equipped with an exhaust port or detachable blower for reversing the airflow , a useful function for everything from clearing a clogged hose to blowing dust into a corner for easy collection .
PNEUMATIC
Section::::Pneumatic .
Pneumatic or pneumatic
wet / dry vacuum cleaners are a specialized form of wet / dry models that hook up to compressed air .
They commonly can accommodate both wet and dry soilage , a useful feature in industrial plants and manufacturing facilities .
BACKPACK Section::::Backpack .
Backpack vacuum cleaners are commonly used for commercial cleaning : they allow the user to move rapidly about a large area .
They are essentially small canister vacuums strapped onto the user 's back .
HAND - HELD Section::::Hand - held .
Lightweight hand - held vacuum cleaners , either powered from rechargeable batteries or mains power , are also popular for cleaning up smaller spills .
Frequently seen examples include the Black & Decker DustBuster , which was introduced in 1979 , and numerous handheld models by Dirt Devil , which were first introduced in 1984 .
Some battery - powered handheld vacuums are wet / dry rated ; the appliance must be partially disassembled and cleaned after picking up wet materials , to avoid developing unpleasant odors .
ROBOTIC Section::::Robotic .
In the late 1990s and early 2000s , several companies developed robotic vacuum cleaners , a form of carpet sweeper usually equipped with limited suction power .
Some prominent brands are Roomba , Neato , and bObsweep .
These machines move autonomously while collecting surface dust and debris into a dustbin .
They can usually navigate around furniture and come back to a docking station to charge their batteries , and a few are able to empty their dust containers into the dock as well .
Most models are equipped with motorized brushes and a vacuum motor to collect dust and debris .
While most robotic vacuum cleaners are designed for home use , some models are appropriate for operation in offices , hotels , hospitals , etc .
In December 2009 , Neato Robotics launched the world 's first robotic vacuum cleaner which uses a rotating laser - based range - finder ( a form of lidar ) to scan and map its surrounding .
It uses this map to clean the floor methodically , even if it requires the robot to return to its base multiple times to recharge itself .
In many cases it will notice when an area of the floor that was previously inaccessible becomes reachable , such as when a dog wakes up from a nap , and return to vacuum that area .
It also has the strongest impeller among robotic vacuum cleaners , pulling in 35 CFM ( 1 m / min ) of air .
CYCLONIC Section::::Cyclonic .
Portable vacuum cleaners working on the cyclonic separation principle became popular in the 1990s .
This dirt separation principle was well known and often used in central vacuum systems .
Cleveland 's P.A. Geier Company had obtained a patent on a cyclonic vacuum cleaner as early as 1928 , which was later sold to Health - Mor in 1939 , introducing the Filter Queen cyclonic canister vacuum cleaner .
In 1979 , James Dyson introduced a portable unit with cyclonic separation , adapting this design from industrial saw mills .
He launched his cyclone cleaner first in Japan in the 1980s at a cost of about US$ 1800 and in 1993 released the Dyson DC01 upright in the UK for £ 200 .
Critics expected that people would not buy a vacuum cleaner at twice the price of a conventional unit , but the Dyson design later became the most popular cleaner in the UK .
Cyclonic cleaners do not use filtration bags .
Instead , the dust is separated in a detachable cylindrical collection vessel or bin .
Air and dust are sucked at high speed into the collection vessel at a direction tangential to the vessel wall , creating a fast - spinning vortex .
The dust particles and other debris move to the outside of the vessel by centrifugal force , where they fall due to gravity .
In fixed - installation central vacuum cleaners , the cleaned air may be exhausted directly outside without need for further filtration .
A well - designed cyclonic filtration system loses suction power due to airflow restriction only when the collection vessel is almost full .
This is in marked contrast to filter bag systems , which lose suction when pores in the filter become clogged as dirt and dust are collected .
In portable cyclonic models , the cleaned air from the center of the vortex is expelled from the machine after passing through a number of successively finer filters at the top of the container .
The first filter is intended to trap particles which could damage the subsequent filters that remove fine dust particles .
The filters must regularly be cleaned or replaced to ensure that the machine continues to perform efficiently .
Since Dyson 's success in raising public awareness of cyclonic separation , several other companies have introduced cyclone models .
Competing manufacturers include Hoover , Bissell , Shark , Eureka , Electrolux , Filter Queen , etc . , and the cheapest models are no more expensive than a conventional cleaner .
CENTRAL
Section::::Central .
Central vacuum cleaners , also known as built - in or ducted , are a type of canister / cylinder model which has the motor and dirt filtration unit located in a central location in a building , and connected by pipes to fixed vacuum inlets installed throughout the building .
Only the hose and cleaning head need be carried from room to room , and the hose is commonly 8 m ( 25 ft ) long , allowing a large range of movement without changing vacuum inlets .
Plastic or metal piping connects the inlets to the central unit .
The vacuum head may be unpowered , or have beaters operated by an electric motor or by an air - driven turbine .
The dirt bag or collection bin in a central vacuum system is usually so large that emptying or changing needs to be done less often , perhaps a few times per year for an ordinary household .
The central unit usually stays in stand - by , and is turned on by a switch on the handle of the hose .
Alternately , the unit powers up when the hose is plugged into the wall inlet , when the metal hose connector makes contact with two prongs in the wall inlet and control current is transmitted through low voltage wires to the main unit .
A central vacuum typically produces greater suction than common portable vacuum cleaners because a larger fan and more powerful motor can be used when they are not required to be portable .
A cyclonic separation system , if used , does not lose suction as the collection container fills up , until the container is nearly full .
This is in marked contrast to filter - bag designs , which start losing suction immediately as pores in the filter become clogged by accumulated dirt and dust .
A benefit to allergy sufferers is that unlike a standard vacuum cleaner , which must blow some of the dirt collected back into the room being cleaned ( no matter how efficient its filtration ) , a central vacuum removes all the dirt collected to the central unit .
Since this central unit is usually located outside the living area , no dust is recirculated back into the room being cleaned .
Also it is possible on most newer models to vent the exhaust entirely outside , even with the unit inside the living quarters .
Another benefit of the central vacuum is , because of the remote location of the motor unit , there is much less noise in the room being cleaned than with a standard vacuum cleaner .
CONSTELLATION Section::::Constellation .
The Hoover Company marketed an unusual vacuum cleaner , called the Constellation , in the 1960s .
The cylinder type lacked wheels , and instead the vacuum cleaner floated on its exhaust , operating as a hovercraft , although this is not true of the earliest models .
They had a rotating hose with the intention being that the user would place the unit in the center of the room , and work around the cleaner .
Introduced in 1954 , they are collectible , and are easily identified by their spherical shape .
But they remain an interesting machine ; restored , they work well in homes with lots of hardwood floors .
The Constellations were changed and updated over the years until discontinued in 1975 .
These Constellations route all of the exhaust under the vacuum using a different airfoil .
The updated design is quiet even by modern standards , particularly on carpet as it muffles the sound .
These models float on carpet or bare floor — although on hard flooring , the exhaust air tends to scatter any fluff or debris around .
Hoover re - released an updated version of this later model Constellation in the US ( model # S3341 in Pearl White and # S3345 in stainless steel ) .
Changes include a HEPA filtration bag , a 12-amp motor , a turbine - powered brush roll , and a redesigned version of the handle .
This same model was marketed in the UK under the Maytag brand as the Satellite because of licensing restrictions .
It was sold from 2006 to 2009 .
VEHICLES Section::::Vehicles .
See vacuum truck for very big vacuum cleaners mounted on vehicles .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Some other vacuum cleaners include an electric mop in the same machine : for a dry and a later wet clean .
The iRobot company developed the Scooba , a robotic wet vacuum cleaner that carries its own cleaning solution , applies it and scrubs the floor , and vacuums the dirty water into a collection tank .
TECHNOLOGY Section::::Technology .
A vacuum 's suction is caused by a difference in air pressure .
A fan driven by an electric motor ( often a universal motor ) reduces the pressure inside the machine .
Atmospheric pressure then pushes the air through the carpet and into the nozzle , and so the dust is literally pushed into the bag .
Tests have shown that vacuuming can kill 100 % of young fleas and 96 % of adult fleas .
EXHAUST FILTRATION
Section::::Exhaust filtration .
Vacuums by their nature cause dust to become airborne , by exhausting air that is not completely filtered .
This can cause health problems since the operator ends up inhaling respirable dust , which is also redeposited into the area being cleaned .
There are several methods manufacturers use to control this problem , some of which may be combined together in a single appliance .
Typically a filter is positioned so that the incoming air passes through it before it reaches the motor , and then the filtered air passes through the motor for cooling purposes .
Some other designs use a completely separate air intake for cooling .
It is nearly impossible for a practical air filter to completely remove all ultrafine particles from a dirt - laden airstream .
An ultra - efficient air filter will immediately clog up and become ineffective during everyday use , and practical filters are a compromise between filtering effectiveness and restriction of airflow .
One way to sidestep this problem is to exhaust partially filtered air to the outdoors , which is a design feature of some central vacuum systems .
Specially engineered portable vacuums may also utilize this design , but are more awkward to set up and use , requiring temporary installation of a separate exhaust hose to an exterior window .
* Bag : The most common method to capture the debris vacuumed up involves a paper or fabric bag that allows air to pass through , but attempts to trap most of the dust and debris .
The bag may be disposable , or designed to be cleaned and re - used .
* Bagless : In non - cyclonic bagless models , the role of the bag is taken by a removable container and a reusable filter , equivalent to a reusable fabric bag .
* Cyclonic separation : A vacuum cleaner employing this method is also bagless .
It causes intake air to be cycled or spun so fast that most of the dust is forced out of the air and falls into a collection bin .
The operation is similar to that of a centrifuge .
* Water filtration : First seen commercially in the 1920s in the form of the Newcombe Separator ( later to become the Rexair Rainbow ) , a water filtration vacuum cleaner uses a water bath as a filter .
It forces the dirt - laden intake air to pass through water before it is exhausted , so that wet dust can not become airborne .
The water trap filtration and low speed may also allow the user to use the machine as a stand - alone air purifier and humidifier unit .
The dirty water must be dumped out and the appliance must be cleaned after each use , to avoid growth of bacteria and mold , causing unpleasant odors .
* Ultra fine air filter :
Also called HEPA filtered , this method is used as a secondary filter after the air has passed through the rest of the machine .
It is meant to remove any remaining dust that could harm the operator .
Some vacuum cleaners also use an activated charcoal filter to remove odors .
Ordinary vacuum cleaners should never be used to clean up asbestos fibers , even if fitted with a HEPA filter .
Specially - designed machines are required to safely clean up asbestos .
ATTACHMENTS Section::::Attachments .
Most vacuum cleaners are supplied with numerous specialized attachments , such as tools , brushes and extension wands , which allow them to reach otherwise inaccessible places or to be used for cleaning a variety of surfaces .
The most common of these tools are : * Hard floor brush ( for non - upright designs ) * Powered floor nozzle ( for canister designs ) *
Dusting brush * Crevice tool
* Upholstery nozzle SPECIFICATIONS Section::::Specifications .
The performance of a vacuum cleaner can be measured by several parameters : * Airflow , in litres per second [ l / s ] or cubic feet per minute ( CFM or ft³/min )
* Air speed , in metres per second [ m / s ] or miles per hour [ mph ]
* Suction , vacuum , or water lift , in pascals [ Pa ] or inches of water Other specifications of a vacuum cleaner are : * Weight , in kilograms [ kg ] or pounds [ lb ]
* Noise , in decibels [ dB ] * Power cord length and hose length ( as applicable ) SUCTION Section::::Suction .
The suction is the maximum pressure difference that the pump can create .
For example , a typical domestic model has a suction of about negative 20 kPa .
This means that it can lower the pressure inside the hose from normal atmospheric pressure ( about 100 kPa ) by 20 kPa .
The higher the suction rating , the more powerful the cleaner .
One inch of water is equivalent to about 249 Pa ; hence , the typical suction is of water .
INPUT POWER Section::::Input power .
The power consumption of a vacuum cleaner , in watts , is often the only figure stated .
Many North American vacuum manufacturers give the current only in amperes ( e.g. " 6 amps " ) , and the consumer is left to multiply that by the line voltage of 120 volts to get the approximate power ratings in watts .
The rated input power does not indicate the effectiveness of the cleaner , only how much electricity it consumes .
After 1 September 2014 , due to EU rules , manufacture of vacuum cleaners with a power consumption greater than 1600 watts will be banned , and from 2017 no vacuum cleaner with a wattage greater than 900 watts will be permitted .
OUTPUT POWER
Section::::Output power .
The amount of input power that is converted into airflow at the end of the cleaning hose is sometimes stated , and is measured in airwatts : the measurement units are simply watts .
The word " air " is used to clarify that this is output power , not input electrical power .
The airwatt is derived from English units .
ASTM International defines the airwatt as 0.117354 × F × S , where F is the rate of air flow in ft / min and S
is the pressure in inches of water .
This makes one airwatt equal to 0.9983 watts .
SEE ALSO * Home appliance
* Hypoallergenic vacuum cleaner * List of vacuum cleaners
* Street sweeper
* Suction excavator
* Vax ev REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Booth , H. Cecil "
The origin of the vacuum cleaner , " Transactions of the Newcomen Society , 1934–1935 , Volume 15 .
* Gantz , Carroll .
The Vacuum Cleaner : A History ( McFarland , 2012 ) , 230 pp EXTERNAL LINKS
* How Stuff Works – Vacuum Cleaner * HEPA & ULPA vacuum cleaners – what they can and ca n't do for IAQ
*
The Historyscoper - online course on vacuum cleaner history with reference hyperlinks