KING ( CHESS )
In chess , the king ( ♔ , ♚ ) is the most important piece .
The object of the game is to threaten the opponent 's king in such a way that escape is not possible ( checkmate ) .
If a player 's king is threatened with capture , it is said to be in check , and the player must remove the threat of on the next move .
If this can not be done , the king is said to be in checkmate , resulting in a loss for that player .
Although the king is the most important piece , it is usually the weakest piece in the game until a later phase , the endgame .
Players can not make any move that places their own king in check .
MOVEMENT Section::::Movement .
White starts with the king on the first to the right of the queen .
Black starts with the king directly across from the white king .
The white king starts on e1 and the black king on e8 .
A king can move one square in any direction ( horizontally , vertically , or diagonally ) unless the square is already occupied by a friendly piece or the move would place the king in check .
As a result , the opposing kings may never occupy adjacent squares ( see opposition ) , but the king can give discovered check by unmasking a bishop , rook , or queen .
The king is also involved in the special move of castling .
CASTLING
Section::::Castling .
In conjunction with a rook , the king may make a special move called castling , in which the king moves two squares toward one of its rooks and then the rook is placed on the square over which the king crossed .
Castling is allowed only when neither the king nor the castling rook has previously moved , no squares between them are occupied , the king is not in check , and the king will not move across or end its movement on a square that is under enemy attack .
STATUS IN GAMES CHECK AND CHECKMATE Section::::Status in games .
Section::::Check and checkmate .
If a player 's move places the opponent 's king under attack , that king is said to be in check , and the player in check is required to immediately remedy the situation .
There are three possible methods to remove the king from check :
* Moving the king to an adjacent non - threatened square .
A king can not castle to get out of check .
* Interposing a piece between the king in check and the attacking piece in order to break the line of threat ( not possible when the attacking piece is a knight or pawn , or when in double check ) .
* Capturing the attacking piece ( not possible in double check , unless the king captures )
If none of these three options are possible , the player 's king has been checkmated and the player loses the game .
STALEMATE Section::::Stalemate .
A stalemate occurs when , for the player with the move : * The player has no legal moves , and * The player 's king is not in check
If this happens , the king is said to have been stalemated and the game ends in a draw .
A player who has very little or no chance of winning will often try to entice the opponent to inadvertently place the player 's king in stalemate in order to avoid a loss .
ROLE IN GAMEPLAY Section::::Role in gameplay .
In the opening and middlegame , the king will rarely play an active role in the development of an offensive or defensive position .
Instead , a player will normally try to castle and seek safety on the edge of the board behind friendly pawns .
In the endgame , however , the king emerges to play an active role as an offensive piece as well as assisting in the promotion of their remaining pawns .
It is not meaningful to assign a value to the king relative to the other pieces , as it can not be captured or exchanged .
In this sense , its value could be considered infinite .
As an assessment of the king 's capability as an offensive piece in the endgame , it is often considered to be slightly stronger than a bishop or knight – Emanuel Lasker gave it the value of a knight plus a pawn ( i.e. four points on the scale of chess piece relative value ) .
It is better at defending nearby pawns than the knight is , and it is better at attacking them than the bishop is .
UNICODE Section::::Unicode .
Unicode defines two codepoints for king : ♔
U+2654 White Chess King ( HTML ♔ )
♚
U+265A
Black Chess King ( HTML ♚ ) SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Fianchetto variation of the King 's Indian Defence
* Piececlopedia : King by Fergus Duniho and Hans Bodlaender