SUMO
The sport originated in Japan , the only country where it is practiced professionally .
It is considered a gendai budō , which refers to modern Japanese martial art , but the sport has a history spanning many centuries .
Many ancient traditions have been preserved in sumo , and even today the sport includes many ritual elements , such as the use of salt purification , from Shinto .
Life as a wrestler is highly regimented , with rules regulated by the Japan Sumo Association .
Most sumo wrestlers are required to live in communal sumo training stables , known in Japanese as heya , where all aspects of their daily lives — from meals to their manner of dress — are dictated by strict tradition .
From 2008 to 2017 , a number of high - profile controversies and scandals have rocked the sumo world , with an associated effect on its reputation and ticket sales .
These have also affected the sport 's ability to attract recruits .
Despite this setback , sumo 's popularity and general attendance has rebounded due to having multiple yokozuna ( or grand champions ) for the first time in a number of years and other high - profile wrestlers such as Endō and Ichinojō grabbing the public 's attention .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
In addition to its use as a trial of strength in combat , sumo has been associated with Shinto ritual .
Some Shinto shrineshrines ] ] carry out forms of ritual dance where a human is said to wrestle with a kami , a Shinto divine spirit .
It was an important ritual at the imperial court , where representatives of each province were ordered to attend the contest at the court and fight .
The contestants were required to pay for their travel themselves .
The contest was known as sumai no sechie , or " sumai party " .
Over the rest of Japanese recorded history , sumo 's popularity changed according to the whims of rulers and the need for its use as a training tool in periods of civil strife .
The form of wrestling combat changed gradually into one where the main aim in victory was to throw one 's opponent .
The concept of pushing one 's opponent out of a defined area came some time later .
A ring , defined as something other than simply the area given to the wrestlers by spectators , is also believed to have come into being in the 16th century as a result of a tournament organized by the then principal warlord in Japan , Oda Nobunaga .
At this point , wrestlers would wear loose loincloths rather than the much stiffer mawashi wrestling belts of today .
During the Edo period , wrestlers would wear a fringed decorative apron called a keshō - mawashi during the match , whereas today these are worn only during pretournament rituals .
Most of the rest of the current forms within the sport developed in the early Edo period .
WINNING A SUMO BOUT
Section::::Winning a sumo bout .
The winner of a sumo bout is generally either the first wrestler to force his opponent to step out of the ring , or the first wrestler to force his opponent to touch the ground with any part of his body other than the bottom of his feet .
Also , a number of other less common rules can be used to determine the winner .
For example , a wrestler using an illegal technique ( kinjite ) automatically loses , as does one whose mawashi ( belt ) comes completely undone .
A wrestler failing to show up for his bout ( even if due to prior injury ) also automatically loses ( fusenpai ) .
Bouts consist solely of a single round and often last only a few seconds , as usually one wrestler is quickly ousted from the circle or thrown to the ground .
However , they can occasionally last for several minutes .
Each match is preceded by an elaborate ceremonial ritual .
Traditionally , sumo wrestlers are renowned for their great girth and body mass , which is often a winning factor in sumo .
No weight divisions are used in professional sumo ; a wrestler can sometimes face an opponent twice his own weight .
However , with superior technique , smaller wrestlers can control and defeat much larger opponents .
In some situations a review of the gyōji 's decision may be needed .
The judges outside the ring , who sit at eye level ( the " shimpan " ) may convene a conference in the middle of the ring , called a " mono - ii " .
This is done if the judges decide that the decision over who won the bout needs to be reviewed ; for example , if both sumotori appear to touch the ground or step out of the ring at the same time .
In these cases , sometimes video is reviewed to see what happened .
Once a decision is made , the chief judge will announce the decision to the spectators and the wrestlers alike .
They may order a bout to be restarted , or leave the decision as given by the gyōji .
Occasionally the shimpan will overrule the gyōji and give the bout to the other wrestler .
After the winner is declared , an off - stage gyōji ( referee ) determines the kimarite ( or winning technique ) used in the bout , which is then announced to the audience .
On rare occasions the referee or judges may award the win to the wrestler who touched the ground first .
This happens if both wrestlers touch the ground at nearly the same time and it is decided that the wrestler who touched the ground second had no chance of winning , his opponent 's superior sumo having put him in an irrecoverable position .
The losing wrestler is referred to as being shini - tai ( " dead body " ) in this case .
WRESTLING RING ( DOHYŌ )
Section::::Wrestling ring ( dohyō ) .
Sumo matches take place in a dohyō ( 土俵 ) : a ring , in diameter and in area , of rice - straw bales on top of a platform made of clay mixed with sand .
A new dohyō is built for each tournament by the bout callers ( or yobidashi ) .
At the center are two white lines , the shikiri - sen , behind which the wrestlers position themselves at the start of the bout .
A roof resembling that of a Shinto shrine may be suspended over the dohyō .
Women are traditionally forbidden from entering or touching the ring .
PROFESSIONAL SUMO Section::::Professional sumo .
Professional sumo is organized by the Japan Sumo Association .
The members of the association , called oyakata , are all former wrestlers , and are the only people entitled to train new wrestlers .
Most practicing wrestlers are members of a training stable ( or heya ) run by one of the oyakata , who is the stablemaster for the wrestlers under him .
In 2007 , 43 training stables hosted 660 wrestlers .
All sumo wrestlers take wrestling names called , which may or may not be related to their real names .
Often , wrestlers have little choice in their names , which are given to them by their trainers ( or stablemasters ) , or by a supporter or family member who encouraged them into the sport .
This is particularly true of foreign - born wrestlers .
A wrestler may change his wrestling name during his career , with some wrestlers changing theirs several times .
Sumo wrestling is a strict hierarchy based on sporting merit .
The wrestlers are ranked according to a system that dates back to the Edo period .
Wrestlers are promoted or demoted according to their performance in six official tournaments held throughout the year .
A carefully prepared banzuke listing the full hierarchy is published two weeks prior to each sumo tournament .
In addition to the professional tournaments , exhibition competitions are held at regular intervals every year in Japan , and roughly once every two years , the top - ranked wrestlers visit a foreign country for such exhibitions .
None of these displays is taken into account in determining a wrestler 's future rank .
Rank is determined only by performance in grand sumo tournaments ( or honbasho ) .
SUMO DIVISIONS
Section::::Sumo divisions .
The six divisions in sumo are : makuuchi ( maximum 42 wrestlers ) , jūryō ( fixed at 28 wrestlers ) , makushita ( fixed at 120 wrestlers ) , sandanme ( fixed at 200 wrestlers ) , jonidan ( about 200 wrestlers ) , and jonokuchi ( around 50 wrestlers ) .
Wrestlers enter sumo in the lowest jonokuchi division and , ability permitting , work their way up to the top division .
A broad demarcation in the sumo world can be seen between the wrestlers in the top two divisions known as sekitori and those in the four lower divisions , known commonly by the more generic term rikishi .
The ranks receive different levels of compensation , privileges , and status .
The topmost makuuchi division receives the most attention from fans and has the most complex hierarchy .
The majority of wrestlers are maegashira and are ranked from the highest level 1 down to about 16 or 17 .
In each rank are two wrestlers , the higher rank is designated as " east " and the lower as " west " , so the list goes # 1 east , # 1 west , # 2 east , # 2 west , etc .
Above the maegashira are the three champion or titleholder ranks , called the san'yaku , which are not numbered .
These are , in ascending order , komusubi , sekiwake , and ōzeki .
At the pinnacle of the ranking system is the rank of yokozuna .
Yokozuna , or grand champions , are generally expected to compete for and to win the top division tournament title on a regular basis , hence the promotion criteria for yokozuna are very strict .
In general , an ōzeki must win the championship for two consecutive tournaments or an " equivalent performance " to be considered for promotion to yokozuna .
More than one wrestler can hold the rank of yokozuna at the same time .
In antiquity , sumo was solely a Japanese sport .
Since the 1900s , however , the number of foreign - born sumo wrestlers has gradually increased .
In the beginning of this period , these few foreign wrestlers were listed as Japanese , but particularly since the 1960s , a number of high - profile foreign - born wrestlers became well - known , and in more recent years have even come to dominate in the highest ranks .
Half of the last six wrestlers promoted to ōzeki have been foreign - born , and a Japanese had not been named yokozuna from 1998 until the promotion of Kisenosato Yutaka in 2017 .
This and other issues eventually led the Sumo Association to limit the number of foreigners allowed to one in each stable .
PROFESSIONAL SUMO
TOURNAMENTS Section::::Professional sumo tournaments .
Since 1958 , six Grand Sumo tournaments ( Japanese : honbasho ) have been held each year : three at the Sumo Hall ( or Ryōgoku Kokugikan ) in Ryōgoku , Tokyo ( January , May , and September ) , and one each in Osaka ( March ) , Nagoya ( July ) , and Fukuoka ( November ) .
Each tournament begins on a Sunday and runs for 15 days , ending also on a Sunday .
Each wrestler in the top two divisions ( sekitori ) has one match per day , while the lower - ranked wrestlers compete in seven bouts , about one every two days .
Each day is structured so that the highest - ranked contestants compete at the end of the day .
Thus , wrestling starts in the morning with the jonokuchi wrestlers and ends at around six o'clock in the evening with bouts involving the yokozuna .
The wrestler who wins the most matches over the 15 days wins the tournament championship ( yūshō ) for his division .
If two wrestlers are tied for the top , they wrestle each other and the winner takes the title .
Three - way ties for a championship are rare , at least in the top division .
In these cases , the three wrestle each other in pairs with the first to win two in a row take the tournament .
More complex systems for championship playoffs involving four or more wrestlers also exist , but these are usually only seen in determining the winner of one of the lower divisions .
The matchups for each day of the tournament are announced a day in advance .
They are determined by the sumo elders who are members of the judging division of the Sumo Association .
As many more wrestlers are in each division than matchups during the tournament , each wrestler only competes against a selection of opponents from the same division , though small overlaps can occur between two divisions .
With the exception of the san'yaku - ranked wrestlers , the first bouts tend to be between wrestlers who are within a few ranks of each other .
Afterwards , the selection of opponents takes into account a wrestler 's prior performance .
For example , in the lower divisions , wrestlers with the same record in a tournament are generally matched up with each other and the last matchups often involve undefeated wrestlers competing against each other , even if they are from opposite ends of the division .
In the top division , in the last few days , wrestlers with exceptional records often have matches against much more highly ranked opponents , including san'yaku wrestlers , especially if they are still in the running for the top division championship .
Similarly , more highly ranked wrestlers with very poor records may find themselves fighting wrestlers much further down the division .
For the yokozuna and ōzeki , the first week and a half of the tournament tends to be taken up with bouts against the top maegashira , komusubi , and sekiwake , with the bouts within these ranks being concentrated into the last five days or so of the tournament ( depending on the number of top - ranked wrestlers competing ) .
Traditionally , on the final day , the last three bouts of the tournament are between the top six ranked wrestlers , with the top two competing in the final matchup , unless injuries during the tournament prevent this .
Certain match - ups are prohibited in regular tournament play .
Wrestlers who are from the same training stable can not compete against each other , nor can wrestlers who are brothers , even if they join different stables .
The one exception to this rule is that training stable partners and brothers can face each other in a championship - deciding playoff match .
The last day of the tournament is called senshūraku , which literally means " the pleasure of a thousand autumns " .
This colorful name for the culmination of the tournament echoes the words of the playwright Zeami to represent the excitement of the decisive bouts and the celebration of the victor .
The Emperor 's Cup is presented to the wrestler who wins the top - division makuuchi championship .
Numerous other ( mostly sponsored ) prizes are also awarded to him .
These prizes are often rather elaborate , ornate gifts , such as giant cups , decorative plates , and statuettes .
Others are quite commercial , such as one trophy shaped like a giant Coca - Cola bottle .
Promotion and relegation for the next tournament are determined by a wrestler 's score over the 15 days .
In the top division , the term kachikoshi means a score of 8–7 or better , as opposed to makekoshi , which indicates a score of 7–8 or worse .
A wrestler who achieves kachikoshi almost always is promoted further up the ladder , the level of promotion being higher for better scores .
See the makuuchi article for more details on promotion and relegation .
A top - division wrestler who is not an ōzeki or yokozuna and who finishes the tournament with kachikoshi is also eligible to be considered for one of the three prizes awarded for " technique " , " fighting spirit " , and defeating the most yokozuna and ōzeki the " outstanding performance " prize .
For more information see " sanshō .
For the list of upper divisions champions since 1909 , refer to the list of top division champions and the list of second division champions .
A PROFESSIONAL SUMO BOUT Section::::A professional sumo bout .
At the initial charge , both wrestlers must jump up from the crouch simultaneously after touching the surface of the ring with two fists at the start of the bout .
The referee ( gyōji ) can restart the bout if this simultaneous touch does not occur .
Upon completion of the bout , the referee must immediately designate his decision by pointing his gunbai or war - fan towards the winning side .
The referee 's decision is not final and may be disputed by the five judges seated around the ring .
If this happens , they meet in the center of the ring to hold a mono - ii ( a talk about things ) .
After reaching a consensus , they can uphold or reverse the referee 's decision or order a rematch , known as a torinaoshi .
The wrestlers then return to their starting positions and bow to each other before retiring .
A winning wrestler in the top division may receive additional prize money in envelopes from the referee if the matchup has been sponsored .
If a yokozuna is defeated by a lower - ranked wrestler , it is common and expected for audience members to throw their seat cushions into the ring ( and onto the wrestlers ) , though this practice is technically prohibited .
In contrast to the time in bout preparation , bouts are typically very short , usually less than a minute ( most of the time only a few seconds ) .
Extremely rarely , a bout can go on for several minutes .
If a bout lasts up to four minutes , the referee or one of the judges sitting around the ring may call a mizu - iri or " water break " .
The wrestlers are carefully separated , have a brief break , and then return to the exact position they left , as determined by the referee .
If after four more minutes , they are still deadlocked , they may have a second break , after which they start from the beginning .
Further deadlock with no end of the bout in sight can lead to a draw ( hikiwake ) , an extremely rare result in modern sumo .
The last draw in the top division was in September 1974 .
LIFE AS
A PROFESSIONAL SUMO WRESTLER Section::::Life as a professional sumo wrestler .
A sumo wrestler leads a highly regimented way of life .
The Sumo Association prescribes the behavior of its wrestlers in some detail .
For example , the association prohibits wrestlers from driving cars , although this is partly out of necessity as many wrestlers are too big to fit behind a steering wheel .
Breaking the rules can result in fines and/or suspension not only for both the offending wrestler and his stablemaster .
On entering sumo , they are expected to grow their hair long to form a topknot , or chonmage , similar to the samurai hairstyles of the Edo period .
Furthermore , they are expected to wear the chonmage and traditional Japanese dress when in public , allowing them to be identified immediately as wrestlers .
The type and quality of the dress depends on the wrestler 's rank .
Rikishi in jonidan and below are allowed to wear only a thin cotton robe called a yukata , even in winter .
Furthermore , when outside , they must wear a form of wooden sandals called geta that make a distinctive clip - clop sound .
Wrestlers in the makushita and sandanme divisions can wear a form of traditional short overcoat over their yukata and are allowed to wear straw sandals , called zōri .
The higher - ranked sekitori can wear silk robes of their own choice , and the quality of the garb is significantly improved .
They also are expected to wear a more elaborate form of topknot called an ōichō ( big ginkgo leaf ) on formal occasions .
Similar distinctions are made in stable life .
The junior wrestlers must get up earliest , around 5 am , for training , whereas the sekitori may start around 7 am .
When the sekitori are training , the junior wrestlers may have chores to do , such as assisting in cooking the lunch , cleaning , and preparing the bath , holding a sekitori 's towel , or wiping the sweat from him .
The ranking hierarchy is preserved for the order of precedence in bathing after training , and in eating lunch .
Wrestlers are not normally allowed to eat breakfast and are expected to have a form of siesta after a large lunch .
The most common type of lunch served is the traditional sumo meal of chankonabe , which consists of a simmering stew of various fish , meat , and vegetables cooked at the table .
It is usually eaten with rice and washed down with beer .
This regimen of no breakfast and a large lunch followed by a sleep is intended to help wrestlers put on a lot of weight so as to compete more effectively .
In the afternoon , the junior wrestlers again usually have cleaning or other chores , while their sekitori counterparts may relax , or deal with work issues related to their fan clubs .
Younger wrestlers also attend classes , although their education differs from the typical curriculum of their non - sumo peers .
In the evening , sekitori may go out with their sponsors , while the junior wrestlers generally stay at home in the stable , unless they are to accompany the stablemaster or a sekitori as his tsukebito ( manservant ) when he is out .
Becoming a tsukebito for a senior member of the stable is a typical duty .
A sekitori has a number of tsukebito , depending on the size of the stable or in some cases depending on the size of the sekitori .
The junior wrestlers are given the most mundane tasks such as cleaning the stable , running errands , and even washing or massaging the exceptionally large sekitori while only the senior tsukebito accompany the sekitori when he goes out .
The sekitori are given their own room in the stable , or may live in their own apartments , as do married wrestlers ; the junior wrestlers sleep in communal dormitories .
Thus , the world of the sumo wrestler is split broadly between the junior wrestlers , who serve , and the sekitori , who are served .
Life is especially harsh for recruits , to whom the worst jobs tend to be allocated , and the dropout rate at this stage is high .
The negative health effects of the sumo lifestyle can become apparent later in life .
Sumo wrestlers have a life expectancy between 60 and 65 , more than 10 years shorter than the average Japanese male , as the diet and sport take a toll on the wrestler 's body .
Many develop type 2 diabetes or high blood pressure , and they are prone to heart attacks due to the enormous amount of body mass and fat that they accumulate .
The excessive intake of alcohol can lead to liver problems and the stress on their joints due to their excess weight can cause arthritis .
Recently , the standards of weight gain are becoming less strict , in an effort to improve the overall health of the wrestlers .
MINIMUM HEIGHT
REQUIREMENT Section::::Minimum height requirement .
Some sumo organizations have minimum height requirements for their competitors .
In 1994 , the Japanese Sumo Association required that all sumo wrestlers be a minimum 173 cm ( 5 feet 8 inches ) in height .
This prompted 16-year - old Takeji Harada of Japan ( who had failed six previous eligibility tests ) to have four separate cosmetic surgeries over a period of 12 months to add an extra 15 cm ( 6 inches ) of silicone to his scalp , which created a large , protruding bulge on his head .
In response to this , the Japanese Sumo Association stated that they would no longer accept aspiring wrestlers who surgically enhanced their height , citing health concerns .
SALARY AND PAYMENT Section::::Salary and payment . , the monthly salary figures for makuuchi ( in Japanese yen ) were :
* yokozuna : 3,000,000 , about US$ 26,500 * ōzeki : 2,500,000 , about US$ 22,000 * san'yaku : 1,800,000 , about US$ 16,000 * maegashira :
1,400,000 or about US$ 12,500 * jūryō : 1,100,000 , about US$ 9,500 Wrestlers lower than the second division , who are considered trainees , receive only a fairly small allowance instead of a salary .
In addition to the basic salary , sekitori wrestlers also receive additional bonus income , called mochikyūkin , six times a year ( once every tournament , or basho ) based on the cumulative performance in their career to date .
This bonus increases every time the wrestler scores a kachikoshi ( with larger kachikoshi giving larger raises ) .
Special increases in this bonus are also awarded for winning the top division championship ( with an extra large increase for a " perfect " championship victory with no losses ) , and also for scoring a gold star or kinboshi ( an upset of a yokozuna by a maegashira ) .
San'yaku wrestlers also receive a relatively small additional tournament allowance , depending on their rank , and yokozuna receive an additional allowance every second tournament , associated with the making of a new tsuna belt worn in their ring entering ceremony .
Also , prize money is given to the winner of each divisional championship , which increases from 100,000 yen for a jonokuchi victory up to 10,000,000 yen for winning the top division .
In addition to prizes for a championship , wrestlers in the top division giving an exceptional performance in the eyes of a judging panel can also receive one or more of three special prizes ( the sanshō ) , which are worth 2,000,000 yen each .
Individual top division matches can also be sponsored by companies .
In such cases , the winner of the bout typically receives around 30,000 yen net per sponsor ( out of the sponsors ' contribution of 60,000 yen — much of the remainder goes in paying the wrestler 's tax on the prize ) .
These bout prizes are called kenshōkin .
For bouts involving yokozuna and ōzeki , the number of sponsors of the matchup can be quite large , whereas for lower ranked matchups , no bout sponsors may be active at all unless one of the wrestlers is particularly popular , or unless a company has a policy of sponsoring all his matchups .
No bout prize money is awarded for a bout decided by a fusenshō or forfeit victory .
AMATEUR SUMO
Section::::Amateur sumo .
Sumo is also practised as an amateur sport , with participants in college , high school , and grade school in Japan .
In addition to college and school tournaments , open amateur tournaments are also held .
The sport at this level is stripped of most of the ceremony .
The most successful amateur wrestlers in Japan ( usually college champions ) can be allowed to enter professional sumo at makushita ( third division ) rather than from the very bottom of the ladder .
This rank is called makushita tsukedashi , and is currently makushita 10 or 15 depending on the level of amateur success achieved .
Many of the current top division wrestlers entered professional sumo by this route .
All amateur athletes entering the professional ranks must be under 23 to satisfy the entry , except those who qualify for makushita tsukedashi , who may be up to 25 .
The International Sumo Federation was established to encourage the sport 's development worldwide , including holding international championships .
A key aim of the federation is to have sumo recognized as an Olympic sport .
Accordingly , amateur tournaments are divided into weight classes ( men : Lightweight up to , Middleweight up to , Heavyweight over , and Open Weight ( unrestricted entry ) , and include competitions for female wrestlers ( Lightweight up to , Middleweight up to , Heavyweight over , and Open Weight ) .
Amateur sumo clubs are gaining in popularity in the United States , with competitions regularly being held in major cities across the country .
The US Sumo Open , for example , was held in the Los Angeles Convention Center in 2007 with an audience of 3,000 .
The sport has long been popular on the West Coast and in Hawaii , where it has played a part in the festivals of the Japanese ethnic communities .
Now , however , the sport has grown beyond the sphere of Japanese diaspora and athletes come from a variety of ethnic , cultural , and sporting backgrounds .
Amateur sumo is particularly strong in Europe .
Many athletes come to the sport from a background in judo , freestyle wrestling , or other grappling sports such as sambo .
Some Eastern European athletes have been successful enough to be scouted into professional sumo in Japan , much like their Japanese amateur counterparts .
The most notable of these to date is the Bulgarian Kotoōshū , who is the highest - ranking foreign wrestler who was formerly an amateur sumo athlete .
Brazil is another center of amateur sumo , introduced by Japanese immigrants who arrived during the first half of the twentieth century .
The first Brazilian sumo tournament was held in 1914 .
Sumo took root in immigrant centers in southern Brazil , especially São Paulo , which is now home to the only purpose - built sumo training facility outside Japan .
Beginning in the 1990s , Brazilian sumo organizations made an effort to interest Brazilians without Japanese ancestry in the sport , and by the mid-2000s an estimated 70 % of participants came from outside the Japanese - Brazilian community .
Brazil is also a center for women 's sumo .
A small number of Brazilian wrestlers have made the transition to professional sumo in Japan , including Ryūkō Gō and Kaisei Ichirō .
IMAGE GALLERY
SEE ALSO
* Controversies in professional sumo
* Culture of Japan * Glossary of sumo terms
* Kimarite , list of winning moves in sumo * List of active sumo wrestlers * List of past sumo wrestlers
* List of sumo stables
* List of sumo record holders
* List of sumo tournament top division champions
* List of sumo tournament second division champions
* List of years in sumo * List of yokozuna * Lists of sumo wrestlers
* Sumo East and West , documentary on sumo REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Sharnoff , Lora ( 1993 ) .
Grand Sumo .
Weatherhill . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Nihon Sumo Kyokai
Official Grand Sumo Home Page
*
The Sumo Forum * Sumo FAQ * Searchable Sumo Database * Sumo News and Analysis * A Matter of Size , an Israeli fictional film on Amateur Sumo ( 2009 )