SEMICOLON
The semicolon or semi colon ( ;) is a punctuation mark that separates major sentence elements .
A semicolon can be used between two closely related independent clauses , provided they are not already joined by a coordinating conjunction .
Semicolons can also be used in place of commas to separate items in a list , particularly when the elements of that list contain commas .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first printed semicolon was the work of the Italian printer Aldus Manutius the Elder in 1494 .
Manutius established the practice of using the semicolon to separate words of opposed meaning and to allow a rapid change in direction in connecting interdependent statements .
Ben Jonson was the first notable English writer to use the semicolon systematically .
The modern uses of the semicolon relate either to the listing of items or to the linking of related clauses .
ENGLISH Section::::English .
Although terminal marks ( i.e. full stops , exclamation marks , and question marks ) mark the end of a sentence , the comma , semicolon and colon are normally sentence - internal , making them secondary boundary marks .
The semicolon falls between terminal marks and the comma ; its strength is equal to that of the colon .
CONSTRAINTS
*
When a semicolon marks the left boundary of a constituent ( e.g. the beginning of a clause or a phrase ) , the right boundary is marked by punctuation of equal or greater strength .
*
* When two or more semicolons are used within a single construction , all constituents are at the same level , unlike commas , which can separate , for example , subordinate clauses from main clauses .
* USAGE Section::::Usage .
Semicolons are followed by a lower case letter , unless that letter would ordinarily be capitalized mid - sentence ( e.g. , the word " I " , acronyms / initialisms , or proper nouns ) .
Modern style guides recommend no space before them and one space after .
They also typically recommend placing semicolons outside ending quotation marks , although this was not always the case .
For example , the first edition of the Chicago Manual of Style ( 1906 ) recommended placing the semicolon inside ending quotation marks .
Applications of the semicolon in English include : * Between items in a series or listing containing internal punctuation , especially parenthetic commas , where the semicolons function as serial commas :
* The people present were Jamie , a man from New Zealand ; John , the milkman 's son ; and George , a gaunt kind of man with no friends .
* Several fast food restaurants can be found within the following cities : London , England ; Paris , France ; Dublin , Ireland ; Madrid , Spain .
*
Here are three examples of familiar sequences : one , two , and three ; a , b , and c ; first , second , and third .
* ( Fig . 8 ;
see also plates in Harley 1941 , 1950 ; Schwab 1947 ) .
* Between closely related independent clauses not conjoined with a coordinating conjunction , when the two clauses are balanced , opposed or contradictory : * My wife would like tea ; I would prefer coffee .
*
I went to the basketball court ; I was told it was closed for cleaning .
*
I told Kate she 's running for the hills ; I wonder if she knew I was joking .
* When a comma replaces a period ( full stop ) in a quotation , or when a quotation otherwise links two independent sentences : * " I have no use for this , " he said ; " you are welcome to it . "
* " Is this your book ?
" she asked ; " I found it on the floor . " OTHER LANGUAGES
ARABIC
Section::::Other languages .
Section::::Arabic .
In Arabic , the semicolon is called Filament Manque ( ) which means literally " a dotted comma " , and is written inverted ( ؛ ) .
In Arabic , the semicolon has several uses : * It can be used between two phrases , in which the first phrase causes the second .
* Example : " He played much ; so , his clothes became dirty " .
( ) , ( )
*
It can be used between two phrases , where the second is a reason for the first .
* Example : " Your sister did not get high marks ; because she did n't study " .
( ) , ( ) GREEK , CHURCH SLAVONIC Section::::Greek , Church Slavonic .
In Greek and Church Slavonic , a semicolon indicates a question , similar to a Latin question mark .
To indicate a long pause or separate sections , each with commas ( the semicolon 's purpose in English ) , Greek uses , but extremely rarely , the " άνω τελεία " , an interpunct ( · ) .
Church Slavonic example : гдѣ єсть рождeйсѧ царь їудeйскій ; ( Where is the one who is born king of the Jews ? -
Matthew 2:1 )
FRENCH Section::::French .
In French , a semicolon ( point - virgule , literally ' dot - comma ' ) is a separation between two full sentences , used where either a colon or a comma would not be appropriate .
The phrase following a semicolon has to be an independent clause , which is related to the previous one ( but not explaining it , contrary to a sentence introduced by a colon ) .
The dash character is used in French writing too , but not as widely as the semicolon .
Usage of these devices ( semicolon and dash ) varies from author to author .
LITERATURE
Section::::Literature .
Some authors have spurned the semicolon throughout their works .
Lynne Truss stated that " Samuel Beckett spliced his way merrily through such novels as Molloy and Malone Dies , thumbing his nose at the semicolon all the way , " " James Joyce preferred the colon , as he thought it was more authentically classical ; P. G. Wodehouse did an effortlessly marvelous job without it ; George Orwell tried to avoid the semicolon completely in Coming Up for Air , ( 1939 ) ; " " Martin Amis included just one semicolon in Money ( 1984 ) ; " and " Umberto Eco was congratulated by an academic reader for using no semicolons in The Name of the Rose ( 1983 ) .
"
In response to Truss , Ben MacIntyre , columnist in The Times ( London ) , wrote : " Americans have long regarded the semi - colon with suspicion , as a genteel , self - conscious , neither - one - thing - nor - the other sort of punctuation mark , with neither the butchness of a full colon nor the flighty promiscuity of the comma .
Hemingway and Chandler and Stephen King would n't be seen dead in a ditch with a semi - colon ( though Truman Capote might ) .
Real men , goes the unwritten rule of American punctuation , do n't use semi - colons .
"
In A Man Without a Country , Kurt Vonnegut writes that semicolons are " transvestite hermaphrodites representing absolutely nothing .
All they do is show you 've been to college . "
ENCODING IN DIGITAL MEDIA Section::::Encoding in digital media .
Scripts comprising wide characters , such as kanji , use a full - width equivalent , ; , located at Unicode code point U+FF1B ( fullwidth semicolon ) .
Unicode characters are allocated for :
* - same as the EBCDIC semicolon character is 94 or 0x5E.
* - Arabic script
* - used in old writing systems , such as Hungarian Runic
* - Ge'ez script
* - Bamum script
* - for use in wide - character scripts such as kanji * - determines orientation when wide - character scripts are written vertically instead of horizontally * - Small Form Variants are for compatibility with Chinese National Standard CNS 11643 * - used in the APL programming language * - " indicates sudden glottal closure " * - deprecated tags block Related characters : COMPUTING
USAGE PROGRAMMING Section::::Computing usage .
Section::::Programming .
In computer programming , the semicolon is often used to separate multiple statements ( for example , in Perl , Pascal , PL / I , and SQL ; see Pascal : Semicolons as statement separators ) .
In other languages , semicolons are called terminators and are required after every statement ( such as in Java , and the C family ) .
Today semicolons as terminators has largely won out , but this was a divisive issue in programming languages from the 1960s into the 1980s .
An influential and frequently - cited study in this debate was , which concluded strongly in favor of semicolon as a terminator : The study has been criticized as flawed by proponents of semicolon as a separator , due to participants being familiar with a semicolon - as - terminator language and unrealistically strict grammar .
Nevertheless , the debate ended in favor of semicolon as terminator .
Therefore , semicolon provides structure to the programming language .
Semicolons are optional in a number of languages , including BCPL , Eiffel , and Go , meaning that they are part of the formal grammar for the language , but can be inferred in many or all contexts ( e.g. by end of line that ends a statement ( in Go ) ) .
As languages can be designed without them , semicolons are considered an unnecessary nuisance by some .
The use of semicolons in control flow structures and blocks of code is varied – semicolons are generally omitted after a closing brace , but included for a single statement branch of a control structure ( the " then " clause ) , except in Pascal , where a semicolon terminates the entire if ...
then ... else clause ( to avoid dangling else ) and thus is not allowed between a " then " and the corresponding " else " , as this causes unnesting .
This use originates with ALGOL 60 , and falls between the comma ( , ) – used as a list separator – and the period / full stop ( . ) – used to mark the end of the program .
The semicolon , as a mark separating statements , corresponds to the ordinary English usage of separating independent clauses , and gives the entire program the gross syntax of a single ordinary sentence .
Of these other characters , whereas commas have continued to be widely used in programming for lists ( and rare other uses , such as the comma operator that separates expressions in C ) , they are rarely used otherwise , and the period as the end of the program has fallen out of use .
The last major use of the comma , semicolon , and period hierarchy is in Erlang ( 1986 ) , where commas separate expressions ; semicolons separate clauses , both for control flow and for function clauses ; and periods terminate statements , such as function definitions or module attributes , not the entire program .
Drawbacks of having multiple different separators or terminators ( compared to a single terminator and single grouping , as in semicolon - and - braces ) include mental overhead in selecting punctuation , and overhead in rearranging code , as this requires not only moving lines around , but also updating the punctuation .
In some cases the distinction between a separator and a terminator is strong , such as early versions of Pascal , where a final semicolon yields a syntax error .
In other cases a final semicolon is treated either as optional syntax , or as being followed by a null statement , which is either ignored or treated as a NOP ( no operation or null command ) ; compare trailing commas in lists .
In some cases a blank statement is allowed , allowing a sequence of semicolons or the use of a semicolon by itself as the body of a control flow structure .
For example , a blank statement ( a semicolon by itself ) stands for a NOP in C / C++ , which is useful in busy waiting synchronization loops .
Other languages ( for instance , some assembly languages and LISP dialects , CONFIG.SYS and INI files ) use semicolons to mark the beginning of comments .
Example C code :
int main ( ) { Conventionally , in many languages , each statement is written on a separate line , but this is not typically a requirement of the language .
In the above example , two statements are placed on the same line ; this is legal , because the semicolon separates the two statements .
Thus programming languages like Java , the C family , Javascript etc .
use semicolons to obtain a proper structure in the respective languages .
DATA Section::::Data .
The semicolon is often used to separate elements of a string of text .
For example , multiple e - mail addresses in the " To " field in some e - mail clients have to be delimited by a semicolon .
In Microsoft Excel , the semicolon is used as a list separator , especially in cases where the decimal separator is a comma , such as codice_1 , instead of codice_2 .
In MATLAB and GNU Octave , the semicolon can be used as a row separator when defining a vector or matrix ( whereas a comma separates the columns within a row of a vector or matrix ) or to execute a command silently , without displaying the resulting output value in the console .
In HTML , a semicolon is used to terminate a character entity reference , either named or numeric .
In some delimiter - separated values file formats , the semicolon is used as the separator character , as an alternative to comma - separated values .
MATHEMATICS Section::::Mathematics .
In the argument list of a mathematical function formula_1 , a semicolon may be used to separate variables from fixed parameters .
In differential geometry , a semicolon preceding an index is used to indicate the covariant derivative of a function with respect to the coordinate associated with that index .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
The semicolon is commonly used as parts of emoticons , in order to indicate winking and/or crying .
Project Semicolon is the name of a faith - based anti - suicide initiative ( since the semicolon continues a sentence rather than ending it ) which has led to the punctuation mark becoming a highly symbolic and popular tattoo .
The Humphrey point is sometimes used instead of a decimal point in duodecimal numbers .
There is much Scratch culture around the semicolon .
REFERENCES GENERAL
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Delegating the Semicolon in a Most Unlikely Location – New York Times , Feb. 18 , 2008 .
* Has modern life killed the semicolon ? – Slate , June 20 , 2008 .
* The end of the line ? – The Guardian , April 4 , 2008 .