ANXIETY DISORDER Anxiety disorders are a group of mental disorders characterized by significant feelings of anxiety and fear .
Anxiety is a worry about future events , and fear is a reaction to current events .
These feelings may cause physical symptoms , such as a fast heart rate and shakiness .
There are a number of anxiety disorders including generalized anxiety disorder , specific phobia , social anxiety disorder , separation anxiety disorder , agoraphobia , panic disorder , and selective mutism .
The disorder differs by what results in the symptoms .
People often have more than one anxiety disorder .
The cause of anxiety disorders is a combination of genetic and environmental factors .
Risk factors include a history of child abuse , family history of mental disorders , and poverty .
Anxiety disorders often occur with other mental disorders , particularly major depressive disorder , personality disorder , and substance use disorder .
To be diagnosed symptoms typically need to be present for at least 6 months , be more than what would be expected for the situation , and decrease functioning .
Other problems that may result in similar symptoms include hyperthyroidism ; heart disease ; caffeine , alcohol , or cannabis use ; and withdrawal from certain drugs , among others .
Without treatment , anxiety disorders tend to remain .
Treatment may include lifestyle changes , counselling , and medications .
Counselling is typically with a type of cognitive behavioral therapy .
Medications , such as antidepressants , benzodiazepines , or beta blockers , may improve symptoms .
About 12 % of people are affected by an anxiety disorder in a given year , and between 5 % and 30 % are affected at some point in their life .
They occur about twice as often in females as males and generally begin before the age of 25 .
The most common are specific phobia which affects nearly 12 % and social anxiety disorder which affects 10 % at some point in their life .
They affect those between the ages 15 and 35 the most and become less common after the age of 55 .
Rates appear to be higher in the United States and Europe .
CLASSIFICATION
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER Section::::Classification .
Section::::Generalized anxiety disorder .
Generalized anxiety disorder ( GAD ) is a common disorder , characterized by long - lasting anxiety that is not focused on any one object or situation .
Those suffering from generalized anxiety disorder experience non - specific persistent fear and worry , and become overly concerned with everyday matters .
Generalized anxiety disorder is " characterized by chronic excessive worry accompanied by three or more of the following symptoms : restlessness , fatigue , concentration problems , irritability , muscle tension , and sleep disturbance " .
Generalized anxiety disorder is the most common anxiety disorder to affect older adults .
Anxiety can be a symptom of a medical or substance abuse problem , and medical professionals must be aware of this .
A diagnosis of GAD is made when a person has been excessively worried about an everyday problem for six months or more .
A person may find that they have problems making daily decisions and remembering commitments as a result of lack of concentration / preoccupation with worry .
Appearance looks strained , with increased sweating from the hands , feet , and axillae , and they may be tearful , which can suggest depression .
Before a diagnosis of anxiety disorder is made , physicians must rule out drug - induced anxiety and other medical causes .
In children GAD may be associated with headaches , restlessness , abdominal pain , and heart palpitations .
Typically it begins around 8 to 9 years of age .
SPECIFIC PHOBIAS Section::::Specific phobias .
The single largest category of anxiety disorders is that of specific phobias which includes all cases in which fear and anxiety are triggered by a specific stimulus or situation .
Between 5 % and 12 % of the population worldwide suffer from specific phobias .
Sufferers typically anticipate terrifying consequences from encountering the object of their fear , which can be anything from an animal to a location to a bodily fluid to a particular situation .
Common phobias are flying , blood , water , highway driving , and tunnels .
When people are exposed to their phobia , they may experience trembling , shortness of breath , or rapid heartbeat .
People understand that their fear is not proportional to the actual potential danger but still are overwhelmed by it .
PANIC DISORDER Section::::Panic disorder .
With panic disorder , a person has brief attacks of intense terror and apprehension , often marked by trembling , shaking , confusion , dizziness , nausea , and/or difficulty breathing .
These panic attacks , defined by the APA as fear or discomfort that abruptly arises and peaks in less than ten minutes , can last for several hours .
Attacks can be triggered by stress , irrational thoughts , general fear or fear of the unknown , or even exercise .
However sometimes the trigger is unclear and the attacks can arise without warning .
To help prevent an attack one can avoid the trigger .
This being said not all attacks can be prevented .
In addition to recurrent unexpected panic attacks , a diagnosis of panic disorder requires that said attacks have chronic consequences : either worry over the attacks ' potential implications , persistent fear of future attacks , or significant changes in behavior related to the attacks .
As such , those suffering from panic disorder experience symptoms even outside specific panic episodes .
Often , normal changes in heartbeat are noticed by a panic sufferer , leading them to think something is wrong with their heart or they are about to have another panic attack .
In some cases , a heightened awareness ( hypervigilance ) of body functioning occurs during panic attacks , wherein any perceived physiological change is interpreted as a possible life - threatening illness ( i.e. , extreme hypochondriasis ) .
AGORAPHOBIA Section::::Agoraphobia .
Agoraphobia is the specific anxiety about being in a place or situation where escape is difficult or embarrassing or where help may be unavailable .
Agoraphobia is strongly linked with panic disorder and is often precipitated by the fear of having a panic attack .
A common manifestation involves needing to be in constant view of a door or other escape route .
In addition to the fears themselves , the term agoraphobia is often used to refer to avoidance behaviors that sufferers often develop .
For example , following a panic attack while driving , someone suffering from agoraphobia may develop anxiety over driving and will therefore avoid driving .
These avoidance behaviors can often have serious consequences and often reinforce the fear they are caused by .
SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER Section::::Social anxiety disorder .
Social anxiety disorder ( SAD ; also known as social phobia ) describes an intense fear and avoidance of negative public scrutiny , public embarrassment , humiliation , or social interaction .
This fear can be specific to particular social situations ( such as public speaking ) or , more typically , is experienced in most ( or all ) social interactions .
Social anxiety often manifests specific physical symptoms , including blushing , sweating , and difficulty speaking .
As with all phobic disorders , those suffering from social anxiety often will attempt to avoid the source of their anxiety ; in the case of social anxiety this is particularly problematic , and in severe cases can lead to complete social isolation .
Social physique anxiety ( SPA ) is a subtype of social anxiety .
It is concern over the evaluation of one 's body by others .
SPA is common among adolescents , especially females .
POST - TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER Section::::Post - traumatic stress disorder .
Post - traumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) was once an anxiety disorder ( now moved to trauma- and stressor - related disorders in DSM - V ) that results from a traumatic experience .
Post - traumatic stress can result from an extreme situation , such as combat , natural disaster , rape , hostage situations , child abuse , bullying , or even a serious accident .
It can also result from long - term ( chronic ) exposure to a severe stressor-- for example , soldiers who endure individual battles but can not cope with continuous combat .
Common symptoms include hypervigilance , flashbacks , avoidant behaviors , anxiety , anger and depression .
In addition , individuals may experience sleep disturbances .
There are a number of treatments that form the basis of the care plan for those suffering with PTSD .
Such treatments include cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) , psychotherapy and support from family and friends .
Posttraumatic stress disorder ( PTSD ) research began with Vietnam veterans , as well as natural and non natural disaster victims .
Studies have found the degree of exposure to a disaster has been found to be the best predictor of PTSD .
SEPARATION ANXIETY DISORDER Section::::Separation anxiety disorder .
Separation anxiety disorder ( SepAD ) is the feeling of excessive and inappropriate levels of anxiety over being separated from a person or place .
Separation anxiety is a normal part of development in babies or children , and it is only when this feeling is excessive or inappropriate that it can be considered a disorder .
Separation anxiety disorder affects roughly 7 % of adults and 4 % of children , but the childhood cases tend to be more severe ; in some instances , even a brief separation can produce panic .
Treating a child earlier may prevent problems .
This may include training the parents and family on how to deal with it .
Often , the parents will reinforce the anxiety because they do not know how to properly work through it with the child .
In addition to parent training and family therapy , medication , such as SSRIs , can be used to treat separation anxiety .
SITUATIONAL ANXIETY Section::::Situational anxiety .
Situational anxiety is caused by new situations or changing events .
It can also be caused by various events that make that particular individual uncomfortable .
Its occurrence is very common .
Often , an individual will experience panic attacks or extreme anxiety in specific situations .
A situation that causes one individual to experience anxiety may not affect another individual at all .
For example , some people become uneasy in crowds or tight spaces , so standing in a tightly packed line , say at the bank or a store register , may cause them to experience extreme anxiety , possibly a panic attack .
Others , however , may experience anxiety when major changes in life occur , such as entering college , getting married , having children , etc .
OBSESSIVE –
COMPULSIVE DISORDER Section::::Obsessive – compulsive disorder .
Obsessive – compulsive disorder ( OCD ) is not classified as an anxiety disorder by the DSM-5 but is by
the ICD-10 .
It was previously classified as an anxiety disorder in the DSM - IV .
It is a condition where the person has obsessions ( distressing , persistent , and intrusive thoughts or images ) and compulsions ( urges to repeatedly perform specific acts or rituals ) , that are not caused by drugs or physical order , and which cause distress or social dysfunction .
The compulsive rituals are personal rules followed to relieve the anxiety .
OCD affects roughly 1 - 2 % of adults ( somewhat more women than men ) , and under 3 % of children and adolescents .
A person with OCD knows that the symptoms are unreasonable and struggles against both the thoughts and the behavior .
Their symptoms could be related to external events they fear ( such as their home burning down because they forget to turn off the stove ) or worry that they will behave inappropriately .
It is not certain why some people have OCD , but behavioral , cognitive , genetic , and neurobiological factors may be involved .
Risk factors include family history , being single ( although that may result from the disorder ) , and higher socioeconomic class or not being in paid employment .
Of those with OCD about 20 % of people will overcome it , and symptoms will at least reduce over time for most people ( a further 50 % ) .
SELECTIVE MUTISM Section::::Selective mutism .
Selective mutism ( SM ) is a disorder in which a person who is normally capable of speech does not speak in specific situations or to specific people .
Selective mutism usually co - exists with shyness or social anxiety .
People with selective mutism stay silent even when the consequences of their silence include shame , social ostracism or even punishment .
Selective mutism affects about 0.8 % of people at some point in their life .
CAUSES DRUGS Section::::Causes .
Section::::Drugs .
Anxiety and depression can be caused by alcohol abuse , which in most cases improves with prolonged abstinence .
Even moderate , sustained alcohol use may increase anxiety levels in some individuals .
Caffeine , alcohol , and benzodiazepine dependence can worsen or cause anxiety and panic attacks .
Anxiety commonly occurs during the acute withdrawal phase of alcohol and can persist for up to 2 years as part of a post - acute withdrawal syndrome , in about a quarter of people recovering from alcoholism .
In one study in 1988–1990 , illness in approximately half of patients attending mental health services at one British hospital psychiatric clinic , for conditions including anxiety disorders such as panic disorder or social phobia , was determined to be the result of alcohol or benzodiazepine dependence .
In these patients , an initial increase in anxiety occurred during the withdrawal period followed by a cessation of their anxiety symptoms .
There is evidence that chronic exposure to organic solvents in the work environment can be associated with anxiety disorders .
Painting , varnishing and carpet - laying are some of the jobs in which significant exposure to organic solvents may occur .
Taking caffeine may cause or worsen anxiety disorders , including panic disorder .
Those with anxiety disorders can have high caffeine sensitivity .
Caffeine - induced anxiety disorder is a subclass of the DSM-5 diagnosis of substance / medication - induced anxiety disorder .
Substance / medication - induced anxiety disorder falls under the category of anxiety disorders , and not the category of substance - related and addictive disorders , even though the symptoms are due to the effects of a substance .
Cannabis use is associated with anxiety disorders .
However , the precise relationship between cannabis use and anxiety still needs to be established .
MEDICAL CONDITIONS Section::::Medical conditions .
Occasionally , an anxiety disorder may be a side - effect of an underlying endocrine disease that causes nervous system hyperactivity , such as pheochromocytoma or hyperthyroidism .
STRESS Section::::Stress .
Anxiety disorders can arise in response to life stresses such as financial worries or chronic physical illness .
Anxiety among adolescents and young adults is common due to the stresses of social interaction , evaluation , and body image .
Anxiety is also common among older people who have dementia .
On the other hand , anxiety disorder is sometimes misdiagnosed among older adults when doctors misinterpret symptoms of a physical ailment ( for instance , racing heartbeat due to cardiac arrhythmia ) as signs of anxiety .
GENETICS Section::::Genetics .
GAD runs in families and is six times more common in the children of someone with the condition .
While anxiety arose as an adaptation , in modern times it is almost always thought of negatively in the context of anxiety disorders .
People with these disorders have highly sensitive systems ; hence , their systems tend to overreact to seemingly harmless stimuli .
Sometimes anxiety disorders occur in those who have had traumatic youths , demonstrating an increased prevalence of anxiety when it appears a child will have a difficult future .
In these cases , the disorder arises as a way to predict that the individual 's environment will continue to pose threats .
PERSISTENCE OF ANXIETY Section::::Persistence of anxiety .
At a low level , anxiety is not a bad thing .
In fact , the hormonal response to anxiety has evolved as a benefit , as it helps humans react to dangers .
Researchers in evolutionary medicine believe this adaptation allows humans to realize there is a potential threat and to act accordingly in order to ensure greatest possibility of protection .
It has actually been shown that those with low levels of anxiety have a greater risk of death than those with average levels .
This is because the absence of fear can lead to injury or death .
Additionally , patients with both anxiety and depression were found to have lower morbidity than those with depression alone .
The functional significance of the symptoms associated with anxiety includes :
greater alertness , quicker preparation for action , and reduced probability of missing threats .
In the wild , vulnerable individuals , for example those who are hurt or pregnant , have a lower threshold for anxiety response , making them more alert .
This demonstrates a lengthy evolutionary history of the anxiety response .
EVOLUTIONARY MISMATCH
Section::::Evolutionary mismatch .
It has been theorized that high rates of anxiety are a reaction to how the social environment has changed from the Paleolithic era .
For example , in the Stone Age there was greater skin - to - skin contact and more handling of babies by their mothers , both of which are strategies that reduce anxiety .
Additionally , there is greater interaction with strangers in present times as opposed to interactions solely between close - knit tribes .
Researchers posit that the lack of constant social interaction , especially in the formative years , is a driving cause of high rates of anxiety .
Many current cases are likely to have resulted from an evolutionary mismatch , which has been specifically termed a " psychopathogical mismatch " .
In evolutionary terms , a mismatch occurs when an individual possesses traits that were adapted for an environment that differs from the individual 's current environment .
For example , even though an anxiety reaction may have been evolved to help with life - threatening situations , for highly sensitized individuals in Westernized cultures simply hearing bad news can elicit a strong reaction .
An evolutionary perspective may provide insight into alternatives to current clinical treatment methods for anxiety disorders .
Simply knowing some anxiety is beneficial may alleviate some of the panic associated with mild conditions .
Some researchers believe that , in theory , anxiety can be mediated by reducing a patient 's feeling of vulnerability and then changing their appraisal of the situation .
MECHANISMS BIOLOGICAL Section::::Mechanisms .
Section::::Biological .
Low levels of GABA , a neurotransmitter that reduces activity in the central nervous system , contribute to anxiety .
A number of anxiolytics achieve their effect by modulating the GABA receptors .
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors , the drugs most commonly used to treat depression , are frequently considered as a first line treatment for anxiety disorders .
AMYGDALA
Section::::Amygdala .
The amygdala is central to the processing of fear and anxiety , and its function may be disrupted in anxiety disorders .
Sensory information enters the amygdala through the nuclei of the basolateral complex ( consisting of lateral , basal , and accessory basal nuclei ) .
The basolateral complex processes sensory - related fear memories and communicates their threat importance to memory and sensory processing elsewhere in the brain , such as the medial prefrontal cortex and sensory cortices .
Another important area is the adjacent central nucleus of the amygdala , which controls species - specific fear responses , via connections to the brainstem , hypothalamus , and cerebellum areas .
In those with general anxiety disorder , these connections functionally seem to be less distinct , with greater gray matter in the central nucleus .
Another difference is that the amygdala areas have decreased connectivity with the insula and cingulate areas that control general stimulus salience , while having greater connectivity with the parietal cortex and prefrontal cortex circuits that underlie executive functions .
The latter suggests a compensation strategy for dysfunctional amygdala processing of anxiety .
Researchers have noted " Amygdalofrontoparietal coupling in generalized anxiety disorder patients may ... reflect the habitual engagement of a cognitive control system to regulate excessive anxiety .
" This is consistent with cognitive theories that suggest the use in this disorder of attempts to reduce the involvement of emotions with compensatory cognitive strategies .
Clinical and animal studies suggest a correlation between anxiety disorders and difficulty in maintaining balance .
A possible mechanism is malfunction in the parabrachial area , a brain structure that , among other functions , coordinates signals from the amygdala with input concerning balance .
Anxiety processing in the basolateral amygdala has been implicated with dendritic arborization of the amygdaloid neurons .
SK2 potassium channels mediate inhibitory influence on action potentials and reduce arborization .
By overexpressing SK2 in the basolateral amygdala , anxiety in experimental animals can be reduced together with general levels of stress - induced corticosterone secretion .
Joseph E. LeDoux and Lisa Feldman Barrett have both sought to separate automatic threat responses from additional associated cognitive activity within anxiety .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Anxiety disorders are often severe chronic conditions , which can be present from an early age or begin suddenly after a triggering event .
They are prone to flare up at times of high stress and are frequently accompanied by physiological symptoms such as headache , sweating , muscle spasms , tachycardia , palpitations , and hypertension , which in some cases lead to fatigue .
In casual discourse the words " anxiety " and " fear " are often used interchangeably ; in clinical usage , they have distinct meanings : " anxiety " is defined as an unpleasant emotional state for which the cause is either not readily identified or perceived to be uncontrollable or unavoidable , whereas " fear " is an emotional and physiological response to a recognized external threat .
The term " anxiety disorder " includes fears ( phobias ) as well as anxieties .
The diagnosis of anxiety disorders is difficult because there are no objective biomarkers , it is based on symptoms , which typically need to be present at least six months , be more than would be expected for the situation , and decrease functioning .
Several generic anxiety questionnaires can be used to detect anxiety symptoms , such as the State - Trait Anxiety Inventory ( STAI ) , the Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7 ( GAD-7 ) , the Beck Anxiety Inventory ( BAI ) , the Zung Self - Rating Anxiety Scale , and the Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale .
Other questionnaires combine anxiety and depression measurement , such as the Hamilton Anxiety Rating Scale , the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale ( HADS ) , the Patient Health Questionnaire ( PHQ ) , and the Patient - Reported Outcomes Measurement Information System ( PROMIS ) .
Examples of specific anxiety questionnaires include the Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale ( LSAS ) , the Social Interaction Anxiety Scale ( SIAS ) , the Social Phobia Inventory ( SPIN ) , the Social Phobia Scale ( SPS ) , and the Social Anxiety Questionnaire ( SAQ - A30 ) .
Anxiety disorders often occur along with other mental disorders , in particular depression , which may occur in as many as 60 % of people with anxiety disorders .
The fact that there is considerable overlap between symptoms of anxiety and depression , and that the same environmental triggers can provoke symptoms in either condition , may help to explain this high rate of comorbidity .
Studies have also indicated that anxiety disorders are more likely among those with family history of anxiety disorders , especially certain types .
Sexual dysfunction often accompanies anxiety disorders , although it is difficult to determine whether anxiety causes the sexual dysfunction or whether they arise from a common cause .
The most common manifestations in individuals with anxiety disorder are avoidance of intercourse , premature ejaculation or erectile dysfunction among men and pain during intercourse among women .
Sexual dysfunction is particularly common among people affected by panic disorder ( who may fear that a panic attack will occur during sexual arousal ) and posttraumatic stress disorder .
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS Section::::Differential diagnosis .
The diagnosis of an anxiety disorder requires first ruling out an underlying medical cause .
Diseases that may present similar to an anxiety disorder , including certain endocrine diseases ( hypo- and hyperthyroidism , hyperprolactinemia ) , metabolic disorders ( diabetes ) , deficiency states ( low levels of vitamin D , B2 , B12 , folic acid ) , gastrointestinal diseases ( celiac disease , non - celiac gluten sensitivity , inflammatory bowel disease ) , heart diseases , blood diseases ( anemia ) , and brain degenerative diseases ( Parkinson 's disease , dementia , multiple sclerosis , Huntington 's disease ) .
Also , several drugs can cause or worsen anxiety , whether in intoxication , withdrawal , or from chronic use .
These include alcohol , tobacco , cannabis , sedatives ( including prescription benzodiazepines ) , opioids ( including prescription pain killers and illicit drugs like heroin ) , stimulants ( such as caffeine , cocaine and amphetamines ) , hallucinogens , and inhalants .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
Focus is increasing on prevention of anxiety disorders .
There is tentative evidence to support the use of cognitive behavior therapy and mindfulness therapy .
As of 2013 , there are no effective measures to prevent GAD in adults .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Treatment options include lifestyle changes , therapy , and medications .
There is no clear evidence as to whether therapy or medication is more effective ; the choice of which is up to the person with the anxiety disorder and most choose therapy first .
The other may be offered in addition to the first choice or if the first choice fails to relieve symptoms .
LIFESTYLE AND DIET Section::::Lifestyle and diet .
Lifestyle changes include exercise , for which there is moderate evidence for some improvement , regularizing sleep patterns , reducing caffeine intake , and stopping smoking .
Stopping smoking has benefits in anxiety as large as or larger than those of medications .
Omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids ( such as fish oil ) may reduce anxiety , particularly in those with more significant symptoms .
THERAPY Section::::Therapy .
Cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) is effective for anxiety disorders and is a first line treatment .
CBT appears to be equally effective when carried out via the internet .
While evidence for mental health apps is promising it is preliminary .
Self - help books can contribute to the treatment of people with anxiety disorders .
Mindfulness based programs also appear to be effective for managing anxiety disorders .
It is unclear if meditation has an effect on anxiety and transcendental meditation appears to be no different than other types of meditation .
MEDICATIONS Section::::Medications .
Medications include SSRIs or SNRIs are first line choices for generalized anxiety disorder .
There is no good evidence for any member of the class being better than another , so cost often drives drug choice .
If they are effective , it is recommend that they be continued for at least a year .
Stopping these medications results in a greater risk of relapse .
Buspirone , quetiapine and pregabalin are second line treatments for people who do not respond to SSRIs or SNRIs ; there is also evidence that benzodiazepines including diazepam and clonazepam are effective but have fallen out of favor due to the risk of dependence and abuse .
Medications need to be used with care among older adults , who are more likely to have side effects because of coexisting physical disorders .
Adherence problems are more likely among older people , who may have difficulty understanding , seeing , or remembering instructions .
In general medications are not seen as helpful in specific phobia but a benzodiazepine is sometimes used to help resolve acute episodes ; as 2007 data were sparse for efficacy of any drug .
ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE Section::::Alternative medicine .
Many other remedies have been used for anxiety disorder .
These include kava , where the potential for benefit seems greater than that for harm with short - term use in those with mild to moderate anxiety .
The American Academy of Family Physicians ( AAFP ) recommends use of kava for those with mild to moderate anxiety disorders who are not using alcohol or taking other medicines metabolized by the liver , and who wish to use " natural " remedies .
Side effects of kava in the clinical trials were rare and mild .
Inositol has been found to have modest effects in people with panic disorder or obsessive - compulsive disorder .
There is insufficient evidence to support the use of St. John 's wort , valerian or passionflower .
Aromatherapy has shown some tentative benefits for anxiety reduction in people with cancer when done with massages , although it not clear whether it could just enhance the effect of massage itself .
CHILDREN Section::::Children .
Both therapy and a number of medications have been found to be useful for treating childhood anxiety disorders .
Therapy is generally preferred to medication .
Cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) is a good first therapy approach .
Studies have gathered substantial evidence for treatments that are not CBT based as being effective forms of treatment , expanding treatment options for those who do not respond to CBT .
Like adults , children may undergo psychotherapy , cognitive - behavioral therapy , or counseling .
Family therapy is a form of treatment in which the child meets with a therapist together with the primary guardians and siblings .
Each family member may attend individual therapy , but family therapy is typically a form of group therapy .
Art and play therapy are also used .
Art therapy is most commonly used when the child will not or can not verbally communicate , due to trauma or a disability in which they are nonverbal .
Participating in art activities allows the child to express what they otherwise may not be able to communicate to others .
In play therapy , the child is allowed to play however
they please as a therapist observes them .
The therapist may intercede from time to time with a question , comment , or suggestion .
This is often most effective when the family of the child plays a role in the treatment .
If a medication option is warranted , antidepressants such as SSRIs and SNRIs can be effective .
Minor side effects with medications , however , are common .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
The prognosis varies on the severity of each case and utilization of treatment for each individual .
If these children are left untreated , they face risks such as poor results at school , avoidance of important social activities , and substance abuse .
Children who have an anxiety disorder are likely to have other disorders such as depression , eating disorders , attention deficit disorders both hyperactive and inattentive .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Globally as of 2010 approximately 273 million ( 4.5 % of the population ) had an anxiety disorder .
It is more common in females ( 5.2 % ) than males ( 2.8 % ) .
In Europe , Africa and Asia , lifetime rates of anxiety disorders are between 9 and 16 % , and yearly rates are between 4 and 7 % .
In the United States , the lifetime prevalence of anxiety disorders is about 29 % and between 11 and 18 % of adults have the condition in a given year .
This difference is affected by the range of ways in which different cultures interpret anxiety symptoms and what they consider to be normative behavior .
In general , anxiety disorders represent the most prevalent psychiatric condition in the United States , outside of substance use disorder .
CHILDREN Section::::Children .
Like adults , children can experience anxiety disorders ; between 10 and 20 percent of all children will develop a full - fledged anxiety disorder prior to the age of 18 , making anxiety the most common mental health issue in young people .
Anxiety disorders in children are often more challenging to identify than their adult counterparts owing to the difficulty many parents face in discerning them from normal childhood fears .
Likewise , anxiety in children is sometimes misdiagnosed as an attention deficit disorder or , due to the tendency of children to interpret their emotions physically ( as stomach aches , head aches , etc . ) , anxiety disorders may initially be confused with physical ailments .
Anxiety in children has a variety of causes ; sometimes anxiety is rooted in biology , and may be a product of another existing condition , such as autism or Asperger 's disorder .
Gifted children are also often more prone to excessive anxiety than non - gifted children .
Other cases of anxiety arise from the child having experienced a traumatic event of some kind , and in some cases , the cause of the child 's anxiety can not be pinpointed .
Anxiety in children tends to manifest along age - appropriate themes , such as fear of going to school ( not related to bullying ) or not performing well enough at school , fear of social rejection , fear of something happening to loved ones , etc .
What separates disordered anxiety from normal childhood anxiety is the duration and intensity of the fears involved .
A small child will usually experience separation anxiety , for example , but he or she will generally grow out of it by about the age of 6 , whereas in an anxious child it may linger for years longer , hindering the child 's development .
Similarly , most children will fear the dark or losing their parents at some point , but this fear will dissipate over time without interfering a great deal in that child 's normal day - to - day activities .
In a child with an anxiety disorder , fearing the dark or loss of loved ones may grow into a lasting obsession which the child tries to deal with in compulsive ways which erode his or her quality of life .
The presence of co- occurring depressive symptoms in anxiety disorders may mark the transition to a more severe and detrimental and impairing disorder in preschool and early school age .
Children , similar to adults , may suffer from a range of different anxiety disorders , including : Generalized anxiety disorder : The child experiences persistent anxiety regarding a wide variety of situations , and this anxiety may adapt to fit each new situation that arises or be based largely on imagined situations which have yet to occur .
Reassurance often has little effect .
Separation anxiety disorder :
A child who is older than 6 or 7 who has an extremely difficult time being away from his or her parents may be experiencing Separation Anxiety Disorder .
Children with this disorder often fear that they will lose their loved ones during times of absence .
As such , they frequently refuse to attend school .
Social anxiety disorder should not be confused with shyness or introversion ; shyness is frequently normal , especially in very young children .
Children with social anxiety disorder often wish to engage in social activity ( unlike introverts ) but find themselves held back by obsessive fears of being disliked .
They often convince themselves they have made a poor impression on others , regardless of evidence to the contrary .
Over time , they may develop a phobia of social situations .
This disorder affects older children and preteens more often than younger children .
Social phobia in children may also be caused by some traumatic event , such as not knowing an answer when called on in class .
While uncommon in children , OCD can occur .
Rates are between two and four percent .
Like adults , children rely on " magical thinking "
in order to allay their anxiety , i.e. , he or she must perform certain rituals ( often based in counting , organizing , cleaning , etc . )
in order to " prevent " the calamity he or she feels is imminent .
Unlike healthy children , who can leave their magical thinking - based activities behind when called upon to do so , children with OCD are literally unable to cease engaging in these activities , regardless of the consequences .
Panic disorder is more common in older children , though younger children sometimes also suffer from it .
Panic disorder is frequently mistaken for a physical illness by children suffering from it , likely due to its strongly physical symptoms ( a racing heartbeat , sweating , dizziness , nausea , etc . )
These symptoms are , however , usually accompanied by extreme fear , particularly the fear of dying .
Like adults with Panic Disorder , children may attempt to avoid any situation they feel
is a " trigger " for their attacks .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS