PUBLIC WORKS
ADMINISTRATION Public Works Administration ( PWA ) , part of the New Deal of 1933 , was a large - scale public works construction agency in the United States headed by Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes .
It was created by the National Industrial Recovery Act in June 1933 in response to the Great Depression .
It built large - scale public works such as dams , bridges , hospitals , and schools .
Its goals were to spend $ 3.3 billion in the first year , and $ 6 billion in all , to provide employment , stabilize purchasing power , and help revive the economy .
Most of the spending came in two waves in 1933 - 35 , and again in 1938 .
Originally called the Federal Emergency Administration of Public Works , it was renamed the Public Works Administration in 1935 and shut down in 1944 .
The PWA spent over $ 7 billion in contracts to private construction firms that did the actual work .
It created an infrastructure that generated national and local pride in the 1930s and remains vital seven decades later .
The PWA was much less controversial than its rival agency with a confusingly similar name , the Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) , headed by Harry Hopkins , which focused on smaller projects and hired unemployed unskilled workers .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
Frances Perkins had first suggested a federally financed public works program , and the idea received considerable support from Harold L. Ickes , James Farley , and Henry Wallace .
After having scaled back the initial cost of the PWA , Franklin Delano Roosevelt agreed to include the PWA as part of his New Deal proposals in the " Hundred Days " of spring 1933 .
PROJECTS Section::::Projects .
The PWA headquarters in Washington planned projects , which were built by private construction companies hiring workers on the open market .
Unlike the WPA , it did not hire the unemployed directly .
More than any other New Deal program , the PWA epitomized the progressive notion of " priming the pump " to encourage economic recovery .
Between July 1933 and March 1939 the PWA funded and administered the construction of more than 34,000 projects including airports , large electricity - generating dams , major warships for the Navy , and bridges , as well as 70 % of the new schools and one - third of the hospitals built in 1933–1939 .
Streets and highways were the most common PWA projects , as 11,428 road projects , or 33 % of all PWA projects , accounted for over 15 % of its total budget .
School buildings , 7,488 in all , came in second at 14 % of spending .
PWA functioned chiefly by making allotments to the various Federal agencies ; making loans and grants to state and other public bodies ; and making loans without grants ( for a brief time ) to the railroads .
For example , it provided funds for the Indian Division of the CCC to build roads , bridges and other public works on and near Indian reservations .
The PWA became , with its " multiplier - effect " and first two - year budget of $ 3.3 billion ( compared to the entire GDP of $ 60 billion ) , the driving force of America 's biggest construction effort up to that date .
By June 1934 , the agency had distributed its entire fund to 13,266 federal projects and 2,407 non - federal projects .
For every worker on a PWA project , almost two additional workers were employed indirectly .
The PWA accomplished the electrification of rural America , the building of canals , tunnels , bridges , highways , streets , sewage systems , and housing areas , as well as hospitals , schools , and universities ; every year it consumed roughly half of the concrete and a third of the steel of the entire nation .
The PWA also electrified the Pennsylvania Railroad between New York and Washington , DC .
At the local level it built courthouses , schools , hospitals and other public facilities that remain in use in the 21st century .
LIST OF MOST NOTABLE PWA PROJECTS
* Lincoln Tunnel in New York City
BRIDGES *
Overseas Highway connecting Key West , Florida , to the mainland * Triborough Bridge * Cape Cod Canal Railroad Bridge * Bourne Bridge * Sagamore Bridge
DAMS
* Bonneville Dam * Fort Peck Dam
* Grand Coulee Dam in Washington
state
* Pensacola Dam
* Mansfield Dam
*
Tom Miller Dam * Upper Mississippi River lock & dams
AIRPORTS
* List of New Deal airports HOUSING Section::::Housing .
The PWA created three Greenbelt communities based on the ideas of Ebenezer Howard which are now the municipalities of Greenbelt , Maryland , Greenhills , Ohio , and Greendale , Wisconsin .
The PWA was the centerpiece of the New Deal program for building public housing for the poor people in cities .
However it did not create as much affordable housing as supporters would have hoped , building only 29,000 units in years .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
The PWA spent over $ 6 billion , but did not succeed in returning the level of industrial activity to pre - depression levels .
Though successful in many aspects , it has been acknowledged that the PWA 's objective of constructing a substantial number of quality , affordable housing units was a major failure .
Some have argued that because Roosevelt was opposed to deficit spending , there was not enough money spent to help the PWA achieve its housing goals .
Reeves ( 1973 ) argues that the competitive theory of administration used by Roosevelt proved to be inefficient and produced delays .
The competition over the size of expenditure , the selection of the administrator , and the appointment of staff at the state level , led to delays and to the ultimate failure of PWA as a recovery instrument .
As director of the budget , Lewis Douglas overrode the views of leading senators in reducing appropriations to $ 3.5 billion and in transferring much of that money to other agencies in lieu of their own specific appropriations .
The cautious and penurious Ickes won out over the more imaginative Hugh S. Johnson as chief of public works administration .
Political competition between rival Democratic state organizations and between Democrats and Progressive Republicans led to delays in implementing PWA efforts on the local level .
Ickes instituted quotas for hiring skilled and unskilled black people in construction financed through the Public Works Administration ( PWA ) .
Resistance from employers and unions was partially overcome by negotiations and implied sanctions .
Although results were ambiguous , the plan helped provide African Americans with employment , especially among unskilled workers .
TERMINATION Section::::Termination .
When President Franklin D. Roosevelt moved industry toward World War II production , the PWA was abolished and its functions were transferred to the Federal Works Agency in June 1943 .
CONTRAST WITH WPA Section::::Contrast with WPA .
The PWA should not be confused with its great rival the Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) , though both were part of the New Deal .
The WPA , headed by Harry Hopkins , engaged in smaller projects in close cooperation with local governments — such as building a city hall or sewers or sidewalks .
The PWA projects were much larger in scope , such as giant dams .
The WPA hired only people on relief who were paid directly by the federal government .
The PWA gave contracts to private firms who did all the hiring on the private sector job market .
The WPA also had youth programs ( the NYA ) , projects for women , and arts projects that the PWA did not have .
REFERENCES
PRIMARY SOURCES
* Ickes , Harold L. Back to Work : The Story of PWA ( 1935 )
* Ickes , Harold L. " The Place of Housing in National Rehabilitation , " Journal of Land & Public Utility Economics , Vol .
11 , No . 2 ( May , 1935 ) , pp .
109–116 in JSTOR * PWA , America Builds .
The Record of PWA .
1939 online edition FURTHER READING
* Cam , Gilbert A. " United States Government Activity in Low - Cost Housing , 1932 - 38 , " Journal of Political Economy , Vol .
47 , No . 3
( Jun. , 1939 ) , pp .
357–378 ; in JSTOR * Clarke , Jeanne Nienaber .
Roosevelt 's Warrior : Harold L. Ickes and the New Deal .
1996 .
414 pp .
* Hunt , D. Bradford .
" America :
Lost Opportunities , " Reviews in American History , Vol .
25 , No . 4 ( Dec. 1997 ) , pp .
637–642 in JSTOR on public housing
* Kruman , Marie W. " Quotas for Blacks : the Public Works Administration and the Black Construction Worker . "
Labor History 1975 16(1 ) : 37 - 51 .
Fulltext : in Ebsco
* Lowry , Charles B.
" The PWA in Tampa : A Case Study , " Florida Historical Quarterly , Vol .
52 , No . 4 ( Apr. 1974 ) , pp .
363–380 in JSTOR
* Reeves , William D. " PWA and Competitive Administration in the New Deal . " Journal of American History 1973 60(2 ) : 357 - 372 .
in JSTOR
* Smith , Jason Scott .
Building New Deal Liberalism : The Political Economy of Public Works , 1933–1956 ( 2006 ) , the major scholarly study * Watkins , T. H.
Righteous Pilgrim :
The Life and Times of Harold L. Ickes , 1874–1952 .
( 1990 ) .
1010 pp .
biography
* Graham , Otis L. , Jr. , and Meghan Robinson Wander eds .
Franklin D. Roosevelt , His Life and Times .
New York :
Da Capo Press , 1985 , pg .
336 - 337 .
* Leuchtenburg , William E. Franklin D Roosevelt and the New Deal .
New York :
Harper & Row , pg .
133 - 34 .. EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The past : Public Works Administration builds housing ( PWA housing in Texas )
* Public Works Administration projects list