MOUNTAIN DEW Mountain Dew ( stylized as Mtn Dew ) is a carbonated soft drink brand produced and owned by PepsiCo .
The original formula was invented in 1940 by Tennessee beverage bottlers Barney and Ally Hartman .
A revised formula was created by Bill Bridgforth in 1958 .
The rights to this formula were obtained by the Tip Corporation of Marion , Virginia .
William H. " Bill " Jones of the Tip corporation further refined the formula , launching that version of Mountain Dew in 1961 .
In August 1964 , the Mountain Dew brand and production rights were acquired from Tip by the Pepsi - Cola company , and the distribution expanded across the United States and Canada .
Between the 1940s and 1980s there was one variety of Mountain Dew , which was citrus - flavored and caffeinated in most markets .
Diet Mountain Dew was introduced in 1988 , followed by Mountain Dew Red , which was introduced and discontinued in 1988 .
In 2001 , a cherry flavor called Code Red debuted .
This product line extension trend has continued , with expansion into specialty , limited time production , region - specific , and retailer - specific
( Taco Bell , 7-Eleven ) variations of Mountain Dew .
Production was extended to the UK in 1996 , but was phased out in 1998 .
A similarly named but different - tasting product has been sold in the UK under the name " Mountain Dew Energy " since 2010 and in Ireland since the spring of 2011 .
The product was renamed in 2014 to simply ' Mountain Dew ' .
As of 2009 , Mountain Dew represented a 6.7 % share of the carbonated soft drinks market in the US .
Its competition includes The Coca - Cola Company 's Mello Yello and Surge , and Dr Pepper Snapple Group 's Sun Drop ; Mountain Dew accounts for 80 % of citrus soft drinks sold within the US .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
Tennessee bottlers Barney and Ally Hartman developed Mountain Dew as a mixer in the 1940s .
Soft drinks were sold regionally in the 1930s , and the Hartmans had difficulty in Knoxville obtaining their preferred soda to mix with liquor , preferably whiskey , so the two developed their own .
Originally a 19th century generic term for whiskey , especially Highland Scotch whiskey , the Mountain Dew name was trademarked for the soft drink in 1948 .
Charles Gordon , who had partnered with William Swartz to bottle and promote Dr. Enuf , was introduced to Mountain Dew when he met the Hartman brothers on a train and they offered him a sample .
Gordon and the Hartman brothers subsequently made a deal to bottle Mountain Dew by the Tri - Cities Beverage Corporation in Johnson City , Tennessee .
The Hartman brothers also asked Coca - Cola for input on their soda .
The Coca - Cola Company refused their offer .
The Tip Corporation of Marion , Virginia bought the rights to Mountain Dew , revising the flavor and launching it in 1961 .
In 1964 , Pepsico purchased the Tip Corporation and thus acquired the rights to Mountain Dew .
In 1999 , the Virginia legislature recognized Bill Jones and the Town of Marion for their role in the history of Mountain Dew .
PACKAGING
Section::::Packaging .
" Mountain Dew " was originally Southern and/or Scots / Irish slang for moonshine ( i.e. , homemade whiskey ) .
Using it as the name for the soda was originally suggested by Carl E. Retzke at an Owens - Illinois Inc. meeting in Toledo , Ohio , and was first trademarked by Ally and Barney Hartman in the 1940s .
Early bottles and signage carried the reference forward by showing a cartoon - stylized hillbilly .
The first sketches of the original Mountain Dew bottle labels were devised in 1948 by John Brichetto , and the representation on product packaging has changed at multiple points in the history of the beverage .
LOGO Section::::Logo .
PepsiCo ( then The Pepsi - Cola Company ) acquired the Mountain Dew brand in 1964 , and shortly thereafter in 1969 the logo was modified as the company sought to shift its focus to a " younger , outdoorsy " generation .
This direction continued as the logo remained the same through the 1970s , 1980s , and then was retired in 1996 when another logo took its place for the next three years .
Later updates to the logo were made in 1998 and then again in 2005 .
In October 2008 , the Mountain Dew logo was redesigned to " Mtn Dew " within the U.S. market , as a result of PepsiCo announcing that it would rebrand its core carbonated soft - drink products by early 2009 .
However , the variant flavors continued to use the previous design until May 2011 , when it was announced that the " Code Red " , " LiveWire " , " Voltage " , and " Baja Blast " flavor variants would be given redesigned packaging , including new logos to correspond with the " Mtn Dew " style .
The returning flavors " Pitch Black " , " Supernova " , " Typhoon " , and " Game Fuel " were given redesigned packaging and logos for their 2011 re - release .
SIDEKICK BOTTLES Section::::Sidekick bottles .
In summer 2010 , a secondary type of Mountain Dew bottles began appearing on some US shelves .
Designed by 4sight , a design and innovation firm , these bottles featured a sleeker design , smaller packaging labels , and a built - in grip .
The bottles were dubbed " Sidekick bottles " and were tested in North Carolina , South Carolina , and Indiana markets .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
In its primary market of the United States , the ingredient composition of Mountain Dew is listed as : " carbonated water , high - fructose corn syrup ( in much of the U.S. ) , concentrated orange juice , citric acid , natural flavors , sodium benzoate , caffeine , sodium citrate , erythorbic acid , gum arabic , Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid , brominated vegetable oil , and yellow 5 .
" The ingredient makeup of Mountain Dew varies based on the country of production .
For example , in Canada , the sweetener listed is " glucose - fructose " ( another name for high - fructose corn syrup ) , and until 2012 , it was caffeine - free by default .
Brominated vegetable oil , which is found in about 10 % of all citrus - flavored soda drinks in the US , is banned in foods throughout Europe and in Japan .
In response to negative publicity around high - fructose corn syrup , PepsiCo in 2009 released a limited - run production of Mountain Dew Throwback , a variation consisting of sugar in place of high - fructose corn syrup .
Mountain Dew Throwback subsequently was re - released for brief periods ( generally 8–12 weeks at a time ) , including a second wave from December 2009 to February 2010 and a third wave in the summer and fall of 2010 .
A fourth 8-week production run began in March 2011 , before it became a permanent addition to the Mountain Dew flavor line - up .
A can of Mountain Dew contains 54 mg of caffeine ( equivalent to ) .
TARTRAZINE Section::::Tartrazine .
An urban legend about Mountain Dew ingredients is that dye Yellow # 5 ( tartrazine ) lowers sperm count .
Tartrazine has never been scientifically linked to any of the alleged effects in the legends , nor has any other component of the drink .
While some studies have shown that among children ( with and without ADHD ) tartrazine can increase ADHD - like symptoms ( see Stevens , Kuczek , Burgess , Hurt & Arnold , 2010 ) , the general consensus is that it does not .
It can cause allergic - type sensitivity reactions ( e.g. hives and asthma ) in a small number of individuals , especially those who also have a sensitivity to aspirin .
PROMOTIONS AMP ENERGY Section::::Promotions .
Section::::Amp Energy .
Amp Energy is an energy drink distributed by PepsiCo under the Mountain Dew brand .
Launched in 2001 , Amp was originally known as " Mountain Dew AMP . "
From 2007 to 2008 , several additional flavors of Amp were introduced .
In 2012 , AMP 's labeling and ingredients changed , as did the flavor and appeal , according to fans .
The Mountain Dew branding was also removed from cans during this change .
TACO
BELL 'S MOUNTAIN DEW BAJA BLAST
Section::::Taco Bell 's Mountain Dew Baja Blast .
Leading up to 2004 , Pepsico conducted extensive research to develop a beverage with a taste and color to complement Taco Bell food products .
The resulting product was named Mountain Dew Baja Blast , a light blue - green colored , tropical - lime - flavored variety of the popular soft drink .
Taco Bell was given a ten - year exclusive rights period during which Baja Blast would not be available in any store or other food outlet , not even to Taco Bell 's fellow Yum brand restaurants .
In spring 2014 , Mountain Dew began distributing its Baja Blast flavor in standard 12 ounce cans , 20 ounce bottles and 24 ounce cans for sale at supermarkets and retail businesses in the US .
The new retail product bore the Taco Bell logo .
Taco Bell 's chief marketing officer , Chris Brandt , said the exclusive drinks have helped increase the company 's beverage sales , even as soda sales have declined in the broader market .
He noted that people are more likely to buy drinks when they 're available exclusively at the chain .
Due to the drink 's success , many other new beverages were introduced at Taco Bell including a new Taco Bell exclusive , Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast , a non - alcoholic sangrita flavored Mountain Dew .
DEWMOCRACY 1
Section::::DEWmocracy 1 .
Beginning in 2007 , Mountain Dew began a promotion entitled " DEWmocracy " , which involved the public electing new flavors , colors , names , packaging graphics and advertisements for upcoming Mountain Dew products .
The campaign has been the subject of recognition within the advertising industry , cited as one of the earliest and longest - running examples of a consumer product brand employing crowdsourcing to make decisions which are traditionally made internally by employees .
In its initial phase , Dewmocracy participation and voting was conducted via an online game .
Television advertisements at the time featured actor Forest Whitaker asking people to decide the next new flavor of Mountain Dew .
Online voters selected from three choices : Supernova ( a strawberry - melon flavor ) , Revolution ( a berry flavor ) , and Voltage ( a raspberry - citrus flavor ) .
Each included ginseng .
The event ended on August 17 , 2008 , with Voltage announced as the winning flavor .
It was officially released on December 29 , 2008 .
According to Beverage Digest , sales of Dewmocracy flavors totaled 25 million cases in 2008 .
DEWMOCRACY 2
Section::::DEWmocracy 2 .
Mountain Dew announced a continuation of the Dewmocracy campaign – referred to as " Dewmocracy 2 " – which launched in July 2009 .
A marked difference between Dewmocracy 2 and its predecessor was the wider range of online voting methods , expanding beyond the Dewmocracy website to include Facebook , Twitter , YouTube , and the " Dew Labs Community " – a private , online forum for the " most passionate Dew fans . "
In July 2009 , Dew Labs sampling trucks distributed product samples of seven potential flavor variations .
At the same time , 50 " Dew fanatics " were chosen based on their video submissions to the video website 12seconds.tv , and were shipped boxes of the seven prototype flavors .
From the initial seven flavors , taste testers were asked to elect three final flavors for later release at retail stores .
The three new candidate flavors were Distortion ( a key lime flavor ) , Typhoon ( a tropical punch flavor ) , and White Out ( a smooth - citrus flavor ) .
The three new candidate flavors were released on 19 April 2010 and voting lasted until 14 June .
The following day , White Out was announced as the winner .
Mountain Dew White Out was released for sale on 4 October 2010 .
A limited production White Out Slurpee ( Mtn Dew White Out Freeze ) was made available at 7-Eleven beginning in January 2011 .
In July 2011 , Mountain Dew Typhoon was re - released briefly in 2-liter form .
GAME FUEL Section::::Game Fuel .
In 2007 , after using the term " Game Fuel " to market their sodas to the video - gaming subculture , Mountain Dew introduced a new flavor variant ( citrus cherry ) with the Game Fuel name .
Coinciding with the release of the Xbox 360 game Halo 3 , Mountain Dew Game Fuel sported a label that was almost entirely image - based , showing promotional artwork for the game and featuring the game series ' main character Master Chief prominently .
This variant remained on shelves for 12 weeks , and was discontinued afterwards .
Two years later , the website for the popular MMORPG World of Warcraft stated that two Mountain Dew Game Fuel flavors would be sold in June 2009 and would promote the game .
Shortly afterwards , the bottle art was released , and showed that the two flavors would promote different player races in the game .
One of the two was exactly the same citrus cherry flavor from the original Halo 3 promotion , with updated packaging .
The second flavor was a new wild fruit drink similar to the previously released Pepsi Blue .
Both drinks were given World of Warcraft - based packaging , and sported the newly updated " MTN Dew " logo .
Like their precursor , these two flavors lasted for 12 weeks and were discontinued .
On 24 August 2011 , Mountain Dew announced another return of the Game Fuel promotion on their Facebook page .
The original citrus - cherry would once again return , along with a new tropical companion flavor .
The announcement gave a planned release date of October 2011 and stated that the packaging would feature codes granting players double experience points in .
Both flavors were mailed out to Dew Labs members in early September 2011 , a month before the planned release date .
Later that same month , it was announced through the Facebook page that Game Fuel would be arriving to the public in mid - October , though it would vary by market .
These flavors began appearing from the first week of October , and were also discontinued after 12 weeks of being on shelves .
Game Fuel returned in October 2012 to promote Halo 4 , in the original citrus - cherry flavor .
In August 2013 , Mountain Dew announced that Game Fuel would be returning to stores in the fall of 2013 , with a new blueberry version titled " Electrifying Berry " .
In October 2013 , boxes of original citrus - cherry Game Fuel appeared on store shelves with packaging promoting Xbox One and the games
Dead Rising 3 and Forza Motorsport 5 and with cans featuring Dead Rising 3 graphics .
The new Electrifying Berry flavor of Game Fuel simultaneously appeared with packaging promoting Kinect Sports Rivals and the game
Ryse : Son of Rome , graphics from which appear on the cans as well .
In May 2014 , the original citrus - cherry Game Fuel began reappearing on shelves , but this time , the soda does not seem to be promoting any video game .
In October 2014 , Game Fuel returned with a new lemonade flavor for the promotion of .
Unlike past two - variant Game Fuel releases , both drinks sport the same artwork ( unlike 2009 's Horde Red and Alliance Blue or 2011 's citrus cherry and tropical ) , albeit differing colors to match their respective flavors .
After the promotion ended , Citrus Cherry reverted to promotionless packaging while lemonade flavor was permanently removed from shelves .
In October 2015 , Game Fuel returned a new companion flavor , Berry Lime , for the promotion of .
After the promotion , Citrus Cherry once again reverted to promotionless packaging , while the Berry Lime flavor remained available as a slurpee .
Images leaked in May 2016 led to speculation that Game Fuel would once again see a new release later in 2016 , with a new mango - flavored variant alongside the original citrus - cherry , promoting the game Titanfall 2 .
Mountain Dew announced the return of Game Fuel and the new flavor , Mango Heat , in September .
Then , in October , Game Fuel was released with the Titanfall 2 promotion , with a lower calorie version of the original citrus - cherry variant returning alongside the new Mango Heat .
In 2017 , Game Fuel returned with two previously discontinued flavors : Arctic Burst ( originally released as a slurpee flavor in 2006 to promote Superman Returns ) and Tropical Smash ( originally Flavor # 736 , one of the four prototype flavors for " DEWmocracy II " that lost to Mountain Dew White Out and did not make the final round ) .
As was the case with the 2013 promotion , the two flavors promoted two different Xbox games ( Arctic Burst promoted while Tropical Smash promoted Forza 7 ) .
For the first time , Citrus Cherry was not fully part of the promotion , instead promotionless Citrus Cherry was sold with the same white caps with codes under them as the other flavors in the promotion .
GREEN LABEL Section::::Green Label .
Green Label is an online magazine , a partnership between Mountain Dew and Complex Media producing sponsored content covering action sports , music , art and style , housed at Green - Label.com .
The site replaces several websites and a YouTube channel that have been overseen by PepsiCo since 2007 .
The initiative originated in 2013 and will continue through the year .
GREEN LABEL ART
Section::::Green Label Art .
Mountain Dew 's Green Label promotion originated in 2007 , when a line of limited edition aluminum bottles was put into production , featuring artwork from a range of tattoo artists and other artists .
This initial series marked the first use of the term Green Label Art to describe the use of artistic works on Mountain Dew packaging .
In June 2010 , a contest entitled " Green Label Art : Shop Series " was announced , involving 35 independent skateboard store owners who partnered with local artists to design and submit future can artwork designs .
Approximately one million votes were submitted by the conclusion of the contest in October of the same year , with Street Science Skate Shop – a store in Tracy , California – named the winner of a cash prize .
This winning can design was scheduled to appear on Mountain Dew cans at some point in 2011 .
GREEN LABEL SOUND Section::::Green Label Sound .
In 2008 , a Mountain Dew - sponsored music label was launched under the name Green Label Sound .
In December 2010 , a Mountain Dew Code Red television advertisement was produced , incorporating the hip - hop artist Jay Electronica performing his song The Announcement .
The advertisement concludes with the tagline " Hip Hop is different on the mountain " .
The label released its first full - length album release , When Fish Ride Bicycles by the hip hop group
The Cool Kids , on June 12 , 2011 .
DEW TOUR / GREEN LABEL EXPERIENCE Section::::Dew
Tour / Green Label experience .
Sponsorship of action sports athletes has been a part of Mountain Dew marketing since the late 1990s , with present sponsorship including Eli Reed ( skateboarder ) , Paul Rodriguez ( skateboarder ) , and Danny Davis ( snowboarder ) .
Mountain Dew also sponsors its own namesake festival , " The Dew Tour " , which is an action sports tour made up of events held in five U.S. cities over several months .
The first Dew Tour was held in the summer of 2005 with events in skateboarding , BMX and Freestyle Motocross .
In 2008 it expanded to add a " Winter Dew Tour " , comprising snowboarding and snow skiing competitions .
It is " the most watched and attended action sports event in the world , " according to Transworld Snowboarding magazine .
In coordination with its Dew Tour sponsorship , a sponsored television show entitled Mountain Dew 's Green Label Experience premiered on Fuel TV in July 2010 , for the primary purpose of broadcasting interviews with action sports athletes from each of the stops on the Dew Tour .
GREEN LABEL GAMING
Section::::Green Label Gaming .
Under the term Green Label Gaming – coined in 2007 – Mountain Dew has broadened its sponsorship of independent video game designers and players .
The brand is often the subject of media attention for its popularity among video game enthusiasts , as several flavors of Mountain Dew have been produced in partnership with video games .
In December 2008 , Mountain Dew produced a 30-minute television special which documented independent gamers in Japan and the U.S. , which aired on the Spike TV network .
In 2009 , Mountain Dew sponsored two prominent gaming events : the Independent Games Festival and the Game Developers Conference .
Green Label Gaming has since come under controversy over a sponsored Game Jam - themed reality show by Matti Leshem .
DORITOS QUEST Section::::Doritos Quest .
In 2008 , Doritos debuted a mystery flavor known as " Quest " , featuring a campaign of online puzzles and prizes to identify the Quest flavor .
The flavor was later identified as Mountain Dew .
FANDEWMONIUM Section::::FanDEWmonium .
In October 2010 , Mountain Dew started the " FanDEWmonium " promotion , a competition in which new flavors would compete to become permanent similar to the two DEWmocracy campaigns , but with eight diet flavors instead of three regular ones .
Five of the participating flavors were diet versions of previous DEWmocracy flavors : Diet Super Nova , Diet Voltage , Diet Crave ( originally Flavor # 722 ) , Diet Distortion , Diet Typhoon , and Diet White Out .
Another flavor , Diet Ultra Violet , was returning from its own limited release in 2009 .
The remaining competitor was a brand - new Diet flavor created specifically for the promotion - Flare ( berry - citrus - flavored ) .
Each of the eight flavors was available for tasting at specific tour locations , and special cans were also mailed to some Dew Labs members .
Also similar to the DEWmocracy campaign , those who taste - tested the Diet flavors were asked to go online and vote for which flavors they thought should be permanently sold in stores .
After the first round of voting was completed , two flavor finalists were chosen to receive a limited release to store shelves for a final round of voting .
Diet Voltage and Diet Super Nova were sold in stores for an eight - week period beginning in March 2011 .
After votes were cast , it was announced that Diet Super Nova had won , with 55 % of all votes , and it returned in January 2012 .
Afterwards , it was removed from shelves permanently after a 12-week release due to poor sales .
BACK BY POPULAR
DEWMAND Section::::Back by Popular DEWmand .
On 7 January 2011 , Mountain Dew posted on their Facebook that Pitch Black would return to the shelves on May 2011 , also stating that this may be the start of many re - releases of old favorites .
The company promoted Pitch Black 's return heavily with giveaways and contests .
About a month before the planned release date , a photo was posted on a Mountain Dew worker 's Pongr , which showed Pitch Black and 2008 's Supernova .
Two weeks before the release , Dew Labs announced the return of 2010 's Typhoon in 2-Liter bottles exclusively at Walmart Supercenters .
The three flavors were re - released to stores on May 2 .
At the same time of the DEWmand Promotion , Mountain Dew launched the Throwback Shack , a website where participators could enter to win exclusive Dew merchandise , including a " secret stash " of Mountain Dew Revolution , a losing competitor from 2008 's DEWmocracy .
The promotional advertisements were then taken down from the Mountain Dew website .
Mountain Dew later stated via tweet that there would not be any more flavors returning ' by Popular DEWmand ' for now , as it was only intended to be a summer program .
THE DARK KNIGHT RISES PARTNERSHIP Section::::The Dark Knight Rises partnership .
After much speculation over a leaked Instagram photo of a potential new flavor , it was officially announced that Mountain Dew was teaming up with Warner Bros. Pictures ' and Legendary Pictures ' film
The Dark Knight Rises and released a limited - edition flavor on 18 June 2012 .
A website — DEWGothamCity.com — was launched , on which fans were able to enter codes to access exclusive content and details on the movie before its 20 July release date .
Some Mountain Dew products temporarily featured packaging to promote the movie , including thermochromic 16 oz .
cans that change color when cooled .
The limited - edition flavor , Dark Berry , was mixed berry - flavored , and was available for 8 weeks .
The Dark Knight Rises promotion inspired a permanent 24 oz .
version of Mountain Dew .
DUB THE DEW Section::::Dub the Dew .
In August 2012 , Villa Enterprises held a promotion known as Dub the Dew , where users were asked to submit and vote on name ideas for a green apple flavor of Mountain Dew .
The promotion was infamously hijacked by users , particularly those originating from the imageboard 4chan , who submitted and upvoted entries such as " Diabeetus " , " Fapple " , " Bill Cosby Sweat " , " Jimmie Rustle 's Jumpin ' Juice " , and numerous variations of " Gushing Granny " .
Although the promotion was not directly connected to Mountain Dew , a representative from the company did offer to " help clean up " the site .
Adweek compared the incident to another recent campaign hijacked under similar circumstances , where musician Pitbull was sent to perform in Kodiak , Alaska in a Walmart promotion .
PUPPY MONKEY BABY Section::::Puppy Monkey Baby .
On February 7 , 2016 for Super Bowl 50 , Mountain Dew aired a spot featuring a CGI character dubbed " The puppy monkey baby " ( also styled PuppyMonkeyBaby ) .
The promotion has garnered a wide amount of media coverage , both positive and negative .
According to iSpot.tv , the spot was rated # 1 of all the Super Bowl commercials of the night , having generated 2.2 million online views and 300,000 social media interactions after airing .
The ad features a computer - generated mash - up of three things that the public generally finds to be cute or harmless ; a Pug puppy ( the head ) , a monkey ( the body and tail ) , and a dancing baby ( the hips and legs ) .
The puppy monkey baby dances with three men who are presumably watching the Super Bowl , offering them Mountain Dew Kickstart , which is similarly described as being a combination of three things ( Mountain Dew , juice , and caffeine ) .
The media response to the advertisement has been mixed to negative .
Melissa Cronin of Gawker described it as a " horror - hallucination of brand awareness " , while noting the beverage itself contains brominated vegetable oil , a chemical that is banned in several countries .
Jim Joseph , chief integrated marketing officer at Cohn & Wolfe , called it " weird " .
DEWCISION 2016
Section::::DEWcision 2016 .
On April 18 , 2016 , Mountain Dew announced the return of two popular favorites , Baja Blast and Pitch Black .
Fans can vote on which flavor stays permanently on store shelves via the Mountain Dew website .
Voting ended on July 9 , and , after many delays , Pitch Black was announced the winner on July 18 , 2016 .
Pitch Black continues to be produced and became part of the brand 's lineup starting in September .
FLAVORS AND VARIETIES
Diet Mountain Dew 1988–present
A no - calorie Mountain Dew that was first introduced in 1988 .
It was formerly known as " Sugar - Free Mountain Dew " until 1986 , when it was given its current name .
In 2006 Diet Mountain Dew was reformulated with a new " Tuned Up Taste " , using a blend of sucralose , aspartame , and acesulfame potassium as sweeteners .
The previous formulation was sweetened exclusively with aspartame . !
scope="row
" Mountain Dew Code Red 2001–present ( U.S.)2009–17 ( New Zealand)2010–present ( Germany)2013 , 2014–present ( Canada )
A cherry - flavored Mountain Dew .
Introduced in 2001 , it was the first widely successful flavor extension ; In its first year of production , Code Red increased overall sales of Mountain Dew by 6 % .
Versions of Code Red were later released in New Zealand in 2009 ( with the cherry flavor changed to berry ) , in Germany in 2010 and in Canada for DEWmocracy Canada in 2013 , where it finished in 2nd place .
Code Red was released along with the two other losing flavors from DewMocracy 2013 , and won the vote , making it a permanent flavor in Canada . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Live Wire 2003–present
( America)2011–present ( New Zealand)2013–present ( Malaysia)2014–2016 ( Philippines post Dewmocracy version)2014–present ( Singapore )
2016–present
( Philippines Dewmocracy version )
An orange - colored , orange - flavored Mountain Dew .
Live Wire was initially introduced in 2003 as a limited - edition flavor for the summer .
In 2005 , after two years of limited summer releases , Live Wire became a permanent addition to the product line .
It was released in New Zealand in 2011 .
It was released in Malaysia in 2013 and in both the Philippines and Singapore in 2014 .
As of 2016 in the Philippines it became a limited edition flavor for the Dewmocracy lineup despite its status as a permanent flavor in the past . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Pitch
Black
A dark purple - colored , grape - flavored Mountain Dew released for the 2004 Halloween season .
Pitch Black was also re - released in Slurpee form as a limited edition flavor during the 2006 Halloween season .
Pitch Black was re - released in soda form in 2011 as a part of the " Back by popular DEWmand " promotion and in 2016 as a part of the " DEWcision " contest where it won over Baja Blast and became a permanent addition in the United States .
Also available in fountains at Speedway Gas stations as of 2016 .
It was released in New Zealand from 2011 to 2012 .
It was released in Malaysia in 2013 and in both the Philippines and Singapore in 2014 .
align = center !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Baja Blast
2004–present
( Springs of 2014 , 2015 , 2016 , 2018 in Cans / Bottles U.S. )
A sea green , tropical lime - flavored Mountain Dew introduced in 2004 , available exclusively as a fountain drink at Taco Bell restaurants .
On May 5 , 2014 , Baja Blast was made available in stores for a limited time by popular demand .
In January 2015 , information began leaking on the internet about a second store release of Baja Blast , accompanied by the debut in - store release of Sangrita Blast .
On April 19 , Baja Blast and Sangrita Blast were made available in stores for a limited time .
In 2018 , Baja Blast was made available in Canada in some Taco Bell Stores .
On April 18 , 2016 , The flavor was re - released for the " DEWcision " contest for a limited time where it lost to Pitch Black at the end of the contest . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Game Fuel ( Citrus Cherry ) 2007 , 2009 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014–present A red - orange - colored , citrus - cherry - flavored Mountain Dew first released in August 2007 for a total of 12 weeks to promote the release of Halo 3 , an Xbox 360 game .
This flavor has had a limited return to shelves in 2009 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 and 2017 to promote World of Warcraft , Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 3 ,
Halo 4 , Dead Rising 3 , Call of Duty :
Advanced Warfare , Call of Duty : Black Ops III and Titanfall 2
respectively , each time with redesigned packaging to promote its associated video game .
Additionally , it is sold in 16 oz .
bottles on Amazon.com .
Its taste has been compared to " LiveWire " , " Code Red " and the energy drink AMP Overdrive .
From 2017 until early 2018 it was seen in Arbys restaurant fountains across America .
align = center !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Voltage 2008–present ( America)2011–14 ( New Zealand)2013–present ( Canada ) A deep blue - colored , raspberry - citrus - flavored Mountain Dew with ginseng .
A part of the first DEWmocracy promotion , it was released in stores on 19 May 2008 as a limited edition flavor so that people could taste test which flavor they like best before voting .
Voltage was announced the winner with 42 % of all votes on 17 August 2008 .
It was released as a permanent flavor on 29 December 2008 and was later released in New Zealand in 2011 under the name " Electro Shock " and described as a " charge of wild berry flavour . "
A Diet Voltage was released in 2011 as a part of the " FanDEWmonium " promotion and made it to the finals with Diet Mountain Dew Supernova , meaning it had a limited release in U.S. stores while voting took place , until Diet Supernova was revealed to be the winner .
It came in second in voting , against Diet Mountain Dew Supernova with 45 % out of all votes .
Mountain Dew Voltage was released in 2013 for DEWmocracy Canada where it got the most votes and Won .
becoming a permanent Canadian flavor . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Throwback 2009–present
A variation of Mountain Dew in the U.S. containing natural sugar in place of high fructose corn syrup , first released in a limited production run during the summer of 2009 .
Mountain Dew Throwback has since been re - released for brief periods ( generally 8–12 weeks at a time ) , including a 2nd wave from December 2009 - February 2010 and a 3rd wave in Summer / Fall 2010 .
A fourth limited production run began in March 2011 , lasting for eight weeks , before it became a permanent addition . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew White Out 2010–present ( U.S. ) 2012–present ( Japan ) 2013 and 2014 ( Canada ) 2014 ( New Zealand )
A white - colored , smooth citrus - flavored Mountain Dew .
Part of the second Mountain Dew " DEWmocracy : Collective Intelligence " promotion .
It was released in stores on 19 April as a limited edition flavor so that people could taste test which flavor they like best before voting .
Voting ended on 14 June , and White Out won the campaign with 44 % of the votes .
It became a permanent flavor and was officially for sale on 4 October 2010 .
It later released in Japan in 2012 .
A Diet White Out was created for the FanDEWmonium promotion , which came in third place , not making it to the final round .
It has been available in slurpee form since January 2011 .
White Out was also released in Canada for Dewmocracy Canada in 2013 , but finished in 3rd place .
Along with Supernova and Code Red , White Out was released for Back By Popular DEWmand 2014 in Canada . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Electric Apple 2012–present
This flavor was introduced exclusively at Villa Pizza restaurants as part of their " Dub the Dew " promotion .
Following a hacker attack on their website , it was simply named " Apple Mountain Dew . "
In 2014 , it was renamed " Mountain Dew Electric Apple " and joined by a companion flavor , Extreme Pomegranate . ! scope="row " Mountain Dew Solar Flare
2014–present
A tropical punch - flavored soda .
Its color is red - orange .
Solar Flare is a new flavor variant that is only available at fountain machines at 7-Eleven locations .
It appears that Solar Flare became region - specific in 2016 , as many areas across the U.S. began noticing that it was pulled from many 7-Elevens . !
scope='row " Mountain Dew Black Label Pre - released at Colleges and Universities starting September 2015 - Officially released March 2016–present .
Mountain Dew Black Label is a Mountain Dew flavor variant that was released in 16 oz .
cans in 2015 to coincide with the " Deeper , Darker Dew " promotion .
It will be a Crafted Dark Berry - flavored soda , and its color is a reddish magenta . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew White Label Pre - released at Colleges and Universities starting January 2017 , Officially released March 2017–present .
" Mountain Dew White Label is a pineapple grapefruit flavored soda .
It sold in 16 oz cans similar to that of Black Label and Green Label , and is described as " Mysteriously Exotic Dew " " . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Spiked Lemonade
2017–present Mountain Dew Spiked Lemonade is a non - alcoholic " original " lemonade flavored soda described as being " spiked with thirst quenching prickly pear cactus juice
" It claims to have been created with " no artificial sweeteners " and " real fruit juice "
Mountain Dew Spiked is currently under two designs .
One design features " Spiked " under the Mountain Dew logo while another design features " Extra " under the Mountain Dew logo .
It seems as if the " Extra " logo will be used in Canada while " Spiked " for the American version .
In June 2017 , Sangrita Blast was replaced in Taco Bell restaurants with Mountain Dew Spiked Lemonade .
In early 2018 , both Spiked variants were discontinued due to low sales , making this flavor now exclusive to Taco Bell . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Kickstart Fruit Punch 2013–present A fruit - flavored soda that was released on February 25 , 2013 .
The drink is advertised to have caffeine and electrolytes to provide energy for the morning . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Kickstart Black Cherry 2014–present A Black - Cherry flavored soda that was released in January 2014 , advertised to contain caffeine and electrolytes to provide energy for the evening .
At the beginning of March 2014 , select Taco Bell locations began offering " Mountain Dew Kickstart Freeze " , which was a slushee version of the Black Cherry Mountain Dew Kickstart flavor .
It replaced the Distortion Freeze ( see table above ) but was discontinued at the beginning of October 2014 and was replaced with the Starburst Strawberry Freeze . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Kickstart Pineapple Orange Mango 2015–present
This is a combination of Pineapple , Orange , and Mango flavors , and will be Golden in color .
It also contains Coconut Water . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Kickstart Blood Orange 2016–present Mountain Dew Kickstart Blood Orange is a flavor of Mountain Dew Kickstart that came out in early 2016 .
It contains Antioxidants - Vitamins C and E. !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Kickstart Watermelon 2016–present
A red - orange colored , Watermelon flavor Mountain Dew .
It also contains Coconut Water . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Kickstart Blueberry Pomegranate 2016–present
Mountain Dew Kickstart Blueberry Pomegranate is a flavor of Mountain Dew Kickstart that will came out in early 2016 .
It contains Antioxidants - Vitamins C and E. !
scope='row ' Mountain Dew Kickstart Midnight Grape 2016–present ( America ) , 2017–present ( Australia ) Mountain Dew Kickstart Midnight Grape is a flavor of Kickstart that came out in 2016 .
It contains 5 % juice . !
scope='row ' Mountain Dew Kickstart Raspberry Citrus
2017–present Mountain Dew Kickstart Raspberry Citrus came out the first quarter of 2017 , and contains coconut water . !
scope='row ' Mountain Dew Kickstart Mango Lime 2017–present Mountain Dew Kickstart Mango Lime came out the first quarter of 2017 , and contains 5 % Juice . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Ice
2017–present
An clear - colored lemon lime flavored soda .
It is a very similar to StormSlurpee flavor .
It was available exclusively at 7-Eleven stores as part of a promotion for the theatrical release of . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Pitch Black II
The " sequel " flavor to Pitch Black , released a year later from the original for the 2005 Halloween season .
This too was a grape flavor but was different from the original Pitch Black flavor as it was a sour grape flavor .
The tagline was " Back with a sour bite . " ! scope="row " Mountain Dew MDX
2005–07 A Mountain Dew - flavored energy soda introduced in 2005 in bottles .
In 2006 , its packaging was changed to bottles .
Its production was discontinued in 2007 . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Kryptonite Ice 2006
A Mountain Dew Slurpee flavor available exclusively at 7-Eleven stores as part of a promotion for the theatrical release of Superman Returns .
The Slurpee was green in color and had a tropical , mango taste . !
scope="row "
Dew Iced
2007–08
A Mountain Dew - flavored smoothie that was available exclusively at Cold Stone Creameryginseng .
One of the three " candidate flavor " finalists for DEWmocracy 's " People 's Dew " national vote .
Revolution held the highest number of votes until the end of the promotion , when it dropped to 3rd place and lost to Mountain Dew Voltage .
In 2011 , the " Mountain Dew Throwback Shack " offered a prize of " A Hidden Stash of Dew " which was revealed to be glass bottles of Revolution with lab labels on them .
Demand for Revolution has increased since Pitch Black , Typhoon , and Supernova were returning to shelves , but Mountain Dew said that there were currently no plans to rerelease Revolution . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Supernova 2008 , 2011 ( America ) 2012–present ( Finland ) , 2013 and 2014
( Canada )
2016–present ( Denmark ) A magenta - colored , strawberry and melon ( raspberry and lemon in Finland and Denmark )
flavored Mountain Dew with ginseng .
One of the three " candidate flavor " finalists for DEWmocracy 's " People 's Dew " national vote , it lost to Mountain Dew Voltage .
It had held the fewest votes until the end , when it finished in 2nd place .
This flavor was re - released as a part of the " Back by popular DEWmand " promotion in early May 2011 and stayed on shelves through July .
In 2012 it was released in Finland and is produced under license by Hartwall .
In 2013 it was released in Canada for DEWmocracy Canada , where it finished in 4th place .
In 2014 , it was released again in Canada for Back By Popular DEWmand Canada , along with the two other losing flavors of DEWmocracy 2013 in Canada .
align = center !
scope="row
" Mountain Dew Game Fuel " Alliance Blue " 2009
A blue violet - colored , wild fruit punch - flavored Mountain Dew flavor released alongside " Mountain Dew Game Fuel Horde Red " ( Citrus Cherry Game Fuel ) for a 10-week period in 2009 .
Like Horde Red , Alliance Blue was a promotional flavor for World of Warcraft . !
scope="row " Diet Mountain Dew Ultra Violet 2009 , 2011 A lavender - colored , mixed berry - flavored Mountain Dew .
It was originally available for three months in 2009 ; and was the first Mountain Dew flavor available exclusively in Diet .
It was released on 3 August 2009 at a first taste party in Brooklyn , New York .
This flavor returned for the " FanDEWmonium " promotion , but ultimately lost to Diet Mountain Dew Supernova , coming in sixth place and not making it into the final round .
Its flavor is sometimes compared to that of " Revolution " due to their berry - themed flavoring . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Thin Ice Freeze 2009–16
A blueberry - flavored SlurpeeWestern United States .
It has a stronger cherry flavor in comparison to Code Red .
Because this flavor was removed from the official Wienerschnitzel online menu , it is presumed to be discontinued . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Flavor # 286 2009
A yellow colored , Pineapple flavored Mountain Dew .
One of the seven semifinalist flavors of the second " DEWmocracy : Collective Intelligence " promotion
but it lost . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Flavor # 648 2009
A red - orange colored , Watermelon flavor Mountain Dew .
One of the seven semifinalist flavors of the second " DEWmocracy : Collective Intelligence " promotion
but it lost . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Distortion 20102013–14 ( Freeze ) A deep green - colored , lime - flavored Mountain Dew .
Part of the second " DEWmocracy : Collective Intelligence " promotion .
It lost to Mountain Dew White Out and came in 3rd place with only 16 % of all votes .
Due to its similarity in color to the original Mountain Dew , Distortion was packaged in a clear bottle with a black label ( as opposed to the green - plastic bottle with a green label used in the original Mountain Dew ) in an attempt to avoid confusion .
A Diet Distortion was created for the FanDEWmonium promotion , which came in eighth place , not making it to the final round .
Beginning on September 26 , 2013 , select Taco Bell locations began offering " Mountain Dew Distortion Freeze " , which was a slushee version of the Mountain Dew Distortion flavor available during 2010 .
It was discontinued at the beginning of March 2014 and was replaced with the Kickstart Freeze . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Typhoon 2010 , 20112013–14 ( Freeze ) A red - orange - colored , strawberry - pineapple flavored Mountain Dew .
Part of the second Mountain Dew " DEWmocracy : Collective Intelligence " promotion .
It lost to Mountain Dew White Out and came in 2nd place with 40 % of all votes .
A Diet Typhoon was created for the FanDEWmonium promotion , which came in fifth place , not making it to the final round .
It was announced on 15 April 2011 that Typhoon would return in May 2011 as part of the " Back by Popular DEWmand " promotion and it stayed on shelves in 2-Liter bottles exclusively at Walmart Supercenters through July .
Beginning on September 26 , 2013 , select Taco Bell locations began offering " Mountain Dew Typhoon Freeze " , which is a slushee version of the Mountain Dew Typhoon flavor available during 2010 and 2011 .
It was discontinued at the beginning of June 2014 and was replaced with the Dr. Pepper Vanilla Float Freeze . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Grape 2010 ( United States ) ,
2011–13 ( Japan )
A deep purple - colored , Grape - flavored Mountain Dew .
It was initially test marketed for a brief time in selected in selected locations on Pepsi 's Fusion fountain machine ( designed to compete with Coca - Cola 's Freestyle machine ) .
Later , on May 24 , 2011 , it was released in Japan and was only available in Japan for a limited time exclusively in Pepsi and Boss vending machines .
It was only offered in cans and not available in stores in Japan .
Its taste has often been compared to that of Grape flavored Jolly Rancher candies . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Lemon 2010
A yellow colored , Lemon flavor Mountain Dew .
It was initially test marketed for a brief time in selected in selected locations on Pepsi 's Fusion fountain machine ( designed to compete with Coca - Cola 's Freestyle machine ) . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Lime 2010 A green colored , Lime flavor Mountain Dew .
It was initially test marketed for a brief time in selected in selected locations on Pepsi 's Fusion fountain machine ( designed to compete with Coca - Cola 's Freestyle machine ) . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Wild Berry 2010
A violet colored , berry flavor Mountain Dew .
It was initially test marketed for a brief time in selected in selected locations on Pepsi 's Fusion fountain machine ( designed to compete with Coca - Cola 's Freestyle machine ) . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Orange 2010 An orange colored , orange flavor Mountain Dew .
It was initially test marketed for a brief time in selected in selected locations on Pepsi 's Fusion fountain machine ( designed to compete with Coca - Cola 's Freestyle machine ) . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Strawberry 2010
A magenta colored , strawberry flavor Mountain Dew .
It was initially test marketed for a brief time in selected in selected locations on Pepsi 's Fusion fountain machine ( designed to compete with Coca - Cola 's Freestyle machine ) . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Raspberry 2010
A violet colored , raspberry flavor Mountain Dew .
It was initially test marketed for a brief time in selected in selected locations on Pepsi 's Fusion fountain machine ( designed to compete with Coca - Cola 's Freestyle machine ) . !
scope="row " Diet Mountain Dew Flare 2011 A deep yellow - colored , berry - citrus - flavored Diet Mountain Dew .
Part of " FanDEWmonium " promotion series of flavors but it lost to Diet Mountain Dew Supernova and came in fourth place , not making it into the final round . !
scope="row "
Diet Mountain Dew Crave 2009 , 2011
A light green - colored , sweet and sour apple - flavored Diet Mountain Dew .
It was originally one of the seven semifinalist flavors of the second " DEWmocracy : Collective Intelligence " promotion and had the number # 722 , but it lost and did not make the final round .
It was later released as part of " FanDEWmonium " promotion series of flavors under the name " Crave " but it lost to Diet Mountain Dew Supernova , coming in seventh place and once again not making it to the final round . !
scope="row "
Diet Mountain Dew Voltage 2011
A raspberry citrus - flavored Diet Mountain Dew , which also contains a " shot of ginseng " .
This flavor was one of the " FanDEWmonium " promotion series of flavors and made it to the finals with Diet Mountain Dew Supernova , meaning it had a limited release in U.S. stores while voting took place until Diet Supernova was revealed to be the winner . !
scope="row "
Diet Mountain Dew Supernova 2011 , 2012
A magenta - colored , strawberry - melon - flavored Diet Mountain Dew with a " shot of ginseng " for flavor enhancement .
This flavor began as one of the " FanDEWmonium " promotion series of flavors .
Diet Supernova was released in U.S. stores alongside Diet Mountain Dew Voltage on 6 March 2011 for eight weeks as a limited edition diet flavor so that people could taste test which flavor they preferred before voting .
It won FanDEWmonium with 55 % out of all votes , and became a permanent addition to the Diet Mountain Dew flavor line - up .
It returned for a 12-week limited release in February but was removed from shelves permanently after 12 weeks due to poor sales . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Coolatta 2011
In 2011 , Dunkin ' Donuts announced a new Mountain Dew - flavored Coolatta , but it was discontinued later that year . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Game Fuel Tropical 2011
A dark green - colored , Tropical - flavored Mountain Dew flavor to coincide with the release of Call of Duty :
Modern Warfare 3 .
Like its counterpart , its concept was leaked in early August 2011 by means of an eBay auction , was announced on Mountain Dew 's Facebook page on 24 August 2011 and was released to U.S. stores on 10 October that year .
It stayed on shelves until the end of 2011 .
It was originally tested by 500 Dew Labs members as a " Mystery " flavor , and was described by many to resemble the taste of " Baja Blast " and " Distortion " . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Citrus Charge 2012–17
In March 2012 " Mountain Dew Citrus Charge " was released in Canada .
( In March 2010 , the ban was lifted on synthetic caffeine in non - cola beverages in Canada . )
It is essentially a caffeinated version of Canadian Mountain Dew , like the US version of Mountain Dew , with a slightly lower caffeine content of 51 mg per serving .
In early 2017 , Mountain Dew in Canada was rebranded once again , this time receiving matching packaging to that of its American counterpart . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew A.M. 2012
This flavor was introduced exclusively at select Taco Bell locations as a part of their new breakfast menu .
It is simply a mixture of the original Mountain Dew flavor and Tropicana Orange Juice ( both Pepsi products ) , and is greenish - orange in color . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Dark Berry 2012 ( U.S. , Iceland , Denmark and Philippines )
2012–2016
( Romania )
A limited - edition mixed - berry - flavored Mountain Dew that coincided with the film The Dark Knight Rises .
It first gained popularity in late May when a 3-in - one photo of its 12-pack box design leaked on Instagram .
On 14 March , Dark Berry was announced by the Mountain Dew Facebook page .
Its 8-week release period began on 18 June . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Johnson City
Gold
2012–13
A malt flavored version of Mountain Dew , named after Johnson City , Tennessee , that was test - marketed starting in late August 2012 in the Chicago area , Denver , Colorado , and Charlotte , North Carolina .
The beverage featured a malt flavor with a kick of lemon - lime .
Mountain Dew promised a return after 2013 after " Dew Fans " voted for names with 6 different kinds of cans for certain regions of the United States , named Liberty Malt , Southern Gold , Rusted Malt , Gold Mountain Malt , Great Plains Gold & Miner 's Malt .
As of late 2015 , there is no word when it will be released to the public . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Energy Game Fuel September 2012–January 2013 and September 2013–January 2014 A limited - edition raspberry - citrus flavor released in the United Kingdom to promote the release of Halo 4 in 2012 and the Xbox One in 2013 .
Though it has a similar - colored bottle as the American cherry - citrus Game Fuel ( see table above ) , it is an entirely different flavour . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Kickstart Orange Citrus 2013–18
An orange - flavored soda that was released on February 25 , 2013 .
The drink is advertised to have caffeine and electrolytes to provide energy for the morning .
As of March 26 , 2015 , this flavor of Kickstart also is available as a fountain drink at Taco Bell locations .
Mountain Dew Kickstart Orange Citrus appeared in Australian stores in April 2017 .
On September 1st , it was announced that Kickstart ( Orange Citrus ) would be discontinued both due to poor sales and to make way for Mountain Dew Ice ( Cherry ) . !
scope="row " AMP Energy — Powered by Mountain Dew ( UK )
2013–17
In August 2013 , PepsiCo .
released a citrus - flavored energy drink under the ' AMP ' brand in the UK .
Rather than being an entirely separate brand as is the case with its North American counterpart — the UK version of AMP EnergySheetz .
It was discontinued in 2016 and is no longer listed as a flavor on their official website . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Game Fuel Electrifying Berry
2013–14
A purple - colored , berry - flavored Mountain Dew to coincide with the release of the video game , for the Xbox One . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast
2013–17 ( 2015 in cans and bottles )
A dark red , cherry and pomegranate - flavored Mountain Dew introduced in 2013 , available exclusively as a fountain drink at Taco Bell restaurants .
In January 2015 , information began leaking on the internet about a second store release of Baja Blast , accompanied by the debut in - store release of Sangrita Blast .
On April 19 of that year , Baja Blast and Sangrita Blast appeared on shelves for a limited time run .
At the beginning of May 2015 , select Taco Bell locations began offering " Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast Freeze " , which was a slushee version of the Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast flavor .
It was discontinued at the beginning of September 2015 and was replaced with the Starburst Cherry Freeze .
Mountain Dew Sangrita Blast itself was discontinued in early 2017 and replaced with Mountain Dew Spiked Lemonade . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Kickstart Limeade 2014–2017 ( America ) , 2017–present ( Australia )
A Lime flavored soda that was released in January 2014 , advertised to contain caffeine and electrolytes to provide energy for the evening .
When Mountain Dew Kickstarts Raspberry Citrus and Mango Lime were released first quarter 2017 , it was announced Mountain Dew Kickstart Limeade & Strawberry Kiwi would be the first two Kickstart to be discontinued .
However , it later appeared in Australian stores in April 2017 , making it now exclusive to Australia . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Energised Code Red 2014
A Berry - flavored variant of Mountain Dew Energised that was released in Australia , it was available from April to September of that year . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Extreme Pomegranate 2014–15
This flavor was available exclusively at Villa Pizza restaurants for a short time as a companion flavor to Mountain Dew Electric Apple . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Game Fuel Lemonade
2014–15
A yellow - colored , Lemonade - flavored Mountain Dew introduced on October 6 , 2014 to promote Call Of Duty : Advanced Warfare . !
scope='row " Mountain Dew Lemonade & Ginger ( Vault Flavor 1 ) 2014
Lemonade and Ginger was a Mountain Dew flavor that was taste tested on college campuses alongside Dewitos .
!
scope='row " Mountain Dew Dewitos ( Vault Flavor 2 ) 2014
In late 2014 , Mountain Dew were reported to be testing a Doritos flavored Mountain Dew on US college campuses . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Kickstart Strawberry Kiwi 2015–17
This is a strawberry kiwi flavored soda , and will have a bright red - orange color .
It also contains Coconut Water .
When Mountain Dew Kickstarts Raspberry Citrus and Mango Lime were released first quarter 2017 , it was announced Mountain Dew Kickstart Limeade & Strawberry Kiwi would be the first two Kickstart to be discontinued !
scope='row " Mountain Dew Dewshine
2015–17 ! scope="row " Mountain Dew Game Fuel Berry Lime October 2015–16 Game Fuel ( Berry Lime ) is dark blue / green in color and , as its name indicates , was a Berry - Lime - flavored drink .
It debuted in October 2015 to promote Call Of Duty : Black Ops III . !
scope='row ' Mountain Dew Kickstart Orange Cranberry 2015 Orange Cranberry was tested alongside Midnight Grape , though never released . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Game Fuel Mango Heat October 2016 - 17 Game Fuel ( Mango Heat ) was a mango flavored drink , with a weak ginger finish and was light orange in color . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew Green Label 2017–18 " Mountain Dew Green Label is a Mountain Dew flavor released in March 2017 .
It has a Crafted Apple Kiwi flavor .
and its can describes it as a " Curiously Daring Dew " .
The flavor 's tagline is " DEW with crafted green apple kiwi " .
Along with the Spiked variants , Green Label was discontinued in early 2018 , presumably due to low sales . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Spiked Raspberry Lemonade 2017–18
Mountain Dew Spiked Raspberry Lemonade is a non - alcoholic " original " raspberry lemonade flavored soda described as being " spiked with thirst quenching prickly pear cactus juice
" It claims to have been created with " no artificial sweeteners " and " real fruit juice "
Mountain Dew Spiked is currently under two designs .
One design features " Spiked " under the Mountain Dew logo while another design features " Extra " under the Mountain Dew logo .
It seems as if the " Extra " logo will be used in Canada while " Spiked " for the American version .
In early 2018 , both Spiked variants were discontinued due to low sales . !
scope="row " Mountain Dew DEW - S - A 2017 Mountain Dew DEW - S - A is a combination of Code Red , White Out and Voltage , with a purple / violet tint , released as a limited edition from May through August 2017 .
It is advertised as a partnership with Dale Earnhardt Jr. !
scope="row " Mountain Dew ( Game Fuel )
Arctic Burst 2017–18
A Mountain Dew Slurpee flavor available exclusively at 7-Eleven stores as part of a promotion for the theatrical release of Superman Returns .
11 years after its original release , in October 2017 , it was rereleased , this time to promote the release of the .
Its companion flavor was Game Fuel ( Tropical Smash ) , another previously discontinued flavor . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Game Fuel Tropical Smash 2009
, 2017–18 A golden colored , Tropical flavored Mountain Dew .
Originally one of the seven semifinalist flavors of the second " DEWmocracy : Collective Intelligence " promotion and was known as " Flavor 736 " , but it lost .
It was rereleased 8 years later alongside another discontinued flavor , 2006 's Arctic Burst , as a Game Fuel flavor , and retitled " Game Fuel Tropical Smash " , promoting the video game
Forza Motorsport 7 . !
scope='row " Mountain Dew Holiday Brew 2017–18
Mountain Dew Holiday Brew was released in late 2017 , alongside Pepsi Salted Caramel , and had the flavor of original Mountain Dew combined with Mountain Dew Code Red .
Holiday Brew refers to the traditional Christmas colors of green and red , such as that of New Mexican chile's2014–present ( Malaysia ) 2016–present
( Philippines Democracy ) Berry - citrus
flavored Mountain Dew .
Blue Shock was initially test - marketed in Chicago in can and bottle formats , but sales did not meet expectations so it was released in 2002 in the U.S. exclusively in Slurpee form at 7-Eleven stores .
As of 2014 , it remains listed as a current flavor according to 7-Eleven .
It was once available at select Marcus Theatres in Icee form .
It is also available as " Mtn Dew Blue Shock Freeze " at RaceTracIreland in April 2011 .
Produced in a lemon and lime flavor , it has a higher caffeine content than Mountain Dew sold in the U.S. , at 18 mg per 100ml , versus 91 mg per 20 fl oz in the U.S. version ( which is ≈15.385 mg per 100ml ) .
The UK version is produced with real sugar instead of high - fructose corn syrup , as with most other soft drinks in the UK .
Mountain Dew did initially launch in the UK and Ireland in 1996 ; however it was discontinued in 1998 due to its low sales .
It is produced by Britvic in the UK .
In 2014 , the " Energy " Wording was removed , so the drink was simply called " Mountain Dew " in the UK .
In early 2015 , it was once again renamed , this time to " Mountain Dew Citrus Blast .
" It is still called Mountain Dew Energy in Italy . !
scope="row " Adrenaline Mountain Dew 2010–present ( Poland)2013–present ( Norway )
In August 2010 , this new flavor was released to Poland .
Much like previous attempts , Adrenaline is marketed as a Mountain Dew energy drink , and contains ingredients such as caffeine , taurine , guarana extract , ginseng , and vitamins B2 and B12 .
The drink is available in 250ml cans and in 500ml black - tinted bottles ( similar to Mountain Dew Energy 's green - tinted bottles ) . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Energised
2012–present
In June 2012 Mountain Dew was relaunched in Australia , with caffeine added , like Canada 's relaunch a few months earlier .
It was first introduced to Australian KFC restaurants , and then spread to markets and convenience stores . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Passionfruit Frenzy
2012–present Passionfruit Frenzy is a Mountain Dew flavor variant released in New Zealand on 15 October 2012 .
Mountain Dew Passionfruit Frenzy is a passion fruit - flavored drink , golden - green in color . !
scope="row "
Mountain Dew Electric Citrus
2015–present
In 2015 , Mountain Dew was released in Spain under the name " Mountain Dew Electric Citrus . " ! scope="row " Mountain Dew Game Fuel ( India )
2016–present
On June 9 , 2016 , a green colored variant of Mountain Dew Game Fuel was launched in India .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The tune " Good Old Mountain Dew " has been recorded and covered by artists like The Stanley Brothers , Grandpa Jones and Willie Nelson .
In its original bluegrass context , " Mountain Dew " refers to moonshine .
After PepsiCo bought the soft drink Mountain Dew in 1964 , they commissioned a set of advertisements featuring a " Good Old Mountain Dew"-based jingle and the drink 's hillbilly mascot .
The last song of the 2003 album
It 's Pronounced
Five Two by Christian rapper KJ-52 titled " Gimme Dat " is a narrative about the singer attending MDA ( Mountain Dew Anonymous ) and telling about how he is addicted to the soft drink .
In the musical Be More Chill , green Mountain Dew activates the Squip , a tiny super computer in a pill that tells the user what to do , in order to help them achieve their goals .
Mountain Dew Red shuts them off .
In the musical it is said that this is the reason for Mountain Dew Red being discontinued .
SEE ALSO
* Generic citrus sodas
* Surge ( soft drink ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Mountain Dew nutritional facts and other information via Pepsico