POSTAL CODE
A postal code ( also known locally in various English - speaking countries throughout the world as a postcode , post code , Eircode , PIN code or ZIP code ) is a series of letters or digits or both , sometimes including spaces or punctuation , included in a postal address for the purpose of sorting mail .
In February 2005 , 117 of the 190 member countries of the Universal Postal Union had postal code systems .
Although postal codes are usually assigned to geographical areas , special codes are sometimes assigned to individual addresses or to institutions that receive large volumes of mail , such as government agencies and large commercial companies .
One example is the French CEDEX system .
TERMS Section::::Terms .
There are a number of synonyms for postal code ; some are country - specific .
* CAP : The standard term in Italy ; CAP is an acronym for codice di avviamento postale ( postal expedition code ) .
* CEP : The standard term in Brazil ; CEP is an acronym for código de endereçamento postal ( postal addressing code ) .
* Eircode : The standard term in Ireland .
* NPA in French - speaking Switzerland ( numéro postal d'acheminement ) and Italian - speaking Switzerland ( numero postale di avviamento ) .
* PIN code / Pincode :
The standard term in India ; PIN is an acronym for postal index number .
* PLZ : The standard term in Germany , Austria , German - speaking Switzerland and Liechtenstein ; PLZ is an abbreviation of Postleitzahl ( postal routing number ) .
* Postal code : The general term is used in Canada .
* Postcode : This solid compound is popular in many English - speaking countries and is also the standard term in the Netherlands .
* ZIP code : The standard term in the United States and the Philippines ; ZIP is an acronym for zone improvement plan .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The development of postal codes reflects the increasing complexity of postal delivery as populations grew and the built environment became more complex .
This happened first in large cities .
Postal codes began with postal district numbers ( or postal zone numbers ) within large cities .
London was first subdivided into 10 districts in 1857 , and Liverpool in 1864 .
By World War I , such postal district or zone numbers existed in various large European cities .
They existed in the United States at least as early as the 1920s , possibly implemented at the local post office level only ( for example , instances of " Boston 9 , Mass " in 1920 are attested , ) although they were evidently not used throughout all major US cities ( implemented USPOD - wide ) until World War II .
By 1930 or earlier the idea of extending postal district or zone numbering plans beyond large cities to cover even small towns and rural locales was in the air .
These developed into postal codes as they are defined today .
The name of US postal codes , " ZIP codes " , reflects this evolutionary growth from a zone plan to a zone improvement plan , " ZIP " .
Modern postal codes were first introduced in the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic in December 1932 , but the system was abandoned in 1939 .
The next country to introduce postal codes was Germany in 1941 , followed by Singapore in 1950 , Argentina in 1958 , the United States in 1963 and Switzerland in 1964 .
The United Kingdom began introducing its current system in Norwich in 1959 , but they were not used nationwide until 1974 .
PRESENTATION
CHARACTER SETS Section::::Presentation .
Section::::Character sets .
The characters used in postal codes are *
The Arabic numerals " 0 " to " 9 " * Letters of the ISO basic Latin alphabet * Spaces , hyphens RESERVED CHARACTERS Section::::Reserved characters .
Postal codes in the Netherlands originally did not use the letters ' F ' , ' I ' , ' O ' , ' Q ' , ' U ' and ' Y ' for technical reasons .
But as almost all existing combinations are now used , these letters were allowed for new locations starting 2005 .
The letter combinations " SS " ( Schutzstaffel ) , " SD"(Sicherheitsdienst ) , and " SA " ( Sturmabteilung ) are not used for historical reasons .
Postal codes in Canada do not include the letters D , F , I , O , Q , or U , as the optical character recognition ( OCR ) equipment used in automated sorting could easily confuse them with other letters and digits .
The letters W and Z are used , but are not currently used as the first letter .
The Canadian Postal Codes use alternate letters and numbers ( with a space after the 3rd character ) in this format : A9A 9A9
In Ireland the eircode system uses the following letters only : A , C , D , E , F , H , K , N , P , R , T , V , W , X ,
Y.
This serves two purposes : * to avoid confusion in OCR , and
* it also helps to avoid accidental doubles - entendres by avoiding the creation of word look - alikes , as Eircode 's last 4 characters are random .
ALPHANUMERIC POSTAL CODES Section::::Alphanumeric postal codes .
Most of the postal code systems are numeric ; only a few are alphanumeric
( i.e. , use both letters and digits ) .
Alphanumeric systems can , given the same number of characters , encode many more locations .
For example , while a 2 digit numeric code can represent 100 locations , a 2 character alphanumeric code using ten numbers and twenty letters can represent 900 locations .
The independent nations using alphanumeric postal code systems are : *
Argentina ( see table ) * Brunei ( see table ) * Canada ( see table ) * Ireland ( see table ) * Jamaica ( see postal codes in Jamaica ) ( suspended in 2007 )
* Kazakhstan ( since 2015 )
* Malta ( see table ) * Netherlands ( see table )
* Peru ( the postal code format in Peru was updated in February 2011 to be of the format of five digits ) * Somalia * Swaziland * United Kingdom ( see table ) Countries which prefix their postal codes with a fixed group of letters , indicating a country code , include Andorra , Azerbaijan , Barbados , Ecuador and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines .
COUNTRY CODE PREFIXES Section::::Country code prefixes .
ISO 3166 - 1 alpha-2 country codes were recommended by the European Committee for Standardization as well as the Universal Postal Union to be used in conjunction with postal codes starting in 1994 , but they have not become widely used .
Andorra , Azerbaijan , Barbados , Ecuador , Latvia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines use the ISO 3166 - 1 alpha-2 as a prefix in their postal codes .
In some countries ( such as in continental Europe , where a numeric postcode format of four or five digits is commonly used ) the numeric postal code is sometimes prefixed with a country code when sending international mail to that country .
PLACEMENT OF THE CODE Section::::Placement of the code .
Postal services have their own formats and placement rules for postal codes .
In most English - speaking countries , the postal code forms the last item of the address , following the city or town name , whereas in most continental European countries it precedes the name of the city or town .
When it follows the city it may be on the same line or on a new line .
In Belarus , Japan , Kyrgyzstan , Russia , Turkmenistan it is written at the beginning of an address .
GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE
Section::::Geographic coverage .
Postal codes are usually assigned to geographical areas .
Sometimes codes are assigned to individual addresses or to institutions that receive large volumes of mail , e.g. government agencies or large commercial companies .
One example is the French Cedex system .
POSTAL ZONE NUMBERS Section::::Postal zone numbers .
Before postal codes as described here were used , large cities were often divided into postal zones or postal districts , usually numbered from 1 upwards within each city .
The newer postal code systems often incorporate the old zone numbers , as with London postal district numbers , for example .
Ireland still uses postal district numbers in Dublin .
In New Zealand , Auckland , Wellington and Christchurch were divided into postal zones , but these fell into disuse , and have now become redundant as a result of a new postcode system being introduced .
CODES DEFINED
ALONG
ADMINISTRATIVE BORDERS Section::::Codes defined along administrative borders .
Some postal code systems , like those of Ecuador and Costa Rica , show an exact agreement with the hierarchy of administrative country subdivisions .
Format of 6 digit numeric ( 8 digit alphanumeric ) postal codes in Ecuador , introduced in December 2007 : ECAABBCC Format of 5 digit numeric Postal codes in Costa Rica , introduced in 2007 :
ABBCC
In Costa Rica these codes are also used by the National Institute for Statistics and Census ( INSEC ) .
The first two digits of the postal codes in Turkey correspond to the provinces and each province has assigned only one number .
They are the same for them as in .
The first two digits of the postal codes in Vietnam indicate a province .
Some provinces have one , other have several two digit numbers assigned .
The numbers differ from the number used in .
CODES DEFINED CLOSE TO ADMINISTRATIVE BOUNDARIES Section::::Codes defined close to administrative boundaries .
In France the numeric code for the departments is used as the first two digits of the postal code , except for the two departments in Corsica that have codes 2A and 2B and use 20 as postal code .
Furthermore , the codes are only the codes for the department in charge of delivery of the post , so it can be that a location in one department has a postal code starting with the number of a neighbouring department .
CODES DEFINED INDIRECTLY TO ADMINISTRATIVE BORDERS Section::::Codes defined indirectly to administrative borders .
The first digit of the postal codes in the United States defines an area including several states .
From the first three digits ( with some exceptions ) , one can deduce the state .
Similarly , in Canada , the first letter indicates the province or territory , although the provinces of Quebec and Ontario are divided into several lettered sub - regions ( e.g. H for Montreal and Laval ) , and the Northwest Territories and Nunavut share the letter X. CODES DEFINED INDEPENDENTLY FROM ADMINISTRATIVE AREAS
Section::::Codes defined independently from administrative areas .
The first two digits of the postal codes in Germany define areas independently of administrative regions .
The coding space of the first digit is fully used ( 0 - 9 ) ; that of the first two combined is utilized to 89 % ,
i.e. there are 89 postal zones defined .
Zone 11 is non - geographic .
Royal Mail designed the postal codes in the United Kingdom mostly for efficient distribution .
Nevertheless , people associated codes with certain areas , leading to some people wanting or not wanting to have a certain code .
See also postcode lottery .
In Brazil the are an evolution of the 5-digit area postal codes .
In the 1990s the Brazilian 5-digit postal code ( illustrated ) , codice_1 , received a 3-digit suffix codice_2 , but this suffix is not directly related to the administrative district hierarchy .
The suffix was created only for logistic reasons .
A postal code is often related to a land lot , but this is not always the case .
Postal codes are usually related to access points on streets .
Small or middle - sized houses , in general , only have a single main gate which is the delivery point .
Parks , large businesses such as shopping centres , and big houses , may have more than one entrance and more than one delivery point .
So the semantic of an address and its postal code can vary , and one land lot may have more than one postal code .
In Brazil only the suffixes 900 - 959 , that designate large post - receivers , can be assigned to lots .
PRECISION INDIA Section::::Precision .
Section::::India .
Postal codes are also known as PIN codes in India , PIN being the short form of Postal Index Number .
The Pin Code was introduced on 15 August 1972 by India Post .
India uses a unique 6 digit code as a geographical number to identify locations in India .
There are 9 postal zones in India : * Delhi , Haryana , Punjab , Himachal Pradesh , Jammu and Kashmir , Chandigarh * * Uttar Pradesh , Uttarakhand
*
* Rajasthan , Gujarat , Daman and Diu , Dadra and Nagar Haveli
*
* Maharashtra , Goa , Madhya Pradesh , Chhattisgarh
*
* Telangana , Andhra Pradesh , Karnataka * * Tamil Nadu , Kerala , Puducherry , Lakshadweep * * West Bengal , Odisha , Arunachal Pradesh , Nagaland , Manipur , Mizoram , Tripura , Meghalaya , Andaman and Nicobar Islands , Assam , Sikkim * * Bihar , Jharkhand * * Army Post office ( APO ) and Field Post office ( FPO ) * IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
In Ireland , the new postal code system launched in 2015 , known as Eircode provides a unique code for each individual address .
These 7-character alphanumerical codes are in the format :
A99 XXXX While it is not intended to replace addresses , in theory simply providing a 7-character Eircode would locate any Irish delivery address .
For example , the Irish Parliament Dáil Éireann is : D02 A272
The first three digits are the routing key , which is a postal district and the last four characters are a unique identifier which relates to an individual address ( business , house or apartment ) .
A fully developed API is also available for integrating the Eircode database into business database and logistics systems .
NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
Postal codes in the Netherlands , known as postcodes , are alphanumeric , consisting of four digits followed by a space and two letters ( NNNN AA ) .
Adding the house number to the postcode will identify the address , making the street name and town name redundant .
For example : 2597 GV 75 will direct a postal delivery to Theo Mann - Bouwmeesterlaan 75 , ' s - Gravenhage ( the International School of The Hague ) .
SINGAPORE
Section::::Singapore .
Since 1 September 1995 , every building in Singapore has been given a unique , six - digit postal code .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
For domestic properties , an individual postcode may cover up to 100 properties in contiguous proximity ( e.g. a short section of a populous road , or a group of less populous neighbouring roads ) .
The postcode together with the number or name of a property is not always unique , particularly in rural areas .
For example , GL20 8NX/1 might refer to either 1 Frampton Cottages or 1 Frampton Farm Cottages , roughly a quarter of a mile ( 400 metres ) apart .
The structure is alphanumeric , with the following six valid formats , as defined by BS 7666 :
There are always two halves : the separation between outward and inward postcodes is indicated by one space .
The outward postcode covers a unique area and has two parts which may in total be two , three or four characters in length .
A postcode area of one or two letters , followed by one or two numbers , followed in some parts of London by a letter .
The outward postcode and the leading numeric of the inward postcode in combination forms a postal sector , and this usually corresponds to a couple of thousand properties .
Larger businesses and isolated properties such as farms may have a unique postcode .
Extremely large organisations such as larger government offices or bank headquarters may have multiple postcodes for different departments .
There are about 100 postcode areas , ranging widely in size from BT which covers the whole of Northern Ireland to ZE for Shetland .
Postcode areas may also cross national boundaries , such as SY which covers a large , predominantly rural area from Shrewsbury and Ludlow in Shropshire , England , through to the seaside town of Aberystwyth , Ceredigion on Wales ' west coast .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , the basic ZIP Code is composed of five numbers .
The first three numbers identify a specific sectional center facility — or central sorting facility — that serves a geographic region ( typically a large part of a state ) .
The next two numbers identify either an area of a city ( if in an urban area ) or a village / town ( if in a suburban / rural area ) .
There is an extended format of the ZIP Code known as the ZIP+4 , which contains the basic five - digit ZIP Code , followed by a hyphen and four additional digits .
These digits identify a specific delivery route , such as one side of a building , a group of apartments , or several floors of a large office building .
Although using the ZIP+4 offers higher accuracy , addressing redundancy , and sorting efficiency within the USPS , it is optional and not widely used by the general public .
It is primarily only used by business mailers .
For high volume business mailers using automated mailing machines , the USPS has promulgated the Intelligent Mail barcode standard , which is a barcode containing the ZIP+4 code plus a two digit delivery point .
This 11-digit number is theoretically a unique identifier for every address in the country .
STATES AND OVERSEAS TERRITORIES SHARING
A POSTAL CODE SYSTEM
Section::::States and overseas territories sharing a postal code system .
French overseas departments and territories use the five - digit French postal code system , each code starting with the three - digit department identifier .
Monaco is also integrated in the French system and has no system of its own .
The British Crown dependencies of Guernsey , Jersey and the Isle of Man are part of the UK postcode system .
They use the schemes AAN NAA and AANN NAA , in which the first two letters are a unique code ( GY , JE and IM respectively ) .
Most of the Overseas Territories have UK - style postcodes , with a single postcode for each territory or dependency , although they are still treated as international destinations by Royal Mail in the UK , and charged at international rather than UK inland rates .
The four other Overseas Territories Anguilla , Bermuda , British Virgin Islands and Cayman Islands have their own separate systems and formats .
The Pacific island states of Palau , Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia remain part of the US ZIP code system , despite having become independent states .
San Marino and the Vatican City are part of the Italian postcode system , while Liechtenstein similarly uses the Swiss system , as do the Italian exclave of Campione d'Italia and the German exclave of Büsingen am Hochrhein , although they also form part of their respective countries ' postal code systems .
The Czech Republic and Slovakia still uses the codes of the former Czechoslovakia , their ranges not overlapping .
NON - GEOGRAPHIC CODES Section::::Non - geographic codes .
In the United Kingdom , the non - conforming postal code GIR 0AA was used for the National Girobank until its closure in 2003 .
A non - geographic series of postcodes , starting with BX , is used by some banks and government departments .
A fictional address is also used by Royal Mail for letters to Santa Claus , more commonly known as Santa or Father Christmas :
Previously , the postcode SAN TA1 was used .
In Finland the special postal code 99999 is for Korvatunturi , the place where Santa Claus ( Joulupukki in Finnish ) is said to live , although mail is delivered to the Santa Claus Village in Rovaniemi .
In Canada the amount of mail sent to Santa Claus increased every Christmas , up to the point that Canada Post decided to start an official Santa Claus letter - response program in 1983 .
Approximately one million letters come in to Santa Claus each Christmas , including from outside of Canada , and all of them are answered in the same languages in which they are written .
Canada Post introduced a special address for mail to Santa Claus , complete with its own postal code :
In Belgium bpost sends a small present to children who have written a letter to Sinterklaas .
They can use the non - geographic postal code 0612 , which refers to the date Sinterklaas is celebrated ( 6 December ) , although a fictional town , street and house number are also used .
In Dutch , the address is This translates as " 1 Spain Street , 0612 Heaven " .
In French , the street is called " Paradise Street " : FORMATS NON - POSTAL USES AND ECONOMIC ASPECTS Section::::Non - postal uses and economic aspects .
While postal codes were introduced to expedite the delivery of mail , they are very useful tools for several other purposes , particularly in countries where codes are very fine - grained and identify just a few addresses .
Among uses are : * Finding the nearest branch of an organisation to a given address .
A computer program uses the postal codes of the target address and the branches to list the closest branches in order of distance as the crow flies ( or , if used in conjunction with streetmap software , road distance ) .
This can be used by companies to inform potential customers where to go , by job centres to find jobs for job - seekers , to alert people of town planning applications in their area , and a great many other applications .
* Fine - grained postal codes can be used with satellite navigation systems to navigate to an address by street number and postcode .
* Geographical sales territories for representatives in the pharmaceutical industry are allocated based on a workload index that is based upon postcode .
AVAILABILITY Section::::Availability .
The availability of postal code information has significant economic advantages .
In some countries , the postal authorities charge for access to the code database .
, the United Kingdom Government is consulting on whether to waive licensing fees for some geographical data sets ( to be determined ) related to UK postcodes .
SEE ALSO
* List of postal codes
* Address ( geography)#Mailing address format by country
* Postcode Address File NOTES AND REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Universal Postal Union * Addressing
* Postcodes
* Reference on World Postcodes * Canadian Postal Code Lookup web page from Canada Post * Pakistan Postcodes