MEMORIAL DAY Memorial Day or Decoration Day is a federal holiday in the United States for remembering the people who died while serving in the country 's armed forces .
The holiday , which is currently observed every year on the last Monday of May , was held on May 28 , 2018 .
The holiday was held on May 30 from 1868 to 1970 .
It marks the unofficial start of the summer vacation season , while Labor Day marks its end .
Many people visit cemeteries and memorials , particularly to honor those who have died in military service .
Many volunteers place an American flag on each grave in national cemeteries .
Two other days celebrate those who serve or have served in the U.S. military : Veterans Day , which celebrates the service of U.S. military veterans ; and Armed Forces Day , a minor U.S. remembrance celebrated earlier in May , specifically honoring those in the U.S. military .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The emergence and evolution of the Memorial Day holiday in the United States has been a highly controversial subject .
The University of Mississippi 's Center for Civil War Research and Columbus State University 's Center for Memorial Day Research serve as excellent starting points for investigating the topic .
The practice of decorating soldiers ' graves with flowers is an ancient custom .
Soldiers ' graves were decorated in the U.S. before and during the American Civil War .
Some believe that an annual cemetery decoration practice began before the American Civil War and thus may reflect the real origin of the " memorial day " idea .
Annual Decoration Days for particular cemeteries are still held on a Sunday in late spring or early summer in some rural areas of the American South , notably in the mountain areas .
In cases involving a family graveyard where remote ancestors as well as those who were deceased more recently are buried , this may take on the character of an extended family reunion to which some people travel hundreds of miles .
People gather , put flowers on graves and renew contacts with relatives and others .
There often is a religious service and a picnic - like " dinner on the grounds , " the traditional term for a potluck meal at a church .
On June 3 , 1861 , Warrenton , Virginia was the location of the first Civil War soldier 's grave ever to be decorated , according to a Richmond Times - Dispatch newspaper article in 1906 .
In 1862 , women in Savannah , Georgia decorated Confederate soldiers ' graves according to the Savannah Republican .
The 1863 cemetery dedication at Gettysburg , Pennsylvania , was a ceremony of commemoration at the graves of dead soldiers .
Some have therefore claimed that Lincoln was the founder of Memorial Day .
On July 4 , 1864 , ladies decorated soldiers ' graves according to local historians in Boalsburg , Pennsylvania , yet the principal grave they claim to have decorated was of a man who was not dead yet .
Nonetheless , Boalsburg promotes itself as the birthplace of Memorial Day .
In April 1865 , following President Abraham Lincoln 's assassination , commemorations were widespread .
The more than 600,000 soldiers of both sides who died in the Civil War meant that burial and memorialization took on new cultural significance .
Under the leadership of women during the war , an increasingly formal practice of decorating graves had taken shape .
In 1865 , the federal government began creating national military cemeteries for the Union war dead .
On May 1 , 1865 , in Charleston , South Carolina , recently freed African - Americans held a parade of 10,000 people to honor 257 dead Union Soldiers , whose remains they had reburied from a mass grave in a Confederate prison camp .
Historian David W. Blight cites contemporary news reports of this incident in the Charleston Daily Courier and the New - York Tribune .
Although Blight claimed that " African Americans invented Memorial Day in Charleston , South Carolina " , in 2012 , Blight stated that he " has no evidence " that the event in Charleston inspired the establishment of Memorial Day across the country .
Accordingly , investigators for Time Magazine , LiveScience , RealClearLife and Snopes have called this conclusion into question .
In 1868 , copying the southern annual observance of the previous three years , General John A. Logan of the Grand Army of the Republic , an organization of Union veterans founded in Decatur , Illinois , established Decoration Day as a time for the nation to decorate the graves of the Union war dead with flowers .
By the 20th century , various Union and Confederate memorial traditions , celebrated on different days , merged , and Memorial Day eventually extended to honor all Americans who died while in the military service .
On May 26 , 1966 , President Lyndon B. Johnson designated an " official " birthplace of the holiday by signing the presidential proclamation naming Waterloo , New York , as the holder of the title .
This action followed House Concurrent Resolution 587 , in which the 89th Congress had officially recognized that the patriotic tradition of observing Memorial Day had begun one hundred years prior in Waterloo , New York .
The village credits druggist Henry C. Welles and county clerk John B. Murray as the founders of the holiday .
Scholars have determined that the Waterloo account is a myth .
Snopes and Live Science also discredit the Waterloo account .
IN THE NORTH Section::::In the North .
On May 5 , 1868 , General John A. Logan issued a proclamation calling for " Decoration Day " to be observed annually and nationwide ; he was commander - in - chief of the Grand Army of the Republic , an organization of and for Union Civil War veterans .
With his proclamation , Logan adopted the Memorial Day practice that had begun in the Southern states three years earlier .
The first northern Memorial Day was observed on May 30 , 1868 .
One author claims that the date was chosen because it was not the anniversary of any particular battle .
According to a White House address in 2010 , the date was chosen as the optimal date for flowers to be in bloom in the North .
The northern states quickly adopted the holiday .
In 1868 , memorial events were held in 183 cemeteries in 27 states , and 336 in 1869 .
In 1871 , Michigan made " Decoration Day " an official state holiday and by 1890 , every northern state had followed suit .
There was no standard program for the ceremonies , but they were typically sponsored by the Women 's Relief Corps , the women 's auxiliary of the Grand Army of the Republic ( GAR ) , which had 100,000 members .
By 1870 , the remains of nearly 300,000 Union dead had been reinterred in 73 national cemeteries , located near major battlefields and thus mainly in the South .
The most famous are Gettysburg National Cemetery in Pennsylvania and Arlington National Cemetery , near Washington , D.C. Memorial Day speeches became an occasion for veterans , politicians , and ministers to commemorate the Civil War and , at first , to rehash the " atrocities " of the enemy .
They mixed religion and celebratory nationalism for the people to make sense of their history in terms of sacrifice for a better nation .
People of all religious beliefs joined together and the point was often made that the German and Irish soldiers had become true Americans in the " baptism of blood " on the battlefield .
Since 1868 Doylestown , Pennsylvania , has held annual Memorial Day parades which it claims to be the nation 's oldest continuously running .
However , the Memorial Day parade in Rochester , Wisconsin , predates Doylestown 's by one year .
By the 1880s , ceremonies were becoming quite similar as the GAR provided handbooks that presented specific procedures , poems , and Bible verses for local post commanders to utilize in planning the local event .
Historian Stuart McConnell reports : on the day itself , the post assembled and marched to the local cemetery to decorate the graves of the fallen , an enterprise meticulously organized months in advance to assure that none were missed .
Finally came a simple and subdued graveyard service involving prayers , short patriotic speeches , and music ... and at the end perhaps a rifle salute .
IN THE SOUTH Section::::In
the South .
The U.S. National Park Service and numerous scholars attribute the beginning of a Memorial Day practice in the South to the ladies of Columbus , Georgia .
On April 25 , 1866 , women in Columbus , Mississippi laid flowers on the graves of both the Union and Confederate dead in the city 's Friendship Cemetery , claiming to be the first " Decoration Day . "
The early southern Memorial Day celebrations were simple , somber occasions for veterans and their families to honor the dead and tend to local cemeteries .
Historians acknowledge the Ladies Memorial Association played a key role in these rituals of preservation of Confederate " memory . "
Various dates ranging from April 25 to mid - June were adopted in different Southern states .
Across the South , associations were founded , many by women , to establish and care for permanent cemeteries for the Confederate dead , organize commemorative ceremonies , and sponsor appropriate monuments as a permanent way of remembering the Confederate dead .
The most important of these was the United Daughters of the Confederacy , which grew from 17,000 members in 1900 to nearly 100,000 women by World War I.
They were " strikingly successful at raising money to build Confederate monuments , lobbying legislatures and Congress for the reburial of Confederate dead , and working to shape the content of history textbooks . "
In 1868 , some southerners appended the label " Confederate " to what they originally called " Memorial Day " after northerners co - opted the holiday .
The tradition of observances were linked to the South , they served as the prototype for the national day of memory embraced by the nation in 1868 .
By 1890 , there was a shift from the emphasis on honoring specific soldiers to a public commemoration of the Confederate south .
Changes in the ceremony 's hymns and speeches reflect an evolution of the ritual into a symbol of cultural renewal and conservatism in the South .
By 1913 , David Blight argues , the theme of American nationalism shared equal time with the Confederate .
AT GETTYSBURG Section::::At
Gettysburg .
Starting in 1868 , the ceremonies and Memorial Day address at Gettysburg National Park became nationally known .
In July 1913 , veterans of the United States and Confederate armies gathered in Gettysburg to commemorate the fifty - year anniversary of the Civil War 's bloodiest and most famous battle .
Since the cemetery dedication at Gettysburg occurred on November 19 , that day ( or the closest weekend ) has been designated as their own local memorial day that is referred to as Remembrance Day .
20TH CENTURY Section::::20th century .
Indiana from the 1860s to the 1920s saw numerous debates on how to expand the celebration .
It was a favorite lobbying activity of the Grand Army of the Republic ( GAR ) .
An 1884 GAR handbook explained that Memorial Day was " the day of all days in the G.A.R. Calendar " in terms of mobilizing public support for pensions .
It advised family members to " exercise great care " in keeping the veterans sober ..
As the years went by , the GAR complained more and more about the younger generation .
In 1913 , one Hoosier veteran complained that younger people born since the war had a " tendency ... to forget the purpose of Memorial Day and make it a day for games , races and revelry , instead of a day of memory and tears . "
Indeed , in 1911 the scheduling of the Indianapolis Motor Speedway car race was vehemently opposed by the increasingly elderly GAR .
The state legislature in 1923 rejected the race on that special day .
But the new American Legion and local officials wanted the big race to continue , so Governor Warren McCray vetoed the bill and the race went on .
In the national capital in 1913 the four - day " Blue - Gray Reunion " featured parades , re - enactments , and speeches from a host of dignitaries , including President Woodrow Wilson , the first Southerner elected to the White House since the War .
James Heflin of Alabama gave the main address .
Heflin was a noted orator ; his choice as Memorial Day speaker was criticized , as he was opposed for his support of segregation ; however , his speech was moderate in tone and stressed national unity and goodwill , gaining him praise from newspapers .
One of the longest - standing traditions is the running of the Indianapolis 500 , an auto race which has been held in conjunction with Memorial Day since 1911 .
Originally it was held on Memorial Day itself , and since 1974 it runs on the Sunday preceding the Memorial Day holiday .
Since 1961 NASCAR 's Coca - Cola 600 has been held during Memorial Day weekend , and has also been held on the previous Sunday since 1974 .
Since 1976
The Memorial Tournament golf event has been held on or close to the Memorial Day weekend .
The Final of the NCAA Division
I Men 's Lacrosse Championship has been held on Memorial Day since 1986 .
The preferred name for the holiday gradually changed from " Decoration Day " to " Memorial Day , " which was first used in 1882 .
Memorial Day did not become the more common name until after World War II , and was not declared the official name by Federal law until 1967 .
On June 28 , 1968 , Congress passed the Uniform Monday Holiday Act , which moved four holidays , including Memorial Day , from their traditional dates to a specified Monday in order to create a convenient three - day weekend .
The change moved Memorial Day from its traditional May 30 date to the last Monday in May.
The law took effect at the federal level in 1971 .
After some initial confusion and unwillingness to comply , all 50 states adopted Congress ' change of date within a few years .
21ST CENTURY Section::::21st century .
Memorial Day endures as a holiday which most businesses observe because it marks the unofficial beginning of summer .
The Veterans of Foreign Wars ( VFW ) and Sons of Union Veterans of the Civil War ( SUVCW ) advocated returning to the original date , although the significance of the date is tenuous .
The VFW stated in 2002 : Changing the date merely to create three - day weekends has undermined the very meaning of the day .
No doubt , this has contributed a lot to the general public 's nonchalant observance of Memorial Day .
In 2000 , Congress passed the National Moment of Remembrance Act , asking people to stop and remember at 3:00 PM .
On Memorial Day , the flag of the United States is raised briskly to the top of the staff and then solemnly lowered to the half - staff position , where it remains only until noon .
It is then raised to full - staff for the remainder of the day .
The National Memorial Day Concert takes place on the west lawn of the United States Capitol .
The concert is broadcast on PBS and NPR .
Music is performed , and respect is paid to the men and women who gave their lives for their country .
Across the United States , the central event is attending one of the thousands of parades held on Memorial Day in large and small cities .
Most of these feature marching bands and an overall military theme with the Active Duty , Reserve , National Guard and Veteran service members participating along with military vehicles from various wars .
POPPIES Section::::Poppies .
In 1915 , following the Second Battle of Ypres , Lieutenant Colonel John McCrae , a physician with the Canadian Expeditionary Force , wrote the poem , " In Flanders Fields " .
Its opening lines refer to the fields of poppies that grew among the soldiers ' graves in Flanders .
In 1918 , inspired by the poem , YWCA worker Moina Michael attended a YWCA Overseas War Secretaries ' conference wearing a silk poppy pinned to her coat and distributed over two dozen more to others present .
In 1920 , the National American Legion adopted it as their official symbol of remembrance .
AS CIVIL RELIGIOUS HOLIDAY Section::::As
civil religious holiday .
Scholars , following the lead of sociologist Robert Bellah , often make the argument that the United States has a secular " civil religion " – one with no association with any religious denomination or viewpoint – that has incorporated Memorial Day as a sacred event .
With the Civil War , a new theme of death , sacrifice and rebirth enters the civil religion .
Memorial Day gave ritual expression to these themes , integrating the local community into a sense of nationalism .
The American civil religion , in contrast to that of France , was never anticlerical or militantly secular ; in contrast to Britain , it was not tied to a specific denomination , such as the Church of England .
The Americans borrowed from different religious traditions so that the average American saw no conflict between the two , and deep levels of personal motivation were aligned with attaining national goals .
Memorial Day has been called a " modern cult of the dead " .
It incorporates Christian themes of sacrifice while uniting citizens of various faiths .
IN FILM , LITERATURE , AND MUSIC
FILMS
* Memorial Day ( 2012 ) is a war film starring James Cromwell , Jonathan Bennett , and John Cromwell .
* Logan Lucky ( 2017 ) starring Channing Tatum MUSIC
* Charles Ives 's symphonic poem Decoration Day depicted the holiday as he experienced it in his childhood , with his father 's band leading the way to the town cemetery , the playing of " Taps " on a trumpet , and a livelier march tune on the way back to the town .
It is frequently played with three other Ives works based on holidays , as the second movement of .
POETRY Section::::In film , literature , and music .
Section::::Poetry .
Poems commemorating Memorial Day include : * Francis M. Finch 's " The Blue and the Gray " ( 1867 ) * Michael Anania 's " Memorial Day " ( 1994 )
* Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's " Decoration Day " ( 1882 )
* Joyce Kilmer 's " Memorial Day " OBSERVANCE DATES ( 1971–PRESENT ) Section::::Observance dates ( 1971–present ) . !
colspan=7 Year !
Memorial Day
SEE ALSO
* A Great Jubilee Day , first held the last Monday in May 1783 ( American Revolutionary War )
* ANZAC Day , an analogous observance in Australia and New Zealand on April 25 every year * Armistice Day * Confederate Memorial Day
* Remembrance of the Dead ( " Dodenherdenking " ) , every year on May 4 , commemorates all civilians and members of the armed forces of the Kingdom of the Netherlands who have died in wars or peacekeeping missions since the outbreak of World War II .
* Heroes ' Day * Memorial Day massacre of 1937 * Nora Fontaine Davidson , credited with the first Memorial Day ceremony in Petersburg , Virginia * Patriot Day * United States military casualties of war
* Remembrance Day , an analogous observance in Canada , the United Kingdom , and many other Commonwealth nations held on November 11 each year
* Volkstrauertag ( " People 's Mourning Day " ) , usually in November two Sundays ahead of 1 .
Advent , inaugurated in Germany in 1919 by the Weimar Republic , the German version of Memorial Day celebrated in the Weimar Republic and since 1949 in West Germany , a holiday with democratic context strictly different from the Imperial and Nazi - Era " Heldengedenktag " , usually with a special event including the President in Bundestag REFERENCES
FURTHER READING *
Albanese , Catherine .
" Requiem for Memorial Day : Dissent in the Redeemer Nation " , American Quarterly , Vol . 26 , No . 4 ( Oct. 1974 )
, pp .
386–98 in JSTOR
* Bellah , Robert N. " Civil Religion in America " .
Daedalus 1967 96(1 ) :
1–21 .
online edition
* Bellware , Daniel , and Richard Gardiner , The Genesis of the Memorial Day Holiday in America ( Columbus State University , 2014 ) .
* Blight , David W. " Decoration Day : The Origins of Memorial Day in North and South " in Alice Fahs and Joan Waugh , eds .
The Memory of the Civil War in American Culture ( 2004 ) , online edition pp .
94–129 ; the standard scholarly history
* Blight , David W. Race and Reunion : The Civil War in American Memory ( 2000 )
ch .
3
, " Decorations " excerpt and text search * Buck , Paul H. The Road to Reunion , 1865–1900 ( 1937 ) * Cherry , Conrad . "
Two American Sacred Ceremonies : Their Implications for the Study of Religion in America " , American Quarterly , Vol .
21 , No . 4
( Winter , 1969 ) , pp .
739–54 in JSTOR
* Dennis , Matthew .
Red , White , and Blue Letter Days : An American Calendar ( 2002 )
* Jabbour , Alan , and Karen Singer Jabbour .
Decoration Day in the Mountains : Traditions of Cemetery Decoration in the Southern Appalachians ( University of North Carolina Press ; 2010 )
* Myers , Robert J. " Memorial Day " .
Chapter 24 in Celebrations : The Complete Book of American Holidays .
( 1972 )
EXTERNAL LINKS * 36 USC 116 .
Memorial Day ( designation law )
* United States Department of Veterans Affairs
* National Moment of Remembrance Home Page *
National Memorial Day Museum website * National Memorial Day Concert site * The History of Memorial Day