OBI - WAN KENOBI Obi - Wan Kenobi , later known as Ben Kenobi , is a fictional character in the Star Wars franchise .
Within the original trilogy he is portrayed by English actor Alec Guinness , while in the prequel trilogy a younger version of the character is portrayed by Scottish actor Ewan McGregor .
In the original trilogy , he is a mentor to Luke Skywalker , to whom he introduces the ways of the Jedi .
In the prequel trilogy , he is a master and friend to Anakin Skywalker .
He is frequently featured as a main character in various other Star Wars media .
Guinness 's portrayal of Obi - Wan in the original Star Wars ( 1977 ) earned him a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor , the only acting nomination for a Star Wars film .
APPEARANCES
ORIGINAL TRILOGY Section::::Appearances .
Section::::Original trilogy .
Obi - Wan Kenobi is introduced in the original Star Wars living as a hermit by the name of Old Ben Kenobi on the planet Tatooine .
When Luke Skywalker and the droid C-3PO wander off in search of the lost droid R2-D2 , Obi - Wan rescues them from a band of native and hostile Tusken Raiders .
At Obi - Wan 's home , R2-D2 plays a recording of Princess Leia saying that R2-D2 contains the plans for the Death Star , the Galactic Empire 's superweapon .
Leia asks him to deliver the droid and the plans safely to the planet Alderaan in order to help the Rebel Alliance .
Obi - Wan reveals his true identity and explains that he is a Jedi , a member of an ancient group of warriors that were hunted down and exterminated by the Empire with help from his former apprentice Darth Vader , the apparent killer of Luke 's father .
He gives Luke his father 's lightsaber and asks him to accompany him to Alderaan and take up Jedi training .
Luke declines , but after finding that his uncle Owen and aunt Beru have been killed by Imperial stormtroopers , he agrees to go with Obi - Wan to Alderaan and to train as a Jedi .
In the spaceport city Mos Eisley , Obi - Wan uses the Force to trick Imperial troops into letting them through a military checkpoint .
They enter a local cantina and make a deal with two smugglers , Han Solo and Chewbacca , to fly them to Alderaan aboard their ship , the Millennium Falcon .
During the journey , Obi - Wan begins instructing Luke in lightsaber combat .
He suddenly becomes weak and tells Luke of " a great disturbance in the Force " .
Emerging from hyperspace , the party finds that the planet Alderaan has been destroyed by the Empire , and the Falcon is attacked by an Imperial TIE Fighter .
The trio chases the TIE fighter to the Death Star , and subsequently get caught in the space station 's tractor beam .
On board the Death Star , Obi - Wan shuts down the tractor beam , but Darth Vader confronts him and they engage in a lightsaber duel .
Obi - Wan uses the duel to distract Vader as Luke , Leia , Han and Chewbacca escape to the Falcon .
Although Vader strikes Obi - Wan down , his body mysteriously vanishes the moment he dies .
At the climax of the film during the Rebel attack on the Death Star , Obi - Wan speaks to Luke through the Force to help him destroy the Imperial station .
In The Empire Strikes Back , Obi - Wan Kenobi appears several times as a spirit through the Force .
On the planet Hoth , he appears to instruct Luke to go to the planet Dagobah to find the exiled Jedi Master Yoda .
Despite Yoda 's skepticism , Obi - Wan convinces his old master to continue Luke 's training .
He appears later to beseech Luke not to leave Dagobah to try to rescue his friends on Cloud City , although Luke ignores this advice .
In Return of the Jedi , Obi - Wan again appears to Luke after Yoda 's death on Dagobah .
Obi - Wan acknowledges that Darth Vader is indeed Luke 's father , revealed by Vader himself in the previous film and confirmed by Yoda on his deathbed , and also reveals that Leia is Luke 's twin sister .
After the Rebels destroy the second Death Star and defeat the Empire , Obi - Wan appears at the celebration on Endor , alongside the spirits of Yoda and the redeemed Anakin Skywalker ( Vader 's former Jedi self ) .
PREQUEL TRILOGY Section::::Prequel trilogy .
In , set 32 years before A New Hope , a 25-year - old Obi - Wan Kenobi appears as the Jedi Padawan ( or student ) of Jedi Master Qui - Gon Jinn .
He accompanies his master in negotiations with the corrupt Trade Federation , which is blockading the planet Naboo with a fleet of spaceships .
After they are attacked by battle droids and forced to retreat to Naboo , Obi - Wan and Qui - Gon rescue Naboo 's Queen Padmé Amidala through the help of native Gungan Jar Jar Binks and escape in a spaceship toward Coruscant , the Republic capital .
Their ship is damaged in the escape , however , and they are forced to land on Tatooine , where they discover the nine - year - old slave Anakin Skywalker .
Qui - Gon believes the boy is the " chosen one " prophesied to bring balance to the Force , and brings him to Coruscant to begin Jedi training , although Obi - Wan expresses concerns .
While leaving Tatooine , they are attacked by Darth Maul , a member of the Sith , a dark side - using cult thought long extinct .
When Qui - Gon and Obi - Wan return to Naboo to defeat the Trade Federation , they are met again by Maul , who engages them both in lightsaber combat .
When Maul mortally wounds Qui - Gon , Obi - Wan rushes to fight Maul , who nearly kills him .
However , Obi - Wan manages to turn the tables and defeat Maul , slicing him in half and sending him plunging down a vast reactor shaft .
He promises to fulfill Qui - Gon 's dying wish of training Anakin in the ways of the Jedi , with or without the Council 's blessing .
Yoda proclaims Obi - Wan a Jedi Knight and reluctantly allows him to take Anakin on as his own Padawan .
In , set 10 years later , Obi - Wan Kenobi is now a respected Jedi Master and the mentor of Anakin Skywalker .
Over the years , Anakin has grown powerful but arrogant , and believes Obi - Wan is " holding him back " .
After they save Padmé , now a senator , from an assassination attempt , Obi - Wan goes on a solo mission to trace the bounty hunters involved to the planet Kamino , where he learns of a massive clone army that the planet 's inhabitants are building for the Republic .
He is introduced to bounty hunter Jango Fett , the clones ' template , and the two fight after Obi - Wan deduces that Fett must be behind the attempted assassination .
Fett escapes to the planet Geonosis with his clone son Boba while Obi - Wan is in pursuit .
On Geonosis , Obi - Wan discovers that a conspiracy of star systems bent on secession from the Republic is led by Jedi - turned - Sith Lord Count Dooku , Qui - Gon 's old master .
After sending a message to Anakin , Obi - Wan is captured , interrogated , and sentenced to death by Dooku .
Anakin and Padmé arrive with a cadre of Jedi and the clone army , just in time to prevent the executions .
Obi - Wan and Anakin confront Dooku during the ensuing battle , but the Sith lord defeats them in a lightsaber duel .
Yoda intervenes and saves their lives , at the cost of Dooku 's escape .
In , set three years later , Obi - Wan Kenobi is a member of the Jedi Council and a General in the Army of the Republic .
Jedi Knight Anakin Skywalker remains Obi - Wan 's partner , and the two have become war heroes and best friends .
The film opens with the two on a rescue mission to save the kidnapped Supreme Chancellor Palpatine from Separatist commander General Grievous onboard his starship .
Count Dooku discovers the attempt and fights the Jedi , knocking Obi - Wan unconscious ; while Obi - Wan is out cold , Anakin defeats Dooku and executes him on Palpatine 's orders .
Soon after returning to Coruscant , Obi - Wan is called away to the planet Utapau to track down the escaped Grievous .
After finding the Separatist encampment , Obi - Wan fights Grievous and eventually kills the cyborg using his enemy 's own blaster .
When Palpatine — who is secretly the Sith Lord Darth Sidious , the mastermind of the war — issues Order 66 to have the clone troopers turn on the Jedi , Obi - Wan survives the attempt on his life and escapes , rendezvousing with Yoda and Senator Bail Organa of Alderaan aboard Organa 's ship Tantive IV .
Returning to Coruscant , he and Yoda discover that every Jedi in the Jedi Temple has been murdered .
After sending a beacon to all surviving Jedi to scatter across the galaxy and remain in hiding , a heartbroken Obi - Wan watches security footage revealing that it was Anakin — who is now Sidious ' Sith apprentice Darth Vader — who led the slaughter .
Yoda says he will confront Sidious , and charges Obi - Wan with fighting Vader .
Obi - Wan is loath to fight his best friend , but reluctantly accepts .
Obi - Wan visits Padmé to learn of Vader 's whereabouts , and realizes that Vader is the father of her unborn child .
When Padmé sets out to the volcanic planet Mustafar to confront her husband herself , Obi - Wan secretly stows away in the ship .
After they arrive on Mustafar , Obi - Wan reveals himself and confronts Vader , who accuses Padmé and Obi - Wan of conspiring against him and uses the dark side to choke Padmé into unconsciousness .
After a long and ferocious lightsaber duel , Obi - Wan defeats Vader by severing his legs and left arm ; as Vader catches fire beside a lava river , Obi - Wan takes his former friend 's lightsaber and leaves him to die .
Unknown to Obi - Wan , Vader is rescued by Sidious and reconstructed into the cyborg first seen in the original trilogy .
Obi - Wan takes Padmé to a remote asteroid belt , where she dies after giving birth to twins Luke and Leia .
Afterwards , Yoda instructs Obi - Wan to give Luke to his uncle Owen and aunt Beru on Tatooine , and reveals that Qui - Gon 's spirit has returned from the Force to continue Obi - Wan 's training .
Obi - Wan hands Luke off to his family and goes into exile on Tatooine .
SEQUEL TRILOGY Section::::Sequel trilogy .
In , set 30 years after Return of the Jedi , the protagonist Rey hears Obi - Wan 's voice when she touches the lightsaber that previously belonged to Luke .
Obi - Wan calls out to Rey , before saying the words of encouragement he gave to Luke during his training on the Millennium Falcon : " These are your first steps " .
James Arnold Taylor actually recorded the lines for this scene , but his recordings were then dropped in favor of Ewan McGregor 's voice acting .
In , Luke mentions indirectly Obi - Wan while talking with Rey .
ANTHOLOGY FILMS Section::::Anthology films .
Obi - Wan was mentioned in the 2016 film Rogue One .
In the scene where right after the Rogue One ship is taken off to Scarif , Mon Mothma has a conversation with Senator Bail Organa .
In that conversation , they discussed about a Jedi Knight who is in hiding , after the events in , which leads to the introduction of Obi - Wan in A New Hope .
TELEVISION Section::::Television .
Obi - Wan Kenobi is a main character in the animated micro - series and the CGI animated series , voiced by James Arnold Taylor .
In both series , Obi - Wan is a general in the Clone Wars , and he and Anakin have many adventures fighting the Separatists .
The latter series highlights his numerous confrontations with General Grievous , his adversarial relationship with Dark Jedi Asajj Ventress , his romance with Duchess Satine Kryze , and the return of his old enemy Darth Maul .
In Star Wars Rebels , set five years before A New Hope , Obi - Wan appears as a hologram in the pilot episode " Spark of Rebellion " .
In the Season 3 episode " Visions and Voices " , protagonist Ezra Bridger discovers that Obi - Wan is alive on Tatooine ; Obi - Wan 's old nemesis Darth Maul finds him as well .
In the episode " Twin Suns " , Obi - Wan mortally wounds Maul during one final lightsaber duel ; with his dying breath , Maul asks Obi - Wan if he is protecting the " Chosen One " , and Obi - Wan replies that he is .
After Maul 's death , Obi - Wan is seen watching over Luke Skywalker from a distance .
In Rebels , Obi - Wan was voiced by Stephen Stanton , who replaced James Arnold Taylor .
Rebels creator Dave Filoni , who worked with the character during the full duration of Star Wars : The Clone Wars , said he considered asking McGregor to reprise and voice the role .
NOVELS AND COMICS Section::::Novels and comics .
Obi - Wan Kenobi appears briefly in the novel , based on unfinished episodes from The Clone Wars .
In the novelization of The Last Jedi written by Jason Fry , Obi - Wan tells a dying Luke to " let go " from the Netherworld of the Force .
The Marvel Comics five issue mini - series Obi - Wan and Anakin focuses on the title characters between The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones .
In the Star Wars main comic series , Luke Skywalker goes to Obi - Wan 's abandoned house on Tatooine , and finds his diary .
LEGENDS Section::::Legends .
In April 2014 , most of the licensed Star Wars novels and comics produced since the original 1977 film Star Wars were rebranded by Lucasfilm as Star Wars Legends and declared non - canon to the franchise .
Obi - Wan Kenobi appears extensively in the Star Wars expanded universe of comic books and novels .
NOVELS Section::::Novels .
Obi - Wan 's life prior to The Phantom Menace is portrayed mostly in Jude Watson 's Jedi Apprentice and Jedi Quest series .
The Jedi Apprentice books follow his adventures as Qui - Gon 's Padawan .
Notable events in the series include battling the Dark Jedi Xanatos and going on his first independent mission .
The Jedi Quest books detail his adventures with Anakin in the years leading up to Attack of the Clones .
His heroism just before and during the Clone Wars is portrayed in novels such as Outbound Flight , The Approaching Storm , and The Cestus Deception .
Obi - Wan 's life between Revenge of the Sith and A New Hope is portrayed mostly in Jude Watson 's The Last of the Jedi series .
Set roughly a year after the fall of the Republic , the series follows Obi - Wan as he seeks out possible survivors of the Great Jedi Purge , most notably Anakin 's former rival , Ferus Olin .
The books also portray Obi - Wan adjusting to life as a hermit on Tatooine and quietly watching over Luke .
He also discovers that Vader is still alive after seeing him on the Holonet , the galaxy 's official news source .
Obi - Wan appears in the final chapter of , set just after the events in Revenge of the Sith .
He is also the protagonist in John Jackson Miller 's novel , which takes place during his exile on Tatooine .
Obi - Wan appears in spirit form in many novels set after Return of the Jedi .
In The Truce at Bakura , he appears to Luke to warn him about the threat presented by the Ssi - ruuk ; in The Lost City of the Jedi , he guides Luke to the titular city on Yavin IV ; in Heir to the Empire , meanwhile , he bids farewell to Luke , explaining that he must abandon his spiritual form to " move on " to a new , higher plane of consciousness .
Before parting , Luke says that Obi - Wan was like a father to him , and Obi - Wan replies that he loved Luke like a son .
VIDEO GAMES Section::::Video games .
Obi - Wan Kenobi appears in several video games .
He is a playable character in all four video games , as well as and .
He is also the lead character in .
The older version is only playable in and , and multiplayer mode and Death Star bonus mission , and in multiplayer mode and the droid PROXY disguises as him .
He also appears in , and as a playable character .
He is also playable in the strategy game Star Wars : Empire at War .
He is a playable character in Disney Infinity 3.0 .
Kenobi has also been confirmed to be a playable character as part of a scheduled Clone Wars season for Star Wars Battlefront II .
COMIC BOOKS Section::::Comic books .
In the comic book series , Obi - Wan Kenobi faces many grave threats while fighting against the Separatists .
Among other notable storylines , he is kidnapped and tortured by Asajj Ventress before being rescued by Anakin ( " Hate & Fear " ) , and apprehends corrupted Jedi Master Quinlan Vos ( " The Dreadnaughts of Rendili " ) .
Throughout the series , he grows increasingly wary of Palpatine 's designs on the Republic and his influence on Anakin .
In the non - canon story " Old Wounds " , set a few years after the events of Revenge of the Sith , Obi - Wan confronts Darth Maul on Tatooine to protect Luke .
The duel ends when Owen Lars shoots and kills Maul ; he then warns Obi - Wan to stay away from his nephew .
Through the Force , Obi - Wan reassures Luke that he will be there for him when needed .
PLANNED ANTHOLOGY FILM Section::::Planned Anthology film .
On August 17 , 2017 , it was reported that there are plans for a stand - alone Star Wars movie about Obi - Wan Kenobi .
No casting or script decisions have been made yet .
It is currently unclear which part of Obi - Wan 's life will be portrayed , though many speculate the film would be a small - scale adventure including Obi - Wan 's exile on Tatooine between the events of episodes III and IV , though it is unsure where Rogue One , which mentioned Obi - Wan , would fit in this story .
In August 2017 , Stephen Daldry was reported to be directing the film .
While no casting decisions have been made , Ewan McGregor has said he would be open to reprising the role of Obi - Wan .
In December 2017 , it was reported that an Obi - Wan Kenobi anthology film was eying a potential January 2019 production - start date .
On May 17 , 2018 , it was reported that the title of the next Star Wars anthology film is titled Kenobi :
A Star Wars Story under the working title " Joshua Tree " , and the rumored director is Stephen Daldry .
CULTURAL IMPACT Section::::Cultural impact .
The character is loosely inspired by General Makabe Rokurōta , a character from Akira Kurosawa 's film The Hidden Fortress , played by Toshiro Mifune ( whom series creator George Lucas also considered casting as Obi - Wan ) .
Mad magazine parodied the original film under the title Star Roars and included a character named ' Oldie Von Moldie ' , a grizzled 97-year - old whose lightsaber runs on an extension cord .
The Shanghai nightclub shown in the beginning of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom is called " Club Obi Wan "
( Lucas wrote both the Star Wars and Indiana Jones series ) .
A real bar / club by this name existed in the Xihai district of Beijing , China but closed in the summer of 2010 .
The Super Mario Bros. Super Show !
episode
" Star Koopa " ( a spoof of Star Wars ) also had its own parody of Obi - Wan called ' Obi - Wan Toadi ' , and the live - action segment " Zenned Out Mario " featured a parody called " Obi - Wan Cannoli " .
The 1998 Animaniacs episode " Star Warners " ( which spoofed Star Wars ) featured Slappy Squirrel portraying a parody of Obi - Wan as ' Slappy Wanna Nappy ' .
In the Family Guy episode " Blue Harvest " , Obi - Wan Kenobi is parodied by the character Herbert .
In the short film Thumb Wars , Obi - Wan is parodied as the character " Oobedoob Benubi " .
In the film , his full name is ' Oobedoob Scooby - Doobi Benubi , the silliest name in the galaxy . '
In the 1977 Star Wars parody Hardware Wars , Obi - Wan is parodied by the character " Augie Ben Doggie " .
The TV Tropes website uses Obi - Wan 's name for the archetype mentor figure .
Guinness received an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor nomination for his portrayal of Obi - Wan Kenobi .
In the parody song
" The Saga Begins " , released approximately one month after the release of , "
Weird Al " Yankovic sings a humorous summary of the plot of that film from Obi - Wan 's perspective , to the tune of the song " American Pie . "
In 2003 , the American Film Institute selected Obi - Wan Kenobi as the 37th greatest movie hero of all time .
He was also listed as IGN 's third greatest Star Wars character , as well as one of UGO Networks 's favorite heroes of all time .
In 2004 , the Council of the Commune Lubicz in Poland passed a resolution giving the name " Obi - Wan Kenobi " to one of the streets in Grabowiec , a small village near Toruń .
The street was named in 2005 .
The spelling of the street name , Obi - Wana Kenobiego is the genitive form of the noun in the Polish language : ( the street ) of Obi - Wan Kenobi .
Guardian cartoonist Steve Bell portrayed Jeremy Corbyn , current leader of the British Labour Party , as Obi - Wan Kenobi .
RUMORED SPIN - OFF FILM
Section::::Rumored spin - off film .
Since the announcement of the sequel trilogy , Ewan McGregor has also expressed interest in returning to the role , albeit for an Obi - Wan spin - off film , should he be approached ; wanting to tell a story between Episode III and IV .
A fan - trailer for an Obi - Wan film , with footage from McGregor 's film Last Days in the Desert , has been widely praised by fans .
Lucasfilm and McGregor have denied the development of such film , despite fans ' continued interest , and rumors .
Despite being nothing but rumors , the film was voted as the most wanted anthology film in a pool by The Hollywood Reporter .
Days before the Star Wars Rebels episode
" Twin Suns " aired , McGregor said he would like to do it , if Lucasfilm wanted him to .
On May 17 , 2018 , entertainment website TMZ.com reported that the next standalone movie in the Star Wars franchise would be an Obi - Wan film , titled Kenobi :
A Star Wars Story .
TMZ also reported that movie had a working title called " Joshua Tree " , similar to the code name used by George Lucas for Return of the Jedi , which was " Blue Harvest " .
Stephen Daldry was reported to be the director of the Obi - Wan film , with Ewan McGregor ready to reprise the role .
According to TMZ , this movie would not be an origin story , but would instead take place a few years after the fall of the Republic shown in Episode III , focusing on Obi - Wan while in exile on Tatooine , as he watches over a young Luke Skywalker .
Marauding Tusken Raiders , and an evil warlord , bring Obi - Wan out of hiding to protect Luke and some farmers , according to TMZ .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* The New Essential Guide to Characters , revised edition , 2002 .
Daniel Wallace , Michael Sutfin ,
* Star Wars Episode
I
Who 's Who :
A Pocket Guide to Characters of the Phantom Menace , hardcover , 1999 .
Ryder Windham , * Star Wars : Power of Myth , 1st edition paperback , 2000 .
DK Publishing ,
* Star Wars :
The Visual Dictionary , hardcover , 1998 .
David West Reynolds ,
* Star Wars :
The Phantom Menace : The Visual Dictionary , hardcover , 1999 .
David West Reynolds ,
* Star Wars : Attack of the Clones : The Visual Dictionary , hardcover , 2002 .
David West Reynolds ,
* Star Wars : Revenge of the Sith : The Visual Dictionary , hardcover , 2005 .
James Luceno , * Revised Core Rulebook ( Star Wars Roleplaying Game ) ,
1st edition , 2002 .
Bill Slavicsek , Andy Collins , J.D. Wiker , Steve Sansweet , * Star Wars Roleplaying Game Core Rulebook , 1st edition , 2000 .
Bill Slavicsek , Andy Collins , EXTERNAL LINKS * Obi - Wan Kenobi on IMDb