MELALEUCA Melaleuca ( ) is a genus of nearly 300 species of plants in the myrtle family , Myrtaceae , commonly known as paperbarks , honey - myrtles or tea - trees ( although the last name is also applied to species of Leptospermum ) .
They range in size from small shrubs that rarely grow to more than 1 m ( 3 ft ) high , to trees up to 35 m ( 100 ft ) .
Their flowers generally occur in groups , forming a " head " or " spike " resembling a brush used for cleaning bottles , containing up to 80 individual flowers .
They are superficially like Banksia species , which also have their flowers in a spike , but the structures of individual flowers in the two genera are very different .
Second only to members of the family Proteaceae , melaleucas are an important food source for nectarivorous insects , birds , and mammals .
Many are popular garden plants , either for their attractive flowers or as dense screens ; and a few have economic value for producing fencing and oils such as " tea tree " oil .
Most melaleucas are endemic to Australia , with a few also occurring in Malesia .
Seven are endemic to New Caledonia , and one is found only on ( Australia 's )
Lord Howe Island .
Melaleucas are found in a wide variety of habitats .
Many are adapted for life in swamps and boggy places , while others thrive in the poorest of sandy soils or on the edge of saltpans .
Some have a wide distribution and are common , whilst others are rare and endangered .
Land clearing , exotic myrtle rust , and especially draining and clearing of swamps threaten many species .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Melaleucas range in size from small shrubs such as M. aspalathoides and M. concinna which rarely grow to more than high , to trees like M. cajuputi and M. quinquenervia , which can reach .
( One specimen of M. cajuputi reached . )
Many , like M. lineariifolia , are known as paperbarks and have bark that can be peeled in thin sheets , whilst about 20 % of the genus , including M. bracteata , have hard , rough bark and another 20 % have fibrous bark .
Every species in the genus is an evergreen , and the leaves vary in size from minute and scale - like ( M. micromera ) to long ( M. leucadendra ) .
Most have distinct oil glands dotted in the leaves , making the leaves aromatic , especially when crushed .
Melaleuca flowers are usually arranged in spikes or heads .
Within the head or spike , the flowers are often in groups of two or three , each flower or group having a papery bract at its base .
Five sepals occur , although these are sometimes fused into a ring of tissue and five petals which are usually small , not showy , and fall off as the flower opens or soon after .
The stamens vary greatly in colour , from white to cream or yellow , red , or mauve with their yellow tips ( the anthers ) contrasting with their " stalks " ( filaments ) .
The fruit are woody , cup - shaped , barrel - shaped , or almost spherical capsules , often arranged in clusters along the stems .
The seeds are sometimes retained in the fruit for many years , only opening when the plant , or part of it , dies or is heated in a bushfire .
In tropical areas , seeds are released annually in the wet season .
TAXONOMY AND NAMING Section::::Taxonomy and naming .
The first known description of a Melaleuca species was written by Rumphius in 1741 , in Herbarium amboinense before the present system of naming plants was written .
The plant he called Arbor alba is now known as Melaleuca leucadendra .
The name Melaleuca was first used by Linnaeus in 1767 .
Many species previously known as Metrosideros were then placed in Melaleuca .
In Australia , Melaleuca is the third most diverse plant genus with up to 300 species .
The genus Callistemon was raised by Robert Brown , who noted its similarity to Melaleuca , distinguishing it only on the basis of whether the stamens are free of each other , or joined in bundles .
Botanists in the past , including Ferdinand von Mueller and Lyndley Craven have proposed uniting the two genera but the matter is not decided .
Evidence from DNA studies suggests that either Callistemon and some other genera be incorporated into Melaleuca or that at least 10 new genera be created from the present genus .
In 2014 , Lyndley Craven and others proposed , on the basis of DNA evidence , that species in the genera Beaufortia , Calothamnus , Conothamnus , Eremaea , Lamarchea , Petraeomyrtus , Phymatocarpus and Regelia be transferred to Melaleuca .
The World Checklist of Selected Plant Families maintained by the Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew lists Calothamnus and the other genera as synonyms of the accepted genus Melaleuca .
The move has not been adopted by all Australian herbaria with some taxonomists , including Alex George opposing the move .
The name Melaleuca is derived from the Ancient Greek μέλας ( mélas ) meaning " dark " or " black " and λευκός ( leukós )
meaning " white " , apparently because one of the first specimens described had fire - blackened white bark .
The common name " tea - tree " has been applied to species in the genera Leptospermum , Melaleuca , Kunzea , and Baeckea because the sailors on the Endeavour used the leaves of a shrub from one of these groups as a replacement for tea Camellia sinensis during Captain James Cook 's 1770 voyage to Australia .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
Most melaleucas occur naturally only on the Australian mainland .
Eight occur in Tasmania , but only two are endemic to that island .
One ( M. howeana ) is endemic to Lord Howe Island and seven are endemic to Grande Terre , the main island of New Caledonia .
A few tropical species also occur in Papua New Guinea , and the distribution of one subspecies , Melaleuca cajuputi subsp .
cumingiana extends as far north as Myanmar , Thailand , and Vietnam .
The southwest of Western Australia has the greatest density of species , and in the tropical north of the continent , species such as M. argentea and M. leucadendra are the dominant species over large areas .
Melaleucas grow in a range of soil types and many tolerate occasional or even permanent waterlogging .
Some species , especially the South Australian swamp paperbark , M. halmaturorum , thrive in saline soils where few other species survive .
Many are fire tolerant , regenerating from epicormic buds or by coppicing , but no melaleucas occur in rainforest and few species occur in the arid zone .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
Melaleuca quinquenervia ( broad - leaved paperbark ) is the most damaging of 60 exotic species introduced to the Florida Everglades to help drain low - lying swampy areas .
Introduced in the early 20th century , it has become a serious invasive species , with damaging effects including the displacement of native species , reduction in wildlife habitat , alteration of hydrology , modification of soil , and changes in fire regimes .
The area of infestation has increased 50-fold over 25 years .
A psyllid , Boreioglycaspis melaleucae has been tested as a biological control agent .
Some success has also been achieved with a weevil , Oxyops vitiosa .
Scientists from the Agricultural Research Service in the United States Department of Agriculture continue to test Australian insects for their potential as biological control agents .
Some species of Melaleuca , especially M. alternifolia , are cultivated for the production of tea tree oil , and in plantations are susceptible to a number of insect pests .
The most significant of these is the Chrysomelid , Paropsisterna tigrina , but other beetles , cutworm caterpillars ( Agrotis species ) , psyllids , mole crickets ( Gryllotalpa ) , and others cause significant damage .
More than 100 species of insects are known to feed on melaleucas .
Native stands have fewer predators , but tea tree sawfly ( Pterygophorus species ) and longicorn beetles are often found .
Melaleucas are also susceptible to myrtle rust ( Puccinia psidii ) which can result in damage to soft plant material and the death of highly susceptible hosts .
Myrtle rust is common in eastern Australia , including Tasmania and has been detected in the Tiwi Islands .
USES TRADITIONAL ABORIGINAL USES Section::::Uses .
Section::::Traditional Aboriginal uses .
Aboriginal Australians used several species of Melaleuca to make rafts , as roofing for shelter , bandages , and food preparation .
" Bee bread " and honey were collected from the hives of native stingless bees in melaleuca forests in the Northern Territory .
The Bundjalung people traditionally lived in the area of north - eastern New South Wales where Melaleuca alternifolia is endemic , and they treated skin infections by crushing the leaves of that species over skin infections then covering the area with a warm mudpack .
ESSENTIAL
OILS Section::::Essential oils .
Melaleuca alternifolia is notable for its essential oil which is both antifungal and antibiotic , while safely usable for topical applications .
This is produced on a commercial scale and marketed as tea tree oil .
Melaleuca cajuputi is used to produce a similar oil , known as cajuput oil , which is used in southeast asia to treat a variety of infections and to add fragrance to food and soaps .
HORTICULTURE
Section::::Horticulture .
Melaleucas are popular garden plants , both in Australia and other tropical areas worldwide .
The first to be cultivated were grown in England from seed in 1771 .
Some melaleucas are commonly cultivated , grown as trees for parks and large gardens ( such as Melaleuca leucadendra ) or as ornamentals ( sometimes as Callistemon ) such as M. citrina ( Callistemon citrinus ) , M. hypericifolia and M. wilsonii .
MELALEUCAS USED
IN HORTICULTURE SEE ALSO * List of Melaleuca species REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS