MOLASSES Molasses is a viscous product resulting from refining sugarcane or sugar beets into sugar .
Molasses varies by amount of sugar , method of extraction , and age of plant .
Sugarcane molasses is primarily used for sweetening and flavoring foods in the United States , Canada , and elsewhere .
Sugar beet molasses is foul - smelling and unpalatable , so it is mostly used as an animal feed additive in Europe and Russia , where it is chiefly produced .
Molasses is a defining component of fine commercial brown sugar .
Sweet sorghum syrup may be colloquially called " sorghum molasses " in the southern United States .
Similar products include treacle , honey , maple syrup , corn syrup , and invert syrup .
Most of these alternative syrups have milder flavors .
NAME Section::::Name .
The word comes from the Portuguese melaço .
Cognates include Ancient Greek μέλι ( méli ) ( honey ) , Latin mel , Spanish melaza ( molasses ) , and French miel ( honey ) .
CANE MOLASSES Section::::Cane molasses .
Cane molasses is an ingredient used in baking and cooking .
It was popular in the Americas prior to the 20th century , when it used to be a common sweetener .
To make molasses , sugar cane is harvested and stripped of leaves .
Its juice is extracted , usually by cutting , crushing , or mashing .
The juice is boiled to concentrate it , promoting sugar crystallization .
The result of this first boiling is called first syrup , and it has the highest sugar content .
First syrup is usually referred to in the Southern states of the United States as cane syrup , as opposed to molasses .
Second molasses is created from a second boiling and sugar extraction , and has a slightly bitter taste .
BLACKSTRAP MOLASSES Section::::Blackstrap molasses .
The third boiling of the sugar syrup yields dark , viscous blackstrap molasses , known for its robust flavor .
The majority of sucrose from the original juice has crystallized and been removed .
The caloric content of blackstrap molasses is mostly due to the small remaining sugar content .
Unlike highly refined sugars , it contains significant amounts of vitamin B and minerals , including calcium , magnesium , iron , and manganese ; one tablespoon provides up to 20 % of the recommended daily value of each of those nutrients .
Blackstrap is also a good source of potassium .
Blackstrap molasses has long been sold as a dietary supplement .
Blackstrap molasses is significantly more bitter than " regular " molasses .
It is sometimes used in baking or for producing ethanol , as an ingredient in cattle feed , and as fertilizer .
The term " black - strap " or " blackstrap " is an Americanism dating from 1875 or before .
Its first known use is in a book by detective Allan Pinkerton in 1877 .
The exaggerated health benefits sometimes claimed for blackstrap molasses were the topic of a 1951 novelty song , " Black Strap Molasses " , recorded by Groucho Marx , Jimmy Durante , Jane Wyman , and Danny Kaye .
SUGAR BEET
MOLASSES
Section::::Sugar beet molasses .
Molasses made from sugar beets differs from sugarcane molasses .
Only the syrup left from the final crystallization stage is called molasses .
Intermediate syrups are called high green and low green , and these are recycled within the crystallization plant to maximize extraction .
Beet molasses is 50 % sugar by dry weight , predominantly sucrose , but contains significant amounts of glucose and fructose .
Beet molasses is limited in biotin ( vitamin H or B ) for cell growth ; hence , it may be supplemented with a biotin source .
The nonsugar content includes many salts , such as calcium , potassium , oxalate , and chloride .
It contains betaine and the trisaccharide raffinose .
These are a result of concentration from the original plant material or chemicals in processing , and make it unpalatable to humans .
So , it is mainly used as an additive to animal feed ( called " molassed sugar beet feed " ) or as a fermentation feedstock .
Extracting additional sugar from beet molasses is possible through molasses desugarization .
This exploits industrial - scale chromatography to separate sucrose from non - sugar components .
The technique is economically viable in trade - protected areas , where the price of sugar is supported above market price .
As such , it is practiced in the U.S. and parts of Europe .
Molasses is also used for yeast production .
UNSULPHURED MOLASSES Section::::Unsulphured molasses .
Many kinds of molasses on the market come branded as " unsulphured " .
Many foods , including molasses , were once treated with sulfur dioxide as a preservative , helping to kill off molds and bacteria .
Sulfur dioxide is also used as a bleaching agent , and helped to lighten the color of molasses .
Most brands have veered away from sulphured molasses , due to the relatively stable natural shelf life of untreated molasses , the off flavor and trace toxicity of low doses of sulfur dioxide .
OTHER FORMS
Section::::Other forms .
In Middle Eastern cuisine , molasses is produced from carob , grapes , dates , pomegranates , and mulberries .
In Nepal it is called chaku used in the preparation of Newari foods such as yomari .
OTHER USES FOOD PRODUCTS AND ADDITIVES
Section::::Other uses .
Section::::Food products and additives .
Molasses can be used : *
In dark rye breads or other whole grain breads
* In some cookies and pies *
In gingerbread ( particularly in the Americas )
*
In barbecue sauces
*
In beer styles such as stouts and porters * To stabilize emulsification of home - made vinaigrette * The principal ingredient in the distillation of rum
* As a humectant in jerky processing * A source for yeast production * An additive in mu'assel ( also known as shisha ) , the tobacco smoked in a hookah .
CHEMICAL
* The carbon source for in situ of chlorinated hydrocarbons * Blended with magnesium chloride and used for de - icing * A stock for ethanol fermentation to produce an alternative fuel for motor vehicles *
As a brightener in copper electroforming solution when used in tandem with thiourea INDUSTRIAL
* As a minor component of mortar for brickwork
* Mixed with gelatin glue and glycerine when casting composition ink rollers on early printing presses
HORTICULTURAL
*
As a soil additive to promote microbial activity
NUTRITIONAL INFORMATION
Section::::Nutritional information .
Molasses is composed of 22 % water , 75 % carbohydrates , and no protein or fat ( table ) .
In a 100 gram reference amount , molasses is a rich source ( 20 % or more of the Daily Value , DV ) of vitamin B6 and several dietary minerals , including manganese , magnesium , iron , potassium , and calcium ( table ) .
The sugars in molasses are sucrose ( 29 % of total carbohydrates ) , glucose ( 12 % ) and fructose ( 13 % ) ( data from USDA nutrition table ) .
SEE ALSO * Anadama bread * Brown sugar
* Caramelization * Great Molasses Flood *
Maillard reaction
* Pekmez * Shoofly pie * Syrup * Treacle * Kuromitsu REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS