SWEET POTATO
The sweet potato ( Ipomoea batatas ) is a dicotyledonous plant that belongs to the bindweed or morning glory family , Convolvulaceae .
Its large , starchy , sweet - tasting , tuberous roots are a root vegetable .
The young leaves and shoots are sometimes eaten as greens .
The sweet potato is only distantly related to the potato ( Solanum tuberosum ) and does not belong to the nightshade family , Solanaceae , but both families belong to the same taxonomic order , the Solanales .
The plant is a herbaceous perennial vine , bearing alternate heart - shaped or palmately lobed leaves and medium - sized sympetalous flowers .
The edible tuberous root is long and tapered , with a smooth skin whose color ranges between yellow , orange , red , brown , purple , and beige .
Its flesh ranges from beige through white , red , pink , violet , yellow , orange , and purple .
Sweet potato cultivars with white or pale yellow flesh are less sweet and moist than those with red , pink or orange flesh .
Ipomoea batatas is native to the tropical regions in the Americas .
Of the approximately 50 genera and more than 1,000 species of Convolvulaceae , I. batatas is the only crop plant of major importance — some others are used locally ( e.g. , I. aquatica " kangkong " ) , but many are poisonous .
The genus Ipomoea that contains the sweet potato also includes several garden flowers called morning glories , though that term is not usually extended to Ipomoea batatas .
Some cultivars of Ipomoea batatas are grown as ornamental plants under the name tuberous morning glory , used in a horticultural context .
The sweet potato is often called a " yam " in parts of North America , but is botanically very distinct from the botanical yams .
NAMING
Section::::Naming .
Although the soft , orange sweet potato is often called a " yam " in parts of North America , the sweet potato is very distinct from the botanical yams ( Dioscorea ) , which is native to Africa and Asia and belongs to the monocot family Dioscoreaceae .
To add to the confusion , a different crop plant , the oca ( Oxalis tuberosa , a species of wood sorrel ) , is called a " yam " in many parts of Polynesia , including New Zealand .
Although the sweet potato is not closely related botanically to the common potato , they have a shared etymology .
The first Europeans to taste sweet potatoes were members of Christopher Columbus 's expedition in 1492 .
Later explorers found many cultivars under an assortment of local names , but the name which stayed was the indigenous Taino name of batata .
The Spanish combined this with the Quechua word for potato , papa , to create the word patata for the common potato .
In Argentina , Venezuela , Puerto Rico and the Dominican Republic the sweet potato is called batata .
In Mexico , Peru , Chile , Central America , and the Philippines , the sweet potato is known as camote ( alternatively spelled kamote in the Philippines ) , derived from the Nahuatl word camotli .
In Peru , the Quechua name for a type of sweet potato is kumar , strikingly similar to the Polynesian name kumara and its regional Oceanic cognates ( kumala , umala , ' uala , etc . ) , which has led some scholars to suspect an instance of pre - Columbian trans - oceanic contact .
In New Zealand , the most common cultivar is the red ( purple ) cultivar called kumara ( now spelled kūmara in the Māori language ) , but orange ( ' Beauregard ' ) and gold cultivars are also available .
Kumara is particularly popular as a roasted food , often served with sour cream and sweet chili sauce .
Occasionally , shops in Australia will label purple cultivars as " purple sweet potato " to denote the difference to the other cultivars .
About 95 % of Australia 's production is of the orange cultivar named ' Beauregard ' , originally from North America , known simply as " sweet potato " .
A reddish - purple cultivar , ' Northern Star ' , is 4 % of production and is sold as " kumara " .
ORIGIN , DISTRIBUTION , AND DIVERSITY ORIGIN Section::::Origin , distribution , and diversity .
Section::::Origin .
The origin and domestication of sweet potato occurred in either Central or South America .
In Central America , domesticated sweet potatoes were present at least 5,000 years ago .
It has been suggested that the origin of I. batatas was between the Yucatán Peninsula of Mexico and the mouth of the Orinoco River in Venezuela .
The cultigen was most likely spread by local people to the Caribbean and South America by 2500 BCE .
The sweet potato was grown in Polynesia before western exploration , and the sweet potato cultivated in Polynesia is the Ipomoea batatas , which is generally spread by vine cuttings rather than by seeds .
Sweet potato has been radiocarbon - dated in the Cook Islands to 1000 CE .
A common hypothesis is that a vine cutting was brought to central Polynesia around 700 CE , possibly by Polynesians who had traveled to South America and back , and spread from there across Polynesia to Hawaii and New Zealand .
However , studies cast doubt on this hypothesis .
Divergence time estimates suggest that sweet potatoes were already present in Polynesia thousands of years before humans arrived there .
Additionally , there is evidence of long - distance dispersal of other species of Ipomoea from North America to Hawaii .
This suggests natural long - distance dispersal of I. batatas is possible .
Natural dispersal thus appears to be the simplest , most plausible explanation for the introduction of I. batatas to Oceania , although humans may have played a role in later dispersal between islands .
DISPERSAL IN HISTORICAL TIMES Section::::Dispersal in historical times .
In response to a major crop failure , sweet potatoes were introduced to Fujian province of China in about 1594 from Luzon .
The growing of sweet potatoes was encouraged by the Governor Chin Hsüeh - tseng ( Jin Xuezeng ) .
The sweet potato was introduced to Okinawa , Japan in the early 1600s .
Sweet potatoes became a staple in Japan because they were important in preventing famine when rice harvests were poor .
Sweet potatoes were later planted in Shōgun Tokugawa Yoshimune 's private garden .
It was also introduced to Korea in 1764 .
The sweet potato arrived in Europe with the Columbian Exchange .
It is recorded , for example , in Elinor Fettiplace 's Receipt Book , compiled in England in 1604 .
TRANSGENICITY Section::::Transgenicity .
The genome of cultivated sweet potatoes contains sequences of DNA from Agrobacterium , with genes actively expressed by the plants .
Transgenes were observed both in the sweet potato 's closely related wild relatives , and in more distantly related wild species .
This observation makes cultivated sweet potatoes the first known example of a naturally transgenic food crop .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
The plant does not tolerate frost .
It grows best at an average temperature of , abundant sunshine and warm nights .
Annual rainfalls of are considered most suitable , with a minimum of in the growing season .
The crop is sensitive to drought at the tuber initiation stage 50–60 days after planting , and it is not tolerant to water - logging , as it may cause tuber rots and reduce growth of storage roots if aeration is poor .
Depending on the cultivar and conditions , tuberous roots mature in two to nine months .
With care , early - maturing cultivars can be grown as an annual summer crop in temperate areas , such as the northern United States and China .
Sweet potatoes rarely flower when the daylight is longer than 11 hours , as is normal outside of the tropics .
They are mostly propagated by stem or root cuttings or by adventitious shoots called " slips " that grow out from the tuberous roots during storage .
True seeds are used for breeding only .
They grow well in many farming conditions and have few natural enemies ; pesticides are rarely needed .
Sweet potatoes are grown on a variety of soils , but well - drained , light- and medium - textured soils with a pH range of 4.5–7.0 are more favorable for the plant .
They can be grown in poor soils with little fertilizer .
However , sweet potatoes are very sensitive to aluminum toxicity and will die about six weeks after planting if lime is not applied at planting in this type of soil .
Because they are sown by vine cuttings rather than seeds , sweet potatoes are relatively easy to plant .
Because the rapidly growing vines shade out weeds , little weeding is needed .
A commonly used herbicide to rid the soil of any unwelcome plants that may interfere with growth is DCPA , also known as Dacthal .
In the tropics , the crop can be maintained in the ground and harvested as needed for market or home consumption .
In temperate regions , sweet potatoes are most often grown on larger farms and are harvested before first frosts .
In the Southeastern United States , sweet potatoes are traditionally cured to improve storage , flavor , and nutrition , and to allow wounds on the periderm of the harvested root to heal .
Proper curing requires drying the freshly dug roots on the ground for two to three hours , then storage at with 90 to 95 % relative humidity from five to fourteen days .
Cured sweet potatoes can keep for thirteen months when stored at with > 90 % relative humidity .
Colder temperatures injure the roots .
PRODUCTION AND YIELD Source : FAOSTAT of the United Nations
In 2016 , global production of sweet potatoes was 105 million tonnes , led by China with 67 % of the world total ( table ) .
In 2016 , the world average annual yield for sweet potato crop was 13 tonnes per hectare .
The most productive yield of sweet potatoes was in Senegal , where the nationwide average annual yield was 39 tonnes per hectare .
Sweet potatoes are cultivated throughout tropical and warm temperate regions wherever there is sufficient water to support their growth .
Sweet potatoes became common as a food crop in the islands of the Pacific Ocean , South India , Uganda and other African countries .
A cultivar of the sweet potato called the boniato is grown in the Caribbean ; its flesh is cream - colored , unlike the more common orange hue seen in other cultivars .
Boniatos are not as sweet and moist as other sweet potatoes , but their consistency and delicate flavor are different than the common orange - colored sweet potato .
Sweet potatoes have been a part of the diet in the United States for most of its history , especially in the Southeast .
The average per capita consumption of sweet potatoes in the United States is only about per year , down from in 1920 . "
Orange sweet potatoes ( the most common type encountered in the US ) received higher appearance liking scores compared with yellow or purple cultivars .
" Purple and yellow sweet potatoes were not as well liked by consumers compared to orange sweet potatoes " possibly because of the familiarity of orange color that is associated with sweet potatoes . " DISEASES NUTRIENT CONTENT Section::::Nutrient content .
Besides simple starches , raw sweet potatoes are rich in complex carbohydrates , dietary fiber and beta - carotene ( a provitamin A carotenoid ) , with moderate contents of other micronutrients , including vitamin B , vitamin B and manganese ( table ) .
When cooked by baking , small variable changes in micronutrient density occur to include a higher content of vitamin C at 24 % of the Daily Value per 100 g serving ( right table ) .
The Center for Science in the Public Interest ranked the nutritional value of sweet potatoes as highest among several other foods .
In addition , their leaves are edible and can be prepared like spinach or turnip greens .
Sweet potato cultivars with dark orange flesh have more beta - carotene than those with light - colored flesh , and their increased cultivation is being encouraged in Africa where vitamin A deficiency is a serious health problem .
A 2012 study of 10,000 households in Uganda found that children eating beta - carotene enriched sweet potatoes suffered less vitamin A deficiency than those not consuming as much beta - carotene .
COMPARISON TO OTHER FOOD STAPLES Section::::Comparison to other food staples .
The table below presents the relative performance of sweet potato ( in column ) to other staple foods .
While sweet potato provides less edible energy and protein per unit weight than cereals , it has higher nutrient density than cereals .
According to a study by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization , sweet potatoes are the most efficient staple food to grow in terms of farmland , yielding approximately 70,000 kcal /
ha
d.
CULINARY USES Section::::Culinary uses .
Although the leaves and shoots are also edible , the starchy tuberous roots are by far the most important product .
In some tropical areas , they are a staple food crop .
AFRICA Section::::Africa .
Amukeke ( sun - dried slices of root ) and inginyo ( sun - dried crushed root ) are a staple food for people in northeastern Uganda .
Amukeke is mainly served for breakfast , eaten with peanut sauce .
Inginyo is mixed with cassava flour and tamarind to make atapa .
People eat atapa with smoked fish cooked in peanut sauce or with dried cowpea leaves cooked in peanut sauce .
Emukaru ( earth - baked root ) is eaten as a snack anytime and is mostly served with tea or with peanut sauce .
Similar uses are also found in South Sudan .
The young leaves and vine tips of sweet potato leaves are widely consumed as a vegetable in West African countries ( Guinea , Sierra Leone and Liberia , for example ) , as well as in northeastern Uganda , East Africa .
According to FAO leaflet No . 13 - 1990 , sweet potato leaves and shoots are a good source of vitamins A , C , and B ( riboflavin ) , and according to research done by A. Khachatryan , are an excellent source of lutein .
In Kenya , Rhoda Nungo of the home economics department of the Ministry of Agriculture has written a guide to using sweet potatoes in modern recipes .
This includes uses both in the mashed form and as flour from the dried tubers to replace part of the wheat flour and sugar in baked products such as cakes , chapatis , mandazis , bread , buns and cookies .
A nutritious juice drink is made from the orange - fleshed cultivars , and deep - fried snacks are also included .
In Egypt , sweet potato tubers are known as " batata " ( بطاطا ) and are a common street food in winter , when street vendors with carts fitted with ovens sell them to people passing time by the Nile or the sea .
The cultivars used are an orange - fleshed one as well as a white / cream - fleshed one .
They are also baked at home as a snack or dessert , drenched with honey .
In Ethiopia , the commonly found cultivars are black - skinned , cream - fleshed and called " bitatis " or " mitatis " .
They are cultivated in the eastern and southern lower highlands and harvested during the rainy season ( June / July ) .
In recent years , better yielding orange - fleshed cultivars were released for cultivation by Haramaya University as a less sugary sweet potato with higher vitamin
A content .
Sweet potatoes are widely eaten boiled as a favored snack .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
In East Asia , roasted sweet potatoes are popular street food .
In China , sweet potatoes , typically yellow cultivars , are baked in a large iron drum and sold as street food during winter .
In Korea , sweet potatoes , known as , are roasted in a drum can , baked in foil or on an open fire , typically during winter .
In Japan , a dish similar to the Korean preparation is called yaki - imo ( roasted sweet potato ) , which typically uses either the yellow - fleshed " Japanese sweet potato " or the purple - fleshed " Okinawan sweet potato " , which is known as beni - imo .
Sweet potato soup , served during winter , consists of boiling sweet potato in water with rock sugar and ginger .
Sweet potato greens are a common side dish in Taiwanese cuisine , often boiled or sautéed and served with a garlic and soy sauce mixture , or simply salted before serving .
They , as well as dishes featuring the sweet potato root , are commonly found at bento ( ) restaurants .
In northeastern Chinese cuisine , sweet potatoes are often cut into chunks and fried , before being drenched into a pan of boiling syrup .
In some regions of India , sweet potato is roasted slow over kitchen coals at night and eaten with some dressing while the easier way in the south is simply boiling or pressure cooking before peeling , cubing and seasoning for a vegetable dish as part of the meal .
In Indian state of Tamil Nadu , it is known as ' Sakkara valli Kilangu ' .
It is boiled and consumed as evening snack .
In some parts of India , fresh sweet potato is chipped , dried and then ground into flour ; this is then mixed with wheat flour and baked into chapattis ( bread ) .
Between 15 and 20 percent of sweet potato harvest is converted by some Indian communities into pickles and snack chips .
A part of the tuber harvest is used in India as cattle fodder .
In Pakistan , sweet potato is known as shakarqandi and is cooked as vegetable dish and also with meat dishes ( chicken , mutton or beef ) .
The ash roasted sweet potatoes are sold as a snack and street food in Pakistani bazaars especially during the winter months .
In Sri Lanka , it is called ' Bathala ' and tubers are used mainly for breakfast ( boiled sweet potato commonly with sambal or grated coconut ) or as an supplementary curry dish for rice .
There are many other culinary uses with sweet potato as well .
The tubers of this plant , known as kattala in Dhivehi , have been used in the traditional diet of the Maldives .
The leaves were finely chopped and used in dishes such as mas huni .
In Japan , both sweet potatoes ( called " satsuma - imo " ) and true purple yams ( called " daijo " or " beni - imo " ) are grown .
Boiling and steaming are the most common cooking methods .
Also , the use in vegetable tempura is common .
Daigaku - imo is a baked sweet potato dessert .
Because it is sweet and starchy , it is used in imo - kinton and some other traditional sweets , such as ofukuimo .
Shōchū , a Japanese spirit normally made from the fermentation of rice , can also be made from sweet potato , in which case it is called imo - jōchū .
Imo - gohan , sweet potato cooked with rice , is popular in Guangdong , Taiwan and Japan .
It is also served in nimono or nitsuke , boiled and typically flavored with soy sauce , mirin and dashi .
In Korean cuisine , sweet potato starch is used to produce dangmyeon ( cellophane noodles ) .
Sweet potatoes are also boiled , steamed , or roasted , and young stems are eaten as namul .
Pizza restaurants such as Pizza Hut and Domino 's in Korea are using sweet potatoes as a popular topping .
Sweet potatoes are also used in the distillation of a variety of Soju .
In Malaysia and Singapore , sweet potato is often cut into small cubes and cooked with taro and coconut milk ( santan ) to make a sweet dessert called bubur caca or " bubu chacha " .
A favorite way of cooking sweet potato is deep frying slices of sweet potato in batter , and served as a tea - time snack .
In homes , sweet potatoes are usually boiled .
The leaves of sweet potatoes are usually stir - fried with only garlic or with sambal belacan and dried shrimp by Malaysians .
In the Philippines , sweet potatoes ( locally known as camote or kamote ) are an important food crop in rural areas .
They are often a staple among impoverished families in provinces , as they are easier to cultivate and cost less than rice .
The tubers are boiled or baked in coals and may be dipped in sugar or syrup .
Young leaves and shoots ( locally known as talbos ng kamote or camote tops ) are eaten fresh in salads with shrimp paste ( bagoong alamang ) or fish sauce .
They can be cooked in vinegar and soy sauce and served with fried fish ( a dish known as adobong talbos ng kamote ) , or with recipes such as sinigang .
The stew obtained from boiling camote tops is purple - colored , and is often mixed with lemon as juice .
Sweet potatoes are also sold as street food in suburban and rural areas .
Fried sweet potatoes coated with caramelized sugar and served in skewers ( camote cue ) are popular afternoon snacks .
Sweet potatoes are also used in a variant of halo - halo called ginatan , where they are cooked in coconut milk and sugar and mixed with a variety of rootcrops , sago , jackfruit , and bilu - bilo ( glutinous rice balls ) .
Bread made from sweet potato flour is also gaining popularity .
Sweet potato is relatively easy to propagate , and in rural areas that can be seen abundantly at canals and dikes .
The uncultivated plant is usually fed to pigs .
In Indonesia , sweet potatoes are locally known as ubi jalar ( lit : spreading tuber ) and are frequently fried with batter and served as snacks with spicy condiments , along with other kinds of fritters such as fried bananas , tempeh , tahu , breadfruits , or cassava .
In the mountainous regions of West Papua , sweet potatoes are the staple food among the natives there .
Using the bakar batu way of cooking ( free translation : burning rocks ) , rocks that have been burned in a nearby bonfire are thrown into a pit lined with leaves .
Layers of sweet potatoes , an assortment of vegetables , and pork are piled on top of the rocks .
The top of the pile then is insulated with more leaves , creating a pressure of heat and steam inside which cooks all food within the pile after several hours .
Young sweet potato leaves are also used as baby food particularly in Southeast Asia and East Asia .
Mashed sweet potato tubers are used similarly throughout the world .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Candied sweet potatoes are a side dish consisting mainly of sweet potatoes prepared with brown sugar , marshmallows , maple syrup , molasses , orange juice , marron glacé , or other sweet ingredients .
It is often served in America on Thanksgiving .
Sweet potato casserole is a side dish of mashed sweet potatoes in a casserole dish , topped with a brown sugar and pecan topping .
The sweet potato became a favorite food item of the French and Spanish settlers and thus continued a long history of cultivation in Louisiana .
Sweet potatoes are recognized as the state vegetable of North Carolina .
Sweet potato pie is also a traditional favorite dish in Southern U.S. cuisine .
Another variation on the typical sweet potato pie is the Okinawan ( Sweet Potato )
Haupia pie , which is made with purple sweet potatoes , native to the island of Hawaii and believed to have been originally cultivated as early as 500 CE .
The fried sweet potatoes tradition dates to the early nineteenth century in the United States .
Sweet potato fries or chips are a common preparation , and are made by julienning and deep frying sweet potatoes , in the fashion of French fried potatoes .
Roasting sliced or chopped sweet potatoes lightly coated in animal or vegetable oil at high heat became common in the United States at the start of the 21st century , a dish called " sweet potato fries " .
Sweet potato mash is served as a side dish , often at Thanksgiving dinner or with barbecue .
John Buttencourt Avila is called the " father of the sweet potato industry " in North America .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
Before European contact , the Māori grew the small , yellow - skin , finger - sized kūmara known as taputini , hutihuti and rekamaroa that they had brought with them from east Polynesia .
Modern trials have shown that the taputini was capable of producing well , but when American whalers , sealers and trading vessels introduced larger cultivars in the early 19th century , they quickly predominated .
In New Zealand , Māori traditionally cooked the kūmara in a hāngi earth oven .
This is still a common practice when there are large gatherings on marae .
Currently there are three main cultivars or groups of cultivar ( red , orange and gold ) grown in the subtropical northern part of the North Island near Dargaville and widely available throughout New Zealand year - round , where they are a popular alternative to potatoes .
The red cultivar has dull red skin and purple - streaked white flesh , and is the most popular .
The orange cultivar is the same as the American ' Beauregard ' .
The gold kumara has pale , yellowish skin and flesh .
Kumara are an integral part of roast meals in New Zealand .
They are served alongside such vegetables as potatoes and pumpkin and , as such , are generally prepared in a savory manner .
Kumara are ubiquitous in supermarkets , roast meal takeaway shops and hāngi .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Among the Urapmin people of Papua New Guinea , taro ( known in Urap as i m a ) and the sweet potato ( Urap : wan ) are the main sources of sustenance , and in fact the word for " food " in Urap is a compound of these two words .
In Spain , sweet potato is called boniato .
On the evening of All Souls ' Day , in Catalonia ( northeastern Spain )
it is traditional to serve roasted sweet potato and chestnuts , panellets and sweet wine .
The occasion is called La Castanyada .
Sweet potato is also appreciated to make cakes or to eat roasted through the whole country .
In Peru , sweet potatoes are called ' camote ' and are frequently served alongside ceviche .
Sweet potato chips are also a commonly sold snack , be it on the street or in packaged foods .
Dulce de batata is a traditional Argentine , Paraguayan and Uruguayan dessert , which is made of sweet potatoes .
It is a sweet jelly , which resembles a marmalade because of its color and sweetness but it has a harder texture , and it has to be sliced in thin portions with a knife as if it was a pie .
It is commonly served with a portion of the same size of soft cheese on top of it .
In the Veneto ( northeast Italy ) , sweet potato is known as patata mericana in the Venetian language ( patata americana in Italian , meaning " American potato " ) , and it is cultivated above all in the southern area of the region ; it is a traditional fall dish , boiled or roasted .
NONCULINARY USES Section::::Nonculinary uses .
Ceramics modeled after sweet potatoes or camotes are often found in Moche culture .
In South America , the juice of red sweet potatoes is combined with lime juice to make a dye for cloth .
By varying the proportions of the juices , every shade from pink to black can be obtained .
Purple sweet potato color is also used as a ' natural ' food coloring .
All parts of the plant are used for animal fodder .
Several selections are cultivated in gardens as ornamental plants for their attractive foliage , including the dark - leafed cultivars ' Blackie ' and ' Ace of Spades ' and the chartreuse - foliaged ' Margarita ' .
Cuttings of sweet potato vine , either edible or ornamental cultivars , will rapidly form roots in water and will grow in it , indefinitely , in good lighting with a steady supply of nutrients .
For this reason , sweet potato vine is ideal for use in home aquariums , trailing out of the water with its roots submerged , as its rapid growth is fueled by toxic ammonia and nitrates , a waste product of aquatic life , which it removes from the water .
This improves the living conditions for fish , which also find refuge in the extensive root systems .
Researchers at North Carolina State University are breeding sweet potato cultivars that would be grown primarily for biofuel production .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS