UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
The Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) is an independent agency of the United States federal government for environmental protection .
President Richard Nixon proposed the establishment of EPA on July 9 , 1970 and it began operation on December 2 , 1970 , after Nixon signed an executive order .
The order establishing the EPA was ratified by committee hearings in the House and Senate .
The agency is led by its Administrator , who is appointed by the President and approved by Congress .
The current acting Administrator following the resignation of Scott Pruitt is Deputy Administrator Andrew Wheeler .
The EPA is not a Cabinet department , but the Administrator is normally given cabinet rank .
The EPA has its headquarters in Washington , D.C. , regional offices for each of the agency 's ten regions , and 27 laboratories .
The agency conducts environmental assessment , research , and education .
It has the responsibility of maintaining and enforcing national standards under a variety of environmental laws , in consultation with state , tribal , and local governments .
It delegates some permitting , monitoring , and enforcement responsibility to U.S. states and the federally recognized tribes .
EPA enforcement powers include fines , sanctions , and other measures .
The agency also works with industries and all levels of government in a wide variety of voluntary pollution prevention programs and energy conservation efforts .
In 2018 , the agency had 14,172 full - time employees .
More than half of EPA 's employees are engineers , scientists , and environmental protection specialists ; other employees include legal , public affairs , financial , and information technologists .
In 2017 the Trump administration proposed a 31 % cut to the EPA 's budget to $ 5.7 billion from $ 8.1 billion and to eliminate a quarter of the agency jobs .
However , this cut was not approved by Congress .
The Environmental Protection Agency can only act under statutes , which are the authority of laws passed by Congress .
Congress must approve the statute and they also have the power to authorize or prohibit certain actions , which the EPA has to implement and enforce .
Appropriations statutes authorize how much money the agency can spend each year to carry out the approved statutes .
The Environmental Protection Agency has the power to issue regulations .
A regulation is a standard or rule written by the agency to interpret the statute , apply it in situations and enforce it .
Congress allows the EPA to write regulations in order to solve a problem , but the agency must include a rationale of why the regulations need to be implemented .
The regulations can be challenged by the Courts , where the regulation is overruled or confirmed .
Many public health and environmental groups advocate for the agency and believe that it is creating a better world .
Other critics believe that the agency commits government overreach by adding unnecessary regulations on business and property owners .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Beginning in the late 1950s and through the 1960s , Congress reacted to increasing public concern about the impact that human activity could have on the environment .
Senator James E. Murray introduced a bill , the Resources and Conservation Act ( RCA ) of 1959 , in the 86th Congress .
The 1962 publication of Silent Spring by Rachel Carson alerted the public about the detrimental effects on the environment of the indiscriminate use of pesticides .
In the years following , similar bills were introduced and hearings were held to discuss the state of the environment and Congress 's potential responses .
In 1968 , a joint House – Senate colloquium was convened by the chairmen of the Senate Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs , Senator Henry M. Jackson , and the House Committee on Science and Astronautics , Representative George P. Miller , to discuss the need for and means of implementing a national environmental policy .
In the colloquium , some members of Congress expressed a continuing concern over federal agency actions affecting the environment .
The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 ( NEPA ) was modeled on the Resources and Conservation Act of 1959 ( RCA ) .
RCA would have established a Council on Environmental Quality in the office of the President , declared a national environmental policy , and required the preparation of an annual environmental report .
President Nixon signed NEPA into law on January 1 , 1970 .
The law created the Council on Environmental Quality ( CEQ ) in the Executive Office of the President .
NEPA required that a detailed statement of environmental impacts be prepared for all major federal actions significantly affecting the environment .
The " detailed statement " would ultimately be referred to as an environmental impact statement ( EIS ) .
On July 9 , 1970 , Nixon proposed an executive reorganization that consolidated many environmental responsibilities of the federal government under one agency , a new Environmental Protection Agency .
This proposal included merging antipollution programs from a number of departments , such as the combination of pesticide programs from the United States Department of Agriculture , Department of Interior , and U.S. Department of Interior .
After conducting hearings during that summer , the House and Senate approved the proposal .
The EPA was created 90 days before it had to operate , and officially opened its doors on December 2 , 1970 .
The agency 's first Administrator , William Ruckelshaus , took the oath of office on December 4 , 1970 .
In its first year , the EPA had a budget of $ 1.4 billion and 5,800 employees .
At its start , the EPA was primarily a technical assistance agency that set goals and standards .
Soon , new acts and amendments passed by Congress gave the agency its regulatory authority .
EPA staff recall that in the early days there was " an enormous sense of purpose and excitement " and the expectation that " there was this agency which was going to do something about a problem that clearly was on the minds of a lot of people in this country , " leading to tens of thousands of resumes from those eager to participate in the mighty effort to clean up America 's environment .
When EPA first began operation , members of the private sector felt strongly that the environmental protection movement was a passing fad .
Ruckelshaus stated that he felt pressure to show a public which was deeply skeptical about government 's effectiveness , that EPA could respond effectively to widespread concerns about pollution .
In 1972 , Congress amended the Federal Insecticide , Fungicide , and Rodenticide Act , requiring the newly formed EPA to measure every pesticide 's risks against its potential benefits .
In 1980 , Congress passed the Comprehensive Environmental Response , Compensation , and Liability Act , nicknamed " Superfund , " which enabled the EPA to cast a wider net for parties responsible for sites contaminated by previous hazardous waste disposal ( such as Love Canal ) and established a funding mechanism for assessment and cleanup .
In April 1986 , when the Chernobyl disaster occurred , the EPA was tasked with identifying any impacts on the United States and keeping the public informed .
Administrator Lee Thomas assembled a cross - agency team , including personnel from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission , National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , and the Department of Energy to monitor the situation .
They held press conferences for 10 days .
The EPA also researched the implications of stratospheric ozone depletion .
Under the leadership of Administrator Lee Thomas , the EPA joined with several international organizations to perform a risk assessment of stratospheric ozone , which helped provide motivation for the Montreal Protocol , which was agreed to in August 1987 .
In 1988 , during his first presidential campaign , George H. W. Bush was vocal about environmental issues .
He appointed as his EPA administrator William K. Reilly , an environmentalist .
Under Reilly 's leadership , the EPA implemented voluntary programs and a cluster rule for multimedia regulation .
At time , the environment was increasingly being recognized as a regional issue , which was reflected in 1990 amendment of the Clean Air Act and new approaches by the agency .
ORGANIZATION Section::::Organization .
The EPA is led by an Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency .
From February 2017 to July 2018 , Scott Pruitt served as the 14th Administrator .
The current acting administrator is Deputy Administrator Andrew R. Wheeler .
OFFICES
* Office of the Administrator ( OA ) .
As of March 2017 the office consisted of 11 divisions , the Office of Administrative and Executive Services , Office of Children 's Health Protection , Office of Civil Rights , Office of Congressional and Intergovernmental Relations , Office of the Executive Secretariat , Office of Homeland Security , Office of Policy , Office of Public Affairs , Office of Public Engagement and Environmental Education , Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization , Science Advisory Board .
* Office of Administration and Resources Management ( OARM )
* Office of Air and Radiation ( OAR ) * Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention ( OCSPP )
* Office of the Chief Financial Officer ( OCFO ) * Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance ( OECA ) * Office of Environmental Information ( OEI ) * Office of General Counsel ( OGC ) * Office of Inspector General ( OIG ) * Office of International and Tribal Affairs ( OITA ) * Office of Research and Development ( ORD ) which as of March 2017 consisted of the * Office of Land and Emergency Management ( OLEM ) * Office of Water ( OW ) which as of March 2017 consisted of the Office of Ground Water and Drinking Water ( OGWDW ) , Office of Science and Technology ( OST ) , Office of Wastewater Management ( OWM ) and Office of Wetlands , Oceans and Watersheds ( OWOW ) .
REGIONS Section::::Regions .
Creating 10 EPA regions was an initiative that came from President Richard Nixon .
See Standard Federal Regions .
Each EPA regional office is responsible within its states for implementing the Agency 's programs , except those programs that have been specifically delegated to states .
* Region 1 : responsible within the states of Connecticut , Maine , Massachusetts , New Hampshire , Rhode Island , and Vermont ( New England ) .
* Region 2 : responsible within the states of New Jersey and New York .
It is also responsible for the US territories of Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands .
* Region 3 : responsible within the states of Delaware , Maryland , Pennsylvania , Virginia , West Virginia , and the District of Columbia .
* Region 4 : responsible within the states of Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Kentucky , Mississippi , North Carolina , South Carolina , and Tennessee .
* Region 5 : responsible within the states of Illinois , Indiana , Michigan , Minnesota , Ohio , and Wisconsin .
* Region 6 : responsible within the states of Arkansas , Louisiana , New Mexico , Oklahoma , and Texas .
* Region 7 : responsible within the states of Iowa , Kansas , Missouri , and Nebraska .
* Region 8 : responsible within the states of Colorado , Montana , North Dakota , South Dakota , Utah , and Wyoming .
* Region 9 : responsible within the states of Arizona , California , Hawaii , Nevada , the territories of Guam and American Samoa , and the Navajo Nation .
* Region 10 : responsible within the states of Alaska , Idaho , Oregon , and Washington .
Each regional office also implements programs on Indian Tribal lands , except those programs delegated to tribal authorities .
RELATED LEGISLATION Section::::Related legislation .
EPA has principal implementation authority for the following federal environmental laws :
* Clean Air Act * Clean Water Act * Comprehensive Environmental Response , Compensation and Liability Act ( " Superfund " ) * Emergency Planning and Community Right - to - Know Act
* Federal Insecticide , Fungicide , and Rodenticide Act
* Resource Conservation and Recovery Act * Safe Drinking Water Act * Toxic Substances Control Act .
There are additional laws where EPA has a contributing role or provides assistance to other agencies .
Among these laws are : * Endangered Species Act * Energy Independence and Security Act * Energy Policy Act * Federal Food , Drug , and Cosmetic Act * Food Quality Protection Act * National Environmental Policy Act * Oil Pollution Act * Pollution Prevention Act .
PROGRAMS Section::::Programs .
It is worth noting that , in looking back in 2013 on the agency he helped shape from the beginning , Administrator William Ruckelshaus observed that a danger for EPA was that air , water , waste and other programs would be unconnected , placed in " silos , " a problem that persists more than 50 years later , albeit less so than at the start .
EPA SAFER CHOICE Section::::EPA Safer Choice .
The EPA Safer Choice label , previously known as the Design for the Environment ( DfE ) label , helps consumers and commercial buyers identify and select products with safer chemical ingredients , without sacrificing quality or performance .
When a product has the Safer Choice label , it means that every intentionally - added ingredient in the product has been evaluated by EPA scientists .
Only the safest possible functional ingredients are allowed in products with the Safer Choice label .
SAFER DETERGENTS STEWARDSHIP INITIATIVE Section::::Safer Detergents Stewardship Initiative .
Through the Safer Detergents Stewardship Initiative ( SDSI ) , EPA 's Design for the Environment ( DfE ) recognizes environmental leaders who voluntarily commit to the use of safer surfactants .
Safer surfactants are the ones that break down quickly to non - polluting compounds and help protect aquatic life in both fresh and salt water .
Nonylphenol ethoxylates , commonly referred to as NPEs , are an example of a surfactant class that does not meet the definition of a safer surfactant .
The Design for the Environment , which was renamed to EPA Safer Choice in 2015 , has identified safer alternative surfactants through partnerships with industry and environmental advocates .
These safer alternatives are comparable in cost and are readily available .
CleanGredients is a source of safer surfactants .
ENERGY STAR Section::::Energy Star .
In 1992 the EPA launched the Energy Star program , a voluntary program that fosters energy efficiency .
This program came out an increased effort to collaborate with industry .
At the start , it motivated major companies to retrofit millions of square feet of building space with more efficient lighting .
As of 2006 , more than 40,000 Energy Star products were available including major appliances , office equipment , lighting , home electronics , and more .
In addition , the label can also be found on new homes and commercial and industrial buildings .
In 2006 , about 12 percent of new housing in the United States was labeled Energy Star .
The EPA estimates it saved about $ 14 billion in energy costs in 2006 alone .
The Energy Star program has helped spread the use of LED traffic lights , efficient fluorescent lighting , power management systems for office equipment , and low standby energy use .
SMART GROWTH Section::::Smart Growth .
EPA 's Smart Growth Program , which began in 1998 , is to help communities improve their development practices and get the type of development they want .
Together with local , state , and national experts , EPA encourages development strategies that protect human health and the environment , create economic opportunities , and provide attractive and affordable neighborhoods for people of all income levels .
PESTICIDES Section::::Pesticides .
EPA regulates pesticides under the Federal Insecticide , Fungicide , and Rodenticide Act ( FIFRA ) ( which is much older than the agency ) and the Food Quality Protection Act .
It assesses , registers , regulates , and regularly reevaluates all pesticides legally sold in the United States .
A few challenges this program faces are transforming toxicity testing , screening pesticides for endocrine disruptors , and regulating biotechnology and nanotechnology .
SUPERFUND
Section::::Superfund .
In the late 1970s , the need to clean up sites such as Love Canal that had been highly contaminated by previous hazardous waste disposal became apparent .
However the existing regulatory environment depended on owners or operators to perform environmental control .
While the EPA attempted to use RCRA 's section 7003 to perform this cleanup , it was clear a new law was needed .
In 1980 , Congress passed the Comprehensive Environmental Response , Compensation , and Liability Act , nicknamed " Superfund . "
This law enabled the EPA to cast a wider net for responsible parties , including past or present generators and transporters as well as current and past owners of the site to find funding .
The act also established some funding and a tax mechanism on certain industries to help fund such cleanup .
The latter was not renewed in the 1990s , which means funding now comes from general approprations .
Today , due to restricted funding , most cleanup is performed by responsible parties under the oversight of the EPA and states .
As of 2016 , more than 1,700 sites had been put on the cleanup list since the creation of the program .
Of these , 370 sites have been cleaned up and removed from the list , cleanup is underway at 535 , cleanup facilities have been constructed at 790 but need to be operated in the future , and 54 are not yet in cleanup stage .
BROWNFIELDS PROGRAM Section::::Brownfields Program .
This program , which was started as a pilot program in the 1990s and signed into law in 2002 , provides grants and tools to local governments for the assessment , cleanup , and revitalization of brownfields .
As of September 2015 , the EPA estimates that program grants have resulted in 56,442 acres of land readied for reuse and leveraged 116,963 jobs and $ 24.2 billion to do so .
Agency studies also found that property values around assessed or cleaned - up brownfields have increased 5.1 to 12.8 percent .
FUEL ECONOMY Section::::Fuel Economy .
The testing system was originally developed in 1972 and used driving cycles designed to simulate driving during rush - hour in Los Angeles during that era .
Until 1984 the EPA reported the exact fuel economy figures calculated from the test .
In 1984 , the EPA began adjusting city ( aka Urban Dynamometer Driving Schedule or UDDS ) results downward by 10 % and highway ( aka HighWay Fuel Economy Test or HWFET )
results by 22 % to compensate for changes in driving conditions since 1972 , and to better correlate the EPA test results with real - world driving .
In 1996 , the EPA proposed updating the Federal Testing Procedures to add a new higher - speed test ( US06 ) and an air - conditioner - on test ( SC03 ) to further improve the correlation of fuel economy and emission estimates with real - world reports .
In December 2006 the updated testing methodology was finalized to be implemented in model year 2008 vehicles and set the precedent of a 12-year review cycle for the test procedures .
In February 2005 , EPA launched a program called " Your MPG " that allows drivers to add real - world fuel economy statistics into a database on the EPA 's fuel economy website and compare them with others and with the original EPA test results .
The EPA conducts fuel economy tests on very few vehicles .
"
Just 18 of the EPA 's 17,000 employees work in the automobile - testing department in Ann Arbor , Michigan , examining 200 to 250 vehicles a year , or roughly 15 percent of new models .
As to that other 85 percent , the EPA takes automakers at their word — without any testing - accepting submitted results as accurate .
" Two - thirds of the vehicles the EPA tests themselves are randomly selected and the remaining third is tested for specific reasons .
Although originally created as a reference point for fossil - fueled vehicles , driving cycles have been used for estimating how many miles an electric vehicle will get on a single charge .
OIL SPILL PREVENTION PROGRAM Section::::Oil spill prevention program .
EPA 's oil spill prevention program includes the Spill Prevention , Control , and Countermeasure ( SPCC ) and the Facility Response Plan ( FRP ) rules .
The SPCC Rule applies to all facilities that store , handle , process , gather , transfer , refine , distribute , use or consume oil or oil products .
Oil products includes petroleum and non - petroleum oils as well as : animal fats , oils and greases ; fish and marine mammal oils ; and vegetable oils .
It mandates a written plan for facilities that store more than 1,320 gallons of fuel above ground or more than 42,000 gallons below - ground , and which might discharge to navigable waters ( as defined in the Clean Water Act ) or adjoining shorelines .
Secondary spill containment is mandated at oil storage facilities and oil release containment is required at oil development sites .
TOXICS RELEASE INVENTORY Section::::Toxics Release Inventory .
The Toxics Release Inventory ( TRI ) is a resource for learning about toxic chemical releases and pollution prevention activities reported by industrial and federal facilities .
TRI data support informed decision - making by communities , government agencies , companies , and others .
WATERSENSE
Section::::WaterSense .
WaterSense is an EPA program launched in June 2006 to encourage water efficiency in the United States through the use of a special label on consumer products .
Products include high - efficiency toilets ( HETs ) , bathroom sink faucets ( and accessories ) , and irrigation equipment .
WaterSense is a voluntary program , with EPA developing specifications for water - efficient products through a public process and product testing by independent laboratories .
UNDERGROUND STORAGE
TANKS
PROGRAM Section::::Underground Storage Tanks Program .
EPA regulates underground storage tanks ( USTs ) containing petroleum and hazardous chemicals under Subtitle I of the Solid Waste Disposal Act .
This program was launched in 1985 and covers about 553,000 active USTs .
Since 1984 , 1.8 million USTs have been closed in compliance with regulations .
38 states , the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico manage UST programs with EPA authorization .
When the program began EPA had only 90 staff to develop a system to regulate more than 2 million tanks and work with 750,000 owners and operators .
Administrator Lee Thomas told the program 's new manager , Ron Brand , that it would have to be done differently that EPA 's traditional approach .
This program therefore behaves differently than other EPA offices , focusing much more on local operations .
DRINKING WATER
Section::::Drinking water .
EPA ensures safe drinking water for the public , by setting standards for more than 160,000 public water systems nationwide .
EPA oversees states , local governments and water suppliers to enforce the standards under the Safe Drinking Water Act .
The program includes regulation of injection wells in order to protect underground sources of drinking water .
Select readings of amounts of certain contaminants in drinking water , precipitation , and surface water , in addition to milk and air , are reported on EPA 's Rad Net web site in a section entitled Envirofacts .
Despite mandatory reporting certain readings exceeding EPA MCL levels may be deleted or not included .
In 2013 , an EPA draft revision relaxed regulations for radiation exposure through drinking water , stating that current standards are impractical to enforce .
The EPA recommended that intervention was not necessary until drinking water was contaminated with radioactive iodine 131 at a concentration of 81,000 picocuries per liter ( the limit for short term exposure set by the International Atomic Energy Agency ) , which was 27,000 times the prior EPA limit of 3 picocuries per liter for long term exposure .
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE
ELIMINATION
SYSTEM
Section::::National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System .
The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System ( NPDES ) permit program addresses water pollution by regulating point sources which discharge to US waters .
Created in 1972 by the Clean Water Act , the NPDES permit program authorizes state governments to perform its many permitting , administrative , and enforcement aspects .
As of 2018 , EPA has approved 47 states to administer all or portions of the permit program .
EPA regional offices manage the program in the remaining areas of the country .
The Water Quality Act of 1987 extended NPDES permit coverage to industrial stormwater dischargers and municipal separate storm sewer systems .
RADIATION PROTECTION Section::::Radiation Protection .
EPA has the following seven project groups to protect the public from radiation .
* Radioactive Waste Management * * Emergency Preparedness and Response Programs Protective Action Guides And Planning Guidance for Radiological Incidents : EPA developed a manual as guideline for local and state governments to protect the public from a nuclear accident , the 2017 version being a 15-year update .
*
* EPA 's Role in Emergency Response – Special Teams
*
* Technologically Enhanced Naturally Occurring Radioactive Materials ( TENORM ) Program * * Radiation Standards for Air and Drinking Water Programs
* * Federal Guidance for Radiation Protection
* TOOLS FOR SCHOOLS Section::::Tools for Schools .
EPA 's Indoor Air Quality Tools for Schools Program helps schools to maintain a healthy environment and reduce exposures to indoor environmental contaminants .
It helps school personnel identify , solve , and prevent indoor air quality problems in the school environment .
Through the use of a multi - step management plan and checklists for the entire building , schools can lower their students ' and staff 's risk of exposure to asthma triggers .
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION
Section::::Environmental education .
The National Environmental Education Act of 1990 requires EPA to provide national leadership to increase environmental literacy .
EPA established the Office of Environmental Education to implement this program .
CLEAN SCHOOL BUS USA Section::::Clean School Bus USA .
Clean School Bus USA is a national partnership to reduce children 's exposure to diesel exhaust by eliminating unnecessary school bus idling , installing effective emission control systems on newer buses and replacing the oldest buses in the fleet with newer ones .
Its goal is to reduce both children 's exposure to diesel exhaust and the amount of air pollution created by diesel school buses .
33/50 PROGRAM ( PAST )
Section::::33/50 Program ( Past ) .
In 1991 under Administrator William Reilly , the EPA implemented its voluntary 33/50 program .
This was designed to encourage , recognize , and celebrate companies that voluntarily found ways to prevent and reduce pollution in their operations .
ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE
Section::::Environmental Justice .
The EPA has been criticized for its lack of progress towards environmental justice .
Administrator Christine Todd Whitman was criticized for her changes to President Bill Clinton 's Executive Order 12898 during 2001 , removing the requirements for government agencies to take the poor and minority populations into special consideration when making changes to environmental legislation , and therefore defeating the spirit of the Executive Order .
In a March 2004 report , the inspector general of the agency concluded that the EPA " has not developed a clear vision or a comprehensive strategic plan , and has not established values , goals , expectations , and performance measurements " for environmental justice in its daily operations .
Another report in September 2006 found the agency still had failed to review the success of its programs , policies and activities towards environmental justice .
Studies have also found that poor and minority populations were underserved by the EPA 's Superfund program , and that this situation was worsening .
BARRIERS TO ENFORCING ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE Section::::Barriers to enforcing environmental justice .
Many environmental justice issues are local , and therefore difficult to address by a federal agency , such as the EPA .
Without strong media attention , political interest , or ' crisis ' status , local issues are less likely to be addressed at the federal level compared to larger , well publicized incidents .
Conflicting political powers in successive administrations : The White House maintains direct control over the EPA , and its enforcements are subject to the political agenda of who is in power .
Republicans and Democrats differ in their approaches to environmental justice .
While President Bill Clinton signed the executive order 12898 , the Bush administration did not develop a clear plan or establish goals for integrating environmental justice into everyday practices , affecting the motivation for environmental enforcement .
The EPA is responsible for preventing and detecting environmental crimes , informing the public of environmental enforcement , and setting and monitoring standards of air pollution , water pollution , hazardous wastes and chemicals .
" It is difficult to construct a specific mission statement given its wide range of responsibilities .
" It is impossible to address every environmental crime adequately or efficiently if there is no specific mission statement to refer to .
The EPA answers to various groups , competes for resources , and confronts a wide array of harms to the environment .
All of these present challenges , including a lack of resources , its self - policing policy , and a broadly defined legislation that creates too much discretion for EPA officers .
The EPA " does not have the authority or resources to address injustices without an increase in federal mandates " requiring private industries to consider the environmental ramifications of their activities .
RESEARCH VESSEL , 2004–2013 Section::::Research vessel , 2004–2013 .
In March 2004 , the U.S. Navy transferred USNS
Bold ( T - AGOS-12 ) , a Stalwart class ocean surveillance ship , to the EPA .
The ship had been used in anti - submarine operations during the Cold War , was equipped with sidescan sonar , underwater video , water and sediment sampling instruments used in study of ocean and coastline .
One of the major missions of the Bold was to monitor for ecological impact sites where materials were dumped from dredging operations in U.S. ports .
In 2013 , the General Services Administration sold the Bold to Seattle Central Community College ( SCCC ) , which demonstrated in a competition that they would put it to the highest and best purpose , at a nominal cost of $ 5,000 .
ADVANCE IDENTIFICATION
Section::::Advance identification .
Advance identification , or ADID , is a planning process used by the EPA to identify wetlands and other bodies of water and their respective suitability for the discharge of dredged and fill material .
The EPA conducts the process in cooperation with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and local states or Native American Tribes .
As of February 1993 , 38 ADID projects had been completed and 33 were ongoing .
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT PROCESSING PERFORMANCE
Section::::Freedom of Information Act processing performance .
In the latest Center for Effective Government analysis of 15 federal agencies which receive the most Freedom of Information Act FOIA requests , published in 2015 ( using 2012 and 2013 data , the most recent years available ) , the EPA earned a D by scoring 67 out of a possible 100 points , i.e. did not earn a satisfactory overall grade .
CONTROVERSIES ( 1983–PRESENT ) FISCAL MISMANAGEMENT , 1983
Section::::Controversies ( 1983–present ) .
Section::::Fiscal mismanagement , 1983 .
In 1982 Congress charged that the EPA had mishandled the $ 1.6 billion program to clean up hazardous waste dumps Superfund and demanded records from EPA director Anne M. Gorsuch .
She refused and became the first agency director in U.S. history to be cited for contempt of Congress .
The EPA turned the documents over to Congress several months later , after the White House abandoned its court claim that the documents could not be subpoenaed by Congress because they were covered by executive privilege .
At that point , Gorsuch resigned her post , citing pressures caused by the media and the congressional investigation .
Critics charged that the EPA was in a shambles at that time .
When Lee Thomas came to the agency in 1983 as Acting Assistant Administrator of the Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response , shortly before Gorsuch 's resignation , six congressional committees were investigating the Superfund program .
There were also two FBI agents performing an investigation for the Justice Department into possible destruction of documents .
Gorsuch , appointed by Ronald Reagan , resigned under fire in 1983 .
Gorsuch based her administration of the EPA on the New Federalism approach of downsizing federal agencies by delegating their functions and services to the individual states .
She believed that the EPA was over - regulating business and that the agency was too large and not cost - effective .
During her 22 months as agency head , she cut the budget of the EPA by 22 % , reduced the number of cases filed against polluters , relaxed Clean Air Act regulations , and facilitated the spraying of restricted - use pesticides .
She cut the total number of agency employees , and hired staff from the industries they were supposed to be regulating .
Environmentalists contended that her policies were designed to placate polluters , and accused her of trying to dismantle the agency .
POLITICAL PRESSURE AND SCIENTIFIC INTEGRITY , 2001–PRESENT
Section::::Political pressure and scientific integrity
, 2001–present .
In April 2008 , the Union of Concerned Scientists said that more than half of the nearly 1,600 EPA staff scientists who responded online to a detailed questionnaire reported they had experienced incidents of political interference in their work .
The survey included chemists , toxicologists , engineers , geologists and experts in other fields of science .
About 40 % of the scientists reported that the interference had been more prevalent in the last five years than in previous years .
The highest number of complaints came from scientists who were involved in determining the risks of cancer by chemicals used in food and other aspects of everyday life .
EPA research has also been suppressed by career managers .
Supervisors at EPA 's National Center for Environmental Assessment required several paragraphs to be deleted from a peer - reviewed journal article about EPA 's integrated risk information system , which led two co - authors to have their names removed from the publication , and the corresponding author , Ching - Hung Hsu , to leave EPA " because of the draconian restrictions placed on publishing " .
EPA subjects employees who author scientific papers to prior restraint , even if those papers are written on personal time .
EPA employees have reported difficulty in conducting and reporting the results of studies on hydraulic fracturing due to industry and governmental pressure , and are concerned about the censorship of environmental reports .
In 2015 , the Government Accountability Office stated that the EPA violated federal law with covert propaganda on their social media platforms .
The social media messaging that was used promoted materials supporting the Waters of the United States rule , including materials that were designed to oppose legislative efforts to limit or block the rule .
In February 2017 , U.S. Representative Matt Gaetz ( R - Fla . ) sponsored H.R. 861 , a bill to abolish the EPA by 2018 .
According to Gaetz , " The American people are drowning in rules and regulation promulgated by unelected bureaucrats .
And the Environmental Protection Agency has become an extraordinary offender .
" The bill was co - sponsored by Thomas Massie ( R - Ky . ) , Steven Palazzo ( R - Ms . ) and Barry Loudermilk ( R - Ga . ) . FUEL ECONOMY , 2005–2010 Section::::Fuel economy , 2005–2010 .
In July 2005 , an EPA report showing that auto companies were using loopholes to produce less fuel - efficient cars was delayed .
The report was supposed to be released the day before a controversial energy bill was passed and would have provided backup for those opposed to it , but the EPA delayed its release at the last minute .
In 2007 , the state of California sued the EPA for its refusal to allow California and 16 other states to raise fuel economy standards for new cars .
EPA administrator Stephen L. Johnson claimed that the EPA was working on its own standards , but the move has been widely considered an attempt to shield the auto industry from environmental regulation by setting lower standards at the federal level , which would then preempt state laws .
California governor Arnold Schwarzenegger , along with governors from 13 other states , stated that the EPA 's actions ignored federal law , and that existing California standards ( adopted by many states in addition to California ) were almost twice as effective as the proposed federal standards .
It was reported that Stephen Johnson ignored his own staff in making this decision .
After the federal government had bailed out General Motors and Chrysler in the Automotive industry crisis of 2008–2010 , the 2010 Chevrolet Equinox was released with an EPA fuel economy rating abnormally higher than its competitors .
Independent road tests found that the vehicle did not out - perform its competitors , which had much lower fuel economy ratings .
Later road tests found better , but inconclusive , results .
MERCURY EMISSIONS , 2005
Section::::Mercury emissions , 2005 .
In March 2005 , nine states ( California , New York , New Jersey , New Hampshire , Massachusetts , Maine , Connecticut , New Mexico and Vermont ) sued the EPA .
The EPA 's Inspector General had determined that the EPA 's regulation of mercury emissions did not follow the Clean Air Act , and that the regulations were influenced by top political appointees .
The EPA had suppressed a study it commissioned by Harvard University which contradicted its position on mercury controls .
The suit alleged that the EPA 's rule exempting coal - fired power plants from " maximum available control technology " was illegal , and additionally charged that the EPA 's system of cap - and - trade to lower average mercury levels would allow power plants to forego reducing mercury emissions , which they objected would lead to dangerous local hotspots of mercury contamination even if average levels declined .
Several states also began to enact their own mercury emission regulations .
Illinois 's proposed rule would have reduced mercury emissions from power plants by an average of 90 % by 2009 .
In 2008—by which point a total of fourteen states had joined the suit — the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia ruled that the EPA regulations violated the Clean Air Act .
In response , EPA announced plans to propose such standards to replace the vacated Clean Air Mercury Rule , and did so on March 16 , 2011 .
CLIMATE CHANGE , 2007–2017 Section::::Climate change , 2007–2017 .
In December 2007 , EPA Administrator Stephen L. Johnson approved a draft of a document that declared that climate change imperiled the public welfare — a decision that would trigger the first national mandatory global - warming regulations .
Associate Deputy Administrator Jason Burnett e - mailed the draft to the White House .
White House aides — who had long resisted mandatory regulations as a way to address climate change — knew the gist of what Johnson 's finding would be , Burnett said .
They also knew that once they opened the attachment , it would become a public record , making it controversial and difficult to rescind .
So they did not open it ; rather , they called Johnson and asked him to take back the draft .
Johnson rescinded the draft ; in July 2008 , he issued a new version which did not state that global warming was danger to public welfare .
Burnett resigned in protest .
A $ 3 million mapping study on sea level rise was suppressed by EPA management during both the Bush and Obama Administrations , and managers changed a key interagency report to reflect the removal of the maps .
On April 28 , 2017 , multiple climate change subdomains at EPA.gov began redirecting to a notice stating " this page is being updated .
" The EPA issued a statement announcing the overhaul of its website to " reflect the agency 's new direction under President Donald Trump and Administrator Scott Pruitt .
" The removed EPA climate change domains included extensive information on the EPA 's work to mitigate climate change , as well as details of data collection efforts and indicators for climate change .
GOLD KING MINE WASTE WATER SPILL , 2015 Section::::Gold King Mine waste water spill , 2015 .
In August 2015 , the 2015 Gold King Mine waste water spill occurred when EPA contractors examined the level of pollutants such as lead and arsenic in a Colorado mine , and accidentally released over three million gallons of waste water into Cement Creek and the Animas River .
COLLUSION WITH MONSANTO CHEMICAL COMPANY Section::::Collusion with Monsanto chemical company .
In 2015 , the International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) , a branch of the World Health Organization , cited research linking glyphosate , an ingredient of the weed killer Roundup manufactured by the chemical company Monsanto , to non - Hodgkin 's lymphoma .
In March 2017 , the presiding judge in a litigation brought about by people who claim to have developed glyphosate - related non - Hodgkin 's lymphoma opened Monsanto emails and other documents related to the case , including email exchanges between the company and federal regulators .
According to an article in the New York Times , the " records suggested that Monsanto had ghostwritten research that was later attributed to academics and indicated that a senior official at the Environmental Protection Agency had worked to quash a review of Roundup 's main ingredient , glyphosate , that was to have been conducted by the United States Department of Health and Human Services .
" The records show that Monsanto was able to prepare " a public relations assault " on the finding after they were alerted to the determination by Jess Rowland , the head of the EPA 's cancer assessment review committee at that time , months in advance .
Emails also showed that Rowland " had promised to beat back an effort by the Department of Health and Human Services to conduct its own review . "
CHIEF SCOTT PRUITT , 2017 Section::::Chief Scott Pruitt , 2017 .
On February 17 , 2017 , Scott Pruitt was selected Administrator of the EPA by president Donald Trump .
This was a seemingly controversial move , as Pruitt had spent most of his career countering environmental policy .
He did not have previous experience in the field and had received financial support from the fossil fuel industry .
Pruitt resigned from the position on July 5 , 2018 , citing " unrelenting attacks " due to ongoing ethics controversies .
SEE ALSO
* Environmental policy of the Donald Trump administration * AP 42 Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors
* Brownfield land * Environmental Technology Verification Program * EPA Methods * Federation of Earth Science Information Partners ( ESIP Federation )
* Green Sticker programs *
MyEnvironment *
Renewable energy * Stormwater
* Volkswagen diesel scandal
* USA.gov * USAFacts FURTHER READING * EPA Alumni Association , " Protecting the Environment , A Half Century of Progress " – an overview of EPA 's environmental protection efforts over 50 years
* EPA Alumni Association individual Half Century of Progress reports for air , water , pesticides , drinking water , waste management , Superfund , and toxic substances
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Environmental Protection Agency in the Federal Register