DIAL - UP INTERNET ACCESS Dial - up Internet access is a form of Internet access that uses the facilities of the public switched telephone network ( PSTN ) to establish a connection to an Internet service provider ( ISP ) by dialing a telephone number on a conventional telephone line .
The user 's computer or router uses an attached modem to encode and decode information into and from audio frequency signals , respectively .
In 1979 , Tom Truscott and Steve Bellovin , graduates for Duke University , created an early predecessor to dial - up Internet access called the USENET .
The USENET was a UNIX based system that used a dial - up connection to transfer data through telephone modems .
Dial - up Internet has been around since the 1980s via public providers such as NSFNET - linked universities and was first offered commercially in July 1992 by Sprint .
Despite losing ground to broadband since the mid-2000s , dial - up is still used where other forms are not available or where the cost is too high , such as in some rural or remote areas .
AVAILABILITY Section::::Availability .
Dial - up connections to the Internet require no infrastructure other than the telephone network and the modems and servers needed to make and answer the calls .
Where telephone access is widely available , dial - up is often the only choice available for rural or remote areas , where broadband installations are not prevalent due to low population density and high infrastructure cost .
Dial - up access may also be an alternative for users on limited budgets , as it is offered free by some ISPs , though broadband is increasingly available at lower prices in many countries due to market competition .
Dial - up requires time to establish a telephone connection ( up to several seconds , depending on the location ) and perform configuration for protocol synchronization before data transfers can take place .
In locales with telephone connection charges , each connection incurs an incremental cost .
If calls are time - metered , the duration of the connection incurs costs .
Dial - up access is a transient connection , because either the user , ISP or phone company terminates the connection .
Internet service providers will often set a limit on connection durations to allow sharing of resources , and will disconnect the user — requiring reconnection and the costs and delays associated with it .
Technically inclined users often find a way to disable the auto - disconnect program such that they can remain connected for more days than one .
A 2008 Pew Research Center study stated that only 10 % of US adults still used dial - up Internet access .
The study found that the most common reason for retaining dial - up access was high broadband prices .
Users cited lack of infrastructure as a reason less often than stating that they would never upgrade to broadband .
That number had fallen to 6 % by 2010 , and to 3 % by 2013 .
The CRTC estimated that there were 336,000 Canadian dial - up users in 2010 .
REPLACEMENT
BY BROADBAND Section::::Replacement by broadband .
Broadband internet access via cable , digital subscriber line , satellite and FTTx has replaced dial - up access in many parts of the world .
Broadband connections typically offer speeds of 700 kbit / s or higher for two - thirds more than the price of dial - up on average .
In addition broadband connections are always on , thus avoiding the need to connect and disconnect at the start and end of each session .
Broadband does not require exclusive use of a phone line and so one can access the Internet and at the same time make and receive voice phone calls without having a second phone line .
However , many rural areas still remain without high speed Internet despite the eagerness of potential customers .
This can be attributed to population , location , or sometimes ISPs ' lack of interest due to little chance of profitability and high costs to build the required infrastructure .
Some dial - up ISPs have responded to the increased competition by lowering their rates and making dial - up an attractive option for those who merely want email access or basic web browsing .
Dial - up Internet access has undergone a precipitous fall in usage , and potentially approaches extinction as modern users turn towards broadband .
In contrast to the year 2000 when about 34 % of the U.S. population used dial - up , this dropped to 3 % in 2013 .
Adding to the extinction of dial - up is many newer programs such as antivirus and major applications download their sizable updates automatically in the background when a connection is first made and this can greatly impact the available bandwidth available to other applications like browsers until all updates have completed which may take several minutes or longer .
Since an " always on " broadband is the norm expected by most newer applications being developed , this automatic upload trend in the background is expected to continue to eat away at dial - up 's available bandwidth to the detriment of dial - up users ' applications .
Many newer websites also now assume broadband speeds as the norm and when confronted with slower dial - up speeds may drop ( timeout ) these slower connections to free up communication resources .
On websites that are designed to be more dial - up friendly , use of a reverse proxy prevents dial - ups from being dropped as often but can introduce long wait periods for dial - up users caused by the buffering used by a reverse proxy to bridge the different data rates .
PERFORMANCE Section::::Performance .
Modern dial - up modems typically have a maximum theoretical transfer speed of 56 kbit / s ( using the V.90 or V.92 protocol ) , although in most cases , 40–50 kbit / s is the norm .
Factors such as phone line noise as well as the quality of the modem itself play a large part in determining connection speeds .
Some connections may be as low as 20 kbit / s in extremely noisy environments , such as in a hotel room where the phone line is shared with many extensions , or in a rural area , many miles from the phone exchange .
Other factors such as long loops , loading coils , pair gain , electric fences ( usually in rural locations ) , and digital loop carriers can also slow connections to 20 kbit / s or lower .
Analog telephone lines are digitally switched and transported inside a Digital Signal 0 once reaching the telephone company 's equipment .
Digital Signal 0 is 64 kbit / s and reserves 8 kbit / s for signalling information ; therefore a 56 kbit / s connection is the highest that will ever be possible with analog phone lines .
Dial - up connections usually have latency as high as 150 ms or even more ; this is longer than for many forms of broadband , such as cable or DSL , but typically less than satellite connections .
Longer latency can make video conferencing and online gaming difficult , if not impossible .
An increasing amount of Internet content such as streaming media will not work at dial - up speeds .
Video games released from the mid-1990s to the mid-2000s that utilized internet access such as EverQuest , Red Faction , Warcraft 3 , Final Fantasy XI , Phantasy Star Online , Guild Wars , Unreal Tournament , , Audition , , and Ragnarok Online , etc . , accommodated for 56k dial - up with limited data transfer between the game servers and user 's personal computer .
The first consoles to provide Internet connectivity , the Dreamcast and PlayStation 2 , supported dial - up as well as broadband .
The GameCube had an ability to use dial - up and broadband connections , but this was used in very few games and required a separate adapter .
The original Xbox exclusively required a broadband connection .
Many computer and video games released since the mid-2000s do not even include the option to use dial - up .
However , there are exceptions to this , such as Vendetta Online , which can still run on a dial - up modem .
USING COMPRESSION TO EXCEED 56 K Section::::Using compression to exceed 56k .
The V.42 , V.42bis and V.44 standards allow modems to accept uncompressed data at a rate faster than the line rate .
These algorithms use data compression to achieve higher throughput .
For instance , a 53.3 kbit / s connection with V.44 can transmit up to 53.3 × 6 = 320 kbit / s if the offered data stream can be compressed that much .
However , the compressibility of data tends to vary considerably , for example , due to the transfer of already - compressed files ( ZIP files , JPEG images , MP3 audio , MPEG video ) .
A modem might be sending compressed files at approximately 50 kbit / s , uncompressed files at 160 kbit / s , and pure text at 320 kbit / s , or any rate in this range .
COMPRESSION BY THE ISP Section::::Compression by the ISP .
As telephone - based internet lost popularity in the mid 2000s , some Internet service providers such as TurboUSA , Netscape , CdotFree , and NetZero started using data compression to increase the perceived speed .
As an example , EarthLink advertises " surf the Web up to 7x faster " using a compression program that squeezes images , text / html , and SWF flash animations prior to transmission across the phone line .
The pre - compression operates much more efficiently than the on - the - fly compression of V.44 modems .
Typically website text is compacted to 5 % thus increasing effective throughput to approximately 1000 kbit / s , and JPEG / GIF / PNG images are lossy - compressed to 15–20 % ( increasing throughput up to 300 kbit / s ) .
The drawback of this approach is a loss in quality , where the graphics acquire compression artifacts taking on a blurry or colorless appearance ; however the perceived speed is dramatically improved .
( If desired the user may choose to view uncompressed images instead , but at a much slower load rate . )
Since streaming music and video are already compressed at the source , they are typically passed by the ISP unaltered .
LIST OF
DIAL - UP SPEEDS
Bitrate REFERENCES