BAYONET
A bayonet ( from French baïonnette ) is a knife , sword , or spike - shaped weapon designed to fit on the end of a rifle 's muzzle , allowing it to be used as a spear .
From the 17th century to World War I , it was considered the primary weapon for infantry attacks .
Today , it is considered an ancillary weapon or a weapon of last resort .
Modern bayonets are often multi - purpose knives such as the Soviet AKM bayonet which was also a ground breaking survival knife that can be used as a wire - cutter when combined with its scabbard .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The concept of the bayonet , which is essentially the idea of improvising a firearm as a spear , evolved from the early concepts of spears having firearms being attached to them as seen in Chinese military manuals on weapons known as " Fire lances " .
Various forms of fire lances were recorded in the 14th century Chinese gunpowder military treatise
Huolongjing , with the recorded to be used by the troops of Li Quan ( Chinese : 李全 )
circa 1218 .
These examples demonstrated a clear need for a form of hybrid weapon as such weapons only have a firing range of 3 meters or less , meaning reloading is almost impossible during an encounter with enemy forces and an immediate melee backup weapon is of paramount .
The term bayonette itself dates back to the second half of the 16th century , but it is not clear whether bayonets at the time were knives that could be fitted to the ends of firearms , or simply a type of knife .
For example , Cotgrave 's 1611 Dictionarie describes the bayonet as " a kind of small flat pocket dagger , furnished with knives ; or a great knife to hang at the girdle " .
Likewise , Pierre Borel wrote in 1655 that a kind of long - knife called a bayonette was made in Bayonne but does not give any further description .
EARLIEST RECORDED BAYONET Section::::Earliest recorded bayonet .
The first clearly recorded instance of a bayonet proper is found in the Chinese military treatise published in 1606 , meaning the firearms documented in the treatise would have to exist even before the publication date .
It was in the form of the , a breech - loading musket that was issued with a plug bayonet that was roughly 57.6 centimetres in length and have an overall length of 1.92 meters with the bayonet attached .
It was labelled as a " gun - blade"(traditional Chinese : 銃刀 ; simplified Chinese : 铳刀 ) with it being described as a " short sword that can be inserted into the barrel and secured by twisting it slightly " that it is to be used " when the battle have depleted both gunpowder and bullets as well as fighting against rebels / bandits , when forces are closing into melee or encountering an ambush " and if one " can not load / reload the gun within the time it takes to cover two bu ( 3.2 meters ) of ground
they are to attach the bayonet and hold it like a spear " .
PLUG BAYONETS Section::::Plug bayonets .
Early bayonets were of the " plug " type , where the bayonet was fitted directly into the barrel of the musket .
This allowed light infantry to be converted to heavy infantry and hold off cavalry charges .
The bayonet had a round handle that slid directly into the musket barrel .
This naturally prevented the gun from being fired .
The first known mention of the use of bayonets in warfare was in the memoirs of Jacques de Chastenet , Vicomte de Puységur .
He described the French using crude foot - long plug bayonets during the Thirty Years ' War ( 1618–1648 ) .
However , it was not until 1671 , that General Jean Martinet standardized and issued plug bayonets to the French regiment of fusiliers then raised .
They were issued to part of an English dragoon regiment raised in 1672 , and to the Royal Fusiliers when raised in 1685 .
SOCKET BAYONETS Section::::Socket bayonets .
The major problem with plug bayonets was that when attached they made it impossible to fire the musket , requiring soldiers to wait until the last possible moment before a melee to fixing bayonets .
The defeat of forces loyal to William of Orange by Jacobite Highlanders at the Battle of Killiecrankie in 1689 was due ( among other things ) to the use of the plug bayonet .
The Highlanders closed to 50 metres , fired a single volley , dropped their muskets , and using axes and swords quickly overwhelmed the loyalists before they had time to fix bayonets .
Shortly thereafter , the defeated leader , Hugh Mackay , is believed to have introduced a socket bayonet of his own invention .
Soon " socket " bayonets would incorporate both socket mounts and an offset blade that fit around the musket 's barrel , which allowed the musket to be fired and reloaded while the bayonet was attached .
An unsuccessful trial with socket or zigzag bayonets was made after the Battle of Fleurus in 1690 , in the presence of King Louis XIV , who refused to adopt them , as they had a tendency to fall off the musket .
Shortly after the Peace of Ryswick ( 1697 ) , the English and Germans abolished the pike and introduced socket bayonets .
The British socket bayonet had a triangular blade with a flat side towards the muzzle and two fluted sides outermost to a length of .
However it had no lock to keep it fast to the muzzle and was well - documented for falling off in the heat of battle .
By the 18th century , socket bayonets had been adopted by most European armies .
In 1703 , the French infantry adopted a spring - loaded locking system that prevented the bayonet from accidentally separating from the musket .
A triangular blade was introduced around 1715 and was stronger than the previous single or double - edged models .
SWORD BAYONETS Section::::Sword bayonets .
The 19th century introduced the concept of the sword bayonet , a long - bladed weapon with a single- or double - edged blade that could also be used as a shortsword .
Its initial purpose was to ensure that riflemen could form an infantry square properly to fend off cavalry attacks when in ranks with musketmen , whose weapons were longer .
A prime early example of a sword bayonet - fitted rifle is the British Infantry Rifle of 1800–1840 , later known as the " Baker Rifle " .
The hilt usually had quillons modified to accommodate the gun barrel and a hilt mechanism that enabled the bayonet to be attached to a bayonet lug .
A sword bayonet could be used in combat as a side arm .
When attached to the musket or rifle , it effectively turned almost any long gun into a spear or glaive , suitable not only for thrusting but also for slashing .
While the British Army eventually discarded the sword bayonet , the socket bayonet survived the introduction of the rifled musket into British service in 1854 .
The new rifled musket copied the French locking ring system .
The new bayonet proved its worth at the Battle of Alma and the Battle of Inkerman during the Crimean War , where the Imperial Russian Army learned to fear it .
From 1869 , some European nations began to develop new bolt - action breechloading rifles ( such as the Chassepot ) and sword bayonets suitable for mass production and for use by police , pioneer , and engineer troops .
The decision to redesign the bayonet into a short sword was viewed by some as an acknowledgement of the decline in importance of the fixed bayonet as a weapon in the face of new advances in firearms technology .
As a British newspaper put it , " the committee , in recommending this new sword bayonet , appear to have had in view the fact that bayonets will henceforth be less frequently used than in former times as a weapon of offence and defence ; they desired , therefore , to substitute an instrument of more general utility . "
MULTIPURPOSE BAYONETS
Section::::Multipurpose bayonets .
One of these multipurpose designs was the ' sawback ' bayonet , which incorporated saw teeth on the spine of the blade .
The sawback bayonet was intended for use as a general - purpose utility tool as well as a weapon ; the teeth were meant to facilitate the cutting of wood for various defensive works such as barbed - wire posts , as well as for butchering livestock .
It was initially adopted by the German states in 1865 ; until the middle of WWI approximately 5 % of every bayonet style was complemented with a sawback version , countries such as Belgium in 1868 , Great Britain in 1869 and Switzerland in 1878 ; ( the latter introduced their last model in 1914 ) .
The original sawback bayonets were typically of the heavy sword - type , they were issued to engineers , with to some extent the bayonet aspect being secondary to the " tool " aspect .
Later German sawbacks were more of a rank indicator than a functional saw .
The sawback proved relatively ineffective as a cutting tool , and was soon outmoded by improvements in military logistics and transportation ; most nations dropped the sawback feature by 1900 .
The German army discontinued use of the sawback bayonet in 1917 after protests that the serrated blade caused unnecessarily severe wounds when used as a fixed bayonet .
If this bayonet was found at a soldier , he was , like snipers or flamethrower crew , mostly executed .
The trowel or spade bayonet was another multipurpose design , intended for use both as an offensive weapon as well as a digging tool for excavating entrenchments .
From 1870 , the US Army issued trowel bayonets to infantry regiments based on a design by Lieutenant - Colonel Edmund Rice , a US Army officer and Civil War veteran , which were manufactured by the Springfield Armory .
Besides its utility as both a fixed bayonet and a digging implement , the Rice trowel bayonet could be used to plaster log huts and stone chimneys for winter quarters ; sharpened on one edge , it could cut tent poles and pins .
Ten thousand were eventually issued , and the design saw service during the 1877 Nez Perce campaign .
Rice was given leave in 1877 to demonstrate his trowel bayonet to several nations in Europe .
One infantry officer recommended it to the exclusion of all other designs , noting that " the intrenching tools of an army rarely get up to the front until the exigency for their use has passed . "
The Rice trowel bayonet was declared obsolete by the US Army in December 1881 .
" REACH " CONTROVERSY Section::::"Reach " controversy .
Prior to World War I , bayonet doctrine was largely founded upon the concept of " reach " ; that is , a soldier 's theoretical ability , by use of an extremely long rifle and fixed bayonet , to stab an enemy soldier without having to approach within reach of his opponent 's blade .
A combined length of rifle and bayonet longer than that of the enemy infantryman 's rifle and attached bayonet , like the infantryman 's pike of bygone days , was thought to impart a definite tactical advantage on the battlefield , and military authorities engaged in endless discussions over the supposed advantages of longer rifle / bayonet combinations .
In 1886 , the French Army introduced a quadrangular épée spike for the bayonet of the Lebel Model 1886 rifle , the Épée - Baïonnette Modèle 1886 , resulting in a rifle and bayonet with an overall length of .
German ordnance authorities responded by introducing a long sword bayonet for the Model 1898 Mauser rifle , which had a 29-inch barrel .
The new bayonet , designated the Seitengewehr 98 , had a 50 cm ( 19.7-inch ) blade .
With an overall length of , the German Army 's rifle / bayonet combination was second only to the French Lebel for overall bayonet ' reach ' .
After 1900 , Switzerland , Britain , and the United States adopted rifles with barrel lengths shorter than that of a rifled musket , but longer than that of a carbine .
These new rifles were intended for general use by both the infantry and cavalry .
Due to the reduction in barrel length , the overall " reach " of the new short rifles with attached bayonet was reduced .
In the case of Britain , this occurred when the British Army adopted a shortened Lee – Enfield rifle , the SMLE , in 1904 .
As a consequence , the German M1898 Mauser rifle and attached sword bayonet was a full eight inches longer than the British SMLE and its P1903 bayonet , which used a twelve - inch blade .
While the British P1903 and its similar predecessor , the P1888 , had proved completely satisfactory in service , a storm of criticism soon arose regarding the effective reach of the new short rifles when equipped with a fixed bayonet .
One military writer of the day warned : " The German soldier has eight inches the better of the argument over the British soldier when it comes to crossing bayonets , and the extra eight inches easily turns the battle in favour of the longer , if both men are of equal skill . "
In 1905 the German Army adopted a shortened bayonet , the Seitengewehr 98/06 for engineer and pioneer troops , and in 1908 , a short rifle as well , the Karabiner Model 1898AZ , which was produced in limited quantities for the cavalry , artillery , and other specialist troops .
However , the long - barreled 98 Mauser rifle remained in service as the primary infantry small arm .
Moreover , German military authorities continued to promote the idea of outreaching one 's opponent on the battlefield by means of a longer rifle / bayonet combination , a concept prominently featured in its infantry bayonet training doctrines .
These included the throw point or extended thrust - and - lunge attack .
Using this tactic , the German soldier dropped into a half - crouch , with the rifle and fixed bayonet held close to the body .
In this position the soldier next propelled his rifle forward , then dropped the supporting hand while taking a step forward with the right foot , simultaneously thrusting out the right arm to full length with the extended rifle held in the grip of the right hand alone .
With a maximum ' kill zone ' of some eleven feet , the throw point bayonet attack gave an impressive increase in ' reach ' , and was later adopted by other military forces , including the U.S. Army .
In response to criticism over the reduced reach of the SMLE rifle and bayonet , British ordnance authorities introduced the P1907 bayonet in 1908 , which had an elongated blade of some seventeen inches to compensate for the reduced overall length of the SMLE rifle .
The 1907 bayonet was essentially a copy of the Japanese Type 30 bayonet , Britain having purchased a number of Japanese type 30 rifles for the Royal Navy during the preceding years .
U.S. authorities in turn adopted a long ( 16-in . blade ) bayonet for the M1903 Springfield short rifle , the M1905 bayonet ; later , a long sword bayonet was also provided for the M1917 Enfield rifle .
REVERSAL IN OPINION Section::::Reversal in opinion .
The experience of World War
I prompted a complete reversal in opinion on the relative value of long rifles and bayonets in typical infantry combat operations .
Whether in the close confines of trench warfare , night time raiding and patrolling , or attacking across open ground , soldiers of both sides soon recognized the inherent limitations of a long and ungainly rifle and bayonet when used as a close - quarters battle weapon .
Once Allied soldiers had been trained to expect the throw point or extended thrust - and - lunge attack , the method lost most of its tactical value on the World War
I battlefield .
It required a strong arm and wrist , was very slow to recover if the initial thrust missed its mark , and was easily parried by a soldier who was trained to expect it , thus exposing the German soldier to a return thrust which he could not easily block or parry .
Instead of longer bayonets , infantry forces on both sides began experimenting with other weapons as auxiliary close - quarter arms , including the trench knife , pistol , hand grenade , and entrenching tool .
Soldiers soon began employing the bayonet as a knife as well as an attachment for the rifle , and bayonets were often shortened officially or unofficially to make them more versatile and easier to use as tools , or to maneuver in close quarters .
During World War II , bayonets were further shortened into knife - sized weapons in order to give them additional utility as fighting or utility knives .
The vast majority of modern bayonets introduced since World War II are of the knife bayonet type .
BAYONET CHARGE Section::::Bayonet charge .
The development of the bayonet in the late 17th century led to the bayonet charge becoming the main infantry tactic through the 19th century and into the 20th .
As early as the 19th century , military scholars were already noting that most bayonet charges did not result in close combat .
Instead , one side usually fled before actual bayonet fighting ensued .
The act of fixing bayonets has been held to be primarily connected to morale , the making of a clear signal to friend and foe of a willingness to kill at close quarters .
NAPOLEONIC WARS
Section::::Napoleonic wars .
The bayonet charge was a common tactic used during the Napoleonic wars .
Despite its effectiveness , a bayonet charge did not necessarily cause substantial casualties through the use of the weapon itself .
Detailed battle casualty lists from the 18th century showed that in many battles , fewer than 2 % of all wounds treated were caused by bayonets .
Antoine - Henri Jomini , a celebrated military author who served in numerous armies during the Napoleonic period , stated that the majority of bayonet charges in the open resulted with one side fleeing before any contact was made .
Combat with bayonets did occur , but mostly on a small scale when units of opposing sides encountered each other in a confined environment , such as during the storming of fortifications or during ambush skirmishes in broken terrain .
In an age of fire by massed volley , when compared to random unseen bullets , the threat of the bayonet was much more tangible and immediate – guaranteed to lead to a personal gruesome conclusion if both sides persisted .
All this encouraged men to flee before the lines met .
Thus , the bayonet was an immensely useful weapon for capturing ground from the enemy , despite seldom actually being used to inflict wounds .
AMERICAN
CIVIL WAR Section::::American Civil War .
During the American Civil War ( 1861–1865 ) the bayonet was found to be responsible for less than 1 % of battlefield casualties , a hallmark of modern warfare .
The use of bayonet charges to force the enemy to retreat was very successful in numerous small unit engagements at short range in the American Civil War , as most troops would retreat when charged while reloading ( which could take up to a minute with loose powder even for trained troops ) .
Although such charges inflicted few casualties , they often decided short engagements , and tactical possession of important defensive ground features .
Additionally , bayonet drill could be used to rally men temporarily discomfited by enemy fire .
While the overall Battle of Gettysburg was won by the Union armies due to a combination of terrain and massed artillery fire , a decisive point on the second day of the battle hinged on a bayonet charge at Little Round Top when the 20th Maine Volunteer Infantry Regiment , running short of musket ammunition , charged downhill , surprising and capturing many of the surviving soldiers of the 15th Alabama and other Confederate regiments .
GOING OVER THE TOP Section::::Going over the top .
The popular image of a World War
I combat is of a wave of soldiers with bayonets fixed , " going over the top " and charging across no man 's land into a hail of enemy fire .
Although this was the standard method of fighting early in the war , it was rarely successful .
British casualties on the first day of the Battle of the Somme were the worst in the history of the British army , with casualties , whom were killed .
During World War I , no man 's land was often hundreds of yards across .
The area was usually devastated by the warfare and riddled with craters from artillery and mortar shells , and sometimes contaminated by chemical weapons .
Heavily defended by machine guns , mortars , artillery and riflemen on both sides , it was often covered with barbed wire and land mines , and littered with the rotting corpses of those who were not able to make it across the sea of bullets , explosions and flames .
A bayonet charge through no man 's land often resulted in the total annihilation of entire battalions .
BANZAI CHARGES
Section::::Banzai charges .
The advent of modern warfare in the 20th century made bayonet charges dubious affairs .
During the Siege of Port Arthur , the Japanese used suicidal human wave attacks against Russian artillery and machine guns , suffering massive casualties .
One description of the aftermath was that a " thick , unbroken mass of corpses covered the cold earth like a [ carpet ] " .
However , during the Second Sino - Japanese War , the Japanese were able to effectively use bayonet charges against poorly organized and lightly armed Chinese troops .
"
Banzai charges " became an accepted military tactic where Japanese forces were able to routinely rout larger Chinese forces .
In the early stages of the Pacific War , a sudden banzai charge might overwhelm small groups of enemy soldiers unprepared for such an attack .
But , by the end of the war , against well organized and heavily armed American forces , a banzai charge inflicted little damage while its participants suffered horrendous losses .
At best , they were conducted as a last resort by small groups of surviving soldiers when the main battle was already lost .
At worst , they threw away valuable resources in men and arms in suicidal attacks , which only hastened defeat .
Some Japanese commanders , such as General Tadamichi Kuribayashi , recognized the futility and waste of such attacks and expressly forbade their men from carrying them out .
Indeed , the Americans were surprised that the Japanese did not employ banzai charges at the Battle of Iwo Jima .
HUMAN WAVE ATTACK Section::::Human wave attack .
The term " human wave attack " was often misused to describe the Chinese short attack — a combination of infiltration and the shock tactics employed by the PLA during the Korean War .
A typical Chinese short attack was carried out at night by sending successive series small five - men fireteams to attack the weakest point of an enemy 's defenses .
The Chinese assault team would crawl undetected within grenade range , then launch surprise attacks with fixed bayonets against the defenders in order to breach the defenses by relying on maximum shock and confusion .
If the initial shock failed to breach the defenses , additional fireteams would press on behind them and attack the same point until a breach was created .
Once penetration was achieved , the bulk of the Chinese forces would move into the enemy rear and attack from behind .
Due to primitive communication systems and tight political controls within the Chinese army , short attacks were often repeated until either the defenses were penetrated or the attackers were completely annihilated .
This persistent attack pattern left a strong impression on UN forces that fought in Korea , giving birth to the description of " human wave " .
The term " human wave " was later used by journalists and military officials to convey the image of the American soldiers being assaulted by overwhelming numbers of Chinese on a broad front , which is inaccurate when compared with the normal Chinese practice of sending successive series of small teams against a weak points of the line .
It was in fact rare for the Chinese to actually use densely concentrated infantry formations to absorb enemy firepower .
LAST HURRAHS Section::::Last hurrahs .
During the Korean War , the French Battalion and Turkish Brigade were not averse to using bayonet charges against their enemy .
On February 7 , 1951 , United States Army officer Lewis L. Millett led soldiers of the US Army 's 27th Infantry Regiment in taking out a machine gun position with bayonets .
Historian S.L.A. Marshall described the attack as " the most complete bayonet charge by American troops since Cold Harbor " .
Out of about 50 enemy dead , roughly 20 were found to have been killed by bayonets , and the location subsequently became known as Bayonet Hill .
This was the last bayonet charge by the US Army .
For his leadership during the assault , Millett was awarded the Medal of Honor .
The medal was formally presented to him by President Harry S. Truman in July 1951 .
He was also awarded the Army 's second - highest decoration , the Distinguished Service Cross , for leading another bayonet charge in the same month .
In 1995 , during the Siege of Sarajevo , French Marine infantrymen from the 3rd RIMA carried out a bayonet charge against the Serbian forces at the Battle of Vrbanja bridge .
The British Army mounted bayonet charges during the Falklands War ( see Battle of Mount Tumbledown ) , the Second Gulf War , and the war in Afghanistan .
In 2004 in Iraq at the Battle of Danny Boy , the Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders bayonet - charged mortar positions filled with over 100 Mahdi Army members .
The ensuing hand - to - hand fighting resulted in an estimate of over 40 insurgents killed and 35 bodies collected ( many floated down the river ) and nine prisoners .
Sergeant Brian Wood , of the Princess of Wales 's Royal Regiment , was awarded the Military Cross for his part in the battle .
In 2009 , Lieutenant James Adamson , of the Royal Regiment of Scotland was awarded the Military Cross for a bayonet charge whilst on a tour of duty in Afghanistan :
after shooting one Taliban fighter dead Adamson had run out of ammunition when another enemy appeared .
He immediately charged the second Taliban fighter and bayoneted him .
In September 2012 , Lance Corporal Sean Jones of The Princess of Wales 's Regiment was awarded the Military Cross for his role in a bayonet charge which took place in October 2011 .
CONTEMPORARY BAYONETS Section::::Contemporary bayonets .
Today the bayonet is rarely used in one - to - one combat .
Despite its limitations , many modern assault rifles ( including bullpup designs ) retain a bayonet lug and the bayonet is still issued by many armies .
The bayonet is still used for controlling prisoners , or as a weapon of last resort .
In addition , some authorities have concluded that the bayonet serves as a useful training aid in building morale and increasing desired aggressiveness in troops .
Today 's bayonets are often multi - purpose knives such as the Soviet AKM bayonet which was also a ground breaking survival knife that can be used as a wire - cutter when combined with its scabbard .
Some bayonets can also be used as utility knives , bottle openers or throwing knives .
Also , issuing one modern multi - purpose bayonet / knife is obviously more cost effective than issuing separate specialty bayonets , field knives and combat knives .
RUSSIAN FEDERATION Section::::Russian Federation .
The original AK-47 has an adequate but unremarkable bayonet .
However , the AKM Type I bayonet ( introduced in 1959 ) was a revolutionary design .
It has a Bowie style ( clip - point ) blade with saw - teeth along the spine , and can be used as a multi - purpose survival knife and wire - cutter when combined with its steel scabbard .
This design was copied by other nations and formed the basis of the US M9 bayonet .
The AK-74 bayonet 6Kh5 ( introduced in 1983 ) represents a further refinement of the AKM bayonet .
" It introduced a radical blade cross - section , that has a flat milled on one side near the edge and a corresponding flat milled on the opposite side near the false edge .
" The blade has a new spear point and an improved one - piece moulded plastic grip , making it a more effective fighting knife .
It also has saw - teeth on the false edge and the usual hole for use as a wire - cutter .
The wire cutting versions of the AK bayonets each have an electrically insulated handle and an electrically insulated part of the scabbard , so it can be used to cut an electrified wire .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The American M16 rifle used the M7 bayonet which is based on earlier designs such as the M4 , M5 and M6 models , all of which are direct descendants of the M3 Fighting Knife and have a spear - point blade with a half sharpened secondary edge .
The newer M9 has a clip - point blade with saw - teeth along the spine , and can be used as a multi - purpose knife and wire - cutter when combined with its scabbard .
It can even be used by troops to cut their way free through the relatively thin metal skin of a crashed helicopter or airplane .
The current USMC OKC-3S bayonet bears a resemblance to the Marines ' iconic Ka - Bar fighting knife with serrations near the handle .
PEOPLE 'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA
Section::::People 's Republic of China .
The AK-47 assault rifle was copied by China as the Type 56 assault rifle and include an integral folding spike bayonet , similar to the SKS rifle .
Some Type 56s may also use the AKM Type II bayonet .
The latest Chinese rifle , the QBZ-95 , has the multi - purpose knife bayonet similar to the US M9 .
BELGIUM Section::::Belgium .
The FN FAL has two types of bayonet .
The first is a traditional spear point bayonet .
The second is the Type C socket bayonet introduced in the 1960s .
It has a hollow handle that fits over the muzzle and slots that lined up with those on the FALs 22 mm NATO - spec flash hider .
Its spear - type blade is offset to the side of the handle to allow the bullet to pass beside the blade .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The current British L3A1 socket bayonet is based on the FN FAL Type C socket bayonet with a clip - point blade .
It has a hollow handle that fits over the SA80 / L85 rifle 's muzzle and slots that lined up with those on the flash eliminator .
The blade is offset to the side of the handle to allow the bullet to pass beside the blade .
It can also be used as a multi - purpose knife and wire - cutter when combined with its scabbard .
The scabbard also has a sharpening stone and folding saw blade .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
The H&K G3 rifle uses two types of bayonets , both of which mount above the G3 's barrel .
The first is the standard G3 bayonet which has a blade similar to the American M7 .
The second is an EICKHORN KCB-70 type multi - purpose knife bayonet , featuring a clip - point with saw - back , a wire - cutter scabbard and a distinctive squared handgrip .
For the H&K G36 there was little use of modified AKM type II blade bayonets from stocks of the former Nationale Volksarmee ( National People 's Army ) of East Germany .
The original muzzle - ring was cut away and a new , large diameter muzzle ring welded in place .
The original leather belt hanger was replaced by a complex web and plastic belt hanger designed to fit the West German load bearing equipment .
AUSTRIA Section::::Austria .
The Steyr AUG uses two types of bayonet .
The first and most common is an Eickhorn KCB-70 type multi - purpose bayonet with an M16 bayonet type interface .
The second are the Glock Feldmesser 78 ( Field Knife 78 ) and the Feldmesser 81 ( Survival Knife 81 ) , which can also be used as a bayonet , by engaging a socket in the pommel ( covered by a plastic cap ) into a bayonet adapter that can be fitted to the AUG rifle .
These bayonets are noteworthy , as they were meant to be used primarily as field or survival knives and use as a bayonet was a secondary consideration .
They can also be used as throwing knives and have a built - in bottle opener in the crossguard .
FRANCE Section::::France .
The French use a more traditional spear point bayonet with the current FAMAS bayonet which is nearly identical to that of the M1949/56 bayonet .
The new French H&K 416F rifle uses the Eickhorn " SG 2000 WC - F " a " tantō"-style multi - purpose combat knife / bayonet ( similar to the KM2000 ) with a wire cutter .
It weighs , is long with half serrated blade for cutting through ropes .
The synthetic handle and sheath have electrical insulation that protects up to 10.000 volts .
The sheath also has a diamond blade sharpener .
PHOTO GALLERY
LINGUISTIC
IMPACT Section::::Linguistic impact .
The push - twist motion of fastening the older type of bayonet has given a name to : * The " bayonet mount " used for various types of quick fastenings , such as camera lenses .
* Several connectors and contacts including the bayonet - fitting light bulb that is common in the UK ( as opposed to the continental European screw - fitting type ) .
* The BNC ( " Bayonet Neill - Concelman " ) RF connector .
* One type of connector for foil and sabre weapons used in modern fencing competitions is referred to as a " bayonet " connector .
In chess , an aggressive variation of the King 's Indian Defence is known as the " Bayonet Attack " .
The bayonet has become a symbol of military power .
The term " at the point of a bayonet " refers to using military force or action to accomplish , maintain , or defend something ( cf .
Bayonet Constitution ) .
Undertaking a task " with fixed bayonets " has this connotation of no room for compromise and is a phrase used particularly in politics .
BADGES AND INSIGNIAS Section::::Badges and insignias .
The Australian Army ' Rising Sun ' badge features a semicircle of bayonets .
The Australian Army Infantry Combat Badge ( ICB ) takes the form of a vertically mounted Australian Army SLR ( 7.62 mm self - loading rifle FN FAL ) bayonet surrounded by an oval - shaped laurel wreath .
The US Army Combat Action Badge , awarded to personnel who have come under fire since 2001 and who are not eligible for the Combat Infantryman Badge ( due to the fact that only Infantry personnel may be awarded the Combat Infantryman Badge ) , has a bayonet as its central motif .
The shoulder sleeve insignia for the 10th Mountain Division in the US Army features crossed bayonets .
The US Army 's 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat Team 's shoulder patch features a bayonet wrapped in a wing , symbolizing their airborne status .
The brigade regularly deploys in task forces under the name " Bayonet " .
The insignia of the British Army 's School of Infantry is an SA80 bayonet against a red shield .
It is worn as a Tactical recognition flash ( TRF ) by instructors at the Infantry Training Centre Catterick , the Infantry Battle School at Brecon and the Support Weapons School in Warminster .
The vocation tab collar insignia for the Singapore Armed Forces Infantry Formation utilizes two crossed bayonets .
The bayonet is often used as a symbol of the Infantry in Singapore .
SEE ALSO * Bayonet Constitution
* Combatives * Jūkendō * Aiki - jō wooden staff used in the japanese martial art of Aikido , which usage resembles a bayonet more than a spear .
* Bayonet lug
*
Spike bayonet
* Use of bayonets for crowd control
* Wilfred Owen mention the bayonets in the poem Soldier 's dream
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
*
Hunting weapons , Howard L Blackmore , 2000 ,
Dover Publications EXTERNAL LINKS * World Bayonets * Infantry Tactics
During the Napoleonic Wars - Bayonet Fights , Bayonet Charges