STEFAN – BOLTZMANN CONSTANT
The Stefan –
Boltzmann constant ( also Stefan 's constant ) , a physical constant denoted by the Greek letter σ ( sigma ) , is the constant of proportionality in the Stefan –
Boltzmann law : " the total intensity radiated over all wavelengths increases as the temperature increases " , of a black body which is proportional to the fourth power of the thermodynamic temperature .
The theory of thermal radiation lays down the theory of quantum mechanics , by using physics to relate to molecular , atomic and sub - atomic levels .
Slovenian physicist Josef Stefan formulated the constant in 1879 , and it was later derived in 1884 by Austrian physicist Ludwig Boltzmann .
The equation can also be derived from Planck 's law , by integrating over all wavelengths at a given temperature , which will represent a small flat black body box .
" The amount of thermal radiation emitted increases rapidly and the principal frequency of the radiation becomes higher with increasing temperatures " .
The Stefan – Boltzmann constant can be used to measure the amount of heat that is emitted by a blackbody , which absorbs all of the radiant energy that hits it , and will emit all the radiant energy .
Furthermore , the Stefan – Boltzmann constant allows for temperature ( K ) to be converted to units for intensity ( W m ) , which is power per unit area .
The value of the Stefan – Boltzmann constant is given in SI units by
In cgs units
the Stefan – Boltzmann constant is :
In thermochemistry the Stefan – Boltzmann constant is often expressed in
cal cm day
K : In US customary units the Stefan –
Boltzmann constant is : The value of the Stefan – Boltzmann constant is derivable as well as experimentally determinable ; see Stefan – Boltzmann law for details .
It can be defined in terms of the Boltzmann constant as :
where : * k is the Boltzmann constant ; * h is the Planck constant ; * ħ is the reduced Planck constant ; * c is the speed of light in vacuum .
The CODATA recommended value is calculated from the measured value of the gas constant :
where :
* R is the Universal gas constant ;
* N is the Avogadro constant ; * R is the Rydberg constant ; * A(e ) is the " relative atomic mass " of the electron ; * M is the molar mass constant ( 1 g / mol by definition ) ;
* α is the fine structure constant .
Dimensional formula :
[ M T Θ ]
A related constant is the radiation constant ( or radiation density constant )
a which is given by : REFERENCES