PEA
The pea is most commonly the small spherical seed or the seed - pod of the pod fruit Pisum sativum .
Each pod contains several peas , which can be green or yellow .
Pea pods are botanically fruit , since they contain seeds and develop from the ovary of a ( pea ) flower .
The name is also used to describe other edible seeds from the Fabaceae such as the pigeon pea ( Cajanus cajan ) , the cowpea ( Vigna unguiculata ) , and the seeds from several species of Lathyrus .
P. sativum is an annual plant , with a life cycle of one year .
It is a cool - season crop grown in many parts of the world ; planting can take place from winter to early summer depending on location .
The average pea weighs between 0.1 and 0.36 gram .
The immature peas ( and in snow peas the tender pod as well ) are used as a vegetable , fresh , frozen or canned ; varieties of the species typically called field peas are grown to produce dry peas like the split pea shelled from the matured pod .
These are the basis of pease porridge and pea soup , staples of medieval cuisine ; in Europe , consuming fresh immature green peas was an innovation of Early Modern cuisine .
The wild pea is restricted to the Mediterranean basin and the Near East .
The earliest archaeological finds of peas date from the late neolithic era of current Greece , Syria , Turkey and Jordan .
In Egypt , early finds date from c. 4800–4400 BC in the Nile delta area , and from c. 3800–3600 BC in Upper Egypt .
The pea was also present in Georgia in the 5th millennium BC .
Farther east , the finds are younger .
Peas were present in Afghanistan c. 2000 BC , in Harappa , Pakistan , and in northwest India in 2250–1750 BC .
In the second half of the 2nd millennium BC , this pulse crop appears in the Ganges Basin and southern India .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
A pea is a most commonly green , occasionally golden yellow , or infrequently purple pod - shaped vegetable , widely grown as a cool season vegetable crop .
The seeds may be planted as soon as the soil temperature reaches , with the plants growing best at temperatures of .
They do not thrive in the summer heat of warmer temperate and lowland tropical climates , but do grow well in cooler , high altitude , tropical areas .
Many cultivars reach maturity about 60 days after planting .
Peas have both low - growing and vining cultivars .
The vining cultivars grow thin tendrils from leaves that coil around any available support and can climb to be 1–2 m high .
A traditional approach to supporting climbing peas is to thrust branches pruned from trees or other woody plants upright into the soil , providing a lattice for the peas to climb .
Branches used in this fashion are sometimes called pea brush .
Metal fences , twine , or netting supported by a frame are used for the same purpose .
In dense plantings , peas give each other some measure of mutual support .
Pea plants can self - pollinate .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In early times , peas were grown mostly for their dry seeds .
From plants growing wild in the Mediterranean basin , constant selection since the Neolithic dawn of agriculture improved their yield .
In the early 3rd century BC Theophrastus mentions peas among the pulses that are sown late in the winter because of their tenderness .
In the first century AD , Columella mentions them in De re rustica , when Roman legionaries still gathered wild peas from the sandy soils of Numidia and Judea to supplement their rations .
In the Middle Ages , field peas are constantly mentioned , as they were the staple that kept famine at bay , as Charles the Good , count of Flanders , noted explicitly in 1124 .
Green " garden " peas , eaten immature and fresh , were an innovative luxury of Early Modern Europe .
In England , the distinction between field peas and garden peas dates from the early 17th century :
John Gerard and John Parkinson both mention garden peas .
Sugar peas , which the French soon called mange - tout , for they were consumed pods and all , were introduced to France from the market gardens of Holland in the time of Henri IV , through the French ambassador .
Green peas were introduced from Genoa to the court of Louis XIV of France in January 1660 , with some staged fanfare ; a hamper of them were presented before the King , and then were shelled by the Sovoyan comte de Soissons , who had married a niece of Cardinal Mazarin ; little dishes of peas were then presented to the King , the Queen , Cardinal Mazarin and Monsieur , the king 's brother .
Immediately established and grown for earliness warmed with manure and protected under glass , they were still a luxurious delicacy in 1696 , when Mme de Maintenon and Mme de Sevigné each reported that they were " a fashion , a fury . "
Modern split peas , with their indigestible skins rubbed off , are a development of the later 19th century .
MODERN CULINARY USE Section::::Modern culinary use .
In modern times peas are usually boiled or steamed , which breaks down the cell walls and makes the taste sweeter and the nutrients more bioavailable .
Along with broad beans and lentils , these formed an important part of the diet of most people in the Middle East , North Africa and Europe during the Middle Ages .
By the 17th and 18th centuries , it had become popular to eat peas " green " , that is , while they are immature and right after they are picked .
New cultivars of peas were developed by the English during this time , which became known as " garden " or " English " peas .
The popularity of green peas spread to North America .
Thomas Jefferson grew more than 30 cultivars of peas on his estate .
With the invention of canning and freezing of foods , green peas became available year - round , and not just in the spring as before .
Fresh peas are often eaten boiled and flavored with butter and/or spearmint as a side dish vegetable .
Salt and pepper are also commonly added to peas when served .
Fresh peas are also used in pot pies , salads and casseroles .
Pod peas ( particularly sweet cultivars called mange tout and " sugar peas " , or the flatter " snow peas , " called hé lán dòu , 荷 兰 豆 in Chinese ) are used in stir - fried dishes , particularly those in American Chinese cuisine .
Pea pods do not keep well once picked , and if not used quickly , are best preserved by drying , canning or freezing within a few hours of harvest .
In India , fresh peas are used in various dishes such as aloo matar ( curried potatoes with peas ) or matar paneer ( paneer cheese with peas ) , though they can be substituted with frozen peas as well .
Peas are also eaten raw , as they are sweet when fresh off the bush .
Split peas are also used to make dal , particularly in Guyana , and Trinidad , where there is a significant population of Indians .
Dried peas are often made into a soup or simply eaten on their own .
In Japan , China , Taiwan and some Southeast Asian countries , including Thailand , the Philippines and Malaysia , peas are roasted and salted , and eaten as snacks .
In the Philippines , peas , while still in their pods , are a common ingredient in viands and pansit .
In the UK , dried yellow or green split peas are used to make pease pudding ( or " pease porridge " ) , a traditional dish .
In North America , a similarly traditional dish is split pea soup .
Pea soup is eaten in many other parts of the world , including northern Europe , parts of middle Europe , Russia , Iran , Iraq and India .
In Sweden it is called ärtsoppa , and is eaten as a traditional Swedish food which predates the Viking age .
This food was made from a fast - growing pea that would mature in a short growing season .
Ärtsoppa was especially popular among the poor , who traditionally only had one pot and everything was cooked together for a dinner using a tripod to hold the pot over the fire .
In Chinese cuisine , the tender new growth [ leaves and stem ] dou miao ( 豆苗 ; dòu miáo ) are commonly used in stir - fries .
Much like picking the leaves for tea , the farmers pick the tips off of the pea plant .
In Greece , Tunisia , Turkey , Cyprus , and other parts of the Mediterranean , peas are made into a stew with lamb and potatoes .
In Hungary and Serbia , pea soup is often served with dumplings and spiced with hot paprika .
In the United Kingdom , dried , rehydrated and mashed marrowfat peas , or cooked green split peas , known as mushy peas , are popular , originally in the north of England , but now ubiquitously , and especially as an accompaniment to fish and chips or meat pies , particularly in fish and chip shops .
Sodium bicarbonate is sometimes added to soften the peas .
In 2005 , a poll of 2,000 people revealed the pea to be Britain 's seventh favourite culinary vegetable .
Processed peas are mature peas which have been dried , soaked and then heat treated ( processed ) to prevent spoilage — in the same manner as pasteurizing .
Cooked peas are sometimes sold dried and coated with wasabi , salt , or other spices .
In North America pea milk is produced and sold as an alternative to cow milk for a variety of reasons .
MANUFACTURING FROZEN PEAS
Section::::Manufacturing frozen peas .
In order to freeze and preserve peas , they must first be grown , picked , and shelled .
Usually , the more tender the peas are , the more likely that they will be used in the final product .
The peas must be put through the process of freezing shortly after being picked so that they do not spoil too soon .
Once the peas have been selected , they are placed in ice water and allowed to cool .
After , they are sprayed with water to remove any residual dirt or dust that may remain on them .
The next step is blanching .
The peas are boiled for a few minutes to remove any enzymes that may shorten their shelf life .
They are then cooled and removed from the water .
The final step is the actual freezing to produce the final product .
This step may vary considerably ; some companies freeze their peas by air blast freezing , where the vegetables are put through a tunnel at high speeds and frozen by cold air .
Finally , the peas are packaged and shipped out for retail .
GRADING Section::::Grading .
Pea grading involves sorting peas by size , in which the smallest peas are graded as the highest quality for their tenderness .
Brines may be used , in which peas are floated , from which their density can be determined .
NUTRITIONAL VALUE
Section::::Nutritional value .
Peas are starchy , but high in fiber , protein , vitamin A , vitamin B6 , vitamin C , vitamin K , phosphorus , magnesium , copper , iron , zinc and lutein .
Dry weight is about one - quarter protein and one - quarter sugar .
Pea seed peptide fractions have less ability to scavenge free radicals than glutathione , but greater ability to chelate metals and inhibit linoleic acid oxidation .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
There are many varieties ( cultivars ) of garden peas .
Some of the most common varieties are listed here .
PMR indicates some degree of powdery mildew resistance ; afila types , also called semi - leafless , have clusters of tendrils instead of leaves .
Unless otherwise noted these are so called dwarf varieties which grow to an average height of about 1 m .
Giving the vines support is recommended , but not required .
Extra dwarf are suitable for container growing , reaching only about 25 cm .
Tall varieties grow to about 2 m with support required .
* Alaska , 55 days ( smooth seeded )
* Tom Thumb / Half Pint , 55 days ( heirloom , extra dwarf )
* Thomas Laxton ( heirloom ) /
Laxton 's Progress / Progress # 9 , 60–65 days * Mr. Big , 60 days , 2000 AAS winner * Little Marvel , 63 days , 1934 AAS winner
* Early Perfection ,
65 days * Kelvedon Wonder , 65 days , 1997 RHS AGM winner
* Sabre , 65 days , PMR * Homesteader / Lincoln , 67 days ( heirloom , known as Greenfeast in Australia and New Zealand )
* Miragreen , 68 days ( tall climber )
* Serge , 68 days , PMR , afila
* Wando , 68 days * Green Arrow , 70 days * Recruit , 70 days , PMR , afila
* Tall Telephone / Alderman , 75 days ( heirloom , tall climber )
Other variations of P. sativum include : *
Pisum sativum var .
saccharatum is commonly known as the snow pea .
* Pisum sativum var .
macrocarpon is known as the sugar snap pea or snap pea .
Both of these are eaten whole before the pod reaches maturity and are hence also known as mange - tout , French for " eat all " .
The snow pea pod is eaten flat , while in sugar / snap peas , the pod becomes cylindrical , but is eaten while still crisp , before the seeds inside develop .
PESTS AND DISEASES Section::::Pests and diseases .
A variety of diseases affect peas through a number of pathogens , including insects , viruses , bacteria and fungi .
In particular , virus disease of peas has worldwide economic importance .
Additionally , insects such as the pea leaf weevil ( Sitona lineatus ) can damage peas and other pod fruits .
The pea leaf weevil is native to Europe , but has spread to other places such as Alberta , Canada .
They are about — long and are distinguishable by three light - coloured stripes running length - wise down the thorax .
The weevil larvae feed on the root nodules of pea plants , which are essential to the plants ' supply of nitrogen , and thus diminish leaf and stem growth .
Adult weevils feed on the leaves and create a notched , " c - shaped " appearance on the outside of the leaves .
PEAS IN SCIENCE Section::::Peas in science .
In the mid-19th century , Austrian monk Gregor Mendel 's observations of pea pods led to the principles of Mendelian genetics , the foundation of modern genetics .
He ended up growing and examining about 28,000 pea plants in the course of his experiments .
Mendel chose peas for his experiments because he could grow them easily , develop pure - bred strains , protect them from cross - pollination , and control their pollination .
Mendel cross - bred tall and dwarf pea plants , green and yellow peas , purple and white flowers , wrinkled and smooth peas , and a few other traits .
He then observed the resulting offspring .
In each of these cases , one trait is dominant and all the offspring , or Filial-1 ( abbreviated F ) generation , showed the dominant trait .
Then he crossed members of the F generation together and observed their offspring , the Filial-2 ( abbreviated F ) generation .
The F plants had the dominant trait in approximately a 3:1 ratio .
Mendel reasoned that each parent had a ' vote ' in the appearance of the offspring , and the non - dominant , or recessive , trait appeared only when it was inherited from both parents .
He did further experiments that showed each trait is separately inherited .
Unwittingly , Mendel had solved a major problem with Charles Darwin 's theory of evolution : how new traits were preserved and not blended back into the population , a question Darwin himself did not answer .
Mendel 's work was published in an obscure Austrian journal and was not rediscovered until about 1900 .
Recently , extracts from garden pea have shown inhibitory activity on porcine pancreatic lipase in vitro .
PEAS IN MEDICINE Section::::Peas in medicine .
Some people experience allergic reactions to peas , as well as lentils , with vicilin or convicilin as the usual allergens .
Favism , or Fava - bean - ism , is a genetic deficiency of the enzyme glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase that affects Jews , other Middle Eastern Semitic peoples and other descendants of the Mediterranean coastal regions .
In this condition , the toxic reaction to eating most , if not all , beans is hemolytic anemia , and in severe cases the released circulating free hemoglobin causes acute kidney injury .
NITROGEN - FIXING ABILITY Section::::Nitrogen - fixing ability .
Peas , like many legumes , contain symbiotic bacteria called Rhizobia within root nodules of their root systems .
These bacteria have the special ability of fixing nitrogen from atmospheric , molecular nitrogen ( N ) into ammonia ( NH ) .
The chemical reaction is : Ammonia is then converted to another form , ammonium ( NH ) , usable by ( some ) plants by the following reaction :
This arrangement means that the root nodules are sources of nitrogen for peas and many legumes , making them relatively rich in plant proteins .
All proteins contain nitrogenous amino acids .
Nitrogen is therefore a necessary ingredient in the production of proteins .
Hence , peas and many legumes are among the best sources of plant protein .
When a pea plant dies in the field , for example following the harvest , all of its remaining nitrogen , incorporated into amino acids inside the remaining plant parts , is released back into the soil .
In the soil , the amino acids are converted to nitrate ( NO ) , making the nitrogen available to other plants , thereby serving as fertilizer for future crops .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term pea originates from the Latin word pisum , which is the latinisation of the Greek πίσον ( pison ) , neuter of πίσος ( pisos ) " pea " .
It was adopted into English as the noun pease ( plural peasen ) , as in pease pudding .
However , by analogy with other plurals ending in -s , speakers began construing pease as a plural and constructing the singular form by dropping the -s , giving the term pea .
This process is known as back - formation .
The name marrowfat pea for mature dried peas is recorded by the Oxford English Dictionary as early as 1733 .
The fact that an export cultivar popular in Japan is called Maro has led some people to assume mistakenly that the English name marrowfat is derived from Japanese .
SEE ALSO
* Black - eyed pea * Black pea
* Chickpea
* Dixie lee pea *
Sweet pea
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY * European Association for Grain Legume Research ( AEP ) .
Pea .
https://web.archive.org/web/20061017214408/http://www.grainlegumes.com/default.asp?id_biblio=52 .
* Hernández Bermejo , J. E. & León , J. , ( 1992 ) .
Neglected crops : 1492 from a different perspective , Food and Agricultural Organization of the United Nations ( FAO ) Contents
* Muehlbauer , F. J. and Tullu , A. , ( 1997 ) .
Pisum sativum L. Purdue University .
Pea * Oelke , E. A. , Oplinger E. S. , et al .
( 1991 ) .
Dry Field Pea .
University of Wisconsin .
Dry Field Pea EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Sorting Pisum names * USDA plant profile * https://web.archive.org/web/20150303184216/http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/search/