CYCLIC GROUP
In algebra , a cyclic group or monogenous group is a group that is generated by a single element .
That is , it consists of a set of elements with a single invertible associative operation , and it contains an element g such that every other element of the group may be obtained by repeatedly applying the group operation or its inverse to g.
Each element can be written as a power of g in multiplicative notation , or as a multiple of g in additive notation .
This element g is called a generator of the group .
Every infinite cyclic group is isomorphic to the additive group of Z , the integers .
Every finite cyclic group of order n is isomorphic to the additive group of Z / nZ , the integers modulo
n. Every cyclic group is an abelian group ( meaning that its group operation is commutative ) , and every finitely generated abelian group is a direct product of cyclic groups .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
+ Infinite cyclic groups ! p1 , ( * ∞∞ ) !
p11 g , ( 22∞ ) colspan=2Two frieze groups are isomorphic to Z. With one generator , p1 has translations and p11 g has glide reflections .
A group G is called cyclic if there exists an element g in G such that Since any group generated by an element in a group is a subgroup of that group , showing that the only subgroup of a group G that contains g is G itself suffices to show that G is cyclic .
For example , if G = { g , g , g , g , g , g } is a group of order 6 , then g = g , and G is cyclic .
In fact , G is essentially the same as ( that is , isomorphic to )
the set with addition modulo 6 .
For example , corresponds to , and corresponds to , and so on .
One can use the isomorphism χ defined by .
The name " cyclic " may be misleading : it is possible to generate infinitely many elements and not form any literal cycles ; that is , every g is distinct .
( It can be thought of as having one infinitely long cycle . )
A group generated in this way ( for example , the first frieze group , p1 ) is called an infinite cyclic group , and is isomorphic to the additive group of the integers , .
The collection of French mathematicians publishing under the name Nicolas Bourbaki introduced the term monogenous group for a group admitting a system of generators consisting of a single element and restricted the term " cyclic group " to mean only finite monogenous groups , avoiding the term " infinite cyclic group " .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
+ Example cyclic groups in n - dimensional symmetry !
C !
C !
C !
C !
C INTEGER AND MODULAR ADDITION Section::::Integer and modular addition .
The set of integers , with the operation of addition , forms a group .
It is an infinite cyclic group , because all integers can be written as a finite sum or difference of copies of the number 1 .
In this group , 1 and −1 are the only generators .
Every infinite cyclic group is isomorphic to this group .
For every positive integer n , the set of integers modulo n , again with the operation of addition , forms a finite cyclic group , the group Z/(n ) .
An element g is a generator of this group if g is relatively prime to n ( because these elements can generate all other elements of the group through integer multiplication ) .
Thus , the number of different generators is φ(n ) , where φ is the Euler totient function , the function that counts the number of numbers modulo n that are relatively prime to n.
Every finite cyclic group is isomorphic to a group Z/(n ) , where n is the order of the group .
The integer and modular addition operations , used to define the cyclic groups , are both the addition operations of commutative rings , also denoted Z and Z/(n ) .
If p is a prime , then Z/(p ) is a finite field , and is usually instead written as F or GF(p ) .
Every field with p elements is isomorphic to this one .
MODULAR MULTIPLICATION
Section::::Modular multiplication .
For every positive integer n , the subset of the integers modulo n that are relatively prime to n , with the operation of multiplication , forms a finite group that for many values of n is again cyclic .
It is the group under multiplication modulo n , and it is cyclic whenever n is 1 , 2 , 4 , a power of an odd prime , or twice a power of an odd prime .
Its elements are the units of the ring Z / nZ ; there are φ(n ) of them , where again φ is the totient function .
This group is written as ( Z / nZ ) .
For example , ( Z/6Z ) has as its elements { 1,5 } ; 6 is twice a prime , so this is a cyclic group .
In contrast , ( Z/8Z ) ( with elements { 1,3,5,7 } ) is the Klein group and is not cyclic .
When ( Z / nZ ) is cyclic , every generator ( through exponentiation ) of ( Z / nZ ) is called a primitive root modulo n.
The cyclic group ( Z / pZ ) for a prime number p , is also written ( Z / pZ ) because it consists of the non - zero elements of the finite field of order
p. More generally , every finite subgroup of the multiplicative group of any field is cyclic .
ROTATIONAL SYMMETRIES Section::::Rotational symmetries .
The set of rotational symmetries of a polygon forms a finite cyclic group .
If there are n different ways of mapping the polygon to itself by a rotation ( including the null rotation ) then this group is isomorphic to Z.
In three or higher dimensions there can exist other finite symmetry groups that are cyclic , but that do not form the set of rotations around a single axis .
The group S of all rotations of a circle ( the circle group ) is not cyclic .
Unlike the infinite cyclic group , it is not even countable .
There also exist other infinite rotation groups ( such as the set of rotations by rational angles ) that are countable but not cyclic .
GALOIS THEORY Section::::Galois theory .
An nth root of unity may be thought of as a complex number whose nth power is 1 .
That is , it is a root of the polynomial x − 1 .
The nth roots of unity form a cyclic group of order n under multiplication .
For example , the polynomial factors as , where ; the set { s , s , s } forms a cyclic group under multiplication .
The Galois group of the field extension of the rational numbers generated by the nth roots of unity forms a different group .
It is isomorphic to the multiplicative group modulo n , which has order φ(n ) and is cyclic for some but not all n.
A field extension is called a cyclic extension if its Galois group is a cyclic group .
The Galois group of every finite extension of a finite field is finite and cyclic , with an iterate of the Frobenius endomorphism as its generator .
Conversely , given a finite field F and a finite cyclic group G , there is a finite field extension of F whose Galois group is G. SUBGROUPS AND NOTATION Section::::Subgroups and notation .
All subgroups and quotient groups of cyclic groups are cyclic .
Specifically , all subgroups of Z are of the form mZ , with m an integer ≥0 .
All of these subgroups are distinct from each other , and apart from the trivial group ( for ) all are isomorphic to Z.
The lattice of subgroups of Z is isomorphic to the dual of the lattice of natural numbers ordered by divisibility .
In particular , because the prime numbers are the numbers with no nontrivial divisors , a cyclic group is simple if and only if its order ( the number of its elements ) is prime .
Since the cyclic groups are abelian , they are often written additively and denoted Z with the identity written 0 .
However , this notation can be problematic for number theorists because it conflicts with the usual notation for p - adic number rings or localization at a prime ideal .
The quotient notations Z / nZ , Z/(n ) , and Z / n are often - used alternatives .
One may instead write the group multiplicatively , and denote it by C , where n is the order for finite groups and by C for the infinite cyclic group .
For example , in C , whereas in Z/5Z. All quotient groups of Z are finite , with the exception For every positive divisor d of n , the quotient group Z / nZ has precisely one subgroup of order d , the one generated by the residue class of n / d .
There are no other subgroups .
Using the quotient group formalism , Z / nZ is a standard notation for the additive cyclic group with n elements .
In ring terminology , the subgroup nZ is also the ideal ( n ) , so the quotient can also be written Z/(n ) without abuse of notation .
These alternatives do not conflict with the notation for the p - adic integers .
The notation Z / n is common in informal calculations .
ADDITIONAL PROPERTIES Section::::Additional properties .
Every cyclic group is abelian .
That is , its group operation is commutative : ( for all g and h in G ) .
This is clear for the groups of integer and modular addition since , and it follows for all cyclic groups since they are all isomorphic to a group generated by an addition operation .
For a finite cyclic group of order n , and every element e of the group , e is the identity element of the group .
This again follows by using the isomorphism to modular addition , since for every integer k.
If d is a divisor of n , then the number of elements in Z / n which have order d is φ(d ) , and the number of elements whose order divides d is exactly d.
If G is a finite group in which , for each , G contains at most n elements of order dividing n , then G must be cyclic .
The order of an element m of the group is n
/ gcd(n , m ) .
The direct product of two cyclic groups Z / n and Z / m is cyclic if and only if n and m are coprime .
Thus e.g. Z/12 is the direct product of Z/3 and Z/4 , but not the direct product of Z/6 and Z/2 .
If p is a prime number , then the only group ( up to isomorphism ) with p elements is Z / p .
it is called a primary cyclic group .
The fundamental theorem of abelian groups states that every finitely generated abelian group is the direct product of finitely many finite primary cyclic and infinite cyclic groups .
A number n is called a cyclic number if it has the property that Z / n is the only group of order n , which is true exactly when .
The cyclic numbers include all prime numbers , but also include some composite numbers such as 15 .
However , except 2 , all cyclic numbers are odd .
The cyclic numbers are :
In fact , a number n is a cyclic number if and only if , where φ is the Euler 's totient function .
The definition immediately implies that cyclic groups have group presentation and for finite n. ASSOCIATED OBJECTS REPRESENTATIONS
Section::::Associated objects .
Section::::Representations .
The representation theory of the cyclic group is a critical base case for the representation theory of more general finite groups .
In the complex case , a representation of a cyclic group decomposes into a direct sum of linear characters , making the connection between character theory and representation theory transparent .
In the positive characteristic case , the indecomposable representations of the cyclic group form a model and inductive basis for the representation theory of groups with cyclic Sylow subgroups and more generally the representation theory of blocks of cyclic defect .
CYCLE GRAPH Section::::Cycle graph .
A cycle graph illustrates the various cycles of a group and is particularly useful in visualizing the structure of small finite groups .
A cycle graph for a cyclic group is simply a circular graph , where the group order is equal to the number of nodes .
A single generator defines the group as a directional path on the graph , and the inverse generator defines a backwards path .
Trivial paths ( identity ) can be drawn as a loop but are usually suppressed .
Z is sometimes drawn with two curved edges as a multigraph .
Cyclic groups Z , order n , is a single cycle graphed simply as an n - sided polygon with the elements at the vertices .
When with a and b being relatively prime ( i.e. , ) , a cyclic group Z can be decomposed into a direct product .
+ Cycle graphs up to order
24 CAYLEY GRAPH Section::::Cayley graph .
A Cayley graph is a graph defined from a pair ( G , S ) where G is a group and S is a set of generators for the group ; it has a vertex for each group element , and an edge for each product of an element with a generator .
In the case of a finite cyclic group , with its single generator , the Cayley graph is a cycle graph , and for an infinite cyclic group with its generator the Cayley graph is a doubly infinite path graph .
However , Cayley graphs can be defined from other sets of generators as well .
The Cayley graphs of cyclic groups with arbitrary generator sets are called circulant graphs .
These graphs may be represented geometrically as a set of equally spaced points on a circle or on a line , with each point connected to neighbors with the same set of distances as each other point .
They are exactly the vertex - transitive graphs whose symmetry group includes a transitive cyclic group .
ENDOMORPHISMS Section::::Endomorphisms .
The endomorphism ring of the abelian group Z / nZ is isomorphic to Z / nZ itself as a ring .
Under this isomorphism , the number r corresponds to the endomorphism of Z / nZ that maps each element to the sum of r copies of it .
This is a bijection if and only if r is coprime with n , so the automorphism group of Z / nZ is isomorphic to the unit group ( Z / nZ ) .
Similarly , the endomorphism ring of the additive group of Z is isomorphic to the ring Z. Its automorphism group is isomorphic to the group of units of the ring Z , i.e. to .
TENSOR PRODUCT AND HOM OF CYCLIC GROUPS Section::::Tensor product and Hom of cyclic groups .
The tensor product formula_1 and the group of homomorphisms formula_2 can be shown to both be isomorphic to formula_3 .
For the tensor product , this is a consequence of the general fact
formula_4 .
For the Hom group , recall that it is isomorphic to the subgroup of formula_5 consisting of the elements of order dividing m. That subgroup is cyclic of order , which completes the proof .
RELATED CLASSES OF GROUPS Section::::Related classes of groups .
Several other classes of groups have been defined by their relation to the cyclic groups :
VIRTUALLY CYCLIC GROUPS
Section::::Virtually cyclic groups .
A group is called virtually cyclic if it contains a cyclic subgroup of finite index ( the number of cosets that the subgroup has ) .
In other words , any element in a virtually cyclic group can be arrived at by applying a member of the cyclic subgroup to a member in a certain finite set .
Every cyclic group is virtually cyclic , as is every finite group .
An infinite group is virtually cyclic if and only if it is finitely generated and has exactly two ends ; an example of such a group is the product of Z/(n ) and Z , in which the factor Z has finite index n.
Every abelian subgroup of a Gromov hyperbolic group is virtually cyclic .
LOCALLY CYCLIC GROUPS Section::::Locally cyclic groups .
A locally cyclic group is a group in which each finitely generated subgroup is cyclic .
An example is the additive group of the rational numbers : every finite set of rational numbers is a set of integer multiples of a single unit fraction , the inverse of their lowest common denominator , and generates as a subgroup a cyclic group of integer multiples of this unit fraction .
A group is locally cyclic if and only if its lattice of subgroups is a distributive lattice .
CYCLICALLY ORDERED GROUPS Section::::Cyclically ordered groups .
A cyclically ordered group is a group together with a cyclic order preserved by the group structure .
Every cyclic group can be given a structure as a cyclically ordered group , consistent with the ordering of the integers ( or the integers modulo the order of the group ) .
Every finite subgroup of a cyclically ordered group is cyclic .
METACYCLIC AND POLYCYCLIC GROUPS
Section::::Metacyclic and polycyclic groups .
A metacyclic group is a group containing a cyclic normal subgroup whose quotient is also cyclic .
These groups include the cyclic groups , the dicyclic groups , and the direct products of two cyclic groups .
The polycyclic groups generalize metacyclic groups by allowing more than one level of group extension .
A group is polycyclic if it has a finite descending sequence of subgroups , each of which is normal in the previous subgroup with a cyclic quotient , ending in the trivial group .
Every finitely generated abelian group or nilpotent group is polycyclic .
SEE ALSO * Cycle graph ( group )
* Cyclic module
FOOTNOTES
NOTES CITATIONS
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Milne , Group theory , http://www.jmilne.org/math/CourseNotes/gt.html
* An introduction to cyclic groups * Cyclic groups of small order on GroupNames