VICE PRESIDENT
A vice president ( in British English : vice - president for governments and director for businesses ) is an officer in government or business who is below a president ( managing director ) in rank .
It can also refer to executive vice presidents , signifying that the vice president is on the executive branch of the government , university or company .
The name comes from the Latin vice meaning " in place of " .
In some countries , the vice president is called the deputy president .
In everyday speech , the abbreviation VP can be used .
IN
GOVERNMENT Section::::In government .
In government , a vice president is a person whose primary responsibility is to act in place of the president on the event of the president 's death , resignation or incapacity .
Vice presidents are either elected jointly with the president as their running mate , or more rarely , appointed independently after the president 's election .
Most governments with vice presidents have one person in this role at any time , although in some countries there are two or more vice presidents – an extreme case being Iran 's 12 vice presidents .
If the president is not present , dies , resigns , or is otherwise unable to fulfill their duties , the vice president will generally serve as president .
In many presidential systems , the vice president does not wield much day - to - day political power , but is still considered an important member of the cabinet .
Several vice presidents in the Americas hold the position of President of the Senate ; this is the case , for example , in Argentina , the United States , and Uruguay .
The vice president sometimes assumes some of the ceremonial duties of the president , such as attending functions and events that the actual president may be too busy to attend ; the Vice President of the United States , for example , often attends funerals of world leaders on behalf of the president .
In parliamentary or semi - presidential systems , a Vice President may coexist with a Prime Minister , as is the case in India and Namibia , but the presence of both offices concurrently is rare .
IN BUSINESS Section::::In business .
In business , " vice president " refers to hierarchical position that ranges from extremely senior positions directly reporting to C - level executives ( in non - financial companies ) , to junior non - management positions with 4 - 10 years of experience ( in financial companies ) .
In non - financial businesses , vice presidents often report directly to the president or CEO of the company and is a member of the executive management team .
Some corporations that use this term may have individuals with the title of vice president responsible for specific business divisions ( e.g. , Vice President for Legal , Vice President for Sales and Marketing , Vice President for Finance , or Vice President for Human Resources ) .
When there are several vice presidents in a company , these individuals are sometimes differentiated with titles denoting higher positions such as executive vice president and/or senior vice president with the remaining management team holding the title vice president .
The title of assistant vice president or associate vice president is used in large organizations below vice president and there can be a very convoluted list of other types of VPs as seen in the next section .
As many of these VPs have minimal employees reporting to them , their necessity has been questioned , with for example Inc Magazine arguing to flatten the corporate hierarchy .
Similarly , as universities have adopted a corporate structure there is concern over administrative bloat and over paying VPs .
Some commentators have even claimed the proliferation of VPs and other administrators is destroying universities .
" Corporate vice president " is an older term that usually denotes a vice president that is named as a corporate officer by the board of directors .
Not all vice presidents in a company in the modern business environment are named as an official corporate officer .
HIERARCHY OF VICE PRESIDENTS Section::::Hierarchy of vice presidents .
Depending on the specific organization , the following may be an example of the hierarchy of the vice presidents :
* Senior Executive Vice President ( Sr . EVP , SEVP )
* First Executive Vice President ( 1EVP or FEVP )
* Executive Vice President ( EVP ) * Senior Vice President ( SVP ) * Vice President ( VP ) * Additional Vice President ( AVP ) * Assistant Vice President ( Asst .
VP )
* Joint Vice President ( Jt .
VP )
* Associate Vice President * Junior Vice President ( Jr. VP ) !
Rank !
U.S. Executive Officer !
U.K. Executive Officer !
Investment Bank Executive Officer !
Asia Pacific Executive Officer
This comparison is not strictly correct , as " director " is a legal term , meaning someone registered with the relevant country 's company registrar ( or simply named in the legal documents , for countries not having company registration ) as having managerial control of the company , and having legal responsibility for its operation , whilst a vice president does not .
In either case the responsibilities may be overall to the company , a region ( US , EMEA , CEE ... ) , business unit or function such as Sales , Marketing , IT etc .
USE IN FINANCIAL SERVICES COMPANIES Section::::Use in financial services companies .
In brokerage firms , investment banks and other financial companies , " vice president " is a seniority rank rather than denoting an actual managerial position within the company .
It is a relatively junior position , usually does not denote managerial responsibilities and companies have a large number of vice presidents , perhaps as an inexpensive way for a company to recognize employees , or perhaps because of delayering when an employee ca n't be moved higher in the organization but still deserves recognition .
In most cases , the title merely implies that someone is in a medium - seniority individual contributor role .
USAGE IN OTHER ORGANIZATIONS Section::::Usage in other organizations .
In other organizations ( e.g. , trade unions , societies , clubs ) one or multiple vice presidents are elected by the members of the organization .
When multiple vice presidents are elected , the positions are usually numbered to prevent confusion as to who may preside or succeed to the office of president upon vacancy of that office ( for example :
1st vice president , 2nd vice president , and so on ) .
In some cases vice presidents are given titles due to their specific responsibilities , for example : Vice President of Operations , Finance , etc .
In some associations the first vice president can be interchangeable with executive vice president and the remaining vice presidents are ranked in order of their seniority .
The primary responsibility of the vice president of a club or organization is to be prepared to assume the powers and duties of the office of the president in the case of a vacancy in that office .
If the office of President becomes vacant , the vice president ( or in clubs with multiple vice presidents , the VP that occupies the highest - ranking office ) , will assume the office of president , with the lower vice presidents to fill in the remaining vice presidencies , leaving the lowest vice presidency to be filled by either election or appointment .
If the bylaws of a club specifically provide of the Officer title of President - Elect , that officer would assume the powers and duties of the president upon vacancy of that office only if specified in the bylaws .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS * American Institute of Parliamentarians -- www.aipparl.org