RHUBARB Rhubarb ( Rheum rhabarbarum or Rheum × hybridum
according to the British Royal Horticultural Society ) is a species of plant in the family Polygonaceae .
It is a herbaceous perennial growing from short , thick rhizomes .
The fleshy , edible stalks ( petioles ) , are used in cooking , but the large , triangular leaves contain high levels of oxalic acid , making them inedible .
The small flowers are grouped in large compound leafy greenish - white to rose - red inflorescences .
Although rhubarb is a vegetable , it is often put to the same culinary uses as fruits .
The leaf stalks can be used raw , when they have a crisp texture ( similar to celery , although it is in a different family ) , but are most commonly cooked with sugar and used in pies , crumbles and other desserts .
They have a strong , tart taste .
Several varieties have been domesticated for human consumption , most of which are recognised as Rheum
x hybridum by the Royal Horticultural Society .
Rhubarb contains anthraquinones including rhein , and emodin and their glycosides ( e.g. glucorhein ) , which impart cathartic and laxative properties .
It is hence useful as a cathartic in case of constipation .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Rhubarb is grown widely , and with greenhouse production it is available throughout much of the year .
Rhubarb grown in hothouses ( heated greenhouses ) is called " hothouse rhubarb " , and is typically made available at consumer markets in early spring , before outdoor cultivated rhubarb is available .
Hothouse rhubarb is usually brighter red , tenderer and sweeter - tasting than outdoor rhubarb .
In temperate climates , rhubarb is one of the first food plants harvested , usually in mid-
to late spring ( April or May in the Northern Hemisphere , October or November in the Southern Hemisphere ) , and the season for field - grown plants lasts until the end of summer .
In the northwestern US states of Oregon and Washington , there are typically two harvests , from late April to May and from late June into July ; half of all US production is in Pierce County , Washington .
Rhubarb is ready to consume as soon as harvested , and freshly cut stalks are firm and glossy .
In the United Kingdom , the first rhubarb of the year is harvested by candlelight in forcing sheds where all other light is excluded , a practice that produces a sweeter , more tender stalk .
These sheds are dotted around the " Rhubarb Triangle " between Wakefield , Leeds , and Morley .
Rhubarb damaged by severe cold should not be eaten , as it may be high in oxalic acid , which migrates from the leaves and can cause illness .
The colour of rhubarb stalks can vary from the commonly associated crimson red , through speckled light pink , to simply light green .
Rhubarb stalks are poetically described as " crimson stalks " .
The colour results from the presence of anthocyanins , and varies according to both rhubarb variety and production technique .
The colour is not related to its suitability for cooking : HISTORICAL CULTIVATION Section::::Historical cultivation .
The Chinese call rhubarb " the great yellow " ( dà huáng ) , and have used rhubarb root for medicinal purposes for thousands of years .
It appears in The Divine Farmer 's Herb - Root Classic which is thought to have been compiled about 2,700 years ago .
Though Dioscurides ' description of ρηον or ρά indicates that a medicinal root brought to Greece from beyond the Bosphorus may have been rhubarb , commerce in the drug did not become securely established until Islamic times .
During Islamic times , it was imported along the Silk Road , reaching Europe in the 14th century through the ports of Aleppo and Smyrna , where it became known as " Turkish rhubarb " .
Later , it also started arriving via the new maritime routes , or overland through Russia .
The " Russian rhubarb " was the most valued , probably because of the rhubarb - specific quality control system maintained by the Russian Empire .
The cost of transportation across Asia made rhubarb expensive in medieval Europe .
It was several times the price of other valuable herbs and spices such as cinnamon , opium , and saffron .
The merchant explorer Marco Polo therefore searched for the place where the plant was grown and harvested , discovering that it was cultivated in the mountains of Tangut province .
The value of rhubarb can be seen in Ruy Gonzáles de Clavijo 's report of his embassy in 1403–05 to Timur in Samarkand : " The best of all merchandise coming to Samarkand was from China : especially silks , satins , musk , rubies , diamonds , pearls , and rhubarb ... "
The high price as well as the increasing demand from apothecaries stimulated efforts to cultivate the plant on European soil .
These were unsuccessful in producing rhubarb root with the necessary medicinal qualities , but the variety then grown in Russia became the ancestor of the common modern rhubarb .
The availability of this " Siberian rhubarb " , together with the increasing abundance and decreasing price of sugar in the 18th century , galvanised its culinary adoption .
Though it is often asserted that rhubarb first came to the United States in the 1820s , John Bartram was growing medicinal and culinary rhubarbs in Philadelphia from the 1730s , planting seeds sent him by Peter Collinson .
From the first , the familiar garden rhubarb was not the only Rheum in American gardens : Thomas Jefferson planted R. undulatum at Monticello in 1809 and 1811 , observing that it was " Esculent rhubarb , the leaves excellent as Spinach . "
CULTIVARS Section::::Cultivars .
The advocate of organic gardening Lawrence D. Hills listed his favourite rhubarb varieties for flavour as ' Hawke 's Champagne ' , ' Victoria ' , ' Timperley Early ' , and ' Early Albert ' , also recommending ' Gaskin 's Perpetual ' for having the lowest level of oxalic acid , allowing it to be harvested over a much longer period of the growing season without developing excessive sourness .
The following cultivars have gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit:-
* ' Grandad 's Favourite ' * ' Reed 's Early Superb ' * ' Stein 's Champagne ' * '
Timperley Early ' ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
" Rhubarb " originally comes from the two Greek words for rhubarb .
Rheon from the Persian rewend , later became the Latin word rheum , meaning rhubarb .
The other Greek word is rha , an ancient name for the Volga River in Russian , where rhubarb was cultivated , having been introduced there from China via the Silk Road .
In medieval Latin , rheon and rha became rheum barbarum , literally " foreign rhubarb " or " strange rhubarb " , and evolved later into rheubarbarum .
Most likely , the English word " rhubarb " entered the language via the French word rhubarbe brought over by the conquering Normans and from the Latin rheubarbarum .
USES Section::::Uses .
Rhubarb is grown primarily for its fleshy leafstalks , technically known as petioles .
The use of rhubarb stalks as food is a relatively recent innovation .
This usage was first recorded in 17th - century England after affordable sugar became available to common people , and reached a peak between the 20th century 's two world wars .
Commonly , it is stewed with sugar or used in pies and desserts , but it can also be put into savoury dishes or pickled .
Rhubarb can be dehydrated and infused with fruit juice .
In most cases , it is infused with strawberry juice to mimic the popular strawberry rhubarb pie .
Rhubarb root produces a rich brown dye similar to walnut husks .
It is used in northern regions where walnut trees do not survive .
FOOD Section::::Food .
For cooking , the stalks are often cut into small pieces and stewed ( boiled in water ) with added sugar , until soft .
Little water is added , as rhubarb stalks already contain a great deal of water .
Rhubarb should be processed and stored in containers which are unaffected by residual acid content , such as glass or stainless steel .
Spices such as cinnamon , nutmeg , and ginger are sometimes added .
Stewed rhubarb or rhubarb sauce , like applesauce , is usually eaten cold .
Pectin , or sugar with pectin , can be added to the mixture to make jams .
A similar preparation , thickened with cornstarch or flour , is used as filling for rhubarb pie , tarts , and crumbles , leading to the nickname " pie plant " , by which it is referred to in many 19th - century cookbooks , as well as by American author Laura Ingalls Wilder in her short novel
The First Four Years .
In recent times rhubarb has often been paired with strawberries to make strawberry - rhubarb pie , though some rhubarb purists jokingly consider this " a rather unhappy marriage " .
In former days , a common and affordable sweet for children in parts of the United Kingdom and Sweden was a tender stick of rhubarb , dipped in sugar .
It is still eaten this way in western Finland , Norway , Canada , Iceland , the Faroe Islands and Sweden , and also some other parts of the world .
In Chile , Chilean rhubarb , which is only very distantly related , is sold on the street with salt or dried chili pepper .
Rhubarb can be used to make a fruit wine or sima .
It is also used to make compote .
Being a bit sour , it is very refreshing and can be drunk cold , especially during the summer .
FOLK MEDICINE Section::::Folk medicine .
In traditional Chinese medicine , rhubarb roots have been thought of as a laxative for several millennia .
Rhubarb also appears in medieval Arabic and European prescriptions .
It was one of the first Chinese medicines to be imported to the West from China .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
The roots and stems are rich in anthraquinones , such as emodin and rhein .
These substances are cathartic and laxative , explaining the sporadic use of rhubarb as a dieting aid .
The anthraquinone compounds have been separated from powdered rhubarb root for medicinal purposes .
The rhizomes contain stilbenoid compounds ( including rhaponticin ) , which seem to lower blood glucose levels in diabetic mice .
Rhubarb also contains the flavanol glucosides ( + ) -catechin-5-O - glucoside and ( −)-catechin-7-O - glucoside .
Rhubarb contains quinone molecules which are capable of carrying an electrical charge .
In 2014 , a Harvard - based team of scientists published results describing the use of the quinone AQDS , almost identical to a form found in rhubarb , in flow - batteries .
TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
Rhubarb leaves contain poisonous substances , including oxalic acid , which is a nephrotoxic and corrosive acid that is present in many plants .
Humans have been poisoned after ingesting the leaves , a particular problem during World War I when the leaves were mistakenly recommended as a food source in Britain .
The toxic rhubarb leaves have been used in flavouring extracts , after the oxalic acid is removed by treatment with precipitated chalk ( i.e. , calcium carbonate ) .
Oxalic acid can also be found in the stalks of rhubarb , but the levels are too low to cause any bodily harm .
The ( median lethal dose ) for pure oxalic acid in rats is about 375 mg / kg body weight , or about 25 grams for a human .
Other sources give a much higher oral LD ( lowest published lethal dose ) of 600 mg / kg .
While the oxalic acid content of rhubarb leaves can vary , a typical value is about 0.5 % , meaning a 65 kg adult would need to eat 4 to 8 kg ( 9 to 18 lbs ) to obtain a lethal dose , depending on which lethal dose is assumed .
Cooking the leaves with baking soda can make them more poisonous by producing soluble oxalates .
The leaves are believed to also contain an additional , unidentified toxin , which might be an anthraquinone glycoside ( also known as senna glycosides ) .
In the petioles ( stalks ) , the proportion of oxalic acid is much lower , only about a tenth of the total acidity of 2–2.5 % , which consists mostly of malic acid .
PESTS
Section::::Pests .
The rhubarb curculio , Lixus concavus , is a weevil .
Rhubarb is a host , damage being visible mainly on the leaves and stalks , with gummosis , and oval or circular feeding and/or egg - laying sites .
Hungry wildlife may dig up and eat rhubarb roots in the spring , as stored starches are turned to sugars for new foliage growth .
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Thompson , Fed S. Rhubarb or Pie Plant Culture , 1894 .
* Morse , J. E.
The New Rhubarb Culture , 1901 .
* Bland , Reginald .
Winter rhubarb , culture and marketing , 1915 .
EXTERNAL LINKS