MARKET CAPITALIZATION Market capitalization ( market cap ) is the market value of a publicly traded company 's outstanding shares .
Market capitalization is equal to the share price multiplied by the number of shares outstanding .
As outstanding stock is bought and sold in public markets , capitalization could be used as an indicator of public opinion of a company 's net worth and is a determining factor in some forms of stock valuation .
Market capitalization is used by the investment community in ranking the size of companies , as opposed to sales or total asset figures .
It is also used in ranking the relative size of stock exchanges , being a measure of the sum of the market capitalizations of all companies listed on each stock exchange .
( See List of stock exchanges . )
In performing such rankings , the market capitalizations are calculated at some significant date , such as June 30 or December 31 .
The total capitalization of stock markets or economic regions may be compared with other economic indicators .
The total market capitalization of all publicly traded companies in the world was US$ 51.2 trillion in January 2007 and rose as high as US$ 57.5 trillion in May 2008 before dropping below US$ 50 trillion in August 2008 and slightly above US$ 40 trillion in September 2008 .
In 2014 and 2015 , global market capitalization was US$ 68 trillion and US$ 67 trillion , respectively .
CALCULATION Section::::Calculation .
Market cap is given by the formula formula_1 , where MC is the market capitalization , N is the number of shares outstanding , and P is the closing price per share .
For example , if some company has 4 million shares outstanding and the closing price per share is $ 20 , its market cap is then $ 80 million .
If the closing price per share rises to $ 21 , the market cap becomes $ 84 million .
If it drops to $ 19 per share , the market cap falls to $ 76 million .
This is in contrast to mercantile pricing where purchase price , average price and sale price may differ due to transaction costs .
MARKET CAP TERMS Section::::Market cap terms .
Traditionally , companies were divided into large - cap , mid - cap , and small - cap .
The terms mega - cap and micro - cap have also since come into common use , and nano - cap is sometimes heard .
Different numbers are used by different indexes ; there is no official definition of , or full consensus agreement about , the exact cutoff values .
The cutoffs may be defined as percentiles rather than in nominal dollars .
The definitions expressed in nominal dollars need to be adjusted over decades due to inflation , population change , and overall market valuation ( for example , $ 1 billion was a large market cap in 1950 , but it is not very large now ) , and market caps are likely to be different country to country .
RELATED
MEASURES
Section::::Related measures .
Market cap reflects only the equity value of a company .
It is important to note that a firm 's choice of capital structure has a significant impact on how the total value of a company is allocated between equity and debt .
A more comprehensive measure is enterprise value ( EV ) , which gives effect to outstanding debt , preferred stock , and other factors .
For insurance firms , a value called the embedded value ( EV ) has been used .
SEE ALSO
* List of finance topics * List of corporations by market capitalization
* List of stock exchanges
* London Stock Exchange
* Market price * Market trend * Middle - market company
* NASDAQ * New York Stock Exchange
*
Public float
* Shares authorized *
Treasury stock
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* How to Value Assets – from the Washington State ( U.S. ) government web site * Year - end market capitalization by country – World Bank , 1988–2010