IT 'S A WONDERFUL LIFE
It 's a Wonderful Life is a 1946 American Christmas fantasy comedy - drama film produced and directed by Frank Capra , based on the short story and booklet The Greatest Gift , which Philip Van Doren Stern wrote in 1939 and published privately in 1945 .
The film stars James Stewart as George Bailey , a man who has given up his dreams in order to help others , and whose imminent suicide on Christmas Eve brings about the intervention of his guardian angel , Clarence Odbody ( Henry Travers ) .
Clarence shows George all the lives he has touched , and how different life in his community of Bedford Falls would be if he had never been born .
Despite initially performing poorly at the box office because of stiff competition at the time of its release , the film has become regarded as a classic , and is a staple of Christmas television around the world .
The film is considered one of the most loved films in American cinema , and has become traditional viewing during the Christmas season .
Theatrically , the film 's break - even point was $ 6.3 million , approximately twice the production cost , a figure it never came close to achieving in its initial release .
An appraisal in 2006 reported : " Although it was not the complete box office failure that today everyone believes ... it was initially a major disappointment and confirmed , at least to the studios , that Capra was no longer capable of turning out the populist features that made his films the must - see , money - making events they once were . "
It 's a Wonderful Life is now considered one of the greatest films ever made .
It was nominated for five Academy Awards , including Best Picture , and has been recognized by the American Film Institute as one of the 100 best American films ever made , placing number 11 on its initial 1998 greatest movie list , number 20 on its revised 2007 greatest movie list , and placing number one on its list of the most inspirational American films of all time .
Capra revealed that this was his personal favorite among the films he directed , and that he screened it for his family every Christmas season .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On Christmas Eve 1945 , in Bedford Falls , New York , George Bailey contemplates suicide .
Prayers for him reach Heaven , where Clarence Odbody , Angel 2nd Class , is assigned to save George , in return for which he will earn his angel wings .
To prepare him for his mission , Clarence is shown flashbacks of George 's life .
The first is from 1919 , when 12-year - old George saves his younger brother Harry from drowning at a frozen lake ; George loses his hearing in one ear as a result .
At his after - school job , George realizes that the druggist , Mr. Gower , distraught over his son 's death from the flu , has accidentally added poison to a child 's prescription , and intervenes to stop it from causing harm .
In 1928 , George plans to leave on a world tour and then attend college .
At Harry 's high - school graduation party , he is reintroduced to Mary Hatch , who has had a crush on him from childhood .
Their walk home is interrupted by news that George 's father , Peter , has died of a stroke .
George postpones his travel so he can sort out the family business , Bailey Brothers ' Building and Loan .
Henry F. Potter , the richest man in town , wishes to dissolve the Building and Loan to eliminate it as a competitor .
The board of directors votes to keep the Building and Loan open , on condition that George stay to run it ( along with his absent - minded uncle Billy ) .
George gives his college tuition to Harry on the condition that Harry take over the Building and Loan when he returns .
Four years later , Harry returns from college with a job offer from his father - in - law .
George tells Harry to take the job , and he will keep running the Building and Loan .
George and Mary get married .
On their way to their honeymoon , they witness a run on the bank and use their honeymoon savings to keep the Building and Loan solvent until the bank re - opens .
Eventually , George establishes Bailey Park , a housing development with small houses financed by the Building and Loan , so that people can own their own homes , rather than paying rent to live in Potter 's overpriced slums .
Potter attempts to lure George into becoming his assistant , offering him $ 20,000 ( ) a year ; George is momentarily tempted , but rebukes him .
During World War II , George is ineligible for service because of his bad ear .
Harry becomes a Navy pilot , and earns the Medal of Honor by shooting down a kamikaze plane headed for a troop transport .
On Christmas Eve morning 1945 , as the town prepares a hero 's welcome for Harry , Uncle Billy goes to the bank to deposit $ 8,000 of the Building and Loan 's cash .
Potter enters , and Billy taunts Potter by grabbing the newspaper and reading the front - page headline about Harry aloud .
Billy gives Mr. Potter his newspaper back , unintentionally wrapping the envelope with the cash in the newspaper .
Billy discovers that he has misplaced $ 8,000 of the Building and Loan 's cash when the teller asks him for the cash to complete the deposit ( ) .
Mr. Potter discovers the envelope with the Building and Loan 's $ 8,000 .
He says nothing , knowing it will cause problems for the company .
When a bank examiner arrives to review the Building and Loan 's records , George realizes that criminal charges are possible ; he berates Uncle Billy , then goes home and takes out his frustration on his family .
He soon apologizes to his wife and children , then leaves .
George desperately appeals to Potter for a loan .
When George offers his life insurance policy as collateral , Potter , aware of the misplaced currency , says George is worth more dead than alive , and phones the police to have him arrested .
George gets drunk at a local bar , and is involved in a fight before he leaves and goes to a nearby bridge , thinking of suicide .
The film 's narrative catches up to the time of the opening scene .
Before he can jump , Clarence dives into the river just before George does , causing George to rescue Clarence , rather than killing himself .
George does not believe Clarence 's subsequent claim that he is George 's guardian angel .
When George says he wishes he had never been born , Clarence decides to grant his wish and show George an alternate timeline in which he never existed .
Bedford Falls is named Pottersville , and is a less congenial place .
Mr. Gower has recently been released from prison for manslaughter , because George was not there to stop him from putting poison in the pills .
The Building and Loan has closed down , as George never took over after Peter 's passing .
George 's mother does not recognize him ; she reveals that Uncle Billy was institutionalized after the collapse of the Building and Loan .
In the cemetery where Bailey Park would have been , George discovers the grave of his brother .
Clarence tells him all the soldiers on the transport died , as Harry was never there to save them , because George had never saved Harry from drowning .
Mary , who works at the library , never married ; when George says he is her husband , she screams for the police , causing George to flee and the local policeman to give chase .
George , now convinced that Clarence is really his guardian angel , runs back to the bridge and begs for his life back ; the alternate timeline changes back to the original reality .
George runs home to await his arrest .
Mary and Uncle Billy arrive , having rallied the townspeople , who donate more than enough to cover the missing $ 8,000 and for Potter 's warrant to be torn up .
Harry arrives and toasts George calling him " The richest man in town " .
A bell on the Christmas tree rings , and his daughter recalls a story that says the sound means that an angel has just earned his wings , signifying Clarence 's promotion .
CAST Section::::Cast .
Credited cast * James Stewart as George Bailey * Bobby Anderson as Little George Bailey
* Donna Reed as Mary Hatch Bailey * Jean Gale as Little Mary Hatch
* Henry Travers as Clarence Odbody
* Lionel Barrymore as Mr. Henry F. Potter * Thomas Mitchell as Uncle Billy Bailey
* Beulah Bondi as Ma Bailey * Frank Faylen as Ernie Bishop , the cab driver * Ward Bond as Bert , the cop * Gloria Grahame as Violet Bick * Jeanine Ann Roose as Little Violet Bick * H. B. Warner as Mr. Emil Gower
* Todd Karns as Harry Bailey * George Nokes as Little Harry Bailey
* Samuel S. Hinds as father
Peter " Pop " Bailey * Lillian Randolph as Annie , maid * Frank Albertson as Sam Wainwright * Ronnie Ralph as Little Sam Wainwright * Virginia Patton as Ruth Dakin Bailey , Harry 's wife
* Mary Treen as Cousin
Tilly , employee * Charles Williams as Cousin Eustace , employee * Sarah Edwards as Mrs. Hatch ,
Mary 's mother * William Edmunds as Mr. Giuseppe Martini * Argentina Brunetti as Mrs. Martini * Harold Landon as Marty Hatch , Mary 's brother ( uncredited ) * Danny Mummert as Little Marty Hatch * Sheldon Leonard as Nick , the bartender * Frank Hagney as Potter 's mute aide * Ray Walker as Joe * Charles Lane as Potter 's rent collector * Larry Simms as Pete Bailey * Carol Coomes ( AKA Carol Coombs ) as Janie Bailey * Jimmy Hawkins as Tommy Bailey * Karolyn Grimes as Zuzu Bailey Uncredited cast * Charles Halton as Mr. Carter , bank examiner * J. Farrell MacDonald as the man whose great - grandfather planted the tree that George drives into * Harry Holman as Mr. Partridge , High School principal * Carl " Alfalfa " Switzer as Freddie ( Mary 's annoying high school suitor )
* Mark Roberts as Mickey ( student with the key to open up pool )
* Max Wagner as Cashier / Bouncer at Nick 's Bar
* Dick Elliott as fat man on porch
* Tom Fadden as Bridge Caretaker * Stanley Andrews as Mr. Welch , teacher 's husband * Al Bridge as Sheriff with arrest warrant * Ellen Corby as Miss Davis * Marian Carr as Jane Wainwright , Sam 's wife * Adriana Caselotti as the singer in Martini 's Bar * Joseph Granby as Angel Joseph ( voice ) * Moroni Olsen as the Senior Angel ( voice )
The contention that James Stewart is often referred to as Capra 's only choice to play George Bailey is disputed by film historian Stephen Cox , who indicates that " Henry Fonda was in the running " .
Cary Grant was also considered for the role when RKO still had the rights to the film , before they were sold to Capra .
Although it was stated that Jean Arthur , Ann Dvorak , and Ginger Rogers were all considered for the role of Mary before Donna Reed won the part , this list is also disputed by Cox as he indicates that Jean Arthur was first offered the part , but had to turn it down for a prior commitment on Broadway before Capra turned to Olivia de Havilland , Martha Scott , and Ann Dvorak .
Ginger Rogers was offered the female lead , but turned it down because she considered it " too bland " .
In Chapter 26 of her autobiography Ginger : My Story , she questioned her decision by asking her readers : " Foolish , you say ? "
A long list of actors were considered for the role of Potter ( originally named Herbert Potter ) :
Edward Arnold , Charles Bickford , Edgar Buchanan , Louis Calhern , Victor Jory , Raymond Massey , Vincent Price , and even Thomas Mitchell .
However , Lionel Barrymore , who eventually won the role , was a famous Ebenezer Scrooge in radio dramatizations of A Christmas Carol at the time , and was a natural choice for the role .
Barrymore had also worked with Capra and Stewart on his 1938 Best Picture Oscar winner , You Ca n't Take It with You .
H.B. Warner , who was cast as the drugstore owner Mr. Gower , actually studied medicine before going into acting .
He was also in some of Capra 's other films , including Mr. Deeds Goes to Town , Lost Horizon , You Ca n't Take It with You , and Mr. Smith Goes to Washington .
In the silent era , he had played the role of Jesus Christ in Cecil B. DeMille 's The King of Kings ( 1927 ) .
The name Gower came from Capra 's employer Columbia Pictures , which had been located on Gower Street for many years .
Also on Gower Street was a drugstore that was a favorite for the studio 's employees .
Charles Williams , who was cast as Eustace Bailey , and Mary Treen , who was cast as Matilda " Tilly " Bailey , were both B - list actors , as they both had appeared in 90 films each before filming It 's a Wonderful Life .
Jimmy
the raven ( Uncle Billy 's pet ) appeared in You
Ca n't Take It with You and each subsequent Capra film .
PRODUCTION
BACKGROUND
Section::::Production .
Section::::Background .
The original story " The Greatest Gift " was written by Philip Van Doren Stern in November 1939 .
After being unsuccessful in getting the story published , he decided to make it into a Christmas card , and mailed 200 copies to family and friends in December 1943 .
The story came to the attention of RKO producer David Hempstead , who showed it to Cary Grant 's Hollywood agent , and in April 1944 , RKO Pictures bought the rights to the story for $ 10,000 , hoping to turn the story into a vehicle for Grant .
RKO created three unsatisfactory scripts before shelving the planned movie , and Grant went on to make another Christmas movie staple , The Bishop 's Wife .
At the suggestion of RKO studio chief Charles Koerner , Frank Capra read " The Greatest Gift " , and immediately saw its potential .
RKO , anxious to unload the project , in 1945 sold the rights to Capra 's production company , Liberty Films , which had a nine - film distribution agreement with RKO , for $ 10,000 , and threw in the three scripts for free .
Capra , along with writers Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett , with Jo Swerling , Michael Wilson , and Dorothy Parker brought in to " polish " the script , turned the story and what was worth using from the three scripts into a screenplay that Capra would rename It 's a Wonderful Life .
The script underwent many revisions throughout pre - production and during filming .
Final screenplay credit went to Goodrich , Hackett , and Capra , with " additional scenes " by Jo Swerling .
Capra produced the film with his independent motion picture production company Liberty Films .
Dalton Trumbo had written a draft that was different from the final film .
In Trumbo 's draft , George Bailey is an idealistic politician that slowly grows more cynical as the story progresses , then tries to commit suicide after losing an election .
The angel shows him Bedford Falls as it would have been not if he had never been born , but as it would have been if he had gone into business instead of politics .
Seneca Falls , New York , claims that when Frank Capra visited their town in 1945 , he was inspired to model Bedford Falls after it .
The town has an annual " It 's a Wonderful Life Festival " in December .
In mid-2009 , The Hotel Clarence opened in Seneca Falls , named for George Bailey 's guardian angel .
On December 10 , 2010 , the " It 's a Wonderful Life " Museum opened in Seneca Falls , with Karolyn Grimes , who played Zuzu in the movie , cutting the ribbon .
Philip Van Doren Stern said in a 1946 interview , " Incidentally , the movie takes place in Westchester County .
Actually , the town I had in mind was Califon ,
N.J. " The historic iron bridge in Califon is similar to the bridge that George Bailey considered jumping from in the movie .
Both James Stewart ( from Indiana , Pennsylvania ) and Donna Reed ( from Denison , Iowa ) came from small towns .
Stewart 's father ran a small hard - ware store where James worked for years .
Reed demonstrated her rural roots by winning an impromptu bet with Lionel Barrymore when he challenged her to milk a cow on set .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
It 's a Wonderful Life was shot at RKO Radio Pictures Studio in Culver City , California , and the 89 acre RKO movie ranch in Encino , where " Bedford Falls " consisted of Art Director Max Ree 's Oscar - winning sets originally designed for the 1931 epic film Cimarron that covered 4 acres ( 1.6 ha ) , assembled from three separate parts , with a main street stretching 300 yards ( three city blocks ) , with 75 stores and buildings , and a residential neighborhood .
For It 's
a Wonderful Life Capra built a working bank set , added a tree - lined center parkway , and planted 20 full grown oak trees to existing sets .
Pigeons , cats , and dogs were allowed to roam the mammoth set to give the " town " a lived - in feel .
Due to the requirement to film in an " alternate universe " setting as well as during different seasons , the set was extremely adaptable .
RKO created " chemical snow " for the film to avoid the need for dubbed dialogue when actors walked across an earlier movie snow that was made of crushed cornflakes .
Filming started on April 15 , 1946 and ended on July 27 , 1946 , exactly on deadline for the 90-day principal photography schedule .
RKO 's movie ranch in Encino , a filming location of Bedford Falls , was razed in 1954 .
There are only two surviving locations from the film .
The first is the swimming pool that was unveiled during the famous dance scene where George courts Mary .
It is located in the gymnasium at Beverly Hills High School and is still in operation .
The second is the " Martini home " in La Cañada Flintridge , California .
During filming , in the scene where Uncle Billy gets drunk at Harry and Ruth 's welcome home / newlyweds ' party , George points him in the right direction home .
As the camera focuses on George , smiling at his uncle staggering away , a crash is heard in the distance and Uncle
Billy yells , " I 'm all right !
I 'm all right !
" Equipment on the set had actually been accidentally knocked over ; Capra left in Thomas Mitchell 's impromptu ad lib ( although the " crashing " noise was augmented with added sound effects ) .
According to Bobby Anderson , H.B. Warner slapped him for real in the scene between Mr. Gower and little George and made his ear bleed , reducing him to tears , but hugged him after the scene was shot .
Dimitri Tiomkin had written " Death Telegram " and " Gower 's Deliverance " for the drugstore scenes , but in the editing room , Capra elected to go with no music for those scenes .
Those changes , along with others , led to a falling out between Tiomkin and Capra .
Tiomkin had worked on a lot of Capra 's previous films , and was saddened that Capra decided to have the music pared or toned down , moved , or cut entirely .
He felt as though his work was being seen as a mere suggestion .
In his autobiography Please Do n't Hate Me , he said of the incident , " an all around scissors job " .
The products and advertisements featured in Mr. Gower 's drugstore include Coca - Cola , Paterson tobacco pipes , La Unica cigars , Camel cigarettes , Lucky Strike cigarettes , Chesterfield cigarettes , Sweet Caporal cigarettes ( with a sign that says " Ask Dad , he knows " , which plays a role in the plot ) ,
Vaseline hair tonic , Penetro cough syrup , Pepto - Bismol , Bayer Aspirin ( " for colds and influenza " ) , and The Saturday Evening Post .
In an earlier draft of the script , the scene where George saves his brother Harry as a child was different .
The scene had the boys playing ice hockey on the river ( which is on Potter 's property ) as Potter watches with disdain .
George shoots the puck , but it goes astray and breaks the " No Trespassing " sign and lands in Potter 's yard .
Potter becomes irate , and the gardener releases the attack dogs , which causes the boys to flee .
Harry falls in the ice , and George saves him with the same results .
Another scene that was in an earlier version of the script had young George visiting his father at his work .
After George tells off Mr. Potter and closes the door , he considers asking Uncle Billy about his drugstore dilemma .
Billy is talking on the phone to the bank examiner , and lights his cigar and throws his match in the wastebasket .
This scene explains that Tilly ( short for Matilda ) and Eustace are both his cousins ( not Billy 's kids , though ) , and Tilly is on the phone with her friend Martha and says , " Potter 's here , the bank examiner 's coming .
It 's a day of judgement . "
As George is about to interrupt Tilly on the phone , Billy cries for help and Tilly runs in and puts the fire out with a pot of coffee .
George decides he is probably better off dealing with the situation by himself .
Capra had filmed a number of sequences that were subsequently cut , the only remnants remaining being rare stills that have been unearthed .
A number of alternative endings were considered , with Capra 's first script having Bailey falling to his knees reciting " The Lord 's Prayer " ( the script also called for an opening scene with the townspeople in prayer ) .
Feeling that an overly religious tone did not have the emotional impact of the family and friends rushing to rescue George Bailey , the closing scenes were rewritten .
Capra found the film 's original cinematographer Victor Milner slow and pretentious and re - hired Joseph Walker , who was warned by Harry Cohn to return to Columbia Pictures to shoot a film for one of the studio 's female stars .
Joseph Biroc was trained by Walker himself to be his replacement .
Although having worked with three cinematographers had been difficult for Capra , it turned out very well in Walker 's opinion , because the scenes each had shot were so different that he felt that Biroc 's did n't have to match his or Milner 's visual style .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
According to a 2006 book , " A spate of movies appeared just after the ending of the Second World War , including It 's a Wonderful Life ( 1946 ) and Stairway to Heaven ( 1946 ) , perhaps tapping into so many people 's experience of loss of loved ones and offering a kind of consolation .
" It 's a Wonderful Life premiered at the Globe Theatre in New York on December 20 , 1946 , to mixed reviews .
While Capra thought the contemporary critical reviews were either universally negative , or at best dismissive , Time said , " It 's a Wonderful Life is a pretty wonderful movie .
It has only one formidable rival ( Goldwyn 's The Best Years of Our Lives ) as Hollywood 's best picture of the year .
Director Capra 's inventiveness , humor , and affection for human beings keep it glowing with life and excitement . "
Bosley Crowther , writing for The New York Times , complimented some of the actors , including Stewart and Reed , but concluded that " the weakness of this picture , from this reviewer 's point of view , is the sentimentality of it — its illusory concept of life .
Mr. Capra 's nice people are charming , his small town is a quite beguiling place and his pattern for solving problems is most optimistic and facile .
But somehow , they all resemble theatrical attitudes , rather than average realities . "
The film , which went into general release on January 7 , 1947 , placed 26th ( $ 3.3 million ) in box office revenues for 1947 ( out of more than 400 features released ) , one place ahead of another Christmas film , Miracle on 34th Street .
The film was supposed to be released in January 1947 , but was moved up to December 1946 to make it eligible for the 1946 Academy Awards .
This move was seen as worse for the film , as 1947 did not have quite the stiff competition as 1946 .
If it had entered the 1947 Awards , its biggest competition would have been Miracle on 34th Street .
The number one grossing movie of 1947 , The Best Years of Our Lives , made $ 11.5 million .
The film recorded a loss of $ 525,000 at the box office for RKO .
On May 26 , 1947 , the FBI issued a memo stating , " With regard to the picture ' It 's a Wonderful Life ' , [ redacted ] stated in substance that the film represented rather obvious attempts to discredit bankers by casting Lionel Barrymore as a ' scrooge - type ' so that he would be the most hated man in the picture .
This , according to these sources , is a common trick used by Communists .
[ In ] addition , [ redacted ] stated that , in his opinion , this picture deliberately maligned the upper class , attempting to show the people who had money were mean and despicable characters .
"
Film historian Andrew Sarris points out as " curious " that " the censors never noticed that the villainous Mr. Potter gets away with robbery without being caught or punished in any way " .
In 1990 , It 's a Wonderful Life was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the United States Library of Congress and selected for preservation in their National Film Registry .
In 2002 , Britain 's Channel 4 ranked It 's a Wonderful Life as the seventh greatest film ever made in its poll " The 100 Greatest Films " .
In June 2008 , AFI revealed its 10 Top 10 , the best ten films in ten " classic " American film genres , after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community .
It 's a Wonderful Life was acknowledged as the third - best film in the fantasy genre .
Somewhat more iconoclastic views of the film and its content are occasionally expressed .
In 1947 , film critic Manny Farber wrote , " To make his points [ Capra ] always takes an easy , simple - minded path that does n't give much credit to the intelligence of the audience " , and adds that there are only a " few unsentimental moments here and there " .
Wendell Jamieson , in a 2008 article for The New York Times which was generally positive in its analysis of the film , noted that far from being simply a sweet sentimental story , it " is a terrifying , asphyxiating story about growing up and relinquishing your dreams , of seeing your father driven to the grave before his time , of living among bitter , small - minded people .
It is a story of being trapped , of compromising , of watching others move ahead and away , of becoming so filled with rage that you verbally abuse your children , their teacher , and your oppressively perfect wife . "
In a 2010 Salon.com piece , Richard Cohen described It 's a Wonderful Life as " the most terrifying Hollywood film ever made " .
In the " Pottersville " sequence , he wrote , George is not seeing the world that would exist had he never been born , but rather " the world as it does exist , in his time and also in our own " .
Nine years earlier , another Salon writer , Gary Kamiya , had expressed the opposing view that " Pottersville rocks ! " , adding : "
The gauzy , Currier - and - Ives veil Capra drapes over Bedford Falls has prevented viewers from grasping what a tiresome and , frankly , toxic environment it is ...
We all live in Pottersville now . "
The film 's elevation to the status of a beloved classic came three decades after its initial release , when it became a television staple during Christmas season in 1976 .
This came as a welcome surprise to Frank Capra and others involved with its production .
" It 's the damnedest thing I 've ever seen " , Capra told The Wall Street Journal in 1984 .
" The film has a life of its own now , and I can look at it
like I had nothing to do with it .
I 'm like a parent whose kid grows up to be president .
I 'm proud ...
but it 's the kid who did the work .
I did n't even think of it as a Christmas story when I first ran across it .
I just liked the idea .
" In a 1946 interview , Capra described the film 's theme as " the individual 's belief in himself " and that he made it " to combat a modern trend toward atheism " .
It ranked 283rd among critics , and 107th among directors , in the 2012 Sight & Sound polls of the greatest films ever made .
The film 's positive reception has continued into the present .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 94 % based on 71 reviews , with an average rating of 8.9/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads ,
" The holiday classic to define all holiday classics , It 's a Wonderful Life is one of a handful of films worth an annual viewing . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a score 89 out of 100 , based on 17 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
AWARDS AND HONORS Section::::Awards and honors .
Prior to the Los Angeles release of
It 's a Wonderful Life , Liberty Films mounted an extensive promotional campaign that included a daily advertisement highlighting one of the film 's players , along with comments from reviewers .
Jimmy Starr wrote , " If I were an Oscar , I 'd elope with
It 's a Wonderful Life lock , stock and barrel on the night of the Academy Awards " .
The New York Daily Times published an editorial that declared the film and James Stewart 's performance to be worthy of Academy Award consideration .
It 's a Wonderful Life
received five Academy Award nominations : !
width=300Award ! !
Result ! !
width=500Nominee
/ Winner
It 's a Wonderful Life
won just the one Academy Award , in the Technical Achievement category for developing a new method of creating artificial snow .
Before It 's a Wonderful Life , fake movie snow was mostly made from cornflakes painted white .
And it was so loud when stepped on that any snow - filled scenes with dialogue had to be re - dubbed afterwards .
RKO studio 's head of special effects , Russell Shearman , developed a new compound , utilizing water , soap flakes , foamite and sugar .
The Best Years of Our Lives , a drama about servicemen attempting to return to their pre - World War II lives , won most of the awards that year , including four of the five for which It 's a Wonderful Life was nominated .
( The award for " Best Sound Recording " was won by The Jolson Story . )
The Best Years of Our Lives was also an outstanding commercial success , ultimately becoming the highest - grossing film of the decade , in contrast to the more modest initial box office returns of It 's a Wonderful Life .
It 's a Wonderful Life received a Golden Globe Award : !
width=300Award ! !
Result ! !
width=500Winner Capra won the " Best Motion Picture Director " award from the Golden Globes , and a " CEC Award " from the Cinema Writers Circle in Spain , for Mejor Película Extranjera ( Best Foreign Film ) .
Jimmy Hawkins won a " Former Child Star Lifetime Achievement Award " from the Young Artist Awards in 1994 ; the award recognized his role as Tommy Bailey as igniting his career , which lasted until the mid-1960s .
American Film Institute lists
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100
Movies – 11
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Passions – 8
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Heroes and Villains :
* Mr. Potter – No . 6 Villain * George Bailey – No . 9 Hero
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs : * " Buffalo Gal ( Wo n't You Come Out Tonight ) " – Nominated
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movie Quotes : *
" What is it you want , Mary ?
What do you want ?
You want the moon ?
Just say the word , and I 'll throw a lasso around it and pull it down . "
– Nominated *
" To my big brother George , the richest man in town ! "
– Nominated *
" Look , Daddy .
Teacher says , ' Every time a bell rings an angel gets his wings . ' " – Nominated * AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Cheers – No . 1
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – No . 20
* AFI 's 10 Top 10 – No . 3
Fantasy Film RELEASE OWNERSHIP AND COPYRIGHT ISSUES ANCILLARY RIGHTS
Section::::Release .
Section::::Ownership and copyright issues .
Section::::Ancillary rights .
Liberty Films was purchased by Paramount Pictures , and remained a subsidiary until 1951 .
In 1955 , M. & A. Alexander purchased the movie .
This included key rights to the original television syndication , the original nitrate film elements , the music score , and the film rights to the story on which the film is based , " The Greatest Gift " .
National Telefilm Associates ( NTA ) took over the rights to the film soon thereafter .
A clerical error at NTA prevented the copyright from being renewed properly in 1974 .
Despite the lapsed copyright , television stations that aired it still had to pay royalties because — though the film 's images had entered the public domain — the film 's story was still restricted as a derivative work of the published story The Greatest Gift , whose copyright Philip Van Doren Stern had renewed in 1971 .
The film became a perennial holiday favorite in the 1980s , possibly due to its repeated showings each holiday season on hundreds of local television stations .
It was mentioned during the deliberations on the Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998 .
In 1993 , Republic Pictures , which was the successor to NTA , relied on the 1990 U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Stewart v. Abend ( which involved another Stewart film , Rear Window ) to enforce its claim to the copyright .
While the film 's copyright had not been renewed , Republic still owned the film rights to " The Greatest Gift " ; thus the plaintiffs were able to argue its status as a derivative work of a work still under copyright .
NBC , since 1996 , is licensed to show the film on U.S. network television , and traditionally shows it twice during the holidays , with one showing on Christmas Eve .
Paramount ( via parent company Viacom 's 1998 acquisition of Republic 's then - parent , Spelling Entertainment ) once again has distribution rights for the first time since 1955 .
Due to all the above actions , this is one of the few RKO films not controlled by Turner Entertainment / Warner Bros. in the US .
It is also one of two Capra films Paramount owns despite not having originally released it — the other is Broadway Bill ( originally from Columbia , remade by Paramount as Riding High in 1950 ) .
COLORIZATION Section::::Colorization .
Director Capra met with Wilson Markle about having Colorization , Inc. , colorize It 's a Wonderful Life based on an enthusiastic response to the colorization of Topper from actor Cary Grant .
The company 's art director Brian Holmes prepared 10 minutes of colorized footage from It 's a Wonderful Life for Capra to view , which resulted in Capra signing a contract with Colorization , Inc. , and his " enthusiastic agree[ment ] to pay half the $ 260,000 cost of colorizing the movie and to share any profits " and giving " preliminary approval to making similar color versions of two of his other black - and - white films , Meet John Doe ( 1941 ) and Lady for a Day ( 1933 ) " .
However , the film was believed to be in the public domain at the time , and as a result , Markle and Holmes responded by returning Capra 's initial investment , eliminating his financial participation , and refusing outright to allow the director to exercise artistic control over the colorization of his films , leading Capra to join in the campaign against the process .
Three colorized versions have been produced .
The first was released by Hal Roach Studios in 1986 .
The second was authorized and produced by the film 's permanent owner , Republic Pictures , in 1989 .
Both Capra and Stewart took a critical stand on the colorized editions .
The Hal Roach color version was re - released in 1989 to VHS through the cooperation of Video Treasures .
A third colorized version was produced by Legend Films and released on DVD in 2007 .
HOME MEDIA VHS Section::::Home media .
Section::::VHS .
Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s , when the film was still under public domain status , It 's A Wonderful Life was released on VHS by a variety of home video companies .
Among the companies that released the film on home video before Republic Pictures stepped in were Meda Video ( which would later become Media Home Entertainment ) , Kartes Video Communications ( under its Video Film Classics label ) , GoodTimes Home Video and Video Treasures ( now Anchor Bay Entertainment ) .
After Republic reclaimed the rights to the film , all unofficial VHS copies of the film in print were destroyed .
Artisan Entertainment ( under license from Republic ) took over home video rights in the mid-1990s .
Artisan was later sold to Lions Gate Entertainment , which continued to hold US home video rights until late 2005 when they reverted to Paramount , who also owns video rights throughout Region 4 ( Latin America and Australia ) and in France .
Video rights in the rest of the world are held by different companies ; for example , the UK rights are with Universal Studios .
TECHNOLOGICAL FIRST : CD - ROM
Section::::Technological first : CD - ROM .
In 1993 , due in part to the confusion of the ownership and copyright issues , Kinesoft Development , with the support of Republic Pictures , released It 's a Wonderful Life as one of the first commercial feature - length films on CD - ROM for the Windows PC ( Windows 3.1 ) .
Predating commercial DVDs by several years , it included such features as the ability to follow along with the complete shooting script as the film was playing .
Given the state of video playback on the PC at the time of its release , It 's a Wonderful Life for Windows represented another first , as the longest running video on a computer .
Prior to its release , Windows could only play back approx .
32,000 frames of video , or about 35 minutes at 15 frames per second .
Working with Microsoft , Kinesoft was able to enhance the video features of Windows to allow for the complete playback of the entire film — all of this on a PC with a 486SX processor and only 8 MB of RAM .
Computer Gaming World said in April 1994 that , " The picture quality still has a way to go before it reaches television standards " , but was " ...
a noble effort " that would " please fans of the film " .
DVD AND BLU - RAY
Section::::DVD and Blu - ray .
The film has seen multiple DVD releases since the availability of the format .
In the autumn of 2001 , Republic issued the movie twice , once in August , and again with different packaging in September of that same year .
On October 31 , 2006 , Paramount released a newly restored " 60th Anniversary Edition " .
On November 13 , 2007 , Paramount released a two - disc " special edition " DVD of the film that contained both the original theatrical black - and - white version , and a new , third colorized version , produced by Legend Films using the latest colorization technology .
On November 3 , 2009 , Paramount released a DVD version with a " Collector 's Edition " ornament , and a Blu - ray edition .
ADAPTATIONS IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::Adaptations in other media .
The film was twice adapted for radio in 1947 , first on Lux Radio Theater ( March 10 ) and then on The Screen Guild Theater ( December 29 ) , then again on the Screen Guild Theater broadcast of March 15 , 1951 .
James Stewart and Donna Reed reprised their roles for all three radio productions .
Stewart also starred in the May 8 , 1949 radio adaptation presented on the Screen Director 's Playhouse .
A musical stage adaptation of the film , titled A Wonderful Life , was written by Sheldon Harnick and Joe Raposo .
This version was first performed at the University of Michigan in 1986 , but a planned professional production was stalled by legal wrangling with the estate of Philip Van Doren Stern .
It was eventually performed in Washington , D.C. , by Arena Stage in 1991 , and had revivals in the 21st century , including a staged concert version in New York City in 2005 and several productions by regional theatres .
Another musical stage adaptation of the film , titled It 's a Wonderful Life – The Musical , was written by Bruce Greer and Keith Ferguson .
This version premiered at the Majestic Theatre , Dallas , Texas , in 1998 .
It was an annual Christmas show at the theatre for five years .
It has since been performed at venues all around the United States .
The film was also adapted into a play in two acts by James W. Rodgers .
It was first performed on December 15 , 1993 at Paul Laurence Dunbar High School .
The play opens with George Bailey contemplating suicide and then goes back through major moments in his life .
Many of the scenes from the movie are only alluded to or mentioned in the play rather than actually dramatized .
For example , in the opening scene Clarence just mentions George having saved his brother Harry after the latter had fallen through the ice .
It 's a Wonderful Life :
A Live Radio Play , a stage adaptation presented as a 1940s radio show , was adapted by Joe Landry and has been produced around the United States since 1997 .
The script is published by Playscripts ,
Inc. In 1997 , PBS aired Merry Christmas , George Bailey , taped from a live performance of the 1947 Lux Radio Theatre script at the Pasadena Playhouse .
The presentation , which benefited the Elizabeth Glaser Pediatric AIDS Foundation , featured an all - star cast , including Bill Pullman as George , Nathan Lane as Clarence , Martin Landau as Mr. Potter , Penelope Ann Miller as Mary , and Sally Field as Mother Bailey .
Philip Grecian 's 2006 radio play based on the film
It 's a Wonderful Life is a faithful adaptation , now in its third incarnation , that has been performed numerous times by local theatres in Canada .
The Last Temptation of Clarence Odbody is a novel written by John Pierson .
The novel imagines the future lives of various characters if George had not survived his jump into the river .
Scenes from the film are seen in the documentary , where Abacus Federal Savings Bank founder and chairman Thomas Sung talked about how It 's a Wonderful Life influenced him .
REMAKES
*
It Happened One Christmas
The film was remade as the 1977 television movie It Happened One Christmas .
Lionel Chetwynd based the screenplay on the original Van Doren Stern short story and the 1946 screenplay .
This remake employed gender - reversal , with Marlo Thomas as the protagonist Mary Bailey , Wayne Rogers as George Hatch , and Cloris Leachman as the angel Clara Oddbody .
Leachman received her second Emmy nomination for this role .
In a significant departure from his earlier roles , Orson Welles was cast as Mr. Potter .
Following initial positive reviews , the made - for - television film was rebroadcast twice in 1978 and 1979 , but has not been shown since on national re - broadcasts , nor issued in home media .
*
The Christmas Spirit was a retelling of the movie starring Nicollette Sheridan as Charlotte Hart .
This was a made - for - TV film aired in December 1 , 2013 on the Hallmark Channel executive produced by Sheridan under her company , Wyke Lane Productions , and Brad Krevoy Television .
The film was directed and written by Jack Angelo .
Spirit was set in the present day , with the Hart character working to save a " quiet New England town from a ruthless real estate developer " .
The film was planned to kick off a film series centered around the Hart character .
The film had 3.372 million viewers overall .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
In 1990 , another made - for - television film called Clarence starred Robert Carradine in a new tale of the helpful angel .
POTENTIAL
Section::::Potential .
A purported sequel was in development for a 2015 release , and was to be called It 's a Wonderful Life : The Rest of the Story .
It was to be written by Bob Farnsworth and Martha Bolton and follow the angel of George Bailey 's daughter Zuzu ( played once again by Karolyn Grimes ) , as she teaches Bailey 's evil grandson how different the world would have been if he had never been born .
Producers were considering directors and hoped to shoot the film with a $ 25–$35 million budget in Louisiana early in 2014 .
The film had been announced as being produced by Star Partners and Hummingbird Productions , neither of which are affiliated with Paramount , owners of the original film ( Farnsworth claimed that It 's a Wonderful Life was in the public domain ) .
Later , a Paramount spokesperson claimed that they were not granting permission to make the film , " To date , these individuals have not obtained any of the necessary rights , and we would take all appropriate steps to protect those rights " , the spokesperson said .
No further developmental plans have since arisen .
URBAN LEGEND Section::::Urban legend .
It is commonly believed that the characters of Bert and Ernie on Sesame Street were named after Bert the cop and Ernie the cabdriver ; however , in a correction for the 1999 " Annual Xmas Quiz " in the San Francisco Chronicle , which made this claim , series writer Jerry Juhl confirmed that , as per producer Jon Stone , the shared names were merely a coincidence .
Despite this , the 1996 holiday special Elmo Saves Christmas references the rumor , during a scene where Bert and Ernie walk by a TV set , which is playing the movie .
The pair are surprised by the line : " Bert !
Ernie !
What 's the matter with you two guys ?
You were here on my wedding night ! "
SEE ALSO
* I Love You
, Alice B. Toklas a 1968 film * Mr. Destiny a 1990 film * The Family Man a 2000 film * Alternate universe in filmdom * Dastar Corp. v.
Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp. ( a legal case partially relating to another example of an out of copyright adaption of a work still under copyright )
* Zu Zu Ginger Snaps
* List of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing
* List of films considered the best REFERENCES CITATIONS
BIBLIOGRAPHY * Barker , Martin and Thomas Austin . "
Films , Audiences and Analyses " .
From Antz To Titanic
: Reinventing Film Analysis .
London :
Pluto Press , 2000 , pp .
15–29 . .
* Cahill , Marie .
It 's a Wonderful Life .
East Bridgewater , Massachusetts :
World Publications Group , 2006 . .
* Capra , Frank .
Frank Capra , The Name Above the Title : An Autobiography .
New York : The Macmillan Company , 1971 . .
* Cox , Stephen .
It 's a Wonderful Life : A Memory Book .
Nashville , Tennessee :
Cumberland House , 2003 . .
* Eliot , Mark .
Jimmy Stewart : A Biography .
New York :
Random House , 2006 . .
* Finler , Joel W.
The Hollywood Story : Everything You Always Wanted to Know About the American Movie Business ,
But Did n't Know Where to Look .
London :
Pyramid Books , 1988 . .
* Goodrich , Francis , Albert Hackett and Frank Capra .
It 's a Wonderful Life :
The Complete Script in its Original Form .
New York :
St. Martin 's Press , 1986 . .
* Jones , Ken D. , Arthur F. McClure and Alfred E. Twomey .
The Films of James Stewart .
New York :
Castle Books , 1970 .
* McBride , Joseph .
Frank Capra : The Catastrophe of Success .
New York :
Touchstone Books , 1992 . .
* Michael , Paul , ed .
The Great Movie Book : A Comprehensive Illustrated Reference Guide to the Best - loved Films of the Sound Era .
Englewood Cliffs , New Jersey :
Prentice - Hall Inc. , 1980 . .
* Rodgers , James W.
It 's a Wonderful Life :
A Play in Two Acts .
Woodstock , Illinois :
Dramatic Publishing , 1994 . .
* Sarris , Andrew . 1998 . "
You Ai n't Heard Nothin' Yet .
"
The American Talking Film History & Memory , 1927 - 1949 .
Oxford University Press .
* Walters , James . "
Reclaiming the Real : It 's a Wonderful Life ( Frank Capra , 1946 ) " .
Alternative Worlds in Hollywood Cinema .
Bristol UK :
Intellect Ltd , 2008 , pp .
115–134 . .
*
Wiley , Mason and Damien Bona .
Inside Oscar : The Unofficial History of the Academy Awards .
New York :
Ballantine Books , 1987 . .
* Willian , Michael .
The Essential
It 's a Wonderful Life :
A Scene - by - Scene Guide to the Classic Film , 2nd ed .
Chicago :
Chicago Review Press , 2006 . .
FURTHER READING
* Stewart , Jimmy . "
Jimmy Stewart Remembers '
It 's a Wonderful Life ' " .
1977 .
MyMerryChristmas.com , 2012 .
Web .
January 9 , 2012 .
* Cox , Stephen .
" On a Wing and a Prayer " .
Los Angeles Times December 23 , 2006 : E-1 .
Web .
January 9 , 2012 .
* Sullivan , Daniel J. " Sentimental Hogwash ?
: On Capra 's It 's a Wonderful Life " , Humanitas ( 2005 )
18.1–2 : 115–140 .
Web .
January 9 , 2012 .
* Kamiya , Gary .
" All hail Pottersville ! "
Salon December 22 , 2001 .
Web .
January 9 , 2012 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Making of It 's A Wonderful Life Frank Capra Online at Eeweems.com *
Dimitri Tiomkin
and It 's A Wonderful Life at AmericanMusicPreservation.com * Philip Van Doren Stern , The Greatest Gift , publicly available 1st edition of authenticated reproduction , at sendaframe.com
Section::::External links .
Streaming audio
*
It 's a Wonderful Life on Lux Radio Theater : March 10 , 1947
*
It 's a Wonderful Life on Screen Directors Playhouse : May 8 , 1949