MAGIC 8-BALL
The Magic 8-Ball is a toy used for fortune - telling or seeking advice , developed in the 1950s and manufactured by Mattel .
The user asks a question to the large plastic ball , then turns it over to reveal a written answer which appears on the surface of the toy .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
An 8-ball was used as a fortune - telling device in the 1940 Three Stooges short , You Nazty Spy ! , and called a " magic ball " .
While Magic 8-Ball did not exist in its current form until 1950 , the functional component was invented by Albert C. Carter , inspired by a spirit writing device used by his mother , Mary , a Cincinnati clairvoyant .
When Carter approached store owner Max Levinson about stocking the device , Levinson called in his brother - in - law Abe Bookman , a graduate of Ohio Mechanics Institute .
In 1944 , Carter filed for a patent for the cylindrical device , assigning it in 1946 to Bookman , Levinson , and another partner in what came to be Alabe Crafts ,
Inc. ( Albert and Abe ) .
Alabe marketed and sold the cylinder as The Syco - Slate .
Carter died sometime before the patent was granted in 1948 .
Bookman made improvements to The Syco - Slate , and in 1948 , it was encased in an iridescent crystal ball .
Though unsuccessful , the revamped product caught the attention of Chicago 's Brunswick Billiards .
In 1950 they commissioned Alabe Crafts to make a version in the form of a traditional black - and - white 8-ball . DESIGN Section::::Design .
The Magic 8-Ball is a hollow plastic sphere resembling an oversized , black - and - white 8-ball .
Inside , a cylindrical reservoir contains a white , plastic icosahedron floating in alcohol dyed dark blue .
Each of the die 's 20 faces has an affirmative , negative , or non - committal statement printed in raised letters .
These messages are read through a window on the ball 's bottom .
To use the ball , it must be held with the window initially facing down .
After " asking the ball " a yes – no question , the user then turns the ball so that the window faces up , setting in motion the liquid and die inside .
When the die floats to the top and one face presses against the window , the raised letters displace the blue liquid to reveal the message as white letters on a blue background .
Although many users shake the ball before turning it upright , the instructions warn against doing so to avoid white bubbles , which interfere with the performance of the ball itself .
POSSIBLE ANSWERS Section::::Possible answers .
The 20 answers inside a standard Magic 8-Ball are : Ten of the possible answers are affirmative ( ● ) , while five are non - committal ( ● ) and five are negative ( ● ) .
SEE ALSO
* Flipism * Divination * Gambling REFERENCES
PATENTS
* — Liquid Filled Dice Agitator ca .
1944 * — Liquid filled die agitator containing a die having raised indicia on the facets thereof , 1962 * — Amusement Device ca .
1961 EXTERNAL LINKS