ORANGE COUNTY , NEW YORK Orange County is a county located in the U.S. state of New York .
As of the 2010 census , the population was 372,813 .
The county seat is Goshen .
This county was first created in 1683 and reorganized with its present boundaries in 1798 .
Orange County is included in the New York - Newark - Jersey City , NY - NJ - PA Metropolitan Statistical Area .
It is in the state 's Mid - Hudson Region of the Hudson Valley .
The County Executive is Steve Neuhaus .
As of the 2010 census the centre of population of New York state was located in Orange County , approximately three miles west of the hamlet of Westbrookville .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Orange County was officially established on November 1 , 1683 , when the Province of New York was divided into twelve counties .
Each of these was named to honor a member of the British royal family , and Orange County took its name from the Prince of Orange , who subsequently became King William III of England .
As originally defined , Orange County included only the southern part of its present - day territory , plus all of present - day Rockland County further south .
The northern part of the present - day county , beyond Moodna Creek , was then a part of neighbouring Ulster County .
At that date , the only European inhabitants of the area were a handful of Dutch colonists in present - day Rockland County , and the area of modern Orange County was entirely occupied by the native Munsee people .
Due to its relatively small population , the original Orange County was not fully independent and was administered by New York County .
The first European settlers in the area of the present - day county arrived in 1685 .
They were a party of around twenty - five families from Scotland , led by David Toshach , the Laird of Monzievaird , and his brother - in - law Major Patrick McGregor , a former officer of the French Army .
They settled in the Hudson Highlands at the place where the Moodna Creek enters the Hudson River , now known as New Windsor .
In 1709 , a group of German Palatine refugees settled at Newburgh .
They were Protestants from a part of Germany along the Rhine that had suffered during the religious wars .
Queen Anne 's government arranged for passage from England of nearly 3,000 Palatines in ten ships .
Many were settled along the Hudson River in work camps on property belonging to Robert Livingston .
A group of Dutch and English settlers arrived at Goshen in 1712 .
Additional immigrants came from Ireland ; they were of Scots and English descent who had been settled as planters there .
During the American Revolutionary War the county was a hotbed of Loyalist and anti - Patriot activity .
Claudius Smith was a Loyalist marauder whose team robbed and terrorized citizens ; he was hanged in Goshen in 1779 for allegedly robbing and killing Major Nathaniel Strong ; two of his sons were also executed for similar crimes .
The Mathews family of Blooming Grove were active Loyalists ; Fletcher Mathews was a sympathizer and sometime associate of Smith , and his brother David Mathews was Mayor of New York City during its British occupation for the entirety of the war .
In 1798 , after the American Revolutionary War , the boundaries of Orange County changed .
Its southern corner was used to create the new Rockland County , and in exchange , an area to the north of the Moodna Creek was added , which had previously been in Ulster County .
This caused a reorganization of the local administration , as the original county seat had been fixed at Orangetown in 1703 , but this was now in Rockland County .
Duties were subsequently shared between Goshen , which had been the center of government for the northern part of Orange County , and Newburgh , which played a similar role in the area transferred from Ulster County .
The county court was established in 1801 .
It was not until 1970 that Goshen was named as the sole county seat .
Due to a boundary dispute between New York and New Jersey , the boundaries of many of the southern towns of the county were not definitively established until the 19th century .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
According to the U.S. Census Bureau , the county has a total area of , of which is land and ( 3.2 % ) is water .
Orange County is in southeastern New York State , directly north of the New Jersey - New York border , west of the Hudson River , east of the Delaware River and northwest of New York City .
It borders the New York counties of Dutchess , Putnam , Rockland , Sullivan , Ulster , and Westchester , as well as Passaic and Sussex counties in New Jersey and Pike County in Pennsylvania .
Orange County is the only county in New York State which borders both the Hudson and Delaware Rivers .
Orange County is where the Great Valley of the Appalachians finally opens up and ends .
The western corner is set off by the Shawangunk Ridge .
The area along the Rockland County border ( within Harriman and Bear Mountain state parks ) and south of Newburgh is part of the Hudson Highlands .
The land in between is the valley of the Wallkill River .
In the southern portion of the county the Wallkill valley expands into a wide glacial lake bed known as the Black Dirt Region for its fertility .
The highest point is Schunemunk Mountain , at above sea level .
The lowest is sea level along the Hudson .
NATIONAL PROTECTED AREAS * Upper Delaware Scenic and Recreational River ( part )
* Wallkill River National Wildlife Refuge ( part ) ADJACENT COUNTIES
* Ulster County – north * Dutchess County – northeast * Putnam County - east * Rockland County – southeast * Passaic County , New Jersey - southeast * Sussex County , New Jersey - south * Pike County , Pennsylvania – southwest * Sullivan County –
northwest DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
As of the 2010 United States Census , there were 372,813 people residing in the county .
The population density was 444 people per square mile ( 171 / km² ) .
The racial makeup of the county was 77.2 % White , 10.2 % Black or African American , 0.5 % Native American , 2.4 % Asian , and 3.1 % from two or more races .
18 % of the population were Hispanic or Latino of any race .
According to the 2000 United States Census , 18.3 % were of Italian , 17.4 % Irish , 10.2 % German and 5.0 % Polish ancestry .
According to the 2009–13 American Community Survey , 76.57 % of people spoke only English at home , 13.39 % spoke Spanish , 4.03 % spoke Yiddish and 0.83 % spoke Italian .
As of the 2000 Census , there were 114,788 households out of which 39.60 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 57.90 % were married couples living together , 11.40 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 26.40 % were non - families .
21.50 % of all households were made up of individuals and 8.50 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The average household size was 2.85 and the average family size was 3.35 .
In the county , the population was spread out with 29.00 % under the age of 18 , 8.70 % from 18 to 24 , 30.00 % from 25 to 44 , 21.90 % from 45 to 64 , and 10.30 % who were 65 years of age or older .
The median age was 35 years .
For every 100 females , there were 100.30 males .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 97.50 males .
The median income for a household in the county was $ 52,058 , and the median income for a family was $ 60,355 .
Males had a median income of $ 42,363 versus $ 30,821 for females .
The per capita income for the county was $ 21,597 .
About 7.60 % of families and 10.50 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 14.80 % of those under age 18 and 8.00 % of those age 65 or over .
Despite its rural roots , Orange County has been among the fastest - growing regions within the New York City Metropolitan Area .
and starting around the 1960s has developed a more suburban character .
LAW AND GOVERNMENT Section::::Law and government .
Originally , like most New York counties , Orange County was governed by a Board of Supervisors .
Its board consisted of the 20 town supervisors , nine city supervisors elected from the nine wards of the City of Newburgh , and four each elected from the wards of the cities of Middletown and Port Jervis .
In 1968 , the board adopted a county charter and a reapportionment plan that created the county legislature and executive .
The first county executive and legislature were elected in November , 1969 and took office on January 1 , 1970 .
Today , Orange County is still governed by the same charter ; residents elect the county executive and a 21-member county legislature elected from 21 single - member districts .
There are also several state constitutional positions that are elected , including a sheriff , county clerk and district attorney .
Prior to 1 January 2008 four coroners were also elected ; however , on that date , the county switched to a medical examiner system .
The current County Officers are : * County Executive : Steven M. Neuhaus ( Republican ) * County Clerk : Annie Rabbit ( Republican )
* Sheriff : Carl E. DuBois ( Republican ) * District Attorney : David M. Hoovler ( Republican )
Republican !
Democratic !
Third parties The County Legislature and its previous board of supervisors were long dominated by the Republican Party .
However , since the late 20th century , the Democrats have closed the gap .
During 2008 and 2009 the legislature was evenly split between 10 Republicans , 10 Democrats and 1 Independence Party member .
In 2009 , the legislature had its first Democratic chairman elected when one member of the Republican caucus voted alongside the 10 Democratic members to elect Roxanne Donnery ( D)-Highlands / Woodbury to the post .
At the November 2009 election , several Democratic incumbents were defeated .
As of the convening of the legislature on January 1 , 2012 , there are 12 Republicans , 8 Democrats and 1 Independence member .
+
Orange County Executives !
Name !
Party !
Term + Orange County Legislature !
District !
Legislator !
Party !
Residence
In 1970 , the county switched from government by a Board of Supervisors , consisting of the elected heads of town governments , to having a 21-member elected county legislature and executive .
The sheriff , district attorney and county clerk have always been elected .
All serve four - year terms , with elections in the year following presidential election years , save the sheriff , whose election is the following year .
The current county executive is Steven Neuhaus , former town supervisor for Chester .
Frank Phillips , Annie Rabbitt and Carl DuBois are the incumbent district attorney , clerk and sheriff respectively .
All are Republicans , and as of 2012 the legislature has a 13–8 Republican majority .
Only one Democrat , Mary McPhillips , has served as county executive .
She failed to win re - election after a single term in the early 1990s .
For several years in the late 2000s , one Republican legislator 's decision to become an independent and caucus with the Democrats led to a 10 - 10 - 1 effective Democratic majority , with Roxanne Donnery as chair .
The Republicans regained their majority in the 2009 elections .
TRANSPORTATION
Section::::Transportation .
The county is served by Stewart International Airport , located two miles west of Newburgh , New York .
The airport serves American Airlines , Delta Air Lines , Allegiant Air , JetBlue Airways and Norwegian Air Shuttle .
AirTran Airways stopped providing service to the airport in late 2008 .
Norwegian Air Shuttle began in 2017 .
Ground transportation within Orange County is provided primarily by Leprechaun Lines , Monsey Trails , NJ Transit , Short Line Bus , and Metro - North Railroad 's Port Jervis Line , as well as amenities such as senior citizen busing and car services , which usually restrict themselves to their respective town or city .
Major routes in Orange County are freeways Interstate 84 , Interstate 87 , State Route 17 , and the Palisades Interstate Parkway , and surface roads U.S. Route 6 , U.S. Route 9W , and U.S. Route 209 .
There are two Hudson River crossings in Orange County : the Bear Mountain Bridge and the Newburgh - Beacon Bridge .
POLITICS Section::::Politics .
George W. Bush won 54 % of the Orange County vote in 2004 reflecting a solid Republican edge in county politics .
However , Barack Obama carried the county by a 51 % margin four years later .
It was the first time a Democrat had carried Orange County when first elected to the presidency .
That year the number of registered Democrats in the county exceeded Republicans for the first time .
The two presidential election results give the county a Cook PVI of R+2 , consistent with county voters ' willingness to sometimes elect Democrats , such as U.S. Rep. John Hall .
From 2007 on , when Hall represented the 19th district , which covered most of the county , Orange 's representation in Congress was exclusively Democratic , as Maurice Hinchey had represented the towns of Crawford , Montgomery and Newburgh and the city of Newburgh , all of which were in what was then the 22nd district , since 1988 .
In the 2010 midterms , Hall was defeated by Nan Hayworth .
In 2012 , after Hinchey 's former 22nd district was eliminated in redistricting following his retirement and all of Orange County was included in the current 18th district , Hayworth was defeated by Democrat Sean Patrick Maloney , a former adviser to President Bill Clinton and the first openly gay person to be elected to Congress from New York .
Maloney won a rematch against Hayworth in 2014 ; in 2016 he was again re - elected over Phil Oliva .
At the state level , Republicans have continued to hold onto Senate seats while Democrats have made inroads in recent years on the Assembly side .
Two State Senate districts — the 39th , held by Bill Larkin and 42nd , held by John Bonacic — cover the county .
Democrats have made significant gains in the county 's State Assembly seats .
The 98th district , which includes the far western part of the county as well as the Town of Warwick , is represented by Annie Rabbitt , and the 101st district , which includes the Towns of Crawford and Montgomery , was until 2016 held by Claudia Tenney , both Republicans .
After Tenney left her seat to run for Congress that year , Brian D. Miller , another Republican , was elected to replace her .
The remainder of the county 's Assembly districts are represented by Democrats : James Skoufis in the 99th district , Aileen Gunther in the 100th district , and Frank Skartados in the 104th district .
Skoufis is the youngest New York State legislator currently serving .
SPORTS
Section::::Sports .
Delano - Hitch Stadium in Newburgh has played host to various professional and amateur baseball teams from various leagues since opening in 1926 .
The stadium is currently home to the Newburgh Newts .
HIGH SCHOOL SPORTS Section::::High school sports .
High schools in Orange County compete in Section 9 of the New York State Public High School Athletic Association along with schools from Dutchess , Ulster , and Sullivan counties .
COLLEGE SPORTS Section::::College sports .
The Army Black Knights of the United States Military Academy in West Point field NCAA Division
I teams in 24 different sports .
The Orange County Community College Colts compete in the National Junior College Athletic Association .
Mount Saint Mary College in Newburgh fields 15 teams in the Eastern College Athletic Conference and the Skyline Conference of NCAA Division III .
ORANGE COUNTY YOUTH FOOTBALL LEAGUE ( OCYFL ) Section::::Orange County Youth Football League ( OCYFL ) .
The Orange County Youth Football League ( O.C.Y.F.L. ) is a non - profit organization that allows youth age 6 through 14 to play competitive American football .
The League encompasses 15 towns with over 100 teams in Orange County and surrounding areas including Chester , Cornwall , Goshen , Highland Falls , Marlboro , Middletown , Minisink Valley , Monticello , Newburgh , New Windsor , Pine Bush , Port Jervis , Valley Central , Wallkill , Warwick and Washingtonville .
It is composed of 4 Divisions , divided by weight restrictions , and a " Mighty Mite " Flag Football division for 6 & 7 year olds .
In each division , there is additionally a complete cheerleading program for each team .
There is a comprehensive annual schedule of play within each division for all teams , culminating in a divisional Championship game , often played in Michie Stadium or Shea Stadium at the historic United States Military Academy at West Point , New York .
COMMUNITIES CITIES
* Middletown * Newburgh * Port Jervis
TOWNS
* Blooming Grove * Chester * Cornwall * Crawford * Deerpark
* Goshen * Greenville *
Hamptonburgh * Highlands
* Minisink * Monroe * Montgomery
* Mount Hope
* New Windsor * Newburgh * Tuxedo * Wallkill * Warwick * Wawayanda * Woodbury VILLAGES
* Chester
* Cornwall on Hudson * Florida
* Goshen ( county seat )
* Greenwood Lake * Harriman * Highland Falls * Kiryas Joel
* Maybrook * Monroe * Montgomery * Otisville * South Blooming Grove * Tuxedo Park
* Unionville
* Walden
* Warwick * Washingtonville
*
Woodbury CENSUS - DESIGNATED PLACES *
Balmville
*
Beaver Dam Lake
* Firthcliffe * Fort Montgomery
* Gardnertown * Mechanicstown * Mountain Lodge Park * New Windsor * Orange Lake *
Pine Bush
* Salisbury Mills
* Scotchtown * Vails Gate * Walton Park * Washington Heights * West Point HAMLETS * Amity * Arden * Bellvale * Bullville
* Carpenter 's Point
* Central Valley * Circleville * Highland Mills
* Howells * Little Britain
* Michigan Corners
* Mountainville * New Hampton * Pine Island * Ridgebury * Slate Hill * Sparrow Bush * Sugar Loaf
* Thompson Ridge
*
Westbrookville IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
In and Out :
Warwick
*
Heavy : Port Jervis * Super Troopers : Parts in Newburgh area
* The Sopranos parts of season 6-b , Episode 1 : Warwick and Tuxedo * Michael Clayton : Moodna Viaduct ( Cornwall ) , South Blooming Grove , and Stewart Airport ( New Windsor / Newburgh area ) * The Human Footprint : parts filmed in the Hudson Valley region ; aired on National Geographic Channel in 2008
* American Chopper : Montgomery , NY * Final Destination 1 & 2
: Parts of plot takes place in Otisville , NY and Greenwood Lake , NY - Shown by patches that police officers wear and television news program that is played .
*
The OA : Partially filmed in Central Valley ,
NY POINTS OF INTEREST Section::::Points of interest .
Points of interest in Orange County include the United States Military Academy at West Point ; Brotherhood Winery , America 's oldest winery , in Washingtonville ; the birthplace of William H. Seward in Florida ; the home and birthplace of Velveeta and Liederkranz Cheese in Monroe ; the Harness Racing Museum & Hall of Fame in Goshen ; the Times Herald - Record newspaper , the first cold press offset daily in the country , in Middletown ; the Galleria at Crystal Run , in Wallkill ; the Woodbury Common Premium Outlets in Monroe ; and the Orange County Fair in Wallkill .
The only state parks include Goosepond Mountain State Park , Harriman State Park and Sterling Forest State Park .
It is also the location of Orange County Choppers , the custom motorcycle shop featured on The Discovery Channel television series American Chopper .
NOTABLE RESIDENTS
* George Washington , 1st President of the United States , leader of the American Revolutionary War , from April 1782 until August 1783 .
* William Seward , U.S. Secretary of State .
* Henry Wisner , Orange County delegate to the First and Second Continental Congress
* David Mathews , Loyalist Mayor of New York City under the British during the American Revolution , may have been born but also lived in Mathewsfield ( now Blooming Grove )
* Willie the Lion Smith , stride jazz pianist * Denzel Washington actor , attended the now defunct Oakland Military Academy
* Whoopi Goldberg , Academy Award - winning actress
* Marisa Anderson , psychic who works with Police and CID ; featured in Hans Holzer Books .
* Paul Teutul , Sr . , custom motorcycle builder of Orange County Choppers
* Paul Teutul , Jr. , custom motorcycle builder of Paul Jr. Designs * Geraldine Ferraro , 1984 U.S.
Vice - Presidential Candidate , U.S. Congresswoman
* Jay Westervelt , environmentalist * Brad Mehldau , jazz pianist
* James Patterson , author
* Al Sarrantonio , author
* Spencer Tunick , photographer * Noah Webster , lexicographer , author
* Elizabeth Marie Pope , author of The Sherwood Ring * Stephen Crane , author of The Red Badge of Courage
*
Pierre Lorillard , tobacco magnate * Tony Gilroy , writer , producer , director .
* James Mangold , screenwriter , director .
* Armand Assante , actor * Emily Post , author
* Barry Bostwick , actor
* Saul Williams , musician , poet , actor and artist ; was born and raised in Newburgh * Cage Kennylz , rapper was raised in Middletown * Derek Jeter , New York Yankees captain , purchased Tiedemann Castle in Warwick
* Cyndi Lauper , used to spend summers in Tuxedo Park * Greg Anthony , former New York Knicks player
* Tim Hummel , former major league baseball player for the Cincinnati Reds .
* Mike Aviles , baseball player for the Kansas City Royals and Boston Red Sox
* Matt Morris , former baseball pitcher for the St. Louis Cardinals and Pittsburgh Pirates
* Joe Nathan , baseball player for the Minnesota Twins and Texas Rangers
* Dee Brown , former Major League Baseball and Nippon Professional Baseball player .
* Rob Bell , former Major League Baseball pitcher .
* Dave Telgheder , former MLB pitcher for the New York Mets and the Oakland Athletics .
* Brian Cashman , General Manager , New York Yankees * Scott Pioli , NFL executive , former General Manager of the Kansas City Chiefs
* Rose Thompson Hovick , mother of Gypsy Rose Lee and June Havoc
* Nathaniel White , serial killer
* Solomon Townsend , industrialist and State Legislator * J. Hector St. John de Crèvecœur , 18th century writer , author of Letters from an American Farmer * Frank Shorter , Olympic gold medalist * Emily DiDonato , fashion model , spokesmodel for Maybelline * General David Petraeus , Retired four - star general of the U.S. Army .
Former Director of the C.I.A. and commander of U.S. forces in Iraq .
* Mel Gibson , attended school in Washingtonville the year before his family moved to Australia in the 1960s .
* Tomás Estrada Palma , first President of Cuba , lived in a home on Route 32 in Central Valley .
* Benedict Arnold , revolutionary war general and defector * Andy Grammer , musician * Joel Teitelbaum , Grand Rabbi of Satmar Hasidic community , spent final years and is buried in Kiryas Joel * Aaron Teitelbaum , current Grand Rabbi of Kiryas Joel faction of Satmar Hasidic community .
* Vérité , musician SEE ALSO
* Hudson Valley
* Orange County Youth Football League
* Wawayanda Patent , 1703 land grant *
Neversink Preserve *
Cuddebackville Dam
* List of counties in New York
* National Register of Historic Places listings in Orange County , New York REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Orange County , New York government * Orange County tourism information
* Orange County , New York , Chamber of Commerce
* Early summary history of Orange County * Hudson Valley Directory , listings pertaining to Orange County , New York