NANCY ASTOR , VISCOUNTESS
ASTOR Nancy
Witcher Langhorne Astor , Viscountess Astor , CH ( 19 May 18792 May 1964 ) was the first female Member of Parliament to take her seat .
She was an American citizen who moved to England at age 26 .
She made a second marriage to Waldorf Astor as a young woman in England .
After he succeeded to the peerage and entered the House of Lords , she entered politics , in 1919 winning his former seat in Plymouth and becoming the first woman to sit as a Member of Parliament ( MP ) in the House of Commons .
Her first husband was an American citizen , Robert Gould Shaw II , and they divorced .
She served in Parliament as a member of the Conservative Party for Plymouth Sutton until 1945 , when she was persuaded to step down .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Nancy
Witcher Langhorne was born at the Langhorne House in Danville , Virginia .
She was the eighth of eleven children born to railroad businessman Chiswell Dabney Langhorne and his wife Nancy
Witcher Keene .
Following the abolition of slavery , Chiswell struggled to make his operations profitable , and with the destruction of the war , the family lived in near - poverty for several years before Nancy was born .
After her birth , her father gained a job as a tobacco auctioneer in Danville , the center of bright leaf tobacco and a major marketing and processing center .
In 1874 , he won a construction contract with the Chespeake and Ohio Railroad , using former contacts from his service in the Civil War .
By 1892 , when Nancy was thirteen years old , her father had re - established his wealth and built a sizeable home .
Chiswell Langhorne later moved his family to an estate , known as Mirador , in Albemarle County , Virginia .
Nancy Langhorne had four sisters and three brothers who survived childhood .
All of the sisters were known for their beauty ; Nancy and her sister Irene both attended a finishing school in New York City .
There Nancy met her first husband , socialite Robert Gould Shaw II , a first cousin of Colonel Robert Gould Shaw , who commanded the 54th Massachusetts Regiment , the first unit in the Union Army to be composed of African Americans .
They married in New York City on 27 October 1897 , when she was 18 .
The marriage was unhappy .
Shaw 's friends said Nancy became puritanical and rigid after marriage ; her friends said that Shaw was an abusive alcoholic .
During their four - year marriage , they had one son , Robert Gould Shaw III ( called Bobby ) .
Nancy left Shaw numerous times during their marriage , the first during their honeymoon .
In 1903 , Nancy 's mother died ; at that time , Nancy Shaw gained a divorce and moved back to Mirador to try to run her father 's household , but was unsuccessful .
Nancy Shaw took a tour of England and fell in love with the country .
Since she had been so happy there , her father suggested that she move to England .
Seeing she was reluctant , her father said this was also her mother 's wish ; he suggested she take her younger sister Phyllis .
Nancy and Phyllis moved together to England in 1905 .
Their older sister Irene had married the artist Charles Dana Gibson and became a model for his Gibson Girls .
ENGLAND Section::::England .
Nancy Shaw had already become known in English society as an interesting and witty American , at a time when numerous wealthy young American women had married into the aristocracy .
Her tendency to be saucy in conversation , yet religiously devout and almost prudish in behavior , confused many of the English men but pleased some of the older socialites .
Nancy also began to show her skill at winning over critics .
She was once asked by an English woman , " Have you come to get our husbands ? "
Her unexpected response , " If you knew the trouble I had getting rid of mine ... " charmed her listeners and displayed the wit for which she became known .
The couple were well matched , as they were both American expatriates with similar temperaments .
They were of the same age , born the same day , 19 May 1879 .
Astor shared some of Nancy 's moral attitudes , and had a heart condition that may have contributed to his restraint .
After the marriage , the Astor couple moved into Cliveden , a lavish estate in Buckinghamshire on the River Thames that was a wedding gift from Astor 's father .
Nancy Astor developed as a prominent hostess for the social elite .
The Astors also owned a grand London house , No . 4
St. James 's Square , which is now the premises of the Naval & Military Club .
A blue plaque unveiled in 1987 commemorates Astor at St. James 's Square .
Through her many social connections , Lady Astor became involved in a political circle called Milner 's Kindergarten .
Considered liberal in their age , the group advocated unity and equality among English - speaking people and a continuance or expansion of British imperialism .
RELIGIOUS VIEWS
Section::::Religious views .
With Milner 's Kindergarten , Astor began her friendship with Philip Kerr .
The friendship became important in her religious life .
The two met shortly after Kerr had suffered a spiritual crisis regarding his once devout Catholicism .
The two were each searching for spiritual stability and they were attracted to Christian Science , to which they both eventually converted .
After converting , she began to proselytize for that faith and played a role in Kerr 's conversion to it .
She also tried to convert Hilaire Belloc 's daughters to Christian Science , which led to a rift between them .
Despite having Catholic friends such as Belloc for a time , Astor 's religious views included a strong vein of Anti - Catholicism .
Christopher Sykes argues that Kerr , an ex - Catholic , influenced this , but others argue that Astor 's Protestant Virginia origins are a sufficient explanation for her Anti - Catholic views .
( Anti - Catholicism was also tied into historic national rivalries . )
In 1927 she reportedly told James Louis Garvin that if he hired a Catholic , " bishops would be there within a week . "
She disliked Jews and discouraged the hiring of Jews or Catholics to positions at The Observer .
This regime persisted at The Observer into the 1960s , although the subsequent owners tried to rescind it .
When Kenneth Tynan resigned from the Observer in 1963 to take the post of Literary Manager of the National Theatre , he proposed the Irish playwright Dominic Behan as his preferred replacement .
Behan , a well - known atheist , was interviewed for the post .
When he told the interview board that he was a Catholic , the offer was withdrawn .
Behan later said to Tynan , " I would hope if a Nazi ever asked me my religion I would have the courage to defend my right to be a Jew , Bush Baptist or even a damn Catholic ! "
FIRST CAMPAIGN FOR PARLIAMENT Section::::First campaign for Parliament .
Several elements of Viscountess Astor 's life influenced her first campaign , but she became a candidate after her husband succeeded to the peerage and House of Lords .
He had enjoyed a promising political career for several years before World War I in the House of Commons ; after his father 's death , he succeeded to his father 's peerage as the 2nd Viscount Astor .
He automatically became a member of the House of Lords and consequently had to forfeit his seat of Plymouth Sutton in the House of Commons .
With this change , Lady Astor decided to contest the vacant Parliamentary seat .
Astor had not been connected with the women 's suffrage movement in the British Isles .
The first woman elected to the British Parliament , Constance Markievicz , said Lady Astor was " of the upper classes , out of touch " .
Countess Markiewicz had been in Holloway prison for Sinn Féin activities during her election , and other suffragettes had been imprisoned for arson .
Astor was hampered in the popular campaign for her published and at times vocal teetotalism and her ignorance of current political issues .
Her tendency to say odd or outlandish things sometimes made her appear unstable .
On one occasion , while canvassing in Plymouth , she was greeted at a door by a girl whose mother was away .
As Astor was unfamiliar with the area , she had been given a naval officer as an escort .
The girl said : " ...
but she [ my mother ] said if a lady comes with a sailor they 're to use the upstairs room and leave ten bob " .
This is .
Astor appealed to voters on the basis of her earlier work with the Canadian soldiers , allies of the British , other charitable work during the war , her financial resources for the campaign and her ability to improvise .
Her audiences appreciated her wit and ability to turn the tables on hecklers .
Once a man asked her what the Astors had done for him
and she responded with , " Why , Charlie , you know , " and later had a picture taken with him .
This informal style baffled yet amused the British public .
She rallied the supporters of the current government , moderated her Prohibition views , and used women 's meetings to gain the support of female voters .
A by - election was held on 28 November 1919 , and she took up her seat in the House on 1 December as a Unionist ( also known as " Tory " ) Member of Parliament .
Viscountess Astor was not the first woman elected to the Westminster Parliament .
That was achieved by Constance Markievicz , who was the first woman MP elected to Westminster in 1918 , but as she was an Irish Republican , she did not take her seat .
As a result , Lady Astor is sometimes erroneously referred to as the first woman elected to Parliament rather than the first woman to take her seat in Parliament .
EARLY YEARS IN
PARLIAMENT Section::::Early years in Parliament .
Astor 's Parliamentary career was the most public phase of her life .
She gained attention as a woman and as someone who did not follow the rules , often attributed to her American upbringing .
On her first day in the House of Commons , she was called to order for chatting with a fellow House member , not realising that she was the person who was causing the commotion .
She learned to dress more sedately and avoided the bars and smoking rooms frequented by the men .
Early in her first term , MP Horatio Bottomley , who wanted to dominate the " soldier 's friend " issue and thought she was an obstacle , sought to ruin her political career .
He capitalised on her opposition to divorce reform and her efforts to maintain wartime alcohol restrictions .
He portrayed her as a hypocrite , as she was divorced ; he noted that the reform bill she opposed would allow women to have the kind of divorce she had had in America .
Bottomley later went to prison for fraud , which Astor used to her advantage in other campaigns .
Astor made friends among other women MPs , including members of the other parties .
Margaret Wintringham was elected after Astor had been in office for two years .
Astor also befriended " Red Ellen " Wilkinson , a former Communist then a member in the Labour Party .
Astor later proposed creating a " Women 's Party " , but the female Labour MPs opposed this , as their party was in power and had promised them positions .
Over time , political differences separated the women MPs ; by 1931 Astor became hostile to female Labour members such as Susan Lawrence .
Nancy Astor 's accomplishments in the House of Commons were relatively minor .
She never held a position with much influence , and never any post of ministerial rank , although her time in Commons saw four Conservative Prime Ministers in office .
The Duchess of Atholl ( elected to Parliament in 1923 , four years after Lady Astor ) rose to higher levels in the Tory Party before Astor did .
Astor felt if she had more position in the party , she would be less free to criticise her party 's government .
She did gain passage of a bill to increase the legal drinking age to eighteen unless the minor has parental approval .
During this period Nancy Astor continued to be active outside government , supporting the development and expansion of nursery schools for children 's education .
She was introduced to the issue by socialist Margaret McMillan , who believed that her late sister helped guide her in life .
Lady Astor was initially sceptical of this aspect , but later the two women became close ; Astor used her wealth to aid their social efforts .
Although active in charitable efforts , Astor also became noted for a streak of cruelty .
On hearing of the death of a political enemy , she expressed her pleasure .
When people complained , she did not apologize but said , " I 'm a Virginian ; we shoot to kill . "
Angus McDonnell , a Virginia friend , angered her by marrying without consulting her on his choice .
She later told him , regarding his maiden speech , that he " really must do better than that . "
During the course of her adult life , Astor alienated many others with her sharp words as well .
During the 1920s , Astor made several effective speeches in Parliament , and gained support for her Intoxicating Liquor ( Sale to Persons under 18 )
Bill ( nicknamed " Lady Astor 's Bill " ) , raising the legal age for consuming alcohol in a public house from 14 to 18 .
Her wealth and persona also brought attention to women who were serving in government .
She worked to recruit women into the civil service , the police force , education reform , and the House of Lords .
She remained popular in her constituency and well liked in the United States during the 1920s , but her success is generally believed to have declined in the following decades .
She was also concerned about the treatment of juvenile victims of crime : " The work of new MPs , such as Nancy Astor , led to a Departmental Committee on Sexual Offences Against Young People , which reported in 1925 . "
1930S Section::::1930s .
The 1930s were a decade of personal and professional difficulty for Lady Astor .
In 1929 she won a narrow victory over the Labour candidate .
In 1931 Bobby Shaw , her son from her first marriage , was arrested for homosexual offences .
As her son had previously shown tendencies toward alcoholism and instability , Astor 's friend Philip Kerr , 11th Marquess of Lothian , suggested the arrest might act as a catalyst for him to change his behavior , but he was incorrect .
Astor made a disastrous speech stating that alcohol use was the reason England 's national cricket team was defeated by the Australian national cricket team .
Both the English and Australian teams objected to this statement .
Astor remained oblivious to her growing unpopularity almost to the end of her career .
Astor 's friendship with George Bernard Shaw helped her through some of her problems , although his own nonconformity caused friction between them .
They held opposing political views and had very different temperaments .
However , his own tendency to make controversial statements or put her into awkward situations proved to be a drawback for her political career .
After Bobby Shaw was arrested , Gertrude Ely , a Pennsylvania Railroad heiress from Bryn Mawr , Pennsylvania offered to provide a guided tour to Moscow for Lady Astor and Bobby .
Because of public comments by her and her son during this period , her political career suffered .
Her son made many flattering statements about Stalinist Russia , while Astor often disparaged the nation because she did not approve of Communism .
In a meeting , she asked Joseph Stalin directly why he had slaughtered so many Russians , but many of her criticisms were translated as less challenging statements .
Some of her conservative supporters feared she had " gone soft " on Communism .
( Her question to Stalin may have been translated correctly only because he insisted that he be told what she had said . )
Tories felt that her son 's praise of the USSR served as a coup for Soviet propaganda ; they were unhappy with her tour .
ASTOR AND NAZISM Section::::Astor and Nazism .
Astor was challenged by the rise of Nazism .
She criticised them for devaluing the position of women , and was strongly opposed to the idea of another World War .
However , several of her friends and associates , especially Lord Lothian , became heavily involved in the German appeasement policy ; this group became known as the " Cliveden set " .
The term was first used in The Week , a newspaper run by the British Communist Claud Cockburn , but over time the allegations became more elaborate .
The Cliveden set were a coterie of aristocrats described by one journalist as having subscribed to their own brand of fascism .
Its members were depicted by war agitators as the prime movers for peace .
Astor believed that Nazism would solve the problems associated with Communism and the Jews .
Some claimed that she had hypnotic powers .
Despite her anti - Catholicism , Nancy Astor was friends with US Ambassador to Britain Joseph P. Kennedy , Sr .
Their correspondence is reportedly filled with anti - Semitic language .
Edward J. Renehan , Jr. notes :
As fiercely anti - Communist as they were anti - Semitic , Kennedy and Astor looked upon Adolf Hitler as a welcome solution to both of these " world problems " ( Nancy 's phrase ) ...
Kennedy replied that he expected the " Jew media " in the United States to become a problem , that " Jewish pundits in New York and Los Angeles " were already making noises contrived to " set a match to the fuse of the world .
Although she held anti - Semitic views , Astor has not been documented as influential in anti - Semitic or pro - Nazi policies .
At the request of her friend , Felix Frankfurter ( future US Supreme Court justice ) , Astor directly intervened with the Nazis in Vienna and secured the release of Frakfurter 's uncle , Solomon .
Astor did occasionally meet with Nazi officials in keeping with Neville Chamberlain 's policies , and she was known to distrust and dislike British Foreign Secretary ( later Prime Minister ) Anthony Eden .
She told one Nazi official , who later turned out to be working against Nazis from within , that she supported their re - armament , but she supported this policy because , she said that Germany was " surrounded by Catholics .
" She also told Joachim von Ribbentrop , the German Ambassador who later became the Foreign Minister of Germany , that Hitler looked too much like Charlie Chaplin to be taken seriously .
These statements are the only documented incidents of her direct expressions to Nazis .
Astor became increasingly harsh in her anti - Catholic and anti - Communist sentiments .
After passage of the Munich Agreement , she said that if the Czech refugees fleeing Nazi oppression were Communists , they should seek asylum with the Soviets instead of the British .
Even supporters of appeasement felt that this was out of line , but Lord Lothian encouraged her comments .
He criticised the Pope for opposing Hitler 's annexation of Austria .
Lord Lothian influenced Lady Astor in many ways .
WORLD WAR II Section::::World War II .
When war did come , Astor admitted that she had made mistakes , and voted against Chamberlain , but left - wing hostility to her politics remained .
In a 1939 speech , the pro - Soviet Labour MP Stafford Cripps called her " The Member for Berlin " .
Her fear of Catholics increased and she made a speech saying that a Catholic conspiracy was subverting the foreign office .
Based on her opposition to Communists , she insulted Stalin 's role ( from 1941 ) as an ally of the Western nations during the war .
Her speeches became rambling and incomprehensible ; an opponent said that debating her had become " like playing squash with a dish of scrambled eggs " .
On one occasion she accosted a young American soldier outside the Houses of Parliament . "
Would you like to go in ? "
she asked .
The GI replied : " You are the sort of woman my mother told me to avoid " .
The period from 1937 to the end of the war was personally difficult for her : from 1937–38 Astor lost both her sister Phyllis and her only surviving brother .
In 1940 Lord Lothian died .
He had been her closest Christian Scientist friend even after her husband converted .
George Bernard Shaw 's wife died three years later .
During the war , Astor 's husband had a heart attack .
After this , their marriage grew cold , likely due to her subsequent discomfort with his health problems .
She ran a hospital for Canadian soldiers as she had during the First World War , but openly expressed a preference for the earlier soldiers .
It was generally believed that it was Lady Astor who , during a World War II speech , first referred to the men of the 8th Army who were fighting in the Italian campaign as the " D - Day Dodgers " .
Observers thought she was suggesting they were avoiding the " real war " in France and the future invasion .
The Allied soldiers in Italy were so incensed that Major Hamish Henderson of the 51st Highland Division composed a bitingly sarcastic song to the tune of the popular German song " Lili Marleen " ( popularised in English by Marlene Dietrich ) , called " The Ballad of the D - Day Dodgers " .
This song has also been attributed to Lance - Sergeant Harry Pynn of the Tank Rescue Section , 19 Army Fire Brigade .
When told she was one of the people listed to be arrested , imprisoned and face possible execution in " The Black Book " under a German invasion of Britain , Lady Astor commented : " It is the complete answer to the terrible lie that the so - called ' Cliveden Set ' was pro - Fascist . " FINAL YEARS Section::::Final years .
Lady Astor did not acknowledge her loss of popularity .
She believed her party and her husband caused her retirement in 1945 .
As the Tories believed she had become a political liability in the final years of World War II , her husband said that if she ran for office again the family would not support her .
She conceded but , according to contemporary reports , was both irritated and angry about this .
Lady Astor struggled in retirement , which put more strain on her marriage .
In a speech commemorating her 25 years in parliament , she stated that her retirement was forced on her and that it should please the men of Britain .
The couple began travelling separately and soon were living apart .
Lord Astor also began moving toward left - wing politics in his last years , and that exacerbated their differences .
However , the couple reconciled before his death on 30 September 1952 .
Lady Astor 's public image suffered , as her ethnic and religious views were increasingly out of touch with cultural changes in Britain .
She expressed a growing paranoia regarding ethnic minorities .
In one instance she stated that the President of the United States had become too dependent on New York City .
To her this city represented " Jewish and foreign " influences that she feared .
During a US tour , she told a group of African - American students that they should aspire to be like the black servants she remembered from her youth .
On a later trip she told African - American church members that they should be grateful for slavery because it had allowed them to be introduced to Christianity .
In Rhodesia she proudly told the white minority government leaders that she was the daughter of a slave owner .
After 1956 , Nancy Astor became increasingly isolated .
In 1959 , she was honored by receiving the Freedom of City of Plymouth .
By this time , she had lost all her sisters and brothers , her colleague " Red Ellen " Wilkinson died in 1947 , George Bernard Shaw died in 1950 , and she did not take well to widowhood .
Her son Bobby Shaw became increasingly combative and after her death he committed suicide .
Her son , Jakie , married a prominent Catholic woman , which hurt his relationship with his mother .
She and her other children became estranged .
Gradually she began to accept Catholics as friends .
However , she said that her final years were lonely .
Lady Astor died in 1964 at her daughter Nancy Astor 's home at Grimsthorpe Castle in Lincolnshire .
She was cremated and her ashes interred at the Octagon Temple at Cliveden .
ALLEGED QUOTATIONS
Section::::Alleged quotations .
She was noted for exchanges with Winston Churchill , though these are not well documented .
Churchill is supposed to have told Lady Astor that having a woman in Parliament was like having one intrude on him in the bathroom , to which she retorted , " You 're not handsome enough to have such fears .
" Lady Astor is also said to have responded to a question from Churchill about what disguise he should wear to a masquerade ball by saying , " Why do n't you come sober , Prime Minister ? "
In another recounted exchange , Lady Astor said to Churchill , " If you were my husband , I 'd poison your tea , " to which he responded , " Madam , if you were my wife , I 'd drink it . "
The retort has been documented as being by Churchill 's friend F. E. Smith , Lord Birkenhead .
CHILDREN
* Robert Gould Shaw III ( 1898–1970 ) * * William Waldorf Astor II ( 1907–1966 ) * * Nancy Phyllis Louise Astor ( 1909–1975 ) * * Francis David Langhorne Astor ( 1912–2001 ) * * Michael Langhorne Astor ( 1916–1980 )
* * John Jacob Astor VII " Jakie " ( 1918–2000 ) * REFERENCES FOOTNOTES CITATIONS
SOURCES
* Astor , Michael , Tribal Feelings ( Readers Union , 1964 )
* Cowling , Maurice , The Impact of Hitler : British Policies and Policy 1933–1940 , Cambridge University Press , 1975 ,
p. 402 , * Musolf , Karen J. , From Plymouth to Parliament ( St. Martin 's Press , 1999 )
* Wearing , J. P. ( editor ) , Bernard Shaw and Nancy Astor ( University of Toronto Press , 2005 ) FURTHER READING
* Harrison , Rosina , Rose : My Life in Service to Lady Astor , ( Penguin Books , 2011 ) .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Portrait of Nancy Langhorne Shaw Astor by Edith Leeson Everett , Virginia Historical Society , Richmond , Virginia * Mirador Historical Marker , Albemarle County , Virginia
* www.cracroftspeerage.co.uk