LANGUAGES OF AFRICA
The languages of Africa are divided into six major language families : * Afroasiatic languages are spread throughout Western Asia , North Africa , the Horn of Africa and parts of the Sahel .
* Austronesian languages are spoken in Madagascar .
* Indo - European languages are spoken in South Africa and Namibia ( Afrikaans , English , German ) and are used as lingua francas in the former colonies of Britain ( English ) , former colonies of France and of Belgium ( French ) , former colonies of Portugal and remaining Afro - Portuguese islands ( Portuguese ) , former colonies of Italy ( Italian ) , former colonies of Spain ( Spanish ) and the current Spanish territories of Ceuta , Melilla and the Canary Islands ( Spanish ) .
* Niger – Congo languages ( Bantu and non - Bantu ) cover West , Central , Southeast and Southern Africa .
* Nilo - Saharan languages ( unity debated ) are spoken from Tanzania to Sudan and from Chad to Mali .
There are several other small families and language isolates , as well as languages that have yet to be classified .
In addition , Africa has a wide variety of sign languages , many of which are language isolates ( see below ) .
The total number of languages natively spoken in Africa is variously estimated ( depending on the delineation of language vs. dialect ) at between 1,250 and 2,100 , and by some counts at " over 3,000 " .
Nigeria alone has over 500 languages ( according to the count of SIL Ethnologue ) , one of the greatest concentrations of linguistic diversity in the world .
However , " One of the notable differences between Africa and most other linguistic areas is its relative uniformity .
With few exceptions , all of Africa 's languages have been gathered into four major phyla . "
Around a hundred languages are widely used for inter - ethnic communication .
Arabic , Somali , Berber , Amharic , Oromo , Igbo , Swahili , Hausa , Manding , Fulani and Yoruba are spoken by tens of millions of people .
Twelve dialect clusters ( which may group up to a hundred linguistic varieties ) are spoken by 75 percent , and fifteen by 85 percent , of Africans as a first or additional language .
Although many mid - sized languages are used on the radio , in newspapers and in primary - school education , and some of the larger ones are considered national languages , only a few are official at the national level .
The African Union declared 2006 the " Year of African Languages " .
LANGUAGE GROUPS Section::::Language groups .
Most languages spoken in Africa belong to one of three large language families : Afroasiatic , Nilo - Saharan and Niger – Congo .
Another hundred belong to small families such as Ubangian ( sometimes grouped within Niger - Congo ) and the various families called Khoisan , or the Indo - European and Austronesian language families mainly spoken outside Africa ; the presence of the latter two dates to 2,600 and 1,500 years ago , respectively .
In addition , the languages of Africa languages include several unclassified languages and sign languages .
The earliest Afroasiatic languages are associated with the Capsian culture , the Nilo - Saharan languages are linked with the Khartoum Mesolithic / Neolithic , the Niger - Congo languages are correlated with the west and central African hoe - based farming traditions and the Khoisan languages are matched with the south and southeastern Wilton industries .
More broadly , the Afroasiatic family is tentatively grouped within the Nostratic superfamily , and the Nilo - Saharan and Niger - Congo phyla form the Niger - Saharan macrophylum .
AFROASIATIC LANGUAGES
Section::::Afroasiatic languages .
Afroasiatic languages are spoken throughout North Africa , the Horn of Africa , Western Asia and parts of the Sahel .
There are approximately 375 Afroasiatic languages spoken by over 400 million people .
The main subfamilies of Afroasiatic are Berber , Chadic , Cushitic , Egyptian and Semitic .
The Afroasiatic Urheimat is uncertain .
However , the family 's most extensive branch , the Semitic languages ( including Arabic , Amharic and Hebrew among others ) , seems to have developed in the Arabian peninsula .
The Semitic languages are now the only branch of Afroasiatic that is spoken outside Africa .
Some of the most widely spoken Afroasiatic languages include Arabic ( a Semitic language , and a recent arrival from West Asia ) , Somali ( Cushitic ) , Berber ( Berber ) , Hausa ( Chadic ) , Amharic ( Semitic ) and Oromo ( Cushitic ) .
Of the world 's surviving language families , Afroasiatic has the longest written history , as both the Akkadian language of Mesopotamia and Ancient Egyptian are members .
NILO - SAHARAN LANGUAGES Section::::Nilo - Saharan languages .
Nilo - Saharan languages consist of a hundred diverse languages .
The family has a speech area that stretches from the Nile Valley to northern Tanzania and into Nigeria and DR Congo , with the Songhay languages along the middle reaches of the Niger River as a geographic outlier .
Genetic linkage between these languages has not been conclusively demonstrated , and among linguists , support for the proposal is sparse .
The languages share some unusual morphology , but if they are related , most of the branches must have undergone major restructuring since diverging from their common ancestor .
The inclusion of the Songhay languages is questionable , and doubts have been raised over the Koman , Gumuz and Kadu branches .
Some of the better known Nilo - Saharan languages are Kanuri , Fur , Songhay , Nobiin and the widespread Nilotic family , which includes the Luo , Dinka and Maasai .
The Nilo - Saharan languages are tonal .
NIGER –
CONGO LANGUAGES Section::::Niger –
Congo languages .
The Niger – Congo languages constitute the largest language family spoken in West Africa and perhaps the world in terms of the number of languages .
One of its salient features is an elaborate noun class system with grammatical concord .
A large majority of languages of this family are tonal such as Yoruba and Igbo , Ashanti and Ewe language .
A major branch of Niger – Congo languages is the Bantu phylum , which has a wider speech area than the rest of the family ( see Niger – Congo B ( Bantu ) in the map above ) .
The Niger – Kordofanian language family , joining Niger – Congo with the Kordofanian languages of south - central Sudan , was proposed in the 1950s by Joseph Greenberg .
Today , linguists often use " Niger – Congo " to refer to this entire family , including Kordofanian as a subfamily .
One reason for this is that it is not clear whether Kordofanian was the first branch to diverge from rest of Niger – Congo .
Mande has been claimed to be equally or more divergent .
Niger – Congo is generally accepted by linguists , though a few question the inclusion of Mande and Dogon , and there is no conclusive evidence for the inclusion of Ubangian .
OTHER LANGUAGE FAMILIES
Section::::Other language families .
Several languages spoken in Africa belong to language families concentrated or originating outside the African continent .
AUSTRONESIAN Section::::Austronesian .
Malagasy belongs to the Austronesian languages and is the westernmost branch of the family .
It is the national and co - official language of Madagascar and one of Malagasy dialects called Bushi is also spoken in Mayotte .
The ancestors of the Malagasy people migrated to Madagascar around 1,500 years ago from Southeast Asia , more specifically the island of Borneo .
The origins of how they arrived to Madagascar remains a mystery , however the Austronesians are known for their seafaring culture .
Despite the geographical isolation , Malagasy still has strong resemblance to Barito languages especially the Ma'anyan language of southern Borneo .
With more than 20 million speakers , Malagasy is one of the most widely spoken of the Austronesian languages .
INDO - EUROPEAN
Section::::Indo - European .
Afrikaans is Indo - European , as is most of the vocabulary of most African creole languages .
Afrikaans evolved from the Dutch vernacular of South Holland ( Hollandic dialect ) spoken by the mainly Dutch settlers of what is now South Africa , where it gradually began to develop distinguishing characteristics in the course of the 18th century .
Most Afrikaans speakers live in South Africa .
In Namibia it is the lingua franca and in Botswana and Zimbabwe
it is a minority language of roughly several ten thousand people .
Overall 15 to 20 million people are estimated to speak Afrikaans .
Since the colonial era , Indo - European languages such as Afrikaans , English , French , Italian , Portuguese and Spanish have held official status in many countries , and are widely spoken , generally as lingua francas .
( See African French and African Portuguese . )
German was once used in Germany 's colonies there from the late 1800s until World War I , when Britain and France took over and revoked German 's official status .
Despite this , German is still spoken in Namibia , mostly among the white population .
Although it lost its official status in the 1990s , it has been redesignated as a national language .
Indian languages such as Gujarati are spoken by South Asian expatriates exclusively .
In earlier historical times , other Indo - European languages could be found in various parts of the continent , such as Old Persian and Greek in Egypt , Latin and Vandalic in North Africa and Modern Persian in the Horn of Africa .
SMALL FAMILIES Section::::Small families .
The three small Khoisan families of southern Africa have not been shown to be closely related to any other major language family .
In addition , there are various other families that have not been demonstrated to belong to one of these families .
( The questionable branches of Nilo - Saharan were covered above , and are not repeated here . )
* Mande , some 70 languages , including the major languages of Mali and Guinea .
These are generally thought to be divergent Niger – Congo , but debate persists .
* Ubangian , some 70 languages , centered on the languages of the Central African Republic ; may be Niger – Congo * Khoe , around 10 languages , the primary family of Khoisan languages of Namibia and Botswana
* Sandawe , an isolate of Tanzania , possibly related to Khoe * Kx'a , a language of Southern Africa * Tuu , or Taa-ǃKwi , two surviving languages
* Hadza , an isolate of Tanzania
* Bangime , a likely isolate of Mali * Jalaa , a likely isolate of Nigeria
* Laal , a possible isolate of Chad Khoisan is a term of convenience covering some 30 languages spoken by around 300,000–400,000 people .
There are five Khoisan families that have not been shown to be related to each other : Khoe , Tuu and Kx'a , which are found mainly in Namibia and Botswana , as well as Sandawe and Hadza of Tanzania , which are language isolates .
A striking feature of Khoisan languages , and the reason they are often grouped together , is their use of click consonants .
Some neighbouring Bantu languages ( notably Xhosa and Zulu ) have clicks as well , but these were adopted from Khoisan languages .
The Khoisan languages are also tonal .
CREOLE LANGUAGES Section::::Creole languages .
Due partly to its multilingualism and its colonial past , a substantial proportion of the world 's creole languages are to be found in Africa .
Some are based on Indo - European languages ( e.g. Krio from English in Sierra Leone and the very similar Pidgin in Nigeria ; Ghana and parts of Cameroon ; Cape Verdean Creole in Cape Verde and Guinea - Bissau Creole in Guinea - Bissau and Senegal , all from Portuguese ; Seychellois Creole in the Seychelles and Mauritian Creole in Mauritius , both from French ) ; some are based on Arabic ( e.g. Juba Arabic in the southern Sudan , or Nubi in parts of Uganda and Kenya ) ; some are based on local languages ( e.g. Sango , the main language of the Central African Republic ) ; while in Cameroon a creole based on French , English and local African languages known as Camfranglais has started to become popular .
UNCLASSIFIED LANGUAGES
Section::::Unclassified languages .
A fair number of unclassified languages are reported in Africa .
Many remain unclassified simply for lack of data ; among the better - investigated ones that continue to resist easy classification are : * possibly Afroasiatic : Ongota , Gomba
* possibly Nilo - Saharan
: Shabo * possibly Niger – Congo : Jalaa , Mbre , Bayot * possibly Khoe : Kwadi
* unknown : Laal , Mpre Of these , Jalaa is perhaps the most likely to be an isolate .
Less - well investigated languages include Irimba , Luo , Mawa , Rer Bare ( possibly Bantu ) , Bete ( evidently Jukunoid ) , Bung ( unclear ) , Kujarge ( evidently Chadic ) , Lufu ( Jukunoid ) , Meroitic ( possibly Afroasiatic ) , Oropom ( possibly spurious ) and Weyto ( evidently Cushitic ) .
Several of these are extinct , and adequate comparative data is thus unlikely to be forthcoming .
Hombert & Philippson ( 2009 ) list a number of African languages that have been classified as language isolates at one point or another .
Many of these are simply unclassified , but Hombert & Philippson believe Africa has about twenty language families , including isolates .
Beside the possibilities listed above , there are : * Aasax or Aramanik ( Tanzania ) ( South Cushitic ?
contains non - Cushitic lexicon )
* Imeraguen ( Mauritania ) -
Hassaniyya Arabic restructured on an Azêr ( Soninke ) base * Kara ( Fer ? )
( Central African Republic )
* Oblo ( Cameroon )
( Adamawa ?
Extinct ? )
Roger Blench notes a couple additional possibilities :
* Defaka ( Nigeria ) * Dompo ( Ghana ) SIGN LANGUAGES Section::::Sign languages .
Many African countries have national sign languages , such as Algerian Sign Language , Tunisian Sign Language , Ethiopian Sign Language .
Other sign languages are restricted to small areas or single villages , such as Adamorobe Sign Language in Ghana .
Tanzania has seven , one for each of its schools for the Deaf , all of which are discouraged .
Not much is known , since little has been published on these languages Sign language systems extant in Africa include the Paget Gorman Sign System used in Namibia and Angola , the Sudanese Sign languages used in Sudan and South Sudan , the Arab Sign languages used across the Arab Mideast , the Francosign languages used in Francophone Africa and other areas such as Ghana and Tunisia , and the Tanzanian Sign languages used in Tanzania .
LANGUAGE IN AFRICA Section::::Language in Africa .
Throughout the long multilingual history of the African continent , African languages have been subject to phenomena like language contact , language expansion , language shift and language death .
A case in point is the Bantu expansion , in which Bantu - speaking peoples expanded over most of Sub - Equatorial Africa , displacing Khoi - San speaking peoples from much of Southeast Africa and Southern Africa and other peoples from Central Africa .
Another example is the Arab expansion in the 7th century , which led to the extension of Arabic from its homeland in Asia , into much of North Africa and the Horn of Africa .
Trade languages are another age - old phenomenon in the African linguistic landscape .
Cultural and linguistic innovations spread along trade routes and languages of peoples dominant in trade developed into languages of wider communication ( lingua franca ) .
Of particular importance in this respect are Berber ( North and West Africa ) , Jula ( western West Africa ) , Fulfulde ( West Africa ) , Hausa ( West Africa ) , Lingala ( Congo ) , Swahili ( Southeast Africa ) , Somali ( Horn of Africa ) and Arabic ( North Africa and Horn of Africa ) .
After gaining independence , many African countries , in the search for national unity , selected one language , generally the former colonial language , to be used in government and education .
However , in recent years , African countries have become increasingly supportive of maintaining linguistic diversity .
Language policies that are being developed nowadays are mostly aimed at multilingualism .
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES Section::::Official Languages .
Besides the former colonial languages of English , French , Portuguese and Spanish , the following languages are official at the national level in Africa ( non - exhaustive list ) : Afroasiatic
* Arabic in Comoros , Chad , Djibouti , Egypt , Eritrea , Mauritania , Somalia , Sudan , Tunisia , Algeria , Libya , Morocco and Zanzibar ( Tanzania )
* Berber in Morocco and Algeria * Amharic in Ethiopia * Somali in Somalia
* Tigrinya in Eritrea and Ethiopia Austronesian
* Malagasy in Madagascar
Indo - European *
Afrikaans
Niger - Congo
* Chewa in Malawi and Zimbabwe
* Comorian in the Comoros * Kinyarwanda in Rwanda
* Kirundi in Burundi * Sesotho in Lesotho , South Africa and Zimbabwe * Setswana / Tswana in Botswana and South Africa
* Shona , Sindebele in Zimbabwe * Sepedi in South Africa
* Ndebele in South Africa * Swahili in Tanzania , Kenya , Rwanda and Uganda
* Swati in Eswatini ( Swaziland ) and South Africa
* Tsonga in South Africa
* Venda in South Africa * Xhosa in South Africa
* Zulu in South Africa CROSS - BORDER LANGUAGES Section::::Cross - border languages .
The colonial borders established by European powers following the Berlin Conference in 1884–1885 divided a great many ethnic groups and African language speaking communities .
In a sense , " cross - border languages " is a misnomer — the speakers did not divide themselves .
Nevertheless , it describes the reality of many African languages , which has implications for divergence of language on either side of a border ( especially when the official languages are different ) , standards for writing the language , etc .
Some notable cross - border languages include Berber ( which stretches across much of North Africa and some parts of West Africa ) , Somali ( stretches across most of the Horn of Africa ) , Swahili ( spoken in the African Great Lakes region ) , Fula ( in the Sahel and West Africa ) and Luo languages ( in Democratic Republic of the Congo , Ethiopia , Kenya , Tanzania , Uganda , South Sudan and Sudan ) .
Some prominent Africans such as former Malian president and former Chairman of the African Commission , Alpha Oumar Konaré , have referred to cross - border languages as a factor that can promote African unity .
LANGUAGE CHANGE AND PLANNING Section::::Language change and planning .
Language is not static in Africa any more than on other continents .
In addition to the ( likely modest ) impact of borders , there are also cases of dialect levelling ( such as in Igbo and probably many others ) , koinés ( such as N'Ko and possibly Runyakitara ) and emergence of new dialects ( such as Sheng ) .
In some countries , there are official efforts to develop standardized language versions .
There are also many less widely spoken languages that may be considered endangered languages .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
Of the 1 billion Africans ( in 2009 ) , about 17 percent speak an Arabic dialect .
About 10 percent speak Swahili , the lingua franca of Southeast Africa ; about 5 percent speak a Berber dialect ; and about 5 percent speak Hausa , which serves as a lingua franca in much of the Sahel .
Other important West African languages are Yoruba , Igbo and Fula .
Major Horn of Africa languages are Amharic , Oromo and Somali .
Important South African languages are Zulu , Xhosa and Afrikaans .
English , French and Portuguese are important languages in Africa .
About 130 million , 115 million and 30 million Africans , respectively , speak them as either native or secondary languages .
Portuguese has become the national language of Angola , and Portuguese is the official language of Mozambique .
The economies of Angola and Mozambique are quickly becoming economic powerhouses in Africa .
Through ( among other factors )
sheer demographic weight , Africans are increasingly taking ownership of these three world languages as they are having an ever - greater influence on the research , economic growth and development in the African countries where English , French and Portuguese are spoken .
LINGUISTIC FEATURES Section::::Linguistic features .
Some linguistic features are particularly common among languages spoken in Africa , whereas others are less common .
Such shared traits probably are not due to a common origin of all African languages .
Instead , some may be due to language contact ( resulting in borrowing ) and specific idioms and phrases may be due to a similar cultural background .
PHONOLOGICAL
Section::::Phonological .
Some widespread phonetic features include : * certain types of consonants , such as implosives ( ) , ejectives ( ) , the labiodental flap and in southern Africa , clicks ( , ) .
True implosives are rare outside Africa , and clicks and the flap almost unheard of .
* doubly articulated labial - velar stops like and are found in places south of the Sahara .
* prenasalized consonants , like and , are widespread in Africa but not common outside it .
* sequences of stops and fricatives at the beginnings of words , such as , and .
* nasal stops which only occur with nasal vowels , such as vs. ( but both and ) , especially in West Africa .
* vowels contrasting an advanced or retracted tongue , commonly called " tense " and " lax " .
* simple tone systems which are used for grammatical purposes .
Sounds that are relatively uncommon in African languages include uvular consonants , diphthongs and front rounded vowels Tonal languages are found throughout the world but are predominantly used in Africa .
Both the Nilo - Saharan and the Khoi - San phyla are fully tonal .
The large majority of the Niger – Congo languages is also tonal .
Tonal languages are also found in the Omotic , Chadic and South & East Cushitic branches of Afroasiatic .
The most common type of tonal system opposes two tone levels , High ( H ) and Low ( L ) .
Contour tones do occur , and can often be analysed as two or more tones in succession on a single syllable .
Tone melodies play an important role , meaning that it is often possible to state significant generalizations by separating tone sequences ( " melodies " ) from the segments that bear them .
Tonal sandhi processes like tone spread , tone shift , downstep and downdrift are common in African languages .
SYNTACTIC Section::::Syntactic .
Widespread syntactical structures include the common use of adjectival verbs and the expression of comparison by means of a verb ' to surpass ' .
The Niger – Congo languages have large numbers of genders ( noun classes ) which cause agreement in verbs and other words .
Case , tense and other categories may be distinguished only by tone .
SEMANTIC Section::::Semantic .
Quite often , only one term is used for both animal and meat ; the word nama or nyama for animal / meat is particularly widespread in otherwise widely divergent African languages .
RATING IN SPEAKERS Section::::Rating in Speakers .
The following is a table displaying the number of speakers of given languages within Africa : !
width=15%Language !
width=15%Family !
width=15
% data - sort - type="number"Native speakers ( L1 ) !
width=30%Official status per country BY REGION Section::::By region .
Below is a list of the major languages of Africa by region , family and total number of primary language speakers in millions .
valign="top " Central Africa * Niger – Congo , Bantu * Lingala * Kinyarwanda:12
* Kongo:5 +
* Tshiluba * Kirundi Horn of Africa
* Afroasiatic * Semitic * Amharic : 20 +
* Tigrinya : 5
*
Cushitic
*
Somali :
10–15 * Oromo : 30–35 * Nilo - Saharan :
1 * Gumuz * Anuak * Kunama
* Nara * Niger – Congo : 1
*
Zigula North Africa *
Afroasiatic
* Semitic * Arabic : 200 * Berber : 30–40 *
Kabyle
*
Atlas
* Tuareg
* Zenaga * Nilo - Saharan
* Nubian : 5 +
*
Fur : 5 +
* Zaghawa * Masalit * Niger – Congo
* Kordofanian languages
* Nuba Southeast Africa
* Niger – Congo , Bantu : * Swahili : 5–10 * Gikuyu : 9
* Ganda:6 * Luhya : 6 * Austronesian
* Malagasy : 20 + * Niger - Congo , Ubangian * Gbaya:2 * Banda:1 - 2 * Zande * Nilo - Saharan * Kanuri:10
* Luo:5 * Sara:3 - 4 * Kalenjin:5 * Dinka
* Nuer * Shilluk * Maasai:1 - 2 Southern Africa * Niger – Congo , Bantu
* Zulu : 10 * Xhosa : 8
* Shona : 7
* Sotho : 5
* Tsonga : 12 * Tswana : 4
* Umbundu : 4 * Northern Sotho : 4
* Chichewa : 8
* Makua : 8
* Indo - European * Germanic
* Afrikaans : 7
* English : 5 * Romance * Portuguese : 14 West Africa * Niger – Congo * Benue – Congo * Ibibio ( Nigeria ) : 7 * Volta – Niger * Igbo ( Nigeria ) : 30–35 * Yoruba : 40 * Kwa : *
Akan ( Ghana , Côte d'Ivoire ) :
20–25 * Gur * More : 5 * Senegambian * Fula ( West Africa ) : 40 * Wolof : 8
* Afroasiatic * Chadic * Hausa : 50 *
Nilo - Saharan *
Saharan
* Kanuri : 10 * Songhai:5
* Zarma:5 SEE ALSO
GENERAL
* Languages of the African Union * Writing systems of Africa * Journal of West African Languages
WORKS
* Polyglotta Africana
* The Languages of Africa CLASSIFIERS
* Karl Lepsius
* Wilhelm Bleek * Carl Meinhof * Diedrich Westermann
* Joseph Greenberg COLONIAL AND
MIGRATORY INFLUENCES
* Asian Africans * Dutch Language Union * French West Africa * German colonization of Africa * Italian East Africa — including Italian Ethiopia * Italian North Africa * Maghrebi Arabic ­ — via Muslim conquest of the Maghreb * Portuguese language in Africa — predominant in Portuguese - speaking African countries
* Spanish Guinea — presently Equatorial Guinea * Spanish West Africa * Spanish North Africa
* West African Pidgin English * White Africans of
European ancestry ­ — via scramble for Africa NOTES
REFERENCES
* Childs , G. Tucker ( 2003 ) .
An Introduction to African Languages .
Amsterdam : John Benjamin .
* Chimhundu , Herbert ( 2002 ) .
Language Policies in Africa .
( Final report of the Intergovernmental Conference on Language Policies in Africa . )
Revised version .
UNESCO .
* Cust , Robert Needham ( 1883 ) .
Modern Languages of Africa .
* Ellis , Stephen ( ed . )
( 1996 ) .
Africa Now : People - Policies - Institutions .
The Hague : Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( DGIS ) .
* Elugbe , Ben ( 1998 ) " Cross - border and major languages of Africa . "
In K. Legère ( editor ) , Cross - border Languages : Reports and Studies , Regional Workshop on Cross - Border Languages , National Institute for Educational Development ( NIED ) , Okahandja , 23–27 September 1996 .
Windhoek : Gamsberg Macmillan .
* Ethnologue.com 's Africa : A listing of African languages and language families .
* Greenberg , Joseph H. ( 1983 ) . '
Some areal characteristics of African languages . '
In Ivan R. Dihoff ( editor ) , Current Approaches to African Linguistics , Vol . 1 ( Publications in African Languages and Linguistics , Vol . 1 )
, Dordrecht : Foris , 3 - 21 .
* Greenberg , Joseph H. ( 1966 ) .
The Languages of Africa ( 2nd edition with additions and corrections ) .
Bloomington : Indiana University .
* Heine , Bernd and Derek Nurse ( editors ) ( 2000 ) .
African Languages : An Introduction .
Cambridge :
Cambridge University Press .
* Webb , Vic and Kembo - Sure ( editors ) ( 1998 ) .
African Voices : An Introduction to the Languages and Linguistics of Africa .
Cape Town : Oxford University Press Southern Africa .
* Wedekind , Klaus ( Oxford University Press .
EXTERNAL LINKS * African language resources for children * Web resources for African languages
* Linguistic maps of Africa from Muturzikin.com
* Online Dictionaries , e - books and other online fulltexts in or on African languages