UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
The United States Department of Justice ( DOJ ) , also known as the Justice Department , is a federal executive department of the U.S. government , responsible for the enforcement of the law and administration of justice in the United States , equivalent to the justice or interior ministries of other countries .
The department was formed in 1870 during the Ulysses S. Grant administration .
The Department of Justice administers several federal law enforcement agencies including the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , and the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) .
The department is responsible for investigating instances of financial fraud , representing the United States government in legal matters ( such as in cases before the Supreme Court ) , and running the federal prison system .
The department is also responsible for reviewing the conduct of local law enforcement as directed by the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994 .
The department is headed by the United States Attorney General , who is nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate and is a member of the Cabinet .
The current Attorney General is Matthew Whitaker ( Acting ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The office of the Attorney General was established by the Judiciary Act of 1789 as a part - time job for one person , but grew with the bureaucracy .
At one time , the Attorney General gave legal advice to the U.S. Congress as well as the President , but in 1819 the Attorney General began advising Congress alone to ensure a manageable workload .
Until March 3 , 1853 , the salary of the Attorney General was set by statute at less than the amount paid to other Cabinet members .
Early Attorneys General supplemented their salaries by running private law practices , often arguing cases before the courts as attorneys for paying litigants .
Following unsuccessful efforts ( in 1830 and 1846 ) to make Attorney General a full - time job , in 1869 , the U.S. House Committee on the Judiciary , led by Congressman William Lawrence , conducted an inquiry into the creation of a " law department " headed by the Attorney General and also composed of the various department solicitors and United States attorneys .
On February 19 , 1868 , Lawrence introduced a bill in Congress to create the Department of Justice .
President Ulysses S. Grant signed the bill into law on June 22 , 1870 .
Grant appointed Amos T. Akerman as Attorney General and Benjamin H. Bristow as America 's first Solicitor General the same week that Congress created the Department of Justice .
The Department 's immediate function was to preserve civil rights .
It set about fighting against domestic terrorist groups who had been using both violence and litigation to oppose the 13th , 14th and 15th Amendments to the Constitution .
Both Akerman and Bristow used the Department of Justice to vigorously prosecute Ku Klux Klan members in the early 1870s .
In the first few years of Grant 's first term in office there were 1000 indictments against Klan members with over 550 convictions from the Department of Justice .
By 1871 , there were 3000 indictments and 600 convictions with most only serving brief sentences while the ringleaders were imprisoned for up to five years in the federal penitentiary in Albany , New York .
The result was a dramatic decrease in violence in the South .
Akerman gave credit to Grant and told a friend that no one was " better " or " stronger " than Grant when it came to prosecuting terrorists .
George H. Williams , who succeeded Akerman in December 1871 , continued to prosecute the Klan throughout 1872 until the spring of 1873 during Grant 's second term in office .
Williams then placed a moratorium on Klan prosecutions partially because the Justice Department , inundated by cases involving the Klan , did not have the manpower to continue prosecutions .
The " Act to Establish the Department of Justice " drastically increased the Attorney General 's responsibilities to include the supervision of all United States Attorneys , formerly under the Department of the Interior , the prosecution of all federal crimes , and the representation of the United States in all court actions , barring the use of private attorneys by the federal government .
The law also created the office of Solicitor General to supervise and conduct government litigation in the Supreme Court of the United States .
With the passage of the Interstate Commerce Act in 1887 , the federal government took on some law enforcement responsibilities , and the Department of Justice tasked with performing these .
In 1884 , control of federal prisons was transferred to the new department , from the Department of Interior .
New facilities were built , including the penitentiary at Leavenworth in 1895 , and a facility for women located in West Virginia , at Alderson was established in 1924 .
In 1933 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt issued an executive order which gave the Department of Justice responsibility for the " functions of prosecuting in the courts of the United States claims and demands by , and offsenses [ sic ] against , the Government of the United States , and of defending claims and demands against the Government , and of supervising the work of United States attorneys , marshals , and clerks in connection therewith , now exercised by any agency or officer ...
"
HEADQUARTERS Section::::Headquarters .
The U.S. Department of Justice building was completed in 1935 from a design by Milton Bennett Medary .
Upon Medary 's death in 1929 , the other partners of his Philadelphia firm Zantzinger , Borie and Medary took over the project .
On a lot bordered by Constitution and Pennsylvania Avenues and Ninth and Tenth Streets , Northwest , it holds over of space .
The sculptor C. Paul Jennewein served as overall design consultant for the entire building , contributing more than 50 separate sculptural elements inside and outside .
Various efforts , none entirely successful , have been made to determine the original intended meaning of the Latin motto appearing on the Department of Justice seal , Qui Pro Domina Justitia Sequitur ( literally " Who For Lady Justice Strives " ) .
It is not even known exactly when the original version of the DOJ seal itself was adopted , or when the motto first appeared on the seal .
The most authoritative opinion of the DOJ suggests that the motto refers to the Attorney General ( and thus , by extension , to the Department of Justice ) "
who prosecutes on behalf of justice ( or the Lady Justice ) " .
The motto 's conception of the prosecutor ( or government attorney ) as being the servant of justice itself finds concrete expression in a similarly - ordered English - language inscription ( " THE UNITED STATES WINS ITS POINT
WHENEVER JUSTICE IS DONE ITS CITIZENS IN THE COURTS " ) in the above - door paneling in the ceremonial rotunda anteroom just outside the Attorney General 's office in the Department of Justice Main Building in Washington ,
D.C. The building was renamed in honor of former Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy in 2001 .
It is sometimes referred to as " Main Justice " .
ORGANIZATION
LEADERSHIP OFFICES
* Office of the Attorney General * Office of the Deputy Attorney General
* Office of the Associate Attorney General * Office of the United States Principal Deputy Associate Attorney General * Office of the Solicitor General of the United States DIVISIONS Section::::Organization .
Section::::Divisions . !
Division !
Date Established(as formal division )
LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES Section::::Law enforcement agencies .
Several federal law enforcement agencies are administered by the Department of Justice : * United States Marshals Service ( USMS ) –
The office of U.S. Marshal was established by the Judiciary Act of 1789 .
The U.S. Marshals Service was established as an agency in 1969 , and it was elevated to full bureau status under the Justice Department in 1974 .
* Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) –
On July 26 , 1908 , a small investigative force was created within the Justice Department under Attorney General Charles Bonaparte .
The following year , this force was officially named the Bureau of Investigation by Attorney General George W. Wickersham .
In 1935 , the bureau adopted its current name .
* Federal Bureau of Prisons ( BOP ) – the Three Prisons Act of 1891 created the federal prison system .
Congress created the Federal Bureau of Prisons in 1930 by Pub .
L.
No .
71–218 , 46 Stat .
325 , signed into law by President Hoover on May 14 , 1930 .
* National Institute of Corrections * Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives ( ATF ) – Except for a brief period during Prohibition , ATF 's predecessor bureaus were part of the Department of the Treasury for more than two hundred years .
ATF was first established by Department of Treasury Order
No . 221 , effective July 1 , 1972 ; this order " transferred the functions , powers , and duties arising under laws relating to alcohol , tobacco , firearms , and explosives from the Internal Revenue Service to ATF .
In 2003 , under the terms of the Homeland Security Act , ATF was split into two agencies – the new Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives ( ATF ) was transferred to the Department of Justice , while the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau ( TTB ) was retained by the Department of the Treasury .
* Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) * Office of the Inspector General ( OIG ) OFFICES * Executive Office for Immigration Review ( EOIR ) * Executive Office for U.S. Attorneys ( EOUSA )
* Executive Office of the United States Trustee ( EOUST )
* Office of Attorney Recruitment and Management ( OARM )
* Office of the Chief Information Officer
In May 2014 , the Department appointed Joseph Klimavicz as CIO .
Klimavicz succeeds Kevin Deeley , who served as acting CIO since November 2013 when the previous office holder , Luke McCormack , left to take the CIO post at the Department of Homeland Security .
* Office of Dispute Resolution * Office of the Federal Detention Trustee ( OFDT )
* Office of Immigration Litigation * Office of Information Policy * Office of Intelligence Policy and Review ( OIPR )
* Office of Intergovernmental and Public Liaison ( merged with Office of Legislative Affairs on April 12 , 2012 )
* Office of Justice Programs ( OJP )
* Bureau of Justice Assistance * Bureau of Justice Statistics
* Community Capacity Development Office
* National Institute of Justice * Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention * Sex Offender Sentencing , Monitoring , Apprehending , Registering , and Tracking Office ( SMART )
* Office for Victims of Crime * Office of the Police Corps and Law Enforcement Education * Office of Legal Counsel ( OLC ) * Office of Legal Policy ( OLP ) * Office of Legislative Affairs
* Office of the Pardon Attorney * Office of Privacy and Civil Liberties ( OPCL ) * Office of Professional Responsibility ( OPR ) * Office of Public Affairs * Office on Sexual Violence and Crimes against Children * Office of Tribal Justice * Office on Violence Against Women
* Professional Responsibility Advisory Office ( PRAO )
* United States Attorneys Offices
* United States Trustees Offices
* Office of Community Oriented Policing Services ( COPS ) * Community Relations Service OTHER OFFICES AND PROGRAMS * Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States
* INTERPOL , U.S. National Central Bureau
* National Drug Intelligence Center ( former ) * Obscenity Prosecution Task Force ( former )
* United States Parole Commission
Section::::Other offices and programs .
In March 2003 , the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service was abolished and its functions transferred to the United States Department of Homeland Security .
The Executive Office for Immigration Review and the Board of Immigration Appeals , which review decisions made by government officials under Immigration and Nationality law , remain under jurisdiction of the Department of Justice .
Similarly the Office of Domestic Preparedness left the Justice Department for the Department of Homeland Security , but only for executive purposes .
The Office of Domestic Preparedness is still centralized within the Department of Justice , since its personnel are still officially employed within the Department of Justice .
In 2003 , the Department of Justice created LifeAndLiberty.gov , a website that supported the USA PATRIOT Act .
It was criticized by government watchdog groups for its alleged violation of U.S. Code Title 18 Section 1913 , which forbids money appropriated by Congress to be used to lobby in favor of any law , actual or proposed .
The website has since been taken offline .
FINANCES AND BUDGET Section::::Finances and budget .
The Justice Department was authorized a budget for Fiscal Year 2015 of approximately $ 31 billion .
The budget authorization is broken down as follows : !
Program !
Funding ( in millions )
General Administration $ 129 Justice Information Sharing Technology $ 26 Administrative Reviews and Appeals $ 351 Office of the Inspector General
$ 89 United States Parole Commission
$ 13 National Security Division $ 92 Office of the Solicitor General $ 12 Tax Division $ 109 Criminal Division $ 202 Civil Division $ 298 Environmental and Natural Resources Division $ 112 Office of Legal Counsel $ 7
Civil Rights Division $ 162 Antitrust Division $ 162 United States Attorneys
$ 1,955 United States Bankruptcy Trustees
$ 226 United States Marshals Service $ 2,668
Federal Bureau of Investigation $ 8,347 Drug Enforcement Administration $ 2,018 Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms , and Explosives $ 1,201 Federal Bureau of Prisons $ 6,894 Interpol - Washington Office $ 32 Office of Justice Programs $ 1,427 Office of Community Oriented Policing Services $ 248 Office on Violence Against Women $ 410 Mandatory Spending $ 4,011 TOTAL $ 31,201 SEE ALSO * Capital punishment in the United States * Incarceration in the United States * Justice
* Litigation * OneDOJ
* Punishment NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* USDOJ in the Federal Register
* Human Rights First ; In Pursuit of Justice : Prosecuting Terrorism Cases in the Federal Courts ( 2009 ) * Justice.gov Indictment against internet poker using UIGEA .