DRUPE
In botany , a drupe ( or stone fruit ) is an indehiscent fruit in which an outer fleshy part ( exocarp , or skin ; and mesocarp , or flesh ) surrounds a single shell ( the pit , stone , or pyrene ) of hardened endocarp with a seed ( kernel ) inside .
These fruits usually develop from a single carpel , and mostly from flowers with superior ovaries ( polypyrenous drupes are exceptions ) .
The definitive characteristic of a drupe is that the hard , " lignified " stone ( or pit ) is derived from the ovary wall of the flower — in an aggregate fruit composed of small , individual drupes ( such as a raspberry ) , each individual is termed a drupelet and may together form a botanic berry .
Other fleshy fruits may have a stony enclosure that comes from the seed coat surrounding the seed , but such fruits are not drupes .
Some flowering plants that produce drupes are : coffee , jujube , mango , olive , most palms ( including açaí , date , sabal , coconut and oil palms ) , pistachio , white sapote , cashew , and all members of the genus Prunus , including the almond ( in which the mesocarp is somewhat leathery ) , apricot , cherry , damson , nectarine , peach , and plum .
The term drupaceous is applied to a fruit which has the structure and texture of a drupe , but which does not precisely fit the definition of a drupe .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
The boundary between a drupe and a berry is not always clear .
Thus , some sources describe the fruit of species of the genus Persea , which includes the avocado , as a " drupe " , others describe avocado fruit as a " berry " .
One definition of " berry " requires the endocarp to be less than thick , other fruits with a stony endocarp being " drupes " .
In marginal cases , terms such as " drupaceous " or " drupe - like " may be used .
The term stone fruit ( also stonefruit ) can be a synonym for drupe or , more typically , it can mean just the fruit of the genus Prunus .
Freestone refers to a drupe having a stone which can be removed from the flesh with ease .
The flesh is not attached to the stone and does not need to be cut to free the stone .
Freestone varieties of fruits are preferred for uses that require careful removal of the stone , especially if removal will be done by hand .
Freestone plums are preferred for making homegrown prunes , and freestone sour cherries are preferred for making pies and cherry soup .
Clingstone refers to a drupe having a stone which can not easily be removed from the flesh .
The flesh is attached strongly to the stone and must be cut to free the stone .
Clingstone varieties of fruits in the genus Prunus are preferred as table fruit and for jams , because the flesh of clingstone fruits tends to be more tender and juicy throughout .
Tryma is a specialized term for such nut - like drupes that are difficult to categorize .
Hickory nuts ( Carya ) and walnuts ( Juglans ) in the Juglandaceae family grow within an outer husk ; these fruits are technically drupes or drupaceous nuts , thus are not true botanical nuts .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
Many drupes , with their sweet , fleshy outer layer , attract the attention of animals as a food , and the plant population benefits from the resulting dispersal of its seeds .
The endocarp ( pit or stone ) is sometimes dropped after the fleshy part is eaten , but is often swallowed , passing through the digestive tract , and returned to the soil in feces with the seed inside unharmed .
This passage through the digestive tract can reduce the thickness of the endocarp , thus can aid in germination rates .
The process is known as scarification .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Typical drupes include apricots , olives , peaches , plums , cherries , mangoes , and amlas ( Indian gooseberries ) .
Other examples include sloe ( Prunus spinosa ) and ivy ( Hedera helix ) .
The coconut is also a drupe , but the mesocarp is fibrous or dry ( termed a husk ) , so this type of fruit is classified as a simple dry , fibrous drupe .
Unlike other drupes , the coconut seed is unlikely to be dispersed by being swallowed by fauna , due to its large size .
It can , however , float extremely long distances across oceans .
Bramble fruits ( such as the blackberry or the raspberry ) are aggregates of drupelets .
The fruit of blackberries and raspberries comes from a single flower whose pistil is made up of a number of free carpels .
However , mulberries , which closely resemble blackberries , are not aggregate fruit , but are multiple fruits , actually derived from bunches of catkins , each drupelet thus belonging to a different flower .
Certain drupes occur in large clusters , as in the case of palm species , where a sizable array of drupes is found in a cluster .
Examples of such large drupe clusters include dates , Jubaea chilensis in central Chile and Washingtonia filifera in the Sonoran Desert of North America .
GALLERY SEE
ALSO
* Pome ( polypyrenous drupe )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Identification Of Major Fruit Types
* Fruits Called Nuts