BROWN RECLUSE SPIDER
The brown recluse , Loxosceles reclusa , Sicariidae ( formerly placed in a family " Loxoscelidae " ) is a recluse spider with a necrotic venom .
Similar to other recluse spider bites , their bite sometimes requires medical attention .
The brown recluse is one of three spiders ( the others being black widow and Loxosceles laeta , the Chilean recluse ) with medically significant venom in North America .
Brown recluse spiders are usually between , but may grow larger .
While typically light to medium brown , they range in color from whitish to dark brown or blackish gray .
The cephalothorax and abdomen are not necessarily the same color .
These spiders usually have markings on the dorsal side of their cephalothorax , with a black line coming from it that looks like a violin with the neck of the violin pointing to the rear of the spider , resulting in the nicknames fiddleback spider , brown fiddler , or violin spider .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The violin pattern is not diagnostic , as other spiders can have similar markings ( e.g. cellar spiders and pirate spiders ) .
For definitive identification it is imperative to examine the eyes .
While most spiders have eight eyes , recluse spiders have six eyes arranged in pairs ( dyads ) with one medial pair and two lateral pairs .
Only a few other spiders have three pairs of eyes arranged in this way ( e.g. , scytodids ) .
Recluses have no obvious coloration patterns on the abdomen or legs , and the legs lack spines .
The abdomen is covered with fine short hairs that , when viewed without magnification , give the appearance of soft fur .
The leg joints may appear to be a slightly lighter color .
LIFE - CYCLE Section::::Life - cycle .
Adult brown recluse spiders often live about one to two years .
Each female produces several egg sacs over a period of two to three months , from May to July , with approximately fifty eggs in each sac .
The eggs hatch in about one month .
The spiderlings take about one year to grow to adulthood .
The brown recluse spider is resilient and can tolerate up to six months of extreme drought and scarcity or absence of food .
On one occasion , a brown recluse survived in controlled captivity for over five seasons without any food at all .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
A brown recluse 's stance on a flat surface is usually with all legs radially extended .
When alarmed it may lower its body , withdraw the forward two legs straight rearward into a defensive position , withdraw the rearmost pair of legs into a position for lunging forward , and stand motionless with pedipalps raised .
The pedipalps in mature specimens are dark and quite prominent and are normally held horizontally forward .
When threatened it usually flees , seemingly to avoid a conflict , and if detained may further avoid contact with quick horizontal rotating movements or even resort to assuming a lifeless pose ( playing dead ) .
The spider does not usually jump unless touched brusquely , and even then its avoidance movement is more of a horizontal lunge rather than a vaulting of itself entirely off the surface .
When running , the brown recluse does not leave a silk line behind , which would make it more easily tracked when it is being pursued .
Movement at virtually any speed is an evenly paced gait with legs extended .
When missing a leg or two it appears to favor this same gait , although ( presumably when a leg has been injured ) it may move and stand at rest with one leg slightly withdrawn .
During travel it stops naturally and periodically when renewing its internal hydraulic blood pressure that , like most spiders , it requires to renew strength in its legs .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
Brown recluse spiders build asymmetrical ( irregular ) webs that frequently include a shelter consisting of disorderly thread .
They frequently build their webs in woodpiles and sheds , closets , garages , plenum spaces , cellars , and other places that are dry and generally undisturbed .
When dwelling in human residences they seem to favor cardboard , possibly because it mimics the rotting tree bark which they inhabit naturally .
Human - recluse contact often occurs when such isolated spaces are disturbed and the spider feels threatened .
Unlike most web weavers , they leave these lairs at night to hunt .
Males move around more when hunting than the females , which tend to remain nearer to their webs .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
The range lies roughly south of a line from southeastern Nebraska through southern Iowa , Illinois , and Indiana to southwestern Ohio .
In the southern states , it is native from central Texas to western Georgia and north to Kentucky .
Despite rumors to the contrary , the brown recluse spider has not established itself in California or anywhere outside its native range .
This directly contradicts numerous sensationalized media reports of bites occurring where these spiders are absent ( and no specimens were found ) , such as a 2014 report from Thailand , where a man was claimed to have died from a brown recluse bite .
Over the last century , occasional spiders have been intercepted in various locations where they have no known established populations ; these spiders may be transported fairly easily , though the lack of established populations well outside the natural range also indicates that such movement has not led to colonization of new areas , after decades of opportunities .
Note that the occurrence of brown recluses in a single building ( such as a warehouse ) outside of the native range is not considered a successful colonization ; such single - building populations can occur ( e.g. , in several such cases in Florida ) , but do not spread , and can be easily eradicated .
There are other species of the genus Loxosceles native to the southwestern part of the United States , including California , that may resemble the brown recluse , but these species have never been documented as medically significant .
The number of " false positive " reports based on misidentifications is considerable ; in a nationwide study where people submitted spiders that they thought were brown recluses , of 581 from California only 1 was a brown recluse — submitted by a family that moved from Missouri and brought it with them ( compared to specimens submitted from Missouri , Kansas , and Oklahoma , where between 75 % and 90 % were recluses ) .
From this study , the most common spider submitted from California as a brown recluse was in the genus Titiotus , whose bite is deemed harmless .
A similar study documented that various arachnids were routinely misidentified by physicians , pest control operators , and other non - expert authorities , who told their patients or clients that the spider they had was a brown recluse when in fact it was not .
Despite the absence of brown recluses from the Western U.S. , physicians in the region commonly diagnose " brown recluse bites " , leading to the popular misconception that the spiders inhabit those areas .
BITE
Section::::Bite .
The bite frequently is not felt initially and may not be immediately painful , but it can be serious .
The brown recluse bears a potentially deadly hemotoxic venom .
Most bites are minor with no necrosis .
However , a small number of brown recluse bites do produce severe dermonecrotic lesions ( i.e. necrosis ) ; an even smaller number produce severe cutaneous ( skin ) or viscerocutaneous ( systemic ) symptoms .
In one study of clinically diagnosed brown recluse bites , skin necrosis occurred 37 % of the time , while systemic illness occurred 14 % of the time .
In these cases , the bites produced a range of symptoms common to many members of the genus Loxosceles known as loxoscelism , which may be cutaneous and viscerocutaneous .
In very rare cases , bites can even cause hemolysis — the bursting of red blood cells .
As suggested by its specific epithet reclusa ( recluse ) , the brown recluse spider is rarely aggressive , and bites from the species are uncommon .
In 2001 , more than 2,000 brown recluse spiders were removed from a heavily infested home in Kansas , yet the four residents who had lived there for years were never harmed by the spiders , despite many encounters with them .
The spider usually bites only when pressed against the skin , such as when tangled within clothes , towels , bedding , inside work gloves , etc .
Many human victims report having been bitten after putting on clothes that had not been worn recently , or had been left for many days undisturbed on the floor .
The fangs of the brown recluse are not large enough to penetrate most fabric .
When both types of loxoscelism do result , systemic effects may occur before necrosis , as the venom spreads throughout the body in minutes .
Children , the elderly , and the debilitatingly ill may be more susceptible to systemic loxoscelism .
The systemic symptoms most commonly experienced include nausea , vomiting , fever , rashes , and muscle and joint pain .
Rarely , such bites can result in hemolysis , thrombocytopenia , disseminated intravascular coagulation , organ damage , and even death .
Most fatalities are in children under the age of seven or those with a weak immune system .
While the majority of brown recluse spider bites do not result in any symptoms , cutaneous symptoms occur more frequently than systemic symptoms .
In such instances , the bite forms a necrotizing ulcer as the result of soft tissue destruction and may take months to heal , leaving deep scars .
These bites usually become painful and itchy within 2 to 8 hours .
Pain and other local effects worsen 12 to 36 hours after the bite , and the necrosis develops over the next few days .
Over time , the wound may grow to as large as 25 cm ( 10 inches ) .
The damaged tissue becomes gangrenous and eventually sloughs away .
MISDIAGNOSIS
Section::::Misdiagnosis .
There is now an ELISA - based test for brown recluse venom that can determine whether a wound is a brown recluse bite , although it is not commercially available and not in routine clinical use .
Clinical diagnoses often use Occam 's razor principle in diagnosing bites based on what spiders the patient likely encountered and previous similar diagnoses .
A new mnemonic device , " NOT RECLUSE " , has been suggested as a tool to help laymen and medical professionals more objectively screen and diagnose potential cases of loxoscelism .
There are numerous documented infectious and noninfectious conditions that produce wounds that have been initially misdiagnosed as recluse bites by medical professionals , including : *
Pyoderma gangrenosum
* Infection by Staphylococcus * Infection by Streptococcus
* Herpes * Diabetic ulcers
* Fungal infection
* Chemical burns
* Toxicodendron dermatitis * Squamous cell carcinoma
*
Localized vasculitis
*
Syphilis
* Toxic epidermal necrolysis
* Sporotrichosis * Lyme disease
Many of these conditions are far more common and more likely to be the source of necrotic wounds , even in areas where brown recluse spiders actually occur .
The most important of these is methicillin - resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) , a bacterium whose necrotic lesions are very similar to those induced by recluse bites , and which can be lethal if left untreated .
Misdiagnosis of MRSA as spider bites is extremely common ( nearly 30 % of patients with MRSA reported that they initially suspected a spider bite ) , and can have fatal consequences .
Reported cases of brown recluse bites occur primarily in Arkansas , Colorado , Kansas , Missouri , Nebraska , Oklahoma , and Texas .
There have been many reports of brown recluse bites in California — though a few related species may be found there , none of these are known to bite humans .
To date , the reports of bites from areas outside of the spider 's native range have been either unverified , or , if verified , the spiders have been moved to those locations by travelers or commerce .
Many arachnologists believe that a large number of bites attributed to the brown recluse in the West Coast are either from other spider species or not spider bites at all .
For example , the venom of the hobo spider , a common European species established in the northwestern United States and southern British Columbia , has been reported to produce similar symptoms as the brown recluse bite when injected into laboratory rabbits .
However , the toxicity of hobo spider venom has been called into question as actual bites have not been shown to cause necrosis , and no such occurrences have ever been reported where the spider is native .
Numerous other spiders have been associated with necrotic bites in medical literature .
Other recluse species , such as the desert recluse ( found in the deserts of southwestern United States ) , are reported to have caused necrotic bite wounds , though only rarely .
The hobo spider and the yellow sac spider have also been reported to cause necrotic bites .
However , the bites from these spiders are not known to produce the severe symptoms that can follow from a recluse spider bite , and the level of danger posed by these has been called into question .
So far , no known necrotoxins have been isolated from the venom of any of these spiders , and some arachnologists have disputed the accuracy of spider identifications carried out by bite victims , family members , medical responders , and other non - experts in arachnology .
There have been several studies questioning the danger posed by some of these spiders .
In these studies , scientists examined case studies of bites in which the spider in question was identified by an expert , and found that the incidence of necrotic injury diminished significantly when " questionable " identifications were excluded from the sample set .
( For a comparison of the toxicity of several kinds of spider bites , see the list of spiders having medically significant venom . )
BITE TREATMENT
Section::::Bite treatment .
First aid involves the application of an ice pack to control inflammation and prompt medical care .
If it can be easily captured , the spider should be brought with the patient in a clear , tightly closed container so it may be identified .
Routine treatment should include immobilization of the affected limb , application of ice , local wound care , and tetanus prophylaxis .
Many other therapies have been used with varying degrees of success , including hyperbaric oxygen , dapsone , antihistamines ( e.g. , cyproheptadine ) , antibiotics , dextran , glucocorticoids , vasodilators , heparin , nitroglycerin , electric shock , curettage , surgical excision , and antivenom .
None of these treatments have been subjected to randomized controlled trials to conclusively show benefit .
In almost all cases , bites are self - limited and typically heal without any medical intervention .
Outpatient palliative care
following discharge often consists of a weak or moderate strength opioid ( e.g. codeine or tramadol , respectively ) depending on pain scores , an anti - inflammatory agent ( e.g. naproxen , cortisone ) , and an antispasmodic ( e.g. cyclobenzaprine , diazepam ) , for a few days to a week .
If the pain and/or spasms have not resolved by this time , a second medical evaluation is generally advised , and differential diagnoses may be considered .
Occasionally , an antibiotic is prescribed as well .
Cases of brown recluse venom travelling along a limb through a vein or artery are rare , but the resulting tissue mortification can affect an area as large as several inches and in extreme cases
require excising of the wound .
SPECIFIC TREATMENTS Section::::Specific treatments .
In presumed cases of recluse bites , dapsone is often used for the treatment of necrosis , but controlled clinical trials have yet to demonstrate efficacy .
However , dapsone may be effective in treating many " spider bites " because many such cases are actually misdiagnosed microbial infections .
There have been conflicting reports about its efficacy in treating brown recluse bites , and some have suggested it should no longer be used routinely , if at all .
Wound infection is rare .
Antibiotics are not recommended unless there is a credible diagnosis of infection .
Studies have shown that surgical intervention is ineffective and may worsen outcome .
Excision may delay wound healing , cause abscesses , and lead to scarring .
Purportedly application of nitroglycerin stopped necrosis .
However , one scientific animal study found no benefit in preventing necrosis , with the study 's results showing it increased inflammation and caused symptoms of systemic envenoming .
The authors concluded the results of the study did not support the use of topical nitroglycerin in brown recluse envenoming .
Antivenom is available in South America for the venom of related species of recluse spiders .
However , the bites , often being painless , usually do not present symptoms until 24 or more hours after the event , possibly limiting the effect of this intervention .
SPIDER POPULATION CONTROL Section::::Spider population control .
Due to increased fear of these spiders prompted by greater public awareness of their presence in recent years , extermination of domestic brown recluses is performed frequently in the lower midwestern United States .
Brown recluse spiders possess a variety of adaptive abilities , including the ability to maintain homeostasis for several seasons with no food or water .
Additionally , these spiders survive significantly longer in a relatively cool , thermally stable environment .
The most important precaution is to remove and reduce trash and rubbish from your property , such as woodpiles , boxes , plywood , tires , and trash cans — especially if they are stored right next to the house .
With attached garages , block off house access by sealing cracks around doors and access holes for electrical conduits or plumbing .
In the Midwest , some brown recluse bites occur when a sleeping person rolls over during the night , and the trapped spider bites .
In the bedroom , move the bed away from the wall , remove any skirts or ruffles and remove all items stored under it .
This minimizes chances that any spider can crawl onto the bed .
Do not leave clothes and shoes on the floor .
If clothes or shoes are left on the floor , be sure to shake them before dressing .
Apparel and equipment that is only occasionally worn should be stored in tightly closed plastic bags , especially if stored in the garage or other dark storage areas .
Typically , pesticide control of spiders is difficult .
There are various insecticides available in retail outlets labeled for spider control .
However , spiders ' perched legs allow them to walk over most pesticides , making the use of chemicals to eradicate the spiders impractical and unnecessarily toxic .
A 2014 study indicates that fumigation may be more effective than previously believed .
Sticky traps placed along floor boards offer a non - insecticidal way to trap spiders as well as provide an idea of population levels in the structure .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Myth of the Brown Recluse * Illinois and Iowa Brown Recluse Project * Description of black widow and brown recluse spiders
* University of Florida Institute of Food and Agricultural Sciences Featured Creatures
* Medical Case is the Work of Brown Recluse Spider * CDC - Venomous Spiders - NIOSH Workplace Safety and Health Topic