IONIZATION ENERGY
In physics and chemistry , ionization energy ( American English spelling ) or ionisation energy ( British English spelling ) , denoted E , is the minimum amount of energy required to remove the most loosely bound electron , the valence electron , of an isolated neutral gaseous atom or molecule .
It is quantitatively expressed as where is any atom or molecule capable of ionization , is that atom or molecule with an electron removed , and is the removed electron .
This is generally an endothermic process .
Generally , the closer the outermost electrons are to the nucleus of the atom , the higher the atom 's or element 's ionization energy .
The sciences of physics and chemistry use different measures of ionization energy .
In physics , the unit is the amount of energy required to remove a single electron from a single atom or molecule , expressed as electronvolts .
In chemistry , the unit is the amount of energy required for all of the atoms in a mole of substance to lose one electron each : molar ionization energy or enthalpy , expressed as kilojoules per mole ( kJ / mol ) or kilocalories per mole ( kcal / mol ) .
Comparison of E of elements in the periodic table reveals two periodic trends :
* E generally increases as one moves from left to right within a given period ( that is , row ) .
*
* E generally decreases as one moves from top to bottom in a given group ( that is , column ) .
*
The latter trend results from the outer electron shell being progressively farther from the nucleus , with the addition of one inner shell per row as one moves down the column .
The nth ionization energy refers to the amount of energy required to remove an electron from the species with a charge of ( n-1 ) .
For example , the first three ionization energies are defined as follows : The term ionization potential is an older name for ionization energy , because the oldest method of measuring ionization energy was based on ionizing a sample and accelerating the electron removed using an electrostatic potential .
However this term is now considered obsolete .
Some factors affecting the ionization energy include : *
Nuclear charge :
the greater the magnitude of nuclear charge the more tightly
the electrons are held by the nucleus and hence more will be ionization energy .
* * Number of electron shells : the greater the size of the atom less tightly the electrons are held by the nucleus and ionization energy will be less * * Effective nuclear charge ( Z ) : the greater the magnitude of electron shielding and penetration the less tightly the electrons are held by the nucleus , the lower the Z of the electron , and hence less will be the ionization energy .
* * Type of orbital ionized : the atom having a more stable electronic configuration has less tendency to lose electrons and consequently has high ionization energy .
* * Occupancy of the orbital matters : if the orbital is half or completely filled then it is harder to remove electrons * VALUES AND TRENDS Section::::Values and trends .
Generally , the ( n+1)th ionization energy is larger than the nth ionization energy .
When the next ionization energy involves removing an electron from the same electron shell , the increase in ionization energy is primarily due to the increased net charge of the ion from which the electron is being removed .
Electrons removed from more highly charged ions of a particular element experience greater forces of electrostatic attraction ; thus , their removal requires more energy .
In addition , when the next ionization energy involves removing an electron from a lower electron shell , the greatly decreased distance between the nucleus and the electron also increases both the electrostatic force and the distance over which that force must be overcome to remove the electron .
Both of these factors further increase the ionization energy .
Some values for elements of the third period are given in the following table : + Successive ionization energy values / kJmol
( 96.485 kJ / mol ≡ 1 eV ) !
Element !
First !
Second !
Third !
Fourth !
Fifth !
Sixth !
Seventh ! align="center
"
Na ! align="center
" Mg ! align="center " Al ! align="center
"
Si ! align="center
" P ! align="center " S ! align="center " Cl !
align="center " Ar Large jumps in the successive molar ionization energies occur when passing noble gas configurations .
For example , as can be seen in the table above , the first two molar ionization energies of magnesium ( stripping the two 3s electrons from a magnesium atom ) are much smaller than the third , which requires stripping off a 2p electron from the neon configuration of Mg .
That electron is much closer to the nucleus than the previous 3s electron .
Ionization energy is also a periodic trend within the periodic table organization .
Moving left to right within a period , or upward within a group , the first ionization energy generally increases , with some exceptions such as aluminum and sulfur in the table above .
As the nuclear charge of the nucleus increases across the period , the atomic radius decreases and the electron cloud becomes closer towards the nucleus .
ELECTROSTATIC EXPLANATION Section::::Electrostatic explanation .
Atomic ionization energy can be predicted by an analysis using electrostatic potential and the Bohr model of the atom , as follows ( note that the derivation uses Gaussian units ) .
Consider an electron of charge -e and an atomic nucleus with charge + Ze , where Z is the number of protons in the nucleus .
According to the Bohr model , if the electron were to approach and bond with the atom , it would come to rest at a certain radius a.
The electrostatic potential V at distance a from the ionic nucleus , referenced to a point infinitely far away , is : formula_1 Since the electron is negatively charged , it is drawn inwards by this positive electrostatic potential .
The energy required for the electron to " climb out " and leave the atom is : formula_2
This analysis is incomplete , as it leaves the distance a as an unknown variable .
It can be made more rigorous by assigning to each electron of every chemical element a characteristic distance , chosen so that this relation agrees with experimental data .
It is possible to expand this model considerably by taking a semi - classical approach , in which momentum is quantized .
This approach works very well for the hydrogen atom , which only has one electron .
The magnitude of the angular momentum for a circular orbit is : formula_3
The total energy of the atom is the sum of the kinetic and potential energies , that is : formula_4 Velocity can be eliminated from the kinetic energy term by setting the Coulomb attraction equal to the centripetal force , giving :
formula_5
Solving the angular momentum for v and substituting this into the expression for kinetic energy , we have :
formula_6
This establishes the dependence of the radius on n. That is : formula_7
Now the energy can be found in terms of Z , e , and r. Using the new value for the kinetic energy in the total energy equation above , it is found that : formula_8 At its smallest value , n is equal to 1 and r
is the Bohr radius a which equals formula_9 .
Now , the equation for the energy can be established in terms of the Bohr radius .
Doing so gives the result : formula_10 QUANTUM - MECHANICAL EXPLANATION Section::::Quantum - mechanical explanation .
According to the more complete theory of quantum mechanics , the location of an electron is best described as a probability distribution within an electron cloud , i.e. atomic orbital .
The energy can be calculated by integrating over this cloud .
The cloud 's underlying mathematical representation is the wavefunction which is built from Slater determinants consisting of molecular spin orbitals .
These are related by Pauli 's exclusion principle to the antisymmetrized products of the atomic or molecular orbitals .
In general , calculating the nth ionization energy requires calculating the energies of formula_11 and formula_12 electron systems .
Calculating these energies exactly is not possible except for the simplest systems ( i.e. hydrogen ) , primarily because of difficulties in integrating the electron correlation terms .
Therefore , approximation methods are routinely employed , with different methods varying in complexity ( computational time ) and in accuracy compared to empirical data .
This has become a well - studied problem and is routinely done in computational chemistry .
At the lowest level of approximation , the ionization energy is provided by Koopmans ' theorem .
VERTICAL AND ADIABATIC IONIZATION ENERGY IN MOLECULES Section::::Vertical and adiabatic ionization energy in molecules .
Ionization of molecules often leads to changes in molecular geometry , and two types of ( first ) ionization energy are defined – adiabatic and vertical .
ADIABATIC IONIZATION ENERGY Section::::Adiabatic ionization energy .
The adiabatic ionization energy of a molecule is the minimum amount of energy required to remove an electron from a neutral molecule , i.e. the difference between the energy of the vibrational ground state of the neutral species ( v " = 0 level ) and that of the positive ion ( v ' = 0 ) .
The specific equilibrium geometry of each species does not affect this value .
VERTICAL IONIZATION ENERGY
Section::::Vertical ionization energy .
Due to the possible changes in molecular geometry that may result from ionization , additional transitions may exist between the vibrational ground state of the neutral species and vibrational excited states of the positive ion .
In other words , ionization is accompanied by vibrational excitation .
The intensity of such transitions are explained by the Franck – Condon principle , which predicts that the most probable and intense transition corresponds to the vibrational excited state of the positive ion that has the same geometry as the neutral molecule .
This transition is referred to as the " vertical " ionization energy since it is represented by a completely vertical line on a potential energy diagram ( see Figure ) .
For a diatomic molecule , the geometry is defined by the length of a single bond .
The removal of an electron from a bonding
molecular orbital weakens the bond and increases the bond length .
In Figure 1 , the lower potential energy curve is for the neutral molecule and the upper surface is for the positive ion .
Both curves plot the potential energy as a function of bond length .
The horizontal lines correspond to vibrational levels with their associated vibrational wave functions .
Since the ion has a weaker bond , it will have a longer bond length .
This effect is represented by shifting the minimum of the potential energy curve to the right of the neutral species .
The adiabatic ionization is the diagonal transition to the vibrational ground state of the ion .
Vertical ionization involves vibrational excitation of the ionic state and therefore requires greater energy .
In many circumstances , the adiabatic ionization energy is often a more interesting physical quantity since it describes the difference in energy between the two potential energy surfaces .
However , due to experimental limitations , the adiabatic ionization energy is often difficult to determine , whereas the vertical detachment energy is easily identifiable and measurable .
ANALOGS OF IONIZATION ENERGY TO OTHER SYSTEMS Section::::Analogs of ionization energy to other systems .
While the term ionization energy is largely used only for gas - phase atomic or molecular species , there are a number of analogous quantities that consider the amount of energy required to remove an electron from other physical systems .
ELECTRON BINDING ENERGY Section::::Electron binding energy .
Electron binding energy is a generic term for the ionization energy that can be used for species with any charge state .
For example , the electron binding energy for the chloride ion is the minimum amount of energy required to remove an electron from the chlorine atom when it has a charge of -1 .
In this particular example , the electron binding energy has the same magnitude as the electron affinity for the neutral chlorine atom .
In another example , the electron binding energy refers the minimum amount of energy required to remove an electron from the dicarboxylate dianion OC(CH)CO .
WORK FUNCTION Section::::Work function .
Work function is the minimum amount of energy required to remove an electron from a solid surface .
SEE ALSO * Electron affinity – a closely related concept describing the energy released by adding an electron to a neutral atom or molecule .
* Electronegativity is a number that shares some similarities with ionization energy .
* Koopmans ' theorem , regarding the predicted ionization energies in Hartree – Fock theory .
* Di - tungsten tetra(hpp ) has the lowest recorded ionization energy for a stable chemical compound .
REFERENCES