DUKE
A duke ( male ) or duchess ( female ) can either be a monarch ruling over a duchy or a member of royalty or nobility , historically of highest rank below the monarch .
The title comes from French duc , itself from the Latin dux , ' leader ' , a term used in republican Rome to refer to a military commander without an official rank ( particularly one of Germanic or Celtic origin ) , and later coming to mean the leading military commander of a province .
The title dux survived in the Eastern Roman Empire where it was used in several contexts signifying a rank equivalent to a captain or general .
Later on , in the 11th century , the title Megas Doux was introduced for the post of commander - in - chief of the entire navy .
During the Middle Ages the title ( as Herzog ) signified first among the Germanic monarchies .
Dukes were the rulers of the provinces and the superiors of the counts in the cities and later , in the feudal monarchies , the highest - ranking peers of the king .
A duke may or may not be
, ipso facto , a member of the nation 's peerage : in the United Kingdom and Spain all dukes are / were also peers of the realm , in France some were and some were not , while the term is not applicable to dukedoms of other nations , even where an institution similar to the peerage ( e.g. , Grandeeship , Imperial Diet , Hungarian House of Magnates ) existed .
During the 19th century many of the smaller German and Italian states were ruled by Dukes or Grand Dukes .
But at present , with the exception of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg , there are no dukes ruling as monarchs .
Duke remains the highest hereditary title ( aside from titles borne by the reigning or formerly reigning dynasty ) in Portugal ( though now a republic ) , Spain , and the United Kingdom .
In Sweden , members of the Royal Family are given a personal dukedom at birth .
The Pope , as a temporal sovereign , has also , though rarely , granted the title of Duke or Duchess to persons for " services " to the Holy See .
In some realms the relative status of " duke " and " prince " , as titles borne by the nobility rather than by members of reigning dynasties , varied — e.g . , in Italy and the Netherlands .
A woman who holds in her own right the title to such duchy or dukedom , or is the wife of a duke , is normally styled duchess .
Queen Elizabeth II , however , is known by tradition as Duke of Normandy in the Channel Islands and Duke of Lancaster in Lancashire .
DUCHY AND DUKEDOM Section::::Duchy and dukedom .
A duchy is the territory or geopolitical entity ruled by a duke , whereas his title or area is often called a dukedom .
The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is a fully independent state and its head , the Grand Duke , is a sovereign monarch reigning over his Luxembourgish subjects .
The Duke of Cornwall holds both the dukedom ( title ) and duchy ( estate holdings ) , the latter being the source of his personal income ; those living on the ducal estates are subjects of the British sovereign and owe neither fealty nor services to the duke per se .
In Scotland the male heir apparent to the British crown is always the Duke of Rothesay as well , but this is a dukedom ( title ) without a duchy .
Similarly , the British monarch rules and owns the Duchy of Lancaster as Duke of Lancaster , but it is held separately from the Crown , with the income of the duchy estates providing the Sovereign 's Privy Purse .
The Channel Islands are two of the three remaining Crown Dependencies , the last vestiges of the lands of the Duchy of Normandy .
The Islanders in their loyal toast will say " La Reine , notre Duc " ( The Queen , Our Duke ) .
Though the title was apparently renounced under the Treaty of Paris in 1259 , the Crown still maintains that the title is retained :
" In 1106 , William 's youngest son Henry I seized the Duchy of Normandy from his brother Robert ; since that time , the English Sovereign has always held the title Duke of Normandy , " and that " By 1205 , England had lost most of its French lands , including Normandy .
However , the Channel Islands , part of the lost Duchy , remained a self - governing possession of the English Crown .
While the islands today retain autonomy in government , they owe allegiance to The Queen in her role as Duke of Normandy . "
MIDDLE AGES Section::::Middle Ages .
During the Middle Ages , after Roman power in Western Europe collapsed , the title was still employed in the Germanic kingdoms , usually to refer to the rulers of old Roman provinces .
ALBANIA Section::::Albania .
In 1332 , Robert of Taranto succeeded his father , Philip .
Robert 's uncle , John , did not wish to do him homage for the Principality of Achaea , so Robert received Achaea from John in exchange for 5,000 ounces of gold and the rights to the diminished Kingdom of Albania .
John took the style of Duke of Durazzo ( today Durrës ) .
In 1368 , Durazzo fell to Karl Thopia , who was recognized by Venice as Prince of Albania .
VISIGOTHS Section::::Visigoths .
The Visigoths retained the Roman divisions of their kingdom in the Iberian Peninsula and it seems that dukes ruled over these areas .
They were the most powerful landowners and , along with the bishops , elected the king , usually from their own midst .
They were the military commanders and in this capacity often acted independently from the king , most notably in the latter period before the Muslim invasions .
The army was structured decimally with the highest unit , the thiufa , probably corresponding to about 1,000 people from each civitas ( city district ) .
The cities were commanded by counts , who were in turn answerable to the dukes , who called up the thiufae when necessary .
LOMBARDS Section::::Lombards .
When the Lombards entered Italy , the Latin chroniclers called their war leaders duces in the old fashion .
These leaders eventually became the provincial rulers , each with a recognized seat of government .
Though nominally loyal to the king , the concept of kingship was new to the Lombards and the dukes were highly independent , especially in central and southern Italy , where the Duke of Spoleto and the Duke of Benevento were de facto sovereigns .
In 575 , when Cleph died , a period known as the Rule of the Dukes , in which the dukes governed without a king , commenced .
It lasted only a decade before the disunited magnates , in order to defend the kingdom from external attacks , elected a new king and even diminished their own duchies to provide him with a handsome royal demesne .
The Lombard kings were usually drawn from the duke pool when the title was not hereditary .
The dukes tried to make their own offices hereditary .
Beneath them in the internal structure were the counts and gastalds , a uniquely Lombard title initially referring to judicial functions , similar to a count 's , in provincial regions FRANKS Section::::Franks .
The Franks employed dukes as the governors of Roman provinces , though they also led military expeditions far from their duchies .
The dukes were the highest - ranking officials in the realm , typically Frankish ( whereas the counts were often Gallo - Roman ) , and formed the class from which the kings ' generals were chosen in times of war .
The dukes met with the king every May to discuss policy for the upcoming year , the so - called Mayfield .
In Burgundy and Provence , the titles of patrician and prefect were commonly employed instead of duke , probably for historical reasons relating to the greater Romanization of those provinces .
But the titles were basically equivalent .
In late Merovingian Gaul , the mayors of the palace of the Arnulfing clan began to use the title dux
et princeps Francorum : " duke and prince of the Franks " .
In this title , " duke " implied supreme military control of the entire nation ( Francorum , the Franks ) and it was thus used until the end of the Carolingian dynasty in France in 987 .
HOLY
ROMAN EMPIRE STEM DUCHIES Section::::Holy Roman Empire .
Section::::Stem duchies .
The stem duchies were the constituent duchies of the kingdom of Germany at the time of the extinction of the Carolingian dynasty ( the death of Louis the Child in 911 ) and the transitional period leading to the formation of the Holy Roman Empire later in the 10th century .
ENGLAND ANGLO - SAXON TIMES
Section::::England .
Section::::Anglo - Saxon times .
In Anglo - Saxon England , where the Roman political divisions were largely abandoned , the highest political rank beneath that of king was ealdorman , and the first ealdormen were referred to as duces ( the plural of the original Latin dux ) in the chronicles .
The title ealdorman was replaced by the Danish eorl ( later earl ) over time .
After the Norman conquest , their power and regional jurisdiction was limited to that of the Norman counts .
LATE MEDIEVAL TIMES Section::::Late medieval times .
Edward III of England created the first English dukedom by naming his eldest son Edward , the Black Prince , as Duke of Cornwall in 1337 , after he lost his own title of Duke of Normandy .
Upon the death of the Black Prince , the duchy of Cornwall passed to his nine - year - old son , who would eventually succeed his grandfather as Richard II .
The title of Duke of Lancaster was created by Edward III in 1351 for Henry of Grosmont , but became extinct upon the duke 's death in 1361 .
The following year , Edward III bestowed the title ( 2nd creation ) on his fourth son , John of Gaunt , who was also married to the first duke 's daughter .
On the same day Edward III also created his second son , Lionel of Antwerp , as Duke of Clarence .
All five of Edward III 's surviving sons eventually became dukes .
In 1385 , ten years after their father 's death , his heir Richard II created dukedoms for his last two uncles on the same day .
Thomas of Woodstock was named Duke of Gloucester and Edmund of Langley became Duke of York , thereby founding the House of York , which later fought for the throne with John of Gaunt 's Lancastrian descendants during the Wars of the Roses .
By 1483 , a total of 16 ducal titles had been created : Cornwall , Lancaster , Clarence , Gloucester , York , Ireland , Hereford , Aumale , Exeter , Surrey , Norfolk , Bedford , Somerset , Buckingham , Warwick and Suffolk .
Some became extinct , others had multiple creations , and some had merged with the crown upon the holder 's accession to the throne .
When the Plantagenet dynasty came to an end at the Battle of Bosworth Field on 22 August 1485 , only four ducal titles remained extant , of which two were now permanently associated with the crown .
John de la Pole was Duke of Suffolk and John Howard was Duke of Norfolk ( 2nd creation ) , while the duchy of Cornwall was reserved as a title and source of income for the eldest son of the sovereign , and the duchy of Lancaster was now held by the monarch .
Norfolk perished alongside Richard III at Bosworth field , and the title was forfeit .
It was restored to his son Thomas thirty years later by Henry VIII , as one of a number of dukes created or recreated by the Tudor dynasty over the ensuing century .
England 's premier ducal title , Norfolk , remains in the Howard family to this day .
THE MODERN AGE Section::::The modern age .
In the 19th century , the sovereign dukes of Parma and Modena in Italy , and of Anhalt , Brunswick - Lüneburg , Nassau , Saxe - Coburg - Gotha , Saxe - Meiningen and Saxe - Altenburg in Germany survived Napoleon 's reorganization .
Since the unification of Italy in 1870 and the end of monarchy in Germany in 1918 , there have no longer been any reigning dukes in Europe ; Luxembourg is ruled by a grand duke , a higher title , just below king .
In the United Kingdom , the inherited position of a duke along with its dignities , privileges , and rights is a dukedom .
However , the title of duke has never been associated with independent rule in the British Isles : they hold dukedoms , not duchies ( excepting the Duchy of Cornwall and the Duchy of Lancaster ) .
Dukes in the United Kingdom are addressed as " Your Grace " and referred to as " His Grace " .
Currently , there are thirty - five dukedoms in the Peerage of England , Peerage of Scotland , Peerage of Great Britain , Peerage of Ireland and Peerage of the United Kingdom , held by thirty different people , as three people hold two dukedoms and one holds three ( see List of dukes in the peerages of Britain and Ireland ) .
EQUIVALENTS IN OTHER EUROPEAN LANGUAGES Section::::Equivalents in other European languages .
See wikt :
en : duke for equivalents in other European languages .
ROYAL DUKES Section::::Royal dukes .
Various royal houses traditionally awarded ( mainly ) dukedoms to the sons and in some cases , the daughters , of their respective sovereigns ; others include at least one dukedom in a wider list of similarly granted titles , nominal dukedoms without any actual authority , often even without an estate .
Such titles are still conferred on royal princes or princesses in the current European monarchies of Belgium , Spain , Sweden and the United Kingdom .
Other historical cases occurred for example in Denmark , Finland ( as a part of Sweden ) and France , Portugal and some former colonial possessions such as Brazil and Haiti .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , ducal titles which have been given within the royal family include Duke of Cornwall , Duke of Lancaster , Duke of Clarence , Duke of York , Duke of Gloucester , Duke of Bedford , Duke of Cumberland , Duke of Cambridge , Duke of Rothesay , Duke of Albany , Duke of Ross , Duke of Edinburgh , Duke of Kent , Duke of Sussex , and Duke of Connaught and Strathearn .
Following his abdication in 1936 the former King Edward VIII was given the title Duke of Windsor .
BELGIUM Section::::Belgium .
In Belgium , the title of Duke of Brabant ( historically the most prestigious in the Low Countries , and containing the federal capital Brussels ) , if still vacant , has been awarded preferentially to the eldest son and heir apparent of the king , other male dynasts receiving various lower historical titles ( much older than Belgium , and in principle never fallen to the Belgian crown ) , such as Count of Flanders ( King Leopold III 's so - titled brother Charles held the title when he became the realm 's temporary head of state as prince - regent ) and Prince of Liège ( a secularised version of the historical prince - bishopric ; e.g. King Albert II until he succeeded his older brother Baudouin I ) .
DENMARK Section::::Denmark .
Denmark 's kings gave appanages in their twin - duchies of Schleswig - Holstein ( now three - fourths of them is part of Germany , but then the Holstein half of it was part of the Holy Roman Empire in personal union with Denmark proper ) to younger sons or their male - line descendants , with a specific though not sovereign title of Duke , e.g. , Duke of Gottorp , Duke of Sonderburg , Duke of Augustenborg , Duke of Franzhagen , Duke of Beck , Duke of Glucksburg and Duke of Norburg .
IBERIAN PENINSULA Section::::Iberian peninsula .
When the Christian Reconquista , sweeping the Moors from the former Caliphate of Córdoba and its taifa - remnants , transformed the territory of former Suevic and Visigothic realms into Catholic feudal principalities , none of these warlords was exactly styled Duke .
A few ( as Portugal itself ) started as Count ( even if the title of Dux was sometimes added ) , but soon all politically relevant princes were to use the royal style of King .
PORTUGAL
Section::::Portugal .
In Portugal , the title of Duke was granted for the first time in 1415 to infante Peter and infante Henry , the second and third sons of king John I ,
following their participation in the successful Conquest of Ceuta .
Pedro became the first Duke of Coimbra and Henry the first Duke of Viseu .
From the reign of king Manuel I , the title of Duke of Beja was given to the second son of the monarch .
This was changed during the Liberal regime in the 19th century ( with queen Maria II ) , when the first infante ( second son of the monarch ) got the title of Duke of Porto and the second infante ( third son ) was known as Duke of Beja .
There are examples of Duke as a subsidiary title , granted to the most powerful noble Houses : * Duke of Barcelos , to be used by the heir of the Duke of Braganza ; * Duke of Torres Novas , to be used by the heir of the Duke of Aveiro ; * Duke of Miranda do Corvo , to be used by the heir of the Duke of Lafões .
Usually , the title of Duke was granted to relatives of the Royal Family , such as the infantes or natural sons of the monarch .
There are exceptions , such as António José de Ávila , who , although not having any relation to the royal family , was given the title of duke of Ávila and Bolama in the 19th Century .
SPAIN
Section::::Spain .
Spanish infantes and infantas were usually given a dukedom upon marriage , excepting the heir apparent who is the Prince of Asturias .
This title is nowadays not hereditary but carries a Grandeza de España .
The current royal duchesses are : HRH the Duchess of Badajoz ( Infanta Maria del Pilar ) , HRH the Duchess of Soria ( Infanta Margarita )
( although she inherited the title of Duchess of Hernani from her cousin and is second holder of that title ) , and HRH the Duchess of Lugo ( Infanta Elena ) .
In Spain all the dukes hold the court rank of Grande , i.e. , Grandee of the realm , which had precedence over all other feudatories .
NORDIC COUNTRIES Section::::Nordic countries .
The Northern European duchies of Halland , Jutland , Lolland , Osilia and Reval existed in the Middle Ages .
The longest - surviving duchy was Schleswig , i.e. , Sonderjylland ( a portion of which later became part of Germany ) .
Its southern neighbor , the duchy of Holstein , in personal union with the Danish crown , was nonetheless always a German principality .
The two duchies jointly became a member of the German Bundesland as " Schleswig - Holstein " in the 19th century .
In Sweden , medieval duchies of Finland , Södermanland , Skåne , and Halland were some appanages for princes of the reigning dynasty .
In modern times almost every province in Sweden was used as the territorial designation for a royal prince 's dukedom .
Sweden had a history of making the sons of its kings ruling princes of vast duchies , but this ceased in 1622 .
Only one non - royal person was ever given a dukedom .
In 1772 , King Gustav III reinstated the appointment of dukes but as a non - hereditary title for his brothers .
Since then , all Swedish princes have been created dukes of a province at birth .
When the 1810 Act of Succession was amended to allow female succession to the throne , King Carl XVI Gustaf 's eldest daughter Victoria became Crown Princess ( displacing her younger brother Carl Philip ) and received the title of Duchess of Västergötland .
The practice of conferring ducal titles has since extended to Swedish princesses as well as princes .
Currently , there are five dukes and four duchesses in their own right .
The territorial designations of these dukedoms refer to ten of the Provinces of Sweden .
Key parts of Finland were sometimes under a Duke of Finland during the Swedish reign .
Some of the provinces are still considered duchies for the purposes of heraldry .
FRANCE AND OTHER FORMER MONARCHIES Section::::France and other former monarchies .
See appanage ( mainly for the French kingdom ) and the list in the geographical section below , which also treats special ducal titles in orders or national significance .
FRANCE Section::::France .
The highest precedence in the realm , attached to a feudal territory , was given to the twelve original pairies ( en : peers ) , which also had a traditional function in the royal coronation , comparable to the German imperial archoffices .
Half of them were ducal : three ecclesiastical ( the six prelates all ranked above the six secular peers of the realm ) and three temporal , each time above three counts of the same social estate : The Prince - Bishops with ducal territories among them were : * The Archbishop of Reims , styled archevêque - duc pair de France ( in Champagne ; who crowns and anoints the king , traditionally in his cathedral )
* Two suffragan bishops , styled evêque - duc pair
de France :
* the bishop - duke of Laon ( in Picardy ; bears the ' Sainte Ampoule ' containing the sacred ointment ) * the bishop - duc de Langres ( in Burgundy ; bears the scepter ) Later , the Archbishop of Paris was given the title of duc de Saint - Cloud with the dignity of peerage , but it was debated if he was an ecclesiastical peer or merely a bishop holding a lay peerage .
The secular dukes in the peerage of the realm were , again in order of precedence :
* The Duke of Burgundy or duc de Bourgogne ( known as Grand duc ; not a separate title at that time ; just a description of the wealth and real clout of the 15th century Dukes , cousins of the Kings of France )
( bears the crown , fastens the belt )
* The Duke of Normandy or duc de Normandie ( holds the first square banner )
* The Duke of Aquitaine or duc d'Aquitaine or de Guyenne ( holds the second square banner )
The theory of the participation of the peers in the coronation was laid down in the late 13th century , when some of the peerage ( the Duchy of Normandy and the County of Toulouse ) had already been merged in the crown .
At the end of this same century , the king elevated some counties into duchies , a practice that increased up until the Revolution .
Many of this duchies were also peerages ( the so - called ' new peerages ' ) .
ITALY , GERMANY AND AUSTRIA Section::::Italy , Germany and Austria .
In Italy , Germany and Austria
the title of " duke " ( duca in Italian , and Herzog in German ) was quite common .
As the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation ( HRE ) was until its dissolution a feudal structure , most of its Dukes were actually reigning in their lands .
As the titles from the HRE were taken over after its dissolution , or in Italy after their territories became independent of the Empire , both countries also had a share of fully sovereign dukes .
Also , in Germany in many ducal families every agnate would bear the ducal title of the family as a courtesy title .
In Italy some important sovereign ducal families were the Visconti and the Sforza , who ruled Milan ; the Savoia in Piedmont ; the Medici of Florence ; the Farnese of Parma and Piacenza ; the Cybo - Malaspina of Massa ; the Gonzaga of Mantua ; the Este of Modena and Ferrara .
The maritime republics of Venice and Genoa were ruled by elected Doges , a word which comes from the same Latin root as " Duke " .
In Germany , important ducal families were the Wittelsbachs in Bavaria , the Welfs in Hannover , the ducal family of Cleves , the Wettins in Saxony ( with its Ernestine branch divided into several duchies ) , the Württembergs , the Mecklenburgs and the Habsburgs in Austria as " Archdukes " .
In the German Confederation the Nassaus , the Ascanians of Anhalt , the Welf branch of Brunswick and the Ernestine lines of the Saxon duchies were the sovereign ducal families .
ELSEWHERE IN EUROPE
HUNGARY
Section::::Elsewhere in Europe .
Section::::Hungary .
In the Kingdom of Hungary no ducal principalities existed but duchies were often formed for members of the dynasty as appanages .
During the rule of the Árpád dynasty dukes held territorial powers , some of them even minted coins , but later this title became more often nominal .
These duchies usually were * the Duchy of Nitra * the Duchy of Bihar * the Duchy of Transylvania ( consisting of the voivodship of Transylvania and some other counties )
In the Jagellonian era ( 1490–1526 ) only two dukes did not belong to the royal dynasty :
John Corvin ( the illegitimate son of Matthias Corvinus ) and Lőrinc Újlaki ( whose father was the king of Bosnia ) , and both bore the title as royal dukes .
After the Battle of Mohács the Habsburg kings rewarded Hungarian aristocrats ( like the Esterházys ) with princely titles , but they created these titles as Holy Roman Emperors , not as kings of Hungary .
GREECE Section::::Greece .
As the Catholic crusaders overran Orthodox Christian parts of the Byzantine empire , they installed several crusader states ( see Frangokratia ) , some of which were of ducal rank : * the Duchy of Athens , to which the duchy of Neopatras was later linked * the Aegean insular Duchy of Naxos , officially the " Duchy of the Archipelago "
The Byzantines retained the title dux , transcribed as doux in Greek .
As in the later Roman Empire , it remained a military office .
In the 10th century , it was given to the military commanders over several themata ( also known as katepano ) , and in the late 11th century it became used for the governor of a thema .
In Italy and other western countries , the later Byzantine appanages of the Palaiologan period were sometimes translated as duchies : the Morea , Mesembria , Selymbria and Thessaloniki .
However , as these had Greek holders , they were titled Archon ( " magistrate " ) or Despotes .
In the independent Kingdom of Greece , the style of Duke of Sparta was instituted in 1868 upon the birth of Constantine I as a distinct title for the crown prince of Greece .
SLAVIC AND NEARBY COUNTRIES
Section::::Slavic and nearby countries .
Generally , confusion reigns whether to translate the usual ruler titles , knyaz/
knez/ ksiaze etc .
as Prince ( analogous to the German Fürst ) or as Duke ; * In splintered Poland petty principalities generally ruled by branches of the earlier Polish Piast dynasty are regarded as duchies in translated titulary .
Examples of such : Kujavia , Masovia , Sandomir , Greater Poland and Kalisz as well as various minor duchies , often short - lived or in personal union or merger , named after their capitals , mainly in the regions known as Little Poland and Greater Poland , including ( there are often also important Latin or German forms )
Kraków , Łęczyca and Sieradz .
*
In Pomerelia and Pomerania ( inhabited by the Kashubians , different Slavic people from the Poles proper ) , branches of native ruling dynasties were usually recognized as dukes , quite similarly to the pattern in Poland .
*
In Russia , before the imperial unification from Muscovy ; sometimes even as vassal , tributary to a Tartar Khan ; later , in Peter the Great 's autocratic empire , the russification gertsog was used as the Russian rendering of the German ducal title Herzog , especially as ( the last ) part of the full official style of the Russian Emperor :
Gertsog Shlesvig - Golstinskiy , Stormarnskiy , Ditmarsenskiy i Oldenburgskiy
i prochaya
, i prochaya , i prochaya " Duke of Schleswig - Holstein [ see above ] , Stormarn , Dithmarschen and Oldenburg , and of other lands " , in chief of German and Danish territories to which the Tsar was dynastically linked .
*
In Bohemia was Duchy of Krumlov , and short - lived Duchy of Reichstadt and Duchy of Friedland .
*
In Silesia were many petty duchies as Duchy of Brzeg , Duchy of Legnica , Duchy of Zator and Duchy of Racibórz .
They were vassals of King of Bohemia .
*
In Lithuania , the approximate equivalent of a duke or prince was called kunigaikštis in the Lithuanian language .
Latin translation was dux meaning " duke " in the Middle Ages , whereas Latin for " prince " is princeps .
The overall leader of the Lithuanian dukes ( Lith .
plural : kunigaikščiai ) was the grand duke ( Lith . :
didysis kunigaikštis , Latin : magnus dux ) , who acted as the monarch of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania until 1795 when Russians took over the land .
NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
After Belgium and the Netherlands separated in 1830 , the title of duke no longer existed in the Netherlands .
There is , however , one exception ; the title Hertog van Limburg ( Duke of Limburg ) still exists .
This title , however , is an exclusive title for the head of state ( the monarch , i.e. , the king or queen of the Netherlands ) .
POST - COLONIAL NON - EUROPEAN STATES EMPIRE OF BRAZIL Section::::Post - colonial non - European states .
Section::::Empire of Brazil .
In the Empire of Brazil duke was the highest rank for people born outside the imperial house and only three dukedoms were created .
Two of these titles were for relatives of Emperor Pedro
I : an illegitimate daughter and a brother - in - law who received the title when married to Pedro I 's daughter Maria II .
The third , given to Luís Alves de Lima e Silva , was the only dukedom created during the reign of Pedro II .
None of these titles were hereditary , just like every other title in the Brazilian nobility system .
HAITI Section::::Haiti .
The royal Christophe dynasty created eight hereditary dukedoms , in rank directly below the nominal princes .
They were short - lived and only recognised in the country .
EQUIVALENTS Section::::Equivalents .
Like other major Western noble titles , Duke is sometimes used to render ( translate ) certain titles in non - western languages .
" Duke " is used even though those titles are generally etymologically and often historically unrelated and thus hard to compare .
However , they are considered roughly equivalent , especially in hierarchic aristocracies such as feudal Japan , useful as an indication of relative rank .
INDIA Section::::India .
Indian feudal system can not be fully translated to its European counterparts .
The closest equivalent to the title of Sovereign Duke is Rao and to a feudal duchy , a large jagir .
Thus , a Rao ( in the ruling system ) or a Jagirdar , Deshmukh , Patil and Zamindar ( in a feudal way ) are closely equivalent to a Duke .
TURKEY , AFGHANISTAN AND IRAN Section::::Turkey , Afghanistan and Iran .
Duke in Turkey , Afghanistan and Iran after Mongolian war against them , was added as generals and kings of districts or states but in the Kingdom of Persians and Ottomans , the systems can not be fully translated to its European counterparts so they called those generals and kings as Khan , a Mongolian royal and noble rank from the Turco - Mongol word for " lord , " equal to Duke .
After , revolutions and falling Empire system in those countries(changing the ruling system to democratic and republic systems ) , those Khans and the other equal ranks titles added to the titleholder 's surnames and the ranking system as usual was disqualified as an official ranking .
CHINA Section::::China .
During the era of feudalism in Ancient China ( Western Zhou , Spring and Autumn period and the Warring States period ) , the title of gōng ( 公 , conventionally translated as " Duke " ) was sparingly granted .
In a tradition called " Three Deferences and Two Royal Descendants " ( 三恪二王後 ) , the three former royal houses were granted the title of Duke .
For the Zhou dynasty , this would be the descendants of the Xia Dynasty and Shang Dynasty ; their dukedoms were respectively the states of Qi ( 杞 ) and Song ( 宋 ) .
When the rulers of these states called at the Zhou court , the king greeted them as equals , out of deference of their former status as royalty .
Noble titles also existed in subsequent periods .
The Duke of Yansheng noble title was granted to the descendants of Confucius .
In 1935 , the Nationalist Government changed the title to Sacrificial Official to Confucius ( 大成至聖先師奉祀官 ) , which still exists as an office of the Republic of China , de facto hereditary .
Dukedoms and other lesser titles were also awarded , sometimes posthumously ( see posthumous names ) , during the imperial period of Chinese history to recognize distinguished civil and military officials .
For example , Emperor Lizong of Song granted the posthumous title Duke of Hui ( 徽国公 ) to the Neo - Confucian thinker Zhu Xi .
INDONESIA
Section::::Indonesia .
The Javanese kingdom of Majapahit , which dominated eastern Java in the 14th and 15th centuries , was divided into nagara ( provinces ) .
The administration of these nagara was entrusted to members of the royal family , who bore the title of Bhre — i.e . ,
Bhra i , " lord of " ( the word bhra being akin to the Thai Phra ) , followed by the name of the land they were entrusted with : for example a sister of king Hayam Wuruk ( r. 1350–1389 ) was " Bhre Lasem " , " lady of Lasem " .
This system was similar to the Apanage system in Western Europe .
Sultan Agung , king of Mataram in Central Java ( r. 1613–1645 ) , would entrust the administration of territories he gradually conquered all over the island of Java , to officials bearing the title of Adipati , this title is hereditary .
Such territories were called Kadipaten .
Prior to the unification of Java by Sultan Agung , independent kadipatens also exist , e.g. the Duchy of Surabaya which was conquered by Agung in 1625 .
The VOC ( Dutch East Indies Company ) , while gradually taking control of Javanese territory , would maintain the existing Mataram administrative structure .
Adipati were called " regenten " in Dutch , and the territories they administered , " regentschappen " .
In the 19th century , the Javanese term for regent was bupati .
French traveller Gérard Louis Domeny de Rienzi mentions bapati .
The bupati have been maintained in the modern Indonesian administrative subdivision structure , heading a kabupaten , the subdivision of a provinsi or province .
The word Adipati is still found in the official title of the hereditary dukes Mangkunegara of Surakarta and Paku Alam of Yogyakarta — i.e . , Kanjeng Gusti Pangeran Adipati Arya ( shortened into KGPAA ) . NIGERIA Section::::Nigeria .
In the Kingdom of Benin , a viceroyal chieftain that is known as an Enogie in the Edo language is usually referred to as a duke in English .
Often a cadet of the dynasty that produces the Oba of Benin , the enogie is expected to rule his domain as he sees fit , subject to the approval of the oba .
In Ife , Oyo and the other kingdoms of Nigerian Yorubaland , a viceroyal chieftain is known as a Baale in the Yoruba language .
He is barred from wearing a crown as a matter of tradition , and is generally seen as the reigning representative of a monarch who has the right to wear one .
SEE ALSO
* List of dukes in the peerages of the British Isles
* Duchies in Sweden
* Duchy of Amalfi
* Duchy of Brittany * Duchy of Gaeta
* Duchy of Naples
* Archduke NOTES REFERENCES
* Hodgkin , Thomas .
Italy and her Invaders .
Clarendon Press : 1895 .
* Lewis , Archibald R. " The Dukes in the Regnum Francorum , A.D. 550 - 751 .
"
Speculum , Vol .
51 ,
No 3 ( July 1976 ) , pp 381–410 .
* Stenton , Sir Frank M. Anglo - Saxon England Third Edition .
Oxford University Press : 1971 .
* Thompson , E. A.
The Goths in Spain .
Clarendon Press : Oxford , 1969 .