AGRICULTURAL ADJUSTMENT ACT
The Agricultural Adjustment Act ( AAA ) was a United States federal law of the New Deal era designed to boost agricultural prices by reducing surpluses .
The Government bought livestock for slaughter and paid farmers subsidies not to plant part of their land .
The money for these subsidies was generated through an exclusive tax on companies which processed farm products .
The Act created a new agency , the Agricultural Adjustment Administration , an agency of the U.S. Department of Agriculture , to oversee the distribution of the subsidies .
The Agriculture Marketing Act , which established the Federal Farm Board in 1929 , was seen as a strong precursor to this act .
The AAA , along with other New Deal programs , represented the federal government 's first substantial effort to address economic welfare in the United States .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
When President Franklin D. Roosevelt took office in March 1933 , the United States was in the midst of the Great Depression . "
Farmers faced the most severe economic situation and lowest agricultural prices since the 1890s . "
" Overproduction and a shrinking international market had driven down agricultural prices . "
Soon after his inauguration , Roosevelt called the Hundred Days Congress into session to address the crumbling economy .
From this Congress came the Agricultural Adjustment Administration , to replace the Federal Farm Board .
The Roosevelt Administration was tasked with decreasing agricultural surpluses .
Wheat , cotton , field corn , hogs , rice , tobacco , and milk and its products were designated as basic commodities in the original legislation .
Subsequent amendments in 1934 and 1935 expanded the list of basic commodities to include rye , flax , barley , grain sorghum , cattle , peanuts , sugar beets , sugar cane , and potatoes .
The administration targeted these commodities for the following reasons : * Changes in the prices of these commodities had a strong effect on the prices of other important commodities .
*
* These commodities were already running a surplus at the time .
*
* These items each required some amount of processing before they could be consumed by humans .
* GOALS AND IMPLEMENTATIONS Section::::Goals and implementations .
" The goal of the Agricultural Adjustment Act , restoring farm purchasing power of agricultural commodities or the fair exchange value of a commodity based upon price relative to the prewar 1909–14 level , was to be accomplished through a number of methods .
These included the authorization by the Secretary of Agriculture ( 1 ) to secure voluntary reduction of the acreage in basic crops through agreements with producers and use of direct payments for participation in acreage control programs ; ( 2 ) to regulate marketing through voluntary agreements with processors , associations or producers , and other handlers of agricultural commodities or products ; ( 3 ) to license processors , association , and others handling agricultural commodities to eliminate unfair practices or charges ; ( 4 ) to determine the necessity for and the rate or processing taxes ; and ( 5 ) to use the proceeds of taxes and appropriate funds for the cost of adjustment operations , for the expansion of markets , and for the removal or agricultural surpluses .
"
" Congress declared its intent , at the same time , to protect the consumers interest .
This was to be done by readjusting farm production at a level that would not increase the percentage of consumers ' retail expenditures above the percentage returned to the farmer in the prewar base period . "
The juxtaposition of huge agricultural surpluses and the many deaths due to insufficient food shocked many , as well as some of the administrative decisions that happened under the Agricultural Adjustment Act .
For example , in an effort to reduce agricultural surpluses , the government paid farmers to reduce crop production and to sell pregnant sows as well as young pigs .
Oranges were being soaked with kerosene to prevent their consumption and corn was being burned as fuel because it was so cheap .
There were many people , however , as well as livestock in different places starving to death .
Farmers slaughtered livestock because feed prices were rising , and they could not afford to feed their own animals .
Under the Agricultural Adjustment Act , " plowing under " of pigs was also common to prevent them reaching a reproductive age , as well as donating pigs to the Red Cross .
In 1935 , the income generated by farms was 50 percent higher than it was in 1932 , which was partly due to farm programs such as the AAA .
The Agricultural Adjustment Acted affected nearly all of the farmers in this time period .
( Around 99 % ) TENANT FARMING Section::::Tenant farming .
Tenant farming characterized the cotton and tobacco production in the post - Civil War South .
As the agricultural economy plummeted in the early 1930s , all farmers were badly hurt but the tenant farmers and sharecroppers experienced the worst of it .
To accomplish its goal of parity ( raising crop prices to where they were in the golden years of 1909–1914 ) , the Act reduced crop production .
The Act accomplished this by offering landowners acreage reduction contracts , by which they agreed not to grow cotton on a portion of their land .
By law , they were required to pay the tenant farmers and sharecroppers on their land a portion of the money ; but after Southern Democrats in Congress complained , the Secretary of Agriculture surrendered and reinterpreted section 7 to no longer send checks to sharecroppers directly , hurting the tenants .
The farm wage workers who worked directly for the landowner suffered the greatest unemployment as a result of the Act .
There are few people gullible enough to believe that the acreage devoted to cotton can be reduced one - third without an accompanying decrease in the laborers engaged in its production .
Researchers concluded that the statistics after the Act took effect " ... indicate a consistent and widespread tendency for cotton croppers and , to a considerable extent , tenants to decrease in numbers between 1930 and 1935 .
The decreases among Negroes were consistently greater than those among whites .
"
Another consequence was that the historic high levels of mobility from year to year declined sharply , as tenants and croppers tended to stay longer with the same landowner .
For most tenants and sharecroppers the AAA was a major help .
Frey and Smith concluded , " To the extent that the AAA control - program has been responsible for the increased price [ of cotton ] , we conclude that it has increased the amount of goods and services consumed by the cotton tenants and croppers area . "
Furthermore , the landowners typically let the tenants and croppers use the land taken out of cotton production for their own personal use in growing food and feed crops , which further increased their standard of living .
Another consequence was that the historic high levels of turnover from year to year declined sharply , as tenants and croppers tend to stay with the same landowner .
Researchers concluded , " As a rule , planters seem to prefer Negroes to whites as tenants and croppers . "
Delta and Providence Cooperative Farms in Mississippi and the Southern Tenant Farmers Union were organized in the 1930s principally as a response to the hardships imposed on sharecroppers and tenant farmers .
Although the Act stimulated American agriculture , it was not without its faults .
For example , it disproportionately benefited large farmers and food processors , with lesser benefits to small farmers and sharecroppers .
With the spread of cotton - picking machinery after 1945 , there was an exodus of small farmers and croppers to the city .
THOMAS AMENDMENT Section::::Thomas Amendment .
Attached as Title III to the Act , the Thomas Amendment became the ' third horse ' in the New Deal 's farm relief bill .
Drafted by Senator Elmer Thomas of Oklahoma , the amendment blended populist easy - money views with the theories of the New Economics .
Thomas wanted a stabilized " honest dollar , " one that would be fair to debtor and creditor alike .
The Amendment said that whenever the President desired currency expansion , he must first authorize the Federal Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve to purchase up to $ 3 billion of federal obligations .
Should open market operations prove insufficient , the President had several options .
He could have the U.S. Treasury issue up to $ 3 billion in greenbacks , reduce the gold content of the dollar by as much as 50 percent , or accept 100 million dollars in silver at a price not to exceed fifty cents per ounce in payment of World War
I debts owed by European nations .
The Thomas Amendment was used sparingly .
The treasury received limited amounts of silver in payment for war debts from World War I. On 21 December 1933 , Roosevelt ratified the London Agreement on Silver ( adopted at the World Economic and Monetary Conference in London on 20 July 1933 ) .
At the same time , Roosevelt issued Proclamation 2067 , ordering the United States mints to buy the entire domestic production of newly mined silver at 64.5¢ per ounce .
" Roosevelt 's most dramatic use of the Thomas amendment " came on 31 January 1934 , when he decreased the gold content of the dollar to 15 5/21 grains ( 0.98741 grams ) .900 fine gold , or 59.06 per cent of the previous fixed content ( 25 8/10 grains , or 1.6718 grams ) . "
However , wholesale prices still continued to climb .
Possibly the most significant expansion brought on by the Thomas Amendment may have been the growth of governmental power over monetary policy .
The impact of this amendment was to reduce the amount of silver that was being held by private citizens ( presumably as a hedge against inflation or collapse of the financial system ) and increase the amount of circulating currency .
RULED
UNCONSTITUTIONAL
Section::::Ruled unconstitutional .
On January 6 , 1936 , the Supreme Court decided in United States v. Butler that the act was unconstitutional for levying this tax on the processors only to have it paid back to the farmers .
Regulation of agriculture was deemed a state power .
As such , the federal government could not force states to adopt the Agricultural Adjustment Act due to lack of jurisdiction .
However , the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 remedied these technical issues and the farm program continued .
WARE GROUP Section::::Ware Group .
The following employees of the AAA were also alleged members of the Ware Group , named by Whittaker Chambers during subpoenaed testimony to HUAC on August 3 , 1948 : Harold Ware , John Abt , Lee Pressman , Alger Hiss , Donald Hiss , Nathan Witt , Henry Collins , Marion Bachrach
( husband Howard Bachrach was an AAA member ) , John Herrmann , and Nathaniel Weyl .
SEE ALSO
* Agricultural Adjustment Act Amendment of 1935
* Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938
* Federal Surplus Relief Corporation * Commodity Credit Corporation
FOOTNOTES
FURTHER READING
* Folino ,
Ann Plowed
Under :
Food Policy Protests and Performance in New Deal America .
Bloomington , IN : Indiana University Press , 2015 .
*
Frey , Fred C. and Smith , T. Lynn .
" The Influence of the AAA Cotton Program Upon the Tenant , Cropper , and Laborer , " Rural Sociology ( 1936 ) 1#4 pp .
483–505 .
* Gilbert , Jess .
Planning Democracy :
Agrarian Intellectuals and the Intended New Deal .
New Haven , CT :
Yale University Press , 2015 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Bill in its entirety
* http://www.u-s-history.com/pages/h1639.html * https://web.archive.org/web/20080409194401/http://newdeal.feri.org/texts/browse.cfm?MainCatID=34 * Public Law 73 - 10 , 73d Congress , H.R. 3835 , Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1933 * A Message from FDR to Congress on the AAA