WAR ( CARD GAME ) War ( US ) or Battle ( UK ) is a card game typically played by two players .
It uses a standard playing card deck in decreasing order is : A K Q J 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 .
Due to its simplicity , it is played most often by children .
There are many variations , including those played in other countries such as Tod und Leben ( Life and Death ) , a 32-card version played in the German - speaking world .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The objective of the game is to win all cards .
The deck is divided evenly among the players , giving each a down stack .
In unison , each player reveals the top card of their deck — this is a " battle"—and the player with the higher card takes both of the cards played and moves them to their stack .
Aces are high , and suits are ignored .
If the two cards played are of equal value , then there is a " war " .
Both players place the next card of their pile face down , depending on the variant , and then another card face - up .
The owner of the higher face - up card wins the war and adds all four ( or six ) cards on the table to the bottom of their deck .
If the face - up cards are again equal then the battle repeats with another set of face - down / up cards .
This repeats until one player 's face - up card is higher than their opponent 's .
Most descriptions of War are unclear about what happens if a player runs out of cards during a war .
In some variants , that player immediately loses .
In others , the player may play the last card in their deck as their face - up card for the remainder of the war or replay the game from the beginning .
Game designer Greg Costikyan has observed that since there are no choices in the game , and all outcomes are random , it can not be considered a game by some definitions .
However , the rules often do not specify in which order the cards should be returned to the deck .
If they are returned in a non - random order , the decision of putting one card before another after a win can change the overall outcome of the game .
The effects of such decisions are more visible with smaller size decks as it is easier for a player to card count , however the decisions can still affect gameplay if taken in standard decks .
VERSIONS Section::::Versions .
Being a widely known game , war has picked up many optional variations , some of which are listed below .
* Add On – Players may flip additional cards each war , but bust if going over 15 ( face cards are valued as 10 ) .
* Three - player War – With three or more players , a war occurs only when the two highest cards tie .
* Scouts – If the card you play is valued 5 or less , you have the option to play one additional card ( a helper card ) .
The combined value of the first card played and the helper card is the value used in the battle .
( J = 11 , Q = 12 , K = 13 ,
A = 14 ) .
One exception is that a helper card can not be played If both players play the same card that is valued 5 or less
( ex : each player plays a 3 ) .
A maximum of one helper card can be played for each card played ( for example , if a 4 is played and then a 3 is played as a helper for the 4 , no more helper cards can be played to help the 4 ) .
If the card and helper card 's combined value loses the battle , then both cards are lost to the other player .
* Automatic War – A certain card , typically a 2 or a Joker causes an automatic war .
* Threes Beat Faces – In this variation , a 3 wins against any face card , but still loses against other cards higher than it .
*
Fours Beat Aces – Usually played alongside the above variation , here a 4 beats an ace , but loses against other cards higher than it .
* Slap War – A certain card , usually 5 if playing with the above rules , has no numerical significance , and when a 5 is played , the first player to slap it collects the cards .
If two players play a 5 or a war is caused in some other way , the person to slap the 5 wins regardless .
* Underdog – When a player has lost a war , he may check his three face down cards for a predetermined underdog card , usually 6 if playing with the above rules , and if one of the cards is a 6 , he wins the war .
* Casino War – A simple variation played for money in casinos .
* Peace – A simple variation played the opposite of War .
Lowest Card wins .
Instead of 3 cards being laid down in a peace ( a war ) 5 are , 1 for each letter in peace .
* Quatro – A drinking game variant in which four players are dealt three face down cards .
The players turn over one of their cards in unison .
The player with the lowest card is eliminated and must drink .
The players continue with their remaining cards until all but one are eliminated .
In the case of a tie , the players participating in the war are immediately dealt three additional face down cards and must turn over one card in unison .
The player with the lower card must then finish his or her entire drink .
In the case of multiple simultaneous wars , the battle between the highest cards takes precedence and the other battle is void .
* Strategy War – Players choose which card to play from their hand .
Hand size varies from 3 to the entire unplayed deck depending on the exact variant chosen .
* War IRL –
This version of War has a poetic similarity to war in real life ; no one wins in war .
If both players play a card of the same value ( ranging from low to high , 2-Ace ) , both players remove that card from play .
Coincidentally , this is also an easy version of the game for programmers to practice on since more than two cards will never be used at once .
* Instant War – Any card that loses a battle is dead , or eliminated from the game .
The card that wins returns to the original owner .
When cards tie , only one card is played by each player in the war .
A draw is possible , and game play is much quicker .
* Five Straight Battles – If a player wins five straight battles , his opponent gives him his next faced down card .
* Simple Math ( only optional when 3 players are playing ) – If the card of the winner of the battle is greater than both losing cards together ( i.e. , the winner had a King , and the losers have a 5 and a 4 )
, each loser hands the winner
their next faced down card .
* Two Card War – Players place two cards each battle instead of one .
If one of them is a king a queen or a jack then the player with the highest card wins .
Otherwise the player with the higher value of cards ( added value of both cards ) wins .
This game is meant to teach adding to children .
* Water War – Each player has five glasses of water .
Each time a player wins a battle , they throw a glass of water at the other player .
The first player to throw all their glasses of water at the other player wins , and gets to douse the other player with a water cannon .
* Prisoners of War - ( Usually used with more than 2 players )
When a player wins a battle , they can choose to take one of the cards as " prisoner " .
( This can not be their own card(s ) . )
If they do , they put the card face up in front of them , away from the discard pile and the deck .
when another battle is started , you may choose to not play a card from your deck , and instead the " prisoner " card .
( You can not look at the card you would have drawn and then choose to play the prisoner . )
If you win the battle , it works like a regular one .
If you lose , however , you give the winner the card you played as well as the card you would have drawn if you chose not to play the " prisoner " card .
If a war is initiated , it works the same way .
If you win a war , you can also choose to " capture " one of the face down cards .
* Marms – A drinking game in which the first player to 7 points buys the next round of drinks .
Points are awarded to the player who draws the lowest value card with aces being lowest in value .
Players who flip a joker will instantly get a negative point added to their total .
If multiple players flip the same card then all other cards are ignored and these players will play an overtime round .
The loser of the overtime will be awarded 2 points .
If a tie happens in overtime an additional overtime will occur with the loser awarded an extra point , this will continue until points are awarded to one player .
SEE ALSO * Beggar - your - neighbor *
Slapjack *
Egyptian Ratscrew
* Snip Snap Snorem
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* This site lists several varieties of variations of the card game War .
* Predictability in the Game of War * Simulations of War using MATLAB * Another explanation of a War simulation using C++
* Finiteness in the card game of War