CHIVALRY Chivalry , or the chivalric code , is an informal , varying code of conduct developed between 1170 and 1220 , never decided on or summarized in a single document , associated with the medieval Christian institution of knighthood ; knights ' and gentlewomen 's behaviours were governed by chivalrous social codes .
The ideals of chivalry were popularized in medieval literature , especially the Matter of Britain and Matter of France , the former based on Geoffrey of Monmouth 's Historia Regum Britanniae , written in the 1130s , which introduced the legend of King Arthur .
All of these were taken as historically accurate until the beginnings of modern scholarship .
The code of chivalry that developed in medieval Europe had its roots in earlier centuries .
It arose in the Holy Roman Empire from the idealisation of the cavalryman — involving military bravery , individual training , and service to others — especially in Francia , among horse soldiers in Charlemagne 's cavalry .
The term " chivalry " derives from the Old French term chevalerie , which can be translated to " horse soldiery " .
Originally , the term referred only to horse - mounted men , from the french word for horse , " cheval " , but later on it became associated with knightly ideals .
Over time , its meaning in Europe has been refined to emphasise more general social and moral virtues .
The code of chivalry , as it stood by the Late Middle Ages , was a moral system which combined a warrior ethos , knightly piety , and courtly manners , all conspiring to establish a notion of honour and nobility .
TERMINOLOGY AND DEFINITIONS Section::::Terminology and definitions .
In origin , the term chivalry means " horsemanship " , formed in Old French , in the 11th century , from ' ( horseman , knight ) , from Medieval Latin ' .
The French word originally means " a man of aristocratic standing , and probably of noble ancestry , who is capable , if called upon , of equipping himself with a war horse and the arms of heavy cavalryman and who has been through certain rituals that make him what he is " .
In English , the term appears from 1292 ( note that cavalry is from the Italian form of the same word ) .
The meaning of the term evolved over time because the word chevalier was used differently in the Middle Ages , from the original concrete military meaning " status or fee associated with a military follower owning a war horse " or " a group of mounted knights " to the ideal of the Christian warrior ethos propagated in the romance genre , which was becoming popular during the 12th century , and the ideal of courtly love propagated in the contemporary Minnesang and related genres .
Thus , chivalry has hierarchical meanings from simply a heavily armed horseman to a code of conduct .
The ideas of chivalry are summarized in three medieval works : the anonymous poem , that tells the story of how Hugh II of Tiberias was captured and released upon his agreement to show Saladin ( 1138–1193 ) the ritual of Christian knighthood , the Libre del ordre de cavayleria , written by Ramon Llull ( 1232–1315 ) , from Majorca in what is today Spain , whose subject is knighthood , and the Livre de Chevalerie of Geoffroi de Charny ( 1300–1356 ) , which examines the qualities of knighthood , emphasizing prowess .
None of the authors of these three texts knew the other two texts , so fusing the three to deduce a general concept of chivalry is not precisely in harmony with any of them .
To different degrees and with different details , they speak of chivalry as a way of life in which the military , the nobility , and religion combine .
The " code of chivalry " is thus a product of the Late Middle Ages , evolving after the end of the crusades partly from an idealization of the historical knights fighting in the Holy Land and from ideals of courtly love .
TEN COMMANDMENTS OF CHIVALRY Section::::Ten Commandments of Chivalry .
Gautier 's Ten Commandments of chivalry are : *
Thou shalt believe all that the Church teaches and thou shalt observe all its directions .
*
*
Thou shalt defend the church .
*
*
Thou shalt respect all weaknesses , and shalt constitute thyself the defender of them .
*
*
Thou shalt love the country in which thou wast born .
*
*
Thou shalt not before thine enemy .
*
*
Thou shalt make war against the infidel without cessation and without mercy .
*
*
Thou shalt perform scrupulously thy feudal duties , if they be not contrary to the laws of God .
*
*
Thou shalt never lie , and shalt remain faithful to thy pledged word .
*
*
Thou shalt be generous , and give largesse to everyone .
*
*
Thou shalt be everywhere and always the champion of the Right and the Good against Injustice and Evil .
* Note that there is no reference to women , horses , quests , or travel .
This list would serve a soldier , or even a clergyman .
Though these ten commandments are often accepted to be what knights would use , they did not exist at the time .
This " code " was created by Léon Gautier , a literary scholar , in 1883 .
No historical knight even came close to carrying out all of these " commandments " all of the time .
Literary knights , being fictitious ( but believed to be historical at the time ) , did better , but not every " commandment " was followed or even considered by every knight .
Chivalry is to some extent a subjective term ; every knight had to decide which " commandments " to obey .
LITERARY CHIVALRY AND HISTORICAL REALITY Section::::Literary chivalry and historical reality .
Fans of chivalry have assumed since the late medieval period that there was a time in the past when chivalry was a living institution , when men acted chivalrically , when chivalry was alive and not dead , the imitation of which period would much improve the present .
This is the mad mission of Don Quixote , protagonist of the most chivalric novel of all time and inspirer of the chivalry of Sir Walter Scott and of the U.S. South : : to restore the age of chivalry , and thereby improve his country .
It is a version of the myth of the Golden Age .
With the birth of modern historical and literary research , scholars have found that however far back in time " The Age of Chivalry " is searched for , it is always further in the past , even back to the Roman Empire .
From Jean Charles Léonard de Sismondi : We must not confound chivalry with the feudal system .
The feudal system may be called the real life of the period of which we are treating , possessing its advantages and inconveniences , its virtues and its vices .
Chivalry , on the contrary , is the ideal world , such as it existed in the imaginations of the romance writers .
Its essential character is devotion to woman and to honour .
Sismondi alludes to the fictitious Arthurian romances about the imaginary Court of King Arthur , which were usually taken as factual presentations of a historical age of chivalry .
He continues : The more closely we look into history , the more clearly shall we perceive that the system of chivalry is an invention almost entirely poetical .
It is impossible to distinguish the countries in which it is said to have prevailed .
It is always represented as distant from us both in time and place , and whilst the contemporary historians give us a clear , detailed , and complete account of the vices of the court and the great , of the ferocity or corruption of the nobles , and of the servility of the people , we are astonished to find the poets , after a long lapse of time , adorning the very same ages with the most splendid fictions of grace , virtue , and loyalty .
The romance writers of the twelfth century placed the age of chivalry in the time of Charlemagne .
The period when these writers existed , is the time pointed out by Francis I. At the present day [ about 1810 ] , we imagine we can still see chivalry flourishing in the persons of Du Guesclin and Bayard , under Charles V and Francis I.
But when we come to examine either the one period or the other , although we find in each some heroic spirits , we are forced to confess that it is necessary to antedate the age of chivalry , at least three or four centuries before any period of authentic history .
Historian of chivalry Richard W. Kaeuper , saw chivalry as a central focus in the study of the European middle ages that was to often presented as a civilizing and stabilizing influence in the turbulent middle ages .
On the contrary , Kaueper argues " that in the problem of public order the knights themselves played an ambivalent , problematic role and that the guides to their conduct that chivalry provided were in themselves complex and problematic . "
Many of the codes and ideals of chivalry were of course contradictory , however , when knights did live up to them , they did not lead to a more " ordered and peaceful society " .
The tripartite conception of medieval European society ( those who pray , those who fight , and those who work ) along with other linked subcategories of monarchy and aristocracy , worked in congruence with knighthood to reform the institution in an effort " to secure public order in a society just coming into its mature formation . "
Kaeuper makes clear that knighthood and the worldview of " those who fight " was pre - Christian in many ways and outside the purview of the church , at least initially .
The church saw it as a duty to reform and guide knights in a way that weathered the disorderly , martial , and chauvinistic elements of chivalry .
Royalty was a similar story , with knighthood at many points clashing with the sovereignty of the king over the conduct of warfare and personal disputes between knights and other knights ( and even between knights and aristocracy ) .
While the worldview of " those who work " ( the burgeoning merchant class and bourgeoisie ) was still in incubation , Kaeuper makes clear that the social and economic class that would end up defining modernity was fundamentally at odds with knights , and those with chivalrous valor saw the values of commerce as beneath them .
Those who engaged in commerce and derived their value system from it could be confronted with violence by knights , if need be .
HISTORY Section::::History .
According to Crouch , many early writers on medieval chivalry can not be trusted as historians , because they sometimes have " polemical purpose which colours their prose " .
As for Kenelm Henry Digby and Léon Gautier , chivalry was a means to transform their corrupt and secular worlds .
Gautier also emphasized that chivalry originated from the Teutonic forests and brought up into civilization by the Catholic Church .
Charles Mills used chivalry " to demonstrate that the Regency gentleman was the ethical heir of a great moral estate , and to provide an inventory of its treasure " .
Mills also stated that chivalry was a social , not a military phenomenon , with its key features : generosity , fidelity , liberality , and courtesy .
EUROPE
BEFORE 1170
: THE NOBLE HABITUS Section::::Europe before 1170 : the noble habitus .
According to Crouch , prior to codified chivalry there was the uncodified code of noble conduct that focused on the preudomme .
This uncodified code – referred to as the noble habitus – is a term for the environment of behavioural and material expectations generated by all societies and classes .
As a modern idea , it was pioneered by the French philosopher / sociologists Pierre Bourdieu and Maurice Merleau - Ponty , even though a precedent exists for the concept as far back as the works of Aristotle .
Crouch argues that the habitus on which " the superstructure of chivalry " was built and the preudomme was a part , had existed long before 1100 , while the codified medieval noble conduct only began between 1170 and 1220 .
The pre - chivalric noble habitus as discovered by Mills and Gautier are as follows :
* Loyalty : It is a practical utility in a warrior nobility .
Richard Kaeuper associates loyalty with prowess .
The importance of reputation for loyalty in noble conduct is demonstrated in William Marshal biography .
*
* Forbearance : knights ' self - control towards other warriors and at the courts of their lords was a part of the early noble habitus as shown in the Conventum of Hugh de Lusignan in the 1020s .
The nobility of mercy and forbearance was well established by the second half of the 12th century long before there was any code of chivalry .
*
* Hardihood :
Numerous historians and social anthropologists have documented the very human fact that literal physical resilience and aptitude in warfare in the earliest formative period of " proto - chivalry " , was in the eyes of contemporary warriors almost the essence of chivalry - defined knighthood ( saving the implicit Christian - Davidic ethical framework ) and for a warrior of any origin , even the lowliest , to demonstrate outstanding physicality - based prowess on the battlefield was viewed as almost certain proof of noble - knightly status , or , alternatively , grounds for immediate , vigorous nobilitation .
To deliver a powerful blow in Arthurian chivalrous literature almost always has the audience comment on the certainty of the warrior 's nobility .
Formal chivalric authorities and commentators were hardly in dispute : the anonymous author of La vraye noblesse , states outright that if the prince or civic authority incarnate , sees a man of " low degree " but of noble ( i.e. , martially imposing in the medieval context ) bearing he should promote him to nobility " even though he be not rich or of noble lineage " : the " poor companion " who distinguishes themselves in very worldly , incarnadine valor should be " publicly rewarded . "
As the erudite scholastic analyst modernly viewing these matters , Richard Kaeuper summarizes the matter succinctly : " A knight 's nobility or worth is proved by his hearty strokes in battle " ( Chivalry and Violence in Medieval Europe , p. 131 ) .
The quality of sheer hardihood aligns itself with forbearance and loyalty in being one of the military virtues of the preudomme .
According to Philip de Navarra , a mature nobleman should have acquired hardiness as part of his moral virtues .
Geoffrey de Charny also stressed on the masculine respectability of hardiness in the light of religious feeling of the contemptus mundi .
*
* Largesse or Liberality : generosity was part of a noble quantity .
According to Alan of Lille , largesse was not just a simple matter of giving away what he had , but " Largitas in a man caused him to set no store on greed or gifts , and to have nothing but contempt for bribes . "
*
* The Davidic ethic : It is the strongest qualities of preudomme derived by clerics from Biblical tradition .
The classical - Aristotelian concept of the " magnanimous personality " in the conceptual formulation of the notion here is not without relevance , additionally , nor likewise the early - Germanic and Norse tradition of the war - band leader as the heroic , anti - materialistic " enemy of gold " .
Formally , the Christian - Davidic guardian - protector role concept of warrior - leadership was extensively articulated initially by the Frankish church which involved legitimizing rightful authority , first and foremost , on the basis of any would - be warrior - headman being ethically committed to the protection of the weak and helpless ( pointedly , the Church and affiliated organizations are here implied primarily if not exclusively ) , respect and provisioning of justice for widows and orphans , and a Christian idealism - inspired , no - nonsense , principle - based militant opposition to the encroachments of overweening cruel and unjust personages wielding power , whether in the form of unruly , " black knight " or " robber - baron"-like local sub - princely magistrates , or even in the context of conceiving the hypothetical overthrow of a monarch who had usurped and violated the lex primordialis or lex naturae of God in his domain by decreeing or permitting immoral customs or laws and thus self - dethroning themselves meta - ethically , inviting tyrannicidal treatment .
The core of Davidic ethic is benevolence of the strong toward the weak ..
Although a somewhat later authority in this specific context , John of Salisbury imbibed this lineage of philosophico - clerical , chivalric justifications of power , and excellently describes the ideal enforcer of the Davidic ethic here : " The [ warrior-]prince accordingly is the minister of the common interest and the bond - servant of equity , and he bears the public person in the sense that he punishes the wrongs and injuries of all , and all crimes , with even - handed equity .
His rod and staff also , administered with wise moderation , restore irregularities and false departures to the straight path of equity , so that deservedly may the Spirit congratulate the power of the prince with the words , ' Thy rod and thy staff , they have comforted me . '
[ Psalm 23:4 ]
His shield , too , is strong , but it is a shield for the protection of the weak , and one which wards off powerfully the darts of the wicked from the innocent .
Those who derive the greatest advantage from his performance of the duties of his office are those who can do least for themselves , and his power is chiefly exercised against those who desire to do harm .
Therefore not without reason he bears a sword , wherewith he sheds blood blamelessly , without becoming thereby a man of blood , and frequently puts men to death without incurring the name or guilt of homicide . "
*
* Honour : honour was what was achieved by living up to the ideal of the preudomme and pursuing the qualities and behaviour listed above .
Maurice Keen notes the most damning , irreversible mode of " demoting " one 's honorific status , again humanly through contemporary eyes , consisted in displaying pusillanimous conduct on the battlefield .
The loss of honour is a humiliation to a man 's standing and is worse than death .
Bertran de Born said : " For myself I prefer to hold a little piece of land in onor , than to hold a great empire with dishonor " .
*
The code of chivalry , as it was known during the late Medieval age , developed between 1170 and 1220 .
ORIGINS IN MILITARY ETHOS Section::::Origins in military ethos .
Chivalry was developed in the north of France around the mid-12th century but adopted its structure in a European context .
New social status , new military techniques , and new literary topics adhered to a new character known as the knight and his ethos called chivalry .
A regulation in the chivalric codes includes taking an oath of loyalty to the overlord and perceiving the rules of warfare , which includes never striking a defenceless opponent in battle .
The chivalric ideals are based on those of the early medieval warrior class , and martial exercise and military virtue remains an integral part of chivalry until the end of the medieval period , as the reality on the battlefield changed with the development of Early Modern warfare increasingly restricted to the tournament ground and duelling culture .
The joust remained the primary example of knightly display of martial skill throughout the Renaissance ( the last Elizabethan Accession Day tilt was held in 1602 ) .
The martial skills of the knight carried over to the practice of the hunt , and hunting expertise became an important aspect of courtly life in the later medieval period ( see terms of venery ) .
Related to chivalry was the practice of heraldry and its elaborate rules of displaying coats of arms as it emerged in the High Middle Ages .
CHIVALRY AND CHRISTIANITY Section::::Chivalry and Christianity .
Christianity and church had a modifying influence on the classical concept of heroism and virtue , nowadays identified with the virtues of chivalry .
The Peace and Truce of God in the 10th century was one such example , with limits placed on knights to protect and honour the weaker members of society and also help the church maintain peace .
At the same time the church became more tolerant of war in the defence of faith , espousing theories of the just war ; and liturgies were introduced which blessed a knight 's sword , and a bath of chivalric purification .
In the story of the Grail romances and Chevalier au Cygne , it was the confidence of the Christian knighthood that its way of life was to please God , and chivalry was an order of God .
Thus , chivalry as a Christian vocation was a result of marriage between Teutonic heroic values with the militant tradition of Old Testament .
The first noted support for chivalric vocation , or the establishment of knightly class to ensure the sanctity and legitimacy of Christianity , was written in 930 by Odo , abbot of Cluny , in the Vita of St. Gerald of Aurillac , which argued that the sanctity of Christ and Christian doctrine can be demonstrated through the legitimate unsheathing of the " sword against the enemy " .
In the 11th century the concept of a " knight of Christ " ( miles Christi ) gained currency in France , Spain and Italy .
These concepts of " religious chivalry " were further elaborated in the era of the Crusades , with the Crusades themselves often being seen as a chivalrous enterprise .
Their ideas of chivalry were also further influenced by Saladin , who was viewed as a chivalrous knight by medieval Christian writers .
The military orders of the crusades which developed in this period came to be seen as the earliest flowering of chivalry , although it remains unclear to what extent the notable knights of this period — such as Saladin , Godfrey of Bouillon , William Marshal or Bertrand du Guesclin — actually did set new standards of knightly behaviour , or to what extent they merely behaved according to existing models of conduct which came in retrospect to be interpreted along the lines of the " chivalry " ideal of the Late Middle Ages .
Nevertheless , chivalry and crusades were not the same thing .
While the crusading ideology had largely influenced the ethic of chivalry during its formative times , chivalry itself was related to a whole range of martial activities and aristocratic values which had no necessary linkage with crusading .
MEDIEVAL LITERATURE AND THE INFLUENCE OF THE MOORS AND ROMANS Section::::Medieval literature and the influence of the Moors and Romans .
From the 12th century onward chivalry came to be understood as a moral , religious and social code of knightly conduct .
The particulars of the code varied , but codes would emphasise the virtues of courage , honour , and service .
Chivalry also came to refer to an idealisation of the life and manners of the knight at home in his castle and with his court .
Medieval Europe , particularly Spanish poets , were greatly influenced by Arabic literature .
The literature of chivalry , bravery , figurative expression , and imagery made its way to Western literature through Arabic literature in Andalusia in particular .
The famous Spanish author Vicente Blasco says : " Europe did not know chivalry , or its adopted literature or sense of honour before the arrival of Arabs in Andalusia and the wide presence of their knights and heroes in the countries of the south . "
The Andalusian Ibn Hazm and his famous book " Tawq al - Hamamah " ( the ring - neck dove ) had a great impact on poets in Spain and southern France after the Islamic community blended with the Christian community .
The Arabic language was the language of the country and the language of the high - class people .
In many Christian Spanish provinces , Christian and Muslim poets used to meet at the court of the governor .
One such an example is what used to take place at the court of Sanko which comprised 13 Arab poets , 12 Christian poets , and a Jewish poet .
A manuscript dating back to the era of Alfonso X , the king of Castile , was found and it contained a portrait that represented the meeting of two moving poets , one Arab and one European , singing together on lute .
Even more , the European poets at the time were good at composing Arabic poetry .
For this reason , Henry Maro says : " The Arab impact on the civilization of the Roman peoples did not stop at fine arts only , but extended to music and poetry as well . "
The influence of Arabic literature on European writers is proven by what Reinhart Dozy quoted on his book " Spanish Islam : History of Moslems in Spain " , of the Spanish writer AlGharo , who deeply regretted the neglect of Latin and Greek and the acceptance of the language of the Muslims , he said " The intelligent and eloquent people are bewitched by the sound of Arabic and they look down on Latin .
They have started to write in the language of those who defeated them " A contemporary of his , who was more influenced by nationalistic feelings , expressed his bitterness when he said , " My Christian brothers admire the poetry and chivalry stories of the Arabs , and they study the books written by the philosophies and scholars of the Muslims .
They do not do that in order to refute them , but rather to learn the eloquent Arabic style .
Where today – apart from the clergy – and those who read the religious commentaries on the Old and New Testaments ?
Where are those who read the Gospels and the words of the Prophets ?
Alas , the new generation of intelligent Christians do not know any literature and language well apart from Arabic literature and the Arabic language .
They avidly read the books of the Arabs and amass huge libraries of these books at great expense ; they look upon these Arabic treasures with great pride , at the time when they refrain from reading Christian books on the basis that they are not worth paying attention to .
How unfortunate it is that the Christians have forgotten their language , and nowadays you can not find among them one in a thousand who could write a letter to a friend in his own language .
But with regard to the language of the Arabs , how many there are who express themselves fluently in it with the most eloquent style , and they write poetry of the Arabs themselves in its eloquence and correct usage . "
Medieval courtly literature glorifies the valour , tactics and ideals of both Moors and ancient Romans .
For example , the ancient hand - book of warfare written by Vegetius called De Re Militari was translated into French in the 13th century as L'art de chevalerie by Jean de Meun .
Later writers also drew from Vegetius such as Honore Bonet who wrote the 14th century L'arbes des batailles , which discussed the morals and laws of war .
In the 15th century Christine de Pizan combined themes from Vegetius , Bonet and Frontinus in Livre des faits d'armes et de chevalerie .
In the later Middle Ages , wealthy merchants strove to adopt chivalric attitudes - the sons of the bourgeoisie were educated at aristocratic courts where they were trained in the manners of the knightly class .
This was a democratisation of chivalry , leading to a new genre called the courtesy book , which were guides to the behaviour of " gentlemen " .
Thus , the post - medieval gentlemanly code of the value of a man 's honour , respect for women , and a concern for those less fortunate , is directly derived from earlier ideals of chivalry and historical forces which created it .
The medieval development of chivalry , with the concept of the honour of a lady and the ensuing knightly devotion to it , not only derived from the thinking about the Virgin Mary , but also contributed to it .
The medieval veneration of the Virgin Mary was contrasted by the fact that ordinary women , especially those outside aristocratic circles , were looked down upon .
Although women were at times viewed as the source of evil , it was Mary who as mediator to God was a source of refuge for man .
The development of medieval Mariology and the changing attitudes towards women paralleled each other and can best be understood in a common context .
When examining medieval literature , chivalry can be classified into three basic but overlapping areas : * Duties to countrymen and fellow Christians : this contains virtues such as mercy , courage , valour , fairness , protection of the weak and the poor , and in the servant - hood of the knight to his lord .
This also brings with it the idea of being willing to give one 's life for another 's ; whether he would be giving his life for a poor man or his lord .
* * Duties to God : this would contain being faithful to God , protecting the innocent , being faithful to the church , being the champion of good against evil , being generous and obeying God above the feudal lord .
*
* Duties to women : this is probably the most familiar aspect of chivalry .
This would contain what is often called courtly love , the idea that the knight is to serve a lady , and after her all other ladies .
Most especially in this category is a general gentleness and graciousness to all women .
* These three areas obviously overlap quite frequently in chivalry , and are often indistinguishable .
Different weight given to different areas produced different strands of chivalry : * warrior chivalry , in which a knight 's chief duty is to his lord , as exemplified by Sir Gawain in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight and The Wedding of Sir Gawain and Dame Ragnelle
* * religious chivalry , in which a knight 's chief duty is to protect the innocent and serve God , as exemplified by Sir Galahad or Sir Percival in the Grail legends .
* * courtly love chivalry , in which a knight 's chief duty is to his own lady , and after her , all ladies , as exemplified by Sir Lancelot in his love for Queen Guinevere or Sir Tristan in his love for Iseult * LATE MIDDLE AGES Section::::Late Middle Ages .
Chivalry underwent a revival and elaboration of chivalric ceremonial and rules of etiquette in the 14th century that was examined by Johan Huizinga , in The Waning of the Middle Ages , in which he dedicates a full chapter to " The idea of chivalry " .
In contrasting the literary standards of chivalry with the actual warfare of the age , the historian finds the imitation of an ideal past illusory ; in an aristocratic culture such as Burgundy and France at the close of the Middle Ages , " to be representative of true culture means to produce by conduct , by customs , by manners , by costume , by deportment , the illusion of a heroic being , full of dignity and honour , of wisdom , and , at all events , of courtesy . ...
The dream of past perfection ennobles life and its forms , fills them with beauty and fashions them anew as forms of art " .
THE END OF CHIVALRY Section::::The end of chivalry .
Chivalry was dynamic and it transformed and adjusted in response to local situation
and this is what probably led to its demise .
There were many chivalric groups in England as imagined by Sir Thomas Malory when he wrote Le Morte d'Arthur in the late 15th century , perhaps each group created each chivalric ideology .
And Malory 's perspective reflects the condition of 15th - century chivalry .
When Le Morte Darthur was printed , William Caxton urged knights to read the romance with an expectation that reading about chivalry could unite a community of knights already divided by the Wars of the Roses .
During the early Tudor rule in England , some knights still fought for honour and for the good , to protect women and the poor while some others ignored the ethos .
There were fewer knights engaged in active warfare because battlefields during this century were generally the area of professional infantrymen , with less opportunity for knights to show chivalry .
It was the beginning of the demise of the knight .
The rank of knight never faded , but it was Queen Elizabeth I who ended the tradition that any knight could create another and made it exclusively the preserve of the monarch .
Christopher Wilkins contends that Sir Edward Woodville , who rode from battle to battle across Europe and died in 1488 in Brittany , was the last knight errant who witnessed the fall of the Age of Chivalry and the rise of modern European warfare .
When the Middle Ages were over , the code of chivalry was gone .
MODERN MANIFESTATIONS AND REVIVALS Section::::Modern manifestations and revivals .
Chivalry !
– why , maiden , she is the nurse of pure and high affection – the stay of the oppressed , the redresser of grievances , the curb of the power of the tyrant –
Nobility were but an empty name without her , and liberty finds the best protection in her lance and her sword .
— Walter Scott , Ivanhoe ( 1820 ) Bombers of abortion clinics in the United States " called themselves knights , their emblem was a mask they had printed on T - shirts bearing the motto ' Protectors of the Code ' , and their mission was to defend the ideals of chivalry " .
Many considered lynching chivalrous .
This Order is an institution of Chivalry , Humanity , Justice , and Patriotism ; embodying in its genius and principles all that is chivalric in conduct , noble in sentiment , generous in manhood , and patriotic in purpose .
---The
Constitution of the Ku Klux Klan
The chivalric ideal persisted into the early modern and modern period .
The custom of foundation of chivalric orders by Europe 's monarchs and high nobility peaked in the late medieval period , but it persisted during the Renaissance and well into the Baroque and early modern period , with e.g. the Tuscan Order of Saint Stephen ( 1561 ) , the French Order of Saint Louis ( 1693 ) or the Anglo - Irish Order of St. Patrick ( 1783 ) , and numerous dynastic orders of knighthood remain active in countries that retain a tradition of monarchy .
At the same time , with the change of courtly ideas during the Baroque period , the ideals of chivalry began to be seen as dated , or " medieval " .
Don Quixote , published in 1605 - 15 , burlesqued the medieval chivalric novel or romance by ridiculing the stubborn adherence to the chivalric code in the face of the then - modern world as anachronistic , giving rise to the term Quixotism .
Conversely , Romanticism refers to the attempt to revive such " medieval " ideals or aesthetics in the late 18th and early 19th century .
The behavioural code of military officers down to the Napoleonic era , the American Civil War ( especially as idealised in the " Lost Cause " movement ) and to some extent even to World War
I was still strongly modelled on the historical ideals , resulting in a pronounced duelling culture , which in some parts of Europe also held sway over the civilian life of the upper classes .
With the decline of the Ottoman Empire , however , the military threat from the " infidel " disappeared ; the European wars of religion spanned much of the early modern period and consisted of infighting between factions of various Christian denominations , this process of confessionalization ultimately giving rise to a new military ethos based in nationalism rather than " defending the faith against the infidel " .
From the early modern period , the term gallantry ( from galant , the Baroque ideal of refined elegance ) rather than chivalry became used for the proper behaviour and acting of upper class men towards upper class women .
In the 19th century , there were attempts to revive chivalry for the purposes of the gentleman of that time .
Kenelm Henry Digby wrote his The Broad - Stone of Honour for this purpose , offering the definition : ' Chivalry is only a name for that general spirit or state of mind which disposes men to heroic actions , and keeps them conversant with all that is beautiful and sublime in the intellectual and moral world ' .
The pronouncedly masculine virtues of chivalry came under attack on the parts of the upper - class suffragettes campaigning for gender equality in the early 20th century , and with the decline of the military ideals of duelling culture and of European aristocracies in general following the catastrophe of World War I , the ideals of chivalry became widely seen as outmoded by the mid-20th century .
As a material reflection of this process , the dress sword lost its position as an indispensable part of a gentleman 's wardrobe , a development described as an " archaeological terminus " by Ewart Oakeshott , as it concluded the long period during which the sword had been a visible attribute of the free man , beginning as early as three millennia ago with the Bronze Age sword .
During the 20th century , the chivalrous ideal of protecting women came to be seen as a trope of melodrama ( " damsel in distress " ) .
The term chivalry retains a certain currency in sociology , in reference to the general tendency of men , and of society in general , to lend more attention offering protection from harm to women than to men , or in noting gender gaps in life expectancy , health , etc . , also expressed in media bias giving significantly more attention to female than to male victims ( see also missing white woman syndrome ) .
Formed in 1907 , the world 's first Scout camp , the Brownsea Island Scout camp , began as a boys ' camping event on Brownsea Island in Poole Harbour , southern England , organised by British Army Lieutenant - General Robert Baden - Powell to test his ideas for the book Scouting for Boys .
Boy scouts from different social backgrounds in the UK participated from 1 to 8 August 1907 in activities around camping , observation , woodcraft , chivalry , lifesaving and patriotism .
According to William Manchester , General Douglas MacArthur was a chivalric warrior who fought a war with the intention to conquer the enemy , completely eliminating their ability to strike back , then treated them with the understanding and kindness due their honour and courage .
One prominent model of his chivalrous conduct was in World War II and his treatment of the Japanese at the end of the war .
MacArthur 's model provides a way to win a war with as few casualties as possible and how to get the respect of the former enemy after the occupation of their homeland .
On May 12 , 1962 , MacArthur gave a famous speech in front of the cadets of United States Military Academy at West Point by referring to a great moral code , the code of conduct and chivalry , when emphasizing duty , honour , and country .
CRITICISM OF CHIVALRY Section::::Criticism of chivalry .
Miguel de Cervantes , in Part I of Don Quixote ( 1605 ) , attacks chivalric literature as historically inaccurate and therefore harmful ( see history of the novel ) , though he was quite in agreement with many so - called chivalric principles and guides to behavior .
He toyed with but was never able to write a chivalric romance that was historically truthful .
The Italian humanist Petrarch is reported to have had no use for chivalry .
SEE ALSO
* Military elite
* Noblesse oblige
* Knight - errant * Gentleman * Chivalric romance * Domnei * High Court of Chivalry * Nine Worthies * Pas d'Armes * Spanish chivalry * The Book of the Courtier
* Junzi * Habitus ( sociology )
* Virtue Section::::See also .
Cross - cultural comparison
* Samurai
* Bushido
* Chinese knight - errant *
Furusiyya * Maharlika * Timawa Sociology
* Warrior code
* Women and children first NOTES REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
FURTHER READING
* Alexander , Michael .
( 2007 )
Medievalism :
The Middle Ages in Modern England , Yale University Press .
Alexander rejects the idea that medievalism , a pervasive cultural movement in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , was confined to the Victorian period and argues against the suspicion that it was by its nature escapist .
* Barber , Richard ( 1980 ) . "
The Reign of Chivalry " .
* Bouchard , Constance Brittain ( 1998 ) .
Strong of Body , Brave and Noble : Chivalry and Society in Medieval France .
Cornell University Press , 1998 .
* Charny , Geoffroi de , died 1356 ( 2005 ) .
A Knight 's Own Book of Chivalry ( The Middle Ages Series ) .
Translated by Eslpeth Kennedy .
Edited and with a historical introduction by Richard W. Kaeuper .
University of Pennsylvania Press .
Celebrated treatise on knighthood by Geoffroi de Charny ( 1304?-56 ) , considered by his contemporaries the quintessential knight of his age .
He was killed during the Hundred Years War at the Battle of Poitiers .
* Gautier , Léon , ( 1895 ) ( 1883 , 3rd ed .
1895
La Chevalerie )
* Girouard , Mark ( 1981 ) .
The Return to Camelot : Chivalry and the English Gentleman .
Yale University Press .
* Haines , Charles Reginald .
( 1889 ) .
Christianity and Islam in Spain , A.D. 756 - 1031 .
London :
Kegan Paul , Trench &
Co. Project Guttnberg online book .
* Prestage , Edgar ( 1928 ) .
" Chivalry : A Series of Studies to Illustrate Its Historical Significance and Civilizing Influence " .
* Kaeuper , Richard W. ( 1999 ) .
Chivalry and Violence in Medieval Europe .
Oxford University Press , 1999 .
* Kaeuper , Richard W. ( 2009 )
Holy Warriors : The Religious Ideology of Chivalry ( The Middle Ages Series ) .
University of Pennsylvania Press .
Foremost scholar of chivalry argues that knights proclaimed the validity of their bloody profession by selectively appropriating religious ideals .
* Keen , Maurice ( 1984 ) .
Chivalry .
Yale University Press . /
( 2005 reprint ) .
* Mills , Charles ( 2004 ) . " The History of Chivalry or knighthood and its Times " Volume I - II .
*
Read , Charles Anderson ( 2007 ) .
The Cabinet Of Irish Literature ; Selections From The Works Of The Chief Poets , Orators , And Prose Writers Of Ireland - Vol IV ( Paperback ) .
* Saul , Nigel .
( 2011 ) Chivalry in Medieval England .
Harvard University Press .
Explores chivalry 's role in English history from the Norman Conquest to Henry VII 's victory at Bosworth in the War of the Roses .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Laura Ashe ( University of Oxford ) , Miri Rubin ( University of London ) , and Matthew Strickland ( University of Glasgow ) , interviewed by Melvin Bragg , " Chivalry " , In Our Time , BBC Radio 4 ( February 13 , 2014 ) .
Includes bibliography for further reading .
Downloadable podcast available .
* " Chivalry " , Old Catholic Encyclopedia , 1914 .
* " Chivalry " , Encyclopædia Britannica , full - article , newest edition .
* " Chivalry during the Reign of Edward III " , from Shadow Realms .
*
The Art of Chivalry : European arms and armor from the Metropolitan Museum of Art : an exhibition , Issued in connection with a 1982 exhibition at The Metropolitan Museum of Art