HOBBIT Hobbits are a fictional , diminutive , humanoid race who inhabit the lands of Middle - earth in J. R. R. Tolkien 's fiction .
They are also referred to as Halflings .
Hobbits first appeared in the novel
The Hobbit , whose titular hobbit is the protagonist Bilbo Baggins .
The novel The Lord of the Rings includes as major characters the hobbits Frodo Baggins , Samwise Gamgee , Peregrin Took , and Meriadoc Brandybuck , as well as several other minor hobbit characters .
Hobbits are also briefly mentioned in The Silmarillion and Unfinished Tales .
According to the author in the prologue to The Lord of the Rings , hobbits are " relatives " of the race of Men .
Elsewhere , Tolkien describes Hobbits as a " variety " or separate " branch " of humans .
Within the story , hobbits and other races seem aware of the similarities ( hence the colloquial terms " Big People " and " Little People " used in Bree ) .
However , within the story , hobbits considered themselves a separate people .
At the time of the events in The Lord of the Rings , hobbits lived in the Shire and in Bree in the north west of Middle - earth , though by the end , some had moved out to the Tower Hills and to Gondor and Rohan .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Tolkien believed he had invented the word hobbit as a speculative derivation from Old English when he began writing The Hobbit ( it was revealed years after his death that the word predated Tolkien 's usage , though with a different meaning ) .
Tolkien 's concept of hobbits , in turn , seems to have been inspired by Edward Wyke Smith 's 1927 children 's book The Marvellous Land of Snergs , and by Sinclair Lewis 's 1922 novel Babbitt .
The Snergs were , in Tolkien 's words , " a race of people only slightly taller than the average table but broad in the shoulders and have the strength of ten men . "
Tolkien wrote to W. H. Auden that The Marvellous Land of Snergs " was probably an unconscious source - book for the Hobbits " and he told an interviewer that the word hobbit " might have been associated with Sinclair Lewis 's Babbitt " ( like hobbits , George Babbitt enjoys the comforts of his home ) .
However , Tolkien claims that he started The Hobbit suddenly , without premeditation , in the midst of grading a set of student essay exams , writing on a blank piece of paper :
" In a hole in the ground there lived a hobbit " .
While The Hobbit introduced this comfortable race to the world , it is only in writing The Lord of the Rings that Tolkien developed details of their history and wider society .
He set out a fictional etymology for the name in an appendix to The Lord of the Rings , to the effect that it was ultimately derived from holbytla ( plural holbytlan ) , meaning " hole - builder " ( and corresponding to Old English ) .
In the language of the Rohirrim the hobbits were called kûd - dûkan ( in plural ? ) , which had rendered the autonym kuduk .
APPEARANCE Section::::Appearance .
In the prologue to The Lord of the Rings , Tolkien writes that hobbits are between tall , the average height being .
They dress in bright colours , favouring yellow and green .
Nowadays ( according to Tolkien 's fiction ) , they are usually shy , but are nevertheless capable of great courage and amazing feats under the proper circumstances .
They are adept at throwing stones .
For the most part , they can not grow beards , but a few of the race of Stoor can .
Their feet are covered with curly hair ( usually brown , as is the hair on their heads ) with leathery soles , so hobbits hardly ever wear shoes .
The race 's average life expectancy is 100 years .
Two Hobbits , Bilbo Baggins and the Old Took , are described as living to the age of 130 or beyond , though Bilbo 's long lifespan owes much to his possession of the One Ring .
Hobbits are considered to " come of age " on their 33rd birthday , so a 50-year - old hobbit would be regarded as entering middle - age .
Hobbits are not quite as stocky as the similarly - sized dwarves , but still tend to be stout , with slightly pointed ears .
Tolkien does not describe hobbits ' ears in The Hobbit or The Lord of the Rings , but in a 1938 letter to his American publisher , he described them as having " ears only slightly pointed and ' elvish ' " .
Tolkien describes hobbits thus : Hobbits and derivative Halflings are often depicted with unusually large feet for their size , perhaps to visually emphasize their unusualness .
This is especially prominent in the influential illustrations by the Brothers Hildebrandt and the large prosthetic feet used in The Lord of the Rings film trilogy .
Tolkien does not specifically mention foot size as a generic hobbit trait , but does make it the distinctive trait of the Proudfoot hobbit family .
LIFESTYLE Section::::Lifestyle .
In his writings , Tolkien depicted hobbits as fond of an unadventurous , bucolic and simple life of farming , eating , and socializing , although capable of defending their homes courageously if the need arises .
They would enjoy six meals a day , if they could get them .
They were often described as enjoying simple food , though this seems to be of an Oxfordshire style , such as cake , bread , meat , potatoes , ale and tea .
They claim to have invented the art of smoking pipe - weed , and according to The Hobbit and The Return of The King it can be found all over Middle - earth .
The hobbits of the Shire developed the custom of giving away gifts on their birthdays , instead of receiving them , although this custom was not universally followed among other hobbit cultures or communities .
They use the term mathom for old and useless objects , which are invariably given as presents many times over , or are stored in a museum ( mathom - house ) .
Some Hobbits live in " hobbit - holes " or Smials , traditional underground homes found in hillsides , downs , and banks .
It has been suggested that the soil or ground of the Shire consists of loess and that this facilitates the construction of hobbit holes .
Loess is a yellow soil , it causes the colour of the Brandywine River , and it was used in making the bricks at Stock , the main Shire brickyard .
Like all Hobbit architecture , the hobbit holes are notable for their round doors and windows .
The hobbits had a distinct calendar : every year started on a Saturday and ended on a Friday , with each of the twelve months consisting of thirty days .
Some special days did not belong to any month — Yule 1 and 2 ( New Year 's Eve & New Years Day ) and three Lithedays in mid - summer .
Every fourth year there was an extra Litheday , most likely as an adaptation , similar to a leap year , to ensure that the calendar remained in synch with the seasons .
FICTIONAL HISTORY
Section::::Fictional history .
In their earliest folk tales Hobbits appear to have inhabited the Valley of Anduin , between Mirkwood and the Misty Mountains .
According to The Lord of the Rings , they have lost the genealogical details of how they are related to the Big People .
At this time , there were three " breeds " of hobbits , with different physical characteristics and temperaments : Harfoots , Stoors and Fallohides .
While situated in the valley of the Anduin River , the hobbits lived close by the Éothéod , the ancestors of the Rohirrim , and this led to some contact between the two .
As a result , many old words and names in " Hobbitish " are derivatives of words in Rohirric .
The Harfoots , the most numerous , were almost identical to the Hobbits as they are described in The Hobbit .
They lived on the lowest slopes of the Misty Mountains and lived in holes , or Smials , dug into the hillsides .
The Stoors , the second most numerous , were shorter and stockier and had an affinity for water , boats and swimming .
They lived on the marshy Gladden Fields where the Gladden River met the Anduin
( there is a similarity here to the hobbits of Buckland and the Marish in the Shire .
It is possible that those hobbits were the descendants of Stoors ) .
It was from these Hobbits that Déagol and Sméagol / Gollum were descended .
The Fallohides , the least numerous , were an adventurous people that preferred to live in the woods under the Misty Mountains and were said to be taller and fairer ( all of these traits were much rarer in later days , and it has been implied that wealthy , eccentric families that tended to lead other hobbits politically , like the Tooks and Brandybucks , were of Fallohide descent ) .
Bilbo and three of the four principal hobbit characters in The Lord of the Rings ( Frodo , Pippin and Merry ) had Fallohide blood through their common ancestor , the Old Took .
About the year , they undertook the arduous task of crossing the Misty Mountains .
Reasons for this trek are unknown , but they possibly had to do with Sauron 's growing power in nearby Greenwood , which later became known as Mirkwood as a result of the shadow that fell upon it during Sauron 's search of the forest for the One Ring .
The Hobbits took different routes in their journey westward , but as they began to settle together in Bree - land , Dunland , and the Angle formed by the rivers Mitheithel and Bruinen , the divisions between the Hobbit - kinds began to blur .
In the year 1601 of the Third Age ( year 1 in the Shire Reckoning ) , two Fallohide brothers named Marcho and Blanco gained permission from the King of Arnor at Fornost to cross the River Brandywine and settle on the other side .
Many Hobbits followed them , and most of the territory they had settled in the Third Age was abandoned .
Only Bree and a few surrounding villages lasted to the end of the Third Age .
The new land that they founded on the west bank of the Brandywine was called the Shire .
Originally the hobbits of the Shire swore nominal allegiance to the last Kings of Arnor , being required only to acknowledge their lordship , speed their messengers , and keep the bridges and roads in repair .
During the final fight against Angmar at the Battle of Fornost , the Hobbits maintain that they sent a company of archers to help
but this is nowhere else recorded .
After the battle , the kingdom of Arnor was destroyed , and in the absence of the king , the Hobbits elected a Thain of the Shire from among their own chieftains .
The first Thain of the Shire was Bucca of the Marish , who founded the Oldbuck family .
However , the Oldbuck family later crossed the Brandywine River to create the separate land of Buckland and the family name changed to the familiar " Brandybuck " .
Their patriarch then became Master of Buckland .
With the departure of the Oldbucks / Brandybucks , a new family was selected to have its chieftains be Thain : the Took family ( Pippin Took was son of the Thain and would later become Thain himself ) .
The Thain was in charge of Shire Moot and Muster and the Hobbitry - in - Arms , but as the Hobbits of the Shire generally led entirely peaceful , uneventful lives the office of Thain came to be seen as something of a formality .
The Hobbits ' numbers dwindled , and their stature became progressively smaller after the Fourth Age .
However , they are sometimes spoken of in the present tense , and the prologue " Concerning Hobbits " in The Lord of the Rings implies they had survived into Tolkien 's day .
DIVISIONS
* Harfoots : The Harfoots were the most numerous group of hobbits and also the first to enter Eriador .
They were the smallest in stature of all hobbits , and the most typical of the race .
They had closer relations with Dwarves than did other Hobbits .
Tolkien coined the term as analogous to " hairfoot " .
* Fallohides : The Fallohides were the least numerous group and the second group to enter Eriador .
They were generally fair - haired and tall ( for hobbits ) .
They were often found leading other clans of hobbits as they were more adventurous than the other subraces .
They preferred the forests and had links with the Elves .
Tolkien created the name from the archaic meanings of English words " fallow " and " hide " , meaning " pale skin " .
* Stoors : The Stoors were the second most numerous group of hobbits and the last to enter Eriador .
They were broader than other hobbits .
They dwelt mostly beside rivers and were the only hobbits to use boats and swim .
Males were able to grow beards .
Tolkien says they were " less shy of Men " .
Sméagol and Déagol were Stoors .
Tolkien used an archaic English word stor or stoor " strong " .
MORAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Moral significance .
Kocher notes that Tolkien 's literary techniques require us to increasingly view hobbits as like us , especially when placed under moral pressure to survive a war that threatens to devastate their land .
Frodo becomes in some ways the symbolic representation of the conscience of hobbits , a point made explicitly in the story " Leaf by Niggle " which Tolkien wrote at the same time as the first nine chapters of The Lord of the Rings .
Niggle is a painter struggling against the summons of death to complete his one great canvas , a picture of a tree with a background of forest and distant mountains .
He dies with the work incomplete , undone by his imperfectly generous heart : " it made him uncomfortable more often than it made him do anything " .
After discipline in Purgatory , however , Niggle finds himself in the very landscape depicted by his painting which he is now able to finish with the assistance of a neighbour who obstructed him during life .
The picture complete , Niggle is free to journey to the distant mountains which represent the highest stage of his spiritual development .
Thus , upon recovery from the wound inflicted by the Witch - King of Angmar on Weathertop , Gandalf speculates that the hobbit Frodo " may become like a glass filled with a clear light for eyes to see that can " .
Similarly , as Frodo nears Mount Doom he casts aside weapons and refuses to fight others with physical force : " For him struggles for the right must hereafter be waged only on the moral plane . "
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Originally , halfling comes from the Scots word hauflin , meaning an awkward rustic teenager , who is neither man nor boy , and so half of both .
Another word for halfling is hobbledehoy or hobby .
This usage of the word pre - dates both The Hobbit and Dungeons & Dragons .
Dungeons & Dragons began using the name halfling as an alternative to hobbit for legal reasons .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Comic horror rock band Rosemary 's Billygoat recorded a song and video called " Hobbit Feet " , about a man who takes a girl home from a bar only to discover she has horrifying " hobbit feet " .
According to lead singer Mike Odd , the band received over 100 pieces of hate mail from angry Tolkien fans .
IN SCIENCE Section::::In science .
The skeletal remains of several diminutive paleolithic hominids were discovered on the Indonesian island of Flores in 2004 .
These tiny people , named Homo floresiensis after the island on which the remains were found , were informally dubbed " hobbits " by their discoverers in a series of articles published in the scientific journal Nature .
The excavated skeletons reveal a hominid that ( like a hobbit ) grew no larger than a three - year - old modern child and had proportionately larger feet than modern humans .
SEE ALSO
* Middle - earth hobbits:-
* List of hobbits * List of hobbit families *
Shire calendar
*
Halfling *
Hob ( folklore )
* Pygmy NOTES AND REFERENCES NOTES AND CITATIONS
GENERAL
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Were Hobbits a sub - group of Humans ?
from the Tolkien Meta - FAQ , compiled by Steuard Jensen *
Concerning Hobbits : Welsh Fairies in Oxford from the Tolkien Library