ÉOWYN
Éowyn is a fictional character in Tolkien 's legendarium who appears in his most famous work ,
The Lord of the Rings .
She is a noblewoman of Rohan who is described as a shieldmaiden .
LITERATURE
Section::::Literature .
In The Two Towers , Éowyn , a daughter of the House of Eorl and the goddaughter of King Théoden of Rohan , is introduced in Meduseld , the king 's hall at Edoras .
She was the daughter of Théodwyn ( Théoden 's sister ) and Éomund and the sister of Éomer .
When she was only seven years old , her father was killed fighting orcs and her mother died of grief .
Éowyn and Éomer were raised in her uncle 's household as if they were his own children .
Tolkien writes that she longed to win renown in battle — especially since she was royal — but being female , her duties were reckoned to be at Edoras .
When Théoden 's mind was poisoned by his adviser Gríma Wormtongue , Éowyn was obliged to care for her uncle , and his deterioration pained her deeply .
To make matters worse , she was constantly harassed by Gríma , who lusted after her .
However , when Gandalf arrived , he freed Théoden from Wormtongue 's influence .
Éowyn fell in love with Aragorn , but it soon became clear that he could not return her love although he did not mention his betrothal to Arwen , except by indirect allusion , and would not allow her to join him in going to war .
As Aragorn pointed out , her duty was with her people ; she had to shoulder the responsibility of ruling Rohan in Théoden 's stead when the war - host of Rohan went to war , a duty he deemed no less valiant .
Likening her situation to a " cage " , Éowyn said she feared " [ t]o stay behind bars , until use and old age accept them , and all chance of great deeds is gone beyond recall or desire " .
In The Return of the King , she disguised herself as a man and , under the alias of Dernhelm ( from Old English dern meaning " secret , concealed " ) , travelled with the Riders of Rohan to the Battle of the Pelennor Fields outside the White City of Minas Tirith in Gondor , carrying with her Meriadoc Brandybuck , who had also been ordered to remain behind , on her horse Windfola .
During the battle of the Pelennor Fields , she confronted the Witch - king of Angmar , Lord of the Nazgûl , after Théoden was injured .
The Witch - king threatened to " bear [ her ] away to the houses of lamentation , beyond all darkness , where [ her ] flesh shall be devoured , and [ her ] shrivelled mind be left naked to the Lidless Eye " .
The Witch - king further boasted that " [ n]o living man may hinder me " , referring to the 1,000-year - old prophecy by the Elf - lord Glorfindel , foretelling that the Witch - king would not fall " by the hand of man " .
Éowyn then removed her helmet and declared : The Witch - king attacked Éowyn with his steed , but she slew it with her sword .
He then shattered her shield and broke her shield - arm with his mace , but was distracted by Merry , who stabbed him behind the knee with a barrow - blade .
Éowyn seized the opportunity to strike the Witch - king with a killing thrust " between crown and mantle " .
Then , as her sword shattered , his withering form collapsed and he vanished with a final cry of anguish .
Éowyn soon passed out from the pain in her arm , and was believed dead until Prince Imrahil of Dol Amroth realized she still lived .
Éowyn was brought to the Houses of Healing , hovering near death from the effects of having struck the Witch - king .
There Éowyn met Faramir , with whom she soon fell in love .
Her outlook on life also changed : " Then the heart of Éowyn changed , or else at last she understood it . ...
I will be a shieldmaiden no longer , nor vie with the great Riders , nor take joy only in the songs of slaying .
I will be a healer , and love all things that grow and are not barren . "
After the demise of Sauron , Éowyn and Faramir married and settled in Ithilien , of which Faramir was made the ruling Prince by King Elessar , the name with which Aragorn ascended the throne of the Reunited Kingdom .
Faramir and Éowyn had at least one son , Elboron , and their grandson was Barahir , who wrote The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen in the Fourth Age .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Éowyn is described to be very beautiful ; she was tall , slim , pale , and graceful , with long golden hair and grey eyes .
In temperament she was idealistic , spirited , brave and high - minded , but very lonely , having sacrificed her own happiness for years to care for her sick uncle and meet the responsibilities of a shield - maiden .
NAMES AND TITLES Section::::Names and titles .
In Old English , the language Tolkien used to represent his invented language of Rohirric , the word eoh ( or eh ) means " war - horse , charger " while wyn means " delight , pleasure " ( in addition , some sample text within Bosworth and Toller translates wyn as " joy , joyous " ) .
Therefore , even though no such word appears in the lexicon of Old English , the name Éowyn can be taken to mean " delightful charger " .
The first syllable of Éowyn sounds like " eh - oh " , with the " oh " just barely pronounced .
As in the North Germanic languages or Finnish , the y in the second syllable is the same sound as the German letter ü or the French u. Tolkien maintained Éowyn was not the character 's actual name .
Her real name in Rohirric is not given , but it , as well as Éomer and Éomund , would have started with the element Lô- or Loh- , meaning " horse " , which he represented with Old English Eoh- .
Although she never carried the title of princess , she was a niece to one King of Rohan and sister to another as well as the wife of a Gondorian prince .
Éowyn 's titles included the ( White ) Lady of Rohan , Lady of Ithilien and Lady of Emyn Arnen .
She was also known as the Lady of the Shield - arm in recognition of her triumph over the Witch - king .
CONCEPT AND CREATION Section::::Concept and creation .
Originally , Tolkien intended for Éowyn to marry Aragorn .
Later , however , he decided against it because Aragorn was " too old and lordly and grim . "
He considered making Éowyn the twin sister of Éomund , and having her die " to avenge or save Théoden " .
He also considered having Aragorn truly love Éowyn and regret never marrying after her death .
At one point Tolkien described Éowyn as " a stern Amazon woman " .
Later he wrote : " Though not a ' dry nurse ' in temper , she was also not really a soldier or ' Amazon ' , but like many brave women was capable of great military gallantry at a crisis . "
( Here he alludes to Éowyn 's statement to Aragorn : "
But am I not of the House of Eorl , a shieldmaiden and not a dry - nurse ? " ) PORTRAYAL IN ADAPTATIONS Section::::Portrayal in adaptations .
The voice of Éowyn was provided by Nellie Bellflower in the 1980 Rankin / Bass animated version of The Return of the King , and by Elin Jenkins in BBC Radio 's 1981 serialisation .
Éowyn also appears briefly in Ralph Bakshi 's 1978 adaptation of The Lord of the Rings , but does not have any dialogue .
In Peter Jackson 's films ( 2002 ) and ( 2003 ) , Éowyn is played by Miranda Otto .
( The role was first offered to Iben Hjejle , who turned it down because she did not like the idea of being away from Denmark ; Uma Thurman was slated for the role at one point . )
In the original novel and Jackson 's adaptation , it is implied that Saruman promised her to Gríma as payment for his services as a spy .
In one scene , while mourning for her dead cousin , she is subjected to Gríma 's obnoxious affections , which she spurns .
She sings the dirge at Théodred 's funeral .
In the extended edition of The Two Towers , Éowyn is shown discovering , to her astonishment , that Aragorn is a long - lived Dúnadan .
In the original theatrical release of The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King , Éowyn plays a much larger role in the Battle of Pelennor Fields than in the book , where the only fighting mentioned is her conflict with the Witch - king and also Gothmog .
Her speech revealing her identity is cut , replaced with the simple declaration "
I am no man ! "
She also replaces Merry as the person to sit with Théoden as he dies .
In the Extended Edition of the film , Éowyn is portrayed as being near death following her fight with the Witch - King ; her brother finds her and screams in anguish because he fears that she is dead .
She is later seen being healed by Aragorn , and meeting Faramir in the Houses of Healing .
While she disguises herself in the film to ride into battle , she never takes on the name " Dernhelm " .
In the Extended Edition , Théoden notices her dispatching several Orcs , but it is not clear if he realizes that she is his niece .
The production team stated that while in a book it was easy to disguise Éowyn 's identity , in the medium of cinema the audience could visually tell that it was she , and it would have strained the credibility of the scenes to try to make it a secret .
Her final appearance occurs at Aragorn 's coronation , where she is shown standing next to Faramir .
The Extended Edition restores a scene in which she falls in love with Faramir at the Houses of Healing , though even this version never states that they eventually marry .
According to the DVD commentaries , an entire set - piece Faramir / Éowyn wedding scene was actually filmed , which Oscar - winning costume designer Ngila Dickson states features what she feels are the best costumes she produced for the entire film trilogy .
While this scene has been described in the DVD commentaries and other interviews , it was ultimately cut and not even included in the Extended Edition , nor have any photos of the scene ever been made public .
NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Éowyn on IMDb * Éowyn at The Thain 's Book