STATUE OF ZEUS AT OLYMPIA
The Statue of Zeus at Olympia was a giant seated figure , about tall , made by the Greek sculptor Phidias around 435 BC at the sanctuary of Olympia , Greece , and erected in the Temple of Zeus there .
A sculpture of ivory plates and gold panels over a wooden framework , it represented the god Zeus sitting on an elaborate cedar wood throne ornamented with ebony , ivory , gold and precious stones .
One of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World , it was lost and destroyed during the 5th century AD with no copy ever being found , and details of its form are known only from ancient Greek descriptions and representations on coins .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The statue of Zeus was commissioned by the Eleans , custodians of the Olympic Games , in the latter half of the fifth century BC for their recently constructed Temple of Zeus .
Seeking to outdo their Athenian rivals , the Eleans employed the renowned sculptor Phidias , who had previously made the massive statue of Athena Parthenos in the Parthenon .
The great seated statue as fashioned by Phidias occupied half the width of the aisle of the temple built to house it .
" It seems that if Zeus were to stand up , " the geographer Strabo noted early in the 1st century BC , " he would unroof the temple . "
The Zeus was a chryselephantine sculpture , made with ivory and gold panels on a wooden substructure .
No copy in marble or bronze has survived , though there are recognizable but only approximate versions on coins of nearby Elis and on Roman coins and engraved gems .
In the 2nd century AD , the geographer and traveler Pausanias gave a detailed description .
The statue was crowned with a sculpted wreath of olive sprays , and wore a gilded robe made from glass and carved with animals and lilies .
In its right hand was a small chryselephantine statue of crowned Nike , goddess of victory .
Its left hand held a scepter inlaid with many metals , supporting an eagle .
The throne featured painted figures and wrought images and was decorated in gold , precious stones , ebony , and ivory .
Zeus ' golden sandals rested upon a footstool decorated with an Amazonomachy in relief .
The passage underneath the throne was restricted by painted screens .
Pausanias also recounts that the statue was kept constantly coated with olive oil to counter the harmful effect on the ivory caused by the " marshiness " of the Altis grove .
The floor in front of the image was paved with black tiles and surrounded by a raised rim of marble , to contain the oil .
This reservoir acted as a reflecting pool which doubled the apparent height of the statue .
According to the Roman historian Livy , the Roman general Aemilius Paulus ( the victor over Macedon ) saw the statue and " was moved to his soul , as if he had seen the god in person , " while the 1st centuryAD Greek orator Dio Chrysostom declared that a single glimpse of the statue would make a man forget all his earthly troubles .
According to a legend , when Phidias was asked what inspired him — whether he climbed Mount Olympus to see Zeus , or whether Zeus came down from Olympus so that Phidias could see him — the artist answered that he portrayed Zeus according to Book One , verses 528 – 530 of Homer 's Iliad :
The sculptor also was reputed to have immortalised Pantarkes , the winner of the boys ' wrestling event at the eighty - sixth Olympiad who was said to have been his " beloved " ( eromenos ) , by carving Pantarkes kalos ( " Pantarkes is beautiful " ) into Zeus 's little finger , and by placing a relief of the boy crowning himself at the feet of the statue .
According to Pausanias , " when the image was quite finished Pheidias prayed the god to show by a sign whether the work was to his liking .
Immediately , runs the legend , a thunderbolt fell on that part of the floor where down to the present day the bronze jar stood to cover the place . "
LOSS AND DESTRUCTION Section::::Loss and destruction .
According to Roman historian Suetonius , the Roman Emperor Caligula gave orders that " such statues of the gods as were especially famous for their sanctity or their artistic merit , including that of Jupiter at Olympia , should be brought from Greece , in order to remove their heads and put his own in their place .
" Before this could happen , the emperor was assassinated in 41 AD ; his death was supposedly foretold by the statue , which " suddenly uttered such a peal of laughter that the scaffolding collapsed and the workmen took to their heels . "
In 391 AD , the Roman emperor
Theodosius
I banned participation in pagan cults and closed the temples .
The sanctuary at Olympia fell into disuse .
The circumstances of the statue 's eventual destruction are unknown .
The 11th - century Byzantine historian Georgios Kedrenos records a tradition that it was carried off to Constantinople , where it was destroyed in the great fire of the Palace of Lausus , in 475 AD .
Alternatively , the statue perished along with the temple , which was severely damaged by fire in 425 AD .
But earlier loss or damage is implied by Lucian of Samosata in the later 2nd century , who referenced it Timon : " they have laid hands on your person at Olympia , my lord High - Thunderer , and you had not the energy to wake the dogs or call in the neighbours ; surely they might have come to the rescue and caught the fellows before they had finished packing up the loot . "
PHIDIAS ' WORKSHOP Section::::Phidias ' workshop .
The approximate date of the statue ( the third quarter of the 5th century BC ) was confirmed in the rediscovery ( 1954–58 ) of Phidias ' workshop , approximately where Pausanias said the statue of Zeus was constructed .
Archaeological finds included tools for working gold and ivory , ivory chippings , precious stones and terracotta moulds .
Most of the latter were used to create glass plaques , and to form the statue 's robe from sheets of glass , naturalistically draped and folded , then gilded .
A cup inscribed " ΦΕΙΔΙΟΥ ΕΙΜΙ " or " I belong to Phidias " was found at the site .
SEE ALSO
* List of statues by height REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Kenneth D. S. Lapatin , Chryselephantine Statuary in the Ancient Mediterranean World , Oxford University Press ( 2001 )
* Alfred Mallwitz and Wolfgang Schiering , Die Werkstatt des Pheidias in Olympia
I :
Olympische Forschungen V , Berlin : Walter de Gruyter ( 1964 )
* Wolfgang Schiering , Die Werkstatt des Pheidias in Olympia II :
Werkstattfunde : Olympische Forschungen XVIII , Berlin : Walter de Gruyter ( 1991 )
* Janette McWilliam , Rashna Taraporewalla , Tom Stevenson , and Sonia Puttock ( Ed . ) , The Statue of Zeus at Olympia .
New Approaches .
Cambridge , Cambridge Scholars Publishing ( 2011 )
FURTHER READING
* Barringer , Judith M. 2010 .
"
Zeus at Olympia .
" In The gods of ancient Greece : Identities and transformations .
Edited by Jan Bremmer and Andrew Erskine , 155–77 .
Edinburgh : Edinburgh Univ .
Press .
* Boardman , John .
1985 .
Greek sculpture : The Classical period .
London : Thames & Hudson .
*
Lapatin , Kenneth D. S. 2001 .
Chryselephantine statuary in the ancient Mediterranean world .
Oxford :
Oxford Univ .
Press .
* McWilliam , Janette .
2011 .
" The statue of Zeus at Olympia in Western imagination via the Internet . "
In The statue of Zeus at Olympia : New approaches .
Edited by Janette McWilliam , Sonia Puttock , Tom Stevenson , and Rashna Taraporewalla , 209–22 .
Newcastle , UK :
Cambridge Scholars .
* Palagia , Olga , and J. J. Pollitt , eds .
1996 .
Personal styles in Greek sculpture .
Cambridge , UK , and New York : Cambridge Univ .
Press .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Ancient History Encyclopedia - Statue of Zeus at Olympia * Colin Delaney , " A Wonder to Behold :
The Statue of Olympian Zeus "
* Archaeopaedia : Statue of Zeus With bibliography
* ( Ellen Papakyriakou ) Olympia :
Art : the chryselephantine statue of Zeus * Michael Lahanas , " The colossal Zeus statue of Pheidias " * David Fenzl " Recreating Olympic Statuary " * History.com : the Seven Wonders