FLAMETHROWER
A flamethrower is a mechanical incendiary device designed to project a long , controllable stream of fire .
They were first used by the Greeks in the 1st century AD .
In modern times , they were used during World War I , and more widely in World War II .
Most military flamethrowers use flammable liquid thickened into a substance similar to napalm , but commercial flamethrowers tend to use high - pressure propane and gasoline , which is considered safer as they both die out faster and are easier to put out .
Note that actual napalm was never used with flamethrowers .
In comparison , a liquid flamethrower 's fuel sticks to its targets and is harder to put out with water , while also allowing for a more specific burn effect .
Napalm specifically also quickly deoxygenates the surrounding air , making smoke inhalation or asphyxiation a real threat .
They are used by the military and by people needing controlled burning capacity , such as in agriculture ( e.g. , sugar cane plantations ) or other such land management tasks .
They can be designed to be either carried by the operator or mounted on a vehicle .
MILITARY FLAMETHROWERS Section::::Military flamethrowers .
Modern flamethrowers were first used during the trench warfare conditions of World War I and their use greatly increased in World War II .
They can be vehicle mounted , as on a tank , or man - portable .
The man - portable flamethrower consists of two elements : the backpack and the gun .
The backpack element usually consists of two or three cylinders .
In a two - cylinder system , one cylinder holds compressed , inert propellant gas ( usually nitrogen ) , and the other holds flammable liquid — typically petrol with some form of fuel thickener added to it .
A three - cylinder system often has two outer cylinders of flammable liquid and a central cylinder of propellant gas to maintain the balance of the soldier carrying it .
The gas propels the liquid fuel out of the cylinder through a flexible pipe and then into the gun element of the flamethrower system .
The gun consists of a small reservoir , a spring - loaded valve , and an ignition system ; depressing a trigger opens the valve , allowing pressurized flammable liquid to flow and pass over the igniter and out of the gun nozzle .
The igniter can be one of several ignition systems :
A simple type is an electrically - heated wire coil ; another used a small pilot flame , fueled with pressurized gas from the system .
The flamethrower is a potent weapon with great psychological impact , inflicting a particularly horrific death .
This has led to some calls for the weapon to be banned .
It is primarily used against battlefield fortifications , bunkers , and other protected emplacements .
A flamethrower projects a stream of flammable liquid , rather than flame , which allows bouncing the stream off walls and ceilings to project the fire into unseen spaces , such as inside bunkers or pillboxes .
Typically , popular visual media depict the flamethrower as short - ranged and only effective for a few meters ( due to the common use of propane gas as the fuel in flamethrowers in movies , for the safety of the actors ) .
Contemporary flamethrowers can incinerate a target some from the gunner ; moreover , an unignited stream of flammable liquid can be fired and afterwards ignited , possibly by a lamp or other flame inside the bunker .
Flamethrowers pose many risks to the operator .
*
The first disadvantage was the weapon 's weight and length , which impairs the soldier 's mobility
* The weapon is limited to only a few seconds of burn time since it uses fuel very quickly , requiring the operator to be precise and conservative
* The weapon was very visible on the battlefield , which caused operators to become immediately singled out as prominent targets , especially for snipers * Flamethrower operators were rarely taken prisoner , especially when their target survived an attack by the weapon ; captured flamethrower users were in some cases summarily executed *
The flamethrower 's effective range is short in comparison with that of other battlefield weapons of similar size .
To be effective , flamethrower soldiers must approach their target , risking exposure to enemy fire .
Vehicular flamethrowers also have this problem ; they may have considerably greater range than a man - portable flamethrower , but their range is still short compared with that of other infantry weapons .
The risk of a flamethrower operator being caught in the explosion of their weapon due to enemy hits on the tanks is exaggerated in films .
However , there are cases where the pressure tanks have exploded and killed the operator when hit by bullets or grenade shrapnel .
In the documentary Vietnam in HD , platoon sergeant Charles Brown tells of how one of his men was killed when his flamethrower was hit by grenade shrapnel during the battle for Hill 875 .
The best way to minimize the disadvantages of flame weapons was to mount them on armoured vehicles .
The Commonwealth and the United States were the most prolific users of vehicle - mounted flame weapons ; the British and Canadians fielded " Wasps " ( Universal Carriers fitted with flamethrowers ) at infantry battalion level , beginning in mid-1944 , and eventually incorporating them into infantry battalions .
Early tank - mounted flamethrower vehicles included the ' Badger ' ( a converted Ram tank ) and the ' Oke ' , used first at Dieppe .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
A propane - operated flamethrower is a relatively straightforward device .
The gas is expelled through the gun assembly by its own pressure and is ignited at the exit of the barrel through piezo ignition .
Liquid - operated flamethrowers use a smaller propane tank to expel the liquid .
For safety reasons , the propane tank is behind the combustible liquid tanks in order to prevent being hit by a bullet .
The propane is fed to two tubes .
The first opens in the napalm tanks , providing the pressure necessary for expelling the liquid .
The other tube leads to an ignition chamber behind the exit of the gun assembly , where it is mixed with air and ignited through piezo ignition .
This pre - ignition propane line is the source of the flame seen in front of the gun assembly in movies and documentaries .
As the napalm passes through the flame , it is ignited and propelled towards the target .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
The concept of throwing fire as a weapon has existed since ancient times .
During the Peloponnesian War , Boeotians used some kind of a flamethrower trying to destroy the fortification walls of the Athenians during the Battle of Delium .
Later , during the Byzantine era , whose inhabitants used rudimentary hand - pumped flamethrowers on board their naval ships in the early 1st century AD ( see Greek fire ) .
Greek fire , extensively used by the Byzantine Empire , is said to have been invented by Kallinikos of Heliopolis , probably about 673 .
The flamethrower found its origins also in the Byzantine Empire , employing Greek fire in a device of a hand - held pump that shot bursts of Greek fire via a siphon - hose and piston , igniting it with a match , similar to modern versions , as it was ejected .
Greek fire , used primarily at sea , gave the Byzantines a substantial military advantage against enemies such as members of the Arab Empire ( who later adopted the use of Greek fire ) .
An 11th - century illustration of its use survives in the John Skylitzes manuscript .
The Pen Huo Qi ( fire spraying machine ; lit .
spray fire device ) was a Chinese piston flamethrower that used a substance similar to petrol or naphtha , invented around 919 AD during the Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms period .
Advances in military technology aided the Song dynasty in its defense against hostile neighbours to the north , including the Mongols .
The earliest reference to Greek fire in China was made in 917 AD , written by Wu Renchen in his Spring and Autumn Annals of the Ten Kingdoms .
In 919 AD , the siphon projector - pump was used to spread the ' fierce fire oil ' that could not be doused with water , as recorded by Lin Yu ( 林禹 ) in his Wu - Yue Beishi ( 吳越備史 ) , hence the first credible Chinese reference to the flamethrower employing the chemical solution of Greek fire .
Lin Yu mentioned also that the ' fierce fire oil ' derived ultimately from China 's contact in the ' southern seas ' , with Arabia ( 大食國 Dashiguo ) .
In the Battle of Langshan Jiang ( Wolf Mountain River ) in 919 , the naval fleet of the Wenmu King of Wuyue defeated the fleet of the Kingdom of Wu because he had used ' fire oil ' to burn his fleet ; this signified the first Chinese use of gunpowder in warfare , since a slow - burning match fuse was required to ignite the flames .
The Chinese applied the use of double - piston bellows to pump petrol out of a single cylinder ( with an upstroke and a downstroke ) , lit at the end by a slow - burning gunpowder match to fire a continuous stream of flame ( as referred to in the Wujing Zongyao manuscript of 1044 AD ) .
In the suppression of the Southern Tang state by 976 AD , early Song naval forces confronted them on the Yangtze River in 975 AD .
Southern Tang forces attempted to use flamethrowers against the Song navy , but were accidentally consumed by their own fire when violent winds swept in their direction .
Documented also in later Chinese publications , illustrations and descriptions of mobile flamethrowers on four - wheel push carts appear in the Wujing Zongyao , written in 1044 AD ( its illustration redrawn in 1601 as well ) .
Although flamethrowers were never used in the American Civil War , the use of Greek fire was threatened , and flamethrowers have been in use in most modern conflicts ever since .
EARLY 20TH CENTURY Section::::Early 20th century .
The English word ' flamethrower ' is a loan - translation of the German word Flammenwerfer , since the modern flamethrower was invented in Germany .
The first flamethrower , in the modern sense , is usually credited to Richard Fiedler .
He submitted evaluation models of his Flammenwerfer to the German Army in 1901 .
The most significant model submitted was a portable device , consisting of a vertical single cylinder long , horizontally divided in two , with pressurized gas in the lower section and flammable oil in the upper section .
On depressing a lever the propellant gas forced the flammable oil into and through a rubber tube and over a simple igniting wick device in a steel nozzle .
The weapon projected a jet of fire and enormous clouds of smoke some .
It was a single - shot weapon — for burst firing , a new igniter section was attached each time .
Hungarian Gábor Szakáts invented the flamethrower which was first used by the German army in WWI .
Gábor Szakáts was the only Hungarian on the list of war criminals assembled by France after the war due to the invention of the flamethrower .
Even his birthplace Budapest refused to bury Szakáts because of his invention .
It was not until 1911 that the German Army accepted their first real flamethrowing device , creating a specialist regiment of twelve companies equipped with Flammenwerferapparaten .
Despite this , use of fire in a World War
I battle predated flamethrower use , with a petrol spray being ignited by an incendiary bomb in the Argonne - Meuse sector in October 1914 .
The flamethrower was first used in World War I on February 26 , 1915 , when it was briefly used against the French outside Verdun .
On July 30 , 1915 , it was first used in a concerted action , against British trenches at Hooge , where the lines were apart — even there , the casualties were caused mainly by soldiers being flushed into the open and being shot by more conventional means rather than from the fire itself .
The flamethrower had other limitations : it was cumbersome and difficult to operate and could only be safely fired from a trench , which limited its use to areas where the opposing trenches were less than the maximum range of the weapon , namely apart — which was not a common situation ; the fuel would also only last for about 2 minutes .
Nevertheless , the German army continued deploying flamethrowers during the war in more than 300 battles , usually in teams of six .
British forces in the Battle of the Somme used experimental weapons called " Livens Large Gallery Flame Projector " , named for their inventor , a Royal Engineers officer William Howard Livens .
This weapon was enormous and completely non - portable .
Livens later invented the Livens Projector , these were in effect crude mortars firing large bombs filled with incendiary liquid .
A little later the weapon was adapted to project canisters of poison gas .
Hundreds , or even thousands , of projectors firing almost simultaneously , would produce an instant cloud of poison gas on the target .
Two Morriss static flamethrowers mounted in HMS Vindictive ( 1897 ) and several Hay portable flamethrowers were deployed by the Royal Navy during the Zeebrugge Raid on 23 April 1918 .
A British newspaper report of the action , referred to the British flamethrowers only as flammenwerfer , using the German word .
The French Army deployed the Schilt family of flamethrowers , that were also used by the Italian Army .
The Russian army used 11,446 indigenously produced flamethrowers , over 10,000 of which were the Tovarnitski man - portable design .
In the interwar period , at least four flamethrowers were used in the Chaco War by the Bolivian Army , during the unsuccessful assault on the Paraguayan stronghold of Nanawa in 1933 .
WORLD WAR II Section::::World War II .
The flamethrower was extensively used during World War II .
In 1939 , the Wehrmacht first deployed man - portable flamethrowers against the Polish Post Office in Danzig .
Subsequently , in 1942 , the U.S. Army introduced its own man - portable flamethrower .
The vulnerability of infantry carrying backpack flamethrowers and the weapon 's short range led to experiments with tank - mounted flamethrowers ( flame tanks ) , which were used by many countries .
AXIS USE GERMANY Section::::Axis use .
Section::::Germany .
The Germans made considerable use of the weapon ( Flammenwerfer 35 ) during their invasion of the Netherlands and France , against fixed fortifications .
World War II German army flamethrowers tended to have one large fuel tank with the pressurizer tank fastened to its back or side .
Some German army flamethrowers occupied only the lower part of its wearer 's back , leaving the upper part of his back free for an ordinary rucksack .
Flamethrowers soon fell into disfavor .
Flamethrowers were extensively used by German units in urban fights in Poland , both in 1943 in the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising and in 1944 in the Warsaw Uprising ( See the Stroop Report and the article on the 1943 Warsaw Ghetto Uprising . )
With the contraction of the Third Reich during the latter half of World War II , a smaller , more compact flamethrower known as the Einstossflammenwerfer 46 was produced .
Germany also used flamethrower vehicles , most of them based on the chassis of the Sdkfz 251 half track and the Panzer II and Panzer III tanks , generally known as Flammpanzers .
The Germans also produced the Abwehrflammenwerfer 42 , a flame - mine or flame fougasse , based on a Soviet version of the weapon .
This was essentially a disposable , single use flamethrower that was buried alongside conventional land mines at key defensive points and triggered by either a trip - wire or a command wire .
The weapon contained around of fuel , that was discharged within a second , to a second and a half , producing a flame with a range .
One defensive installation found in Italy included seven of the weapons , carefully concealed and wired to a central control point .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
Italy employed man - portable flamethrowers and L3 Lf flame tanks during the Second Italo - Abyssinian War of 1935 to 1936 , during the Spanish Civil War , and during World War II .
The L3 Lf flame tank was a CV-33 or CV-35 tankette with a flamethrower operating from the machine gun mount .
In the Northern Africa Theatre , the L3 Lf flame tank found little to no success .
An L6 Lf flametank was also developed using the L6/40 light tank platform .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
Japan used man - portable flamethrowers to clear fortified positions , in the Battle of Wake Island , Corregidor , Battle of the Tenaru on the Guadalcanal and Battle of Milne Bay .
ALLIES BRITAIN AND THE COMMONWEALTH Section::::Allies .
Section::::Britain and the Commonwealth .
The British World War II army flamethrowers , " Ack Packs " , had a doughnut - shaped fuel tank with a small spherical pressurizer gas tank in the middle .
As a result , some troops nicknamed them " lifebuoys " .
It was officially known as Flamethrower , Portable , No 2 .
Extensive plans were made in 1940 - 1941 by the Petroleum Warfare Department to use Flame fougasse static flame projectors in the event of an invasion , with around 50,000 barrel - based incendiary mines being deployed in 7,000 batteries throughout Southern England .
The British hardly used their man - portable systems , relying on Churchill Crocodile tanks in the European theatre .
These tanks proved very effective against German defensive positions , and caused official Axis protests against their use .
This flamethrower could produce a jet of flame exceeding .
There are documented instances of German units summarily executing any captured British flame - tank crews .
In the Pacific theatre , Australian forces used converted Matilda tanks , known as Matilda Frogs .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the Pacific theatre , The U.S. Army used M-1 & M-2 flamethrowers to clear stubborn Japanese resistance from prepared defenses , caves , and trenches .
Starting in New Guinea , through the closing stages on Guadalcanal and during the approach to and reconquest of the Philippines and then through the Okinawa campaign , the Army deployed hand held , man portable units .
Often flamethrower teams were made up of combat engineer units , later with troops of the chemical warfare service .
The Army fielded more Flamethrower units than the Marine Corps , and The Army 's Chemical Warfare Service pioneered tank mounted flamethrowers on Sherman tanks ( CWS - POA H-4 ) .
All the flamethrower tanks on Okinawa were supplied and manned by Army troops and often supported Marine infantry .
Many of the first Marine flamerthrower units were trained by Army specialists in Hawaii and other places in the South Pacific .
The U.S. Army used flamethrowers in Europe in much smaller numbers , though they were available for special employments .
Flamethrowers were deployed during the Normandy landings in order to clear Axis fortifications .
Also , most boat teams on Omaha Beach included a two - man flamethrower team .
The Marine Corps used the backpack - type M2A1 - 7 flamethrower and M2 - 2 flamethrowers , also finding them useful in clearing Japanese trench and bunker complexes .
The first known USMC use of the man portable flamethrower was against the formidable defenses at Tarawa in Nov 1943 .
The Marines pioneered the use of Ronson equipped M-3 Stuart tanks in the Marianas .
These were known as SATAN flame tanks .
Though effective , they lacked the armor to safely engage fortifications and were phased out in favor of the better armored M4 Shermans .
Most Marine Flamethrower Shermans were of the Army Type ( CWS - POA or Chemical Warfare Service Pacific Ocean Area ) .
The Marines also deployed large Navy Flamethrowers in the cargo compartment of LVT-4 AMTRACs and used them on Peleliu .
Late in the war , both services operated LVT-4 & -5 amphibious Flametanks in limited numbers .
Both the Army and the Marines still used their infantry - portable systems despite the arrival of adapted Sherman tanks with the Ronson system ( cf .
flame tank ) .
In cases where the Japanese were installed in deep caves , the flames often consumed the available oxygen , suffocating the occupants .
Many Japanese troops interviewed
post war said they were terrified more by flamethrowers than any other American weapon .
Flame Thrower operators were often the first U.S. troops targeted .
SOVIET UNION Section::::Soviet Union .
The FOG-1 and 2 flamethrowers were stationary devices used in defense .
They could also be categorized as a projecting incendiary mine .
The FOG had only one cylinder of fuel , which was compressed using an explosive charge and projected through a nozzle .
The November 1944 issue of the US War Department Intelligence Bulletin refers to these ' Fougasse flame throwers ' being used in the Soviet defense of Stalingrad .
The FOG-1 was directly copied by the Germans as the Abwehrflammenwerfer 42 .
Unlike the flamethrowers of the other powers during World War II , the Soviets were the only ones to consciously attempt to camouflage their infantry flamethrowers .
With the ROKS-2 flamethrower this was done by disguising the flame projector as a standard issue rifle , such as the Mosin – Nagant , and the fuel tanks as a standard infantryman 's rucksack .
This was to try to stop the flamethrower operator from being specifically targeted by enemy fire .
This " rifle " had a working action which was used to cycle blank igniter cartridges .
AFTER 1945 Section::::After 1945 .
The United States Marines used flamethrowers in the Korean and Vietnam Wars .
The M132 Armored Flamethrower , an M113 armored personnel carrier with a mounted flame thrower was successfully used in the conflict .
Flamethrowers have not been in the U.S. arsenal since 1978 , when the Department of Defense unilaterally stopped using them :
the last American infantry flamethrower was the Vietnam - era M9 - 7 .
They have been deemed of questionable effectiveness in modern combat .
Despite some assertions , they are not generally banned , but as incendiary weapons they are subject to the usage prohibitions described under Protocol III of the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons .
USA army flamethrowers developed up to the M9 model .
In the M9 the propellant tank is a sphere below the left fuel tank and does not project backwards .
Non - flamethrower incendiary weapons remain in modern military arsenals .
Thermobaric weapons have been fielded in Afghanistan by the United States .
The USA and USSR both developed a rocket launcher specifically for the deployment of incendiary munitions , respectively the M202 FLASH and the RPO " Rys , " ancestor of the RPO - A Shmel .
In the last stages of the Troubles , during the mid-80s , the IRA smuggled a number of Soviet LPO-50 military flamethrowers ( supplied to them by the Libyan government ) into Northern Ireland .
They used a flamethrower , among other weapons , to storm a British Army permanent checkpoint in Derryard , near Rosslea , on 13 December 1989 .
Another IRA unit attacked a British Army watchtower , the Borucki sangar , with an improvised flamethrower towed by a tractor in Crossmaglen , on 12 November 1993 .
The device consisted of a manure spreader which doused the facility with fuel , ignited few seconds later by a small explosion .
A nine - meter - high fireball engulfed the tower .
The four Grenadier Guards inside were rescued by a Saxon armored vehicle .
PRIVATE OWNERSHIP Section::::Private ownership .
In the United States , private ownership of a flamethrower is not restricted by federal law .
Flamethrowers are legal in 48 states and restricted in California and Maryland .
In California , unlicensed possession of a flame - throwing device — statutorily defined as " any non - stationary and transportable device designed or intended to emit or propel a burning stream of combustible or flammable liquid a distance of at least 10 feet " H&W 12750 ( a)—is a misdemeanor punishable with a county jail term not exceeding one year OR with a fine not exceeding $ 10,000 ( CA H&W 12761 ) .
Licenses to use flamethrowers are issued by the State Fire Marshal , and they may use any criteria for issuing or not issuing that license which is deemed fit , but must publish those criteria in the California Code of Regulations , Title 11 , Section 970 et seq .
In the United Kingdom , flamethrowers are a " prohibited weapon " under section 5(1)(b ) of the Firearms Act 1968 and article 45(1)(f ) of the Firearms ( Northern Ireland ) Order 2004 and possession of a flamethrower would carry a sentence of up to ten years ' imprisonment .
In 1994 , a man attacked school pupils at Sullivan Upper School , just outside Belfast , with a home - made flamethrower .
A South African inventor brought the Blaster car mounted flamethrower to market in 1998 as a security device to defend against carjackers .
It has since been discontinued , with the inventor moving on to pocket - sized self - defence flamethrowers .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
Flamethrowers are occasionally used for igniting controlled burns for land management and agriculture .
For example , in the production of sugar cane , where canebrakes are burned to get rid of the dry dead leaves which clog harvesters , and incidentally kill any lurking venomous snakes .
More common , however , a driptorch or a flare ( fusee ) is used .
U.S. troops used flamethrowers on the streets of Washington , D.C.
( mentioned in a December 1998 article in the San Francisco Flier ) , as one of several clearance methods used for the surprisingly large amount of snow that fell before the presidential inauguration of John F. Kennedy .
A history article on the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers notes , " In the end , the task force employed hundreds of dump trucks , front - end loaders , sanders , plows , rotaries , and flamethrowers to clear the way " .
A squad armed with backpack flamethrowers had an important part in the 2012 Summer Paralympics closing ceremony .
They had one big tank each .
They could make a flame about 12 feet long .
In April 2014 it was reported that a North Korean government official , O Sang - Hon , Deputy Minister at the Ministry of Public Security was executed by flamethrower .
It has been known for police to fill a " flamethrower , " not with flammable liquid , but rather with tear gas dissolved in water as a riot - control device :
see Converted Flamethrower 40 .
SEE ALSO * Churchill Crocodile * Converted Flamethrower 40 ( used to shoot tear gas dissolved in water )
* Dragon 's Breath * Early thermal weapons
* Flame gun *
Flame fougasse *
Huo Long Jing
* List of flamethrowers * Livens Large Gallery Flame Projector
*
M202A1 FLASH * Meng Huo
You
* Petroleum Warfare Department
* Technology of Song Dynasty
NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS * First World War.com :
Weapons of War :
Flamethrowers * Weapons of the World War II gyrene : Flamethrowers * Howstuffworks
" How Flamethrowers Work " * Jaeger Platoon : Portable flame - throwers * A history of flamethrowers
* Image of flamethrower in use * Images , including a tank - mounted flamethrower 's nozzle
*
The Pen Huo Qi * History and images of Australian flamethrowers * WWII German army flamethrowers * Modern Russian Flamethrowers , page in Russian * USA - type flamethrower in use
* M42B1 Flamethrower Sherman Tank at U.S. Veterans Memorial Museum