LYMPHOMA Lymphoma is a group of blood cancers that develop from lymphocytes ( a type of white blood cell ) .
The name often refers to just the cancerous versions rather than all such tumors .
Signs and symptoms may include enlarged lymph nodes , fever , drenching sweats , unintended weight loss , itching , and constantly feeling tired .
The enlarged lymph nodes are usually painless .
The sweats are most common at night .
There are dozens of subtypes of lymphomas .
The two main categories of lymphomas are Hodgkin 's lymphomas ( HL ) and the non - Hodgkin lymphomas ( NHL ) .
The World Health Organization ( WHO ) includes two other categories as types of lymphoma : multiple myeloma and immunoproliferative diseases .
About 90 % of lymphomas are non - Hodgkin lymphomas .
Lymphomas and leukemias are a part of the broader group of tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues .
Risk factors for Hodgkin lymphoma include infection with Epstein – Barr virus and a history of the disease in the family .
Risk factors for common types of non - Hodgkin lymphomas include autoimmune diseases , HIV / AIDS , infection with human T - lymphotropic virus , immunosuppressant medications , and some pesticides .
Eating large amounts of red meat and tobacco smoking may also increase the risk .
Diagnosis , if enlarged lymph nodes are present , is usually by lymph node biopsy .
Blood , urine , and bone marrow testing may also be useful in the diagnosis .
Medical imaging may then be done to determine if and where the cancer has spread .
Lymphoma most often spreads to the lungs , liver , and brain .
Treatment may involve one or more of the following : chemotherapy , radiation therapy , targeted therapy , and surgery .
In some non - Hodgkin lymphomas , an increased amount of protein produced by the lymphoma cells causes the blood to become so thick that plasmapheresis is performed to remove the protein .
Watchful waiting may be appropriate for certain types .
The outcome depends on the subtype with some being curable and treatment prolonging survival in most .
The five - year survival rate in the United States for all Hodgkin lymphoma subtypes is 85 % , while that for non - Hodgkin lymphomas is 69 % .
Worldwide , lymphomas developed in 566,000 people in 2012 and caused 305,000 deaths .
They make up 3–4 % of all cancers , making them as a group the seventh - most common form .
In children , they are the third - most common cancer .
They occur more often in the developed world than the developing world .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Lymphoma may present with certain nonspecific symptoms ; if the symptoms are persistent , an evaluation to determine their cause , including possible lymphoma , should be undertaken .
* Lymphadenopathy or swelling of lymph nodes , is the primary presentation in lymphoma .
* B symptoms ( systemic symptoms ) – can be associated with both Hodgkin lymphoma and non - Hodgkin lymphoma .
They consist of :
* Fever * Night sweats
* Weight loss
* Other symptoms : * Loss of appetite or anorexia * Fatigue * Respiratory distress or dyspnea
* Itching DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Lymphoma is definitively diagnosed by a lymph node biopsy , meaning a partial or total excision of a lymph node examined under the microscope .
This examination reveals histopathological features that may indicate lymphoma .
After lymphoma is diagnosed , a variety of tests may be carried out to look for specific features characteristic of different types of lymphoma .
These include : *
Immunophenotyping * Flow cytometry * Fluorescence in situ hybridization testing CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Lymphomas in the strict sense are any neoplasms of the lymphatic tissues ( lympho-
+ -oma ) .
The main classes are malignant neoplasms ( that is , cancers ) of the lymphocytes , a type of white blood cell that belongs to both the lymph and the blood and pervades both .
Thus , lymphomas and leukemias are both tumors of the hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues , and as lymphoproliferative disorders , lymphomas and lymphoid leukemias are closely related , to the point that some of them are unitary disease entities that can be called by either name ( for example adult T - cell leukemia / lymphoma ) .
Several classification systems have existed for lymphoma , which use histological and other findings to divide lymphoma into different categories .
The classification of a lymphoma can affect treatment and prognosis .
Classification systems generally classify lymphoma according to : * Whether or not it is a Hodgkin lymphoma
* Whether the cell that is replicating is a T cell or B cell * The site from which the cell arises Lymphoma can also spread to the central nervous system , often around the brain in the meninges , known as lymphomatous meningitis ( LM ) .
HODGKIN LYMPHOMA Section::::Hodgkin lymphoma .
Hodgkin lymphoma accounts for about 15 % of lymphomas .
It differs from other forms of lymphoma in its prognosis and several pathological characteristics .
A division into Hodgkin and non - Hodgkin lymphomas is used in several of the older classification systems .
A Hodgkin lymphoma is marked by the presence of a type of cell called the Reed – Sternberg cell .
NON - HODGKIN LYMPHOMAS Section::::Non - Hodgkin lymphomas .
Non - Hodgkin lymphomas , which are defined as being all lymphomas except Hodgkin lymphoma , are more common than Hodgkin lymphoma .
A wide variety of lymphomas are in this class , and the causes , the types of cells involved , and the prognosis vary by type .
The incidence of non - Hodgkin lymphoma increases with age .
It is further divided into several subtypes .
EPSTEIN - BARR
VIRUS - ASSOCIATED LYMPHOPROLIFERATIVE DISEASES
Section::::Epstein - Barr virus - associated lymphoproliferative diseases .
Epstein - Barr virus - associated lymphoproliferative diseases are a group of benign , pre - malignant , and malignant diseases of lymphoid cells , i.e. B cells , T cells , NK cells , and histiocytic - dendritic cells in which one or more of these cell types is infected with the Epstein - Barr virus ( EBV ) .
The virus may be responsible for the development and/or progression of these diseases .
In addition to EBV - positive Hodgkin lymphomas , the World Health Organization ( 2016 ) includes the following lymphomas , when associated with EBV infection , in this group of diseases : Burkitt lymphoma ; large B cell lymphoma , not otherwise specified ; diffuse large B cell lymphoma associated with chronic inflammation ; fibrin - associated diffuse large cell lymphoma ; primary effusion lymphoma ; plasmablastic lymphoma ; extranodal NK / T cell lymphoma , nasal type ; peripheral T cell lymphoma , not otherwise specified ; angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma ; follicular T cell lymphoma ; and systemic T cell lymphoma of childhood .
WHO CLASSIFICATION Section::::WHO classification .
The WHO classification , published in 2001 and updated in 2008 , is based upon the foundations laid within the " revised European - American lymphoma classification " ( REAL ) .
This system groups lymphomas by cell type ( i.e. the normal cell type that most resembles the tumor ) and defining phenotypic , molecular , or cytogenetic characteristics .
The five groups are shown in the table .
Hodgkin lymphoma is considered separately within the WHO and preceding classifications , although it is recognized as being a tumor of , albeit markedly abnormal , lymphocytes of mature B cell lineage .
Of the many forms of lymphoma , some are categorized as indolent ( e.g. small lymphocytic lymphoma ) , compatible with a long life even without treatment , whereas other forms are aggressive ( e.g. Burkitt 's lymphoma ) , causing rapid deterioration and death .
However , most of the aggressive lymphomas respond well to treatment and are curable .
The prognosis , therefore , depends on the correct diagnosis and classification of the disease , which is established after examination of a biopsy by a pathologist ( usually a hematopathologist ) .
PREVIOUS CLASSIFICATIONS
Section::::Previous classifications .
Several previous classifications have been used , including Rappaport 1956 , Lennert / Kiel 1974 , BNLI , Working formulation ( 1982 ) , and REAL ( 1994 ) .
The Working formulation of 1982 was a classification of non - Hodgkin lymphoma .
It excluded the Hodgkin lymphomas and divided the remaining lymphomas into four grades ( low , intermediate , high , and miscellaneous ) related to prognosis , with some further subdivisions based on the size and shape of affected cells .
This purely histological classification included no information about cell surface markers , or genetics , and it made no distinction between T - cell lymphomas and B - cell lymphomas .
It was widely accepted at the time of its publication , but is now obsolete .
It is still used by some cancer agencies for compilation of lymphoma statistics and historical rate comparisons .
In 1994 , the Revised European - American Lymphoma ( REAL ) classification applied immunophenotypic and genetic features in identifying distinct clinicopathologic entities among all the lymphomas except Hodgkin lymphoma .
For coding purposes , the ICD - O ( codes 9590–9999 ) and ICD-10 ( codes C81-C96 ) are available .
STAGING
Section::::Staging .
After a diagnosis and before treatment , a cancer is staged .
This refers to determining if the cancer has spread , and if so , whether locally or to distant sites .
Staging is reported as a grade between I ( confined ) and IV ( spread ) .
Staging is carried out because the stage of a cancer impacts its prognosis and treatment .
The Ann Arbor staging system is routinely used for staging of both HL and NHL .
In this staging system , I represents a localised disease contained within a lymph node group , II represents the presence of lymphoma in two or more lymph nodes groups , III represents spread of the lymphoma to lymph nodes groups on both sides of the diaphragm , and IV indicates spread to tissue outside the lymphatic system .
Different suffixes imply involvement of different organs , for example S for the spleen and H for the liver .
Extra - lymphatic involvement is expressed with the letter E.
In addition , the presence of B symptoms or their absence is expressed with B and A , respectively .
B symptoms are defined as the presence of one of three symptoms : Unintentional weightloss of 10 % body weight in the last 6 months , night sweats , and persistent fever of 38 ° C or more .
CT scan or PET scan imaging modalities are used to stage a cancer .
PET scan is advised for FDG avid lymphomas , for example Hodgkins Lymphoma as a staging tool that can even replace bone marrow biopsy .
For other lymphomas CT scan is recommended for staging .
Age and poor performance status are established poor prognostic factors , as well .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Prognoses and treatments are different for HL and between all the different forms of NHL , and also depend on the grade of tumour , referring to how quickly a cancer replicates .
Paradoxically , high - grade lymphomas are more readily treated and have better prognoses : Burkitt lymphoma , for example , is a high - grade tumour known to double within days , and is highly responsive to treatment .
Lymphomas may be curable if detected in early stages with modern treatment .
LOW - GRADE LYMPHOMAS Section::::Low - grade lymphomas .
Many low - grade lymphomas remain indolent for many years .
Treatment of the nonsymptomatic patient is often avoided .
In these forms of lymphoma , such as follicular lymphoma , watchful waiting is often the initial course of action .
This is carried out because the harms and risks of treatment outweigh the benefits .
If a low - grade lymphoma is becoming symptomatic , radiotherapy or chemotherapy are the treatments of choice ; although they do not cure the lymphoma , they can alleviate the symptoms , particularly painful lymphadenopathy .
Patients with these types of lymphoma can live near - normal lifespans , but the disease is incurable .
Some centers advocate the use of single agent rituximab in the treatment of follicular lymphoma rather than the wait and watch approach .
Watchful waiting is not a good strategy for all patients , as it leads to significant distress and anxiety in some patients .
It has been equated with watch and worry .
HIGH - GRADE LYMPHOMAS Section::::High - grade lymphomas .
Treatment of some other , more aggressive , forms of lymphoma can result in a cure in the majority of cases , but the prognosis for patients with a poor response to therapy is worse .
Treatment for these types of lymphoma typically consists of aggressive chemotherapy , including the CHOP or R - CHOP regimen .
A number of people are cured with first - line chemotherapy .
Most relapses occur within the first two years , and the relapse risk drops significantly thereafter .
For people who relapse , high - dose chemotherapy followed by autologous stem cell transplantation is a proven approach .
HODGKIN LYMPHOMA Section::::Hodgkin lymphoma .
Hodgkin lymphoma typically is treated with radiotherapy alone , as long as it is localized .
Advanced Hodgkin disease requires systemic chemotherapy , sometimes combined with radiotherapy .
Chemotherapy used includes the ABVD regimen , which is commonly used in the United States .
Other regimens used in the management of Hodgkin lymphoma include BEACOPP and Stanford V. Considerable controversy exists regarding the use of ABVD or BEACOPP .
Briefly , both regimens are effective , but BEACOPP is associated with more toxicity .
Encouragingly , a significant number of people who relapse after ABVD can still be salvaged by stem cell transplant .
PALLIATIVE CARE Section::::Palliative care .
Palliative care , a specialized medical care focused on the symptoms , pain , and stress of a serious illness , is recommended by multiple national cancer treatment guidelines as an accompaniment to curative treatments for people suffering from lymphoma .
It is used to address both the direct symptoms of lymphoma and many unwanted side effects that arise from treatments .
Palliative care can be especially helpful for children who develop lymphoma , helping both children and their families deal with the physical and emotional symptoms of the disease .
For these reasons , palliative care is especially important for patients requiring bone marrow transplants .
PROGNOSIS EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Lymphoma is the most common form of hematological malignancy , or " blood cancer " , in the developed world .
Taken together , lymphomas represent 5.3 % of all cancers ( excluding simple basal cell and squamous cell skin cancers ) in the United States and 55.6 % of all blood cancers .
According to the U.S. National Institutes of Health , lymphomas account for about 5 % , and Hodgkin lymphoma in particular accounts for less than 1 % of all cases of cancer in the United States .
Because the whole system is part of the body 's immune system , patients with a weakened immune system such as from HIV infection or from certain drugs or medication also have a higher incidence of lymphoma .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Thomas Hodgkin published the first description of lymphoma in 1832 , specifically of the form named after him .
Since then , many other forms of lymphoma have been described .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
The two types of lymphoma research are clinical or translational research and basic research .
Clinical / translational research focuses on studying the disease in a defined and generally immediately patient - applicable way , such as testing a new drug in patients .
Studies may focus on effective means of treatment , better ways of treating the disease , improving the quality of life for patients , or appropriate care in remission or after cures .
Hundreds of clinical trials are being planned or conducted at any given time .
Basic science research studies the disease process at a distance , such as seeing whether a suspected carcinogen can cause healthy cells to turn into lymphoma cells in the laboratory or how the DNA changes inside lymphoma cells as the disease progresses .
The results from basic research studies are generally less immediately useful to patients with the disease , but can improve scientists ' understanding of lymphoma and form the foundation for future , more effective treatments .
OTHER ANIMALS
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS