FRENCH FIRST REPUBLIC
In the history of France , the First Republic ( French : Première République ) , officially the French Republic ( République française ) , was founded on 22 September 1792 during the French Revolution .
The First Republic lasted until the declaration of the First Empire in 1804 under Napoleon , although the form of the government changed several times .
This period was characterized by the fall of the monarchy , the establishment of the National Convention and the Reign of Terror , the Thermidorian Reaction and the founding of the Directory , and , finally , the creation of the Consulate and Napoleon 's rise to power .
END OF THE MONARCHY IN FRANCE
Section::::End of the monarchy in France .
Under the Legislative Assembly , which was in power before the proclamation of the First Republic , France was engaged in war with Prussia and Austria .
In July 1792 , the Duke of Brunswick , commanding general of the Austro – Prussian Army , issued his Brunswick Manifesto , in which he threatened the destruction of Paris should any harm come to King Louis XVI of France .
The foreign threat exacerbated France 's political turmoil amid the French Revolution and deepened the passion and sense of urgency among the various factions .
In the violence of 10 August 1792 , citizens stormed the Tuileries Palace , killing six hundred of the King 's Swiss guards and insisting on the removal of the king .
A renewed fear of anti - revolutionary action prompted further violence , and in the first week of September 1792 , mobs of Parisians broke into the city 's prisons , killing over half of the prisoners .
This included nobles , clergymen , and political prisoners , but also numerous common criminals , such as prostitutes and petty thieves , many murdered in their cells — raped , stabbed , and slashed to death .
This became known as the September Massacres .
THE NATIONAL CONVENTION Section::::The National Convention .
As a result of the spike in public violence and the political instability of the constitutional monarchy , a party of six members of France 's Legislative Assembly was assigned the task of overseeing elections .
The resulting Convention was founded with the dual purpose of abolishing the monarchy and drafting a new constitution .
The Convention 's first act , on 10 August 1792 , was to establish the French First Republic and officially strip the king of all political powers .
Citizen Louis Capet , by then a private citizen bearing his family name of Capet , was subsequently put on trial for crimes of high treason starting in December 1792 .
On 16 January 1793 he was convicted , and on 21 January , he was executed by guillotine .
Throughout the winter of 1792 and spring of 1793 , Paris was plagued by food riots and mass hunger .
The new Convention did little to remedy the problem until late spring of 1793 , occupied instead with matters of war .
Finally , on 6 April 1793 , the Convention created the Committee of Public Safety , and was given a monumental task : "
To deal with the radical movements of the Enragés , food shortages and riots , the revolt in the Vendée and in Brittany , recent defeats of its armies , and the desertion of its commanding general .
" Most notably , the Committee of Public Safety instated a policy of terror , and the guillotine began to fall on perceived enemies of the republic at an ever - increasing rate , beginning the period known today as the Reign of Terror .
Despite growing discontent with the National Convention as a ruling body , in June the Convention drafted the Constitution of 1793 , which was ratified by popular vote in early August .
However , the Committee of Public Safety was seen as an " emergency " government , and the rights guaranteed by the 1789 Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen and the new constitution were suspended under its control .
The Committee 's laws and policies took the revolution to unprecedented heights .
THE DIRECTORY Section::::The Directory .
After the arrest and execution of Robespierre in July 28 , 1794 , the Jacobin club was closed , and the surviving Girondins were reinstated .
A year later , the National Convention adopted the Constitution of the Year III .
They reestablished freedom of worship , began releasing large numbers of prisoners , and most importantly , initiated elections for a new legislative body .
On 3 November 1795 , the Directory was established .
Under this system , France was led by a bicameral Parliament , consisting of an upper chamber called the Council of Elders ( with 250 members ) and a lower chamber called the Council of Five Hundred ( with , accordingly , 500 members ) , and a collective Executive of five members called the Directory ( from which the historical period gets its name ) .
Due to internal instability , caused by hyperinflation of the paper monies called Assignats , and French military disasters in 1798 and 1799 , the Directory lasted only four years , until overthrown in 1799 .
THE CONSULATE Section::::The Consulate .
The period known as the French Consulate began with the coup of 18 Brumaire in 1799 .
Members of the Directory itself planned the coup , indicating clearly the failing power of the Directory .
Napoleon Bonaparte was a co - conspirator in the coup , and became head of the government as the First Consul .
He would later proclaim himself Emperor of the French , ending the First French Republic and ushering in the French First Empire .
SEE ALSO
* French Republican Calendar
* French Revolutionary Wars REFERENCES