ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS Alternation of generations ( also known as metagenesis ) is the type of life cycle that occurs in those plants and algae in the Archaeplastida and the Heterokontophyta that have distinct sexual haploid and asexual diploid stages .
In these groups , a multicellular gametophyte , which is haploid with n chromosomes , alternates with a multicellular sporophyte , which is diploid with 2n chromosomes , made up of n pairs .
A mature sporophyte produces spores by meiosis , a process which reduces the number of chromosomes to half , from 2n to n.
The haploid spores germinate and grow into a haploid gametophyte .
At maturity , the gametophyte produces gametes by mitosis , which does not alter the number of chromosomes .
Two gametes ( originating from different organisms of the same species or from the same organism ) fuse to produce a zygote , which develops into a diploid sporophyte .
This cycle , from gametophyte to gametophyte ( or equally from sporophyte to sporophyte ) , is the way in which all land plants and many algae undergo sexual reproduction .
The relationship between the sporophyte and gametophyte varies among different groups of plants .
In those algae which have alternation of generations , the sporophyte and gametophyte are separate independent organisms , which may or may not have a similar appearance .
In liverworts , mosses and hornworts , the sporophyte is less well developed than the gametophyte and is largely dependent on it .
Although moss and hornwort sporophytes can photosynthesise , they require additional photosynthate from the gametophyte to sustain growth and spore development and depend on it for supply of water , mineral nutrients and nitrogen .
By contrast , in all modern vascular plants the gametophyte is less well developed than the sporophyte , although their Devonian ancestors had gametophytes and sporophytes of approximately equivalent complexity .
In ferns the gametophyte is a small flattened autotrophic prothallus on which the young sporophyte is briefly dependent for its nutrition .
In flowering plants , the reduction of the gametophyte is much more extreme ; it consists of just a few cells which grow entirely inside the sporophyte .
Animals develop differently .
They directly produce haploid gametes .
No haploid spores capable of dividing are produced , so they do not have a haploid gametophyte alternating with a diploid sporophyte .
( Some insects have a sex - determining system whereby haploid males are produced from unfertilized eggs ; however the females are diploid . )
Life cycles of plants and algae with alternating haploid and diploid multicellular stages are referred to as diplohaplontic (
the equivalent terms haplodiplontic , diplobiontic or dibiontic are also in use ) .
Life cycles , such as those of animals , in which there is only a diploid multicellular stage are referred to as diplontic .
Life cycles in which there is only a haploid multicellular stage are referred to as haplontic .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
Alternation of generations is defined as the alternation of multicellular diploid and haploid forms in the organism 's life cycle , regardless of whether or not these forms are free - living .
In some species , such as the alga Ulva lactuca , the diploid and haploid forms are indeed both free - living independent organisms , essentially identical in appearance and therefore said to be isomorphic .
The free - swimming , haploid gametes form a diploid zygote which germinates into a multicellular diploid sporophyte .
The sporophyte produces free - swimming haploid spores by meiosis that germinate into haploid gametophytes .
However , in some other groups , either the sporophyte or the gametophyte is very much reduced and is incapable of free living .
For example , in all bryophytes the gametophyte generation is dominant and the sporophyte is dependent on it .
By contrast , in all modern vascular land plants the gametophytes are strongly reduced , although the fossil evidence indicates that they were derived from isomorphic ancestors .
In seed plants , the female gametophyte develops totally within the sporophyte which protects and nurtures it and the embryo sporophyte that it produces .
The pollen grains , which are the male gametophytes , are reduced to only a few cells ( just three cells in many cases ) .
Here the notion of two generations is less obvious ; as Bateman & Dimichele say " [ s]porophyte and gametophyte effectively function as a single organism " .
The alternative term ' alternation of phases ' may then be more appropriate .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Debates about alternation of generations in the early twentieth century can be confusing because various ways of classifying " generations " co - exist ( sexual vs. asexual , gametophyte vs. sporophyte , haploid vs. diploid , etc . ) .
Initially , Chamisso and Steenstrup described the succession of differently organized generations ( sexual and asexual ) in animals as " alternation of generations " , while studying the development of tunicates , cnidarians and trematode animals .
This phenomenon is also known as heterogamy .
Presently , the term " alternation of generations " is almost exclusively associated with the life cycles of plants , specifically with the alternation of haploid gametophytes and diploid sporophytes .
Wilhelm Hofmeister demonstrated the morphological alternation of generations in plants , between a spore - bearing generation ( sporophyte ) and a gamete - bearing generation ( gametophyte ) .
By that time , a debate emerged focusing on the origin of the asexual generation of land plants ( i.e. , the sporophyte ) and is conventionally characterized as a conflict between theories of antithetic ( Čelakovský , 1874 ) and homologous ( Pringsheim , 1876 ) alternation of generations .
Čelakovský coined the words sporophyte and gametophyte .
Eduard Strasburger ( 1874 ) discovered the alternation between diploid and haploid nuclear phases , also called cytological alternation of nuclear phases .
Although most often coinciding , morphological alternation and nuclear phases alternation are sometimes independent of one another , e.g. , in many red algae , the same nuclear phase may correspond to two diverse morphological generations .
In some ferns which lost sexual reproduction , there is no change in nuclear phase , but the alternation of generations is maintained .
ALTERNATION OF GENERATIONS IN PLANTS FUNDAMENTAL ELEMENTS Section::::Alternation of generations in plants .
Section::::Fundamental elements .
The diagram above shows the fundamental elements of the alternation of generations in plants .
The many variations found in different groups of plants are described by use of these concepts later in the article .
Starting from the right of the diagram , the processes involved are as follows : * Two single - celled haploid gametes , each containing n unpaired chromosomes , fuse to form a single - celled diploid zygote , which now contains n pairs of chromosomes , i.e. 2n chromosomes in total .
* The single - celled diploid zygote germinates , dividing by the normal process ( mitosis ) , which maintains the number of chromosomes at 2n .
The result is a multi - cellular diploid organism , called the sporophyte ( because at maturity it produces spores ) .
* When it reaches maturity , the sporophyte produces one or more sporangia ( singular : sporangium ) which are the organs that produce diploid spore mother cells ( sporocytes ) .
These divide by a special process ( meiosis ) that reduces the number of chromosomes by a half .
This initially results in four single - celled haploid spores , each containing n unpaired chromosomes .
* The single - celled haploid spore germinates , dividing by the normal process ( mitosis ) , which maintains the number of chromosomes at n.
The result is a multi - cellular haploid organism , called the gametophyte ( because it produces gametes at maturity ) .
* When it reaches maturity , the gametophyte produces one or more gametangia ( singular : gametangium ) which are the organs that produce haploid gametes .
At least one kind of gamete possesses some mechanism for reaching another gamete in order to fuse with it .
The ' alternation of generations ' in the life cycle is thus between a diploid ( 2n ) generation of sporophytes and a haploid ( n ) generation of gametophytes .
The situation is quite different from that in animals , where the fundamental process is that a diploid ( 2n ) individual directly produces haploid ( n ) gametes by meiosis .
Spores ( i.e. haploid cells which are able to undergo mitosis ) are not produced , so neither is an asexual multi - cellular generation that alternates with a sexual multi - cellular generation .
( Some insects have haploid males that develop from unfertilized eggs , but the females are all diploid . )
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
The diagram shown above is a good representation of the life cycle of some multi - cellular algae ( e.g. the genus Cladophora ) which have sporophytes and gametophytes of almost identical appearance and which do not have different kinds of spores or gametes .
However , there are many possible variations on the fundamental elements of a life cycle which has alternation of generations .
Each variation may occur separately or in combination , resulting in a bewildering variety of life cycles .
The terms used by botanists in describing these life cycles can be equally bewildering .
As Bateman and Dimichele say " [ ... ] the alternation of generations has become a terminological morass ; often , one term represents several concepts or one concept is represented by several terms . "
Possible variations are : * Relative importance of the sporophyte and the gametophyte .
* Equal ( homomorphy or isomorphy).Filamentous algae of the genus Cladophora , which are predominantly found in fresh water , have diploid sporophytes and haploid gametophytes which are externally indistinguishable .
No living land plant has equally dominant sporophytes and gametophytes , although some theories of the evolution of alternation of generations suggest that ancestral land plants did .
* Unequal ( heteromorphy or anisomorphy ) .
*
Dominant gametophyte ( gametophytic).In liverworts , mosses and hornworts , the dominant form is the haploid gametophyte .
The diploid sporophyte is not capable of an independent existence , gaining most of its nutrition from the parent gametophyte , and having no chlorophyll when mature .
* Dominant sporophyte ( sporophytic).In ferns , both the sporophyte and the gametophyte are capable of living independently , but the dominant form is the diploid sporophyte .
The haploid gametophyte is much smaller and simpler in structure .
In seed plants , the gametophyte is even more reduced ( at the minimum to only three cells ) , gaining all its nutrition from the sporophyte .
The extreme reduction in the size of the gametophyte and its retention within the sporophyte means that when applied to seed plants the term ' alternation of generations ' is somewhat misleading : " [ s]porophyte and gametophyte effectively function as a single organism " .
Some authors have preferred the term ' alternation of phases ' .
* Differentiation of the gametes .
*
Both gametes the same ( isogamy).Like other species of Cladophora , C. callicoma has flagellated gametes which are identical in appearance and ability to move .
* Gametes of two distinct sizes ( anisogamy ) .
* Both of similar motility .
Species of Ulva , the sea lettuce , have gametes which all have two flagella and so are motile .
However they are of two sizes : larger ' female ' gametes and smaller ' male ' gametes .
* One large and sessile , one small and motile ( oogamy ) .
The larger sessile megagametes are eggs ( ova ) , and smaller motile microgametes are sperm ( spermatozoa , spermatozoids ) .
The degree of motility of the sperm may be very limited ( as in the case of flowering plants ) but all are able to move towards the sessile eggs .
When ( as is almost always the case ) the sperm and eggs are produced in different kinds of gametangia , the sperm - producing ones are called antheridia ( singular antheridium ) and the egg - producing ones archegonia ( singular archegonium ) .
* Antheridia and archegonia occur on the same gametophyte , which is then called monoicous .
( Many sources , including those concerned with bryophytes , use the term ' monoecious ' for this situation and ' dioecious ' for the opposite .
Here ' monoecious ' and ' dioecious ' are used only for sporophytes.)The liverwort Pellia epiphylla has the gametophyte as the dominant generation .
It is monoicous : the small reddish sperm - producing antheridia are scattered along the midrib while the egg - producing archegonia grow nearer the tips of divisions of the plant .
* Antheridia and archegonia occur on different gametophytes , which are then called dioicous .
The moss Mnium hornum has the gametophyte as the dominant generation .
It is dioicous : male plants produce only antheridia in terminal rosettes , female plants produce only archegonia in the form of stalked capsules .
Seed plant gametophytes are also dioicous .
However , the parent sporophyte may be monoecious , producing both male and female gametophytes or dioecious , producing gametophytes of one gender only .
Seed plant gametophytes are extremely reduced in size ; the archegonium consists only of a small number of cells , and the entire male gametophyte may be represented by only two cells .
* Differentiation of the spores .
*
All spores the same size ( homospory or isospory).Horsetails ( species of Equisetum ) have spores which are all of the same size .
* Spores of two distinct sizes ( heterospory or anisospory ) : larger megaspores and smaller microspores .
When the two kinds of spore are produced in different kinds of sporangia , these are called megasporangia and microsporangia .
A megaspore often ( but not always ) develops at the expense of the other three cells resulting from meiosis , which abort .
* Megasporangia and microsporangia occur on the same sporophyte , which is then called monoecious .
Most flowering plants fall into this category .
Thus the flower of a lily contains six stamens ( the microsporangia ) which produce microspores which develop into pollen grains ( the microgametophytes ) , and three fused carpels which produce integumented megasporangia ( ovules )
each of which produces a megaspore which develops inside the megasporangium to produce the megagametophyte .
In other plants , such as hazel , some flowers have only stamens , others only carpels , but the same plant ( i.e. sporophyte ) has both kinds of flower and so is monoecious .
* Megasporangia and microsporangia occur on different sporophytes , which are then called dioecious .
An individual tree of the European holly ( Ilex aquifolium ) produces either ' male ' flowers which have only functional stamens ( microsporangia ) producing microspores which develop into pollen grains ( microgametophytes ) or ' female ' flowers which have only functional carpels producing integumented megasporangia ( ovules ) that contain a megaspore that develops into a multicellular megagametophyte .
There are some correlations between these variations , but they are just that , correlations , and not absolute .
For example , in flowering plants , microspores ultimately produce microgametes ( sperm ) and megaspores ultimately produce megagametes ( eggs ) .
However , in ferns and their allies there are groups with undifferentiated spores but differentiated gametophytes .
For example , the fern Ceratopteris thalictrioides has spores of only one kind , which vary continuously in size .
Smaller spores tend to germinate into gametophytes which produce only sperm - producing antheridia .
A COMPLEX LIFE CYCLE Section::::A complex life cycle .
The diagram shows the alternation of generations in a species which is heteromorphic , sporophytic , oogametic , dioicous , heterosporic and dioecious .
A seed plant example might be a willow tree ( most species of the genus Salix are dioecious ) .
Starting in the centre of the diagram , the processes involved are : * An immobile egg , contained in the archegonium , fuses with a mobile sperm , released from an antheridium .
The resulting zygote is either ' male ' or ' female ' .
* A ' male ' zygote develops by mitosis into a microsporophyte , which at maturity produces one or more microsporangia .
Microspores develop within the microsporangium by meiosis .
In a willow ( like all seed plants ) the zygote first develops into an embryo microsporophyte within the ovule ( a megasporangium enclosed in one or more protective layers of tissue known as integument ) .
At maturity , these structures become the seed .
Later the seed is shed , germinates and grows into a mature tree .
A ' male ' willow tree ( a microsporophyte ) produces flowers with only stamens , the anthers of which are the microsporangia .
* Microspores germinate producing microgametophytes ; at maturity one or more antheridia are produced .
Sperm develop within the antheridia .
In a willow , microspores are not liberated from the anther ( the microsporangium ) , but develop into pollen grains ( microgametophytes ) within it .
The whole pollen grain is moved ( e.g. by an insect or by the wind ) to an ovule ( megagametophyte ) , where a sperm is produced which moves down a pollen tube to reach the egg .
* A ' female ' zygote develops by mitosis into a megasporophyte , which at maturity produces one or more megasporangia .
Megaspores develop within the megasporangium ; typically one of the four spores produced by meiosis gains bulk at the expense of the remaining three , which disappear .
'Female ' willow trees ( megasporophytes ) produce flowers with only carpels ( modified leaves that bear the megasporangia ) .
* Megaspores germinate producing megagametophytes ; at maturity one or more archegonia are produced .
Eggs develop within the archegonia .
The carpels of a willow produce ovules , megasporangia enclosed in integuments .
Within each ovule , a megaspore develops by mitosis into a megagametophyte .
An archegonium develops within the megagametophyte and produces an egg .
The whole of the gametophytic ' generation ' remains within the protection of the sporophyte except for pollen grains ( which have been reduced to just three cells contained within the microspore wall ) .
LIFE CYCLES OF DIFFERENT PLANT GROUPS Section::::Life cycles of different plant groups .
The term " plants " is taken here to mean the Archaeplastida , i.e. the glaucophytes , red and green algae and land plants .
Alternation of generations occurs in almost all multicellular red and green algae , both freshwater forms ( such as Cladophora ) and seaweeds ( such as Ulva ) .
In most , the generations are homomorphic ( isomorphic ) and free - living .
Some species of red algae have a complex triphasic alternation of generations , in which there is a gametophyte phase and two distinct sporophyte phases .
For further information , see Red algae : Reproduction .
Land plants all have heteromorphic ( anisomorphic ) alternation of generations , in which the sporophyte and gametophyte are distinctly different .
All bryophytes , i.e. liverworts , mosses and hornworts , have the gametophyte generation as the most conspicuous .
As an illustration , consider a monoicous moss .
Antheridia and archegonia develop on the mature plant ( the gametophyte ) .
In the presence of water , the biflagellate sperm from the antheridia swim to the archegonia and fertilisation occurs , leading to the production of a diploid sporophyte .
The sporophyte grows up from the archegonium .
Its body comprises a long stalk topped by a capsule within which spore - producing cells undergo meiosis to form haploid spores .
Most mosses rely on the wind to disperse these spores , although Splachnum sphaericum is entomophilous , recruiting insects to disperse its spores .
For further information , see Liverwort : Life cycle , Moss :
Life cycle , Hornwort : Life cycle .
In ferns and their allies , including clubmosses and horsetails , the conspicuous plant observed in the field is the diploid sporophyte .
The haploid spores develop in sori on the underside of the fronds and are dispersed by the wind ( or in some cases , by floating on water ) .
If conditions are right , a spore will germinate and grow into a rather inconspicuous plant body called a prothallus .
The haploid prothallus does not resemble the sporophyte , and as such ferns and their allies have a heteromorphic alternation of generations .
The prothallus is short - lived , but carries out sexual reproduction , producing the diploid zygote that then grows out of the prothallus as the sporophyte .
For further information , see Fern : Life cycle .
In the spermatophytes , the seed plants , the sporophyte is the dominant multicellular phase ; the gametophytes are strongly reduced in size and very different in morphology .
The entire gametophyte generation , with the sole exception of pollen grains ( microgametophytes ) , is contained within the sporophyte .
The life cycle of a dioecious flowering plant ( angiosperm ) , the willow , has been outlined in some detail in an earlier section ( A complex life cycle ) .
The life cycle of a gymnosperm is similar .
However , flowering plants have in addition a phenomenon called ' double fertilization ' .
Two sperm nuclei from a pollen grain ( the microgametophyte ) , rather than a single sperm , enter the archegonium of the megagametophyte ; one fuses with the egg nucleus to form the zygote , the other fuses with two other nuclei of the gametophyte to form ' endosperm ' , which nourishes the developing embryo .
For further information , see Double fertilization .
EVOLUTIONARY EMERGENCE OF THE DOMINANT DIPLOID PHASE
Section::::Evolutionary emergence of the dominant diploid phase .
It has been proposed that the basis for the emergence of the diploid phase of the life cycle ( sporophyte ) as the dominant phase ( e.g. as in vascular plants ) is that diploidy allows masking of the expression of deleterious mutations through genetic complementation .
Thus if one of the parental genomes in the diploid cells contained mutations leading to defects in one or more gene products , these deficiencies could be compensated for by the other parental genome ( which nevertheless may have its own defects in other genes ) .
As the diploid phase was becoming predominant , the masking effect likely allowed genome size , and hence information content , to increase without the constraint of having to improve accuracy of DNA replication .
The opportunity to increase information content at low cost was advantageous because it permitted new adaptations to be encoded .
This view has been challenged , with evidence showing that selection is no more effective in the haploid than in the diploid phases of the lifecycle of mosses and angiosperms .
SIMILAR PROCESSES IN OTHER ORGANISMS RHIZARIA Section::::Similar processes in other organisms .
Section::::Rhizaria .
Some organisms currently classified in the clade Rhizaria and thus not plants in the sense used here , exhibit alternation of generations .
Foraminifera undergo a heteromorphic alternation of generations between haploid gamont and diploid agamont forms .
The single - celled haploid organism is typically much larger than the diploid organism .
FUNGI Section::::Fungi .
Fungal mycelia are typically haploid .
When mycelia of different mating types meet , they produce two multinucleate ball - shaped cells , which join via a " mating bridge " .
Nuclei move from one mycelium into the other , forming a heterokaryon ( meaning " different nuclei " ) .
This process is called plasmogamy .
Actual fusion to form diploid nuclei is called karyogamy , and may not occur until sporangia are formed .
Karogamy produces a diploid zygote , which is a short - lived sporophyte that soon undergoes meiosis to form haploid spores .
When the spores germinate , they develop into new mycelia .
SLIME MOULDS
Section::::Slime moulds .
The life cycle of slime moulds is very similar to that of fungi .
Haploid spores germinate to form swarm cells or myxamoebae .
These fuse in a process referred to as plasmogamy and karyogamy to form a diploid zygote .
The zygote develops into a plasmodium , and the mature plasmodium produces , depending on the species , one to many fruiting bodies containing haploid spores .
ANIMALS Section::::Animals .
Alternation between a multicellular diploid and a multicellular haploid generation is never encountered in animals .
In some animals , there is an alternation between parthenogenic and sexually reproductive phases ( heterogamy ) .
Both phases are diploid .
This has sometimes been called " alternation of generations " , but is quite different .
In some other animals , such as hymenopterans , males are haploid and females diploid , but this is always the case rather than there being an alternation between distinct generations .
SEE ALSO * Evolutionary history of plants#life cycles : Evolutionary origin of the alternation of phases
* Ploidy * Biological life cycle * Apomixis NOTES AND REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY