THE GREEN MILE ( NOVEL )
The Green Mile is a 1996 serial novel by American writer Stephen King .
It tells the story of death row supervisor Paul Edgecombe 's encounter with John Coffey , an unusual inmate who displays inexplicable healing and empathetic abilities .
The serial novel was originally released in six volumes before being republished as a single - volume work .
The book is an example of magical realism .
PUBLICATION HISTORY Section::::Publication history .
The Green Mile was first published in six low - priced paperback volumes .
The first , subtitled
The Two Dead Girls was published on March 28 , 1996 , with new volumes following monthly until the final volume , Coffey on the Mile , was released on August 29 , 1996 .
The novel was republished as a single paperback volume on May 5 , 1997 .
On October 3 , 2000 , the book was published in its first hardcover edition ( ) .
In 2007 , Subterranean Press released a 10th anniversary edition of the novel in three different versions , each mimicking the original six - volume release : the Gift Edition , limited to 2,000 copies , containing six unsigned hardcover volumes of each separate part , housed in a slipcase ; the Limited Edition , limited to 148 numbered copies , and signed by Stephen King , housed in a slipcase ; and the Lettered Edition , limited to 52 lettered copies , and signed by Stephen King , housed in a traycase .
Every edition contained new illustrations by Mark Geyer , the novel 's original illustrator .
Each version had its own design , and cost $ 150 , $ 900 , and $ 2,500 , respectively .
There were other versions published as well , including a " pocketbook " sized hardcover by Paw Prints ( ) .
VOLUME LIST PLOT Section::::Plot .
A first - person narrative told by Paul Edgecombe , the novel switches between Paul as an old man in the Georgia Pines nursing home sharing his story with fellow resident Elaine Connelly in 1996 , and his time in 1932 as the block supervisor of the Cold Mountain Penitentiary death row , nicknamed " The Green Mile " for the color of the floor 's linoleum .
This year marks the arrival of John Coffey , a tall powerfully built black man who has been convicted of raping and murdering two small white girls .
During his time on the Mile , John interacts with fellow prisoners Eduard " Del " Delacroix , a Cajun arsonist , rapist , and murderer , and William Wharton ( " Billy the Kid " to himself , " Wild Bill " to the guards ) , a wild - acting and dangerous multiple murderer who is determined to make as much trouble as he can before he is executed .
Other inhabitants include Arlen Bitterbuck , a Native American convicted of killing a man in a fight over a pair of boots ( also the first character to die in the electric chair ) ; Arthur Flanders , a real estate executive who killed his father to perpetrate insurance fraud , and whose sentence is eventually commuted to life imprisonment ( while serving his sentence , he is killed by another inmate in the laundry room ) ; and Mr. Jingles , a mouse , to whom Del teaches various tricks .
Paul and the other guards are irritated throughout the book by Percy Wetmore , a sadistic guard who enjoys antagonizing the prisoners .
The other guards have to be civil to him despite their dislike of him because he is the nephew of the Governor 's wife .
When Percy is offered a position at the nearby Briar Ridge psychiatric hospital as a secretary , Paul thinks they are finally rid of him .
However , Percy refuses to leave until he is allowed to supervise an execution , so Paul hesitantly allows him to run Del 's .
Percy deliberately avoids soaking a sponge in brine that is supposed to be tucked inside the electrode cap to ensure a quick death in the electric chair .
When the switch is thrown , the current causes Del to catch fire in the chair and suffer a prolonged , agonizing demise .
Over time , Paul realizes that John possesses inexplicable healing abilities , which he uses to cure Paul 's urinary tract infection and revive Mr. Jingles after Percy stomps on him .
Simple - minded and shy , John is very empathic and sensitive to the thoughts and feelings of others around him .
One night , the guards drug Wharton , then put a straitjacket on Percy and lock him in the padded restraint room so that they can smuggle John out of the prison and take him to the home of Warden Hal Moores .
Hal 's wife Melinda has an inoperable brain tumor , which John cures .
When they return to the Mile , John passes the " disease " from Melinda into Percy , causing him to go mad and shoot Wharton to death before falling into a catatonic state from which he never recovers .
Percy is committed to Briar Ridge .
Paul 's long - simmering suspicions that John is innocent are proven right when he discovers that it was actually William Wharton who raped and killed the twin sisters and that John was trying to revive them .
Later John tells Paul what he saw when Wharton grabbed his arm one time , how Wharton had coerced the sisters to be silent by threatening to kill one if the other made a noise , using their love for each other .
Paul is unsure how to help John , but John tells him not to worry , as he is ready to die anyway , wanting to escape the cruelty of the world .
John 's execution is the last one in which Paul participates .
He introduces Mr. Jingles to Elaine just before the mouse dies , having lived 64 years past these events , and explains that those healed by John gained an unnaturally long lifespan .
Elaine dies shortly after , never learning how Paul 's wife died in his arms immediately after they suffered a bus accident , and that he then saw John Coffey 's ghost watching him from an overpass .
Paul seems to be all alone , now 104 years old , and wondering how much longer he will live .
CHARACTERS
Paul Edgecombe
Brutus " Brutal " Howell John Coffey Percy
Wetmore William " Wild Bill
" Wharton Eduard " Del " Delacroix Mr. Jingles / Steamboat Willie MINOR CHARACTERS Arthur
" The President " Flanders Arlen " The Chief " Bitterbuck Janice Edgecombe Hal Moores Melinda Moores
Curtis Anderson Dean Stanton
Harry Terwilliger Bill Dodge
Jack Van Hay
Toot - Toot Burt Hammersmith Elaine
Connelly Homer Cribus Rob McGee Brad Dolan Kathe and Cora Detterick Klaus and Marjorie Detterick
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Green Mile won the Bram Stoker Award for Best Novel in 1996 .
In 1997 , The Green Mile was nominated as Best Novel for the British Fantasy Award and the Locus Award .
In 2003 the book was listed on the BBC 's The Big Read poll of the UK 's " best - loved novel . "
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
Frank Darabont adapted the novel into a screenplay for a feature film of the same name .
Released in 1999 , the film was directed by Darabont and starred Tom Hanks as Paul Edgecombe and Michael Clarke Duncan as John Coffey .
The setting is changed from 1932 to 1935 in order to include the film Top Hat , which does not appear in the book .
REFERENCES