KITTEN
A kitten is a juvenile cat .
After being born , kittens are totally dependent on their mother for survival and they do not normally open their eyes until after seven to ten days .
After about two weeks , kittens quickly develop and begin to explore the world outside the nest .
After a further three to four weeks , they begin to eat solid food and grow adult teeth .
Domestic kittens are highly social animals and usually enjoy human companionship .
ETYMOLOGY AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Etymology and development .
The word " kitten " derives from the Middle English word kitoun , which in turn came from the Old French chitoun or cheton .
Juvenile big cats are called " cubs " rather than kittens ; either term ( but usually more commonly " kitten " ) may be used for the young of smaller wild felids , such as ocelots , caracals , and lynxes .
A feline litter usually consists of two to five kittens born after a gestation lasting between 64 and 67 days , with an average length of 66 days , but from one to more than ten are known .
Kittens emerge in a sac called the amnion , which is bitten off and eaten by the mother cat .
For the first several weeks , kittens can not urinate or defecate without being stimulated by their mother .
They also can not regulate their body temperature for the first three weeks , so kittens born in temperatures less than can die from hypothermia if their mother does not keep them warm .
The mother 's milk is very important for the kittens ' nutrition and proper growth .
This milk transfers antibodies to the kittens , which helps protect them against infectious disease .
Newborn kittens are unable to produce concentrated urine , and so have a very high requirement for fluids .
Kittens open their eyes about seven to ten days after birth .
At first , the retina is poorly developed and vision is poor .
Kittens can not see as well as adult cats until about ten weeks after birth .
Kittens develop very quickly from about two weeks of age until their seventh week .
Their coordination and strength improve .
They play - fight with their litter - mates and begin to explore the world outside the nest or den .
They learn to wash themselves and others as well as play hunting and stalking games , showing their inborn ability as predators .
These innate skills are developed by the kittens ' mother or other adult cats , who bring live prey to the nest .
Later , the adult cats demonstrate hunting techniques for the kittens to emulate .
As they reach three to four weeks old , the kittens are gradually weaned and begin to eat solid food , with weaning usually complete by six to eight weeks .
Kittens generally begin to lose their baby teeth around three months of age , and have a complete set of adult teeth by nine months .
Kittens live primarily on solid food after weaning , but usually continue to suckle from time to time until separated from their mothers .
Some mother cats will scatter their kittens as early as three months of age , while others continue to look after them until they approach sexual maturity .
The sex of kittens is usually easy to determine at birth .
By six to eight weeks they are harder to sex because of the growth of fur in the genital region .
The male 's urethral opening is round , whereas the female 's urethral opening is a slit .
Another marked difference is the distance between anus and urethral opening , which is greater in males than in females .
Kittens are highly social animals and spend most of their waking hours interacting with available animals and playing on their own .
Play with other kittens peaks in the third or fourth month after birth , with more solitary hunting and stalking play peaking later , at about five months .
Kittens are vulnerable because they like to find dark places to hide , sometimes with fatal results if they are not watched carefully .
Cats have a habit of seeking refuge under or inside cars or on top of car tires during stormy or cold weather .
This often leads to broken bones , burns , heat stroke , damaged internal organs or death .
Domestic kittens are commonly sent to new homes at six to eight weeks of age , but it has been suggested that being with their mother and litter - mates from six to twelve weeks is important for a kitten 's social and behavioural development .
Usually , breeders and foster / rescue homes will not sell or adopt out a kitten that is younger than twelve weeks .
In many jurisdictions , it is illegal to give away kittens younger than eight weeks of age .
Kittens generally reach sexual maturity at around seven months old .
A cat reaches full " adulthood " around one year of age .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
Domestic kittens in developed societies are usually vaccinated against common illnesses from two to three months of age .
The usual combination vaccination protects against feline viral rhinotracheitis ( FVR ) , feline calicivirus ( C ) , and feline panleukopenia ( P ) .
This FVRCP inoculation is usually given at eight , twelve , and sixteen weeks , and an inoculation against rabies may be given at sixteen weeks .
Kittens are usually spayed or neutered at seven months of age , but kittens may be neutered as young as seven weeks ( if large enough ) , especially in animal shelters .
Such early neutering does not appear to have any long - term health risks to cats , and may even be beneficial in male cats .
Kittens are commonly wormed against roundworms from about four weeks .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
Felines are carnivores and have adapted to animal - based diets and low carbohydrate inclusion .
Kittens are categorized in a growth life stage , and have high energy and protein requirements .
When feeding a kitten , it is often recommended to use highly digestible ingredients and various components to aid in development in order to produce a healthy adult .
In North America , diets certified by the Association of American Feed Control Officials ( AAFCO ) are accepted as adequate nutrition , thus kitten diets should be AAFCO approved to ensure full supplementation .
Key components of the diet are high fat content to meet caloric requirements of growth , high protein to meet requirements for muscle growth as well as supplementation of certain nutrients such as docosahexaenoic acid to benefit the development of the brain and optimization of cognition .
PRE - WEANING NUTRITION
ESTABLISHING IMMUNITY Section::::Pre - weaning nutrition .
Section::::Establishing immunity .
Part of the kitten 's immune system is the mucosal immune system , which is within the gastrointestinal tract .
The mucosal immune system is largely responsible for coordinating proper immune responses by tolerating innocuous antigens and attacking foreign pathogens .
In order to optimize kitten health and increase chances of survival , it is important to optimize the link between the gut - associated lymphoid tissue and the microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract .
Lasting health and longevity can be accomplished partly through proper nutrition and establishing a healthy gut from birth through utilizing colostrum .
Within the first 2 days after birth , kittens acquire passive immunity from their mother 's milk .
Milk within the first few days of parturition is called colostrum , and contains high concentrations of immunoglobulins .
These include immunoglobulin A and immunoglobulin G which cross the intestinal barrier of the neonate .
The immunoglobulins and growth factors found in the colostrum begin to establish and strengthen the weak immune system of the offspring .
Kittens are able to chew solid food around 5–6 weeks after birth , and it is recommended that 30 % of their diet should consist of solid food at this time .
The kitten remains on the mother 's milk until around eight weeks of age when weaning is complete and a diet of solid food is the primary food source .
POST - WEANING NUTRITION FAT Section::::Post - weaning nutrition .
Section::::Fat .
Up until approximately one year of age the kitten is undergoing a growth phase where energy requirements are up to 2.5 times higher than maintenance .
Pet nutritionists often suggest that a commercial cat food designed specifically for kittens should be offered beginning at 4 weeks of age .
Fat has a higher caloric value than carbohydrates and protein , supplying 8.5kcal / g .
The growing kitten requires arachidonic and linoleic acid which can be provided in omega-3 fatty acids .
Docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) is another vital nutrient that can be supplied through omega 3 fatty acid .
Addition of DHA to the diet benefits the cognition , brain and visual development of kittens .
PROTEIN Section::::Protein .
Cats are naturally carnivores and require high amounts of protein in the diet .
Kittens are undergoing growth and require high amounts of protein to provide essential amino acids that enable the growth of tissues and muscles .
It is recommended that kittens consume a diet containing approximately 30 % protein on a dry matter basis for proper growth .
Taurine is an essential amino acid found only in animal tissues and can not be produced in sufficient amounts by the cat .
As it is an indispensable amino acid , it must be provided exogenously through the diet at 10 mg / kg bodyweight / day .
Kittens deprived of taurine can experience poor growth and can result in retinal degeneration in cats .
CARBOHYDRATES Section::::Carbohydrates .
Felines are natural carnivores and do not intentionally consume large quantities of carbohydrates .
The domestic cat 's liver has adapted to the lack of carbohydrates in the diet by using amino acids to produce glucose to fuel the brain and other tissues .
Studies have shown that carbohydrate digestion in young kittens is much less effective than that of a mature feline with a developed gastrointestinal tract .
Highly digestible carbohydrates can be found in commercial kitten food as a source of additional energy as well as a source of fiber to stimulate the immature gut tissue .
Soluble fibre such as beet pulp is a common ingredient used as a fibrous stool hardener and has been proven to strengthen intestinal muscles and to thicken the gut mucosal layer to prevent diarrhea .
DIET COMPOSITION
AMINO ACIDS Section::::Diet Composition .
Section::::Amino Acids .
The lack of readily available glucose from the limited carbohydrates in the diet has resulted to the adaptation of the liver to produce glucose from the breakdown components of protein — amino acids .
The enzymes that breakdown amino acids are constantly active in cats and thus , cats need a constant source of protein in their diet .
Kittens , require an increased amount of protein to supply readily available amino acids for daily maintenance and for building new body components seeing as they are constantly growing .
There are many required amino acids for kittens .
Histidine is required at no greater than 30 % in kitten diets since consuming histidine - free diets causes weight loss .
Tryptophan is required at 0.15 % seeing as it maximized performance at this level .
Kittens also need the following amino acids supplemented in their diet : arginine to avoid an excess of ammonia in the blood otherwise known as hyperammonemia , isoleucine , leucine , valine , lysine , methionine as a sulfur containing amino acid , asparagine for maximal growth in the early post - weaning kitten , threonine and taurine to prevent from central retinal degeneration .
VITAMINS Section::::Vitamins .
Fat - Soluble Vitamins
Vitamin A is required in kitten diets because cats can not convert carotenes to retinol in the intestinal mucosa because they lack the enzyme so this vitamin must be supplement in the diet .
Vitamin E is another required vitamin in kitten diets seeing as deficiency leads to steatitis , causing the depot fat to become firm and yellow - orange in colour , which is painful and leads to death .
Also , Vitamin D is an essential vitamin because cats can not convert it from precursors in the skin .
Water - Soluble Vitamins Cats can synthesize niacin , but their breakdown exceeds the rate that it can be synthesized and thus , have a higher need for it , which can be fulfilled through an animal - based diet .
Pyridoxine ( vitamin B6 ) is required in increased amounts seeing as it is needed to produce amino acids .
To continue , vitamin B12 is an AAFCO recommended vitamin essential in the metabolism of carbohydrates and protein and maintains a healthy nervous system , healthy mucous membranes , healthy muscle and heart function and in general , promotes normal growth and development .
Choline is also a AAFCO recommended ingredient for kittens , which is important for neurotransmission in the brain and as a component of membrane phospholipids .
Biotin is another AAFCO recommended vitamin to support thyroid and adrenal glands and the reproductive and nervous systems .
Kittens also require riboflavin ( vitamin B2 ) for heart health , pantothenic acid ( vitamin B5 ) , and folacin .
METABOLISM AIDS Section::::Metabolism aids .
Since kitten diets are very high in calories , ingredients must be implemented to ensure adequate digestion and utilization of these calories .
Choline chloride is an ingredient that maintains fat metabolism .
Biotin and niacin are also active in the metabolism of fats , carbs and protein .
Riboflavin is also necessary for the digestion of fats and carbohydrates .
These are the main metabolism aids incorporated into kitten diets to ensure nutrient usage is maximized .
GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Growth and Development .
A combination of required nutrients is used to satisfy the overall growth and development of the kitten body , there are many ingredients that kittens do not require , but are included in diet formulation to encourage healthy growth and development .
These ingredients include : dried egg as source of high quality protein and fatty acids , flaxseed as source of flaxseed oil which is rich in omega 3 fatty acid and aids in digestion , calcium carbonate as a source of calcium , and calcium pantothenate ( vitamin B5 ) acts as a coenzyme in the conversion of amino acids and is important for healthy skin .
IMMUNITY BOOSTERS Section::::Immunity Boosters .
Antioxidants help support the development of a healthy immune system through inhibiting the oxidation of other molecules , which are essential for a growing kitten .
Antioxidants can be derived from ingredients , such as : carrots , sweet potatoes , spinach , vitamin E and vitamin E supplement , and zinc proteinate .
ORPHANED KITTENS Section::::Orphaned kittens .
Kittens require a high - calorie diet that contains more protein than the diet of adult cats .
Young orphaned kittens require cat milk every two to four hours , and they need physical stimulation to defecate and urinate .
Cat milk replacement is manufactured to feed to young kittens , because cow 's milk does not provide all the necessary nutrients .
Human - reared kittens tend to be very affectionate with humans as adults and sometimes more dependent on them than kittens reared by their mothers , but they can also show volatile mood swings and aggression .
Depending on the age at which they were orphaned and how long they were without their mothers , these kittens may be severely underweight and can have health problems later in life , such as heart conditions .
The compromised immune system of orphaned kittens ( from lack of antibodies found naturally in the mother 's milk ) can make them especially susceptible to infections , making antibiotics a necessity .
SEE ALSO
* Felis * Puppy REFERENCES
SOURCES
PRINTED
ONLINE
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Timetable of kitten development ( weeks 1 to 8)