ANNA LEONOWENS
Anna Harriette Emma Leonowens ( born Anna Harriette Emma Edwards ; 5 November 1831 – 19 January 1915 ) was an Anglo - Indian or Indian - born British travel writer , educator and social activist .
She became well known with the publication of her memoirs , beginning with The English Governess at the Siamese Court ( 1870 ) , which chronicled her experiences in Siam ( modern Thailand ) , as teacher to the children of the Siamese King Mongkut .
Leonowens ' own account has been fictionalised in Margaret Landon 's 1944 best - selling novel Anna and the King of Siam , as well as films and television series based on the book , most notably Rodgers and Hammerstein 's 1951 hit musical The King and I.
During the course of her life , Leonowens also lived in Aden , Australia , Singapore , the United States and Canada .
Among other achievements , she co - founded the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design .
EARLY LIFE AND FAMILY Section::::Early life and family .
Anna Leonowens ' mother , Mary Ann Glascott , married her father , Sergeant Thomas Edwards , a non - commissioned officer in the Honourable East India Company 's Corps of Sappers and Miners , on 15 March 1829 in St James 's Church , Tannah , Bombay Presidency , British India .
Edwards was from London and a former cabinetmaker .
She was born in Ahmednagar district , India , on 5 November 1831 , three months after the death of her father .
While she was christened Anna Harriet Emma Edwards , Leonowens later changed Harriet to " Harriette " and ceased using her third given name ( Emma ) .
Leonowens ' maternal grandfather , William Vawdrey ( or Vaudrey ) Glascott , was an English - born commissioned officer of the 4th Regiment , Bombay Native Infantry , in the Bombay Army .
Glascott arrived in India in 1810 , and was apparently married in 1815 , although his wife 's name is not known .
According to biographer Susan Morgan , the only viable explanation for the complete and deliberate lack of information regarding Glascott 's wife , in official British records , is that she " was not European " .
Morgan suggests that she was " most likely ...
Anglo - Indian ( of mixed race ) born in India .
"
Anna 's mother , Mary Anne Glascott , was born in 1815 or 1816 .
For most of her adult life , Anna Edwards had no contact with her family and took pains to disguise her origins by claiming that she had been born with the surname " Crawford " in Caernarfon and giving her father 's rank as Captain .
By doing so , she protected not only herself but her children , who would have had greater opportunities if their possibly mixed - race heritage remained unknown .
Investigations uncovered no record of her birth at Caernarfon , news which came as a shock to the town that had long claimed her as one of its most famous natives .
On 24 April 1845 , Anna 's 15-year - old sister , Eliza Julia Edwards , married James Millard , a Sergeant - Major with the 4th Troop Artillery , Indian Army in Deesa , Banaskantha , Gujarat , India .
Their daughter , Eliza Sarah Millard , born in 1848 in India , married on 7 October 1864 in Surat , Gujarat , India .
Her husband was Edward John Pratt , a 38-year - old British civil servant who had served in the Indian Navy .
One of their sons , William Henry Pratt , born 23 November 1887 upon their return to London , was better known by his stage name of Boris Karloff , making Anna his grand - aunt .
Anna Edwards never approved of her sister 's marriage , and her self - imposed separation from the family was so complete that , decades later , when a Pratt relative contacted her , she replied by threatening suicide if he persisted .
Anna 's mother , Mary Edwards , a widow , later married an Irish soldier , Patrick Donohoe of the Royal Engineers .
Anna Edwards 's relationship with her stepfather Donohoe was not a happy one , and she later accused him of putting pressure on her , like her sister ( with whom she also fell out ) , to marry a much older man .
In 1847 , Donohoe was seconded as assistant supervisor of public works in Aden .
Whether the rest of the family went with him or stayed in India is unsure .
Anna Leonowens later claimed that she had gone on a three - year tour through Egypt and the Middle East with the orientalist Reverend George Percy Badger and his wife .
However , recent biographies consider this episode to be fictitious .
Anna may have met Badger in India and listened to or read reports about his travels .
MARRIAGE , WESTERN AUSTRALIA AND WIDOWHOOD
Section::::Marriage , Western Australia and widowhood .
At the end of 1849 , Anna Edwards returned with her family to India , where in Poona , over the objections of her stepfather and mother , she married her childhood sweetheart , Thomas Leon ( or Lane / Lean ) Owens ; he later merged his second and last names as Leonowens .
Her husband was a civilian clerk ( rather than the army officer suggested by her memoir ) .
In 1852 the young couple , accompanied by Anna 's uncle , W. V. Glasscott , sailed to Australia via Singapore , where they boarded the barque Alibi .
The journey from Singapore was long and while on board Anna gave birth to a son , also named Thomas .
On 8 March 1853 , nearing the Western Australian coast , the Alibi was almost wrecked on a reef .
Ten days later Anna , Thomas , their newborn son and Glasscott arrived in Perth .
Glasscott and Thomas Leonowens quickly found employment as clerks in the colonial administration .
Later in 1853 , Glasscott accepted a position as government commissariat storekeeper at Lynton , a small and remote settlement that was the site of Lynton Convict Depot .
Glasscott became involved in frequent disagreements with the abrasive Resident Magistrate , William Burges .
Within three years Glasscott had returned to India and taken up a career in teaching , before dying suddenly in 1856 .
Anna Leonowens – using her middle name of Harriett – tried to start a school for young ladies .
In March 1854 , the infant Thomas died at the age of 13 months , and later that year , a daughter , Avis Annie , was born .
In 1855 , Thomas Leonowens was appointed to Glasscott 's former position with the commissariat at Lynton , and the family moved there .
At Lynton , Anna Leonowens gave birth to a son , Louis .
During late 1856 , Thomas Leonowens also served briefly as magistrate 's clerk under William Burges .
Like Glasscott , Thomas clashed with Burges but survived until the Convict Depot was closed in 1857 , and he was transferred to a more senior position with the Commissariat in Perth .
The Leonowens family left Australia abruptly in April 1857 , sailing to Singapore , and then moving to Penang , where Thomas found work as a hotel keeper .
In or before the first week of May 1859 , Thomas Leonowens died of " apoplexy " and was buried ( 7 May 1859 ) in the Protestant Cemetery in Penang .
His death left Anna Leonowens an impoverished widow .
Of their four children , two had died in infancy .
To support her surviving daughter Avis and son Louis , Leonowens again took up teaching and opened a school for the children of British officers in Singapore .
While the enterprise was not a financial success , it established her reputation as an educator .
ROYAL GOVERNESS
Section::::Royal governess .
In 1862 , Leonowens accepted an offer made by the consul in Singapore , Tan Kim Ching , to teach the wives and children of Mongkut , King of Siam .
The king wished to give his 39 wives and concubines and 82 children a modern Western education on scientific secular lines , which earlier missionaries ' wives had not provided .
Leonowens sent her daughter Avis to school in England , and took her son Louis with her to Bangkok .
She succeeded Dan Beach Bradley , an American missionary , as teacher to the Siamese court .
Leonowens served at court until 1867 , a period of nearly six years , first as a teacher and later as language secretary for the king .
Although her position carried great respect and even a degree of political influence , she did not find the terms and conditions of her employment to her satisfaction , and came to be regarded by the king himself as a " difficult woman and more difficult than generality " .
In 1868 , Leonowens was on leave for her health in England and had been negotiating a return to the court on better terms when Mongkut fell ill and died .
The king mentioned Leonowens and her son in his will , though they did not receive a legacy .
The new monarch , fifteen - year - old Chulalongkorn , who succeeded his father , wrote Leonowens a warm letter of thanks for her services .
He did not invite her to resume her post but they corresponded amicably for many years .
At the age of 27 , Louis Leonowens returned to Siam and was granted a commission of Captain in the Royal Cavalry .
Chulalongkorn made reforms for which his former tutor claimed some of the credit , including the abolition of the practice of prostration before the royal person .
However , many of those same reforms were goals established by his father .
LITERARY CAREER
Section::::Literary career .
By 1869 , Leonowens was in New York City , where she opened a school for girls for a brief period on Staten Island , and began contributing travel articles to a Boston journal , Atlantic Monthly , including " The Favorite of the Harem " , reviewed by The New York Times as " an Eastern love story , having apparently a strong basis of truth " .
She expanded her articles into two volumes of memoirs , beginning with The English Governess at the Siamese Court ( 1870 ) , which earned her immediate fame but also brought charges of sensationalism .
In her writing , she casts a critical eye over court life ; the account is not always a flattering one , and has become the subject of controversy in Thailand ; she has also been accused of exaggerating her influence with the king .
There have also been claims of fabrication : the likelihood of the argument over slavery , for example , when King Mongkut was for 27 years a Buddhist monk and later abbot , before ascending to the throne .
It is thought that his religious training and vocation would never have permitted the views expressed by Leonowens ' cruel , eccentric and self - indulgent monarch .
Leonowens was a feminist and in her writings she tended to focus on what she saw as the subjugated status of Siamese women , including those sequestered within the Nang Harm , or royal harem .
She emphasised that although Mongkut had been a forward - looking ruler , he had desired to preserve customs such as prostration and sexual slavery which seemed unenlightened and degrading .
The sequel , Romance of the Harem ( 1873 ) , incorporates tales based on palace gossip , including the king 's alleged torture and execution of one of his concubines , Tuptim ; the story lacks independent corroboration and is dismissed as out of character for the king by some critics .
A great granddaughter , Princess Vudhichalerm Vudhijaya ( b. 21 May 1934 ) , stated in a 2001 interview , " King Mongkut was in the monk 's hood for 27 years before he was king .
He would never have ordered an execution .
It is not the Buddhist way . "
She added that the same Tuptim was her grandmother and had married Chulalongkorn .
( He had 36 wives . )
While in the United States , Leonowens also earned much - needed money through popular lecture tours .
At venues such as the house of Mrs. Sylvanus Reed in Fifty - third Street , New York City , in the regular members ' course at Association Hall , or under the auspices of bodies such as the Long Island Historical Society , she lectured on subjects including " Christian Missions to Pagan Lands " and " The Empire of Siam , and the City of the Veiled Women " .
The New York Times reported : " Mrs. Leonowens ' purpose is to awaken an interest , and enlist sympathies , in behalf of missionary labors , particularly in their relation to the destiny of Asiatic women . "
She joined the literary circles of New York and Boston and made the acquaintance of local lights on the lecture circuit , such as Oliver Wendell Holmes , Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and Harriet Beecher Stowe , author of Uncle Tom 's Cabin , a book whose anti - slavery message Leonowens had brought to the attention of the royal household .
She said the book influenced Chulalongkorn 's reform of slavery in Siam , a process he had begun in 1868 , and which would end with its total abolition in 1915 .
Meanwhile , Louis had accumulated debts in the U.S. by 1874 and fled the country .
He became estranged from his mother and did not see her for 19 years .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In 1878 , Leonowens 's daughter Avis Annie Crawford Connybeare married Thomas Fyshe , a Scottish banker and the cashier ( general manager ) of the Bank of Nova Scotia in Halifax , where she resided for nineteen years as she continued to travel the world .
This marriage ended the family 's money worries .
Leonowens resumed her teaching career and taught daily from 9 am to 12 noon for an autumn half at the Berkeley School of New York at 252 Madison Avenue , Manhattan , beginning on 5 October 1880 ; this was a new preparatory school for colleges and schools of science and her presence was advertised in the press .
Leonowens visited Russia in 1881 , shortly after the assassination of Tsar Alexander II , and other European countries , and continued to publish travel articles and books .
She settled in Halifax , Nova Scotia , Canada , where she again became involved in women 's education , and was a suffragist and one of the founders of the Local Council of Women of Halifax and the Nova Scotia College of Art and Design .
After nineteen years , she moved to Montreal , Quebec .
Leonowens 's son , Louis , returned to Siam and became an officer in the Siamese royal cavalry .
He married Caroline Knox , a daughter of Sir Thomas George Knox , the British consul - general in Bangkok ( 1824–1887 ) , and his Thai wife , Prang Yen .
Under Chulalongkorn 's patronage , Louis Leonowens founded the trading company that bears his name , Louis T. Leonowens &
Co. Ltd. which is still trading in Thailand .
Anna Leonowens met Chulalongkorn again when he visited London in 1897 , thirty years after she had left Siam .
During this audience the king took the opportunity to express his thanks in person but he also voiced his dismay at the inaccuracies in Leonowens ' books .
Anna Leonowens died on 19 January 1915 , at 83 years of age .
She was interred in Mount Royal Cemetery in Montreal .
ANNA LEONOWENS IN
FICTION AND FILM Section::::Anna Leonowens in fiction and film .
Margaret Landon 's novel Anna and the King of Siam ( 1944 ) provides a fictionalised look at Anna Leonowens 's years at the royal court , developing the abolitionist theme that resonated with her American readership .
In 1946 , Talbot Jennings and Sally Benson adapted it into the screenplay for a dramatic film of the same name , starring Irene Dunne and Rex Harrison .
In response , Thai authors Seni and Kukrit Pramoj wrote their own account in 1948 and sent it to American politician and diplomat Abbot Low Moffat ( 1901–1996 ) , who drew on it for his biography Mongkut , the King of Siam ( 1961 ) .
Moffat donated the Pramoj brothers ' manuscript to the Library of Congress in 1961 .
Landon had , however , created the iconic image of Leonowens , and " in the mid-20th century she came to personify the eccentric Victorian female traveler " .
The novel was adapted as a hit musical by Rodgers and Hammerstein , The King and I ( 1951 ) , starring Gertrude Lawrence and Yul Brynner , which ran 1,246 performances on Broadway and was also a hit in London and on tour .
In 1956 , a film version was released , with Deborah Kerr starring in the role of Leonowens and Brynner reprising his role as the king .
Revived many times on stage ( with Brynner starring in revivals until 1985 ) , the musical has remained a favourite of the theatregoing public .
The humorous depiction of Mongkut as a polka - dancing despot , as well as the king 's and Anna 's apparent romantic feeling for each other , is condemned as disrespectful in Thailand , where the Rodgers and Hammerstein film and musical were banned by the government .
The 1946 film version of Anna and the King of Siam starring Rex Harrison as Mongkut was allowed to be shown in Thailand , although it was banned in newly independent India as an inaccurate insult by westerners to an Eastern king .
In 1950 , the Thai government did not permit the film to be shown for the second time in Thailand .
The books Romance in the Harem and An English Governess at the Siamese Court were not banned in Thailand .
There were even Thai translations of these books by respected Thai writer " Humorist " ( Ob Chaivasu ) .
During a visit to the United States in 1960 , the monarch of Thailand , King Bhumibol ( a great - grandson of Mongkut ) , and his entourage explained that from what they could gather from the reviews of the musical , the characterisation of Mongkut seemed " 90 percent exaggerated .
My great - grandfather was really quite a mild and nice man .
"
Years later , during her 1985 visit to New York , Bhumibol 's wife , Queen Sirikit , went to see the Broadway musical at the invitation of Yul Brynner .
The then ambassador of Thailand to the US gave another reason for Thailand 's disapproval of The King and I : its ethno - centric attitude and its barely hidden insult on the whole Siamese nation as childish and inferior to the Westerners .
In 1972 , Twentieth Century Fox produced a non - musical American TV series for CBS , Anna and the King , with Samantha Eggar taking the part of Leonowens and Brynner reprising his role as the king .
Margaret Landon charged the makers with " inaccurate and mutilated portrayals " of her literary property and sued unsuccessfully for copyright infringement .
The series was not a success and was cancelled after only 13 episodes .
In 1999 an animated film using the songs of the musical was released by Warner Bros. Animation .
In the same year , Jodie Foster and Chow Yun - fat starred in a new feature - length cinematic adaptation of Leonowens ' books , also titled Anna and the King .
One Thai critic complained that the filmmakers had made Mongkut " appear like a cowboy " ; this version was also banned by censors in Thailand .
Leonowens appears as a character in Paul Marlowe 's novel Knights of the Sea , in which she travels from Halifax to Baddeck in 1887 to take part in a campaign to promote women 's suffrage during a by - election .
SEE ALSO
* Reginald Johnston — the Scottish tutor to Aisin - Gioro Puyi the last emperor of China .
His story was also dramatised in films such as The Last Emperor .
* Joseph Caulfield James — the English tutor to King Vajiravudh of Siam * Katharine Carl — an American painter and author at the court of the Empress Dowager Cixi of China
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Bristowe , W. S. Louis and the King of Siam , Chatto & Windus , 1976 , * Dow , Leslie Smith .
Anna Leonowens : A Life Beyond The King and I , Pottersfield Press , 1992 , * Habegger , Alfred and Foley , Gerard .
Anna and Thomas Leonowens in Western Australia , 1853–1857 , State Records Office of W. Australia , Occasional Paper , March 2010 * Morgan , Susan .
Bombay Anna :
The Real Story and Remarkable Adventures of the King and I Governess , University of California Press , 2008 , * Seni Pramoj and Kukrit Pramoj .
The King of Siam speaks EXTERNAL LINKS
* Biography at the Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online
* Louis T. Leonowens ( Thailand ) Ltd. , the company founded by Leonowens 's son * ( Thai ) "
Anna Leonowens :
Who says she 's a compulsive liar ? "
- Art and Culture Magazine * ( Thai ) Art and Culture Magazine ,
English translation here .
* ( Thai ) "
King Mongkut set up ' secret mission ' disguising Sir John and Anna , hid Laos in Khmer " - Art and Culture Magazine
* ( Thai ) "
King Mongkut 's letters to Anna : When Madame Teacher plays political negotiator " - Art and Culture Magazine