THE EYES OF THE DRAGON
The Eyes of the Dragon is a fantasy novel by American writer Stephen King , first published as a limited edition slipcased hardcover by Philtrum Press in 1984 , illustrated by Kenneth R. Linkhauser .
The novel would later be published for the mass market by Viking in 1987 , with illustrations by David Palladini .
This trade edition was slightly revised for publication .
The 1995 French edition did not reproduce the American illustrations ; it included brand new illustrations by Christian Heinrich , and a 2016 new French version also included brand new illustrations , by par Nicolas Duffaut .
At the time of publication , it was a deviation from the norm for King , who was best known for his horror fiction .
This book is a work of epic fantasy in a quasi - medieval setting , with a clearly established battle between good and evil , and magic playing a lead role .
The Eyes of the Dragon was originally titled Napkins .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The Eyes of the Dragon takes place entirely within the realm of Delain ( which itself is located within In - World from The Dark Tower series , as established in " The Little Sisters of Eluria " ) .
It is told from the perspective of an unnamed storyteller / narrator , who speaks casually and frankly to the reader , frequently adding his own commentary on characters ' motivations and the like .
King Roland 's magician , Flagg , seeking to destroy the Kingdom of Delain , sees his plans being ruined by the good heart of Queen Sasha .
After Sasha gives birth to Peter , a noble and worthy future king , Flagg realizes that his position , his plans , and his life may be in danger because of Peter .
When Sasha is pregnant with a second son , Flagg seizes the opportunity .
He forces the Queen 's midwife to cut Sasha as the second son , Thomas , is born .
Sasha bleeds to death and Flagg begins plotting to remove Peter .
As Peter becomes a teenager , he begins the custom of bringing a glass of wine to his father before bed each night .
Flagg decides to use this as a means of framing Peter .
He dissolves a poison called " Dragon Sand " in a glass of wine and delivers it to the king after Peter leaves .
Previously , in an attempt to win Thomas ' friendship , Flagg had shown him a secret passage where Thomas could spy on his father .
Unbeknownst to Flagg , when he delivers the poison , Thomas is watching through the glass eyes of the mounted head of Roland 's greatest trophy , the dragon .
Flagg plants evidence incriminating Peter .
After a brief trial , during which the judge decides Peter is guilty , he is locked up in the enormous tower called the Needle in the center of the city .
Thomas is then crowned King , although he is only twelve years old ; due to his youth and his fearful inexperience , he allows Flagg enormous amounts of power .
At the start of his long stay in the Needle , Peter manages to send a note to the judge who convicted him , Anders Peyna , with the seemingly innocuous requests to have his mother 's old dollhouse and napkins with his meals .
Peyna is puzzled by the requests , but , seeing no harm in them , grants them .
Five years later , Peter escapes from the Needle , having used the toy loom in the dollhouse and threads from the napkins to make a rope .
After the escape he and his allies rush to get Roland 's bow and arrow .
However , it is not to be found because Thomas had it once they got into the king 's " sitting room " .
Flagg , now revealed as a demonic being , is about to kill them when Thomas reveals himself and tells Flagg that he ( Thomas ) watched Flagg poison Roland .
Thomas shoots Flagg in the eye , but Flagg uses magic to disappear and escape .
At the end of the novel , Peter is declared to be the rightful king .
Thomas , who has become deeply hated in Delain , sets off alongside his butler , Dennis , to find Flagg .
They find him and confront him , but the narrator does not reveal the outcome .
CHARACTERS HOUSE DELAIN
* King Alan II ( aka Alan the Mad ) – father of Queen Kyla
the Good ; grandfather of King Landry .
Alan 's legendarily - beautiful cousin Eleanor married Duke Leven of Valera ( aka the Black Duke ) .
* Queen Kyla the Good – daughter of King Alan the Mad ; mother of King Landry ; grandmother of Queen Lita .
* King Landry – grandson of King Alan the Mad ; son of Queen Kyla the Good ; father of Queen Lita ; grandfather of King Roland the Good * Queen Lita – granddaughter of Queen Kyla the Good ; daughter of King Landry ; mother of King Roland the Good ; grandmother of Princes Thomas and Peter .
She forged the great hunting - arrow known as Foe - Hammer .
* King Roland the Good –
Delain 's ruler as the novel opens .
In his younger and more virile days , Roland was renowned for slaying Niner the Dragon with Foe - Hammer , a great hunting - arrow forged by his mother , Queen Lita .
Over the years since then , Roland has become somewhat infirm and addled .
He trusts Flagg , his counselor , little realizing the ill will that Flagg harbors toward him .
However , early in the story , he does favor his wife 's advice more than Flagg 's .
Roland is the husband of Queen Sasha ; their sons are Peter and Thomas .
* Queen Sasha – Roland 's wife ; mother of Peter and Thomas .
Sasha was chosen for Roland because she was an innocent girl from a lesser noble family ... and , seemingly , the shyest of those whom Flagg had selected for Roland .
Flagg believed Sasha would pose the least long - term threat to his authority ; Roland , for his part , chose her since she seemed the least frightening to him .
Yet Sasha revealed herself to be a strong and independent woman , who truly loved - and was truly loved in return by - both Roland and the kingdom .
She was murdered under Flagg 's orders while giving birth to Thomas .
Her cousin is Squire Andrew Staad .
* Prince Peter – Roland 's elder son , heir to the throne of Delain .
Peter is a tall , lithe , handsome young man who has inherited his mother 's good looks and his father 's love of the common man .
He is openly favored among the people of Delain to be their next King .
Peter rides a horse named Peony .
* Prince Thomas –
Roland 's younger son .
Thomas takes after Roland , being slow and heavy even in childhood .
He feels overshadowed by Peter and resents his elder brother because Roland clearly loves Peter more .
Yet Thomas , like their father , is a talented archer ; in this he can outstrip even Peter .
As Thomas gets older , Flagg becomes his only friend and sole source of comfort .
Crowned " Thomas the Light - Bringer , " he soon receives the nickname " Thomas the Tax - Bringer" ... due to the merciless 80 % tax increase he imposed upon the people of Delain at Flagg 's urging .
HOUSE REECHUL
* Charles Reechul – Naomi 's father .
* Naomi Reechul – the eldest daughter of farmer Charles Reechul .
This peasant girl ultimately joins up with the Exiles , a developing resistance group .
She and her dog Frisky help Ben Staad ( whom she later marries ) to locate Dennis .
HOUSE STAAD
* Squire Andrew Staad – cousin of Queen Sasha ; husband of Susan ; father of Ben and Emmaline .
* Susan Staad – wife of Squire Andrew ; their offspring are Ben and Emmaline .
* Ben Staad – Peter 's cousin and closest friend , although the Staad family is considered Delain 's most unfortunate .
Ben is strong , handsome , and loyal .
He eventually marries Naomi Reechul .
* Emmaline Staad – Ben 's younger sister .
OTHER CHARACTERS * Prince Ailon – mythological ruler of the Moon
; he drives his lunar chariot across the sky every night .
* Aron Beson – Chief Warder of the Needle .
* Browson – King Roland 's bard .
* Anna Crookbrows –
Queen Sasha 's midwife , and a pawn in her assassination .
Her only son was twenty when he contracted Shaking Disease ( " the Shakes " , for short ) .
Flagg cured him in exchange for her killing Queen Sasha .
* Dennis – Peter 's butler .
He , his father Brandon , and their family have served the royals of Delain for centuries ; Dennis takes great pride in his work .
He is complicit in Peter 's imprisonment ; Dennis found the poison , which killed King Roland , inside Peter 's room .
He acted as Thomas 's butler upon Roland 's death , and later aided Peter 's escape .
Ultimately , Dennis goes with Thomas on his quest to find Flagg .
* Quentin Ellender – Delain 's greatest craftsman .
* Flagg Garlan ( aka Flagg the Hooded ) – the Royal Adviser to King Roland .
Flagg , a powerful wizard , has been around for centuries .
He has served as a counselor to four successive monarchs : Roland 's grandparents and parents , Roland himself , and Thomas .
Though Flagg has lived in Delain for roughly seventy years , he has only appeared to age ten .
Later in the story , it is revealed that Flagg has appeared in Delain multiple times , under multiple guises ...
the oldest - known of which took place over five hundred years in the past .
His ultimate goal is to overthrow Delain 's monarchy and to plunge the kingdom into " a thousand years of bloody anarchy , give or take a few months " .
( In The Stand , Randall Flagg was the personification of evil ; Flagg plays a part in the Dark Tower novels as well .
Coincidentally or purposefully , the initials R.F. are used randomly for the names of antagonistic characters in numerous other Stephen King works . )
* Galen Goshawk – Corporal of Delain 's Home Guard .
* Bill Hinch – serves King Roland as Lord High Executioner .
* Lord - Chancellor Anders Peyna – The Kingdom 's Judge - General , who presides over the Royal Court of Delain .
The people are far more afraid of Peyna than they are of the King .
Peyna condemns Peter to his imprisonment , but is later convinced of the prince 's innocence .
Along with Ben Staad and Dennis , he helps engineer Peter 's escape from the Needle ( albeit unwittingly ) by raising the jailhouse bribe which allows Peter to have the dollhouse and napkins .
Peyna is served by his butler Arlen .
* Rhiannon – Dark Witch of the Coos .
* Splitfoot – The Devil .
* Lord Towson * Ulrich Wicks – one of the ten Great Lawyers of Delain .
* Yosef – serves King Roland as head groom .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Eyes of the Dragon was warmly received by professional critics .
Barbara Tritel of The New York Times described The Eyes of the Dragon as drawing clear influence from European fairy tales and wrote that the novel was " more elegant than any other novel Mr. King has written so far . "
Some of King 's established fans rejected the novel , considering it a children 's book - King originally wrote the novel for his children .
Another reason for fan rejection of The Eyes of the Dragon was the fact that it was epic fantasy , with little to no elements of the horror that typified King 's most successful work of this era .
Negative fan reaction to The Eyes of the Dragon was an inspiration for King 's subsequent novel Misery .
The protagonist of Misery was a successful romance novelist who killed off his most popular character to allow himself to write in other styles of fiction only to be imprisoned by a deranged fan ; King saw Misery as a metaphor for the fact that he felt chained to writing horror fiction .
RELATIONSHIP WITH OTHER WORKS
* Flagg ( Randall Flagg ) , the villain of this story , is directly involved with The Dark Tower series , appearing as one of Roland of Gilead 's main antagonists .
He is also the main antagonist in The Stand .
*
In , Roland Deschain mentions Thomas and Dennis visiting Gilead . "
Great Letters " are also used in both novels .
*
The witch Rhiannon ( Rhea ) of the Coos appears in , and uses Flagg 's technique of becoming " dim " .
Garlan , the land Flagg claims to be from , is also mentioned several times .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Rights to The Eyes of the Dragon have been optioned twice , once for a film and once for a television series .
FILM Section::::Film .
Initially The Eyes of the Dragon was to be created as an animated film produced through the French company WAMC Entertainment .
The movie would have a budget of $ 45 million and was expected to release in late 2001 or early 2002 .
However the movie did not progress into active production and the rights lapsed in 2000 .
TELEVISION ADAPTATION
Section::::Television adaptation .
In 2012 Syfy announced that they were developing several projects for potential television adaptations , one of which was The Eyes of the Dragon .
If successfully developed , the book would be made into either a movie or miniseries .
Michael Taylor and Jeff Vintar were confirmed to be penning the script and Taylor and Bill Haber would act as executive producers .
REFERENCES