1966 FIFA WORLD CUP
The 1966 FIFA World Cup was the eighth FIFA World Cup and was held in England from 11 to 30 July 1966 .
England beat West Germany 4–2 in the final , winning the Jules Rimet Trophy .
It is England 's only FIFA World Cup title .
They were the fifth nation to win and the third host nation to win after Uruguay in 1930 and Italy in 1934 .
Notable performances were made by the two debutants Portugal , ending third , and North Korea , getting to the quarter finals after a 1–0 win against Italy .
Also notable was the elimination of world champions Brazil after the preliminary round .
Notably , all four semi - finalists were European , a situation occurring in only four other world cups ( 1934 , 1982 , 2006 and 2018 ) .
Portugal 's Eusébio was top scorer with nine goals .
The final is remembered for being the only one with a hat - trick and for its controversial third goal awarded to England .
An incident before the tournament was the theft and refinding of the trophy .
The final , held at Wembley Stadium , was the last to be broadcast in black and white .
The tournament held a FIFA record for the largest average attendance until it was surpassed by Mexico in 1970 .
It was boycotted by most independent countries from Africa who objected to the qualification requirements .
Despite this , the number of entries for the qualifying tournament was a new record , with 70 nations .
HOST SELECTION
Section::::Host selection .
England was chosen as host of the 1966 World Cup in Rome , Italy on 22 August 1960 , over rival bids from West Germany and Spain .
This is first tournament to be held in a country that was affected directly by World War II , as the four previous tournaments were either held in countries out of war theatres or in neutral countries .
QUALIFICATION Section::::Qualification .
Despite the Africans ' absence , there was another new record number of entries for the qualifying tournament , with 70 nations taking part .
After all the arguments , FIFA finally ruled that ten teams from Europe would qualify , along with four from South America , one from Asia and one from North and Central America .
Portugal and North Korea qualified for the first time .
Portugal would not qualify again until 1986 , while North Korea 's next appearance was at the 2010 tournament .
This was also Switzerland 's last World Cup finals until 1994 .
Notable absentees from this tournament included 1962 semi - finalists Yugoslavia and 1962 runners up Czechoslovakia .
AFRICAN BOYCOTT Section::::African boycott .
Thirty - one African nations boycotted the tournament to protest a 1964 FIFA ruling that required the three second - round winners from the African zone to enter a play - off round against the winners of the Asian zone in order to qualify for the World Cup , as they felt winning their zone was enough in itself to merit qualification .
They also protested against the readmission of South Africa to FIFA in 1963 , despite its expulsion from CAF due to the apartheid regime in 1958 .
South Africa was subsequently assigned to the Asia and Oceania qualifying group before being disqualified after being suspended again due to pressure from other African nations in October 1964 .
Despite this , after FIFA refused to change the qualifying format , the African teams decided anyway to pull out of the World Cup until at least one African team had a place assured in the World Cup , something which was put in place for the 1970 FIFA World Cup and all subsequent World Cup finals .
The Portuguese colonies of Angola and Mozambique participated for Portugal .
These colonies only got their independence in the 1970s , while most other African colonies became independent in the 1960s .
QUALIFIED TEAMS Section::::Qualified teams .
The following 16 teams qualified for the final tournament .
AFC ( 1 )
* CAF ( 0 ) *
None participated OFC ( 0 )
*
None qualified CONCACAF ( 1 ) * CONMEBOL ( 4 )
*
*
* * UEFA ( 10 )
* * ( hosts )
* *
*
*
*
*
* * FORMAT Section::::Format .
The format of the 1966 competition remained the same as 1962 : 16 qualified teams were divided into four groups of four .
Each group played a round - robin format .
Two points were awarded for a win and one point for a draw , with goal average used to separate teams equal on points .
The top two teams in each group advanced to the knockout stage .
In the knockout games , if the teams were tied after 90 minutes , 30 minutes of extra time were played .
For any match other than the final , if the teams were still tied after extra time , lots would be drawn to determine the winner .
The final would have been replayed if tied after extra time .
In the event , no replays or drawing of lots was necessary .
The draw for the final tournament , taking place on 6 January 1966 at the Royal Garden Hotel in London was the first ever to be televised , with England , West Germany , Brazil and Italy as seeds .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
The opening match took place on Monday 11 July .
With the exception of the first tournament , which commenced on 13 July 1930 , every other tournament ( up to and including 2018 ) has commenced in May or June .
The final took place on 30 July 1966 , the 36th anniversary of the first final .
This remains the latest date that any tournament has concluded .
The reason for the unusually late scheduling of the tournament appears to lie with the outside broadcast commitments of the BBC , which also had commitments to cover Wimbledon ( which ran between 20 June and 2 July ) and the Open Golf Championship ( 6 to 9 July ) .
GROUP PLAY Section::::Group play .
1966 was a World Cup with few goals as the teams began to play much more tactically and defensively .
This was exemplified by Alf Ramsey 's England as they finished top of Group 1 with only four goals , but having none scored against them .
They also became the first World Cup winning team not to win its first game in the tournament .
Uruguay were the other team to qualify from that group at the expense of both Mexico and France .
All the group 's matches were played at Wembley Stadium apart from the match between Uruguay and France which took place at White City Stadium .
In Group 2 , West Germany and Argentina qualified with ease as they both finished the group with 5 points , Spain managed 2 , while Switzerland left the competition after losing all three group matches .
FIFA cautioned Argentina for its violent style in the group games , particularly in the scoreless draw with West Germany , which saw Argentinean Rafael Albrecht get sent off and suspended for the next match .
In the northwest of England , Old Trafford and Goodison Park played host to Group 3 which saw the two - time defending champions Brazil finish in third place behind Portugal and Hungary , and be eliminated along with Bulgaria .
Brazil were defeated 3–1 by Hungary in a classic encounter before falling by the same scoreline to Portugal in a controversial game .
Portugal appeared in the finals for the first time , and made quite an impact .
They won all three of their games in the group stage , with a lot of help from their outstanding striker Eusébio , whose nine goals made him the tournament 's top scorer .
Group 4 , however , provided the biggest upset when North Korea beat Italy 1–0 at Ayresome Park , Middlesbrough and finished above them , thus earning qualification to the next round along with the Soviet Union .
This was the first time that a nation from outside Europe or the Americas had progressed from the first stage of a World Cup : the next would be Morocco in 1986 .
QUARTER - FINALS , SEMI - FINALS , AND THIRD - PLACE MATCH Section::::Quarter - finals , semi - finals , and third - place match .
The quarter - finals provided a controversial victory for West Germany as they cruised past Uruguay 4–0 ; the South Americans claimed that this occurred only after the referee ( who was Jim Finney , from England ) had not recognised a handball by Schnellinger on the goal line and then had sent off two players from Uruguay : Horacio Troche and Héctor Silva .
It appeared as though the surprise package North Korea would claim another major upset in their match against Portugal at Goodison Park , when after 22 minutes they led 3–0 .
It fell to one of the greatest stars of the tournament , Eusébio , to change that .
He scored four goals in the game and José Augusto added a fifth in the 78th minute to earn Portugal a 5–3 win .
Meanwhile , in the other two games , Ferenc Bene 's late goal for Hungary against the Soviet Union , who were led by Lev Yashin 's stellar goalkeeping , proved little more than a consolation as they crashed out 2–1 , and the only goal between Argentina and England came courtesy of England 's Geoff Hurst .
During that controversial game ( for more details see Argentina and England football rivalry ) , Argentina 's Antonio Rattín became the first player to be sent off in a senior international football match at Wembley .
Rattín at first refused to leave the field and eventually had to be escorted by several policemen .
After 30 minutes England scored the only goal of the match .
This game is called el robo del siglo ( the robbery of the century ) in Argentina .
All semi - finalists were from Europe .
The venue of the first semi - final between England and Portugal was changed from Goodison Park in Liverpool to Wembley , due to Wembley 's larger capacity .
This larger capacity was particularly significant during a time when ticket revenue was of crucial importance .
Bobby Charlton scored both goals in England 's win , with Portugal 's goal coming from a penalty in the 82nd minute after a handball by Jack Charlton on the goal line .
The other semi - final also finished 2–1 : Franz Beckenbauer scoring the winning goal with a left foot shot from the edge of the area for West Germany as they beat the Soviet Union .
Portugal went on to beat the Soviet Union 2–1 to take third place .
Portugal 's third place remains the best finish by a team making its World Cup debut since 1934 .
It was subsequently equalled by Croatia in the 1998 tournament .
FINAL Section::::Final .
London 's Wembley Stadium was the venue for the final , and 98,000 people attended .
After 12 minutes 32 seconds Helmut Haller put West Germany ahead , but the score was levelled by Geoff Hurst four minutes later .
Martin Peters put England in the lead in the 78th minute ; England looked set to claim the title when the referee awarded a free kick to West Germany with one minute left .
The ball was launched goalward and Wolfgang Weber scored , with England appealing in vain for handball as the ball came through the crowded penalty area .
With the score level at 2–2 at the end of 90 minutes , the game went to extra time .
In the 98th minute , Hurst found himself on the scoresheet again ; his shot hit the crossbar , bounced down onto the goal line , and was awarded as a goal .
Debate has long raged over whether the ball crossed the line , with the goal becoming part of World Cup history .
England 's final goal was scored by Hurst again , as a celebratory pitch invasion began .
This made Geoff Hurst the only player ever to have scored three times in a single World Cup final .
BBC commentator Kenneth Wolstenholme 's description of the match 's closing moments has gone down in history : " Some people are on the pitch .
They think it 's all over ...
[ Hurst scores ]
It is now ! " .
England 's total of eleven goals scored in six games set a new record low for average goals per game scored by a World Cup winning team .
The record stood until 1982 , when it was surpassed by Italy 's twelve goals in seven games ; in 2010 this record was lowered again by Spain , winning the Cup with eight goals in seven games .
England 's total of three goals conceded also constituted a record low for average goals per game conceded by a World Cup winning team .
That record stood until 1994 , when it was surpassed by Brazil 's three goals in seven games .
France again lowered the record to two goals in seven during the 1998 tournament , a record that has since been equalled by Italy at the 2006 tournament and by Spain 's two goals in the group stage conceded during the 2010 tournament .
England received the recovered Jules Rimet trophy from Elizabeth II and were crowned World Cup winners for the first time .
In this World Cup , the national anthems were played only in the final .
They were not played in the earlier matches because the organisers ( FIFA and the FA ) feared that North Korea 's presence – a socialist country that was not recognised by the United Kingdom – in the World Cup would cause problems with South Korea .
A memo from the Foreign Office months before the finals began stated that the solution would be " denying the visas to North Korean players " .
TROPHY INCIDENT
Section::::Trophy incident .
The 1966 World Cup had a rather unusual hero off the field , a dog called Pickles .
In the build - up to the tournament , the Jules Rimet trophy was stolen from an exhibition display .
A nationwide hunt for the icon ensued .
It was later discovered wrapped in newspaper as the dog sniffed under some bushes in London .
The FA commissioned a replica cup in case the original cup was not found in time .
This replica is held at the English National Football Museum in Manchester , where it is on display .
MASCOT
Section::::Mascot .
World Cup Willie , the mascot for the 1966 competition , was the first World Cup mascot , and one of the first mascots to be associated with a major sporting competition .
World Cup Willie is a lion , a typical symbol of the United Kingdom , wearing a Union Flag jersey emblazoned with the words " WORLD CUP " .
VENUES
Section::::Venues .
Eight venues were used for this World Cup .
The newest and biggest venue used was Wembley Stadium in west London , which was 43 years old in 1966 .
As was often the case in the World Cup , group matches were played in two venues in close proximity to each other .
Group 1 matches ( which included the hosts ) were all played in London : five at Wembley , which was England 's national stadium and was considered to be the most important football venue in the world ; and one at White City Stadium in west London , which was used as a temporary replacement for nearby Wembley .
The group stage match between Uruguay and France played at White City Stadium ( originally built for the 1908 Summer Olympics ) was scheduled for a Friday , the same day as regularly scheduled greyhound racing at Wembley .
Because Wembley 's owner refused to cancel this , the game had to be moved to the alternative venue in London .
Group 2 's matches were played at Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield and Villa Park in Birmingham ; Group 3 's matches were played at Old Trafford in Manchester and Goodison Park in Liverpool ; and Group 4 's matches were played at Ayresome Park in Middlesbrough and Roker Park in Sunderland .
The most used venue was Wembley , which was used for nine matches , including all six featuring England , the final and the third - place match .
Goodison Park was used for five matches , Roker Park and Hillsborough both hosted four , while Old Trafford , Villa Park and Ayresome Park each hosted three matches and did not host any knockout round matches . !
colspan=2London !
Manchester Wembley Stadium White City
Stadium Old Trafford Capacity : 98,600 Capacity : 76,567 Capacity : 58,000 !
Birmingham !
colspan=2 , rowspan=8 Villa Park
Capacity : 52,000 !
Liverpool Goodison Park Capacity : 50,151 !
Sheffield !
Sunderland !
Middlesbrough Hillsborough Stadium Roker Park
Ayresome Park Capacity : 42,730 Capacity : 40,310 Capacity : 40,000 MATCH OFFICIALS Africa
* Ali Kandil
Asia
* Menachem Ashkenazi South America
* José María Codesal * Roberto Goicoechea
* Armando Marques
* Arturo Yamasaki
Europe
* John Adair * Tofiq Bahramov
* Leo Callaghan
* Joaquim Campos
* Ken Dagnall
* Gottfried Dienst
* Jim Finney
* Karol Galba *
Juan Gardeazábal Garay * Rudolf Kreitlein
* Concetto Lo Bello * Bertil Lööw * George McCabe
* Hugh Phillips
* Dimitar Rumentchev
* Pierre Schwinte * Kurt Tschenscher * Konstantin Zečević * István Zsolt SEEDING Section::::Seeding . !
width=20%Pot 1 :
South American !
width=25%Pot 2 :
European !
width=25%Pot 3 :
Latin European !
width=25%Pot 4 : Rest of the World valign="top " valign="top " * ( hosts ) valign="top " valign="top " SQUADS
Section::::Squads .
For a list of all squads that appeared in the final tournament , see 1966 FIFA World Cup squads .
GROUP STAGE GROUP 1 GROUP 2
*
West Germany were placed first due to superior goal average .
GROUP 3 GROUP
4 KNOCKOUT STAGE
BRACKET QUARTER - FINALS SEMI - FINALS
THIRD PLACE PLAY - OFF FINAL GOALSCORERS Section::::Goalscorers .
With nine goals , Eusébio was the top scorer in the tournament .
In total , 89 goals were scored by 47 players , with two of them credited as own goals .
9 goals
*
Eusébio 6 goals * Helmut Haller 4 goals
*
Geoff Hurst * Ferenc Bene * Valeriy Porkujan *
Franz Beckenbauer 3 goals
*
Luis
Artime
* Bobby Charlton * Roger Hunt
* José Augusto
* José Torres
* Eduard Malofeyev 2 goals * Rubén Marcos
* Kálmán Mészöly * Pak Seung - zin * Igor Chislenko *
Uwe Seeler 1 goal
* Ermindo Onega
*
Garrincha
* Pelé *
Rildo *
Tostão * Georgi Asparuhov * Martin Peters
* Héctor De Bourgoing * Gérard Hausser
*
János
Farkas
* Paolo Barison
*
Sandro Mazzola * Enrique Borja * Li Dong - woon
* Pak Doo - ik
* Yang Seung - kook * António Simões * Anatoliy Banishevskiy * Amancio * Josep Maria Fusté *
Pirri *
Manuel Sanchís *
René - Pierre Quentin
* Julio César Cortés *
Pedro Rocha * Lothar Emmerich
* Sigfried Held
*
Wolfgang Weber 1 own goal
* Ivan Davidov ( playing against Hungary )
* Ivan Vutsov ( playing against Portugal ) ALL - STAR TEAM Section::::All - star team . !
Goalkeeper !
Defenders !
Midfielders !
Forwards align
= left valign =
top align = left valign =
top align = left valign =
top align = left valign = top !
colspan="4
" FINAL STANDINGS 4 3 0 1 2 2 5
−3 1
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * 1966 FIFA World Cup
England ™ , FIFA.com
* Details at RSSSF
* FIFA Technical Report