DRAGON ( MIDDLE - EARTH ) J. R. R. Tolkien 's Middle - earth legendarium features dragons closely based on those of European legend .
Besides dragon ( derived from French ) , Tolkien variously used the terms drake ( the original English term , from Old English draca , in turn from Latin draco and Greek δράκων ) and worm ( from Old English wyrm , " serpent " , " dragon " ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The dragons were bred by Morgoth during the First Age , when Glaurung , the first dragon , appears .
Tolkien 's dragons are capable of breeding on their own , and in later ages the Withered Heath is purportedly their spawning ground .
INSPIRATION
Section::::Inspiration .
The Dragons were inspired by Fafnir from Germanic mythology , The Dragon from Beowulf , the Dragon from the legend of Saint George and the Dragon .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
Tolkien designed his own taxonomic system for dragons , based on locomotion and fire - breathing .
In Tolkien 's works , dragons are quadrupedal , like Komodo dragons or other lizards , and are either flightless ( Glaurung ) or are winged and capable of flight ( Ancalagon and Smaug ) .
Winged dragons are stated to have first appeared during the War of Wrath , the battle that ended the First Age .
Tolkien refers to dragons which breathe fire as " Fire - drakes " , or " Urulóki " ( singular " Urulokë " ) in Quenya .
It is not entirely clear whether the term " Urulóki " referred only to the first dragons such as Glaurung that could breathe fire but were wingless , or to any dragon that could breathe fire , and thus include Smaug .
In Appendix A of The Lord of the Rings Tolkien mentions a " Cold - drake " .
It is commonly assumed , though not directly stated , that this term indicates a dragon which can not breathe fire , rather than one who breathes ice or snow .
Further , Tolkien calls a fire - breathing dragon in the non - Middle - earth story Farmer Giles of Ham a " hot " one .
Tolkien calls the dragon Scatha a " long - worm " but does not explicitly explain the term .
OTHER CHARACTERISTICS
Section::::Other characteristics .
All of Tolkien 's dragons share a love of treasure ( especially gold ) , subtle intelligence , immense cunning , great physical strength , and a hypnotic power called " dragon - spell " .
They are extremely powerful and dangerous but mature very slowly .
Because of this , Melkor 's first attempts to use them against his enemies fail , as they are not yet powerful enough to be useful in battle .
Despite their evil beginnings , they are not purely destructive by nature , as can be seen by Smaug , who wants to be left in peace , though he did force out the dwarves in the Lonely Mountain .
Dragon - fire (
even that of Ancalagon the Black ) is described as not being hot enough to melt the One Ring ; however , four of the Dwarven Rings are consumed by Dragon - fire .
NAMED DRAGONS
Section::::Named dragons .
Tolkien named only four dragons in his Middle - earth writings .
Another , Chrysophylax Dives , appears in Farmer Giles of Ham , a story separate from the Middle - earth corpus .
GLAURUNG Section::::Glaurung .
Glaurung , first introduced in The Silmarillion , is described as the Father of Dragons in Tolkien 's legendarium , and the first of the Urulóki , the Fire - drakes of Angband .
He is a main antagonist in The Children of Húrin , in which he sets in motion events that bring about the protagonist Túrin 's eventual suicide before being slain by him .
Glaurung is shown to use his ability to control and enslave Men using his mind to wipe the memory of Túrin 's sister Nienor , though it was restored after Glaurung had perished .
He is described as having four legs and the ability to breathe fire , but no wings .
ANCALAGON
THE BLACK Section::::Ancalagon the Black .
Ancalagon :
( Sindarin : rushing jaws from anc ' jaw ' , alag ' impetuous ' )
Ancalagon the Black was a dragon bred by Morgoth during the First Age of Middle - earth , as told in The Silmarillion .
He was one of Morgoth 's most powerful servants , bred to be the greatest and mightiest of all dragons , and the first of the winged " fire - drakes " .
He arose like a storm of wind and fire from the infernal pits of Angband beneath the Iron Mountains , as a last defense of the realm of Dor Daedeloth .
Near the end of the War of Wrath that pitted Morgoth 's hosts against the Host of the Valar , Morgoth sent Ancalagon to lead a fleet of winged dragons from the fortress of Angband to destroy the Dark Lord 's enemies .
So powerful was the assault of the dragon flight that the Host of the Valar was driven back from the gates of Angband onto the ashy plain of Anfauglith .
Eärendil ' The Blessed ' in his powerfully hallowed Elven airborne ship Vingilot , aided by Thorondor and the great Eagles , battled Ancalagon and his dragons for an entire day .
At length Eärendil prevailed , casting Ancalagon upon the triple - peaked towers of Thangorodrim , destroying both Ancalagon and the towers .
With his last and mightiest defender slain , Morgoth was soon utterly defeated and made captive , thus ending the War of Wrath .
Ancalagon the Black was the greatest dragon of Middle - earth , undoubtedly the largest , and is often referred to as the " father of the winged - drakes " .
Like all other Urulóki , Ancalagon breathed fire , which was said to be hotter than any other known flame .
Two extinct genera have been named inspired by Tolkien 's dragon .
In 1977 , an extinct genus of worms from the Cambrian Burgess Shale was named Ancalagon and in 1980 , an extinct genus of mammal was named Ankalagon .
SCATHA Section::::Scatha .
Scatha was a mighty " long - worm " of the Grey Mountains .
Little is known of Scatha except that he was slain by Fram in the early days of the Éothéod ( circa ) .
After slaying Scatha , Fram 's ownership of his recovered hoard was then disputed by the Dwarves of that region .
Fram rebuked this claim , sending them instead Scatha 's teeth , with the words , " Jewels such as these you will not match in your treasuries , for they are hard to come by .
"
This led to his death in a feud with the Dwarves .
The Éothéod retained at least some of the hoard , and brought it south with them when they settled in Rohan .
The silver horn that Éowyn gave to Merry Brandybuck after the War of the Ring came from this hoard .
His name was likely taken from Anglo - Saxon sceaða , " injurious person , criminal , thief , assassin " .
SMAUG Section::::Smaug .
Smaug was the last named dragon of Middle - earth .
He was slain by Bard , a descendant of Girion , Lord of Dale .
A deadly winged fire - breathing dragon , he was described as red - gold in colour and his underbelly was encrusted with many gemstones from the treasure - pile he commonly slept upon once he had taken control of Erebor ( the Lonely Mountain ) .
The Arkenstone was buried right in the pile he slept on , but Smaug never noticed it .
Smaug had only a single weakness : there was a hole in his jewel encrusted underbelly on his left breast area .
Bilbo Baggins discovered this , which led to Smaug 's death above Esgaroth .
OTHER DRAGONS
Section::::Other dragons .
Other dragons were present at the Fall of Gondolin .
In the late Third Age the dragons bred in the Northern Waste and Withered Heath north of the Grey Mountains .
Dáin
I of Durin 's folk and his son Frór were killed by a cold - drake , prompting their people to leave the Grey Mountains .
EARLIER CONCEPTIONS
Section::::Earlier conceptions .
Dragons are already present in The Book of Lost Tales , the earliest Middle - earth - related narratives written by Tolkien , starting in 1917 .
The Book of Lost Tales was eventually posthumously published in two volumes as part of The History of Middle - earth series , which was edited and includes commentary by his son Christopher .
In the earliest drafts of " The Fall of Gondolin " , the Lost Tale that is the basis for The Silmarillion , Morgoth ( here called Melkor ) sends mechanical war machines in the form of dragons against the city ; some even serve as armoured personnel carriers for Orcs .
These machines do not appear in the published Silmarillion , also edited by Christopher Tolkien , in which real dragons attack the city .
As in the later conception of the dragons in the Legendarium , the winged dragons had not yet been devised by Morgoth at the time of the Fall of Gondolin .
The first winged dragons were coeval with Ancalagon the Black .
NON - CANON DRAGONS Section::::Non - canon dragons .
When the company Iron Crown Enterprises gained the licensing rights for games made from Tolkien 's books , they expanded the selection of named dragons considerably in both Middle - earth Role Playing and The Wizards , a trading card game set in Middle - earth .
Also in the real - time strategy game , based on Peter Jackson 's film trilogy , there is a dragon named Drogoth .
In , there are several types of creatures distantly related to dragons .
There are giant salamanders , worms ( long , quadrupedal serpents ) and drakes ( smaller , weaker , less intelligent forms of dragons . )
There is also an undead dragon in the game , Thorog , resurrected by the forces of the Witch - king of Angmar to aid him in maintaining control over the Misty Mountains .
Though not all dragons were mentioned by name in the official texts , names coming from sources other than Tolkien are said not to be " canonical " .
In a later expansion of the game , , a raid of 12 or 24 players takes place in the lair of Draigoch , another dragon in the Misty Mountains , though much further south in Enedwaith .
He , unlike Thorog , is alive , though similarly flies and breathes fire .
In , players encounter the dragon Úrgost and must ally with him against Agandaûr .
SEE ALSO
* Niënor Níniel
*
The Quest of Erebor NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Encyclopedia of Arda article on Middle - earth 's dragons * Concerning the Origin of Dragons