BATTLES OF SARATOGA
The Battles of Saratoga ( September 19 and October 7 , 1777 ) marked the climax of the Saratoga campaign , giving a decisive victory to the Americans over the British in the American Revolutionary War .
British General John Burgoyne led a large invasion army southward from Canada in the Champlain Valley , hoping to meet a similar British force marching northward from New York City and another British force marching eastward from Lake Ontario ; the southern and western forces never arrived , and Burgoyne was surrounded by American forces in upstate New York .
He fought two small battles to break out which took place 18 days apart on the same ground , south of Saratoga , New York .
They both failed .
Burgoyne found himself trapped by superior American forces with no relief , so he retreated to Saratoga ( now Schuylerville ) and surrendered his entire army there on October 17 .
His surrender , says historian Edmund Morgan , " was a great turning point of the war because it won for Americans the foreign assistance which was the last element needed for victory . "
Burgoyne 's strategy to divide New England from the southern colonies had started well but slowed due to logistical problems .
He won a small tactical victory over General Horatio Gates and the Continental Army in the September 19 at the cost of significant casualties .
His gains were erased when he again attacked the Americans in the October 7 and the Americans captured a portion of the British defenses .
Burgoyne was therefore compelled to retreat , and his army was surrounded by the much larger American force at Saratoga , forcing him to surrender on October 17 .
News of Burgoyne 's surrender was instrumental in formally bringing France into the war as an American ally , although it had previously given supplies , ammunition , and guns , notably the de Valliere cannon which played an important role in Saratoga .
This battle also resulted in Spain joining France in the war against Britain .
The battle on September 19 began when Burgoyne moved some of his troops in an attempt to flank the entrenched American position on Bemis Heights .
Benedict Arnold anticipated the maneuver and placed significant forces in his way .
Burgoyne did gain control of Freeman 's Farm , but it came at the cost of significant casualties .
Skirmishing continued in the days following the battle , while Burgoyne waited in the hope that reinforcements would arrive from New York City .
Patriot militia forces continued to arrive , meanwhile , swelling the size of the American army .
Disputes within the American camp led Gates to strip Arnold of his command .
British General Sir Henry Clinton moved up from New York City and attempted to divert American attention by capturing two forts in the Hudson River highlands on October 6 , but his efforts were too late to help Burgoyne .
Burgoyne attacked Bemis Heights again on October 7 after it became apparent that he would not receive relieving aid in time .
This battle culminated in heavy fighting marked by Arnold 's spirited rallying of the American troops .
Burgoyne 's forces were thrown back to the positions that they held before the September 19 battle , and the Americans captured a portion of the entrenched British defenses .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The American Revolutionary War was approaching the two - year point , and the British changed their plans .
They decided to split the Thirteen Colonies and isolate New England from what they believed to be the more Loyalist middle and southern colonies .
The British command devised a plan to divide the colonies with a three - way pincer movement in 1777 .
The western pincer under the command of Barry St. Leger was to progress from Ontario through western New York , following the Mohawk River , and the southern pincer was to progress up the Hudson River valley from New York City .
The northern pincer was to proceed southward from Montreal , and the three forces were to meet in the vicinity of Albany , New York , severing New England from the other colonies .
BRITISH SITUATION Section::::British situation .
British General John Burgoyne moved south from the province of Quebec in June 1777 to gain control of the upper Hudson River valley .
His campaign had become bogged down in difficulties following a victory at Fort Ticonderoga .
Elements of the army had reached the upper Hudson as early as the end of July , but logistical and supply difficulties delayed the main army at Fort Edward .
One attempt to alleviate these difficulties failed when nearly 1,000 men were killed or captured at the August 16 Battle of Bennington .
Furthermore , news reached Burgoyne on August 28 that St. Leger 's expedition down the Mohawk River valley had turned back after the failed Siege of Fort Stanwix .
General William Howe had taken his army from New York City by sea on a campaign to capture Philadelphia instead of moving north to meet Burgoyne .
Most of Burgoyne 's Indian support had fled following the loss at Bennington , and his situation was becoming difficult .
He needed to reach defensible winter quarters , requiring either retreat back to Ticonderoga or advance to Albany , and he decided to advance .
He then deliberately cut communications to the north so that he would not need to maintain a chain of heavily fortified outposts between his position and Ticonderoga , and he decided to cross the Hudson River while he was in a relatively strong position .
He ordered Baron Riedesel , who commanded the rear of the army , to abandon outposts from Skenesboro south , and then had the army cross the Hudson just north of Saratoga between September 13 and 15 .
AMERICAN SITUATION Section::::American situation .
The Continental Army had been in a slow retreat since Burgoyne 's capture of Ticonderoga early in July , under the command of Major General Philip Schuyler , and was encamped south of Stillwater , New York .
On August 19 , Major General Horatio Gates assumed command from Schuyler , whose political fortunes had fallen over the loss of Ticonderoga and the ensuing retreat .
Gates and Schuyler were from very different backgrounds and did not get along with each other ; they had previously argued over command issues in the army 's Northern Department .
The army was growing in size because of increased militia turnout following calls by state governors , the success at Bennington , and widespread outrage over the slaying of Jane McCrea , the fiancée of a Loyalist in Burgoyne 's army by Indians under Burgoyne 's command .
General George Washington 's strategic decisions also improved the situation for Gates ' army .
Washington was most concerned about the movements of General Howe .
He was aware that Burgoyne was also moving , and he took some risks in July .
He sent aid north in the form of Major General Benedict Arnold , his most aggressive field commander , and Major General Benjamin Lincoln , a Massachusetts man noted for his influence with the New England militia .
He ordered 750 men from Israel Putnam 's forces defending the New York highlands to join Gates ' army in August , before he was certain that Howe had indeed sailed south .
He also sent some of the best forces from his own army : Colonel Daniel Morgan and the newly formed Provisional Rifle Corps , which comprised about 500 specially selected riflemen from Pennsylvania , Maryland , and Virginia , chosen for their sharpshooting ability .
This unit came to be known as Morgan 's Riflemen .
On September 7 , Gates ordered his army to march north .
A site was selected for its defensive potential that was known as Bemis Heights , just north of Stillwater and about south of Saratoga ; the army spent about a week constructing defensive works designed by Polish engineer Tadeusz Kościuszko .
The heights had a clear view of the area and commanded the only road to Albany , where it passed through a defile between the heights and the Hudson River .
To the west of the heights lay more heavily forested bluffs that would present a significant challenge to any heavily equipped army .
FIRST SARATOGA : BATTLE OF FREEMAN 'S FARM ( SEPTEMBER 19 )
PRELUDE
Section::::First Saratoga : Battle of Freeman 's Farm ( September 19 ) .
Section::::Prelude .
Moving cautiously , since the departure of his Native American support had deprived him of reliable reports on the American position , Burgoyne advanced to the south after crossing the Hudson .
On September 18 the vanguard of his army had reached a position just north of Saratoga , about from the American defensive line , and skirmishes occurred between American scouting parties and the leading elements of his army .
The American camp had become a bed of festering intrigue ever since Arnold 's return from Fort Stanwix .
While he and Gates had previously been on reasonably good terms in spite of their prickly egos , Arnold managed to turn Gates against him by taking on officers friendly to Schuyler as staff , dragging him into the ongoing feud between the two .
These conditions had not yet reached a boil on September 19 , but the day 's events contributed to the situation .
Gates had assigned the left wing of the defenses to Arnold , and assumed command himself of the right , which was nominally assigned to General Lincoln , whom Gates had detached in August with some troops to harass the British positions behind Burgoyne 's army .
Both Burgoyne and Arnold understood the importance of the American left , and the need to control the heights there .
After the morning fog lifted around 10 am , Burgoyne ordered the army to advance in three columns .
Baron Riedesel led the left column , consisting of the German troops and the 47th Foot , on the river road , bringing the main artillery and guarding supplies and the boats on the river .
General James Inglis Hamilton commanded the center column , consisting of the 9th , 20th , 21st , and 62nd regiments , which would attack the heights , and General Simon Fraser led the right wing with the 24th Regiment and the light infantry and grenadier companies , to turn the American left flank by negotiating the heavily wooded high ground north and west of Bemis Heights .
Arnold also realized such a flanking maneuver was likely , and petitioned Gates for permission to move his forces from the heights to meet potential movements , where the American skill at woodlands combat would be at an advantage .
Gates , whose preferred strategy was to sit and wait for the expected frontal assault , grudgingly permitted a reconnaissance in force consisting of Daniel Morgan 's men and Henry Dearborn 's light infantry .
When Morgan 's men reached an open field northwest of Bemis Heights belonging to Loyalist John Freeman , they spotted British advance troops in the field .
Fraser 's column was slightly delayed and had not yet reached the field , while Hamilton 's column had also made its way across a ravine and was approaching the field from the east through dense forest and difficult terrain .
Riedesel 's force , while it was on the road , was delayed by obstacles thrown down by the Americans .
The sound of gunfire to the west prompted Riedesel to send some of his artillery down a track in that direction .
The troops Morgan 's men saw were an advance company from Hamilton 's column .
BATTLE Section::::Battle .
Morgan placed marksmen at strategic positions , who then picked off virtually every officer in the advance company .
Morgan and his men then charged , unaware that they were headed directly for Burgoyne 's main army .
While they succeeded in driving back the advance company , Fraser 's leading edge arrived just in time to attack Morgan 's left , scattering his men back into the woods .
James Wilkinson , who had ridden forward to observe the fire , returned to the American camp for reinforcements .
As the British company fell back toward the main column , the leading edge of that column opened fire , killing a number of their own men .
There was then a lull in the fighting around 1:00 pm as Hamilton 's men began to form up on the north side of the field , and American reinforcements began to arrive from the south .
Learning that Morgan was in trouble , Gates ordered out two more regiments ( 1st and 3rd New Hampshire ) to support him , with additional regiments ( 2nd New York , 4th New York , the 1st Canadian , and Connecticut militia ) from the brigade of Enoch Poor to follow .
Burgoyne arrayed Hamilton 's men with the 21st on the right , the 20th on the left , and the 62nd in the center , with the 9th held in reserve .
The battle then went through phases alternating between intense fighting and breaks in the action .
Morgan 's men had regrouped in the woods , and picked off officers and artillerymen .
They were so effective at reducing the latter that the Americans several times gained brief control of British field pieces , only to lose them in the next British charge .
At one point it was believed that Burgoyne himself had been taken down by a sharpshooter ; it was instead one of Burgoyne 's aides , riding a richly dressed horse , who was the victim .
The center of the British line was very nearly broken at one point , and only the intervention of General Phillips , leading the 20th , made it possible for the 62nd to reform .
In Roger Lamb 's memoir , ( a British soldier present at the battle ) , he wrote In this battle an unusual number of officers fell , as our army abounded with young men of respectability at this time , who after several years of general peace anterior to the American revolution , were attracted to the profession of arms .
Three sulbalterns ( officers ) of the 20th regiment on this occasion , the oldest of whom did not exceed the age of seventeen years , were buried together The final stroke of the battle belonged to the British .
Around 3 pm , Riedesel sent a messenger to Burgoyne for instructions .
He returned two hours later with orders to guard the baggage train , but also to send as many men as he could spare toward the American right flank .
In a calculated risk , Riedesel left 500 men to guard the vital supply train and marched off toward the action with the rest of his column .
Two of his companies advanced on the double and opened vicious fire on the American right , and Fraser 's force threatened to turn the American left flank .
In response to the latter threat , Arnold requested more forces , and Gates allowed him to dispatch Ebenezer Learned 's brigade ( 2nd , 8th and 9th Massachusetts ) .
( If Arnold had been on the field , these forces might have instead faced the larger danger posed by Riedesel 's force . )
Fortunately for the American right , darkness set in , bringing an end to the battle .
The Americans retreated back to their defenses , leaving the British on the field .
Burgoyne had gained the field of battle , but suffered nearly 600 casualties .
Most of these were to Hamilton 's center column , where the 62nd was reduced to the size of a single company , and three quarters of the artillerymen were killed or wounded .
American losses were nearly 300 killed and seriously wounded .
It has been widely recounted in histories of this battle that General Arnold was on the field , directing some of the action .
However , John Luzader , a former park historian at the Saratoga National Historical Park , carefully documents the evolution of this story and believes it is without foundation in contemporary materials , and that Arnold remained at Gates ' headquarters , receiving news and dispatching orders through messengers .
Arnold biographer James Kirby Martin , however , disagrees with Luzader , arguing that Arnold played a more active role at Freeman 's Farm by directing patriot troops into position and possibly leading some charges before being ordered back to headquarters by Gates .
INTERLUDE
Section::::Interlude .
Burgoyne 's council discussed whether to attack the next day , and a decision was reached to delay further action at least one day , to September 21 .
The army moved to consolidate the position closer to the American line while some men collected their dead .
The attack on the 21st was called off when Burgoyne received a letter dated September 12 from Henry Clinton , who was commanding the British garrison in New York City .
Clinton suggested that he could " make a push at [ Fort ] Montgomery in about ten days . "
( Fort Montgomery was an American post on the Hudson River , in the New York Highlands south of West Point ) .
If Clinton left New York on September 22 , " about ten days " after he wrote the letter , he still could not hope to arrive in the vicinity of Saratoga before the end of the month .
Burgoyne , running low on men and food , was still in a very difficult position , but he decided to wait in the hope that Clinton would arrive to save his army .
Burgoyne wrote to Clinton on September 23 , requesting some sort of assistance or diversion to draw Gates ' army away .
Clinton sailed from New York on October 3 , and captured Forts Montgomery and Clinton on October 6 .
The furthest north any of his troops reached was Clermont , where they raided the estate of the prominent Patriot Livingston family on October 16 .
Unknown to either side at Saratoga , General Lincoln and Colonel John Brown had staged an attack against the British position at Fort Ticonderoga .
Lincoln had collected 2,000 men at Bennington by early September .
Brown and a detachment of 500 men captured poorly defended positions between Ticonderoga and Lake George , and then spent several days ineffectually bombarding the fort .
These men , and some of the prisoners they freed along the way , were back in the American camp by September 29 .
In the American camp , the mutual resentment between Horatio Gates and Benedict Arnold finally exploded into open hostility .
Gates quickly reported the action of September 19 to the Congress and Governor George Clinton of New York , but he failed to mention Arnold at all .
The field commanders and men universally credited Arnold for their success .
Almost all the troops involved were from Arnold 's command and Arnold was the one directing the battle while Gates sat in his tent .
Arnold protested , and the dispute escalated into a shouting match that ended with Gates relieving Arnold of his command and giving it to Benjamin Lincoln .
Arnold asked for a transfer to Washington 's command , which Gates granted , but instead of leaving he remained in his tent .
There is no documentary evidence for a commonly recounted anecdote that a petition signed by line officers convinced Arnold to stay in camp .
During this period there were almost daily clashes between pickets and patrols of the two armies .
Morgan 's sharpshooters , familiar with the strategy and tactics of woodland warfare , constantly harassed British patrols on the western flank .
As September passed into October it became clear that Clinton was not coming to help Burgoyne , who put the army on short rations on October 3 .
The next day , Burgoyne called a war council in which several options were discussed , but no conclusive decisions were made .
When the council resumed the next day , Riedesel proposed retreat , in which he was supported by Fraser .
Burgoyne refused to consider it , insisting that retreat would be disgraceful .
They finally agreed to conduct an assault on the American left flank with two thousand men , more than one - third of the army , on October 7 .
The army he was attacking , however , had grown in the interval .
In addition to the return of Lincoln 's detachment , militiamen and supplies continued to pour into the American camp , including critical increases in ammunition , which had been severely depleted in the first battle .
The army Burgoyne faced on October 7 was more than 12,000 men strong and was led by a man who knew how much trouble Burgoyne was in .
Gates had received consistent intelligence from the stream of deserters leaving the British lines and had also intercepted Clinton 's response to Burgoyne 's plea for help .
SECOND SARATOGA : BATTLE OF BEMIS HEIGHTS ( OCTOBER 7 ) BRITISH
FORAY
Section::::Second Saratoga : Battle of Bemis Heights ( October 7 ) .
Section::::British foray .
While Burgoyne 's troop strength was nominally higher , he likely had only about 5,000 effective , battle - ready troops on October 7 , as losses from the earlier battles in the campaign and desertions following the September 19 battle had reduced his forces .
General Riedesel advised that the army retreat .
Burgoyne decided to reconnoiter the American left flank to see if an attack was possible .
As an escort , the generals took Fraser 's Advanced Corps , with light troops and the 24th Foot on the right and the combined British grenadiers on the left , and a force drawn from all the German regiments in the army in the center .
There were eight British cannon under Major Williams and two Hesse - Hanau cannon under Captain Pausch .
Leaving their camp between 10 and 11 am , they advanced about three - quarters of a mile ( 1 km ) to Barber 's wheat field on a rise above Mill Brook , where they stopped to observe the American position .
While the field afforded some room for artillery to work , the flanks were dangerously close to the surrounding woods .
Gates , following the removal of Arnold from the field command , assumed command of the American left and gave the right to General Lincoln .
When American scouts brought news of Burgoyne 's movement to Gates , he ordered Morgan 's riflemen out to the far left , with Poor 's men ( 1st , 2nd , and 3rd New Hampshire on the left ; the 2nd and 4th New York Regiments ) on the right , and Learned 's ( 1st New York , 1st Canadian , 2nd , 8th and 9th Massachusetts Regiments , plus militia companies ) in the center .
A force of 1,200 New York militia under Brigadier General Abraham Ten Broeck was held in reserve behind Learned 's line .
In all , more than 8,000 Americans took the field that day , including about 1,400 men from Lincolns command that were deployed when the action became particularly fierce .
The opening fire came between 2 and 2:30 pm from the British grenadiers .
Poor 's men held their fire , and the terrain made the British shooting largely ineffective .
When Major Acland led the British grenadiers in a bayonet charge , the Americans finally began shooting at close range .
Acland fell , shot in both legs , and many of the grenadiers also went down .
Their column was a total rout , and Poor 's men advanced to take Acland and Williams prisoner and capture their artillery .
On the American left , things were also not going well for the British .
Morgan 's men swept aside the Canadians and Native Americans to engage Fraser 's regulars .
Although slightly outnumbered , Morgan managed to break up several British attempts to move west .
While General Fraser was mortally wounded in this phase of the battle , a frequently told story claiming it to be the work of Timothy Murphy , one of Morgan 's men , appears to be a 19th - century fabrication .
The fall of Fraser and the arrival of Ten Broeck 's large militia brigade ( which roughly equaled the entire British reconnaissance force in size ) , broke the British will , and they began a disorganized retreat toward their entrenchments .
Burgoyne was also very nearly killed by one of Morgan 's marksmen ; three shots hit his horse , hat , and waistcoat .
The first phase of the battle lasted about one hour and cost Burgoyne nearly 400 men , including the capture of most of the grenadiers ' command , and six of the ten field pieces brought to the action .
AMERICAN ATTACK Section::::American attack .
At this point , the Americans were joined by an unexpected participant .
General Arnold , who was " betraying great agitation and wrath " in the American camp , and may have been drinking , rode out to join the action .
Gates immediately sent Major Armstrong after him with orders to return ; Armstrong did not catch up with Arnold until the action was effectively over .
( A letter , written by a witness to proceedings in the camp , suggests that Arnold did in fact have authorization from Gates to engage in this action . )
The defenses on the right side of the British camp were anchored by two redoubts .
The outermost one was defended by about 300 men under the command of the Hessian Heinrich von Breymann , while the other was under the command of Lord Balcarres .
A small contingent of Canadians occupied the ground between these two fortifications .
Most of the retreating force headed for Balcarres ' position , as Breymann 's was slightly north and further away from the early action .
Arnold led the American chase , and then led Poor 's men in an attack on the Balcarres redoubt .
Balcarres had set up his defenses well , and the redoubt was held , in action so fierce that Burgoyne afterwards wrote , " A more determined perseverance than they showed … is not in any officer 's experience " .
Seeing that the advance was checked , and that Learned was preparing to attack the Breymann redoubt , Arnold moved toward that action , recklessly riding between the lines and remarkably emerging unhurt .
He led the charge of Learned 's men through the gap between the redoubts , which exposed the rear of Breymann 's position , where Morgan 's men had circled around from the far side .
In furious battle , the redoubt was taken and Breymann was killed .
Arnold 's horse was hit in one of the final volleys , and Arnold 's leg was broken by both shot and the falling horse .
Major Armstrong finally caught up with Arnold to officially order him back to headquarters ; he was carried back in a litter .
The capture of Breymann 's redoubt exposed the British camp , but darkness was setting in .
An attempt by some Germans to retake the redoubt ended in capture as darkness fell and an unreliable guide led them to the American line .
SURRENDER Section::::Surrender .
Burgoyne had lost 1,000 men in the two battles , leaving him outnumbered by roughly 3 to 1 ; American losses came to about 500 killed and wounded .
Burgoyne had also lost several of his most effective leaders , his attempts to capture the American position had failed , and his forward line was now breached .
After the second battle , Burgoyne lit fires at his remaining forward positions and withdrew under the cover of darkness .
He withdrew his men 10–15 miles north , near present - day Schuylerville , New York .
By the morning of October 8 , he was back in the fortified positions he had held on September 16 .
On October 13 , with his army surrounded , Burgoyne held a council of war to propose terms of surrender .
Riedesel suggested that they be paroled and allowed to march back to Canada without their weapons .
Burgoyne felt that Gates would not even consider such terms , asking instead to be conveyed to Boston , where they would sail back to Europe .
After several days of negotiations , the two sides signed the capitulation .
On October 17 , Burgoyne surrendered his army to Gates .
The British and German troops were accorded the traditional honors of war as they marched out to surrender .
The troops formed the Convention Army , named after the convention that granted them safe passage back to Europe .
However , the Continental Congress revoked the convention , and the Convention Army was kept in captivity until the end of the war .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
Burgoyne 's failed campaign marked a major turning point in the war .
General Burgoyne returned to England and was never given another commanding position in the British Army .
The British learned that the Americans would fight bravely and effectively .
Said one British officer :
The courage and obstinacy with which the Americans fought were the astonishment of everyone , and we now became fully convinced that they are not that contemptible enemy we had hitherto imagined them , incapable of standing a regular engagement and that they would only fight behind strong and powerful works .
In recognition of his contribution to the battles at Saratoga , General Arnold had his seniority restored ( he had lost it after being passed over for promotion earlier in 1777 ) .
His leg wound left Arnold bedridden for five months .
Later , while still unfit for field service but serving as military governor of Philadelphia , Arnold entered into treasonous correspondence with the British .
He received command of the fort at West Point and plotted to hand it over to the British , only to flee into the British lines when the capture of his contact John Andre led to the exposure of the plot .
Arnold went on to serve under William Phillips , the commander of Burgoyne 's right wing , in a 1781 expedition into Virginia .
Although he left the direction of the battle to subordinates , General Gates received a great deal of credit as the commanding general for the greatest American victory of the war to date .
He may have conspired with others to replace George Washington as the commander - in - chief .
Instead , he received the command of the main American army in the South .
He led it to a disastrous defeat at the 1780 Battle of Camden , where he was at the forefront of a panicked retreat .
Gates never commanded troops in the field again .
In response to Burgoyne 's surrender , Congress declared December 18 , 1777 , as a national day " for solemn Thanksgiving and praise " ; it was the nation 's first official observance of a holiday with that name .
FRENCH AID Section::::French aid .
Once news of Burgoyne 's surrender reached France , King Louis XVI decided to enter into negotiations with the Americans that resulted in a formal Franco - American alliance and French entry into the war .
This moved the conflict onto a global stage .
As a consequence , Britain was forced to divert resources used to fight the war in North America to theaters in the West Indies and Europe , and rely on what turned out to be the chimera of Loyalist support in its North American operations .
Being defeated by the British in the French and Indian War more than a decade earlier , France found an opportunity to undercut British power and ultimately of revenge by aiding the colonists throughout the Revolutionary War .
Prior to the Battle of Saratoga , France did n't fully aid the colonists .
However , after the Battles of Saratoga were conclusively won by the colonists , France realized that the Americans had the hope of winning the war , and began fully aiding the colonists by sending soldiers , donations , loans , military arms , and supplies .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
The battlefield and the site of Burgoyne 's surrender have been preserved , and are now administered by the National Park Service as the Saratoga National Historical Park , which was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1966 .
The park preserves a number of the buildings in the area and contains a variety of monuments .
The Saratoga Monument obelisk has four niches , three of which hold statues of American commanders : Gates and Schuyler and of Colonel Daniel Morgan .
The fourth niche , where Arnold 's statue would go , is empty .
A more dramatic memorial to Arnold 's heroism , that does not name him , is the Boot Monument .
Donated by Civil War General John Watts de Peyster , it shows a boot with spurs and the stars of a major general .
It stands at the spot where Arnold was shot on October 7 charging Breymann 's redoubt and is dedicated to " the most brilliant soldier of the Continental Army " .
Six Army National Guard units ( 101st Eng Bn , 102nd Inf , 125th QM Co , 181st Inf , 182nd Inf and 192nd MP Bn ) are derived from American units that participated in the Battle of Saratoga .
There are now only thirty units in the U.S. Army with lineages that go back to the colonial era .
There are a number of ships named after the battles including USS Saratoga ( 1842 ) , USS Saratoga ( CV-3 ) , and USS Saratoga ( CV-60 )
REFERENCES IN POPULAR
CULTURE Section::::References in Popular Culture .
In an episode of The Brady Bunch titled " Everyone Ca n't be George Washington " , which originally aired on December 22 , 1972 , Peter ( Christopher Knight ) is assigned the part of Benedict Arnold in a school play about the American Revolution .
His teacher Miss Bailey incorrectly states that Benedict Arnold was wounded at the Battle of Saratoga when there was , in fact no SINGLE Battle of Saratoga .
She also fails to mention that Arnold was wounded during the assault on Quebec City in the same leg .
SEE ALSO
* List of American Revolutionary War battles
* Saratoga National Historical Park
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Corbett , Theodore .
( 2012 )
No Turning Point : The Saratoga Campaign in Perspective .
Norman OK : University of Oklahoma Press .
* ( Paperback { { ISBN0 - 8050 - 6123 - 1 } * { { Cite book last =
Luzader first =
John F ref
= Luzader title
= Saratoga : A Military History of the Decisive Campaign of the American Revolutionlocation =
New York publisher =
Savas Beatie isbn=978 - 1 - 932714 - 44 - 9 url = https://books.google.com / books?id = qroFo8gWha4C&vq = resigned } } * { { Cite book title = Saratoga 1777 :
Turning Point of a Revolutionfirst = Brendanlast = Morrisseypublisher = Osprey Publishingyear=2000isbn=978 - 1 - 85532 - 862 - 4 ref = Morrissey oclc=43419003location =
Oxford } } * { { Cite book last =
Murphy first
=
Jim title =
The Real Benedict Arnoldpublisher =
Houghton Mifflinyear=2007isbn=978 - 0
- 395 - 77609 - 4ref
= Murphy } } * { { Cite book last =
Nickerson first
= Hoffman title =
The Turning Point of the Revolution publisher = Kennikatyear=1967 origyear=1928location
=
Port Washington , NYoclc=549809ref = Nickerson }
} * { { Cite book title =
This Destructive Warfirst =
Johnlast =
Pancakepublisher = University of Alabama Pressyear=1985ref = Pancakeisbn=0 - 8173 - 0191 - 7 } } * { { Cite book last =
Randall first =
Willard
Sterneyear=1990title = Benedict Arnold : Patriot and Traitorpublisher =
William Morrow and Incisbn=978 - 1 - 55710 - 034 - 4ref
= Randall } } * { { Cite book title = Infantry Regiments of the US Armyfirst = James A.last =
Sawickipublisher = Wyvern Publicationslocation =
Dumfries , VAyear=1981isbn=978 - 0
- 9602404 - 3 - 2ref
= Sawicki } } * { { Cite web title = Saratoga National Historical Parkpublisher =
National Park Serviceaccessdate=2009 - 06 - 23ref = NPS
archiveurl=
https://web.archive.org/web/20090530051324/http://www.nps.gov/sara/ archivedate=
2009 - 05 - 30 url = http://www.nps.gov
/ sara/ } } * { { Cite web url = http://www.nps.gov / archive / sara / tour-7.htmtitle = Saratoga National Historical Park –
Tour Stop
7publisher =
National Park Service accessdate=2009 - 06 - 23ref = NPSBoot } } * { { Cite web url =
https://archive.org / stream / marchtosaratogag008320mbp / marchtosaratogag008320mbp_djvu.txttitle
= March To Saratoga General Burgoyne
And The American Campaign 1777first = Harrisonlast
= Birdpublisher =
New York Oxford University Pressyear=1963ref = Bird } } { { Refend } } FURTHER READING *
{ { Cite booklast =
Creasyfirst =
Sir Edwardtitle =
The Fifteen Decisive Battles of the Worldurl = https://www.questia.com / PM.qst?a = o&d=106242918year=1908 } } * { { Cite booklast =
Furneauxfirst = Ruperttitle =
The Battle of Saratogapublisher = Stein and Daylocation =
New Yorkyear=1971 } } * { { Cite booklast =
Mintzfirst =
Max Mtitle =
The Generals of Saratoga : John Burgoyne and Horatio Gatesyear=1990publisher =
Yale University Pressisbn=0 - 300 - 04778 - 9 } } * { { Cite booklast =
Pattersonfirst =
Samuel Whitetitle =
Horatio Gates : Defender of American Libertiesurl = https://www.questia.com /
PM.qst?a =
o&d=100637218publisher = Columbia University Pressyear=1941 } } * { { Cite booklast =
Savasfirst =
Theodore Pauthor2 =
Dameron , J. Davidtitle =
A Guide to the Battles of the American Revolutionpublisher =
Savas Beatieyear=2005isbn=1 - 932714 - 12-X } } * { { Cite booklast =
Wardfirst =
Christophertitle = War of the Revolution , 2 Volumespublisher = MacMillanyear=1952 } }
{ { Refend } } EXTERNAL LINKS
* Saratoga :
The Tide Turns on the Frontier , a National Park Service Teaching with Historic Places ( TwHP ) lesson plan
* War Boardgame on the Battle of Saratoga
* Monument to Arnold 's leg at Saratoga , from pbs.org * Battle of Bemis ' Heights , and Retreat of Burgoyne * { { Cite weburl = http://www.britishbattles.com / battle - freemans - farm.htmtitle
= Battle of Freeman 's Farmpublisher = Britishbattles.comaccessdate=9 October 2014 }
} * { { Cite weburl =
http://britishbattles.com / battle - saratoga.htmtitle =
The Battle of Saratogapublisher =
Britishbattles.comaccessdate=9 October 2014 } } * Animated History of the Saratoga Campaign * { { Cite weburl =
http://naticklabs.org / brunswick.htmltitle =
Friedrich Kaltofen , one of the intentionally misnamed ' Brunswick Deserters .
'accessdate=9
October 2014archive - url
= https://web.archive.org /
web/20160304061335 / http://naticklabs.org / brunswick.htmlarchive -
date=4 March 2016dead - url = yesdf = dmy - all } }