ALICE ( ALICE 'S ADVENTURES IN WONDERLAND )
Alice is a fictional character and protagonist of Lewis Carroll 's children 's novel Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland ( 1865 ) and its sequel , Through the Looking - Glass ( 1871 ) .
A child in the mid - Victorian era , Alice unintentionally goes on an underground adventure after accidentally falling down a rabbit hole into Wonderland ; in the sequel , she steps through a mirror into an alternative world .
The character originated in stories told by Carroll to entertain the Liddell sisters while rowing on the Isis with his friend Robinson Duckworth , and on subsequent rowing trips .
Although she shares her given name with Alice Liddell , scholars disagree about the extent to which she was based upon Liddell .
Characterized by Carroll as " loving and gentle " , " courteous to all " , " trustful " , and " wildly curious " , Alice has been variously seen as clever , well - mannered , and skeptical of authority , although some commentators find more negative aspects of her personality .
Her appearance changed from Alice 's Adventures Under Ground , the first draft of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , to political cartoonist John Tenniel 's illustrations of her in the two Alice books .
Alice has been identified as a cultural icon .
She has been described as a departure from the usual nineteenth - century child protagonist , and the success of the two Alice books inspired numerous sequels , parodies , and imitations , with protagonists similar to Alice in temperament .
She has been interpreted through various critical approaches , and has appeared and been re - imagined in numerous adaptations , including Walt Disney 's influential film ( 1951 ) .
Her continuing appeal has been ascribed to her ability to be continuously re - imagined .
CHARACTER Section::::Character .
Alice is a fictional child living during the middle of the Victorian era .
In Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland ( 1865 ) , which takes place on 4 May , the character is widely assumed to be seven years old ; Alice gives her age as seven and a half in the sequel , which takes place on 4 November .
In the text of the two Alice books , author Lewis Carroll often did not remark on the physical appearance of his protagonist .
Details of her fictional life can be discovered from the text of the two books .
At home , she has a significantly older sister , a pet cat named Dinah , an elderly nurse , and a governess , who teaches her lessons starting at nine in the morning .
Additionally , she had gone to a day school at some point in her backstory .
Alice has been variously characterised as belonging to the upper class , middle class , or part of the bourgeoisie .
When writing on her personality in " Alice on the Stage " ( April 1887 ) , Carroll described her as " loving and gentle " , " courteous to all " , " trustful " , and " wildly curious , and with the eager enjoyment of Life that comes only in the happy hours of childhood , when all is new and fair , and when Sin and Sorrow are but names — empty words signifying nothing ! "
Commentators characterise her as " innocent " , " imaginative " , introspective , generally well - mannered , critical of authority figures , and clever .
Others see less positive traits in Alice , writing that she frequently shows unkindness in her conversations with the animals in Wonderland , takes violent action against the character Bill the Lizard by kicking him into the air , and reflects her social upbringing in her lack of sensitivity and impolite replies .
According to Donald Rackin , " In spite of her class- and time - bound prejudices , her frightened fretting and childish , abject tears , her priggishness and self - assured ignorance , her sometimes blatant hypocrisy , her general powerlessness and confusion , and her rather cowardly readiness to abandon her struggles at the ends of the two adventures — [ ... ]
many readers still look up to Alice as a mythic embodiment of control , perseverance , bravery , and mature good sense . "
The degree to which the character of Alice can be identified as Alice Liddell is controversial .
Some critics identify the character as Liddell , or write that she inspired the character .
Others argue that Carroll considered his protagonist and Liddell to be separate .
According to Carroll , his character was not based on any real child , but was entirely fictional .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Alice debuted in Carroll 's first draft of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , Alice 's Adventures Under Ground .
Under Ground originated from stories told to the Liddell sisters during an afternoon on 4 July 1862 while rowing on the Isis with his friend Robinson Duckworth , and on subsequent rowing trips .
At the request of ten - year - old Alice Liddell , Carroll wrote down the stories as Alice 's Adventures Under Ground , which he completed in February 1864 .
Under Ground contains thirty - seven illustrations , twenty - seven of which Alice is depicted in .
As his drawings of Alice bear little physical resemblance to Alice Liddell , whose given name she shares , it has been suggested that Alice 's younger sister , Edith , might have been his model .
He portrays his protagonist as wearing a tunic , in contrast to the tailored dresses that the Liddell sisters might have worn .
His illustrations drew influence from the Pre - Raphaelite painters Dante Gabriel Rossetti and Arthur Hughes , whose painting Girl with the Liliacs ( 1863 ) he visually alluded to in one drawing in Under Ground .
He gave the hand - written Alice 's Adventures Under Ground to Alice Liddell in November 1864 .
John Tenniel illustrated Alice Adventures in Wonderland ( 1865 ) for a fee of £ 138 , which was roughly a fourth of what Carroll earned each year and which he paid for himself .
Tenniel was an already successful , well - known lead illustrator for the satirical magazine Punch , when Carroll employed him as an illustrator in April 1864 .
In contrast , Carroll did not have any literary fame at the time .
Tenniel likely based the majority of his illustrations off those in Under Ground , and Carroll carefully oversaw his work ; among his suggestions was that Alice should have long , light - colored hair .
Alice 's clothes are typical of what a girl belonging to the middle class in the mid - Victorian era might have worn at home .
Her pinafore , a detail created by Tenniel and now associated with the character , " suggests a certain readiness for action and lack of ceremony " .
Tenniel 's depiction of Alice has its origins in a physically similar character which appeared in at least eight cartoons in Punch , during a four - year period that began in 1860 .
In an 1860 cartoon , this character wore clothes now associated with Alice : " the full skirt , pale stockings , flat shoes , and a hairband over her loose hair " .
In the cartoons , the character appeared as an archetype of a pleasant girl from the middle classes ; she has been described as similar to Alice : " a pacifist and noninterventionist , patient and polite , slow to return the aggression of others " .
Tenniel 's fee for illustrating the sequel Through the Looking - Glass ( 1871 ) rose to £ 290 , which Carroll again paid for out of his own pocket .
Tenniel changed Alice 's clothing slightly in the sequel , where she wears horizontal - striped stockings instead of plain ones and has a more ornate pinafore with a bow .
Originally , Alice wore a " crinoline - supported chessmanlike skirt " similar to that of the Red and White Queens , as a queen ; the design was rejected by Carroll .
Her clothing as a queen and in the railway carriage is a polonaise - styled dress with a bustle , which would have been fashionable at the time .
The clothing worn by the characters in " My First Sermon " ( 1863 ) by pre - Raphaelite painter John Millais and " The Travelling Companions " ( 1862 ) by Victorian painter Augustus Leopold Egg have some elements in common with Alice 's clothing in the railway carriage .
Carroll expressed unhappiness at Tenniel 's refusal to use a model for illustrations of Alice , writing that this resulted in her head and feet being out of proportion .
In February 1881 , Carroll contacted his publisher about the possibility of creating The Nursery " Alice " , a simplified edition of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland with coloured and enlarged illustrations .
Tenniel coloured twenty illustrations from Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland , in addition to revising some aspects of them ; Alice is depicted as a blonde , and her dress is yellow , with blue stockings .
Her dress became pleated with a bow at the back of it , and she wore a bow in her hair .
Edmund Evans printed the illustrations in colour through chromoxylography , a process using woodblocks to produce colour prints .
APPEARANCES Section::::Appearances .
Set in summer , Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland opens with Alice on the riverbank with her elder sister .
She falls down a rabbit hole into Wonderland after following the White Rabbit .
Meeting many characters and changing her size several times , she eventually finds herself at the trial of the Knave of Hearts as a witness .
Ordered to leave by the King and Queen of Hearts , Alice argues with them , eventually claiming that they are just a pack of cards .
As they swarm her , Alice awakens on the riverbank and realizes that it was just a dream .
Set during autumn , Through the Looking - Glass begins with Alice indoors as she plays with the kittens of her pet cat , Dinah .
Through a mirror , she travels to the alternative world behind the mirror , where chess pieces are alive .
Encountering various characters , she eventually becomes a queen , and attends a party celebrating her coronation , although it quickly grows chaotic .
Grabbing and shaking the Red Queen , Alice awakens back indoors , holding one of the kittens .
The novel concludes with Alice 's speculation on whether or not it was her dream or the Red King 's .
CULTURAL IMPACT Section::::Cultural impact .
Alice has been recognized as a cultural icon .
The Alice books have continued to remain in print , and the first book is available in a hundred languages .
Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland has continued to maintain its popularity , placing on surveys of the top children 's books .
Alice placed on a 2015 British survey of the top twenty favorite characters in children 's literature .
She also lends her name to the style of headband that she is depicted with in Tenniel 's illustrations .
The continued popularity of the two Alice books has resulted in numerous adaptations , re - imaginings , literary continuations , and various merchandise .
The influence of the two Alice books in the literary field began as early as the mid - Victorian era , with various novels that adopted the style , acted as parodies of contemporary political issues , or reworked an element of the Alice books ; they featured one or more protagonists with characteristics similar to Alice 's ( " typically polite , articulate , and assertive " ) , regardless of gender .
Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland and Through the Looking - Glass were critically and commercially successful in Carroll 's lifetime ; more than 150,000 copies of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland and 100,000 copies of Through the Looking - Glass had been printed by 1898 .
Victorian readers generally enjoyed the Alice books as light - hearted entertainment that omitted the stiff morals which other books for children frequently included .
In its review of the first Alice book , The Spectator described Alice as a " a charming little girl , [ ... ] with a delicious style of conversation , " while The Publishers Circular lauded her as " a simple , loving child . "
Several reviewers thought that Tenniel 's illustrations added to the book , with The Literary Churchman remarking that Tenniel 's art of Alice provided " a charming relief to the all the grotesque appearances which surround her . "
Alice 's character has been highlighted by later literary critics as unusual or a departure from the typical mid - nineteenth - century child protagonists .
Richard Kelly sees the character as Carroll 's creation of a different protagonist through his reworking of the Victorian orphan trope .
According to Kelly , Alice must rely on herself in Wonderland away from her family , but the moral and societal narrative arc of the orphan is replaced with Alice 's intellectual struggle to maintain her sense of identity against the inhabitants of Wonderland .
Alison Lurie argues that Alice defies the gendered , mid - Victorian conceptions of the idealized girl : Alice does not have a temperament in keeping with the ideal , and she challenges the adult figures in Wonderland .
From the 1930s to 1940s , the books came under the scrutiny of psychoanalytic literary critics .
Freudians believed that the events in Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland reflected the personality and desires of the author , because the stories which it was based on had been told spontaneously .
In 1933 , Anthony Goldschmidt introduced " the modern idea of Carroll as a repressed sexual deviant " , theorizing that Alice served as Carroll 's representation in the novel ; Goldschmidt 's influential work , however , may have been meant as a hoax .
Regardless , Freudian analysis found in the books symbols of " classic Freudian tropes " : " a vaginal rabbit hole and a phallic Alice , an amniotic pool of tears , hysterical mother figures and impotent father figures , threats of decapitation [ castration ] , swift identity changes " .
Described as " the single greatest rival of Tenniel , " Walt Disney created an influential representation of Alice in his 1951 film adaption , which helped to mold the image of Alice within pop culture .
Although Alice had previously been depicted as a blonde in a blue dress in an unauthorized American edition of the two Alice books published by Thomas Crowell ( 1893 ) , possibly for the first time , Disney 's portrayal has been the most influential in solidifying the popular image of Alice as such .
Disney 's version of Alice has its visual basis in Mary Blair 's concept drawings and Tenniel 's illustrations .
While the film was not successful during its original run , it later became popular with college students , who interpreted the film as a drug - drenched narrative .
In 1974 , Alice in Wonderland was re - released in the United States , with advertisements playing off this association .
The drug association persists as an " unofficial " interpretation , despite the film 's status as family - friendly entertainment .
In the twenty - first century , Alice 's continuing appeal has been attributed to her ability to be continuously re - imagined .
In Men in Wonderland , Catherine Robson writes that , " In all her different and associated forms — underground and through the looking glass , textual and visual , drawn and photographed , as Carroll 's brunette or Tenniel 's blonde or Disney 's prim miss , as the real Alice Liddell [ ... ] Alice is the ultimate cultural icon , available for any and every form of manipulation , and as ubiquitous today as in the era of her first appearance . "
Robert Douglass - Fairhurst compares Alice 's cultural status to " something more like a modern myth , " suggesting her ability to act as an empty canvas for " abstract hopes and fears " allows for further " meanings " to be ascribed to the character .
Zoe Jacques and Eugene Giddens suggest that the character occupies a status within pop culture where " Alice in a blue dress is as ubiquitous as Hamlet holding a skull , " which creates " the strange position whereby the public ' knows ' Alice without having read either Wonderland or Looking - Glass . "
They argue that this allows for creative freedom in subsequent adaptations , in that faithfulness to the texts can be overlooked .
In Japan , Alice has a significant influence on pop culture .
Tenniel 's artwork and Disney 's film adaptation have been credited as factors in the continuing favorable reception of the two novels .
Within youth culture in Japan , she has been adopted as " a rebellion figure in much the same way as the American and British 1960s ' hippies ' did .
"
She has also been a source of inspiration for Japanese fashion , in particular Lolita fashion .
Her popularity has been attributed to the idea that she performs the shōjo ideal , a Japanese understanding of girlhood that is " sweet and innocent on the outside , and considerably autonomous on the inside . "
OTHER ILLUSTRATORS
Section::::Other illustrators .
The two Alice books are frequently re - illustrated .
The expiration of the copyright of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland in 1907 resulted in eight new printings , including one illustrated in an Art Nouveau style by Arthur Rackham .
The illustrators for the other editions published in 1907 include Charles Robinson , Alice Ross , W. H. Walker , Thomas Maybank and Millicent Sowerby .
Among the other notable illustrators are Blanche McManus ( 1896 ) ; Peter Newell ( 1901 ) , who used monochrome ; Mabel Lucie Atwell ( 1910 ) ; Harry Furniss ( 1926 ) ; and Willy Pogany ( 1929 ) , who featured an Art Deco style .
Notable illustrators from the 1930s onwards include Edgar Thurstan ( 1931 ) , and his visual allusions to the Wall Street Crash of 1929 ; D.R. Sexton ( 1933 ) and J. Morton Sale ( 1933 ) , both of whom featured an older Alice ; Mervyn Peake ( 1954 ) ; Ralph Steadman ( 1967 ) , for which he received the Francis Williams Memorial award in 1972 ; Salvador Dalí ( 1969 ) , who used Surrealism ; and Peter Blake , with his watercolors ( 1970 ) .
By 1972 , there were ninety illustrators of Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland and twenty - one of Through the Looking - Glass .
Among the notable illustrators of Alice in the 1980s , 1990s and early 2000s are Barry Moser ( 1982 ) ; Greg Hildebrandt ( 1990 ) ; David Frankland ( 1996 ) ; Lisbeth Zwerger ( 1999 ) , who used watercolors in her adaptation ; Helen Oxenbury ( 1999 ) , who won two awards , the Kurt Maschler Award in 1999 and the Kate Greenaway Medal in 2000 , for her work ; and DeLoss McGraw ( 2001 ) , with his abstract illustrations .
NOTES CITATIONS
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS