MARTHA 'S VINEYARD
Martha 's Vineyard ( Wampanoag : ; often simply called The Vineyard ) is an island located south of Cape Cod in Massachusetts that is known for being an affluent summer colony .
Martha 's Vineyard includes the smaller Chappaquiddick Island , which is usually connected to the Vineyard , though storms and hurricanes have separated them , as in 2007 .
It is the 58th largest island in the United States , with a land area of , and the third - largest on the East Coast of the United States , after Long Island and Mount Desert Island .
Martha 's Vineyard constitutes the bulk of Dukes County , Massachusetts , which also includes the Elizabeth Islands and the island of Nomans Land .
The Vineyard was home to one of the earliest known deaf communities in the United States ; consequently , a special sign language , Martha 's Vineyard Sign Language , was developed on the island .
The 2010 census reported a year - round population of 16,535 residents , although the summer population can swell to more than 100,000 people .
About 56 percent of the Vineyard 's 14,621 homes are seasonally occupied .
Martha 's Vineyard is primarily known as a summer colony , and it is only accessible by boat and air .
However , its year - round population has considerably increased since the 1960s .
The island 's year - round population increased about a third each decade from 1970 to 2000 , for a total of 145 percent or about 3 percent to 4 percent per year ( 46 percent , 30 percent , and 29 percent in each respective decade ) .
The population of the Vineyard was 14,901 in the 2000 Census and was estimated at 15,582 in 2004 .
( Dukes County was 14,987 in 2000 and 15,669 in 2004 ) .
Dukes County includes the six towns on Martha 's Vineyard and Gosnold ; it increased by more than 10 percent between 2000 and 2010 , according to Census data released in 2011 , gaining nearly 1,548 residents .
The Island 's population increased from 14,987 to 16,535 .
A study by the Martha 's Vineyard Commission found that the cost of living on the island is 60 percent higher than the national average , and housing prices are 96 percent higher .
A study of housing needs by the Commission found that the average weekly wage on Martha 's Vineyard was " 71 percent of the state average , the median home price was 54 percent above the state 's and the median rent exceeded the state 's by 17 percent " .
HISTORY EXPLORATION Section::::History .
Section::::Exploration .
Originally inhabited by the Wampanoag people , Martha 's Vineyard was known in the Massachusett language as Noepe , or " land amid the streams " .
In 1642 , the Wampanoag numbered somewhere around 3,000 on the island .
By 1764 , that number had dropped to 313 .
A smaller island to the south was named " Martha 's Vineyard " by the English explorer Bartholomew Gosnold , who sailed to the island in 1602 .
The name was later transferred to the main island .
It is the eighth - oldest surviving English place - name in the United States .
The island 's namesake is not definitively known , but it is thought that the island was named after Gosnold 's mother - in - law or his daughter , both named Martha .
The island was also known as Martin 's Vineyard ( perhaps after the captain of Gosnold 's ship , John Martin ) ; many islanders up to the 18th century called it by this name .
The United States Board on Geographic Names worked to standardize placename spellings in the late 19th century , including the dropping of apostrophes .
Thus for a time Martha 's Vineyard was officially named Marthas Vineyard , but the Board reversed its decision in the early 20th century , making Martha 's Vineyard one of the five placenames in the United States that takes a possessive apostrophe .
COLONIAL ERA Section::::Colonial era .
English settlement began with the purchase of Martha 's Vineyard , Nantucket , and the Elizabeth Islands by Thomas Mayhew of Watertown , Massachusetts from two English " owners " .
He had friendly relations with the Wampanoags on the island , in part because he was careful to honor their land rights .
His son , also named Thomas Mayhew , began the first English settlement in 1642 at Great Harbor ( later Edgartown , Massachusetts ) .
The younger Mayhew began a relationship with Hiacoomes , a Native American neighbor , which eventually led to Hiacoomes ' family converting to Christianity .
Ultimately , many of the tribe became Christian , including the pow - wows ( spiritual leaders ) and sachems ( political leaders ) .
During King Philip 's War later in the century , the Martha 's Vineyard band did not join their tribal relatives in the uprising and remained armed , a testimony to the good relations cultivated by the Mayhews as the leaders of the English colony .
In 1657 , the younger Thomas Mayhew was drowned when a ship he was travelling in was lost at sea on a voyage to England .
Mayhew 's grandsons Matthew Mayhew ( 1648 ) , John Mayhew ( 1652 ) , and other members of his family assisted him in running his business and government .
In 1665 , Mayhew 's lands were included in a grant to the Duke of York .
In 1671 , a settlement was arranged which allowed Mayhew to continue in his position while placing his territory under the jurisdiction of the Province of New York .
In 1682 , Matthew Mayhew succeeded his grandfather as Governor and Chief Magistrate , and occasionally preached to the Native Americans .
He was also appointed judge of the Court of Common Pleas for Dukes county in 1697 , and remained on the bench until 1700 .
He was judge of probate from 1696 to 1710 .
In 1683 , Dukes County , New York was incorporated , including Martha 's Vineyard .
In 1691 , at the collapse of rule by Sir Edmund Andros and the reorganization of Massachusetts as a royal colony , Dukes County was transferred back to the Province of Massachusetts Bay , and split into the county of Dukes County , Massachusetts and Nantucket County , Massachusetts .
Native American literacy in the schools founded by Thomas Mayhew Jr. and taught by Peter Folger , the grandfather of Benjamin Franklin , was such that the first Native American graduates of Harvard were from Martha 's Vineyard , including the son of Hiacoomes , Joel Hiacoomes .
" The ship Joel Hiacoomes was sailing on , as he was returning to Boston from a trip home shortly before the graduation ceremonies , was found wrecked on the shores of Nantucket Island .
Caleb Cheeshahteaumauk , the son of a sachem of Homes Hole , did graduate from Harvard in the class of 1665 .
" Cheeshahteaumauk 's Latin address to the corporation ( New England Corporation ) , which begins " Honoratissimi benefactores " ( most honored benefactors ) , has been preserved .
In addition to speaking Wampanoag and English , they studied Hebrew , Greek , and Latin .
All of the early Native American graduates died shortly after completing their course of study .
Many native preachers on the island , however , also preached in the English churches from time to time .
Mayhew 's successor as leader of the community was the Hon .
Leavitt Thaxter , who married Martha Mayhew , a descendant of Thomas Mayhew , and was an Edgartown educator described by Indian Commissioner John Milton Earle as " a long and steadfast friend to the Indians . "
After living in Northampton , Thaxter , a lawyer , returned home to Edgartown , where he took over the school founded by his father , Rev. Joseph Thaxter , and served in the State House and the Senate , was a member of the Massachusetts Governor 's Council and later served as U. S. Customs Collector for Martha 's Vineyard .
Having rechristened his father 's Edgartown school Thaxter Academy , Hon .
Leavitt Thaxter was granted on February 15 , 1845 , the sum of $ 50-per - year for " the support of William Johnson , an Indian of the Chappequiddic tribe .
" By this time , Leavitt Thaxter had taken on the role , described in an act passed by the General Court of Massachusetts , as " guardian of the Indians and people of color resident at Chappequiddic and Indiantown in the County of Dukes County . "
Thaxter Academy , founded by Leavitt Thaxter as first principal in 1825 , became known for educating both white and Native American youth .
19TH CENTURY Section::::19th century .
Like the nearby island of Nantucket , Martha 's Vineyard was brought to prominence in the 19th century by the whaling industry , during which ships were sent around the world to hunt whales for their oil and blubber .
The discovery of petroleum in Pennsylvania gave rise to a cheaper source of oil for lamps and led to an almost complete collapse of the industry by 1870 .
After the Old Colony railroad came to mainland Woods Hole in 1872 , summer residences began to develop on the island , such as the community of Harthaven established by William H. Hart , and later , the community of Ocean Heights , developed near Sengekontacket Pond in Edgartown by the prominent island businessman , Robert Marsden Laidlaw .
Although the island struggled financially through the Great Depression , its reputation as a resort for tourists and the wealthy continued to grow .
There is still a substantial Wampanoag population on the Vineyard , mainly located in the town of Aquinnah .
Aquinnah means " land under the hill " in the Wampanoag language .
The island was the last refuge of the Heath Hen , a once common game bird .
Despite 19th Century efforts to protect the hen , by 1927 , the population of birds had dropped to 13 .
The last known Heath Hen perished on Martha 's Vineyard in 1932 .
MODERN ERA Section::::Modern era .
The linguist William Labov wrote his MA essay on changes in the Martha 's Vineyard dialect of English .
The 1963 study is widely recognized as a seminal work in the foundation of sociolinguistics .
The island received international notoriety after the " Chappaquiddick incident " of July 18 , 1969 , in which Mary Jo Kopechne was killed in a car driven off the Dike Bridge by U.S. Senator Edward " Ted " Kennedy .
The bridge crossed Poucha Pond on Chappaquiddick Island ( a smaller island formerly connected to the Vineyard and part of Edgartown ) .
As a foot bridge , it was intended for people on foot and bicycles , as well as the occasional emergency vehicle when conditions warranted .
Currently , 4×4 vehicles with passes are allowed to cross the reconstructed bridge .
On November 23 , 1970 , in the Atlantic Ocean just west of Aquinnah , Simas Kudirka , a Soviet seaman of Lithuanian nationality , attempted to defect to the United States by leaping onto a United States Coast Guard cutter from a Soviet ship .
The Coast Guard allowed a detachment of KGB agents to board the cutter , and subsequently arrested Kudirka , taking him back to the Soviet Union .
In 1974 , Steven Spielberg filmed the movie Jaws on Martha 's Vineyard , most notably in the fishing village of Menemsha and the town of Chilmark .
Spielberg selected island natives Christopher Rebello as Chief Brody 's oldest son , Michael Brody ; Jay Mello as the younger son , Sean Brody ; and Lee Fierro as Mrs. Kintner .
Scores of other island natives appeared in the film as extras .
Later , scenes from Jaws 2 and were filmed on the island , as well .
In June 2005
the island celebrated the 30th anniversary of Jaws with a weekend - long Jawsfest .
In 1977 , distressed over losing their guaranteed seat in the Massachusetts General Court , inhabitants of Martha 's Vineyard considered the possibility of secession from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts , either to become part of another state ( having received offers from both Vermont and Hawaii ) , reincorporating as a separate U.S. territory , or as the nation 's 51st state .
The separatist flag , consisting of a white seagull over an orange disk on a sky - blue background , is still seen on the island today .
Although the idea of separation from Massachusetts eventually proved impracticable , it did receive attention in the local , regional , and even national media .
On March 5 , 1982 , John Belushi died of a drug overdose in Los Angeles , California , and was buried four days later in Abel 's Hill Cemetery in Chilmark .
Belushi often visited the Vineyard and his family felt it fitting to bury him there .
On his gravestone is the quote : " Though I may be gone , Rock ' N ' Roll lives on . "
Because of the many visitors to his grave and the threat of vandalism , his body was moved somewhere nearby the grave site .
His grave remains a popular site for visitors to Chilmark and they often leave tokens in memory of the late comedian .
Since the 1990s , Bill Clinton spent regular vacation time on the island during and after his presidency , along with his wife , Hillary Clinton , and their daughter , Chelsea .
Clinton was not the first president to visit the islands ; Ulysses S. Grant visited the vacation residence of his friend , Bishop Gilbert Haven on August 24 , 1874 .
As a coincidental footnote in history , Bishop Haven 's gingerbread cottage was located in Oak Bluffs at 10 Clinton Avenue .
The avenue was named in 1851 and was designated as the main promenade of the Martha 's Vineyard Campmeeting Association campgrounds .
On August 23 , 2009 , Barack Obama arrived in Chilmark with his family for a week 's vacation at a rental property known as Blue Heron Farm .
On July 16 , 1999 , a small plane crashed off the coast of Martha 's Vineyard , claiming the lives of pilot John F. Kennedy Jr. , his wife Carolyn Bessette and her sister Lauren Bessette .
Kennedy 's mother , former U.S. first lady Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis , maintained a home in Aquinnah ( formerly " Gay Head " ) until her death in 1994 .
In the summer of 2000 , an outbreak of tularemia , also known as rabbit fever , resulted in one death and piqued the interest of the CDC , which wanted to test the island as a potential investigative ground for aerosolized Francisella tularensis .
Over the following summers , Martha 's Vineyard was identified as the only place in the world where documented cases of tularemia resulted from lawn mowing .
The research could prove valuable in preventing bioterrorism .
In the television show The X - Files , Fox Mulder 's parents live on the island , and it was also the setting for Robert Harris ' 2007 novel The Ghost .
HEREDITARY DEAFNESS AND SIGN
LANGUAGE Section::::Hereditary deafness and sign language .
Martha 's Vineyard was known as an " everyone signed " community for several hundred years , and many Deaf people view Martha 's Vineyard as a utopia .
A high rate of hereditary deafness was documented on Martha 's Vineyard for almost two centuries .
The island 's deaf heritage can not be traced to one common ancestor and is thought to have originated in the Weald , a region that overlaps the borders of the English counties of Kent and Sussex , prior to immigration .
Researcher Nora Groce estimates that by the late 19th century , 1 in 155 people on the Vineyard was born deaf ( 0.7 percent ) , about 37 times the estimate for the nation at large ( 1 in 5,728 , or 0.02 percent ) , because of a " recessive pattern " of genetic deafness , circulated through endogamous marriage patterns .
Deaf Vineyarders generally earned an average or above - average income , proved by tax records , and they participated in church affairs with passion .
The deafness on the island affected both females and males in an approximately same percentage .
In the late 19th century , the mixed marriages between deaf and hearing spouses comprised 65 percent of all deaf marriages on the island , as compared to the rate of 20 percent deaf - hearing marriage in the mainland .
The sign language used by Vineyarders is called Martha 's Vineyard Sign Language ( MVSL ) , and it is different from American Sign Language ( ASL ) .
However , the geographical , time , and population proximities state that MVSL and ASL are impossible to develop in complete isolation from each other .
MVSL was commonly used by hearing residents as well as Deaf ones until the middle of the 20th century .
No language barrier created a smooth communication environment for all the residences on the island .
In the 20th century , tourism became a mainstay in the island economy , and new tourism - related jobs appeared .
However , jobs in tourism were not as deaf - friendly as fishing and farming had been .
Consequently , as intermarriage and further migration joined the people of Martha 's Vineyard to the mainland , the island community more and more resembled the oral community there .
The last deaf person born into the island 's sign - language tradition , Katie West , died in 1952 , but a few elderly residents were able to recall MVSL as recently as the 1980s when research into the language began .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
According to the Köppen climate classification system , the climate of the island borders between a humid continental climate ( Dfa / Dfb ) , a humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) , and an oceanic climate ( Cfb ) , the latter a climate type rarely found on the east coast of North America .
Martha 's Vineyard 's climate is highly influenced by the surrounding Atlantic Ocean , which moderates temperatures throughout the year , albeit this moderation is nowhere as strong as on opposite sides of the Atlantic ( Porto , Portugal ) or the Pacific coast of the United States ( Crescent City ) at similar latitudes .
As a result , winter temperatures tend to be a few degrees warmer while summer temperatures tend to be cooler than inland locations .
Winters are cool to cold with a January average of just slightly below .
Owing to the influence of the Atlantic Ocean , temperatures below are rare , occurring at least 1 day per year and most days during the winter months rise above freezing .
The average annual snowfall is .
Summers are warm and mild with temperatures rarely exceeding , with only 1 or 2 days reaching or exceeding it .
During the summer months , the island 's warmest months ( July and August ) average around .
Spring and fall are transition seasons with spring being cooler than fall .
Martha`s Vineyard receives of precipitation per year , which is evenly distributed throughout the year .
The highest daily maximum temperature was on August 27 , 1948 , and the highest daily minimum temperature was on September 4 , 2010 .
The lowest daily maximum temperature was on December 26 , 1980 , and the lowest daily minimum temperature was on February 2 and 3 , 1961 .
TOWNS
Section::::Towns .
Martha 's Vineyard is divided into six towns .
Each town is governed by a board of selectmen elected by town voters , along with annual and periodic town meetings .
Each town is also a member of the Martha 's Vineyard Commission , which regulates island - wide building , environmental , and aesthetic concerns .
Some government programs on the island have been regionalized , such as the public school system , emergency management and waste management .
There is a growing push for further regionalization areas of law enforcement , water treatment , and possible government regionalization .
Each town also follows certain regulations from Dukes County .
The towns are : * Tisbury , which includes the main village of Vineyard Haven , and the West Chop peninsula .
It is the island 's primary port of entry for people and cargo , supplemented by the seasonal port in Oak Bluffs .
* Edgartown , which includes Chappaquiddick island and Katama .
Edgartown is noted for its rich whaling tradition , and is the island 's largest town by population and area .
* Oak Bluffs is most well known for its gingerbread cottages , open harbor , and its vibrant town along busy Circuit Avenue .
Oak Bluffs enjoys a reputation as one of the more active night - life towns on the island for both residents and tourists .
It was known as " Cottage City " from its separation from Edgartown in 1880 until its reincorporation as Oak Bluffs in 1907 .
Oak Bluffs includes several communities that have been popular destinations for affluent African Americans since the early 20th century .
It also includes the East Chop peninsula , Lagoon Heights and Harthaven .
* West Tisbury is the island 's agricultural center , and hosts the well known Martha 's Vineyard Agricultural Fair in late August each year .
* Chilmark , including the fishing village of Menemsha .
Chilmark is also rural and features the island 's hilliest terrain .
It is the birthplace of George Claghorn , master shipbuilder of the USS Constitution , " Old Ironsides " .
*
Aquinnah , Aquinnah is home to the Wampanoag Indian tribe and clay cliffs .
The three " Down - Island " towns of Edgartown , Tisbury and Oak Bluffs are " wet " towns serving all alcohol .
West Tisbury and Aquinnah are " soggy " towns that serve only beer and wine , and Chilmark is a " dry " town .
TRANSPORTATION WATER Section::::Transportation . Section::::Water .
Martha 's Vineyard is located approximately seven miles off the southern coast of Cape Cod .
It is reached by a ferry that departs from Woods Hole , Massachusetts , and by several other ferries departing from Falmouth , New Bedford , Hyannis , Quonset Point , Rhode Island , and the East 35th Street ferry terminal in Manhattan .
The Steamship Authority operates most of the shorter routes , while Martha 's Vineyard Fast Ferry and Hy - Line Cruises run faster , longer distance ferries to Rhode Island and Hyannis .
There are direct ferries to each place .
SeaStreak operates the seasonal , weekend New York City to Martha 's Vineyard route .
One ferry departs New York City on Friday afternoon and returns on Sunday night .
The trip through Long Island Sound and along the shoreline of Rhode Island and Massachusetts takes about four and a half hours ( 270 minutes ) .
In the era before modern highways and jet planes , travelers took New York , New Haven & Hartford Railroad trains from New York City or Boston to Woods Hole or Hyannis , at which point they would embark on ferries to the island .
AIR Section::::Air .
Commuter airline Cape Air offers frequent service to the island via the Martha 's Vineyard Airport ( MVY ) .
It provides year - round service to and from Boston , Hyannis , New Bedford , Providence , and Nantucket , and seasonal service to White Plains , New York .
Additional air service is provided to New York - LaGuardia , as well as Philadelphia and Washington - Reagan seasonally .
JetBlue serves the island out of New York 's Kennedy Airport .
Delta Connection also operates seasonal service to New York - LaGuardia and New York - JFK airports , and American Airlines operates seasonal service to Washington - Reagan .
The airport also handles much general aviation traffic .
Katama airpark , with grass runways , is popular with private pilots ; it is located near South Beach .
MASS TRANSIT Section::::Mass transit .
Bus service is provided on the island year - round by the Martha 's Vineyard Transit Authority ( VTA ) .
EDUCATION Section::::Education .
Martha 's Vineyard is served by Martha 's Vineyard Public Schools : * Edgartown School ( Grades K-8 ) * West Tisbury School ( Grades K–8 )
* Oak Bluffs School ( Grades K–8 )
* Tisbury School ( Grades K–8 )
* Chilmark School ( Grades K–5 ) * Martha 's Vineyard Public Charter School ( Grades K–12 ) * Martha 's Vineyard Regional High School ( Grades 9–12 )
Five of the six towns have their own elementary schools , while Aquinnah residents usually attend nearby Chilmark 's elementary school .
The Chilmark school serves only grades pre - K to 5 , so students in grades 6–8 must attend another middle school — usually the West Tisbury school .
The Martha 's Vineyard Public Charter School , located in West Tisbury , serves the entire island and provides grades K–12 .
Martha 's Vineyard Regional High School , which is located in Oak Bluffs , serves the entire island .
TOURISM AND CULTURE Section::::Tourism and culture .
The Vineyard grew as a tourist destination primarily because of its very pleasant summer weather ( during summers , the temperature rarely breaks 32 ° C / 90 ° F ) and many beautiful beaches .
It is primarily a place where people go to relax and the island offers a range of tourist accommodation including large hotels such as the Harbor View Hotel and Winnetu Resort , modern boutique hotels like the Nobnocket Boutique Inn as well as traditional bed and breakfasts such as The 1720 House , Ashley Inn , Pequot House , Thorncroft Inn and Oak Bluffs Inn .
Many visitors also rent private homes .
During the whaling era , wealthy Boston sea captains and merchant traders often created estates on Martha 's Vineyard with their trading profits .
Today , the Vineyard has become one of the Northeast 's most prominent summering havens , having attracted numerous celebrity regulars .
The island now has a year - round population of about 15,000 people in six towns ; in summer , the population increases to 100,000 residents , with more than 25,000 additional short - term visitors coming and going on the ferries during the summer season .
The most crowded weekend is July 4 , followed by the late - August weekend of the Agricultural Fair .
In general , the summer season runs from June through Labor Day weekend , coinciding with the months most American children are not in school .
In 1985 , the two islands of Martha 's Vineyard and Chappaquiddick Island were included in a new American Viticultural Area designation for wine appellation of origin specification : Martha 's Vineyard AVA .
Wines produced from grapes grown on the two islands can be sold with labels that carry the Martha 's Vineyard AVA designation .
Martha 's Vineyard was the home to the winemaker Chicama Vineyards in West Tisbury , though it closed after 37 years on August 10 , 2008 .
Other popular attractions include the annual Grand Illumination in Oak Bluffs ; the Martha 's Vineyard Film Center , an arthouse cinema which the non - profit Martha 's Vineyard Film Society , and which screens independent and world cinema
all year long ; the historic Capawock and Strand theatres , also run by the Martha 's Vineyard Film Society , the Martha 's Vineyard Film Festival , which runs a winter film festival in March , a Summer Film Series and Cinema Circus every Wednesday in July and August , the Martha 's Vineyard African - American Film Festival , which showcases the works of independent and established African - American filmmakers in August , and Martha 's Vineyard International Film Festival in September ; the Farm Institute at Katama Farm in Edgartown ; and the Flying Horses Carousel in Oak Bluffs , the oldest operating platform carousel in the United States .
ISLAND LIFE AND RESIDENTS Section::::Island life and residents .
Its relatively small year - round population has led to a very activist citizenry who are highly involved in the island 's day - to - day activities .
Tourism , over - development , politics , and environmentalism are of keen interest to the community .
Keeping the balance between the much needed tourist economy and the ecology and wildlife of the island is of paramount importance to residents .
In contrast to the seasonal influx of wealthy visitors , Dukes County remains one of the poorest in the state .
Residents have established resources to balance the contradictions and stresses that can arise in these circumstances , notably the Martha 's Vineyard Commission and Martha 's Vineyard Community Services , founded by the late Dr. Milton Mazer , author of People and Predicaments : Of Life and Distress on Martha 's Vineyard .
The majority of the Vineyard 's residents during the summer are well - established seasonal residents from up and down the Northeast coast of the United States .
While many of these summer residents come from all over the United States and abroad , the island tends to be a destination for those within close proximity .
Many communities around the island tend to have deep family roots in the island that have matured over the years to create hamlets of good friends and neighbors .
Nevertheless , many visitors are summer renters and weekenders , for whom the island is simply a " home away from home " .
Many high - profile residents , movie stars , politicians , writers , and artists contribute to fundraisers and benefits that raise awareness of the fragile ecosystem of the Vineyard and support community organizations and services .
The largest of these is the annual Possible Dreams Auction .
Martha 's Vineyard has also been or is home to a number of artists and musicians , including Albert Alcalay , Evan Dando , Tim " Johnny Vegas " Burton of the Mighty Mighty Bosstones , James Taylor , Carly Simon , Livingston Taylor , Kate Taylor , Alex Taylor , Tom Rush , Geoff Muldaur , Maria Muldaur , Willy Mason , Unbusted and Mike Nichols .
Historian and author David McCullough is also an island resident , as is author Susan Branch and the young - adult books authors :
Judy Blume and Norman Bridwell , and crime / political intrigue novelist Richard North Patterson .
Late authors Shel Silverstein and William Styron also lived on the Vineyard , as did writer , journalist and teacher John Hersey , poet and novelist Dorothy West and artist Thomas Hart Benton .
Various writers have been inspired by the island — including the mystery writer Philip R. Craig who set several novels on the island .
On related note , Martha 's Vineyard Poet Laureate , Lee H. McCormack , has written many poems about the island .
The Academy Award - winning Patricia Neal owned a home on South Water St in Edgartown , and James Cagney , Lillian Hellman ( who is buried in Abel 's Hill Cemetery near the site of Belushi 's grave ) , and Katharine Cornell all found the Vineyard an exciting , rewarding place to live .
In addition the famous Life Magazine photographer Alfred Eisenstaedt was a fifty - year summer resident of the Vineyard until his death in 1995 .
Since 2006 the Australian born author Geraldine Brooks , writer of the Pulitzer Prize winning novel March , has lived there with her husband , Tony Horwitz , himself a Pulitzer Prize winner and successful novelist , and their two sons .
Other well - known celebrities who live on or have regularly visited the island : Famously renowned Harlem Renaissance artist Lois Mailou Jones , former U.S. President Barack Obama , former president Bill Clinton and his wife , former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton ; comedian and talk
show host David Letterman ; Bill Murray ; Tony Shalhoub ; Quincy Jones ; Ted Danson and wife Mary Steenburgen ; Larry David ; the Farrelly brothers ; Meg Ryan ; Chelsea Handler .
Mike Wallace of 60 Minutes was a summer resident of Martha 's Vineyard .
Late anchorman Walter Cronkite was a prominent summer resident as well .
Other regularly appearing celebrities include film writer / director Spike Lee , attorney Alan Dershowitz , comedians Dan Aykroyd and James Belushi ,
politico Vernon Jordan , television news reporters Diane Sawyer , fashion designer Kenneth Cole ( designer ) and former Ambassador and President of the Metropolitan Museum of Art , William H. Luers and Charlayne Hunter - Gault .
Despite popular perceptions of the Vineyard as " Hollywood East " , the island is very low - key and quiet ; celebrities go to the Vineyard to enjoy the atmosphere , and not to be seen .
Locals tend to be protective of celebrity privacy , though recent coverage of celebrity sightings ( most notably in the two local newspapers on the Island ) has begun to erode that respect for privacy through more frequent reporting on celebrity sightings and famous visitors .
In August 2014 , both President Obama and Hillary Clinton planned to have overlapping visits to the island , where the presence of security details that create traffic challenges is becoming an annual affair .
Vineyard social life often occurs in private , down country roads , and not in the small towns , and until 2017 only two of which sold alcohol ( Oak Bluffs and Edgartown ) .
Many of the country 's most affluent African - American families have enjoyed a century - old tradition of summering on the island .
Concentrated primarily in and around the town of Oak Bluffs , and the East Chop area , these families have historically represented the black elite from Boston ; Washington , D.C. ; and New York City .
Today , affluent families from around the country have taken to the Vineyard , and the community is known as a popular summer destination for judges , physicians , business executives , surgeons , attorneys , writers , politicians , and professors .
The historic presence of African - American residents in Oak Bluffs resulted in its Town Beach being pejoratively called " The Inkwell " , a nickname which was reappropriated as an emblem of pride .
The Inkwell ( 1994 ) , directed by Matty Rich , dealt with this close - knit Vineyard community ..
The Run&Shoot Filmworks Martha 's Vineyard African - American Film Festival held every second week in August , highlights the works of independent and established filmmakers from across the globe .
This annual event draws attendees from all across the world .
Since the 19th century , the island has had a sizable community of Portuguese - Americans , concentrated primarily in the three down - Island towns of Oak Bluffs , Tisbury , and Edgartown ; they have traditionally worked alongside other island residents in whaling and fishing .
It also has a large community of Brazilian immigrants who work mainly in the maintenance of the island 's vacation facilities .
The island 's permanent residents were profiled in a London Telegraph article showing " the dark side of Martha 's Vineyard " .
In the same month an article titled " Edgartown 's Darker Side " appeared in the Boston Globe detailing the extremely poor working conditions suffered by Irish and Serbian students in a newly built private members club in Edgartown .
Concerns over munitions that may be buried on Martha 's Vineyard , most from World War II , have led to an 8.1 million dollar project to remove and rebuild part of a privately - owned barrier beach off the Tisbury Great Pond .
The year - round working population of Martha 's Vineyard earns 30 percent less on average than other residents of the state while keeping up with a cost of living that is 60 percent higher than average .
Many people are moving to more affordable areas .
Schools have seen a successive drop in enrollment over the past few years .
Typically home to artists , musicians , and other creative types , the Island has many residents who manage by working several jobs in the summer and taking some time off in the winter .
The lack of affordable housing on the island has forced many families to move off - island .
MARTHA 'S VINEYARD TELEVISION AND RADIO * MVTV – Martha 's Vineyard Community Television Comcast Channels 13 , 14 , 15 Community Television
* WVVY - LP – 96.7 FM , Martha 's Vineyard Community Radio ,
Inc. * WCAI – 90.1 FM , 91.1 FM , 94.3 FM , Cape and Islands NPR station , radio
* WBUA – 92.7 FM , affiliate of WBUR
90.9 FM , Boston 's NPR news station , radio ; * WMVY – stylized as " Mvyradio " and formerly on 92.7 FM , is now on 88.7 FM and available online * WYOB - LP – 105.5 , The Rhythm of the Rock , Reggae format
Most Vineyard residents also have access to FM and AM radio broadcasting from the Greater Boston Area , along with television stations from Boston via both US satellite providers ( DirecTV & Dish Network ) , Comcast Xfinity cable , and RCN Cable .
With reception methods powerful enough , it is also possible to receive Boston TV stations , along with Providence stations , over - the - air .
LOCAL NEWSPAPERS
* Vineyard Gazette * The Martha 's Vineyard Times
SEE ALSO
* Outer Lands
* Dukes County , Massachusetts ( for towns and villages of Martha 's Vineyard )
*
Elizabeth Islands *
Cuttyhunk * Naushon Island
* Nomans Land ( Massachusetts ) * Nantucket Island * Martha 's Vineyard Regional High School * Martha 's Vineyard Sign Language * The Steamship Authority * Martha 's Vineyard Magazine * Martha 's Vineyard in World War II
* Vineyard Golf Club
NOTES
REFERENCES
Additional sources
* Gookin , Historical Collections , 53 ; Railton , " Vineyard 's First Harvard men " , 91–112 .
* Monaghan , E.J. ( 2005 ) .
Learning to Read and Write in Colonial America University of Massachusetts Press .
Boston :
MA EXTERNAL LINKS