TOM BOMBADIL Tom Bombadil is a character in J. R. R. Tolkien 's legendarium .
He first appeared in print in a 1934 poem called The Adventures of Tom Bombadil , which also included Old Man Willow and the Barrow - wight .
They were not then explicitly part of the older legends that became The Silmarillion , and are not mentioned in The Hobbit .
Bombadil is best known from his appearance as a supporting character in Tolkien 's high fantasy epic
The Lord of the Rings , published in 1954 and 1955 .
In the first volume , The Fellowship of the Ring , Frodo Baggins and company meet Bombadil in the Old Forest .
This idea and an appearance by both Old Man Willow and the Barrow - wight were included in some of Tolkien 's earliest notes for a sequel to The Hobbit .
Bombadil is mentioned but not seen near the end of The Return of the King , with Gandalf planning to pay him a long visit .
A slightly expanded version of the original poem appeared in a collection of poems called The Adventures of Tom Bombadil and other verses from The Red Book .
It included a new poem with him as the main characters , and several other unconnected poems .
It presents itself as a selection of Hobbit poems .
APPEARANCES
THE ADVENTURES OF TOM BOMBADIL Section::::Appearances .
Section::::The Adventures of Tom Bombadil .
Tolkien invented Tom Bombadil in memory of his children 's Dutch doll , and wrote light - hearted children 's poems about him , imagining him as a nature - spirit evocative of the English countryside .
The original version of Tolkien 's poem " The Adventures of Tom Bombadil " was published on 15th February 1934 in The Oxford Magazine .
The poem depicts Bombadil as a " merry fellow " living in a small valley close to the Withywindle river , where he wanders and explores nature at his leisure .
Several of the valley 's mysterious residents , including the River - spirit Goldberry ( also known as the " River - woman 's daughter " ) , the malevolent tree - spirit Old Man Willow , the Badger - folk and a Barrow - wight , attempt to capture Bombadil for their own ends , but quail at the power of Tom 's voice , which defeats their enchantments and commands them to return to their natural existence .
At the end of the poem , Bombadil captures and marries Goldberry .
Throughout the poem , Bombadil is unconcerned by the attempts to capture him and brushes them off with the power in his words .
The later poem " Bombadil Goes Boating " anchors Bombadil in Middle - earth , featuring a journey down the Withywindle to the Brandywine river , where hobbits ( " Little Folk I know there " )
live at Hays - end .
Bombadil is challenged by various river - residents on his journey , including birds , otters and hobbits , but charms them all with his voice , ending his journey at the farm of Farmer Maggot , where he drinks ale and dances with the family .
At the end of the poem , the charmed birds and otters work together to bring Bombadil 's boat home .
The poem includes a reference to the Norse lay of Ótr , when Bombadil threatens to give the hide of a disrespectful otter to the Barrow - wights , who he says will cover it with gold apart from a single whisker .
The poem mentions a number of Middle - earth locations , including Hays - end , Bree and the Tower Hills , and hints at the events of the end of the Third Age , speaking of " Tall Watchers by the Ford , Shadows on the Marches " .
The poems were published in the collections The Adventures of Tom Bombadil and later in Tales from the Perilous Realm .
THE LORD OF THE RINGS
Section::::The Lord of the Rings .
In The Lord of the Rings , Tom Bombadil is a mysterious character who aids Frodo Baggins and his companions on their journey .
Tom and his wife Goldberry , the " Daughter of the River " , still live in their house by the source of the Withywindle , and some of the characters and situations from the original poem appear in The Lord of the Rings .
In the book , he is described as " Master of wood , water and hill " , and nearly always speaks or sings in stress - timed metre :
7-beat lines broken into groups of 4 and 3 ( old English metre as first noted in Caedmon 's Hymn in the story of Bede , discovered in the 19th century ) .
He appears in three chapters , " The Old Forest " , " In the House of Tom Bombadil " and " Fog on the Barrow - downs " .
He is mentioned in the chapter " The Council of Elrond " as a possible keeper and protector of the One Ring , as well as at the end of the story in " Homeward Bound " and " The Grey Havens " .
Behind Bombadil 's simple façade are hints of great knowledge and power , though limited to his own domain .
However , there is a certain amount of evidence that he may be the oldest being in Middle - earth ; he tells Frodo , Sam , Merry and Pippin that he was there when the Elves first came West , Elrond states that Bombadil was considered old during the Elder Days ( even by high Elf lords ) , and Bombadil names himself
" Eldest " .
Tom first appears when Merry and Pippin are trapped by Old Man Willow , and Frodo and Sam cry for help .
Tom commands Old Man Willow to release them , singing him to sleep , and shelters the hobbits in his house for two nights .
Here it is seen that the One Ring has no power over Bombadil ; he can see Frodo when the Ring makes him invisible to others , and can wear it himself with no effect .
He even tosses the Ring in the air and makes it disappear , but then produces it from his other hand and returns it to Frodo .
While this seems to demonstrate that he has unique and mysterious power over the Ring , the idea of giving him the Ring for safekeeping is rejected in Book Two 's second chapter , " The Council of Elrond " .
Gandalf says , rather , that " the Ring has no power over him ... " and believes that Tom would not find the Ring to be very important and so might simply misplace it .
Frodo spends two nights in Tom Bombadil 's house , each night dreaming a different dream , which appear to be either clairvoyant or prophetic .
The first night he dreams of fearful things , including Gandalf 's imprisonment atop Orthanc in Isengard .
The second night he dreams of a song that " seemed to come like a pale light behind a grey rain - curtain , and growing stronger to turn the veil all to glass and silver , until at last it was rolled back , and a far green country opened before him under a swift sunrise . "
Before sending the hobbits on their way , Tom teaches them a rhyme to summon him if they fall into danger again within his borders .
This proves fortunate , as the four encounter Barrow - wights in the following chapter , " Fog on the Barrow - downs " .
After saving them from the Barrow - wights , Tom gives each hobbit a long dagger taken from the treasure in the barrow .
As the hobbits leave the Barrow Downs , he refuses to pass the borders of his own land , but before he goes he directs them to The Prancing Pony Inn at Bree .
Towards the end of The Return of the King , when Gandalf leaves the hobbits , he mentions that he wants to have a long talk with Bombadil , calling him a " moss - gatherer " .
Gandalf says , in response to Frodo 's query of how well Bombadil is getting along , that Bombadil is " as well as ever " , " quite untroubled " and " not much interested in anything that we have done and seen " , save their visits to the Ents .
At the very end of The Lord of the Rings , as Frodo sails into the West and leaves Middle - earth , he has what seems to him the very experience that appeared to him in the house of Bombadil in his dream of the second night .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Tom Bombadil is spry , with a quick , playful wit .
He speaks in a rhyming whimsical way : " Hey dol !
merry dol !
ring a dong dillo !
Ring a dong !
hop along !
fal lal the willow !
Tom Bom , jolly Tom , Tom Bombadillo !
"
He has a jolly , carefree attitude , and little seems to concern him .
He sometimes refers to himself in the third person , as if simultaneously weaving his own epic narrative , even as he lives it .
In The Lord of the Rings he twice describes himself in his songs as : " Bright blue his jacket is , and his boots are yellow . "
Bombadil does not seem concerned about the One Ring , though he seems to know at least as much as the hobbits about its provenance and power .
Although the deliberations at the Council of Elrond at Rivendell suggest that Bombadil would be vulnerable to Sauron if the latter recovered the Ring , Bombadil seems unaffected by the Ring 's power and more concerned with keeping his own " country " around the Withywindle in order .
Tolkien says little about Tom Bombadil 's origins , and he does not fit neatly into the categories of beings Tolkien created .
Bombadil calls himself the " Eldest " and the " Master " .
He claims to remember " the first raindrop and the first acorn " , and that he " knew the dark under the stars when it was fearless — before the Dark Lord came from Outside " .
When Frodo asks Goldberry just who Tom Bombadil is , she responds simply by saying " He is " , which some have taken as a reference to God 's statement "
I Am that I Am " in the Book of Exodus .
But Tolkien rejected this notion , saying that in Middle Earth " there is no embodiment of the One , of God , who indeed remains remote , outside the World " , and he carefully differentiated Goldberry 's response from the Biblical
" I Am that I Am " .
Others , such as Robert Foster , have suggested that Bombadil is one of the Ainur , angelic beings who shaped the earth : Foster 's The Complete Guide to Middle Earth describes him as " a Maia ' gone native ' " .
At the Council of Elrond , Galdor suggests that Bombadil would be unable to withstand a siege by Sauron " unless such power is in the earth itself " , implying that the character may be a manifestation of Middle - earth 's inherent properties .
This connection would explain Bombadil 's seeming obliviousness to the transient concerns of mortals , as evidenced in Gandalf 's concern that Tom would not understand the importance of the Ring and would lose it if entrusted with it .
In reference to Bombadil , Tolkien himself said that some things should remain mysterious in any narrative , " especially if an explanation actually exists " .
Tom Bombadil is not the only being whose nature is unexplained in the book .
While passing Caradhras in Book Two of The Lord of the Rings , Aragorn mentions beings more ancient even than Sauron .
In Book Three , when describing his fall in the pits of Moria , Gandalf mentions dark creatures who gnaw the world .
NAMES AND TITLES Section::::Names and titles .
Gandalf calls Tom Bombadil the eldest being in existence ; his Sindarin name Iarwain Ben - adar means " Eldest and Fatherless " .
Dwarves called him Forn ( Old Norse , meaning " Ancient " or " Belonging to the distant past " ; in Icelandic it can also mean that he has magical abilities ) .
Men call him Orald ( compare Dutch oeroud and German uralt , " ancient , very old " ) .
Treebeard calls himself the eldest living being of Middle - earth and says that he was there before anyone else .
However , Tolkien remarked in another context , " Treebeard is a character in my story , not me ; and though he has a great memory and some earthy wisdom , he is not one of the Wise , and there is quite a lot he does not know or understand . "
Hobbits of Buckland , the closest part of the Shire to Bombadil 's dwelling , " probably " gave him the name Bombadil .
This name was in any case familiar to Elves such as Elrond .
CONCEPT AND CREATION Section::::Concept and creation .
As with Roverandom , Tolkien 's initial inspiration came from an incident with his children playing with toys .
Tolkien invented Tom Bombadil in memory of a Dutch doll which had been flushed down a lavatory .
These original poems far pre - date the writing of The Lord of the Rings , into which Tolkien introduced Tom Bombadil from the earliest drafts .
In response to a letter from one of his readers , Tolkien described Tom 's role in The Lord of the Rings :
Tom Bombadil is not an important person — to the narrative .
I suppose he has some importance as a ' comment . '
I mean , I do not really write like that : he is just an invention ( who first appeared in The Oxford Magazine about 1933 ) , and he represents something that I feel important , though I would not be prepared to analyse the feeling precisely .
I would not , however , have left him in , if he did not have some kind of function .
Tolkien did go on to analyse the character 's role further :
I might put it this way .
The story is cast in terms of a good side , and a bad side , beauty against ruthless ugliness , tyranny against kingship , moderated freedom with consent against compulsion that has long lost any object save mere power , and so on ; but both sides in some degree , conservative or destructive , want a measure of control .
But if you have , as it were , taken ' a vow of poverty ' , renounced control , and take your delight in things for themselves without reference to yourself , watching , observing , and to some extent knowing , then the questions of the rights and wrongs of power and control might become utterly meaningless to you , and the means of power quite valueless ...
It is a natural pacifist view , which always arises in the mind when there is a war ...
the view of Rivendell seems to be that it is an excellent thing to have represented , but that there are in fact things with which it can not cope ; and upon which its existence nonetheless depends .
Ultimately only the victory of the West will allow Bombadil to continue , or even to survive .
Nothing would be left for him in the world of Sauron .
Tolkien commented further : And even in a mythical Age there must be some enigmas , as there always are .
Tom Bombadil is one ( intentionally ) .
In a letter to Stanley Unwin , Tolkien called Tom Bombadil the spirit of the vanishing landscapes of Oxfordshire and Berkshire .
However , this letter was in reference to works which pre - dated the writings of The Lord of The Rings .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
In most film and radio adaptations of the story , Bombadil is notable by his absence ( an exception is the Mind 's Eye recordings ) .
Peter Jackson stated that the reason the character was omitted from his film was because , in his view and to his co - writers , Bombadil does little to advance the story , and would make their film unnecessarily long .
Christopher Lee concurred , stating the scenes were left out to make time for showing Saruman 's capture of Gandalf .
Some of Bombadil 's dialogue , as well as the scene in which the hobbits meet Old Man Willow , are transferred into scenes which Merry and Pippin share with Treebeard in Jackson 's adaptation , included in the extended edition DVD .
Although Tom Bombadil was not portrayed in Peter Jackson 's film trilogy of The Lord of the Rings , a Tom Bombadil card exists in The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game by Decipher ,
Inc. ( part of the trilogy 's merchandise ) .
The model portraying Bombadil on this card is Harry Wellerchew .
Bombadil has appeared in a number of other adaptations , including the Mind 's Eye radio adaptation .
He was played by Norman Shelley in the 1955–1956 BBC radio adaptation of The Lord of the Rings .
He was portrayed by Esko Hukkanen in the 1993 Finnish miniseries Hobitit .
Although the character does not actually appear in the musical adaptation , towards the end of the show Gandalf explains to Frodo that on his journey back to the Shire he will spend some time in Bombadil 's company .
Tom Bombadil is an NPC in the MMORPG game , serving as a main character in Book 1 of the epic quests .
He also makes an appearance in EA Games ' as a summonable hero for the forces of light ( except the dwarves ) where his only real use is skipping through the battlefield , kicking enemy troops out of the way as he goes .
Tom is a usable model in The Lord of the Rings Strategy Battle Game produced by Games Workshop .
In this , he is invincible , in that he can never be harmed in any way , but neither can he cause harm to any of his opponents .
He can only be played in the Old Forest , as in keeping with his story .
He also appears in video game , and has an appearance as a purchasable character in Lego The Lord of the Rings and Lego
The Hobbit .
The Harvard Lampoon novel Bored of the Rings parodies Bombadil as " Tim Benzedrine " , a stereotypical hippie married to " Hashberry " .
Her name was a reference to Haight - Ashbury , a district of San Francisco widely seen as being the origin of hippie counterculture and nicknamed Hashbury .
In the Portlandia episode " Motorcycle " , segment " Small Hatchback " , several hippies are shown singing Bombadil 's name .
REFERENCES
Notes Works cited EXTERNAL LINKS
* Entry in the Encyclopedia of Arda * Entry in Lord of the Rings Wiki