DIAMOND CUTTING Diamond cutting is the practice of changing a diamond from a rough stone into a faceted gem .
Cutting diamond requires specialized knowledge , tools , equipment , and techniques because of its extreme difficulty .
The first guild of diamond cutters and polishers ( diamantaire ) was formed in 1375 in Nuremberg , Germany , and led to the development of various types of " cut " .
This has two meanings in relation to diamonds .
The first is the shape : square , oval , and so on .
The second relates to the specific quality of cut within the shape , and the quality and price will vary greatly based on the cut quality .
Since diamonds are one of the hardest materials , special diamond - coated surfaces are used to grind the diamond down .
The first major development in diamond cutting came with the " Point Cut " during the later half of the 14th century : the Point Cut follows the natural shape of an octahedral rough diamond crystal , eliminating some waste in the cutting process .
Diamond cutting , as well as overall processing , is concentrated in a few cities around the world .
The main diamond trading centers are Antwerp , Tel Aviv , and Dubai from where roughs are sent to the main processing centers of India and China .
Diamonds are cut and polished in Surat , India and the Chinese cities of Guangzhou and Shenzhen .
India in recent years has held between 19–31 % of the world market in polished diamonds and China has held 17 % of the world market share in a recent year .
Another important diamond center is New York City .
DIAMOND CUTTING PROCESS
Section::::Diamond cutting process .
The diamond cutting process includes these steps ; planning , cleaving or sawing , bruting , polishing , and final inspection .
PLANNING
Section::::Planning .
Diamond manufacturers analyze diamond rough from an economic perspective , with two objectives steering decisions made about how a faceted diamond will be cut .
The first objective is that of maximum return on investment for the piece of diamond rough .
The second is how quickly the finished diamond can be sold .
Scanning devices are used to get a 3-dimensional computer model of the rough stone .
Also , inclusions are photographed and placed on the 3D model , which is then used to find an optimal way to cut the stone .
MAXIMIZING VALUE
Section::::Maximizing value .
The process of maximizing the value of finished diamonds , from a rough diamond into a polished gemstone , is both an art and a science .
The choice of cut is influenced by many factors .
Market factors include the exponential increase in value of diamonds as weight increases , referred to as weight retention , and the popularity of certain shapes amongst consumers .
Physical factors include the original shape of the rough stone , and location of the inclusions and flaws to be eliminated .
WEIGHT
RETENTION
Section::::Weight retention .
The weight retention analysis studies the diamond rough to find the best combination of finished stones as it relates to per carat value .
For instance , a 2.20 carat ( 440 mg ) octahedron may produce ( i ) either two half carat ( 100 mg ) diamonds whose combined value may be higher than that of ( ii ) a 0.80 carat ( 160 mg ) diamond + 0.30 carat ( 60 mg ) diamond that could be cut from the same rough diamond .
The round brilliant cut and square brilliant cuts are preferred when the crystal is an octahedron , as often two stones may be cut from one such crystal .
Oddly shaped crystals , such as macles are more likely to be cut in a fancy cut — that is , a cut other than the round brilliant — which the particular crystal shape lends itself to .
Even with modern techniques , the cutting and polishing of a diamond crystal always results in a dramatic loss of weight , about 50 % .
Sometimes the cutters compromise and accept lesser proportions and symmetry in order to avoid inclusions or to preserve the weight .
Since the per - carat price of a diamond shifts around key milestones ( such as 1.00 carat ) , many one - carat ( 200 mg ) diamonds are the result of compromising Cut quality for Carat weight .
COLOR RETENTION
Section::::Color retention .
In colored diamonds , cutting can influence the color grade of the diamond , thereby raising its value .
Certain cut shapes are used to intensify the color of the diamond .
The radiant cut is an example of this type of cut .
Natural green color diamonds most often have merely a surface coloration caused by natural irradiation , which does not extend through the stone .
For this reason green diamonds are cut with significant portions of the original rough diamond 's surface ( naturals ) left on the finished gem .
It is these naturals that provide the color to the diamond .
TURNAROUND MINIMIZATION
Section::::Turnaround minimization .
The other consideration of diamond planning is how quickly a diamond will sell .
This consideration is often unique to the type of manufacturer .
While a certain cutting plan may yield a better value , a different plan may yield diamonds that will sell sooner , providing an earlier return on the investment .
CLEAVING OR SAWING
Section::::Cleaving or sawing .
Cleaving is the separation of a piece of diamond rough into separate pieces , to be finished as separate gems .
Sawing is the use of a diamond saw or laser to cut the diamond rough into separate pieces .
BRUTING
Section::::Bruting .
Bruting is the art of cutting a diamond round .
In the modern era diamonds are rounded using either a laser ; a diamond disk impregnated with diamonds ; or two diamonds cutting against each other .
Industrial diamonds can also be used for bruting a diamond round .
Modern computer software measures the roundness of each diamond and " Ideal Cut " diamonds have to round within a 10th of a millimeter to qualify as an excellent cut diamond .
DIAMOND POLISHING Section::::Diamond polishing .
Diamond polishing is the final polishing of the diamond .
In a diamond factory one would find a diamond " Crossworker " who first places the main facets on a diamond ( Blocking the diamond ) .
This is done to ensure maximum weight , clarity and best angles for the specific shape of diamond .
After initial crossworking is complete , the diamond is finalized by smoothing the main facets by the crossworker , which is known as polishing the diamond .
After the main facets have been polished by the crossworker , the final facets are polished onto the diamond by a " Brillianteer .
" The facets added are the stars , top and bottom halves also known as upper and lower girdle facets .
FINAL INSPECTION
Section::::Final inspection .
The final stage involves thoroughly cleaning the diamond in acids , and examining the diamond to see whether it meets the quality standards of the manufacturer .
CUTTING PROCESS Section::::Cutting process .
It is possible only because the hardness of diamond varies widely according to the direction in which one is trying to cut or grind .
A simplified round brilliant cut process includes the following stages : * Planning – Modern day planning of a diamond is done using computer software .
* Marking – Outlining the best possible shape and cut of the diamond .
* Sawing the rough stone – depending on the shape of rough diamond as not all diamonds are sawn .
* Table * Bruting the girdle .
* Blocking 8 main pavilion facets – these facets are divided into 4 Corners and 4 pavilions as the corners and pavilions run in different directions due to the atomic structure of the diamond .
* Crown – the crown consist of 8 main facets and are divided into 4 Corners and 4 Bezels .
* Final bruting – ensuring the diamonds girdle is perfectly round and smooth .
* Polishing all 16 main facets .
* Brillianteering – Adding and polishing 8 stars and 16 pavilion and 16 crown halves .
* Quality Control – checking for symmetry , polish and cut ( angles ) after the diamond is completed .
This is just one , although a fairly common way of creating a round brilliant cut .
The actual process also includes many more stages depending on the size and quality of the rough stone .
For example , bigger stones are first scanned to get the three - dimensional shape , which is then used to find the optimal usage .
The scanning may be repeated after each stage and bruting may be done in several steps , each bringing the girdle closer to the final shape .
RECUTTING
Section::::Recutting .
Due to changes in market desirability and popularity , the value of different styles of diamond fluctuate .
All diamonds can be recut into new shapes that will increase value at that time in the market and desirability .
An example of this is the marquise cut diamond which was popular in the 1970s to 1980s .
In later decades , jewelers had little success in selling this shape in comparison to other shapes like the oval or pear shape .
The marquise can be cut into an oval diamond by any diamond cutter with a loss of 5 - 10 % in total weight .
For example , a 1.10 carat marquise shape would be a 1.00 oval cut diamond by rounding the sharp points and creating an oval which currently in the market has a much greater desirability and resale value .
The same marquise shape also could become a pear shape instead by only trimming and rounding the side which will be turned into the base of the pear shape .
In the 18th century there was a trend for recutting Indian diamonds to suit English tastes .
The Koh - i - Noor 's original cut weighed a little over 186.00 carats .
When it was recut to an oval - shapped brilliant , almost 80 carats were lost .
Other aspects are affected in recutting for value as well , such as the clarity .
If an original shape contained inclusions on the tips , the recut would yield an increase in clarity since trimming down to a new shape would yield a cleaner overall finished diamond .
SEE ALSO
* Cut ( gems ) * Diamond
* Diamond cut
* Brilliant ( diamond cut )
*
Princess cut * Faceting machine
* Gemcutter REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Antique Jewelry University – A History of Diamond Cutting * Diamond Design , Marcel Tolkowsky .
Web edition as edited by Jasper Paulsen .