GRAND OLE
OPRY
The Grand Ole Opry is a weekly country music stage concert in Nashville , Tennessee founded on November 28 , 1925 , by George D. Hay as a one - hour radio " barn dance " on WSM .
Currently owned and operated by Opry Entertainment ( a division of Ryman Hospitality Properties , Inc. ) , it is the longest running radio broadcast in US history .
Dedicated to honoring country music and its history , the Opry showcases a mix of famous singers and contemporary chart - toppers performing country , bluegrass , Americana , folk , and gospel music as well as comedic performances and skits .
It attracts hundreds of thousands of visitors from around the world and millions of radio and internet listeners .
The Opry 's current primary slogan is " The Show That Made Country Music Famous . "
Other slogans include " Home of American Music " and " Country 's Most Famous Stage . "
In the 1930s , the show began hiring professionals and expanded to four hours .
Broadcasting by then at 50,000 watts , WSM made the program a Saturday night musical tradition in nearly 30 states .
In 1939 , it debuted nationally on NBC Radio .
The Opry moved to a permanent home , the Ryman Auditorium , in 1943 .
As it developed in importance , so did the city of Nashville , which became America 's " country music capital .
"
The Grand Ole Opry holds such significance in Nashville that its name is included on the city / county line signs on all major roadways .
The signs read " Music CityMetropolitan Nashville Davidson CountyHome of the Grand Ole Opry . "
Membership in the Opry remains one of country music 's crowning achievements .
Such country music legends as Hank Williams , Johnny Cash , Patsy Cline , Marty Robbins , Roy Acuff , the Carter family , Bill Monroe , Ernest Tubb , Kitty Wells , and Minnie Pearl were regulars on the Opry 's stage throughout its history .
In recent decades , the Opry has hosted such contemporary country stars as Dolly Parton , Loretta Lynn , Alan Jackson , Garth Brooks , Reba McEntire , Josh Turner , Carrie Underwood , Brad Paisley , Rascal Flatts , Dierks Bentley , Little Big Town , Blake Shelton , Chris Young , Ricky Skaggs , Faith Hill and Tim Mcgraw .
[ Since 1974 , the show has been broadcast from the Grand Ole Opry House east of downtown Nashville , with an annual three - month winter foray back to the Ryman since 1999 .
In addition to the radio programs , performances have been sporadically televised over the years .
HISTORY BEGINNINGS Section::::History .
Section::::Beginnings .
The Grand Ole Opry started as the WSM Barn Dance in the new fifth - floor radio studio of the National Life & Accident Insurance Company in downtown Nashville on November 28 , 1925 .
On October 18 , 1925 , management began a program featuring " Dr. Humphrey Bate and his string quartet of old - time musicians .
" On November 2 , WSM hired long - time announcer and program director
George D. " Judge " Hay , an enterprising pioneer from the National Barn Dance program at WLS in Chicago , who was also named the most popular radio announcer in America as a result of his radio work with both WLS and WMC in Memphis , Tennessee .
Hay launched the WSM Barn Dance with 77-year - old fiddler Uncle Jimmy Thompson on November 28 , 1925 , and that date is celebrated as the birth date of the Grand Ole Opry .
Some of the bands regularly on the show during its early days included Bill Monroe , the Possum Hunters ( with Dr. Humphrey Bate ) , the Fruit Jar Drinkers with Uncle Dave Macon , the Crook Brothers , the Binkley Brothers ' Dixie Clodhoppers , Sid Harkreader , Deford Bailey , Fiddlin ' Arthur Smith , and the Gully Jumpers .
Judge Hay liked the Fruit Jar Drinkers and asked them to appear last on each show because he wanted to always close each segment with " red hot fiddle playing .
" They were the second band accepted on Barn Dance , with the Crook Brothers being the first .
When the Opry began having square dancers on the show , the Fruit Jar Drinkers always played for them .
In 1926 , Uncle Dave Macon , a Tennessee banjo player who had recorded several songs and toured on the vaudeville circuit became its first real star .
NAME Section::::Name .
The phrase " Grand Ole Opry " was first uttered on radio on December 10 , 1927 .
At the time , the NBC Red Network 's Music Appreciation Hour , a program with classical music and selections from grand opera , was followed by Barn Dance .
Opry
presenter George Hay introduced the programme :
For the past hour , we have been listening to music taken largely from Grand Opera .
From now on , we will present the " Grand Ole Opry . "
LARGER VENUES Section::::Larger venues .
As audiences for the live show increased , National Life & Accident Insurance 's radio venue became too small to accommodate the hordes of fans .
They built a larger studio , but it was still not large enough .
After several months with no audiences , National Life decided to allow the show to move outside its home offices .
In October 1934 , the Opry moved into then - suburban Hillsboro Theatre ( now the Belcourt ) before moving to the Dixie Tabernacle in East Nashville on June 13 , 1936 .
The Opry then moved to the War Memorial Auditorium , a downtown venue adjacent to the State Capitol , and a 25-cent admission fee was charged to try to curb the large crowds , but to no avail .
On June 5 , 1943 , the Opry moved to Ryman Auditorium .
Top - charting country music acts performed at the Opry during the Ryman years , including Roy Acuff – called the King of Country Music – Hank Williams , Webb Pierce , Faron Young , Martha Carson , Lefty Frizzell , and many others .
One hour of the Opry was nationally broadcast by the NBC Red Network from 1939 to 1956 , and for much of its run , it aired one hour after the program that had inspired it , National Barn Dance .
The NBC segment , originally known by the name of its sponsor , The Prince Albert Show , was first hosted by Acuff , who was succeeded by Red Foley from 1946 to 1954 .
From October 15 , 1955 to September 1956 , ABC - TV aired a live , hour - long television version once a month on Saturday nights ( sponsored by Ralston - Purina ) that pre - empted one hour of the then-90-minute Ozark Jubilee .
From 1955 to 1957 , Al Gannaway owned and produced both The Country Show and Stars of the Grand Ole Opry , both filmed programs syndicated by Flamingo Films .
Gannaway 's Stars of the Grand Ole Opry was the first television show shot in color .
On October 2 , 1954 , a teenage Elvis Presley had his only Opry performance .
Although the audience reacted politely to his revolutionary brand of rockabilly music , Opry manager Jim Denny told Presley 's producer Sam Phillips after the show that the singer 's style did not suit the program .
1960S
Section::::1960s .
In the 1960s , as the hippie counterculture movement spread , the Opry maintained a strait - laced , conservative image with " longhairs " not being featured on the show .
The Byrds were a notable exception .
Country rock pioneer Gram Parsons , who was a member of The Byrds at the time , was in Nashville to work on the band 's country rock album , Sweetheart of the Rodeo .
The band 's record label , Columbia Records , had arranged for The Byrds to perform at the Ryman on March 15 , 1968 , a prospect that thrilled Parsons .
However , when the band took the stage the audience 's response was immediately hostile , resulting in derisive heckling , booing , and mocking calls of " tweet , tweet " and " cut your hair "
The Byrds further outraged the Opry establishment by ignoring accepted protocol when they performed Parsons ' song " Hickory Wind " instead of the Merle Haggard song " Life in Prison , " as had been announced by Tompall Glaser .
Two decades later , long after Parsons 's death , members of The Byrds reconciled with the Opry and collaborated on the 1989 album .
Another artist that ran afoul of the Oprys stringent standards was Jerry Lee Lewis , who made his first and only appearance on the show on January 20 , 1973 , after several years of success on the country charts .
Lewis was given two conditions for his appearance – no rock and roll and no profanity – and he proceeded to disregard both , even referring to himself as a certain unairable maternal insult at one point .
In a continuous 40-minute set , Lewis played a mixture of his rock and roll hits and covers of other singers ' country songs .
It has been said that he was bitter about how he was treated when he first arrived in Nashville in 1955 , and he supposedly used his Opry appearance to exact revenge on the Nashville music industry .
GRAND OLE
OPRY HOUSE Section::::Grand Ole Opry House .
Ryman Auditorium was home to the Opry until 1974 .
By the late 1960s , National Life & Accident desired a new , larger , more modern home for the long - running radio show .
Already 51 years old at the time the Opry moved there , the Ryman was beginning to suffer from disrepair as the downtown neighborhood around it fell victim to increasing urban decay .
Despite these shortcomings , the show 's popularity continued to increase , and its weekly crowds were outgrowing the 3,000-seat venue .
The Opry 's operators wanted to build a new air - conditioned theater , with greater seating capacity , ample parking , and the ability to serve as a television production facility .
The ideal location would be in a less urbanized part of town to provide visitors with a safer , more controlled , and more enjoyable experience .
National Life & Accident purchased farmland owned by a local sausage manufacturer ( Rudy 's Farm ) in the Pennington Bend area of Nashville , nine miles east of downtown and adjacent to the newly constructed Briley Parkway .
The new Opry venue was the centerpiece of a grand entertainment complex at that location , which later included Opryland USA Theme Park and Opryland Hotel .
The theme park opened to the public on June 30 , 1972 , well ahead of the 4,000-seat Opry House , which debuted nearly two years later , on Saturday , March 16 , 1974 .
Opening night was attended by sitting U.S. President Richard Nixon , who played a few songs on the piano .
To carry on the tradition of the show 's run at the Ryman , a six - foot circle of oak was cut from the corner of the Ryman 's stage and inlaid into center stage at the new venue .
Artists on stage usually stood on the circle as they performed , and most modern performers still follow this tradition .
The theme park was closed and demolished following the 1997 season , but the Grand Ole Opry House remains in use .
The immediate area around it was left intact , even throughout the construction of Opry Mills , which opened in May 2000 .
The Grand Ole Opry continues to be performed every Tuesday , Friday , and Saturday at the Grand Ole Opry House from March through November each year , and the site was added to the National Register of Historic Places on January 27 , 2015 .
RETURN TO RYMAN AUDITORIUM
Section::::Return to Ryman Auditorium .
Following the departure of the Opry , Ryman Auditorium sat mostly vacant and decaying for 20 years .
An initial effort by National Life & Accident to tear down the Ryman and use its bricks to build a chapel at Opryland USA was met with resounding resistance from the public , including many influential musicians of the time .
The plans were abandoned , and the building remained standing with an uncertain future .
Despite the absence of performances , the building remained a tourist attraction with tours .
In 1991 and 1992 , Emmylou Harris performed a series of concerts there and released some of the recordings as an album entitled At the Ryman .
The concert and album 's high acclaim renewed interest in reviving Ryman Auditorium as an active venue .
Beginning in September 1993 , Gaylord Entertainment initiated a full renovation of the Ryman , restoring it to a world - class concert hall that reopened with a broadcast of A Prairie Home Companion on June 4 , 1994 .
On Sunday , October 18 , 1998 , the Opry held a benefit show at Ryman Auditorium , marking its return to the venue for the first time since its final show on March 15 , 1974 .
The show was well received by fans , performers , and management alike , and the decision was made to host the Oprys regular shows there on January 15 & 16 , 1999 , as part of the celebration to commemorate 25 years at the new venue .
Beginning in November 1999 , the Opry was held at Ryman Auditorium for three months , partly due to the ongoing construction of Opry Mills .
The Opry has returned to the Ryman for the three winter months every year since then , allowing the show to acknowledge its roots while also taking advantage of a smaller venue during an off - peak season for tourism .
While still officially the Grand Ole Opry , the shows there are billed as Opry at the Ryman .
From 2002 to 2014 , a traveling version of the Radio City Christmas Spectacular took up residence at the Grand Ole Opry House each holiday season while the Opry was away .
It was replaced by Dr. Seuss ' How the Grinch Stole Christmas !
The Musical beginning in 2015 .
2010 FLOODING Section::::2010 flooding .
In May 2010 , the Opry House was flooded , along with much of Nashville , when the Cumberland River overflowed its banks .
Repairs were made , and the Opry itself remained uninterrupted .
Over the course of the summer of 2010 , the broadcast temporarily originated from alternate venues in Nashville , with Ryman Auditorium hosting the majority of the shows .
Other venues included TPAC War Memorial Auditorium , another former Opry home ; TPAC 's Andrew Jackson Hall ; Nashville Municipal Auditorium ; Allen Arena at Lipscomb University ; and Two Rivers Baptist Church .
Much of the auditorium 's main floor seating , the backstage areas , and the entire stage – including the inlaid circle of wood from Ryman 's stage – was underwater during the flood .
While the Grand Ole Opry House 's stage was replaced , the Ryman circle was restored and again placed at center stage in the Grand Ole Opry House before shows resumed .
The renovations following the flood also resulted in an updated backstage area , including the construction of more dressing rooms and a performer 's lounge .
The Opry returned to the Grand Ole Opry House on September 28 , 2010 , in a special edition of the Opry entitled Country Comes Home that was televised live on Great American Country .
The evening was filled with one - of - a - kind Opry moments .
Martina McBride and Connie Smith sang Smith 's signature hit " Once a Day " together , and other collaborations included Dierks Bentley and Del McCoury ( " Roll On Buddy , Roll On " ) , Josh Turner and Lorrie Morgan ( " Golden Ring " ) , and Montgomery Gentry and Charlie Daniels Band
( " Devil Went Down To Georgia " ) , among others .
The show closed with an all - star guitar jam featuring Brad Paisley , Keith Urban , Steve Wariner , Ricky Skaggs , and Marty Stuart .
BROADCASTS Section::::Broadcasts .
The Grand Ole Opry is broadcast live on WSM - AM at 7 p.m. CT on Saturday nights , changed from a previous time start of 6:30 .
A similar program , Friday Night Opry , airs live on Friday nights .
From February through December , Tuesday Night Opry is also aired live .
Wednesday shows are typically presented in the summer months , while an " Opry Country Classics " program sporadically airs on Thursdays , devoted solely to older artists and broadcasting from Ryman Auditorium .
The length of each of the various shows varies ; typically , the show runs three nights a week for just over two hours each night , with Saturday night shows often extended as late as midnight .
The Opry can also be heard live on Willie 's Roadhouse on channel 59 on Sirius XM Satellite Radio , and the program streams on WSM 's website .
ABC broadcast the Grand Ole Opry as a monthly series from 1955 to 1956 , and PBS televised annual live performances from 1978 to 1981 .
In 1985 , The Nashville Network began airing an edited half - hour version of the program as Grand Ole Opry Live .
The show moved to Country Music Television , where it expanded to an hour , and then to the Great American Country ( GAC ) cable network , which no longer televised its Opry Live show .
RFD - TV carries reruns of Opry telecasts under the title Opry Encore .
MEMBERSHIP Section::::Membership .
Regular performers at the Grand Ole Opry can be inducted into the organization as a member ; the Opry management , when it decides to induct a new member , directs an existing member to publicly ask them to join , usually during a live episode .
As the Opry is a running series , membership in the show 's cast must be maintained throughout an artist 's career , through frequent performances , and expires when the performer dies ( in the case of duos , membership continues until both members die , with the survivor allowed to maintain membership after the other 's death ) .
The Opry maintains a wall of fame listing every member of the Opry in the show 's history , including those that have died , lost or relinquished their membership .
Receiving Opry membership is considered an honor that is similar in prestige to a hall of fame induction , with the caveat that a number of prominent country musicians ( Conway Twitty , George Strait , Buck Owens and Merle Haggard being some of the most successful examples ) never received it .
The Opry also maintains a list of active " guest musicians " without official Opry membership ( over 400 as of July 2018 ) who appear on the show .
CONTROVERSIES Section::::Controversies .
In April 1963 , Opry management made a rule that members had to perform on at least 26 shows a year to keep their memberships active .
WSM dropped the number of required performances to 20 in January 1964 , and the minimum number was 12 in 2000 .
Although the minimum number of performances has been reduced over the years , artists offered membership are expected to show their dedication to the Opry with frequent attendance .
Another controversy raged for years over allowable instrumentation , especially the use of drums and electrically amplified instruments .
Some purists were appalled at the prospect ; traditionally a string bass provided the rhythm component in country music , and percussion instruments were seldom used .
Electric amplification , new in the beginning days of the Opry , was regarded as the province of popular music and jazz in the 1940s .
Although the Opry allowed electric guitars and steel guitars by World War II , the restrictions against drums and horns continued , causing a conflict when Bob Wills and Pee Wee King defied the show 's ban on drums .
Stonewall Jackson , the Opry 's longest - tenured standing member as of 2018 , sued the Opry management in 2008 alleging that manager Pete Fisher was trying to purge older members of the Opry from its membership and committing age discrimination .
Jackson settled the lawsuit later that year .
COMMERCIALIZATION
Section::::Commercialization .
The company has enforced its trademark on the name " Grand Ole Opry , " with trademark registrations in the United States and in numerous countries around the world .
It has taken court action to limit use of the word " Opry " – not directly trademarked – to members of the Opry and products associated with or licensed by it and to discourage use of the word in ways that would imply a connection to the Grand Ole Opry .
In late 1968 , for instance , WSM sued Opry Records , a record label that was independent of WSM , and the court decided that " the record is replete with newspaper and magazine articles and clippings which demonstrate conclusively that the term ' Opry , ' standing alone as defendant has used it , is constantly used in country and western music circles in referring to plaintiff 's ' Grand Ole Opry ' .
" The court also stated " the defendant has appropriated , at its peril , the dominant or salient term in the plaintiff 's mark , a term which identified the ' Grand Ole Opry ' in the mind of the public many years before the inception of ' Opry Records ' – the name adopted by defendant . "
In another case , the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board granted summary judgment that the term " Opry " is a generic term ( and thus no more protected than the words " Grand " or " Ole " ) , but the Federal Circuit court reversed this decision .
As recently as 2009 , the Trademark Trial and Appeal Board granted judgment against Texas Opry House , LLC , which had filed a trademark application for TEXAS OPRY HOUSE .
In 2004 , it was announced that the Grand Ole Opry had contracted for the first time with a " presenting sponsor , " Cracker Barrel , and the sponsoring company 's name would be associated with Grand Ole Opry in all its advertising .
Humana , Inc. , Cracker Barrel , and Dollar General are the present sponsors of the Opry .
HONORS
* Peabody Award , 1983
* National Radio Hall of Fame induction , 1992 SEE ALSO * Country Music Association * Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum
* Music & the Spoken Word -
" The longest - running continuous network radio program in the world " ( began July 15 , 1929 ) .
NOTES
REFERENCES
* Hay , George D. A Story of the Grand Ole Opry .
1945 .
* Kingsbury , Paul ( 1998 ) . "
Grand Ole Opry " .
In The Encyclopedia of Country Music .
Paul Kingsbury , Editor .
New York :
Oxford University Press .
pp .
208–9 .
* Wolfe , Charles K. A Good - Natured Riot : The Birth of the Grand Ole Opry .
Nashville :
Country Music Foundation Press , 1999 . .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Grand Ole Opry on TV Internet Archive Complete show of April 28 , 1956 in black & white * Library of Congress Local Legacies Project :
Grand Ole Opry * Grand Ole Opry at Outlaws Old Time Radio Corner