THE QUIET MAN
The Quiet Man is a 1952 Technicolor American romantic comedy - drama film directed by John Ford .
It stars John Wayne , Maureen O'Hara , Barry Fitzgerald , Ward Bond and Victor McLaglen .
The screenplay by Frank S. Nugent was based on a 1933 Saturday Evening Post short story of the same name by Maurice Walsh , later published as part of a collection titled The Green Rushes .
The film is notable for Winton Hoch 's lush photography of the Irish countryside and a long , climactic , semi - comic fist fight .
It was an official selection of the 1952 Venice Film Festival .
The Quiet Man won the Academy Award for Best Director for John Ford , his fourth , and for Best Cinematography .
In 2013 , the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the 1920s , Sean Thornton ( John Wayne ) , an Irish - born American from Pittsburgh , travels to Ireland to reclaim his family 's farm and his birthplace in Inisfree .
He meets and falls in love with the fiery Mary Kate Danaher ( Maureen O'Hara ) , the sister of the bullying , loud - mouthed landowner Squire " Red " Will Danaher ( Victor McLaglen ) .
Danaher , who had wanted the farm himself , is angry that the Widow Tillane ( angered by Danaher 's admission that he had discussed her in the local pub ) accepts Sean 's bid and retaliates by refusing consent for his sister to marry .
Several town locals , including the Catholic priest , Father Lonergan ( Ward Bond ) and the village matchmaker ( and bookmaker )
Michaleen Oge Flynn ( Barry Fitzgerald ) , conspire to trick him into believing that the wealthy Widow Tillane ( Mildred Natwick ) wants to marry him , but only if Mary Kate is no longer living in his house .
After learning the truth on Sean and Mary Kate 's wedding day , an enraged Will refuses to give his sister her dowry which is made up of a large sum of money and her family possessions passed down from her mother .
Sean , unschooled in Irish customs , cares nothing about the dowry , but to Mary Kate the dowry represents her independence , identity , and pride .
She feels passionately and intensely that the dowry is hers and is needed to validate her marriage to Sean .
Angered and shamed by Sean 's refusal to confront her brother and demand what is legally hers , she brands him a coward , and , despite living together , they are estranged as husband and wife .
In the morning they find that others in the village had visited Will and pressured him to return Mary Kate 's furniture , but could not make him pay the 350 pounds of dowry money .
Sean had been a boxer in the United States , a heavyweight challenger known as " Trooper Thorn . "
After accidentally killing an opponent in the ring , Sean hung up his gloves , vowing never to fight again .
This is known to only one person in the village , the Church of Ireland minister , the Rev. Playfair ( Arthur Shields ) , who once upon a time had been the lightweight champion and so understands Thornton 's internal conflict over the fight .
In an attempt to force Sean to confront Will , Mary Kate leaves him and boards a train departing Castletown and headed to Dublin .
Sean hears from Michaleen that she left for the station and drags her off the train .
Followed by a crowd of townspeople , he forces her to walk with him the five miles back to Inisfree and directly to the Danaher farm .
Sean demands that Will hand over her dowry .
When Will refuses , he throws Mary Kate back at Will , saying that " no dowry , no marriage " is their custom , not his ; shocking the two and shaming Will into finally paying the monetary portion of his sister 's dowry .
Sean promptly throws the money into a nearby furnace which Mary Kate holds open , showing that Mary Kate never cared about the money but only what it represented .
After a proud Mary Kate announces so all can hear that she will now return home to prepare his supper and departs , Will throws a punch at Sean , and is dropped by Sean 's vicious right hook to the gut .
A long , memorable fistfight ensues between the two , drawing crowds from miles around .
They slug it out through the village , stop for a drink , admit grudging mutual respect for each other , and disagree over who is to pay for the porter they are drinking .
Sean ends the fight by clocking Danaher on the jaw hard enough to smash him through the pub 's door , knocking him out .
Then , somewhat drunk , the two return to Sean and Mary Kate 's home for supper , where it is implied the rift is healed .
Sean regains Mary Kate 's love and respect .
In the aftermath it is shown that Will and the Widow Tillane begin courting , and " peace is returned to Inisfree " .
When last seen , Mary Kate has whispered something in Sean 's ear and the couple is shown trotting back to their house ... in the middle of the day , no less .
CAST
* John Wayne as Sean Thornton * Maureen O'Hara as Mary Kate Danaher * Barry Fitzgerald as Michaeleen " Óge " Flynn ( Óge means " young " in Irish , which was used to denote between a father and son named the same , such as " Sr . " and " Jr. " are used in English )
* Victor McLaglen as Squire " Red " Will Danaher * Ward Bond as Father Peter Lonergan
* Mildred Natwick as the Widow Sarah
Tillane * Francis Ford as Dan Tobin * Arthur Shields as Rev. Cyril Playfair * Eileen Crowe as Elizabeth Playfair * Charles FitzSimons as Hugh Forbes
* James Fitzsimons ( as James Lilburn )
as Father Paul * Sean McClory as Owen Glynn * Emily Eby as Mave Campbell * Jack MacGowran as Ignatius Feeney * Philip Stainton as Anglican Bishop * May Craig as Fishwoman with Basket at Station
* Paddy O'Donnell as Railway porter
* Eric Gorman as Costello –
Engine driver * Kevin Lawless as Engine fireman * Joseph O'Dea as Molouney – Train guard
* Tony Canzoneri as Boxing Second ( uncredited ) * Frank Baker as Man in Bar ( uncredited ) * Ruth Clifford as Mother ( uncredited )
* Maureen Coyne as Dan Tobin 's Daughter Ireland ( uncredited ) * Mimi Doyle as Dan Tobin 's Daughter USA ( uncredited )
* Ken Curtis as Dermot Fahy ( uncredited ) * Douglas Evans as Ring Physician ( uncredited ) * Charles Ferguson as Danaher Brother ( uncredited )
* Robert Foy as Driver of Cart Across River ( uncredited )
* Sam Harris as the deaf General ( uncredited ) * D.R.O. Hatswell as Guppy ( uncredited )
* John Horan as Man at Railway Station ( uncredited )
* David Hughes as Police Constable ( uncredited ) * Billy Jones as Bugler ( uncredited ) * Tiny Jones as Nell ( Maid ) ( uncredited )
* Colin Kenny as Pub Extra ( uncredited ) * Patrick Wayne as Boy on Wagon at Horse Race ( uncredited )
* Michael Wayne as Teenage Boy at Races ( uncredited )
* Toni Wayne as Teenage Girl at Races ( uncredited )
* Melinda Wayne as Girl on Wagon at Horse Race ( uncredited ) * Mae Marsh as Father Paul 's Mother ( uncredited )
* Jim Morrin as Roof Thatcher ( uncredited )
* Jim McVeigh as Man Following Cart Across River ( uncredited )
* Harry Tenbrook as Police Sergeant Hanan ( uncredited ) * Harry Tyler as Pat Cohan ( Publican ) ( uncredited ) * Al Murphy as Boxing Referee ( uncredited ) * Hank Worden as Boxing Trainer ( uncredited )
* Michael O'Brian as Musha Musha Man ( uncredited ) * Pat O'Malley as Man in Bar ( uncredited ) * Frank O'Connor as Ringside Photographer ( uncredited ) * Web Overlander as Hugh Bailey ( Stationmaster ) ( uncredited )
* Bob Perry as Trooper Thorn 's Ringside Trainer ( uncredited )
* Darla Ridgeway as Girl ( uncredited )
* Freddy Ridgeway as Boy ( uncredited )
* Philip Stainton as Anglican Bishop ( uncredited ) * Jack Roper as Tony Gardello ( Boxer ) ( uncredited )
* Brick Sullivan as Townsman ( uncredited ) PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The film was something of a departure for Wayne and Ford , who were both known mostly for Westerns and other action - oriented films .
It was also a departure for Republic Pictures , which backed Ford in what was considered a risky venture at the time .
It was the only time the studio , known for low budget B - movies , released a film that would receive an Oscar nomination for Best Picture .
Ford read the story in 1933 and soon purchased the rights to it for $ 10 .
The story 's author was paid another $ 2,500 when Republic bought the idea , and he received a final payment of $ 3,750 when the film was actually made .
Republic Pictures agreed to finance the film with O'Hara and Wayne starring and Ford directing , but only if all three agreed to first film a Western with Republic .
They did , and after completing Rio Grande , they headed for Ireland to start shooting .
One of the conditions that Republic placed on Ford was that the film run under two hours .
However , the finished picture was two hours and nine minutes .
When screening the film for Republic executives , Ford stopped the film at approximately two hours in , on the verge of the climactic fistfight .
Republic executives relented and allowed the film to run its full length .
It was one of the few films that Republic filmed in Technicolor ; most of the studio 's other color films were made in a more economical process known as Trucolor .
The film employed many actors from the Irish theatre , including Barry Fitzgerald 's brother , Arthur Shields , as well as extras from the Irish countryside , and it is one of the few Hollywood movies in which the Irish language can be heard .
Filming commenced on June 7 , 1951 .
All of the outdoor scenes were shot on location in Ireland in County Mayo and County Galway .
The inside scenes were filmed toward the end of July at the Republic Studios in Hollywood .
The story is set in the fictitious community of Inisfree .
This is not the same as the Lake Isle of Innisfree , a place in Lough Gill on the Sligo – Leitrim border made famous by poet William Butler Yeats , which is a tiny island .
Many scenes for the film were actually shot in and around the village of Cong , County Mayo , on the grounds of Cong 's Ashford Castle .
Cong is now a wealthy small town and the castle a 5-star luxury hotel .
The connections with the film have led to the area becoming a tourist attraction .
In 2008 , a pub opened in the building used as the pub in the film ( it had actually been a shop at the time when the movie was shot ) ; the pub hosts daily re - runs of the film on DVD .
The Quiet Man
Fan Club holds its annual general meeting in Ashford Castle .
Other locations in the film include Thoor Ballylee ,
Co. Galway , home of poet W.B. Yeats for a period , Ballyglunin railway station near
Tuam Co. Galway , which was filmed as Castletown station , and various places in Connemara Co. Galway and Co. Mayo .
Among those are Lettergesh beach , where the horse race scene was filmed , the Quiet Man Bridge , signposted off the N59 road between Maam Cross and Oughterard and the " White O'Morn
" cottage .
The latter is located on R336 south of Maam , but has long ago fallen into ruin .
The film also presents Ford 's depiction of an idealized Irish society , with no social divisions based on class or religion .
The Catholic priest , Father Lonergan , and the Protestant Rev. Playfair maintain a strong friendly relationship throughout the film – which represented the norm in what was then the Irish Free State .
( Religious tensions occurred in the 1930s , but were the norm only in Northern Ireland . )
The only allusions to Anglo - Irish animosity occur after the happy couple is married and a congratulatory toast expresses the wish that they live in " national freedom " ( the term national has been censored from most editions ) and before the final donnybrook when Thornton demands his wife 's dowry from Danaher .
Danaher asks Hugh Forbes , who had been commander of the local Irish Republican Army unit during the fight to expel the British , " So the IRA is in this too , ah " , to which Forbes replies , " If it were , not a scorched stone of your fine house would be standing . "
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Ford chose his friend , Hollywood composer Victor Young , to compose the score for the film .
Young sprinkled the soundtrack with many Irish airs such as the " Rakes of Mallow " and " The Wild Colonial Boy " .
One piece of music , chosen by Ford himself , is most prominent : the melody the " Isle of Innisfree " , written not by Young , but by the Irish policeman / songwriter Richard Farrelly .
The melody of the " Isle of Innisfree " , which is first heard over the opening credit sequence with Ashford Castle in the background , becomes the principal musical theme of The Quiet Man .
The melody is reprised at least eleven times throughout the film .
The upbeat melody comically hummed by Michaeleen Oge Flynn and later played on the accordion is the " Rakes of Mallow " .
A portion of the Irish version of " The Wild Colonial Boy " is played throughout the film .
When Maureen O'Hara died in October 2015 , her family stated she listened to music from The Quiet Man during her final hours .
Filmmaker George A. Romero was also said to have died listening to the score .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
A. H. Weiler of The New York Times called the film " as darlin ' a picture as we 've seen this year , " with " dialogue that is as tuneful as a lark 's song .
"
Variety called the picture " beautifully filmed " and wrote that " Wayne works well under Ford 's direction , " but found the 129-minute running time " unnecessary . "
Harrison 's Reports called the film " a delightful and rollicking comedy melodrama of Irish life , directed with skill and acted with gusto by a fine cast . "
Richard L. Coe of The Washington Post called it " a complete jim - dandy ...
The photography is glorious and Victor Young 's score , inspired by folk airs , is a complete joy for an exuberant , vigorous picture . "
Philip Hamburger of The New Yorker was not so taken with the film , writing , " If am to believe what I saw in John Ford 's sentimental new film , ' The Quiet Man , ' practically everybody in Ireland is just as cute as a button , " adding , " Mr. Ford 's scenes of the Irish countryside are often breathtaking ... but the master who made ' The Informer ' appears to have fallen into a vat of treacle . "
The Quiet Man has a 90 % approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes , with the critical consensus stated as , " Director John Ford and star John Wayne depart the Western for the Irish countryside , and the result is a beautifully photographed , often comedic romance . "
The film was also a financial success , grossing $ 3.8 million in its first year of release .
This was among the top ten grosses of the year .
It was the seventh most popular film for British audiences in 1952 .
ACADEMY AWARDS Section::::Academy Awards . bgcolor="#75B5F6 " Award HOME VIDEO Section::::Home video .
It was first released on DVD December 14 , 1998 by Artisan Home Entertainment .
It was also released 4 years later on a Collector 's edition DVD on October 22 , 2002 by Artisan .
The Special features on this edition include " The Making of the Quiet Man
" Documentary with Leonard Maltin , and " The Joy of Ireland " Documentary with Maureen O'Hara and Andrew V. McLaglen , and " Remembering The Quiet Man Montage " .
On January 22 , 2013 Olive Films released The Quiet Man on DVD and for the first time on Blu - ray , as a 60th Anniversary Special edition .
It included the documentary " The Making of the Quiet Man " with Leonard Maltin .
In 2010 there was a documentary called Dreaming The Quiet Man made about the journey and making of The Quiet Man .
It was narrated by Gabriel Byrne , and had interviews with Peter Bogdanovich , Martin Scorsese , Charles F. Fitzsimons , and Maureen O'Hara .
It was released on DVD and Blu - ray for the first time on March 24 , 2015 .
SEE ALSO
* John Wayne filmography
* Marquess of Queensberry rules of boxing
* Innisfree , a 1990 Spanish documentary film about the making of The Quiet Man * Jaunting car , the horse - drawn vehicle owned by Michaeleen Oge Flynn that is first seen delivering Sean to Innisfree at the beginning of the film .
Michaleen is seen using it throughout the film as his main mode of transport and it is in the amusing courting scenes that it plays a greater role .
GALLERY
REFERENCES
* Crosson , Seán and Rod Stoneman ( 2009 ) .
The Quiet Man ... and Beyond : Reflections on a Classic Film , John Ford , and Ireland .
Liffey Press . .
Includes chapters examining the film 's use of language , style , landscape and Ford 's connection more generally with Ireland .
* Includes an in - depth chapter on the film 's score and the " Isle of Innisfree " .
No online access .
* Narrative of the film 's production .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Quiet Man on Rotten Tomatoes
* The Quiet Man at Filmsite.org *
Quiet Man Movie Club * The Quiet Man at Reel Classics *
The Quiet Man Cottage museum in Cong * William C. Dowling , " John Ford 's Festive Comedy :
Ireland Imagined in The Quiet Man " * Dick Farrelly , songwriter :
Lyrics * A Quiet Man Miscellany Cork University Press
* Dick Farrelly and ' The Isle of Innisfree '