ANACARDIACEAE
The Anacardiaceae , commonly known as the cashew family or sumac family , are a family of flowering plants , including about 83 genera with about 860 known species .
Members of the Anacardiaceae bear fruits that are drupes and in some cases produce urushiol , an irritant .
The Anacardiaceae include numerous genera , several of which are economically important , notably cashew ( in the type genus Anacardium ) , mango , poison ivy , sumac , smoke tree , marula , yellow mombin , and cuachalalate .
The genus Pistacia ( which includes the pistachio and mastic tree ) is now included , but was previously placed in its own family , the Pistaciaceae .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Trees or shrubs , each has inconspicuous flowers and highly poisonous , sometimes foul - smelling resinous or milky sap .
Resin canals located in the inner fibrous bark of plants ' fibrovascular system found in the stems , roots , and leaves are characteristic of all members of this family ; resin canals located in the pith are characteristic of many of the cashew family species and several species have them located in the primary cortex or the regular bark .
Tannin sacs are also widespread among the family .
The wood of the Anacardiaceae has the frequent occurrence of simple small holes in the vessels , occasionally in some species side by side with scalariform holes ( in Campnosperma , Micronychia , and Heeria argentea ( Anaphrenium argenteum ) .
The simple pits are located along the vessel wall and in contact with the parenchyma .
Leaves are deciduous or evergreen , usually alternate ( rarely opposite ) , estipulate ( without stipule ) and imparipinnate ( rarely paripinnate or bipinnate ) , usually with opposite leaflats ( rarely alternate ) , while others are trifoliolate or simple or unifoliolate ( very rarely simple leaves are palmate ) .
Leaf architecture is very diverse .
Primary venation is pinnate ( rarely palmate ) .
Secondary venation is eucamptodromous , brochidodromous , craspedodromous or cladodromous ( rarely reticulodromous ) Cladodromous venation , if present is considered diagnostic for Anacardiaceae .
Flowers grow at the end of a branch or stem or at an angle from where the leaf joins the stem and have bracts .
Often with this family , bisexual and male flowers occur on some plants , and bisexual and female flowers are on others , or flowers have both stamens and pistils ( perfect ) .
A calyx with three to seven cleft sepals and the same number of petals , occasionally no petals , overlap each other in the bud .
Stamens are twice as many or equal to the number of petals , inserted at the base of the fleshy ring or cup - shaped disk , and inserted below the pistil(s ) .
Stamen stalks are separate , and anthers are able to move .
Flowers have the ovary free , but the petals and stamen are borne on the calyx .
In the stamenate flowers , ovaries are single - celled .
In the pistillate flowers , ovaries are single or sometimes quadri- or quinticelled .
One to three styles and one ovule occur in each cavity .
Fruits rarely open at maturity and are most often drupes .
Seed coats are very thin or are crust - like .
Little or no endosperm is present .
Cotyledons are fleshy .
Seeds are solitary with no albumen around the embryo .
TAXONOMY HISTORY Section::::Taxonomy .
Section::::History .
In 1759 , Bernard de Jussieu arranged the plants in the royal garden of the Trianon at Versailles , according to his own scheme .
That classification included a description of an order called the Terebintaceæ which contained a suborder that included Cassuvium ( Anacardium ) , Anacardium ( Semecarpus ) , Mangifera , Connarus , Rhus and Rourea .
In 1789 , Antoine Laurent de Jussieu , nephew of Bernard de Jussieu , published that classification scheme .
Robert Brown described a subset of the Terebintaceae called Cassuvlæ or Anacardeæ in 1818 , using the herbarium that was collected by Christen Smith during a fated expedition headed by James Hingston Tuckey to explore the River Congo .
The name and genera were based on the order with the same name that had been described by Bernard de Jussieu in 1759 .
The herbarium from that expedition contained only one genus from the family , Rhus .
Augustin Pyramus de Candolle in 1824 , used Robert Browns name Cassuvlæ or Anacardeæ , wrote another description of the group and filled it with the genera Anacardium , Semecarpus , Holigarna , Mangifera , Buchanania , Pistacia , Astronium , Comocladia and Picramnia .
John Lindley described the " Essential character " of the Anacardiaceæ , the " Cashew Tribe " in 1831 , adopting the order that was described by Jussieu , but abandoning the name Terebintaceæ .
He includes the genera which were found in de Candolle 's Anacardieæ and Sumachineæ : Anacardium , Holigarna , Mangifera , Rhus and Mauria .
PHYLOGENY Section::::Phylogeny .
The genus Pistacia has sometimes been separated into its own family , the Pistaciaceae , based on the reduced flower structure , differences in pollen , and the feathery style of the flowers .
However , the nature of the ovary does suggest it belongs in the Anacardiaceae , a position which is supported by morphological and molecular studies , and recent classifications have included Pistacia in the Anacardiaceae .
The genus Abrahamia was separated from Protorhus in 2004.(Pell 2004 )
SUBDIVISION Section::::Subdivision .
The family has been treated as a series of five tribes by Engler , and later into subfamilies by Takhtajan , as Anacardioideae ( including tribes Anacardieae , Dobineae , Rhoeae , and Semecarpeae ) and Spondiadoideae ( including tribe Spondiadeae ) .
Pell 's ( 2008 ) molecular analysis reinstated the two subfamilies without further division into tribes.(Pell 2004 )
Later Min and Barfod , in the Flora of China ( 2008 ) reinstated the five tribes ( four in Anacardioideae ) , and the single tribe Spondiadeae as Spondiadoideae .
SELECTED GENERA Section::::Selected genera .
Abrahamia
Actinocheita
Amphipterygium Anacardium ( Cashew )
Androtium Antrocaryon Apterokarpos Astronium ( = Myracrodruon )
Baronia
Blepharocarya
Bonetiella Bouea
Buchanania Campnosperma
Campylopetalum
Cardenasiodendron
Choerospondias Comocladia Cotinus ( smoke tree )
Cyrtocarpa
Dobinea
Dracontomelon
Drimycarpus
Ebandoua
Euleria
Euroschinus
Faguetia
Fegimanra Gluta
Haematostaphis
Haplorhus
Harpephyllum
Heeria
Holigarna
Koordersiodendron Lannea
Laurophyllus
Lithraea
Loxopterigium
Loxostylis Malosma Mangifera ( mango )
Mauria
Melanochyla
Melanococca Melanorrhoea
Metopium
Micronychia
Montagueia
Mosquitoxylum
Nothopegia
Ochoterenaea
Operculicarya Orthopterygium
Ozoroa Pachycormus
Parishia
Pegia
Pentaspadon Pistacia ( pistachio )
Pleiogynium Poupartia
Poupartiopsis
Protorhus
Pseudoprotorhus
Pseudosmodingium
Pseudospondias Rhodosphaera Rhus ( sumac ) Schinopsis Schinus ( peppertree )
Sclerocarya
Searsia
Semecarpus Smodingium
Solenocarpus
Sorindeia Spondias Swintonia
Tapirira
Thyrsodium Toxicodendron ( poison ivy , poison oak , poison sumac )
Trichoscypha ECOLOGY
Section::::Ecology .
The cashew family is more abundant in warm or tropical regions with only a few species living in the temperate zones .
Mostly native to tropical Americas , Africa and India .
Pistacia and some species of Rhus can be found in southern Europe , Rhus species can be found in much of North America and Schinus inhabits South America exclusively .
USES Section::::Uses .
Members of this family produce cashew and pistacia nuts and others produce mango and marula fruits .
Some members produce a viscous or adhesive fluid which turns black and is used as a varnish or for tanning and even as a mordant for red dyes .
Medicinally the edible nuts from this family have a reputation for being good for the brain .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The name Anacardium , originally from the Greek , refers to the nut , core or heart of the fruit , which is outwardly located : ana means " upward " and -cardium means " heart " ) .
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* , in EXTERNAL LINKS * Tree of Life :
Anacardiaceae * Anacardiaceae and Burseraceae research * Anacardiaceae in Topwalks * Anacardiaceae in L. Watson and M.J. Dallwitz ( 1992 onwards ) .
The families of flowering plants .
* Family Anacardiaceae - Flowers in Israel * Anacardiaceae of Chile , by Chileflora * Anacardiaceae in BoDD – Botanical Dermatology Database
* Anacardiaceae at Flickr * Tianlu Min & Anders Barfod .
Anacardiaceae at Flora of China , 2008
* pdf