TASMAN SEA
The Tasman Sea ( Māori : Te Tai - o - Rehua , ) is a marginal sea of the South Pacific Ocean , situated between Australia and New Zealand .
It measures about across and about from north to south .
The sea was named after the Dutch explorer Abel Janszoon Tasman , who was the first recorded European to encounter New Zealand and Tasmania .
The British explorer Captain James Cook later extensively navigated the Tasman Sea in the 1770s as part of his first voyage of exploration .
The Tasman Sea is informally referred to in both Australian and New Zealand English as The Ditch ; for example , crossing the Ditch means travelling to Australia from New Zealand , or vice versa .
The diminutive term " The Ditch " used for the Tasman Sea is comparable to referring to the North Atlantic Ocean as " The Pond " .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
The south of the sea is passed over by depressions going from west to east .
The northern limit of these westerly winds is near to 40 ° S.
During the southern winter , from April to October , the northern branch of these winds from the west changes its direction toward the north and goes up against trade winds .
Hence , the sea receives frequent winds from the southwest during this period .
In the Australian summer ( from November to March ) the southern branch of the trade winds goes up against west winds and produces further wind activity in the area .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The sea circumscribes a water body of wide and in area .
The depth of the sea is .
The base of the sea is made up of globigerina ooze .
A small zone of pteropod ooze is found to the south of New Caledonia and to the southern extent of 30 ° S , siliceous ooze can be found .
EXTENT Section::::Extent .
The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Tasman Sea as follows : RIDGE Section::::Ridge .
The Tasman Sea 's mid - ocean ridge developed between 85 and 55 million years ago as Australia and Zealandia broke apart during the breakup of supercontinent Gondwana .
It lies roughly midway between the continental margins of Australia and Zealandia .
Much of Zealandia is submerged , so the ridge runs much closer to the Australian coast than New Zealand 's .
ISLANDS Section::::Islands .
The Tasman Sea features a number of mid - sea island groups , quite apart from coastal islands located near the Australian and New Zealand mainlands : * Lord Howe Island ( part of New South Wales ) * Ball 's Pyramid ( part of New South Wales ) * Norfolk Island , in the extreme north of the Tasman Sea , on the border with the Coral Sea ( External Territory )
* Middleton Reef ( part of Coral Sea Islands Territory )
* Elizabeth Reef ( part of Coral Sea Islands Territory ) ADJOINING BODIES OF WATER
* North : Coral Sea * Northeast and East : Pacific Ocean * South and Southeast : Southern Ocean
* West : Bass Strait ANIMAL AND PLANT LIFE Section::::Animal and plant life .
A deep - sea research ship , the Tangaroa explored the sea and found 500 species of fish and 1300 species of invertebrates .
The tooth of Megalodon , an extinct shark was also found by some researchers .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Moncrieff and Hood were the first to attempt a Trans - Tasman crossing by plane in 1928 .
The first successful flight over the sea was accomplished by Charles Kingsford Smith later that year .
The first person to row solo across the sea was Colin Quincey in 1977 .
The next successful solo crossing was completed by his son , Shaun Quincey , in 2010 .
SEE ALSO
* Axis naval activity in New Zealand waters
* Crossing the Ditch
* List of seas
* Coral sea
REFERENCES BOOK SOURCES EXTERNAL LINKS