SOY SAUCE Soy sauce ( also called soya sauce in British English ) is a liquid condiment of Chinese origin , made from a fermented paste of soybeans , roasted grain , brine , and Aspergillus oryzae or Aspergillus sojae molds .
Soy sauce in its current form was created about 2,200 years ago during the Western Han dynasty of ancient China , and spread throughout East and Southeast Asia where it is used in cooking and as a condiment .
HISTORY
EAST ASIA CHINA Section::::History .
Section::::East Asia .
Section::::China .
Soy sauce ( 醬油 ) is considered almost as old as soy paste — a type of fermented paste ( Jiang , ) obtained from soybeans — which had appeared during the Western Han dynasty ( 206 BC – 220 AD ) and was listed in the bamboo slips found in the archaeological site Mawangdui ( 馬王堆 ) .
There are several precursors of soy sauce that are associated products with soy paste .
Among them the earliest one is Qingjiang ( 清醬 ) that had appeared in AD 40 and was listed in Simin Yueling ( ) .
Others are Jiangqing ( 醬清 ) , Chizhi ( 豉汁 ) and Chiqing ( 豉清 ) which are recorded in Qimin Yaoshu ( ) in AD 540 .
By the time of the Song dynasty ( 960–1279 AD ) , the term soy sauce ( 醬油 ) had become the accepted name for the liquid condiment , which are documented in two books : Shanjia Qinggong ( 山家清供 ) and Pujiang Wushi Zhongkuilu ( 浦江吳氏中饋錄 ) during the Song dynasty ( 960–1279 AD ) .
Like many salty condiments , soy sauce was originally a way to stretch salt , historically an expensive commodity .
During the Zhou dynasty of ancient China , fermented fish with salt was used as a condiment in which soybeans were included during the fermentation process .
By the time of the Han dynasty , this had been replaced with the recipe for soy paste and its by - product soy sauce , by using soybeans as the principal ingredient , with fermented fish - based sauces developing separately into fish sauce .
The 19th century
Sinologist Samuel Wells Williams wrote that in China , the best soy sauce is " made by boiling beans soft , adding an equal quantity of wheat or barley , and leaving the mass to ferment ; a portion of salt and three times as much water are afterwards put in , and the whole compound left for two or three months when the liquid is pressed and strained " .
KOREA
Section::::Korea .
The earliest soy sauce brewing in Korea seems to have begun prior to the era of the Three Kingdoms c. 57 BC .
The Records of the Three Kingdoms , a Chinese historical text written and published in the 3rd century , mentions that " Goguryeo people are good at brewing fermented soy beans .
" in the section named Dongyi ( Eastern foreigners ) , in the Book of Wei .
Jangdoks used for soy sauce brewing are found in the mural paintings of Anak Tomb No.3 from the 4th century Goguryeo .
In Samguk Sagi , a historical record of the Three Kingdoms era , it is written that ganjang ( soy sauce ) and doenjang ( soybean paste ) along with meju ( soybean block ) and jeotgal ( salted seafood ) were prepared for the wedding ceremony of the King Sinmun in February 683 .
Sikhwaji , a section from Goryeosa ( History of Goryeo ) , recorded that ganjang and doenjang were included in the relief supplies in 1018 , after a Khitan invasion , and in 1052 , when a famine occurred .
Joseon texts such as Guhwangchwaryo and Jeungbo sallim gyeongje contain the detailed procedures on how to brew good quality ganjang and doenjang .
Gyuhap chongseo explains how to pick a date for brewing , what to forbear , and how to keep and preserve ganjang and doenjang .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
Chinese Buddhist monks introduced soy sauce into Japan in the 7th century , where it is known as .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Records of the Dutch East India Company list soy sauce as a commodity in 1737 , when seventy - five large barrels were shipped from Dejima , Japan , to Batavia ( present - day Jakarta ) on the island of Java .
Thirty - five barrels from that shipment were then shipped to the Netherlands .
In the 18th century , diplomat and scholar Isaac Titsingh published accounts of brewing soy sauce .
Although earlier descriptions of soy sauce had been disseminated in the West , his was among the earliest to focus specifically on the brewing of the Japanese version .
By the mid-19th century , Japanese soy sauce gradually disappeared from the European market , and the condiment became synonymous with the Chinese product .
Europeans were unable to make soy sauce because they did not understand the function of Aspergillus oryzae , the fungus used in its brewing .
Soy sauce made from ingredients such as Portobello mushrooms were disseminated in European cookbooks during the late 18th century .
A Swedish recipe for " Soija " was published in the 1770 edition of Cajsa Warg 's Hjelpreda
i Hushållningen för
Unga Fruentimber and was flavored with allspice and mace .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Soy sauce is made either by fermentation or by hydrolysis .
Some commercial sauces have both fermented and chemical sauces .
Flavor , color , and aroma developments during production are attributed to non - enzymatic Maillard browning .
Variation is usually achieved as the result of different methods and durations of fermentation , different ratios of water , salt , and fermented soy , or through the addition of other ingredients .
TRADITIONAL Section::::Traditional .
Traditional soy sauces are made by mixing soybeans and grain with mold cultures such as Aspergillus oryzae and other related microorganisms and yeasts ( the resulting mixture is called " koji " in Japan ; the term " koji " is used both for the mixture of soybeans , wheat , and mold as well as for the mold itself ) .
Historically , the mixture was fermented naturally in large urns and under the sun , which was believed to contribute extra flavors .
Today , the mixture is placed in a temperature and humidity controlled incubation chamber .
Traditional soy sauces take months to make :
* Soaking and cooking : The soybeans are soaked in water and boiled until cooked .
Wheat is roasted , crushed .
*
* Koji culturing :
An equal amount of boiled soybeans and roasted wheat are mixed to form a grain mixture .
A culture of Aspergillus spore is added to the grain mixture and mixed or the mixture is allowed to gather spores from the environment itself .
The cultures include : *
* Aspergillus : a genus of fungus that is used for fermenting various ingredients ( the cultures are called koji in Japanese ) .
Three species are used for brewing soy sauce :
* A. oryzae :
Strains with high proteolytic capacity are used for brewing soy sauce .
* A. sojae :
This fungus also has a high proteolytic capacity .
* A. tamarii :
This fungus is used for brewing tamari , a variety of soy sauce .
* Saccharomyces cerevisiae :
the yeasts in the culture convert some of the sugars to ethanol which can undergo secondary reactions to make other flavor compounds * Other microbes contained in the culture : * Bacillus spp .
( genus )
: This organism is likely to grow soy sauce ingredients , and to generate odors and ammonia .
*
Lactobacillus species : This organism makes a lactic acid that increases the acidity in the feed .
* Brewing : The cultured grain mixture is mixed into a specific amount of salt brine for wet fermentation or with coarse salt for dry fermentation and left to brew .
Over time , the Aspergillus mold on the soy and wheat break down the grain proteins into free amino acid and protein fragments and starches into simple sugars .
This amino - glycosidic reaction gives soy sauce its dark brown color .
Lactic acid bacteria ferments the sugars into lactic acid and yeast makes ethanol , which through aging and secondary fermentation makes numerous flavor compounds typical of soy sauce .
*
* Pressing : The fully fermented grain slurry is placed into cloth - lined containers and pressed to separate the solids from the liquid soy sauce .
The isolated solids are used as fertilizer or fed to animals while the liquid soy sauce is processed further .
*
* Pasteurization : The raw soy sauce is heated to eliminate any active yeasts and molds remaining in the soy sauce and can be filtered to remove any fine particulates *
* Storage : The soy sauce can be aged or directly bottled and sold .
* ACID - HYDROLYZED VEGETABLE PROTEIN Section::::Acid - hydrolyzed vegetable protein .
Some brands of soy sauce are made from acid - hydrolyzed soy protein instead of brewed with a traditional culture .
This takes about three days .
Although they have a different flavor , aroma , and texture when compared to brewed soy sauces , they can be produced more quickly and cheaply , and also have a longer shelf life and are usually made for these reasons .
The clear plastic packets of dark sauce common with Chinese - style take - out food typically use a hydrolyzed vegetable protein formula .
Some higher - priced hydrolyzed vegetable protein products with no added sugar or colorings are sold as low - sodium soy sauce alternatives called " liquid aminos " in health food stores , similar to the way salt substitutes are used .
These products are , however , not necessarily low in sodium .
HIGH - SALT
LIQUID - STATE FERMENTED SOY SAUCE Section::::High - salt liquid - state fermented soy sauce .
High - salt liquid - state fermentation ( HLF ) of soybeans depends heavily on microbial activity , metabolism and enzymatic hydrolysis of macro - nutrients .
*
During HLF , koji infused soybeans are exposed to air so that hydrolytic enzymes of the mold can continuously break down macro - nutrients within the soybean .
* Ample water , usually about 2 to 2.5 times the weight of the feed , is required to support sufficient microbial growth .
* High amount of salt concentration ( 17–20 % ) is required to selectively inhibit microbial activity .
* HLF is generally carried out under 15–30 ° C , and requires long ageing period , usually from 90 – 180 days .
In the aging period , constant stirring of moromi is required for distributing nutrients , as well as flavoring compounds evenly .
In some cases , moromi is exposed to direct sunlight to facilitate the decomposition of macro - nutrients .
*
Due to the high salinity of HLF moromi , only anaerobic halophile can survive in the medium .
Beside the 15–30 ° C temperature range narrows down the growth condition to allow only the growth of mesophiles .
Similar to the fermentation of pickle , the primary lactic acid fermentation of sugars by halophiles reduces the pH of moromi down to acidic range .
Lowered pH further limited the growth of undesirable microbes , but favors the growth of fermentative yeast which contributes to secondary fermentation that generate various flavoring compounds and odorants .
LOW - SALT SOLID - STATE FERMENTED SOY SAUCE Section::::Low - salt solid - state fermented soy sauce .
LSF , also referred as rapid fermenting , is a modern fermentation method invented in response to high market demand .
*
Compared to HLF , LSF employs pure cultures at a relatively higher temperature ( 40–55 ° C ) and lower brine solution concentrations ( 13–15 % ) .
In LSF , koji is mixed with the equivalent weight of brine to form solid moromi .
*
The elevated temperature accelerates the fermentation process significantly .
Due to the short aging ( 15–30 days ) period of LSF , and low production cost , LSF soy sauce ( LSFSS ) accounts for more share of the Chinese soy sauce market .
CHEMICAL COMPOSITION
Section::::Chemical composition .
The chemical composition of soy sauce can be affected easily by raw materials , fermentation methodologies , fermenting molds and strains , and post - fermentation treatments .
*
Although the formation mechanism of chemical composition in soy sauce is complex , it has been widely accepted that free amino acids , water soluble peptides and Maillard reaction products in soy sauce are considered as essential chemical composition and to provide core sensory effects .
The primary fermentation of lactic - acid - fermenting halophiles has lower the pH of the moromi , and this has directly resulted in an acidic pH range ( 4.4–5.4 ) of soy sauce products .
The secondary fermentation conducted by heterofermentative microbes provides soy sauce with a wide range of flavor and odorant compounds by breaking down macro - nutrients .
Soy proteins and grain proteins are hydrolyzed into short peptide chain and free amino acids , which adds umami taste to the product .
Based on the result of free amino acid analysis , the most abundant amino acids in Chinese soy sauce product are glutamic acid , aspartic acid , alanine and leucine .
* Starch is hydrolyzed into simple sugars which contribute to the sweet flavor in soy sauce .
Legume fats may also have been decomposed into short chain fatty acids , and the interaction among lipid and other macronutrients also result in richer flavor in the final product .
* Non - enzymatic browning also contributes significantly to the property development of soy sauce .
The hydrolysis of protein and large carbohydrates has provided free amino acids and simple sugars as reagents for Maillard reaction .
SENSORY PROFILE Section::::Sensory profile .
The taste of soy sauce is predominated by saltiness , followed by moderate umami , sweet taste , and finally slight bitterness , which is hard to perceive due to the masking effect of other tastes .
The overall flavor of soy sauce is a result of the balance and interaction among different taste components .
The saltiness is largely attributed to the presence of NaCl in brine .
The sugars hydrolyzed from starch add sweetness into soy sauce .
Umami is largely caused by the presence of free amino acids .
Besides , the interaction between glutamine and sodium cation may have given rise to sodium glutamate ( MSG ) , which can further contribute to the umami flavor .
Basic tastes can also be attributed to amino acids groups arranged in specific sequence .
In soy sauce , it was found that " amino acids were grouped as MSG - like ( monosodium glutamate - like )
( Asp+Glu ) , sweet ( Ala+Gly+Ser+Thr ) , bitter ( Arg+His+Ile+Leu+Met+Phe+Trp+Try+Val ) , and tasteless ( Cys+Lys+Pro ) " .
Despite a large variety of volatile and odorant compounds that have been identified in soy sauce , the food product per se does not present a strong aroma .
Alcohols , acids , esters , aldehydes , ketones , phenols , heterocyclic compounds , alkynes and benzenes are identified in Chinese soy sauces .
An explanation for this observation is that the aroma of soy sauce does not depend largely on the aroma - active compounds .
The subtle aroma is a result of a " critical balance " achieved among all volatile and odorant compounds , whose respective concentrations are relatively low .
VARIATIONS
BY COUNTRY Section::::Variations by country .
Soy sauce is widely used as an important flavoring and has been integrated into the traditional cuisines of many East Asian and Southeast Asian cultures .
Despite their rather similar appearance , soy sauces made in different cultures and regions are different in taste , consistency , fragrance and saltiness .
Soy sauce retains its quality longer when kept away from direct sunlight .
BURMESE
Section::::Burmese .
Burmese soy sauce production is dated back to the Bagan era in the 9th and 10th century .
Scripts written in praise of pe ngan byar yay ( , literally " bean fish sauce " ) were found .
Thick soy sauce is called kya nyo ( , from Chinese jiàngyóu ) .
CHINESE Section::::Chinese .
Chinese soy sauces (; or alternatively , ; ) are primarily made from soybeans , with relatively low amounts of other grains .
Chinese soy sauce can be roughly split into two classes : brewed or blended .
Chinese soy sauces can also be classified into Low - Salt Solid - State fermented soy sauce ( LSF ) , and High - Salt Liquid - State fermented soy sauce ( HLF ) .
BREWED Section::::Brewed .
Soy sauce that has been brewed directly from a fermentation process using wheat , soybeans , salt , and water without additional additives .
* Light or fresh soy sauce (; or
; ): is a thin ( low viscosity ) , opaque , lighter brown soy sauce , brewed by first culturing steamed wheat and soybeans with Aspergillus , and then letting the mixture ferment in brine .
It is the main soy sauce used for seasoning , since it is saltier , has less noticeable color , and also adds a distinct flavor .
* Tóu chōu ( ):
A light soy sauce made from the first pressing of the soybeans , this can be loosely translated as " first soy sauce " or referred to as premium light soy sauce .
Tóu chōu is sold at a premium because , like extra virgin olive oil , the flavor of the first pressing is considered superior .
Due to its delicate flavor it is used primarily for seasoning light dishes and for dipping .
*
Shuāng huáng ( ):
A light soy sauce that is double - fermented by using the light soy sauce from another batch to take the place of brine for a second brewing .
This adds further complexity to the flavor of the light soy sauce .
Due to its complex flavor this soy sauce is used primarily for dipping .
*
Yìn
yóu
( ): A darker soy sauce brewed primarily in Taiwan by culturing only steamed soybeans with Aspergillus and mixing the cultured soybeans with coarse rock salt before undergoing prolonged dry fermentation .
The flavor of this soy sauce is complex and rich and is used for dipping or in red cooking .
For the former use , yìn yóu can be thickened with starch to make a thick soy sauce .
BLENDED
Section::::Blended .
Additives with sweet or umami ( savory ) tastes are sometimes added to a finished brewed soy sauce to modify its taste and texture .
* Dark and old soy sauce (; ) , a darker and slightly thicker soy sauce made from light soy sauce .
This soy sauce is made through prolonged aging and may contain added caramel color and/or molasses to give it its distinctive appearance .
It has a richer , slightly sweeter , and less salty flavor than light soy sauce .
This variety is mainly used during cooking , since its flavor develops during heating .
Dark soy sauce is also occasionally used to add color and flavor to a dish after cooking .
* Mushroom dark soy ( cǎogū lǎochōu ) :
In the finishing and aging process of making dark soy sauce , the broth of Volvariella volvacea ( straw mushroom ) is mixed into the soy sauce and is then exposed to the sun to make this type of dark soy .
The added broth gives this soy sauce a richer flavor than plain dark soy sauce .
* Thick soy sauce ( jiàng yóu gāo ) , is a dark soy sauce that has been thickened with starch and sugar and occasionally flavored with certain spices and MSG .
This sauce is often used as a dipping sauce or finishing sauce and poured on food as a flavorful addition .
However , due to its sweetness and caramelized flavors from its production process the sauce is also used in red cooking .
* Shrimp soy sauce ( Xiā zǐ jiàngyóu ) :
Fresh soy sauce is simmered with fresh shrimp and finished with sugar , baijiu ( type of distilled liquor , 白酒 ) , and spices .
A specialty of Suzhou .
FILIPINO Section::::Filipino .
In the Philippines , soy sauce is called toyò in the native languages , derived from " Tau - yu " in Hokkien and is a broad term used for both the Japanese shōyu and Chinese jiàngyóu .
Philippine soy sauce is usually a combination of soybeans , wheat , salt , and caramel color .
It is thinner in texture and has a saltier taste than its Southeast Asian counterparts , similar to Japanese variety .
Toyò is used as a marinade , an ingredient in cooked dishes , and most often as a table condiment , usually alongside other sauces such as fish sauce ( patís ) and sugar cane vinegar ( sukà ) .
It is often mixed and served with the juice of the calamansi ( × Citrofortunella microcarpa ; also called calamondin , limonsito ) .
The combination is known as toyomansî , which can be comparable to the Japanese ponzu sauce ( soy sauce with yuzu ) .
Toyò is also a main ingredient in Philippine adobo , one of the more famous dishes of Filipino cuisine .
HAWAIIAN Section::::Hawaiian .
Soy sauce is a very popular condiment and marinade for many dishes in the Hawaiian cuisine .
Aloha shoyu is soy sauce made in the Islands .
Aloha is of the acid - hydrolyzed vegetable protein variety .
INDONESIAN Section::::Indonesian .
In Indonesia , soy sauce is known as kecap ( old spelling : ketjap ) , which is a catch - all term for fermented sauces , and cognate to the English word " ketchup " .
The most popular type of soy sauce in Indonesian cuisine is kecap manis or sweet soy sauce .
The term kecap is also used to describe other non soy - based sauces , such as kecap ikan ( fish sauce ) and kecap Inggris ( worcestershire sauce ; lit . "
English sauce " , due to worchestershire sauce originating in England ) .
Three common varieties of soy - based kecap exist in Indonesian cuisine , used either as ingredients or condiments :
* Kecap manis : Sweetened soy sauce , which has a thick syrupy consistency and a unique , pronounced , sweet somewhat treacle - like flavor due to generous addition of palm sugar .
Regular soy with brown sugar and a trace of molasses added can substitute .
It is by far , the most popular type of soy sauce employed in Indonesian cuisine , accounts for an estimated 90 percent of the nation 's total soy sauce production .
Kecap manis is an important sauce in Indonesian signature dishes , such as nasi goreng , mie goreng , satay , tongseng and semur .
Sambal kecap for example is type of sambal dipping sauce of kecap manis with sliced chili , tomato and shallot , a popular dipping sauce for sate kambing ( goat meat satay ) and ikan bakar ( grilled fish / seafood ) .
Since soy sauce is of Chinese origin , kecap asin is also an important seasoning in Chinese Indonesian cuisine .
* Kecap manis sedang :
Medium sweet soy sauce , which has a less thick consistency , is less sweet and has a saltier taste than kecap manis .
*
Kecap asin :
Regular soy sauce derived from the Japanese shoyu , but are usually more concentrated , thicker , darker color and stronger flavor ; it can be replaced by Chinese light soy sauce in some recipes .
Salty soy sauce was first introduced into Indonesia by Hokkien people so its taste resembles that of Chinese soy sauce .
Hakka soy sauce made from black beans is very salty and large productions are mainly made in Bangka Island .
JAPANESE
Section::::Japanese .
Shōyu is traditionally divided into five main categories depending on differences in their ingredients and method of production .
Most , but not all Japanese soy sauces include wheat as a primary ingredient , which tends to give them a slightly sweeter taste than their Chinese counterparts .
They also tend towards an alcoholic sherry - like flavor , sometimes enhanced by the addition of small amounts of alcohol as a natural preservative .
The widely varying flavors of these soy sauces are not always interchangeable , some recipes only call for one type or the other , much as a white wine can not replace a red 's flavor or beef stock
does not make the same results as fish stock .
Some soy sauces made in the Japanese way or styled after them contain about 50 % wheat .
VARIETIES
* : Originating in the Kantō region , its usage eventually spread all over Japan .
Over 80 % of the Japanese domestic soy sauce production is of koikuchi , and can be considered the typical Japanese soy sauce .
It is made from roughly equal quantities of soybean and wheat .
This variety is also called kijōyu ( ) or namashōyu ( ) when it is not pasteurized .
* : Particularly popular in the Kansai region of Japan , it is both saltier and lighter in color than koikuchi .
The lighter color arises from the use of amazake , a sweet liquid made from fermented rice , that is used in its production .
Made mainly in the Chūbu region of Japan , tamari is darker in appearance and richer in flavor than koikuchi .
It contains little or no wheat .
Wheat - free tamari can be used by people with gluten intolerance .
It is the " original " Japanese soy sauce , as its recipe is closest to the soy sauce originally introduced to Japan from China .
Technically , this variety is known as miso - damari ( ) , as this is the liquid that runs off miso as it matures .
The Japanese word tamari is derived from the verb that signifies " to accumulate " , referring to the fact that tamari was traditionally a liquid byproduct made during the fermentation of miso ( type of seasoning ) .
Japan is the leading producer of tamari .
* : In contrast to tamari soy sauce , shiro soy sauce uses mostly wheat and very little soybean , lending it a light appearance and sweet taste .
It is more commonly used in the Kansai region to highlight the appearances of food , for example sashimi .
* : This variety substitutes previously made koikuchi for the brine normally used in the process .
Consequently , it is much darker and more strongly flavored .
This type is also known as kanro shōyu ( ) or " sweet soy sauce " .
Section::::Varieties .
Newer varieties of Japanese soy sauce include : * :
This version contains 50 % less salt than regular soy sauce for consumers concerned about heart disease .
* : This version contains 20 % less salt than regular soy sauce .
All of these varieties are sold in the marketplace in three different grades according to how they were made :
* : Contains 100 % genuine fermented product
* : Contains genuine fermented shōyu mash mixed with 30–50 % of chemical or enzymatic hydrolysate of plant protein *
: Contains Honjōzō or Kongō - jōzō shōyu mixed with 30–50 % of chemical or enzymatic hydrolysate of plant protein All the varieties and grades may be sold according to three official levels of quality : * : Standard grade , contains more than 1.2 % total nitrogen * :
Upper grade , contains more than 1.35 % of total nitrogen * : Special grade , contains more than 1.5 % of total nitrogen Soy sauce is also commonly known as shoyu , and less commonly shōyu , in Hawaii and Brazil .
KOREAN Section::::Korean .
In South Korea , soy sauces or ganjang ( , " seasoning sauce " ) can be roughly split into two categories : hansik ganjang ( Korean - style soy sauce ) and gaeryang ganjang ( modernized soy sauce ) .
The term ganjang can also refer to non soy - based salty condiments , such as eo - ganjang ( fish sauce ) .
HANSIK GANJANG
Section::::Hansik ganjang .
Hansik ganjang ( , " Korean - style soy sauce " ) is made entirely of fermented soybean ( meju ) and brine .
It is a byproduct of doenjang ( fermented soybean paste ) production , and has a unique fermented soybean flavour .
Both lighter in colour and saltier than other Korean ganjang varieties , hansik ganjang is used mainly in guk ( soup ) and namul ( seasoned vegetable dish ) in modern Korean cuisine .
Common names for hansik ganjang include jaeraesik ganjang ( , " traditional soy sauce " ) , Joseon - ganjang ( , " Joseon soy sauce " ) , and guk - ganjang
( , " soup soy sauce " ) .
The homebrewed variety is also called jip - ganjang ( , " home soy sauce " ) .
Depending on the length of aging , hansik ganjang can be divided into three main varieties : clear , middle , and dark .
* Haet - ganjang ( , " new soy sauce " ) – soy sauce aged for a year .
Also called cheongjang ( , " clear soy sauce " ) .
* Jung - ganjang ( , " middle soy sauce " ) – soy sauce aged for three to four years .
* Jin - ganjang ( , " dark soy sauce " ) – soy sauce aged for more than five years .
Also called jinjang ( , " aged soy sauce " ) , nongjang ( , " thick soy sauce " ) , or jingamjang ( , " aged mature soy sauce " ) .
Korean Ministry of Food and Drug Safety 's Food Code classifies hansik - ganjang into two categories by their ingredients .
* Jaerae - hansik - ganjang ( , " traditional Korean - style soy sauce " ) – made with traditional style meju and brine .
* Gaeryang - hansik - ganjang ( , " modernized Korean - style soy sauce " ) – made with nontraditional meju ( which can be made of regular soybean , rice , barley , wheat , or soybean meal , and ripened using traditional method or Aspergillus ) and brine .
GAERYANG GANJANG Section::::Gaeryang ganjang .
Gaeryang - ganjang ( , " modernized soy sauce " )
, referring to varieties of soy sauces not made of meju , is now the most widely used type of soy sauce in modern Korean cuisine .
The word ganjang without modifiers in bokkeum ( stir - fry ) , jorim ( braised or simmered dishes ) , and jjim ( steamed dishes )
recipes usually mean gaeryang - ganjang .
Another common name of gaeryang - ganjang is jin - ganjang ( , " dark soy sauce " ) , because gaeryang - ganjang varieties are usually darker in appearance compared to traditional hansik ganjang .
Having been introduced to Korea during the era of Japanese forced occupation , garyang ganjang is also called Wae - ganjang ( , " Wae soy sauce " ) .
Korean Ministry of Food and Drug Safety 's Food Code classifies gaeryang - ganjang into four categories by their method of production .
* Brewed soy sauce ( , yangjo - ganjang ) – made by fermenting soybean , soybean meal , or other grains with saline solution .
* Acid - hydrolyzed soy sauce ( ) – made by hydrolyzing raw materials containing protein with acid .
* Enzyme - hydrolyzed soy sauce ( ) – made by hydrolyzing raw materials containing protein with enzyme .
* Blended soy sauce ( ) – Also called mixed soy sauce , blended soy sauce can be made by blending hansik - ganjang ( Korean - style soy sauce ) or yangjo - ganjang ( brewed soy sauce ) with acid - hydrolyzed soy sauce or enzyme - hydrolyzed soy sauce .
OTHER
* Eo - ganjang ( , " fish sauce " ) :
Made mainly in Jeju island , eo - ganjang is a soy sauce substitute made of jeotgal ( fermented fish ) .
MALAYSIAN AND SINGAPOREAN Section::::Malaysian and Singaporean .
Malays from Malaysia , using the Malay dialect similar to Indonesian , use the word kicap for soy sauce .
Kicap is traditionally of two types : kicap lemak ( lit " fat / rich soy sauce " ) and kicap cair .
Kicap lemak is similar to Indonesian kecap manis but with very much less sugar while kicap cair is the Malaysian equivalent of kecap asin .
TAIWANESE Section::::Taiwanese .
The history of soy sauce making in Taiwan can be traced back to southeastern China , in the provinces of Fujian and Guangdong .
Taiwanese soy sauce is known for its black bean variant , known as black bean soy sauce ( 黑豆蔭油 ) , which takes longer to make ( about 6 months ) .
Most major soy sauce makers in Taiwan make soy sauce from soybeans and wheat , and are widely popular , and are available in many Oriental Foods and Grocery Stores .
Some make black bean soy sauce , which is very widely used in Chinese and Oriental cooking as an excellent flavor enhancer .
THAI Section::::Thai .
In Thailand , soy sauce is called sii - íu ( ) .
Sii - íu kǎao ( , " white soy sauce " ) is used as regular soy sauce in Thai cuisine , while sii - íu dam ( , " black soy sauce " ) is used primarily for colour .
Another darker - coloured variety , sii - íu wǎan ( , " sweet soy sauce " ) is used for dipping sauces .
Sɔ́ɔt
prung rót ( , " seasoning sauce " ) is also commonly used in modern Thai cuisine .
VIETNAMESE Section::::Vietnamese .
In Vietnam , Chinese - style soy sauce is called xì dầu ( derived from the Cantonese name 豉油 ) or nước tương .
The term " soy sauce " could also imply other condiments and soy bean paste with thick consistency known as tương .
Both are used mostly as a seasoning or dipping sauce for a number of dishes .
Vietnamese cuisine itself favors fish sauce in cooking but nước tương has a clear presence in vegetarian cuisine .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
A study by the National University of Singapore showed that Chinese dark soy sauce contains 10 times the antioxidants of red wine , and can help prevent cardiovascular diseases .
Soy sauce is rich in lactic acid bacteria and of excellent anti - allergic potential .
Soy sauce does not contain the level of isoflavones associated with other soy products such as tofu or edamame .
It can also be very salty , having a salt content between 14–18 % .
Low - sodium soy sauces are made , but it is difficult to make soy sauce without using some quantity of salt as an antimicrobial agent .
A serving of 100 ml of soy sauce contains , according to the USDA :
* Energy : 60
kcal
* Fat : 0.1 g
* Carbohydrates : 5.57 g
* Fibers : 0.8 g
* Protein : 10.51 g * Sodium : 6
g
CARCINOGENS
Section::::Carcinogens .
Soy sauce may contain ethyl carbamate , a Group 2A carcinogen .
In 2001 , the United Kingdom Food Standards Agency found in testing various soy sauces manufactured in mainland China , Taiwan , Hong Kong , and Thailand ( made from hydrolyzed soy protein , rather than being naturally fermented ) that 22 % of tested samples , contained a chemical carcinogen named 3-MCPD ( 3-monochloropropane-1,2-diol ) at levels considerably higher than those deemed safe by the EU .
About two - thirds of these samples also contained a second carcinogenic chemical named 1,3-DCP ( 1,3-dichloropropane-2-ol ) which experts advise should not be present at any levels in food .
Both chemicals have the potential to cause cancer , and the Agency recommended that the affected products be withdrawn from shelves and avoided .
The same carcinogens were found in soy sauces manufactured in Vietnam , causing a food scare in 2007 .
In Canada , the Canadian Cancer Society writes , ALLERGIES Section::::Allergies .
Most varieties of soy sauce contain wheat , to which some people have a medical intolerance .
However , some naturally brewed soy sauces made with wheat may be tolerated by people with a specific intolerance to gluten because gluten is not detectable in the finished product .
Japanese tamari soy sauce is traditionally wheat - free , and some tamari available commercially today is wheat- and gluten - free .
SEE ALSO
* List of Chinese sauces * List of condiments * List of fermented soy products REFERENCES
REFERENCES
* Titsingh , Isaac .
( 1781 ) .
" Bereiding van de Soya " ( " Producing Soy Sauce " ) , Verhandelingen van het Bataviaasch Genootschap ( Transactions of the Batavian Academy ) , Vol . III .
OCLC 9752305
*
http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodcomp/search/ FURTHER READING * — on the production of soy sauce EXTERNAL LINKS