BORIC ACID Boric acid , also called hydrogen borate , boracic acid , orthoboric acid and , is a weak , monobasic Lewis acid of boron , which is often used as an antiseptic , insecticide , flame retardant , neutron absorber , or precursor to other chemical compounds .
It has the chemical formula HBO ( sometimes written B(OH ) ) , and exists in the form of colorless crystals or a white powder that dissolves in water .
When occurring as a mineral , it is called sassolite .
OCCURRENCE Section::::Occurrence .
Boric acid , or sassolite , is found mainly in its free state in some volcanic districts , for example , in the Italian region of Tuscany , the Lipari Islands and the US state of Nevada .
In these volcanic settings it issues , mixed with steam , from fissures in the ground .
It is also found as a constituent of many naturally occurring minerals – borax , boracite , ulexite ( boronatrocalcite ) and colemanite .
Boric acid and its salts are found in seawater .
It is also found in plants , including almost all fruits .
Boric acid was first prepared by Wilhelm Homberg ( 1652–1715 ) from borax , by the action of mineral acids , and was given the name ( " sedative salt of Homberg " ) .
However borates , including boric acid , have been used since the time of the ancient Greeks for cleaning , preserving food , and other activities .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
Boric acid may be prepared by reacting borax ( sodium tetraborate decahydrate ) with a mineral acid , such as hydrochloric acid : It is also formed as a by product of hydrolysis of boron trihalides and diborane : PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Boric acid is soluble in boiling water .
When heated above 170 ° C , it dehydrates , forming metaboric acid ( HBO ) :
Metaboric acid is a white , cubic crystalline solid and is only slightly soluble in water .
Metaboric acid melts at about 236 ° C , and when heated above about 300 ° C further dehydrates , forming tetraboric acid , also called pyroboric acid ( HBO ) :
The term boric acid may sometimes refer to any of these compounds .
Further heating ( to about 330 ° C ) leads to boron trioxide .
There are conflicting interpretations for the origin of the acidity of aqueous boric acid solutions .
Raman spectroscopy of strongly alkaline solutions has shown the presence of B(OH ) ion , leading some to conclude that the acidity is exclusively due to the abstraction of OH from water : or more properly expressed in the aqueous solution : This may be characterized as Lewis acidity of boron toward OH , rather than as Brønsted acidity .
Polyborate anions are formed at pH 7–10 if the boron concentration is higher than about 0.025 mol /
L. The best known of these is the ' tetraborate ' ion , found in the mineral borax :
Boric acid makes an important contribution to the absorption of low frequency sound in seawater .
REACTIONS Section::::Reactions .
With polyols such as glycerol and mannitol the acidity of the solution is increased .
With mannitol for example the pK decreases to 5.15 .
This is due to the formation of a chelate , [ ( ( OH)CHO)B ] , and this feature is used in analytical chemistry .
Boric acid dissolves in anhydrous sulfuric acid :
Boric acid reacts with alcohols to form borate esters , B(OR ) where R is alkyl or aryl .
A dehydrating agent , such as concentrated sulfuric acid is typically added : MOLECULAR AND CRYSTAL STRUCTURE Section::::Molecular and crystal structure .
The three oxygen atoms form a trigonal planar geometry around the boron .
The B - O bond length is 136 pm and
the O - H is 97 pm .
The molecular point group is C. Crystalline boric acid consists of layers of B(OH ) molecules held together by hydrogen bonds of length 272 pm .
The distance between two adjacent layers is 318 pm .
The unit cell of boric acidhydrogen bonding ( dashed lines)allows boric acid molecules to formparallel layers in the solid state TOXICOLOGY Section::::Toxicology .
Based on mammalian median lethal dose ( LD ) rating of 2,660 mg / kg body mass , boric acid is only poisonous if taken internally or inhaled in large quantities .
The Fourteenth Edition of the Merck Index indicates that the LD of boric acid is 5.14 g / kg for oral dosages given to rats , and that 5 to 20 g / kg has produced death in adult humans .
For comparison 's sake , the LD of salt is reported to be 3.75 g / kg in rats according to the Merck Index .
According to the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry , " The minimal lethal dose of ingested boron ( as boric acid ) was reported to be 2–3 g in infants , 5–6 g in children , and 15–20 g in adults .
[ ... ]
However , a review of 784 human poisonings with boric acid ( 10–88 g ) reported no fatalities , with 88 % of cases being asymptomatic . "
Long - term exposure to boric acid may be of more concern , causing kidney damage and eventually kidney failure ( see links below ) .
Although it does not appear to be carcinogenic , studies in dogs have reported testicular atrophy after exposure to 32 mg / kg bw / day for 90 days .
This level is far lower than the LD .
According to the CLH report for boric acid published by the Bureau for Chemical Substances Lodz , Poland , boric acid in high doses shows significant developmental toxicity and teratogenicity in rabbit , rat , and mouse fetuses as well as cardiovascular defects , skeletal variations , and mild kidney lesions .
As a consequence in the 30th ATP to EU directive 67/548 / EEC of August 2008 , the European Commission decided to amend its classification as reprotoxic category 2 , and to apply the risk phrases R60 ( may impair fertility ) and R61 ( may cause harm to the unborn child ) .
At a 2010 European Diagnostics Manufacturing Association ( EDMA ) Meeting , several new additions to the Substance of Very High Concern ( SVHC ) candidate list in relation to the Registration , Evaluation , Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals Regulations 2007 ( REACH ) were discussed .
Following the registration and review completed as part of REACH , the classification of Boric Acid CAS 10043 - 35 - 3 / 11113 - 50 - 1 is listed from 1 December 2010 is H360FD ( May damage fertility .
May damage the unborn child . )
USES INDUSTRIAL Section::::Uses .
Section::::Industrial .
The primary industrial use of boric acid is in the manufacture of monofilament fiberglass usually referred to as textile fiberglass .
Textile fiberglass is used to reinforce plastics in applications that range from boats , to industrial piping to computer circuit boards .
In the jewelry industry , boric acid is often used in combination with denatured alcohol to reduce surface oxidation and firescale from forming on metals during annealing and soldering operations .
Boric acid is used in the production of the glass in LCD flat panel displays .
In electroplating , boric acid is used as part of some proprietary formulas .
One such known formula calls for about a 1 to 10 ratio of to , a very small portion of sodium lauryl sulfate and a small portion of .
Boric acid , mixed with borax ( sodium tetraborate decahydrate ) at the weight ratio of 4:5 , is highly soluble in water , though they are not so soluble separately .
The solution is used for fire retarding agent of wood by impregnation .
It is also used in the manufacturing of ramming mass , a fine silica - containing powder used for producing induction furnace linings and ceramics .
Boric acid is one of the most commonly used substances that can neutralize active hydrofluoric acid ( HF ) .
It works by forcing the free F anions into complex salts .
This process defeats the extreme toxicity of hydrofluoric acid , particularly its ability to sequester ionic calcium from blood serum which can lead to cardiac arrest and bone decomposition ; such an event can occur from just minor skin contact with HF .
Boric acid is added to borax for use as welding flux by blacksmiths .
Boric acid , in combination with silicone oil , is used to manufacture Silly Putty .
Boric acid may be used in Marcellus Shale hydraulic fracturing in Pennsylvania .
MEDICAL Section::::Medical .
Boric acid can be used as an antiseptic for minor burns or cuts and is sometimes used in salves and dressings , such as boracic lint .
Boric acid is applied in a very dilute solution as an eye wash .
Dilute boric acid can be used as a vaginal douche to treat bacterial vaginosis due to excessive alkalinity , as well as candidiasis due to non - albicans candida .
As an antibacterial compound , boric acid can also be used as an acne treatment .
It is also used as prevention of athlete 's foot , by inserting powder in the socks or stockings , and in alcohol solution can be used to treat some kinds of ( ear infection ) in both humans and animals .
The preservative in urine sample bottles in the UK is boric acid .
Boric acid solutions used as an eye wash or on abraded skin are known to be toxic , particularly to infants , especially after repeated use ; this is because of its slow elimination rate .
INSECTICIDAL Section::::Insecticidal .
Boric acid was first registered in the US as an insecticide in 1948 for control of cockroaches , termites , fire ants , fleas , silverfish , and many other insects .
The product is generally considered to be safe to use in household kitchens to control cockroaches and ants .
It acts as a stomach poison affecting the insects ' metabolism , and the dry powder is abrasive to the insects ' exoskeletons .
Boric acid also has the reputation as " the gift that keeps on killing " in that roaches that cross over lightly dusted areas do not die immediately , but that the effect is like shards of glass cutting them apart .
This often allows a roach to go back to the nest where it soon dies .
Cockroaches , being cannibalistic , eat others killed by contact or consumption of boric acid , consuming the powder trapped in the dead roach and killing them , too .
PRESERVATION Section::::Preservation .
In combination with its use as an insecticide , boric acid also prevents and destroys existing wet and dry rot in timbers .
It can be used in combination with an ethylene glycol carrier to treat external wood against fungal and insect attack .
It is possible to buy borate - impregnated rods for insertion into wood via drill holes where dampness and moisture is known to collect and sit .
It is available in a gel form and injectable paste form for treating rot affected wood without the need to replace the timber .
Concentrates of borate - based treatments can be used to prevent slime , mycelium , and algae growth , even in marine environments .
Boric acid is added to salt in the curing of cattle hides , calfskins , and sheepskins .
This helps to control bacterial development , and helps to control insects .
PH BUFFER
Section::::pH buffer .
Boric acid in equilibrium with its conjugate base
the borate ion is widely used ( in the concentration range 50 - 100 ppm boron equivalents ) as a primary or adjunct pH buffer system in swimming pools .
Boric acid is a weak acid , with pKa ( the pH at which buffering is strongest because the free acid and borate ion are in equal concentrations ) of 9.24 in pure water at 25 ° C .
But apparent pKa is substantially lower in swimming pool or ocean waters because of interactions with various other molecules in solution .
It will be around 9.0 in a salt - water pool .
No matter which form of soluble boron is added , within the acceptable range of pH and boron concentration for swimming pools , boric acid is the predominant form in aqueous solution , as shown in the accompanying figure .
The boric acid - borate system can be useful as a primary buffer system ( substituting for the bicarbonate system with pKa1 = 6.0 and pKa2 = 9.4 under typical salt - water pool conditions ) in pools with salt - water chlorine generators that tend to show upward drift in pH from a working range of pH 7.5 - 8.2 .
Buffer capacity is greater against rising pH ( towards the pKa around 9.0 ) , as illustrated in the accompanying graph .
The use of boric acid in this concentration range does not allow any reduction in free HOCl concentration needed for pool sanitation , but it may add marginally to the photo - protective effects of cyanuric acid and confer other benefits through anti - corrosive activity or perceived water softness , depending on overall pool solute composition .
LUBRICATION Section::::Lubrication .
Colloidal suspensions of nanoparticles of boric acid dissolved in petroleum or vegetable oil can form a remarkable lubricant on ceramic or metal surfaces with a coefficient of sliding friction that decreases with increasing pressure to a value ranging from 0.10 to 0.02 .
Self - lubricating HBO films result from a spontaneous chemical reaction between water molecules and BO coatings in a humid environment .
In bulk - scale , an inverse relationship exists between friction coefficient and Hertzian contact pressure induced by applied load .
Boric acid is used to lubricate carrom and novuss boards , allowing for faster play .
NUCLEAR POWER
Section::::Nuclear power .
Boric acid is used in some nuclear power plants as a neutron poison .
The boron in boric acid reduces the probability of thermal fission by absorbing some thermal neutrons .
Fission chain reactions are generally driven by the probability that free neutrons will result in fission and is determined by the material and geometric properties of the reactor .
Natural boron consists of approximately 20 % boron-10 and 80 % boron-11 isotopes .
Boron-10 has a high cross - section for absorption of low energy ( thermal ) neutrons .
By increasing boric acid concentration in the reactor coolant , the probability that a neutron will cause fission is reduced .
Changes in boric acid concentration can effectively regulate the rate of fission taking place in the reactor .
Boric acid is used only in pressurized water reactors ( PWRs ) whereas boiling water reactors ( BWRs ) employ control rod pattern and coolant flow for power control .
BWRs use an aqueous solution of boric acid and borax or Sodium Pentaborate for an emergency shut down system .
Boric acid may be dissolved in spent fuel pools used to store spent fuel elements .
The concentration is high enough to keep neutron multiplication at a minimum .
Boric acid was dumped over Reactor 4 of the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Plant after its meltdown to prevent another reaction from occurring .
PYROTECHNICS
Section::::Pyrotechnics .
Boron is used in pyrotechnics to prevent the amide - forming reaction between aluminum and nitrates .
A small amount of boric acid is added to the composition to neutralize alkaline amides that can react with the aluminum .
Boric acid can be used as a colorant to make fire green .
For example , when dissolved in methanol it is popularly used by fire jugglers and fire spinners to create a deep green flame .
AGRICULTURE Section::::Agriculture .
Boric acid is used to treat or prevent boron deficiencies in plants .
It is also used in preservation of grains such as rice and wheat .
RECREATIONAL
Section::::Recreational .
For the game of carrom , boric acid is sprinkled onto the board of play to act as a dry lubricant to increase the speed of the pieces when struck .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Cordia JA , Bal EA , Mak WA and Wils ERJ ( 2003 ) , Determination of some physico - chemical properties of Optibor EP .
Rijswijk , The Netherlands : TNO Prins Maurits Laboratory , report PML 2002-C42rr , GLP , Unpublished , confidential data provided by Bor ax Europe Limited EXTERNAL LINKS * Boric Acid Technical Fact Sheet - National Pesticide Information Center * Boric Acid General Fact Sheet - National Pesticide Information Center * International Chemical Safety Card 0991
* US EPA Pesticide Reregistration Eligibility Decision * National Pollutant Inventory - Boron and compounds
* Boric acid at ChemicalLand21 * European Chemicals Agency ( ECHA)"New Public Consultation on Eight Potential Substances of Very High Concern " - includes Boric Acid .
Closes 22 April 2010 *
ChemSub Online :
Boric acid