BOYLE 'S LAW Boyle 's law , sometimes referred to as the Boyle – Mariotte law , or Mariotte 's law ( especially in France ) , is an experimental gas law that describes how the pressure of a gas tends to increase as the volume of the container decreases .
A modern statement of Boyle 's law is The absolute pressure exerted by a given mass of an ideal gas is inversely proportional to the volume it occupies if the temperature and amount of gas remain unchanged within a closed system .
Mathematically , Boyle 's law can be stated as or where P is the pressure of the gas , V is the volume of the gas , and k is a constant .
The equation states that the product of pressure and volume is a constant for a given mass of confined gas and this holds as long as the temperature is constant .
For comparing the same substance under two different sets of conditions , the law can be usefully expressed as
The equation shows that , as volume increases , the pressure of the gas decreases in proportion .
Similarly , as volume decreases , the pressure of the gas increases .
The law was named after chemist and physicist Robert Boyle , who published the original law in 1662 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
This relationship between pressure and volume was first noted by Richard Towneley and Henry Power in the seventeenth century .
Robert Boyle confirmed their discovery through experiments and published the results .
According to Robert Gunther and other authorities , it was Boyle 's assistant , Robert Hooke , who built the experimental apparatus .
Boyle 's law is based on experiments with air , which he considered to be a fluid of particles at rest in between small invisible springs .
At that time , air was still seen as one of the four elements , but Boyle disagreed .
Boyle 's interest was probably to understand air as an essential element of life ; for example , he published works on the growth of plants without air .
Boyle used a closed J - shaped tube and after pouring mercury from one side he forced the air on the other side to contract under the pressure of mercury .
After repeating the experiment several times and using different amounts of mercury he found that under controlled conditions , the pressure of a gas is inversely proportional to the volume occupied by it .
The French physicist Edme Mariotte ( 1620–1684 ) discovered the same law independent of Boyle in 1679 , but Boyle had already published it in 1662 .
Mariotte did , however , discover that air volume changes with temperature .
Thus this law is sometimes referred to as Mariotte 's law or the Boyle – Mariotte law .
Later , in 1687 in the Philosophiæ Naturalis Principia Mathematica , Newton showed mathematically that if an elastic fluid consisting of particles at rest , between which are repulsive forces inversely proportional to their distance , the density would be directly proportional to the pressure , but this mathematical treatise is not the physical explanation for the observed relationship .
Instead of a static theory a kinetic theory is needed , which was provided two centuries later by Maxwell and Boltzmann .
This law was the first physical law to be expressed in the form of an equation describing the dependence of two variable quantities .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
The law itself can be stated as follows : Or Boyle 's law is a gas law , stating that the pressure and volume of a gas have an inverse relationship , when temperature is held constant .
If volume increases , then pressure decreases and vice versa , when temperature is held constant .
Therefore , when the volume is halved , the pressure is doubled ; and if the volume is doubled , the pressure is halved .
RELATION WITH KINETIC THEORY AND IDEAL GASES Section::::Relation with kinetic theory and ideal gases .
Boyle 's law states that at constant temperature the volume of a given mass of a dry gas is inversely proportional to its pressure .
Most gases behave like ideal gases at moderate pressures and temperatures .
The technology of the 17th century could not produce high pressures or low temperatures .
Hence , the law was not likely to have deviations at the time of publication .
As improvements in technology permitted higher pressures and lower temperatures , deviations from the ideal gas behavior became noticeable , and the relationship between pressure and volume can only be accurately described employing real gas theory .
The deviation is expressed as the compressibility factor .
Boyle ( and Mariotte ) derived the law solely on experimental grounds .
The law can also be derived theoretically based on the presumed existence of atoms and molecules and assumptions about motion and perfectly elastic collisions ( see kinetic theory of gases ) .
These assumptions were met with enormous resistance in the positivist scientific community at the time however , as they were seen as purely theoretical constructs for which there was not the slightest observational evidence .
Daniel Bernoulli in 1737 - 1738 derived Boyle 's law using Newton 's laws of motion with application on a molecular level .
It remained ignored until around 1845 , when John Waterston published a paper building the main precepts of kinetic theory ; this was rejected by the Royal Society of England .
Later works of James Prescott Joule , Rudolf Clausius and in particular Ludwig Boltzmann firmly established the kinetic theory of gases and brought attention to both the theories of Bernoulli and Waterston .
The debate between proponents of Energetics and Atomism led Boltzmann to write a book in 1898 , which endured criticism up to his suicide in 1906 .
Albert Einstein in 1905 showed how kinetic theory applies to the Brownian motion of a fluid - suspended particle , which was confirmed in 1908 by Jean Perrin .
EQUATION Section::::Equation .
The mathematical equation for Boyle 's law is : where : * P denotes the pressure of the system .
* V denotes the volume of the gas .
*
k is a constant value representative of the temperature and volume of the system .
So long as temperature remains constant the same amount of energy given to the system persists throughout its operation and therefore , theoretically , the value of k will remain constant .
However , due to the derivation of pressure as perpendicular applied force and the probabilistic likelihood of collisions with other particles through collision theory , the application of force to a surface may not be infinitely constant for such values of v , but will have a limit when differentiating such values over a given time .
Forcing the volume V of the fixed quantity of gas to increase , keeping the gas at the initially measured temperature , the pressure p must decrease proportionally .
Conversely , reducing the volume of the gas increases the pressure .
Boyle 's law is used to predict the result of introducing a change , in volume and pressure only , to the initial state of a fixed quantity of gas .
The initial and final volumes and pressures of the fixed amount of gas , where the initial and final temperatures are the same ( heating or cooling will be required to meet this condition ) , are related by the equation :
Here P and V represent the original pressure and volume , respectively , and P and V represent the second pressure and volume .
Boyle 's law , Charles 's law , and Gay - Lussac 's law form the combined gas law .
The three gas laws in combination with Avogadro 's law can be generalized by the ideal gas law .
HUMAN BREATHING SYSTEM Section::::Human breathing system .
Boyle 's law is often used as part of an explanation on how the breathing system works in the human body .
This commonly involves explaining how the lung volume may be increased or decreased and thereby cause a relatively lower or higher air pressure within them ( in keeping with Boyle 's law ) .
This forms a pressure difference between the air inside the lungs and the environmental air pressure , which in turn precipitates either inhalation or exhalation as air moves from high to low pressure .
SEE ALSO Section::::See also .
Related phenomena :
* Gardener 's watering - pot Other gas laws : CITATIONS
EXTERNAL LINKS * Boyle 's law calculator