PRINCE WILLIAM , DUKE OF CAMBRIDGE Prince William , Duke of Cambridge , ( William Arthur Philip Louis ; born 21 June 1982 ) is a member of the British royal family .
He is a grandson of Queen Elizabeth II , and the elder son of Charles , Prince of Wales , and Diana , Princess of Wales .
Since birth , he has been second in the line of succession to the British throne after his father .
William was educated at four schools in the United Kingdom and studied for a degree at the University of St. Andrews .
During a gap year , he spent time in Chile , Belize , and Africa .
In December 2006 , he completed 44 weeks of training as an officer cadet and was commissioned in the Blues and Royals regiment .
In April 2008 , William completed pilot training at Royal Air Force College Cranwell , then underwent helicopter flight training and became a full - time pilot with the RAF Search and Rescue Force in early 2009 .
His service with the British Armed Forces ended in September 2013 .
He then trained for a civil pilot 's licence and spent over two years working as a pilot for the East Anglian Air Ambulance .
In 2011 , Prince William was made Duke of Cambridge and married Catherine Middleton .
The couple have three children : Prince George , Princess Charlotte , and Prince Louis .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Prince William was born at Lindo Wing of St Mary 's Hospital , London , at 9:03pm on 21 June 1982 as the first child of Charles , Prince of Wales — heir apparent to Queen Elizabeth II — and Diana , Princess of Wales .
His names , William Arthur Philip Louis , were announced by Buckingham Palace on 28 June .
He was baptised by the Archbishop of Canterbury , Robert Runcie , in the Music Room of Buckingham Palace on 4 August , the 82nd birthday of his paternal great - grandmother Queen Elizabeth
The Queen Mother .
He was the first child born to a Prince and Princess of Wales since Prince John in 1905 .
William 's parents affectionately called him " Wombat " or " Wills"—a name coined by the press .
Since his birth , William has been second in the line of succession to the British throne .
At age seven , he reportedly told his mother he wanted to be a police officer when he was older so that he might be able to protect her ; a statement to which his five - year - old brother Harry reportedly replied , " Oh , no you ca n't .
You 've got to be King . "
William began accompanying his parents on official visits at an early age .
In 1983 , he accompanied them on a tour to Australia and New Zealand , a decision made by Diana .
The decision was considered to be unconventional because the first- and second - in - line to the throne would be travelling together , and because of William 's young age .
His first public appearance was on 1 March 1991—Saint David 's Day — during an official visit of his parents to Cardiff .
After arriving by aeroplane , William was taken to Llandaff Cathedral where he signed the visitors ' book , showing he is left - handed .
On 3 June 1991 , William was admitted to Royal Berkshire Hospital after being accidentally hit on the forehead by a fellow student wielding a golf club .
He suffered a depressed fracture of the skull and was operated on at Great Ormond Street Hospital , resulting in a permanent scar .
In a 2009 interview , he dubbed this scar a " Harry Potter scar " and said , " I call it that because it glows sometimes and some people notice it — other times they do n't notice it at all " .
William 's mother wanted him and his younger brother Harry to have wider experiences than are usual for royal children .
She took them to Walt Disney World and McDonald 's , as well as AIDS clinics and shelters for the homeless , and bought them items typically owned by teenagers , such as video games .
Diana , who was by then divorced from Charles , died in a car accident in the early hours of 31 August 1997 .
William , then aged 15 , together with his 12-year - old brother and their father , were staying at Balmoral Castle at the time .
The Prince of Wales waited until his sons awoke the following morning to tell them about their mother 's death .
William accompanied his father , brother , paternal grandfather Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , and his maternal uncle Charles Spencer , 9th Earl Spencer , at his mother 's funeral ; they walked behind the funeral cortège from Buckingham Palace to Westminster Abbey .
EDUCATION Section::::Education .
William was educated at independent schools , starting at Jane Mynors ' nursery school and the pre - preparatory Wetherby School , both in London .
Following this , he attended Ludgrove School near Wokingham , Berkshire , and was privately tutored during summers by Rory Stewart .
At Ludgrove , he participated in football , swimming , basketball , clay pigeon shooting , and cross country running .
He sat the entrance exam to Eton College and was admitted .
There , he studied Geography , Biology , and History of Art at A - Level , obtaining an ' A ' in Geography , a ' C ' in Biology , and a ' B ' in History of Art .
At Eton , he took up water polo and continued to play football , captaining his house team .
The decision to place William in Eton went against the family tradition of sending royal children to Gordonstoun , which William 's grandfather , father , two uncles , and two cousins all attended .
Diana 's father and brother both attended Eton .
The royal family and the tabloid press agreed William would be allowed to study free from intrusion in exchange for regular updates about his life .
John Wakeham , chairman of the Press Complaints Commission , said of the arrangement , " Prince William is not an institution ; nor a soap star ; nor a football hero .
He is a boy : in the next few years , perhaps the most important and sometimes painful part of his life , he will grow up and become a man . "
After completing his studies at Eton , William took a gap year , during which he took part in British Army training exercises in Belize , worked on English dairy farms , visited Africa , and for ten weeks taught children in southern Chile .
As part of the Raleigh International program in the town of Tortel , William lived with other young volunteers , sharing in the common household chores — including cleaning the toilet — and also volunteered as a guest disc jockey at a local radio station .
His interest in African culture prompted him to teach himself Swahili .
By 2001 , William was back in the United Kingdom and had enrolled at the University of St Andrews .
News of this caused a temporary increase in the number of applications to St Andrews , mostly from young women who wanted an opportunity to meet him .
The extra attention did not deter him ; he embarked on a degree course in Art History , later changing his main subject to Geography , and earned a Scottish Master of Arts degree with upper second class honours .
While at university , he represented the Scottish national universities water polo team at the Celtic Nations tournament in 2004 .
He was known as " Steve " by other students to avoid any journalists overhearing and realising his identity .
William returned to St Andrews in February 2011 as patron of the university 's 600th Anniversary Appeal .
To prepare for his eventual management of the Duchy of Cornwall , in 2014 William enrolled in a vocational agricultural management course at Cambridge , which was organised by the Cambridge Programme for Sustainability Leadership ( CPSL ) , of which his father is patron .
According to a CNN report in 2014 , the duchy is " a £ 760 million ( about $ 1.25 billion ) entity established in 1337 to provide a private income for use by the reigning monarch 's eldest son " , which William will inherit when his father becomes king .
MILITARY AND AIR AMBULANCE
SERVICE MILITARY TRAINING AND SECONDMENTS Section::::Military and air ambulance service .
Section::::Military training and secondments .
Having decided to follow a military career , in October 2005 William attended the four - day Regular Commissions Board at Westbury in Wiltshire , where he underwent selection to judge his suitability to become an army officer .
He passed selection and was admitted to the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst in January 2006 .
After completing the course , William was commissioned as a Second Lieutenant at Sandhurst on 15 December 2006 ; the graduation parade was attended by the Queen and the Prince of Wales , along with other members of the Royal Family .
William officially received his commission as a lieutenant at midnight .
As " Lieutenant Wales"—a name based on his father 's title Prince of Wales — he followed his younger brother into the Blues and Royals as a troop commander in an armoured reconnaissance unit , after which he spent four months training for the post at Bovington Camp , Dorset .
Though Major - General Sir Sebastian Roberts , General Officer commanding the Household Division , had said William 's deployment was possible , the Prince 's position as second - in - line to the throne and the convention of ministers advising against placing that person into dangerous situations cast doubts on William 's chances of seeing combat .
These doubts increased after Prince Harry 's deployment was cancelled in 2007 due to " specific threats " .
William , instead , went on to train in the Royal Navy and Royal Air Force , obtaining his commission as a sub - lieutenant in the former and flying officer in the latter — both broadly equivalent to the army rank of lieutenant .
After completing his training , William undertook an attachment with the Royal Air Force , undergoing an intensive , four - month training course at RAF Cranwell .
Upon completing the course on 11 April 2008 , he was presented with his RAF wings by his father , who had received his own wings after training at Cranwell .
During this secondment , William flew to Afghanistan in a C-17 Globemaster that repatriated the body of Trooper Robert Pearson .
William was then seconded to train with the Royal Navy from June to August 2008 , during which he spent three weeks at the Britannia Royal Naval College training on units of the surface fleet and submarines , as well as with the Fleet Air Arm and the Royal Marines .
He spent a day on submarine HMS Talent .
During a five - week deployment on HMS Iron Duke in the Caribbean , he took part in a joint operation with the United States Coast Guard that identified and captured a speedboat carrying of cocaine worth about £ 40 million .
The ship also took part in other raids .
Because of William 's future royal role , a long - term career in the military was considered out of the question ; due to his position , his desire to see active service was unlikely to be fulfilled .
William originally joined the military on a short - service commission lasting three years .
It was announced in September 2008 , however , that he would be extending his forces career in 2008 by accepting another secondment that included working at the Ministry of Defence ( MOD ) and non - operational flying with the Army Air Corps .
It was later announced that he would transfer from the Army to the RAF to train as a full - time search and rescue helicopter pilot , a role that would enable him to take an active role in the armed forces without being deployed on combat operations .
ROYAL AIR FORCE SERVICE Section::::Royal Air Force service .
In January 2009 , William transferred his commission to the RAF and was promoted to Flight Lieutenant .
He trained to become a helicopter pilot with the RAF 's Search and Rescue Force .
In January 2010 , he graduated from the Defence Helicopter Flying School at RAF Shawbury , where he had been under the instruction of Squadron Leader Craig Finch .
On 26 January 2010 , he transferred to the Search and Rescue Training Unit at RAF Valley , Anglesey , to receive training on the Sea King search and rescue helicopter ; he graduated from this course on 17 September 2010 .
This made him the first member of the British royal family since Henry VII to live in Wales .
It was announced on 15 April 2010 that William would remain at RAF Valley for his operational tour ; he was assigned to C Flight No .
22 Squadron and initially performed co - pilot duties .
His operational tour was expected to last 30 to 36 months .
William 's first rescue mission as co - pilot of an RAF Sea King was a response to an emergency call from the Liverpool Coastguard on 2 October 2010 .
William — who was excited to take part in an active mission — and the other three crew members , flew from their base at RAF Valley to an offshore gas rig in Morecambe Bay , from where a man who had suffered a suspected heart attack was airlifted to hospital .
In November 2011 , he participated in a search - and - rescue mission involving a cargo ship that was sinking in the Irish Sea ; William , as a co - pilot , helped rescue two sailors .
William was deployed to the Falkland Islands for a six - week tour with No .
1564 Flight from February to March 2012 .
The Argentine government condemned the Duke 's deployment to the islands close to the 30th anniversary of the beginning of the Falklands War as a " provocative act " .
In June 2012 Prince William gained a qualification to be captain or pilot in command of a Sea King rather than a co - pilot .
His active service as an RAF search - and - rescue pilot ended in September 2013 .
AIR AMBULANCE PILOT Section::::Air ambulance pilot .
In 2014 , it was announced that William would accept a full - time role as a pilot with the East Anglian Air Ambulance ( EAAA ) based at Cambridge Airport .
Despite his qualifications as a military helicopter pilot , William needed a civil pilot 's licence and further training before being permitted to take command of the Air Ambulance .
Although his position was paid , Kensington Palace announced that William would donate his full salary to the EAAA charity .
He underwent part of his training as an EAAA pilot at Norwich Airport .
On 13 July 2015 , William started his new job , which he felt was a natural progression from his previous role as an RAF search - and - rescue pilot .
He left his position with EAAA in July 2017 to assume a more active role in royal duties on behalf of his grandmother the Queen .
ROYAL DUTIES Section::::Royal duties .
Upon graduation from university , William began to undertake his own public duties and privately obtained work experience by interning in land management at Chatsworth House and in banking at HSBC .
At the age of 21 , Prince William was appointed as a Counsellor of State ; he first served in that capacity when the Queen was in Nigeria attending the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting in 2003 .
For his 21st birthday , William accompanied his father on a tour of Wales , visiting the Anglesey Food Fair and opening a centre for the homeless in Newport .
By July 2005 , he embarked on his first solo overseas tour , travelling to New Zealand , to participate in World War II commemorations on behalf of Queen Elizabeth II in her role as Queen of New Zealand .
For the 30th anniversary of his father 's charity The Prince 's Trust , William and his brother were interviewed together for the first time by television personalities Ant & Dec.
According to Tina Brown in her 2007 biography of Diana , Princess of Wales , William had , like his father , expressed a desire to become Governor - General of Australia .
Prime Minister of Australia John Howard said , " We have for a long time embraced the idea that the person who occupies that post should be in every way an Australian citizen " .
In 2009 , the Queen set up a private office for William with Sir David Manning as his adviser .
Manning accompanied him in January 2010 as he toured Auckland and Wellington on behalf of the Queen ; William opened the new building of the Supreme Court of New Zealand and was welcomed by a Māori chief .
William succeeded Lord Attenborough in 2010 as the fifth president of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts .
In March 2011 , William visited Christchurch , New Zealand , shortly after the earthquake , and spoke at the memorial service at Hagley Park on behalf of his grandmother .
Upon leaving New Zealand , he travelled to Australia to visit areas affected by flooding in Queensland and Victoria .
After twice accompanying his parents to Canada , Prince William and his wife toured the country in June and July 2011 ; they visited the United States and attended Canada Day celebrations on Parliament Hill .
On 2 November , the Duke and Duchess visited the UNICEF Supply Division Centre in Copenhagen , Denmark , which supplies food to malnourished African children .
In September 2012 , they toured Singapore , Malaysia , Tuvalu , and the Solomon Islands as part of the Queen 's Diamond Jubilee celebrations .
In April 2014 , the Duke and Duchess undertook a royal tour to New Zealand and Australia .
From 20–21 September , William took his wife 's place on a tour of Malta to mark the 50th anniversary of the island 's independence from the United Kingdom .
On 21 October , the Duke and Duchess met the President of Singapore , Tony Tan , during his state visit to the UK .
In December 2014 , the Duke met US President Barack Obama in the Oval Office , and subsequently made a speech at the World Bank in Washington , D. C. , condemning the illegal trade in wildlife .
In 2015 , Prince William visited the Chinese cities Beijing , Shanghai , and Yunnan from 1 to 4 March .
Chinese President Xi Jinping welcomed him as he began the first visit to mainland China by a member of the British royal family in almost three decades .
In June 2018 , Prince William visited Israel and Palestine , being the first British royal to visit the area officially since the expiry of the British Mandate .
He visited Tel Aviv , meeting with mayor Ron Huldai and touring the beach area and city centre ; Jerusalem , meeting with President Reuven Rivlin and Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu ; and Ramallah , meeting with Palestinian president Mahmoud Abbas .
PATRONAGES AND INTERESTS HUMANITARIAN AND ENVIRONMENTAL PATRONAGES Section::::Patronages and interests .
Section::::Humanitarian and environmental patronages .
William became aware of HIV / AIDS in the mid-1990s when he accompanied his mother and brother on visits to shelters and clinics for sufferers .
In January 2005 , William and his brother volunteered at a British Red Cross aid distribution centre to pack emergency supplies for countries affected by the 2004 Boxing Day tsunami .
In September that year , William granted his patronage to Centrepoint , a charity that assists the homeless .
In 2005 , William worked in the children 's unit at The Royal Marsden Hospital for two days of work experience ; he also assisted in the medical research , catering , and fund raising departments .
In May that year , he spent two weeks in North Wales with a mountain rescue team .
In May 2007 , William became patron of both organisations — his mother had also been patron of the Royal Marsden Hospital — and he became attracted to Mountain Rescue England and Wales to " highlight and celebrate the vital , selfless and courageous work of our mountain rescue organisations " .
Prince William also became a patron of the Tusk Trust in December 2005 , a charity that works towards conserving wildlife and initiating community development , including providing education , across Africa .
He became associated with the organisation after he witnessed its work first hand in Africa .
Saying " rural African initiatives that foster education , responsibility and participation in the local community light the way to conservation " , he carried out his first official duty with the trust in launching a bike ride across the African continent in 2007 .
In 2010 , he also became a patron of 100 Women in Hedge Funds Philanthropic Initiatives .
In March 2011 , the Duke and Duchess set up a gift fund held by The Foundation of Prince William and Prince Harry to allow well - wishers who wanted to give them a wedding gift to donate money to charities instead .
The gift fund supported 26 charities of the couple 's choice , incorporating the armed forces , children , the elderly , art , sport and conservation .
These causes are close to their hearts and reflect the experiences , passions and values of their lives so far .
SPORT Section::::Sport .
William plays polo to raise money for charity , is a fan of football , and supports the English club Aston Villa .
He became President of England 's Football Association in May 2006 and vice - royal patron of the Welsh Rugby Union ( WRU ) in February 2007 , supporting the Queen as patron .
The same year , the WRU 's decision to name a new cup for test matches between Wales and South Africa the Prince William Cup caused controversy ; some believed it would have been more appropriate to name it after Ray Gravell .
In 2006 , William , along with other Sandhurst officers , took part in a run to support the charity Sport Relief , as he had done in 2004 with a team from Clarence House .
In May 2007 , William became patron of the English Schools ' Swimming Association .
In 2013 , he succeeded his grandfather Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , as president of the UK charity Fields in Trust .
In December 2010 , William and Prime Minister David Cameron attended a meeting with FIFA vice - president Chung Mong - joon at which Chung suggested a vote - trading deal for the right to host the 2018 World Cup in England .
The English delegation reported the suggestion to FIFA 's ethics investigator because they considered vote - swapping to be a violation of anti - collusion rules .
Both William and his brother are enthusiastic motorcyclists ; William owns a Ducati 1198 S Corse .
In May 2014 , William , like his father and paternal grandfather , became president of the British Sub - Aqua Club ( BSAC ) .
He enthusiastically took part in a bandy event in Stockholm in January 2018 .
PERSONAL LIFE
BACHELORHOOD Section::::Personal life .
Section::::Bachelorhood .
William 's private life became a subject of tabloid speculation , especially around his relationship with Catherine Middleton , one of William 's university flatmates whom William began dating in 2003 .
Middleton attended William 's passing - out parade at Sandhurst , which was the first high - profile event that she attended as his guest .
Their relationship was followed so closely that bookmakers took bets on the possibility of marriage and the retail chain Woolworths produced memorabilia bearing the likenesses of the couple .
Media attention became so intense that William formally asked the press to keep their distance from Middleton .
It was reported in April 2007 that the couple had split up , but they resumed their relationship a few months later .
MARRIAGE AND FATHERHOOD Section::::Marriage and fatherhood .
On 16 November 2010 , Clarence House announced that Prince William and Middleton were to marry ; the couple had become engaged in Kenya in October .
The engagement ring given by William to Catherine had belonged to his mother .
The wedding took place on 29 April 2011 in Westminster Abbey , London .
A few hours before the ceremony , William 's new titles Duke of Cambridge , Earl of Strathearn , and Baron Carrickfergus were announced .
His wife 's first pregnancy was announced on 3 December 2012 .
She was admitted on 22 July 2013 to the Lindo Wing of St Mary 's Hospital , London , where Prince William had been delivered .
Later that day , she gave birth to Prince George .
On 8 September 2014 , it was announced that the Duchess of Cambridge was pregnant with her second child .
She was admitted on 2 May 2015 to the same hospital and gave birth to Princess Charlotte .
The Duchess 's third pregnancy was announced on 4 September 2017 ; Prince Louis was born on 23 April 2018 .
In March 2017 , a video of William dancing with an unidentified woman at a nightclub in Verbier , Switzerland , surfaced in the media .
At the time , he was on a skiing holiday with his friends .
The press criticised William 's behaviour because he had failed to attend the Commonwealth Day service at Westminster Abbey , which was attended by other senior members of the royal family .
TITLES , STYLES , HONOURS , AND ARMS TITLES AND STYLES
* 1982–2011 : His Royal Highness Prince William of Wales * 2011–present : His Royal Highness The Duke of Cambridge *
In Scotland : His Royal Highness The Earl of Strathearn *
In Northern Ireland : Baron Carrickfergus Section::::Titles , styles , honours , and arms . Section::::Titles and styles .
The hereditary titles of Duke of Cambridge , Earl of Strathearn , and Baron Carrickfergus were announced on 29 April 2011 and formally patented on 26 May that year .
William is a Royal Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter ( KG ) , a Knight of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle ( KT ) , a member of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom ( PC ) , and a Personal Aide - de - Camp ( ADC ) to the Queen .
As a British prince , William does not use a surname for everyday purposes .
For formal and ceremonial purposes , children of the Prince of Wales use the title " prince " or " princess " before their forename and follow it with their father 's territorial designation .
Thus , before his marriage , Prince William was styled " Prince William of Wales " .
Such territorial designations are discarded by women when they marry and by men if they are given a peerage of their own , such as when Prince William was given his dukedom .
Although the name of the Royal House is Windsor , the surname Mountbatten - Windsor belongs to all the children and male - line descendants of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip , and is used , if needed , by those who do not have the style of Royal Highness and the title Prince or Princess ; when a female descendant marries , she traditionally takes her husband 's surname from that point onward , and their children take their father 's .
Both Princes William and Harry used Wales as their surname for military purposes ; this continues to be the case for William since his creation as Duke of Cambridge .
MILITARY RANKS * 8 January 2006 :
Officer cadet * 16 December 2006 : Cornet ( Second Lieutenant ) , The Blues and Royals ( short service commission )
* 16 December 2006 : Lieutenant , The Blues and Royals * 1 January 2009 : Captain , The Blues and Royals ( and transferred to a full regular commission ) * 1 January 2016 : Major , British Army * 1 January 2008 : Sub - lieutenant , Royal Navy * 1 January 2009 : Lieutenant , Royal Navy * 1 January 2016 : Lieutenant Commander , Royal Navy * 1 January 2008 :
Flying Officer , Royal Air Force * 1 January 2009 :
Flight Lieutenant , Royal Air Force * 1 January 2016 :
Squadron Leader , Royal Air Force HONOURS Section::::Honours .
Prince William is the 1,000th member of the register of the Order of the Garter , and was officially invested by the Queen on 16 June 2008 at a service at St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle .
The last time a monarch appointed a grandchild into the Order of the Garter was in 1894 , when Queen Victoria invested Alfred , Hereditary Prince of Saxe - Coburg and Gotha .
* 23 April 2008 :
Royal Knight Companion of the Most Noble Order of the Garter ( KG )
* 25 May 2012 : Extra Knight of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle ( KT )
MEDALS * 6 February 2002 :
Queen Elizabeth II
Golden Jubilee Medal * 6 February 2012 : Queen Elizabeth II Diamond Jubilee Medal
COMMONWEALTH HONOURS * 1 October 2016 : Tuvalu Order of Merit APPOINTMENTS
*
Since 6 July 2009 : Honorary Bencher of the Honourable Society of the Middle Temple .
* Since 23 June 2010 : Royal Fellow of the Royal Society ( FRS ) * 17 March 2013 : Personal Aide - de - Camp to Her Majesty
The Queen ( ADC ) * 9 June 2016 : Member of Her Majesty 's Most Honourable Privy Council ( PC ) * Since 1 March 2017 : Royal Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh ( HonFRSE )
*
Since 17 January 2018 : Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Medicine ( FRSM ) HONORARY MILITARY APPOINTMENTS Canada * 10 November 2009 : Canadian Ranger United Kingdom * Since 8 August 2006 : Commodore - in - Chief of the Royal Navy Submarine Service * Since 8 August 2006 : Commodore - in - Chief of Scotland * Since 3 October 2008 : Honorary Air Commandant of RAF Coningsby * Since 10 February 2011 : Colonel of the Irish Guards EPONYMS * Their Royal Highnesses The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge Award , University of Waterloo , Waterloo , Ontario * Duke and Duchess of Cambridge 's Parks Canada Youth Ambassadors Program * Duke of Cambridge Public School , Bowmanville , Ontario ARMS Section::::Arms .
In September 2013 , the Queen granted to the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge a conjugal coat of arms consisting of their individual arms displayed side - by - side beneath a helm and coronet denoting the Duke 's status as grandson of the Sovereign .
PERSONAL FLAG FOR CANADA
Section::::Personal flag for Canada .
In 2011 , the Canadian Heraldic Authority introduced a personal heraldic flag for the Duke of Cambridge 's use in Canada .
It is the Royal Arms of Canada in banner form defaced with a blue roundel surrounded with a wreath of gold maple leaves and shells within which is a depiction of a " W " surmounted by a coronet .
Above the roundel is a white label of three points , charged with a red shell .
ANCESTRY Section::::Ancestry .
Prince William is a member of the House of Windsor .
By direct paternal ancestry via his grandfather the Duke of Edinburgh , he is a descendant of Elimar I , Count of Oldenburg of the House of Oldenburg , one of Europe 's oldest royal houses ; and more specifically the cadet branch known as the House of Glücksburg , which was founded by William 's paternal ancestor Friedrich Wilhelm , Duke of Schleswig - Holstein - Sonderburg - Glücksburg .
William 's ancestors on the male line include five kings ; Christian I of Denmark , Frederick I of Denmark , Christian III of Denmark , Christian IX of Denmark , and George I of Greece ; and also includes eleven counts of Oldenburg , two dukes of Schleswig - Holstein - Sonderburg , five dukes of Schleswig - Holstein - Sonderburg - Beck , and one duke of Schleswig - Holstein - Sonderburg - Glücksburg .
Through his mother , William descends from the Earls Spencer — a cadet branch of the Spencer family descended from the Earls of Sunderland ; the senior branch are now also Dukes of Marlborough ; the Barons Fermoy ; and more anciently from Henry FitzRoy , 1st Duke of Grafton , and Charles Lennox , 1st Duke of Richmond — two illegitimate sons of King Charles II .
As king , William would be the first monarch since Anne to descend from Charles I and the first to descend from Charles II .
William descends matrilineally from Eliza Kewark , a housekeeper for his great - great - great - great - great - grandfather Theodore Forbes — a Scottish merchant who worked for the East India Company in Surat .
She is variously described in contemporary documents as " a dark - skinned native woman " , " an Armenian woman from Bombay " , and " Mrs. Forbesian " .
Genealogist William Addams Reitwiesner assumed Kewark was Armenian .
In June 2013 , BritainsDNA announced that genealogical DNA tests on two of William 's distant matrilineal cousins confirm Kewark was matrilineally of Indian descent .
SEE ALSO
* Royal William , a German red rose named after Prince William shortly after his birth NOTES REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Duke of Cambridge at the Royal Family website
* The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge profile at the Official website of the Prince of Wales
* Prince William graduates from RMAS
* Prince William talks with NBC 's Matt Lauer