SUPERSONIC SPEED Supersonic travel is a rate of travel of an object that exceeds the speed of sound ( Mach 1 ) .
For objects traveling in dry air of a temperature of 20 ° C ( 68 ° F ) at sea level , this speed is approximately 344 m / s , 1,125 ft / s , 768 mph , 667 knots , or 1,235 km / h .
Speeds greater than five times the speed of sound ( Mach 5 ) are often referred to as hypersonic .
Flights during which only some parts of the air surrounding an object , such as the ends of rotor blades , reach supersonic speeds are called transonic .
This occurs typically somewhere between Mach 0.8 and Mach 1.23 .
Sounds are traveling vibrations in the form of pressure waves in an elastic medium .
In gases , sound travels longitudinally at different speeds , mostly depending on the molecular mass and temperature of the gas , and pressure has little effect .
Since air temperature and composition varies significantly with altitude , Mach numbers for aircraft may change despite a constant travel speed .
In water at room temperature supersonic speed can be considered as any speed greater than 1,440 m / s ( 4,724 ft / s ) .
In solids , sound waves can be polarized longitudinally or transversely and have even higher velocities .
Supersonic fracture is crack motion faster than the speed of sound in a brittle material .
EARLY MEANING
Section::::Early meaning .
At the beginning of the 20th century , the term " supersonic " was used as an adjective to describe sound whose frequency is above the range of normal human hearing .
The modern term for this meaning is " ultrasonic " .
SUPERSONIC OBJECTS Section::::Supersonic objects .
The tip of a bullwhip is thought to be the first man - made object to break the sound barrier , resulting in the telltale " crack " ( actually a small sonic boom ) .
The wave motion traveling through the bullwhip is what makes it capable of achieving supersonic speeds .
Most modern fighter aircraft are supersonic aircraft , but there have been supersonic passenger aircraft , namely Concorde and the Tupolev Tu-144 .
Both these passenger aircraft and some modern fighters are also capable of supercruise , a condition of sustained supersonic flight without the use of an afterburner .
Due to its ability to supercruise for several hours and the relatively high frequency of flight over several decades , Concorde spent more time flying supersonically than all other aircraft combined by a considerable margin .
Since Concorde 's final retirement flight on November 26 , 2003 , there are no supersonic passenger aircraft left in service .
Some large bombers , such as the Tupolev Tu-160 and Rockwell
B-1 Lancer are also supersonic - capable .
Most modern firearm bullets are supersonic , with rifle projectiles often travelling at speeds approaching and in some cases well exceeding Mach 3 .
Most spacecraft , most notably the Space Shuttle are supersonic at least during portions of their reentry , though the effects on the spacecraft are reduced by low air densities .
During ascent , launch vehicles generally avoid going supersonic below 30 km ( ~98,400 feet ) to reduce air drag .
Note that the speed of sound decreases somewhat with altitude , due to lower temperatures found there ( typically up to 25 km ) .
At even higher altitudes the temperature starts increasing , with the corresponding increase in the speed of sound .
When an inflated balloon is burst , the torn pieces of latex contract at supersonic speed , which contributes to the sharp and loud popping noise .
SUPERSONIC LAND VEHICLES Section::::Supersonic land vehicles .
To date , only one land vehicle has officially travelled at supersonic speed .
It is ThrustSSC , driven by Andy Green , which holds the world land speed record , having achieved an average speed on its bi - directional run of in the Black Rock Desert on 15 October 1997 .
Richard Noble , Andy Green and a team of engineers are currently planning to break this record in 2019 at Hakskeen
Pan in South Africa with the Bloodhound SSC hybrid jet- and rocket - propelled car .
SUPERSONIC FLIGHT Section::::Supersonic flight .
Supersonic aerodynamics is simpler than subsonic aerodynamics because the airsheets at different points along the plane often can not affect each other .
Supersonic jets and rocket vehicles require several times greater thrust to push through the extra aerodynamic drag experienced within the transonic region ( around Mach 0.85–1.2 ) .
At these speeds aerospace engineers can gently guide air around the fuselage of the aircraft without producing new shock waves , but any change in cross area farther down the vehicle leads to shock waves along the body .
Designers use the Supersonic area rule and the Whitcomb area rule to minimize sudden changes in size .
However , in practical applications , a supersonic aircraft must operate stably in both subsonic and supersonic profiles , hence aerodynamic design is more complex .
One problem with sustained supersonic flight is the generation of heat in flight .
At high speeds aerodynamic heating can occur , so an aircraft must be designed to operate and function under very high temperatures .
Duralumin , the traditional aircraft material , starts to lose strength and go into plastic deformation at relatively low temperatures , and is unsuitable for continuous use at speeds above Mach 2.2 to 2.4 .
Materials such as titanium and stainless steel allow operations at much higher temperatures .
For example , the Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird jet could fly continuously at Mach 3.1 which could lead to temperatures on some parts of the aircraft getting above 315 ° C ( 600 ° F ) .
Another area of concern for sustained high - speed flight is engine operation .
Jet engines create thrust by increasing the temperature of the air they ingest , and as the aircraft speeds up , friction and compression heat this air before it reaches the engines .
The maximum allowable temperature of the exhaust is determined by the materials in the turbine at the rear of the engine , so as the aircraft speeds up , the difference in intake and exhaust temperature that the engine can create decreases , and the thrust along with it .
Air cooling the turbine area to allow operations at higher temperatures was a key solution , one that continued to improve through the 1950s and on to this day .
Intake design was also a major issue .
Normal jet engines can only ingest subsonic air , so for supersonic operation the air must be slowed down .
Ramps or cones in the intake are used to create shock waves that slow the airflow before it reaches the engine .
Doing so removes energy from the airflow , causing drag .
The key to reducing this drag is to use multiple small oblique shock waves , but this was difficult because the angle they make inside the intake changes with Mach number .
In order to efficiently operate across a range of speeds , the shock waves have to be " tuned . "
An aircraft able to operate for extended periods at supersonic speeds has a potential range advantage over a similar design operating subsonically .
Most of the drag an aircraft sees while speeding up to supersonic speeds occurs just below the speed of sound , due to an aerodynamic effect known as wave drag .
An aircraft that can accelerate past this speed sees a significant drag decrease , and can fly supersonically with improved fuel economy .
However , due to the way lift is generated supersonically , the lift - to - drag ratio of the aircraft as a whole drops , leading to lower range , offsetting or overturning this advantage .
The key to having low supersonic drag is to properly shape the overall aircraft to be long and thin , and close to a " perfect " shape , the von Karman ogive or Sears - Haack body .
This has led to almost every supersonic cruising aircraft looking very similar to every other , with a very long and slender fuselage and large delta wings , cf .
SR-71 , Concorde , etc .
Although not ideal for passenger aircraft , this shaping is quite adaptable for bomber use .
HISTORY OF SUPERSONIC FLIGHT Section::::History of supersonic flight .
Aviation research during World War II led to the creation of the first rocket- and jet - powered aircraft .
Several claims of breaking the sound barrier during the war subsequently emerged .
However , the first recognized flight exceeding the speed of sound by a manned aircraft in controlled level flight was performed on October 14 , 1947 by the experimental Bell X-1 research rocket plane piloted by Charles " Chuck " Yeager .
The first production plane to break the sound barrier was an F-86 Canadair Sabre with the first ' supersonic ' woman pilot , Jacqueline Cochran , at the controls .
According to David Masters , the DFS 346 prototype captured in Germany by the Soviets , after being released from a B-29 at 32800 ft ( 10000 m ) , reached 683 mph ( 1100 km / h ) late in 1945 , which would have exceeded Mach 1 at that height .
The pilot in these flights was the German Wolfgang Ziese .
On August 21 , 1961 , a Douglas DC-8 - 43 ( registration N9604Z ) exceeded Mach 1 in a controlled dive during a test flight at Edwards Air Force Base .
The crew were William Magruder ( pilot ) , Paul Patten ( copilot ) , Joseph Tomich ( flight engineer ) , and Richard H. Edwards ( flight test engineer ) .
This was the first and only supersonic flight by a civilian airliner other than the Concorde or Tu-144 .
SEE ALSO
* Area rule
* Hypersonic speed * Transonic speed
* Sonic boom * Supersonic aircraft * Supersonic airfoils
* Vapor cone * Prandtl – Glauert singularity
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
" Can We Ever Fly Faster Speed of Sound " , October 1944 , Popular Science one of the earliest articles on shock waves and flying the speed of sound *
" Britain Goes Supersonic " , January 1946 , Popular Science 1946 article trying to explain supersonic flight to the general public * MathPages - The Speed of Sound * Supersonic sound pressure levels