OSBORNE HOUSE Osborne House is a former royal residence in East Cowes , Isle of Wight , United Kingdom .
The house was built between 1845 and 1851 for Queen Victoria and Prince Albert as a summer home and rural retreat .
Prince Albert designed the house himself in the style of an Italian Renaissance palazzo .
The builder was Thomas Cubitt , the London architect and builder whose company built the main façade of Buckingham Palace for the royal couple in 1847 .
An earlier smaller house on the site was demolished to make way for a new and far larger house , though the original entrance portico survives as the main gateway to the walled garden .
Queen Victoria died at Osborne House in January 1901 .
Following her death , the house became surplus to royal requirements and was given to the state , with a few rooms being retained as a private museum to Queen Victoria .
From 1903 until 1921 it was used as a junior officer training college for the Royal Navy , known as the Royal Naval College , Osborne .
In 1998 training programmes consolidated at the Britannia Royal Naval College , now at Dartmouth , thus vacating Osborne House .
The House is now open to the public for tours .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Queen Victoria and Prince Albert bought Osborne House on the Isle of Wight from Lady Isabella Blachford in October 1845 .
They wanted a home removed from the stresses of court life .
Queen Victoria had spent two holidays on the Isle of Wight as a young girl , when her mother , the then Duchess of Kent , rented Norris Castle , the estate next door to Osborne .
The setting of the three - storey Georgian house appealed to Queen Victoria and Prince Albert ; in particular , the views of the Solent reminded Albert of the Bay of Naples in Italy .
They soon realised that the house was too small for their needs .
They decided with advisors to replace the house with a new , larger residence .
The new Osborne House was built between 1845 and 1851 in the style of the Italian Renaissance , complete with two belvedere towers .
Prince Albert designed the house himself in conjunction with builder Thomas Cubitt , the London architect and builder whose company also built the main façade of Buckingham Palace .
The couple paid for much of the new house 's furnishings by the sale of the Royal Pavilion at Brighton .
The house 's original square wing was known as ' The Pavilion , ' containing the principal and royal apartments on the ground and first floors , respectively .
The principal apartments , particularly , hold reminders of Victoria 's dynastic links with the other European royal families .
The Billiard Room holds a massive porcelain vase that was a gift of the Russian Tsar .
The Billiard Room , Queen 's Dining Room , and the Drawing Room on the ground floor all express grandeur .
In marked contrast is the more homely and unassuming décor of the royal apartments on the first floor .
These include the Prince 's Dressing Room , the Queen 's Sitting Room , the Queen 's Bedroom , and the children 's nurseries .
Intended for private , domestic use , these rooms were made as comfortable as possible .
Both Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were determined to bring up their children in a natural and loving environment .
They allowed the royal children to visit their parents ' bedrooms frequently , at a time when children of aristocrats often lived at a remove from their parents in nurseries , joining them occasionally in public rooms , rather than in shared intimate spaces .
The ' main wing ' was added later : it contains the household accommodation and council and audience chambers .
The final addition to the house was a wing built between 1890 and 1891 .
This wing was designed by John Lockwood Kipling , father of the poet Rudyard Kipling .
On the ground floor , it includes the famous Durbar Room , named after an anglicised version of the Hindi word durbar , meaning court .
The Durbar Room was built for state functions ; it was decorated by Bhai Ram Singh in an elaborate and intricate style , and has a carpet from Agra .
It now holds gifts Queen Victoria received on her Golden and Diamond jubilees .
These include engraved silver and copper vases , Indian armour , and a model of an Indian palace .
The first floor of the new wing was for the sole use of Princess Beatrice and her family .
Beatrice was the Queen 's youngest daughter , and she lived near Victoria during her life .
Osborne House expresses numerous associations with the British Raj and India , housing a collection of paintings of Indian persons and scenes , painted at Queen Victoria 's request by Rudolf Swoboda .
These include depictions of Indians resident or visiting Britain in the 19th century , and scenes painted in India when Swoboda traveled there to create such works .
The royal family stayed at Osborne for lengthy periods each year : in the spring for Victoria 's birthday in May ; in July and August when they celebrated Albert 's birthday ; and just before Christmas .
In a break from the past , Queen Victoria and Prince Albert allowed photographers and painters to make works featuring their family in the grounds and in the house .
This was partly for their own enjoyment and partly as a form of public relations to demonstrate to the nation their character as a happy and devoted family .
Many thousands of prints of the royal family were sold to the public , which led Victoria to remark , " no Sovereign was ever more loved than I am ( I am bold enough to say ) .
" Writing to her daughter Victoria in 1858 about the gloominess of Windsor Castle , Queen Victoria stated , " I long for our cheerful and unpalacelike rooms at Osborne . "
In December 1861 , Prince Albert died at Windsor Castle .
During her long widowhood , Queen Victoria continued to visit Osborne House as one of her favourite homes .
In 1876 , as a tribute to Queen Victoria , the Government House of the colony ( now State ) of Victoria , Australia , was constructed as a copy of Osborne House .
GROUNDS Section::::Grounds .
The Prince Consort participated directly in the laying out of the estate , gardens and woodlands to prove his knowledge of forestry and landscaping .
At the more official royal residences , he had been overruled by the Commissioners of Woods and Forests , who had official responsibilities for the grounds .
Below the gardens on Osborne Bay was a private beach , where the Queen kept her own private bathing machine .
The grounds include a ' Swiss Cottage . '
The cottage was dismantled and brought piece by piece from Switzerland to Osborne where it was reassembled .
There , the royal children were encouraged to garden .
Each child was given a rectangular plot in which to grow fruit , vegetables and flowers .
They sold their produce to their father .
Prince Albert used this as a way to teach the basics of economics .
The children also learned to cook in the Swiss Cottage , which was equipped with a fully functioning kitchen .
Both parents saw this kind of education as a way of grounding their children in the activities of daily life shared by the people in the kingdom despite their royal status .
In 1859 Prince Albert designed a new and larger quadrangular stable block , which was built by Cubitts on the former cricket pitch .
The building is now Grade II * listed .
20TH CENTURY Section::::20th century .
Queen Victoria died at Osborne on 22 January 1901 with two generations of her family gathered around her .
Although Victoria had adored Osborne , her children were less attached to it .
Victoria 's will left strict instructions that Osborne was to stay within the family , but nobody wanted it , so the new King Edward VII presented it to the nation .
With the exception of Princess Beatrice and Princess Louise , who both retained houses on the estate , the rest of the royal family considered Osborne as something of an inaccessible white elephant .
The royal apartments on the upper floors of the pavilion wing , including the late Queen 's bedroom , were turned into a private museum accessible only to the royal family .
ROYAL NAVAL COLLEGE , 1903–1921 Section::::Royal Naval College , 1903–1921 .
In 1903 , the new stable block became a junior officer training college for the Royal Navy known as the Royal Naval College , Osborne .
Initial training began at about the age of 13 , and after two years studies were continued at the Royal Naval College , Dartmouth .
The college closed in 1921 , with the last students leaving on 9 April 1921 .
The traditions of Osborne helped inspire the operations of the Nautical College Pangbourne , after its founding in 1917 .
The NCP has now become Pangbourne College , but its students continue the tradition of wearing naval uniform , and maintaining certain naval traditions .
Former students of Osborne included Queen Victoria 's great - grandsons , the future Edward VIII and George VI , and their younger brother George , Duke of Kent .
Another well - known alumnus of the college was Jack Llewelyn Davies , one of the five Llewelyn Davies boys who inspired J. M. Barrie 's Peter Pan .
The case of George Archer - Shee from 1908 , who was expelled from Osborne after being falsely accused of stealing a 5-shilling postal order , inspired the play The Winslow Boy .
In some continuity with the former Royal Naval College is the nearby T.S. Osborne Sea Cadet unit .
OFFICERS ' CONVALESCENT HOME
Section::::Officers ' convalescent home .
During World War I , the secondary wings of Osborne House were used as an officers ' convalescent home — Robert Graves and A. A. Milne were two famous patients .
Known as King Edward VII Retirement Home for Officers , this later included convalescents from military and civil service backgrounds , until the late 1990s for retired officers of the British Armed Services .
OSBORNE TODAY Section::::Osborne today .
Today , Osborne House is under the care of English Heritage and is open to the public .
The former Naval College 's cricket pavilion was converted into a holiday cottage in 2004 .
Since 2005 , the house has occasionally hosted picnic - style concerts on the lawn outside the main house .
English Heritage has a management contract to run Osborne House as a historic tourist attraction .
The house 's ownership since 1971 has been held in a private trust connected to Historic Royal Palaces , the agency covering , among others , Hampton Court Palace and the Tower of London .
Queen Victoria 's private beach at Osborne , including her personal bathing machine , was opened to the public for the first time in July 2012 following an extensive restoration programme .
On 29 July 2006 , Irish vocal pop band Westlife held a concert for their Face to Face Tour supporting their album Face to Face .
BOOKS AND ARTICLES
*
Osborne English heritage guide book – printed by colour house
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Osborne House information at English Heritage
* Old pictures of Osborne House and area
* 7/20/1907 ; Osborne College : An English Naval School ( purchase required ) * Osborne House information for tourists