MASON – DIXON LINE
The Mason – Dixon line , also called the Mason and Dixon line or Mason 's and Dixon 's line , was surveyed between 1763 and 1767 by Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon in the resolution of a border dispute involving Maryland , Pennsylvania , and Delaware in Colonial America .
It is still a demarcation line among four U.S. states , forming part of the borders of Pennsylvania , Maryland , Delaware , and West Virginia ( originally part of Virginia before 1863 ) .
Later it became known as the border between the Northern United States and the Southern United States .
Before the Missouri Compromise , the line ( west of Delaware ) marked the northern limit of slavery in the United States .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Maryland 's charter of 1632 granted the Calverts land north of the entire length of the Potomac River up to the 40th parallel .
A problem arose when Charles II granted a charter for Pennsylvania in 1681 .
The grant defined Pennsylvania 's southern border as identical to Maryland 's northern border , but described it differently , as Charles relied on an inaccurate map .
The terms of the grant clearly indicate that Charles II and William Penn believed the 40th parallel would intersect the Twelve - Mile Circle around New Castle , Delaware , when in fact it falls north of the original boundaries of the City of Philadelphia , the site of which Penn had already selected for his colony 's capital city .
Negotiations ensued after the problem was discovered in 1681 .
A compromise proposed by Charles II in 1682 , which might have resolved the issue , was undermined by Penn receiving the additional grant of the " Three Lower Counties " along Delaware Bay , which later became the Delaware Colony , a satellite of Pennsylvania .
Maryland considered these lands part of its original grant .
The conflict became more of an issue when settlement extended into the interior of the colonies .
In 1732 the proprietary governor of Maryland , Charles Calvert , 5th Baron Baltimore , signed a provisional agreement with William Penn 's sons , which drew a line somewhere in between and renounced the Calvert claim to Delaware .
But later , Lord Baltimore claimed that the document he had signed did not contain the terms he had agreed to , and refused to put the agreement into effect .
Beginning in the mid-1730s , violence erupted between settlers claiming various loyalties to Maryland and Pennsylvania .
The border conflict would be known as Cresap 's War .
Progress was made after a Court of Chancery ruling affirming the 1732 agreement , but the issue remained unresolved until Frederick Calvert , 6th Baron Baltimore ceased contesting the claims on the Maryland side and accepted the earlier agreements .
Maryland 's border with Delaware was to be based on the Transpeninsular Line and the Twelve - Mile Circle around New Castle .
The Pennsylvania – Maryland border was defined as the line of latitude south of the southernmost house in Philadelphia ( on what is today South Street ) .
As part of the settlement , the Penns and Calverts commissioned the English team of Charles Mason and Jeremiah Dixon to survey the newly established boundaries between the Province of Pennsylvania , the Province of Maryland , and Delaware Colony .
In 1779 , Pennsylvania and Virginia agreed " To extend Mason 's and Dixon 's line , due west , five degrees of longitude , to be computed from the river Delaware , for the southern boundary of Pennsylvania , and that a meridian , drawn from the western extremity thereof to the northern limit of the said state , be the western boundary of Pennsylvania for ever . " After Pennsylvania abolished slavery in 1781 , the western part of this line and the Ohio River became a border between slave and free states , with Delaware retaining slavery until the Thirteenth Amendment was ratified in 1865 .
GEOGRAPHY OF THE LINE Section::::Geography of the line .
Mason 's and Dixon 's actual survey line began to the south of Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , and extended from a benchmark east to the Delaware River and west to what was then the boundary with western Virginia .
The surveyors also fixed the boundary between Delaware and Pennsylvania and the approximately north - south portion of the boundary between Delaware and Maryland .
Most of the Delaware –
Pennsylvania boundary is an arc , and the Delaware –
Maryland boundary does not run truly north - south because it was intended to bisect the Delmarva Peninsula rather than follow a meridian .
The Maryland
– Pennsylvania boundary is an east – west line with an approximate mean latitude of 39 ° 43′20″ N
( Datum WGS 84 ) .
In reality , the east – west Mason – Dixon line is not a true line in the geometric sense , but is instead a series of many adjoining line segments , following a path between latitude 39 ° 43′15″ N and 39 ° 43′23″ N.
The surveyors also extended the boundary line west of Maryland 's western boundary , into territory that was still in dispute between Pennsylvania and Virginia , though this was contrary to their original charter .
Mason and Dixon 's survey was finished on October 9 , 1767 , about east of what is now Pennsylvania 's southwest corner .
In 1774 , commissioners from Pennsylvania and Virginia met to negotiate their boundary , which at the time involved Pennsylvania 's southern border west of Maryland and its entire western border .
Both sides agreed that Pennsylvania 's grant made its western border a tracing of the course of the Delaware River , displaced five degrees to the west .
And both sides thought this would place Fort Pitt in Virginia territory ( in fact it would not have ) .
With that in mind , the governor of Pennsylvania argued that , despite the agreement reached with Maryland , Pennsylvania 's southern border west of Maryland was still the 39th parallel , about south of the Mason – Dixon line .
Negotiations continued for five years , with a series of proposed lines .
In the end , a compromise was reached : the Mason – Dixon line would be extended west to a point five degrees west of the Delaware River .
To compensate Pennsylvania for the claimed territory lost , its western boundary would be run due north rather than copying the course of the Delaware River .
The Mason – Dixon line was marked by stones every mile and " crownstones " every , using stone shipped from England .
The Maryland side says " ( M ) " and the Delaware and Pennsylvania sides say " ( P ) " .
Crownstones include the two coats of arms .
Today , while a number of the original stones are missing or buried , many are still visible , resting on public land and protected by iron cages .
Mason and Dixon confirmed earlier survey work , which delineated Delaware 's southern boundary from the Atlantic Ocean to the " Middle Point " stone ( along what is today known as the Transpeninsular Line ) .
They proceeded nearly due north from this , to the Pennsylvania border .
Later , the line was marked in places by additional benchmarks and survey markers .
The lines have been resurveyed several times over the centuries without substantive changes to Mason 's and Dixon 's work .
The stones may be a few , to a few hundred , feet east or west of the point Mason and Dixon thought they were : in any event , the line drawn from stone to stone forms the legal boundary .
According to Dave Doyle at the National Geodetic Survey , part of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , the common corner of Pennsylvania , Maryland , and Delaware , at The Wedge is marked by Boundary Monument # 87 .
The marker " MDP Corner " dates from 1935 and is offset on purpose .
Doyle said the Maryland – Pennsylvania Mason – Dixon line is exactly : and Boundary Monument # 87 is on that parallel , at : Visitors to the tripoint are strongly encouraged to first obtain permission from the nearest landowner , or use the path from the arc corner monument , which is bordered by Delaware parkland most of the way , and Pennsylvania parkland the entire way .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The line was established to end a boundary dispute between the British colonies of Maryland and Pennsylvania / Delaware .
Maryland had been granted the territory north of the Potomac River up to the fortieth parallel .
Pennsylvania 's grant defined the colony 's southern boundary as following a 12-mile ( radius ) circle ( ) counter - clockwise from the Delaware River until it hit " the beginning of the fortieth degree of Northern latitude .
" From there the boundary was to follow the fortieth parallel due west for five degrees of longitude .
But the fortieth parallel does not in fact intersect the 12-mile circle , instead lying significantly farther north .
Thus Pennsylvania 's southern boundary as defined in its charter was contradictory and unclear .
The most serious problem was that the Maryland claim would put Philadelphia , the major city in Pennsylvania , within Maryland .
The dispute was peacefully resolved in 1767 when the boundary was fixed as follows : * Between Pennsylvania and Maryland :
* The parallel ( latitude line )
south of the then southernmost point in Philadelphia , measured to be at about 39 ° 43′ N and agreed upon as the Maryland – Pennsylvania line .
* Between Delaware and Maryland : * The existing east – west transpeninsular line from the Atlantic Ocean to the Chesapeake Bay , as far as its midpoint from the Atlantic .
* A 12-mile ( radius ) circle ( ) around the city of New Castle , Delaware .
* A " tangent line " connecting the midpoint of the transpeninsular line to the western side of the 12-mile circle .
* A " north line " along the meridian ( line of longitude ) from the tangent point to the Maryland Pennsylvania border .
* Should any land within the 12-mile circle fall west of the north line , it would remain part of Delaware .
( This was indeed the case , and this border is the " arc line " . )
The disputants engaged an expert British team , astronomer Charles Mason and surveyor Jeremiah Dixon , to survey what became known as the Mason – Dixon line .
It cost the Calverts of Maryland and the Penns of Pennsylvania £ 3,512 9/- ( 9 shillings 0 pence ) to have surveyed with such accuracy .
To them the money was well spent , for in a new country there was no other way of establishing ownership .
The Mason – Dixon line is made up of four segments corresponding to the terms of the settlement : * the tangent line
* the north line * the arc line *
the 39 ° 43′ N parallel
The most difficult task was fixing the tangent line , as they had to confirm the accuracy of the transpeninsular line midpoint and the 12-mile circle , determine the tangent point along the circle , and then actually survey and monument the border .
They then surveyed the north and arc lines .
They did this work between 1763 and 1767 .
This actually left a small wedge of land in dispute between Delaware and Pennsylvania until 1921 .
In April 1765 , Mason and Dixon began their survey of the more famous Maryland – Pennsylvania line .
They were commissioned to run it for a distance of five degrees of longitude west from the Delaware River , fixing the western boundary of Pennsylvania ( see the entry for Yohogania County ) .
However , in October 1767 , at Dunkard Creek near Mount Morris , Pennsylvania , nearly west of the Delaware , their Iroquois guides refused to go any further , having reached the border of their lands with the Lenape , with whom they were engaged in hostilities .
As such the group was forced to quit , and on October 11 , they made their final observations , from their starting point .
In 1784 , surveyors David Rittenhouse and Andrew Ellicott and their crew completed the survey of the Mason – Dixon line to the southwest corner of Pennsylvania , five degrees from the Delaware River .
Other surveyors continued west to the Ohio River .
The section of the line between the southwestern corner of Pennsylvania and the river is the county line between Marshall and Wetzel counties , West Virginia .
The Mason – Dixon line has been resurveyed three times : in 1849 , 1900 , and in the 1960s .
On November 14 , 1963 , during the bicentennial of the Mason – Dixon line , U.S. President John F. Kennedy opened a newly completed section of Interstate 95 where it crossed the Maryland – Delaware border .
It was one of his last public appearances before his assassination in Dallas , Texas .
The Delaware Turnpike and the Maryland portion of the new road were later designated as the John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway .
SYSTEMATIC ERRORS AND EXPERIMENTS
TO WEIGH
THE EARTH Section::::Systematic errors and experiments to weigh the Earth .
Mason and Dixon could only do the work as accurately as they did due to the work of Nevil Maskelyne , some of whose instruments they used .
There was keen interest in their work and much communication between the surveyors , Maskelyne and other members of the British Scientific establishment in the Royal Society in Britain , notably Henry Cavendish .
During such survey work , it is normal to survey from point to point along the line and then survey back to the starting point , where if there were no errors the origin and re - surveyed position would coincide .
Normally the return errors would be random – i.e. the return survey errors compared to the intermediate points back to the start point would be spatially randomly distributed around the start point .
Mason and Dixon found that there were larger than expected systematic errors , i.e. non - random errors , that led the return survey consistently being in one direction away from the starting point .
When this information got back to the Royal Society members , Henry Cavendish realised that this may have been due to the gravitational pull of the Allegheny Mountains deflecting the theodolite plumb - bobs and spirit levels .
Maskelyne then proposed measuring the gravitational force causing this deflection induced by the pull of a nearby mountain upon a plumb - bob in 1772 and sent Mason ( who had returned to England ) on a site survey through central England and Scotland to find a suitable location during the summer of 1773 .
Mason selected Schiehallion at which to conduct what became known as the Schiehallion experiment , which was carried out primarily by Maskelyne and determined the density of the Scottish mountain .
Several years later Cavendish used a very sensitive torsion balance to carry out the Cavendish experiment and determine the average density of Earth .
IN CULTURE NAME Section::::In culture .
Section::::Name .
Mason and Dixon likely never heard the phrase , " Mason – Dixon line " .
The official report on the survey , issued in 1768 , did not even mention their names .
While the term was used occasionally in the decades following the survey , it came into popular use when the Missouri Compromise named " Mason and Dixon 's line " as part of the boundary between slave territory and free territory .
SYMBOLISM Section::::Symbolism .
In popular usage to people from the Northern United States , the Mason – Dixon line symbolizes a cultural boundary between the North and the South ( Dixie ) .
However , for many people who identify as Southern , Maryland is not considered a Southern state , leading to confusion over terminology ( for more on Maryland 's position as southern or northern , see the Region section of the article on Dixie ) .
Originally " Mason and Dixon 's Line " referred to the border between Pennsylvania and Maryland .
After Pennsylvania abolished slavery , it served as a demarcation line for the legality of slavery .
That demarcation did not extend beyond Pennsylvania because Delaware , then a slave state , extended north and east of the boundary .
Also lying north and east of the boundary was New Jersey , where slavery was formally abolished in 1846 , but former slaves continued to be " apprenticed " to their masters until the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1865 .
The Missouri Compromise line ( Parallel 36 ° 30′ north ) had a much clearer geographic connection to slavery in the United States leading up to the Civil War .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Popular culture contains a multitude of references to the Mason – Dixon line as a general geographic division , or character names evoking it , although a minority of those specifically relate to the line itself .
FILM
* Mason " The Line " Dixon is a leading character in Rocky Balboa ( 2006 ) , the sixth film in the Rocky franchise , directed by and starring Sylvester Stallone .
Played by real - life boxer Antonio Tarver , Dixon is the current World Heavyweight Boxing Champion who is ridiculed for having never fought a real contender , and who thus agrees to an exhibition fight against the nearly 60-year - old Rocky Balboa .
*
In Attack of the Killer Tomatoes , Mason Dixon is the leader of a government task force dedicated to stopping the worldwide crisis when tomatoes turn malignant .
CARTOONS Section::::Cartoons .
The line makes several appearances in the 1953 Bugs Bunny cartoon " Southern Fried Rabbit " .
The line separates the drought affected North from which the " Yankee " Bugs leaves in search of carrots in the green lands of the " Dixie " south , the latter being guarded by Yosemite Sam .
LITERATURE
*
In the novel People 's Choice by Jeff Greenfield , the character of W. Dixon Mason is an African - American preacher who plays a major role in determining the next U.S. President when the elected candidate dies between the popular election and the Electoral College formal vote .
* Mason & Dixon ( 1997 ) is the title of a novel by American author Thomas Pynchon .
The novel meanders widely through the lives of Mason and Dixon , traditional American history , and other themes such as hollow earth theory , geomancy , deism , andperhapsalien abduction .
MUSIC
* The 1918 song , " Rock - a - Bye
Your Baby with a Dixie Melody " , written by Jean Schwartz and popularized by Al Jolson , includes the lyric Just hang my cradle ,
Mammy mine/
Right on that Mason – Dixon Line .
* A small group of musicians from Paul Whiteman 's orchestra led by C melody saxophonist Frank Trumbauer and including Bix Beiderbecke recorded two sides for Columbia on May 15 , 1929 titled , " Alabammy Snow " and " What A Day ! "
under the pseudonym , " Mason – Dixon Orchestra " .
It is probable that they chose this pseudonym because the catalog number of the record would be 1861-D , 1861 being the year that the American Civil War began .
*
The lyric " First to cross the Mason – Dixon line " features in the opening verse of the song
" I 've done it again " ( composers Marianne Faithfull / Barry Reynolds ) on Grace Jones ' 1981 album Nightclubbing .
Nightclubbing ( Grace Jones album )
* The Mason – Dixon line provides the main narrative for the song " Sailing to Philadelphia " ( featuring James Taylor ) by British singer - songwriter and guitarist Mark Knopfler .
* The 1955 song , " Hey , Porter " , by Johnny Cash makes reference to the Mason –
Dixon line in the line
, How much longer will it be until we cross that Mason - Dixon line ?
*
The Shires 2015 song " State Lines " includes the lyrics "
Like when you roll your eyes like a cool new Yorker , Driving across the Mason – Dixon line " * The Long Ryders 1985 song " Mason - Dixon line " from their third album " State of our union " refers to the line .
SPORTS
*
In the regional baseball rivalry between the New York Yankees and the Boston Red Sox , the theoretical border that separates population centers that are majority - Red Sox fans from majority - Yankees fans in Connecticut is sometimes called the " Munson - Nixon Line " , in a reference to the Mason – Dixon line .
Credited to Steve Rushin of Sports Illustrated , the line is named for famed Yankee catcher Thurman Munson and Red Sox
right fielder Trot Nixon .
SEE ALSO * Collins – Valentine line , the boundary between the province of Quebec and the states of New York and Vermont * Delaware Boundary Markers
* Penn – Calvert boundary dispute
* Mason and Dixon Survey Terminal Point
* Star Gazers ' Stone * Tofu Curtain
* Weißwurstäquator , a similar border line in Germany between the Northern and Southern areas of the country .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes
Further reading
* Danson , Edwin .
Drawing the Line : How Mason and Dixon Surveyed the Most Famous Border in America .
Wiley .
* Ecenbarger , Bill .
Walkin ' the Line : A Journey from Past to Present Along the Mason – Dixon .
M. Evans .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Mason and Dixon Line Preservation Partnership Collection of historical articles and pictures
* The Evolution of the Mason and Dixon Line Facsimile copy of this 1902 text available on - line at Penn State 's Digital Bookshelf * Mason and Dixon in Mill Creek , Friends of White Clay Creek State Park * University of North Carolina : Southern Things * The Historical Society of Pennsylvania ( 1855 )