NORTH BY NORTHWEST North by Northwest is a 1959 American thriller film directed by Alfred Hitchcock and starring Cary Grant , Eva Marie Saint , and James Mason .
The screenplay was by Ernest Lehman , who wanted to write " the Hitchcock picture to end all Hitchcock pictures " .
North by Northwest is a tale of mistaken identity , with an innocent man pursued across the United States by agents of a mysterious organization trying to prevent him from blocking their plan to smuggle out microfilm which contains government secrets .
This is one of several Hitchcock films which feature a music score by Bernard Herrmann and an opening title sequence by graphic designer Saul Bass , and it is generally cited as the first to feature extended use of kinetic typography in its opening credits .
North by Northwest is listed among the canonical Hitchcock films of the 1950s and is often listed among the greatest films of all time .
It was selected in 1995 for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
It is 1958 .
At a New York City hotel bar , two thugs looking for " George Kaplan " see a waiter calling his name ; at the same time advertising executive Roger Thornhill summons the waiter ( to help send a telegram to his mother ) .
Thornhill is then mistaken for " George Kaplan " and is kidnapped .
Thornhill is brought to the Long Island estate of Lester Townsend and is interrogated by spy Phillip Vandamm .
Despite Thornhill denying he is George Kaplan , Vandamm thinks he is lying and has his henchman Leonard arrange Thornhill 's death in a staged drunken driving accident .
Thornhill miraculously manages to steer away from danger but is soon arrested for driving under the influence and is taken to the Glen Cove , New York police station .
The next morning , Thornhill tries but fails to convince his mother and the police that he had been kidnapped and forcibly inebriated .
Journeying to the scene of the crime with police , a woman at Townsend 's home , presumed to be Mrs. Townsend , says he showed up drunk at her dinner party .
She also informs them that Townsend is a United Nations diplomat .
While searching Kaplan 's hotel room with his mother , Thornhill answers a phone call from the thugs who are in the hotel lobby .
He escapes and visits the U.N. General Assembly building to meet Townsend .
He discovers that Townsend is not the man he met on Long Island , and that Townsend is a widower .
As Thornhill questions Townsend , one of the thugs throws a knife , hitting Townsend in the back , killing him .
Thornhill catches Townsend as he falls and grabs the knife , giving the appearance that he murdered Townsend .
A nearby photographer captures the crime and Thornhill flees .
Thornhill attempts to find the real Kaplan .
Meanwhile , a government intelligence agency in Washington , D.C. read the news and realize that Thornhill has been mistaken for " George Kaplan " , a fictional persona created by the agency to thwart Vandamm .
However , Thornhill is not rescued for fear of compromising their operation .
Thornhill sneaks onto the 20th Century Limited train .
He meets Eve Kendall , who hides him from the police .
Kendall and Thornhill establish a relationship even though Kendall , unbeknownst to Thornhill , is actually working with Vandamm and his thugs .
In Chicago , Kendall tells Thornhill she has arranged a meeting with Kaplan at an isolated bus stop .
Thornhill waits at the bus stop , but Kaplan does not show up .
He is then attacked by a crop duster plane .
After unsuccessfully trying to hide in the fields , he steps in front of a speeding tank truck and the airplane crashes into it , leaving Thornhill to escape in a stolen pickup truck when traffic stops .
When he reaches Kaplan 's hotel in Chicago , he discovers that Kaplan had checked out and left before Kendall said she talked to him on the phone .
Thornhill goes to her room and confronts her , but she leaves .
He tracks her to an art auction , where he finds Vandamm and his thugs .
Vandamm purchases a Mexican Purépecha statue and leaves his thugs to deal with Thornhill .
To engineer an escape from the thugs , Thornhill disrupts the auction by acting erratically ; the police are summoned and take him away .
When he tries to tell them he is the fugitive murderer , the police release him to the government agency 's chief Professor ( Leo G. Carroll ) .
The Professor reveals that Kaplan does not exist and was invented to distract Vandamm from the real government agent : Kendall .
Thornhill agrees to help maintain her cover .
At the Mount Rushmore visitor center , Thornhill ( as Kaplan ) negotiates Vandamm 's turnover of Kendall for her prosecution as a spy .
When " Kaplan " confronts Kendall , she shoots him " fatally " with a handgun ( loaded with blanks ) and flees .
Thornhill and Kendall meet in a forest .
Thornhill discovers Kendall must depart with Vandamm and Leonard on a plane .
When Thornhill tries to dissuade her from going , he is knocked unconscious and locked in a hospital room .
Thornhill escapes the Professor 's custody , and goes to Vandamm 's house to rescue Kendall .
At the house , Thornhill overhears that the sculpture holds microfilm , and that Leonard discovered that the gun used by Kendall to kill Thornhill was filled with blanks .
Vandamm indicates that he will kill Kendall during the flight .
Thornhill warns her with a surreptitious note .
Vandamm , Leonard and Kendall depart the house to board the plane .
Thornhill attempts to follow , but is stopped by Anna , the housekeeper , who holds him at bay with a gun — until he realizes it is the one loaded only with blanks .
As Vandamm is boarding the plane , Kendall takes the sculpture and runs to the pursuing Thornhill .
They flee to the top of Mount Rushmore .
As they begin to climb down the mountain , they are pursued by Vandamm 's two thugs , Leonard and Valerian .
After a harrowing chase , Valerian falls to his death , while Leonard is fatally shot by a park ranger .
Later , Thornhill invites Kendall , now the new Mrs. Thornhill , onto the upper berth of a train , which then , suggestively , enters a tunnel .
CAST * Cary Grant as Roger Thornhill
* Eva Marie Saint as Eve Kendall
* James Mason as Phillip Vandamm * Jessie Royce Landis as Clara Thornhill
* Leo G. Carroll as The Professor
* Josephine Hutchinson as " Mrs. Townsend " * Philip Ober as Lester Townsend * Martin Landau as Leonard
* Adam Williams as Valerian * Edward Platt as Victor Larrabee
* Robert Ellenstein as Licht * Les Tremayne as Auctioneer
* Philip Coolidge as Dr. Cross * Patrick McVey as Sergeant Flamm * Edward Binns as Captain Junket * Ken Lynch as Charlie Section::::Cast .
Uncredited cast * Maudie Prickett as Elsie the Maid * Malcolm Atterbury as Man at the crossroads * Tol Avery as State Police Detective
* John Beradino as Sergeant Emile Klinger * Ned Glass as Ticket Seller * Robert Lieber as Man in Chicago Train Station
* Doreen Lang as Maggie ,
Roger 's Secretary * Nora Marlowe as Anna * Ralph Reed as Bellboy * Olan Soule as Assistant Auctioneer * Frank Wilcox as Herman Weitner * Robert Shayne as Larry Wade * Sara Berner as Telephone Operator ( voice )
Hitchcock 's cameo appearances are a signature occurrence in most of his films .
In North by Northwest , he is seen getting a bus door slammed in his face , just as his credit is appearing on the screen .
There has been some speculation as to whether he made one of his rare second appearances , this time at around the 44-minute mark in drag as a woman in a turquoise dress on the train .
In fact , the woman was played by Jesslyn Fax , who went on to appear in many episodes of Alfred Hitchcock Presents .
She had previously appeared in Rear Window .
MGM wanted Cyd Charisse for the role of Eve Kendall .
Hitchcock stood by his choice of Eva Marie Saint .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
John Russell Taylor 's biography Hitch :
The Life and Times of Alfred Hitchcock ( 1978 ) suggests that the story originated after a spell of writer 's block during the scripting of another film project :
Alfred Hitchcock had agreed to do a film for MGM and they had chosen an adaptation of the novel The Wreck of the Mary Deare by Hammond Innes .
Composer Bernard Herrmann had recommended that Hitchcock work with his friend Ernest Lehman .
After a couple of weeks , Lehman offered to quit saying he did n't know what to do with the story .
Hitchcock told him they got along great together
and they would just write something else .
Lehman said that he wanted to make the ultimate Hitchcock film .
Hitchcock thought for a moment then said he had always wanted to do a chase across Mount Rushmore .
Lehman and Hitchcock spitballed more ideas : a murder at the United Nations Headquarters ; a murder at a car plant in Detroit ; a final showdown in Alaska .
Eventually they settled on the U.N. murder for the opening and the chase across Mount Rushmore for the climax .
For the central idea , Hitchcock remembered something an American journalist had told him about spies creating a fake agent as a decoy .
Perhaps their hero could be mistaken for this fictitious agent and end up on the run .
They bought the idea from the journalist for $ 10,000 .
Lehman repeated this story in the documentary that accompanied the 2001 DVD release of the film .
Screenwriter William Goldman insists in Which Lie Did I Tell ?
( 2000 )
that it was Lehman who created North by Northwest and that many of Hitchcock 's ideas were not used .
Hitchcock had the idea of the hero being stranded in the middle of nowhere , but suggested that the villains try to kill him with a tornado .
Lehman responded , " but they 're trying to kill him .
How are they going to work up a cyclone ? "
Then , as he told an interviewer , " I just ca n't tell you who said what to whom , but somewhere during that afternoon , the cyclone in the sky became the crop - duster plane . "
In fact , Hitchcock had been working on the story for nearly nine years prior to meeting Lehman .
Otis C. Guernsey was the American journalist who had the idea which influenced Hitchcock , inspired by a true story during World War II when British Intelligence obtained a dead body , invented a fictitious officer who was carrying secret papers , and arranged for the body and misleading papers to be discovered by the Germans as a disinformation exercise called Operation Mincemeat .
Guernsey turned his idea into a story about an American salesman who travels to the Middle East and is mistaken for a fictitious agent , becoming " saddled with a romantic and dangerous identity . "
Guernsey admitted that his treatment was full of " corn " and " lacking logic " , and he urged Hitchcock to do what he liked with the story .
Hitchcock bought the 60 pages for $ 10,000 .
Hitchcock often told journalists of an idea that he had about Cary Grant hiding from the villains inside Abraham Lincoln 's nose and being given away when he sneezes .
He speculated that the film could be called " The Man in Lincoln 's Nose " ( Lehman 's version is that it was " The Man on Lincoln 's Nose " ) or even " The Man who Sneezed in Lincoln 's Nose " .
Hitchcock sat on the idea , waiting for the right screenwriter to develop it .
The original traveling salesman character had been suited to James Stewart , but Lehman changed it to a Madison Avenue advertising executive , a position which he had formerly held .
In an interview in the book Screenwriters on Screenwriting ( 1995 ) , Lehman stated that he had already written much of the screenplay before coming up with critical elements of the climax .
This was the only Hitchcock film released by Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer .
It is currently owned by Turner Entertainment , which owns the pre-1986 MGM film library .
Production costs on North by Northwest were seriously escalated when a delay in filming put Cary Grant into the penalty phase of his contract , resulting in an additional $ 5,000 per day in fees for him before shooting even began .
FILMING Section::::Filming .
At Hitchcock 's insistence , the film was made in Paramount 's VistaVision widescreen process ; only two VistaVision films were made at MGM , the other being High Society .
The scene of Cary Grant going to the United Nations in New York was filmed illicitly because UN authorities denied permission to film on or near its property , after reviewing the script .
After two failed attempts to get the required shots , Hitchcock had Grant pull up in a taxicab right outside the general assembly building while a hidden camera crew filmed him exiting the vehicle and walking across the plaza .
The crop - duster sequence was meant to take place in northern Indiana but was shot on location on Garces Highway ( 155 ) near the towns of Wasco and Delano , north of Bakersfield in Kern County , California .
The aircraft flying in the aerial chase scene is a Naval Aircraft Factory N3N Canary , better known as the " Yellow Peril , " a World War II Navy primary trainer sometimes converted for crop - dusting .
The aircraft that hits the truck and explodes is a wartime Stearman Boeing Model 75 trainer , and many of these were also used for agricultural purposes through the 1970s .
The plane was piloted by Bob Coe , a crop - duster from Wasco .
Hitchcock placed replicas of square Indiana highway signs in the scene .
The British film magazine Empire ranked the crop - duster scene as the " greatest movie moment " of all time in its August 2009 issue .
SET DESIGN Section::::Set design .
The house near the end of the film was not real .
Hitchcock asked the set designers to make the set resemble a house by Frank Lloyd Wright , the most popular architect in America at the time , using the materials , form and interiors associated with him .
The set was built in Culver City , California , where MGM 's studios were located .
House exteriors were matte paintings .
COSTUMING Section::::Costuming .
A panel of fashion experts convened by GQ in 2006 said the gray suit worn by Cary Grant throughout almost the entire film was the best suit in film history , and the most influential on men 's style , stating that it has since been copied for Tom Cruise 's character in Collateral and Ben Affleck 's character in Paycheck .
This sentiment has been echoed by writer Todd McEwen , who called it " gorgeous " , and wrote a short story " Cary Grant 's Suit " which recounts the film 's plot from the viewpoint of the suit .
There is some disagreement as to who tailored the suit ; according to Vanity Fair magazine , it was Norton & Sons of London , although according to The Independent it was Quintino of Beverly Hills .
Eva Marie Saint 's wardrobe for the film was originally entirely chosen by MGM .
Hitchcock disliked MGM 's selections and the actress and director went to Bergdorf Goodman in New York to select what she would wear .
EDITING AND POST - PRODUCTION
Section::::Editing and post - production .
In François Truffaut 's book - length interview , Hitchcock / Truffaut ( 1967 ) , Hitchcock said that MGM wanted North by Northwest cut by 15 minutes so the film 's length would run under two hours .
Hitchcock had his agent check his contract , learned that he had absolute control over the final cut , and refused .
One of Eva Marie Saint 's lines in the dining - car seduction scene was redubbed .
She originally said " I never make love on an empty stomach " , but it was changed in post - production to " I never discuss love on an empty stomach " , as the censors considered the original version too risqué .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film opened in 1959 with a two - week run at Radio City Music Hall and the film had a successful gross of $ 404,056 for that period .
One trailer for North by Northwest features Hitchcock presenting himself as the owner of Alfred Hitchcock Travel Agency and telling the viewer he has made a motion picture to advertise these wonderful vacation stops .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
North by Northwest was released on the Blu - ray Disc format in the United States on November 3 , 2009 by Warner Bros. with a 1080p VC-1 encoding .
This release is a special 50th - anniversary edition , restored and remastered from original VistaVision elements .
A DVD edition was also released .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
During its two - week run at Radio City Music Hall , the film grossed $ 404,056 , setting a record in that theater 's non - holiday gross .
According to MGM records the film earned $ 5,740,000 in the US and Canada and $ 4.1 million elsewhere , resulting in a profit of $ 837,000 .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
North by Northwest currently holds a 99 % approval rating on the review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , based on 71 reviews .
The site states the critical consensus as , " Gripping , suspenseful and visually iconic , this late - period Hitchcock classic laid the groundwork for countless action thrillers to follow .
" The film ranks at number 98 in Empire magazine 's list of the 500 Greatest Films of All Time .
The Writers Guild of America ranked the screenplay No . 21 on its list of 101 Greatest Screenplays ever written .
It is ranked the 40th - greatest American film by the American Film Institute .
Time magazine called the film " smoothly troweled and thoroughly entertaining . "
A. H. Weiler of The New York Times made it a " Critic 's Pick " and said it was the " year 's most scenic , intriguing and merriest chase " ; Weiler complimented the two leads :
Cary Grant , a veteran member of the Hitchcock acting varsity , was never more at home than in this role of the advertising - man - on - the - lam .
He handles the grimaces , the surprised look , the quick smile , … and all the derring - do with professional aplomb and grace ,
In casting Eva Marie Saint as his romantic vis - à - vis , Mr. Hitchcock has plumbed some talents not shown by the actress heretofore .
Although she is seemingly a hard , designing type , she also emerges both the sweet heroine and a glamorous charmer .
Film critic Charles Champlin saw the film as an " anthology of typical Hitchcockian situations " , and was particularly taken by the scene and suspense in which Grant 's character avoids death when attacked by a crop - dusting plane in the cornfields , which he believed was representative of Hitchcock 's finest work .
The London edition of Time Out magazine , reviewing the film nearly a half - century after its initial release , commented : Fifty years on , you could say that Hitchcock 's sleek , wry , paranoid thriller caught the zeitgeist perfectly : Cold War shadiness , secret agents of power , urbane modernism , the ant - like bustle of city life , and a hint of dread behind the sharp suits of affluence .
Cary Grant 's Roger Thornhill , the film 's sharply dressed ad exec who is sucked into a vortex of mistaken identity , certainly would n't be out of place in Mad Men .
But there 's nothing dated about this perfect storm of talent , from Hitchcock and Grant to writer Ernest Lehman ( Sweet Smell of Success ) , co - stars James Mason and Eva Marie Saint , composer Bernard Herrmann and even designer Saul Bass , whose opening - credits sequence still manages to send a shiver down the spine .
Author and journalist Nick Clooney praised Lehman 's original story and sophisticated dialogue , calling the film " certainly Alfred Hitchcock 's most stylish thriller , if not his best " .
AWARDS RECEPTION
Section::::Awards reception .
North by Northwest was nominated for three Academy Awards — for Best Film Editing ( George Tomasini ) , Best Art Direction – Set Decoration , Color ( William A. Horning , Robert F. Boyle , Merrill Pye , Henry Grace , Frank McKelvy ) , and Best Original Screenplay (
Ernest Lehman)—at the 32nd Academy Awards ceremony .
Two of the three awards went instead to Ben - Hur , and the other went to Pillow Talk .
The film also won a 1960 Edgar Award for Best Motion Picture Screenplay , for Lehman .
In 1995 , North by Northwest was selected for preservation in the National Film Registry by the United States Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant .
"
In June 2008 , the American Film Institute revealed its " 10 Top 10"—the best ten films in ten " classic " American film genres — after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community .
North by Northwest was acknowledged as the seventh - best film in the mystery genre .
It was also listed as No . 40 in AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies , No . 4 in AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills , and No . 55 in AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) .
THEMES AND MOTIFS Section::::Themes and motifs .
Hitchcock planned the film as a change of pace after his dark romantic thriller Vertigo a year earlier .
In his book - length interview Hitchcock / Truffaut ( 1967 ) with François Truffaut , Hitchcock said that he wanted to do " something fun , light - hearted , and generally free of the symbolism permeating his other movies . "
Writer Ernest Lehman has also mocked those who look for symbolism in the film .
Despite its popular appeal , the film is considered to be a masterpiece for its themes of deception , mistaken identity , and moral relativism in the Cold War era .
The title North by Northwest is a subject of debate .
Many have seen it as having been taken from a line ( " I am but mad north - north - west : when the wind is southerly I know a hawk from a handsaw " ) in Hamlet , a work also concerned with the shifty nature of reality .
Hitchcock noted , in an interview with Peter Bogdanovich in 1963 , " It 's a fantasy .
The whole film is epitomized in the title — there is no such thing as north - by - northwest on the compass . "
( " Northwest by north " , however , is one of 32 points of the compass . )
Lehman states that he used a working title for the film of " In a Northwesterly Direction " , because the film 's action was to begin in New York and climax in Alaska .
Then the head of the story department at MGM suggested " North by Northwest " , but this was still to be a working title .
Other titles were considered , including " The Man on Lincoln 's Nose " , but " North by Northwest " was kept because , according to Lehman , " We never did find a [ better ] title . "
The Northwest Airlines reference in the film plays on the title .
The film 's plot involves a " MacGuffin " , a term popularized by Hitchcock : a physical object that everyone in the film is chasing but which has no deep relationship to the plot .
Late in North by Northwest , it emerges that the spies are attempting to smuggle microfilm containing government secrets out of the country .
They have been trying to kill Thornhill , whom they believe to be the agent on their trail , ' George Kaplan ' .
North by Northwest has been referred to as " the first James Bond film " due to its similarities with splashily colorful settings , secret agents , and an elegant , daring , wisecracking leading man opposite a sinister yet strangely charming villain .
The crop - duster scene inspired the helicopter chase in From Russia with Love .
The film 's final shot — that of the train speeding into a tunnel during a romantic embrace onboard — is a famous bit of self - conscious Freudian symbolism reflecting Hitchcock 's mischievous sense of humor .
In the book Hitchcock / Truffaut ( p. 107–108 ) , Hitchcock called it a " phallic symbol … probably one of the most impudent shots I ever made . "
INFLUENCES Section::::Influences .
The film 's title is reported to have been the influence for the name of the popular annual live - music festival South by Southwest in Austin , Texas , started in 1987 , with the name idea coming from Louis Black , editor and co - founder of the local alternative weekly The Austin Chronicle , as a play on the Hitchcock film title .
The third episode of the Doctor
Who serial " The Deadly Assassin " includes an homage to North by Northwest , when the Doctor , who like Hitchcock 's hero is falsely accused of a politically motivated murder , is attacked by gunfire from a biplane piloted by one of his enemy 's henchmen .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
North by Northwest was adapted as a stage play by Carolyn Burns .
The adaptation premiered at the Melbourne Theatre Company in 2015 .
SEE ALSO
* List of films considered the best REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS