COURTESY TITLES IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
A courtesy title is a form of address in systems of nobility used for children , former wives and other close relatives of a peer , as well as certain officials such as some judges and members of the Scottish gentry .
These styles are used ' by courtesy ' in the sense that the relatives , officials and others do not themselves hold substantive titles .
There are several different kinds of courtesy titles in the British peerage .
CHILDREN OF PEERS COURTESY TITLES Section::::Children of peers .
Section::::Courtesy titles .
If a peer of one of the top three ranks ( a duke , marquess or earl ) has more than one title , his eldest son - himself not a peer - may use one of his father 's lesser titles " by courtesy " .
However , the father continues to be the substantive holder of the peerage title and the son using the title by courtesy legally subordinate unless issued a writ of acceleration .
If the eldest son of a duke or marquess has an eldest son , he may use a still lower title , if one exists .
For example , the Duke of Norfolk is also Earl of Arundel and Baron Maltravers .
His eldest son is therefore styled " Earl of Arundel " ( without the definite article " The " which indicates a substantive title ) .
Lord Arundel 's eldest son ( should he have one during his father 's lifetime ) would be styled " Lord Maltravers " .
However , only The Duke of Norfolk is actually a peer ; his son Lord Arundel and his hypothetical grandson Lord Maltravers are not .
Courtesy titles are only used by the peer 's eldest living son , and the eldest son 's eldest living son , and so forth .
Other descendants are not permitted to use the peer 's subsidiary titles .
Only the heir apparent ( and heir apparent to the heir apparent , and so on ) may use them .
An heir presumptive ( e.g. , a brother , nephew , or cousin ) does not use a courtesy title .
However , Scottish practice allows the style Master / Mistress of X to an heir presumptive as well as to an heir apparent ; for example , the brother of the present Marquess of Tweeddale has the title Master of Tweeddale .
Wives are entitled to use the feminine form of their husbands ' courtesy titles .
Thus , the wife of an Earl of Arundel would be styled " Countess of Arundel " ( again , without the article ) .
Holders of courtesy titles do not , at the Court of St James 's , have their title preceded by the definite article " The " ( which is always written with the capital letter " T " ) :
e.g. , ' Earl of Arundel ' rather than ' The Earl of Arundel ' .
CHOOSING
A COURTESY PEER 'S
TITLE
Section::::Choosing a courtesy peer 's title .
The actual courtesy title which is used is a matter of family tradition .
For instance , the eldest son of The Duke of Buccleuch and Queensberry is styled " Earl of Dalkeith " , even though the duke is also the Marquess of Dumfriesshire , a title which outranks the earldom .
Similarly , the eldest son of The Marquess of Londonderry is styled " Viscount Castlereagh " , even though the marquess is also the Earl Vane .
Titles with the same name as a peer 's main title are also not used as courtesy titles .
For instance , The Duke of Westminster is also The Marquess of Westminster and The Earl Grosvenor ( amongst other titles ) .
The duke 's eldest son is not styled " Marquess of Westminster " ( which would cause confusion between the son and the father ) , and so is styled " Earl Grosvenor " instead .
The title used does not have to be exactly equivalent to the actual peerage : the eldest son of the current Duke of Wellington is styled Marquess of Douro , although the actual peerage possessed by his father is Marquess Douro ( not of Douro ) .
If a peer of the rank of earl or above does not have any subsidiary titles of a name different from his main title , his eldest son usually uses an invented courtesy title of " Lord [ Surname ] " .
For instance , the eldest son of The Earl of Devon is styled " Lord Courtenay " , even though the Earl has no barony of that name , and similarly the eldest son of The Earl of Guilford is styled " Lord North " .
The eldest son of The Earl of Huntingdon , who has no subsidiary titles , is styled " Viscount Hastings " to avoid confusion with the substantive peer The Lord Hastings .
The Earl Castle Stewart 's heir uses the style Viscount Stewart in order to avoid confusion with Lord Stewart , the eldest son of Viscount Castlereagh ( the eldest son of The Marquess of Londonderry ) .
COURTESY PREFIX OF " LORD " Section::::Courtesy prefix of " Lord " .
Another form of courtesy title is the honorific prefix of " Lord " before the name .
This non - peerage title is accorded to younger sons of dukes and marquesses .
The courtesy title is added before the person 's given name and surname , as in the example of Lord Randolph Churchill , although conversational usage drops the surname on secondary reference .
The title persists after the death of the holder 's father , but is not inherited by any of his children .
The wife of the holder is entitled to the feminine form of her husband 's title , which takes the form of " Lady " , followed by her husband 's given name and surname , as in the example of Lady Randolph Churchill .
The holder is addressed as " Lord Randolph " and his wife as " Lady Randolph " .
COURTESY PREFIX OF " LADY " Section::::Courtesy prefix of " Lady " .
The honorific prefix of " Lady " is used for the daughters of dukes , marquesses and earls .
The courtesy title is added before the person 's given name , as in the example Lady Diana Spencer .
Because it is merely a courtesy with no legal implications , the honorific persists after the death of the holder 's father but it is not inherited by her children .
The spouse of a woman with an honorific title does not hold any courtesy title in right of their spouse .
Neither does the husband of a man with any title ( including the husband of a peer ) .
COURTESY PREFIX OF " THE HONOURABLE " Section::::Courtesy prefix of " The Honourable " .
The younger sons of earls , along with all sons and daughters of viscounts , barons and lords of parliament are accorded the courtesy style of " The Honourable " before their name .
This is usually abbreviated to " The Hon .
" The title persists after the death of the holder 's father , but it may not be inherited by the holder 's children .
It is used only in third person reference , not in speaking to the person .
MARRIED DAUGHTERS Section::::Married daughters .
The daughter of a duke , marquess , or earl who marries an untitled man becomes " Lady [ Given name ] [ Husband 's surname ] " .
The daughter of a viscount or baron who marries a commoner is styled " The Honourable [ Given name ] [ Husband 's surname ] "
( the given name is dropped and Mrs is substituted if the husband 's right to the style derives from office or appointment rather than from ancestral peerage ) .
Any woman who marries a peer uses the feminine version of his peerage title , even if her own precedence is higher than his , as in the case of a duke 's daughter marrying a baron , because a peerage is a substantive title , the usage of which is preferred to any courtesy style - unless she marries into the Royal Family .
If a woman marries the younger son of a duke or marquess , she becomes " Lady
[ Husband 's given name ]
[ Husband 's surname ] .
" If she marries the younger son of an earl , viscount or baron , she becomes " The Hon .
Mrs
[ Husband 's given name ]
[ Husband 's surname ] .
"
In case of a divorce , she may keep the same style as during marriage or she may choose to assume the style " Mrs [ Given name ] [ Husband 's surname ] .
"
Regardless of what she chooses , she loses all precedence acquired from marriage and because of the former option , there can be multiple Lady John Smiths .
ADOPTION Section::::Adoption .
Until 2004 , children who had been adopted by peers had no right to any courtesy title .
Pursuant to a Royal Warrant dated 30 April 2004 , these children are now automatically entitled to the same styles and courtesy titles as their siblings .
However , unlike biological children , they can not inherit peerages from their parent ( and thus , since they can not be heirs , if a peer adopts a son
and he is the oldest son , he would use the styles of younger sons ) .
For example , actress Nimmy March , the daughter of The Duke and Duchess of Richmond , was immediately elevated to Lady Naomi Gordon - Lennox on 30 April 2004 .
Note that Scottish peerages ' rules for courtesy titles and styles differ .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary . !
Peer !
Wife !
Eldest son !
Younger son !
Unmarried daughter INDIRECT
INHERITANCE Section::::Indirect inheritance .
Occasionally a peer succeeds to a peerage upon the death of a relative who is not one of his or her parents .
When this happens , the relatives of the new peer may be allowed to use the courtesy titles or styles which would have been accorded them if the new peer had succeeded a parent or grandparent in the title .
For instance , Rupert Ponsonby , 7th Baron de Mauley , succeeded his uncle in 2002 .
His brother Ashley had no title , as their father was only the younger son of a peer and was never actually Baron de Mauley .
However , in 2003 , Ashley was granted , by Warrant of Precedence from Queen Elizabeth II , the style and precedence that would have been his had his father survived to inherit the barony , becoming The Honourable Ashley Ponsonby .
Precedence in such circumstances is usually granted but is not automatic .
SPOUSES OF PEERS Section::::Spouses of peers .
The wife of a substantive peer is legally entitled to the privileges of peerage : she is said to have a " life estate " in her husband 's dignity .
Thus a duke 's wife is titled a " duchess " , a marquess 's wife a " marchioness " , an earl 's wife a " countess " , a viscount 's wife a " viscountess " and a baron 's wife a " baroness " .
Despite being referred to as a " peeress " , she is not a peer in her own right : this is a ' style ' and not a substantive title .
However , this is considered a legal title , unlike the social titles of a peer 's children .
The wives of eldest sons of peers hold their titles on the same basis as their husbands , i.e. by courtesy .
Thus the wife of the Marquess of Douro is known as the " Marchioness of Douro " .
HUSBANDS Section::::Husbands .
In the case of a woman who is a substantive peer in her own right , by succession or by first creation ( i.e. ennoblement , most commonly in recent times under the Life Peerages Act 1958 ) , her husband acquires no distinction in right of his wife .
Thus , the husband of The Baroness Bottomley of Nettlestone has no courtesy title ; he was simply called " Mr Peter Bottomley " until he was knighted and became " Sir Peter Bottomley " .
In 2013 , there was a private member 's bill in the House of Lords to allow the spouse of a woman who holds an honour , if he or she enters civil partnership or marriage , to assume the title The Honourable .
This bill stalled , and was not passed by the end of the Parliament .
DIVORCED WIVES
Section::::Divorced wives .
A peeress retains her legal right to the peerage style following divorce and even upon her remarriage to a non - peer .
A convention has developed whereby her Christian name is added in front of her title to distinguish her from any subsequent wife of her former husband .
Hence , " Her Grace The Duchess of London " becomes " Mary , Duchess of London " .
In written forms , she is not entitled to the use of the address " Her Grace ... " but may be addressed as " Duchess " . "
The Rt Hon .
The Lady London " becomes " Mary , Lady London " and may be addressed as " Lady London " , or " My Lady " .
On 21 August 1996 letters patent changed titles of divorced wives of British princes , depriving their former wives of the style of Royal Highness .
For this reason Her Royal Highness The Princess of Wales after divorce became Diana , Princess of Wales .
The same happened to Her Royal Highness The Duchess of York who became Sarah , Duchess of York .
WIDOWS Section::::Widows .
If a prince or peer dies , his wife 's style does not change unless the new peer is a married man ( or a woman , if the succession permits ) ; traditionally the widowed peeress puts " Dowager " in her style , i.e. " The Most Hon .
The Marchioness of London " becomes " The Most Hon .
The Dowager Marchioness of London . "
If a widowed peeress 's son predeceases her , her daughter - in - law does not use the title of Dowager , but is styled , e.g. " The Most Hon .
Mary , Marchioness of London " , until her mother - in - law dies , at which point she may use the title of " Dowager Marchioness " .
In more recent times , some widows choose to be styled with their Christian names , instead of as Dowager , e.g. " Olave , Lady Baden - Powell " ( " Lady Olave Baden - Powell " would incorrectly imply
she was the daughter of a duke , marquess or earl ) .
DIVORCED WIVES AND WIDOWS
WHO REMARRY
Section::::Divorced wives and widows who remarry .
It used to be customary for women with higher titles from one marriage to retain them even on subsequent remarriage .
As Lord Macnaughten put it in the case of Earl Cowley v Countess Cowley [ 1901 ]
AC 450 : " ...
everybody knows that it is a very common practice for peeresses ( not being peeresses in their own right ) after marrying commoners to retain the title lost by such marriage .
It is not a matter of right .
It is merely a matter of courtesy , and allowed by the usages of society . "
The divorce court , in the above case , granted the earl an injunction preventing his former wife from using his title ; however this was overturned by the Court of Appeal , whose decision was confirmed by the House of Lords , on the grounds that ordinary courts of law lacked any jurisdiction in matters of honour .
The same practice was followed by widows who remarried .
A prominent example was Catherine Parr , the last wife of Henry VIII , who continued to be known as Queen Catherine even after her marriage to The Lord Seymour of Sudeley ( and , indeed , she disputed precedence with the wife of her brother - in - law the Duke of Somerset on this basis ) .
This usage died out later in the twentieth century , and women who remarry now ordinarily take a new married name and do not retain their former title .
CIVIL PARTNERS
Section::::Civil partners .
If a peer or knight enters into a civil partnership , his or her partner is not entitled to a courtesy title .
SCOTTISH COURTESY TITLES Section::::Scottish courtesy titles .
Laird is a courtesy title which applies to the owner of certain long - established Scottish estates ; the title being attached to the estate .
Traditionally , a laird is formally styled in the manner evident on the 1730 tombstone in a Scottish churchyard .
It reads : " The Much Honoured [ Forename ( John ) ]
[ Surname ( Grant ) ] Laird of [ Lairdship ( Glenmoriston ) ] " .
The section titled Scottish Feudal Baronies in Debrett 's states that the use of the prefix " The Much Hon . " is " correct " , but that " most lairds prefer the unadorned name and territorial designation " .
The wife of a Laird is traditionally accorded the courtesy title of Lady .
COURTESY SUFFIX OF " YOUNGER " Section::::Courtesy suffix of " Younger " .
A form of courtesy title granted is the suffix of " The Younger " ( also written as Yr or yr ) at the end of the name .
This title is granted to the Heir Apparent of a Laird ( Lord ) and is placed at the end of his or her name ( example - Mr John Smith of Edinburgh , Younger ) .
The wife of a Younger
may herself place the title at the end of her name .
The holder is addressed as the younger ( example - The Younger of Edinburgh ) .
COURTESY PREFIX OF " MAID " Section::::Courtesy prefix of " Maid " .
The courtesy prefix of " Maid " is granted to the eldest daughter of a Laird ( Lord ) .
If the eldest daughter is also the heir presumptive
she may either hold the title " Younger " or the title " Maid " .
The title is customary and not automatically given .
The title is placed at the end of the name ( example - Miss Ali Joy , Maid of Newcastle ) .
The holder is addressed as " The Maid of Lairdship " .
PRECEDENCE STATUS OF COURTESY TITLES Section::::Precedence status of courtesy titles .
The courtesy titles and styles of children of peers are social , not legal .
For this reason , in official documents , Lord John Smith is often referred to as John Smith , Esq . , commonly called Lord John Smith ; The Hon .
Mrs Smith would be called Mary Jane , Mrs Smith , commonly called The Hon .
Mary Jane Smith .
Only peers in attendance at Parliament enjoy statutory precedence .
There is , however , official precedence accorded at the Court of St James 's that results from being the wife or child of a peer , and to which social styles are attached .
The wives of peers , however , are peeresses and legally enjoy their titles in exactly the same manner as peeresses in their own right .
Children of peers can outrank certain actual peers .
For instance , the daughter of a duke outranks a countess .
However , if the daughter of a duke marries an earl , she drops to the rank of countess , because her courtesy title is subsumed in his substantive title .
But , if that same daughter marries a commoner , she retains her rank .
If that daughter marries the eldest son of an earl , though he may be a courtesy peer , she may keep her rank until the son inherits the earldom , when she must drop to the rank of countess .
JUDICIAL COURTESY TITLES Section::::Judicial courtesy titles .
Following the creation of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom , the first Justices of that Court held life peerages , and continued to hold them .
However , the Government has announced that future appointees will not be created peers , and the first non - peer appointed to the Court was Sir John Dyson .
In order to avoid any distinction between the Scottish Justices of the Court ( who receive a judicial title ) , by Royal Warrant dated 10 December 2010
all Justices of the Supreme Court not holding a peerage are entitled to a judicial title , and retain the style ( a courtesy title ) for life .
Thus , Sir John Dyson is now styled as Lord Dyson ( instead of The Lord Dyson ) .
Wives of male justices not holding a peerage are styled as if they were wives of peers .
In Scotland , Senators of the College of Justice ( judges who sit in the Court of Session ) use the title Lord or Lady along with a surname or a territorial name .
All Senators of the College have the honorific , The Honourable , before their titles , while those who are also Privy Counsellors or peers have the honorific , The Right Honourable .
Senators are made Privy Counsellors upon promotion to the Inner House .
For example , Alexander Wylie is known as The Honourable Lord Kinclaven , whilst Ronald Mackay is known as The Right Honourable Lord Eassie .
Some Senators also hold peerage titles , such as The Rt Hon .
The Lady Clark of Calton , and these would be used in place of judicial titles .
PROFESSIONAL COURTESY TITLES Section::::Professional courtesy titles .
The title of " Doctor " ( or the abbreviation " Dr " ) is used as a courtesy title in a number of fields by professionals who do not hold doctoral degrees .
It is commonly used in this manner by qualified medical practitioners ( except surgeons ) and by qualified dentists .
The Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons also allows the use of " Doctor " as a courtesy title by its members .
The title of Captain is used as a courtesy title by shipmasters in the merchant navy who do not hold the military rank of captain .
It is also used in oral address for naval officers below the rank of captain who are in command of a ship .
SEE ALSO
* List of courtesy titles in the peerages of Britain and Ireland
* Forms of address in the United Kingdom REFERENCES AND NOTES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Montague - Smith , P. ( editor ) .
( 1979 ) .
Debrett 's Peerage and Baronetage EXTERNAL LINKS *
" Courtesy Titles , " Debrett 's * Glossary of Burke 's Peerage and Baronetage - Courtesy title * Royal Warrants of Precedence
* Use of courtesy titles by the Associated Press and on webforms * Courtesy Titles