MEET ME IN ST .
LOUIS Meet Me in St. Louis is a 1944 American Technicolor musical film made by Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer .
Divided into a series of seasonal vignettes , starting with Summer 1903 , it relates the story of a year in the life of the Smith family in St. Louis , leading up to the opening of the Louisiana Purchase Exposition ( more commonly referred to as the World 's Fair ) in the spring of 1904 .
The picture stars Judy Garland , Margaret O'Brien , Mary Astor , Lucille Bremer , Tom Drake , Leon Ames , Marjorie Main , June Lockhart , and Joan Carroll .
The film was adapted by Irving Brecher and Fred F. Finklehoffe from a series of short stories by Sally Benson , originally published in The New Yorker magazine under the title " 5135 Kensington " , and later in novel form as Meet Me in St. Louis .
The film was directed by Vincente Minnelli , who met Garland on the set and later married her .
It was the second - highest grossing picture of the year , only behind Going My Way .
In 1994 , the film has been deemed " culturally significant " by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry .
Garland debuted the standards " The Trolley Song " , " The Boy Next Door " , and " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " , all of which became hits after the film was released .
Arthur Freed , the producer of the film , also wrote and performed one of the songs .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The backdrop for Meet Me in St. Louis is St. Louis , Missouri in the year leading up to the 1904 World 's Fair .
It is summer 1903 .
The Smith family leads a comfortable upper - middle class life .
Alonzo Smith ( Leon Ames ) and his wife Anna ( Mary Astor ) have four daughters :
Rose ( Lucille Bremer ) , Esther ( Judy Garland ) , Agnes ( Joan Carroll ) , and Tootie ( Margaret O'Brien ) ; and a son ,
Lon Jr. ( Henry H. Daniels , Jr. ) .
Esther , the second eldest daughter , is in love with the boy next door , John Truett ( Tom Drake ) , although he does not notice her at first .
Rose is expecting a phone call during which she hopes to be proposed to by Warren Sheffield ( Robert Sully ) , and is embarrassed when not only does Warren fail to propose , but the entire family is present as she takes the call during dinner .
Esther finally gets to meet John properly when he is a guest at the Smiths ' house party , although her chances of romancing him do n't go as planned when , after all the guests are gone and he is helping her turn off the gas lamps throughout the house , he tells her she uses the same perfume as his grandmother and that she has " a mighty strong grip for a girl . "
Esther hopes to meet John again the following Friday on a trolley ride from the city to the construction site of the World Fair .
Esther is sad when the trolley sets off without any sign of him , but cheers up when she sees him running to catch the trolley mid journey .
On Halloween , Tootie returns home injured , claiming that John Truett attacked her .
Without bothering to investigate , Esther confronts John , physically attacking him and scolding him for being a " bully .
" When Esther returns home , Tootie confesses that what really happened was that John was trying to protect Tootie and Agnes from the police after a dangerous prank they pulled went wrong .
Upon learning the truth , Esther immediately dashes to John 's house next door to apologize , and they share their first kiss .
Mr. Smith announces to the family that he is to be sent to New York City on business and they will all move after Christmas .
The family is devastated and upset at the news of the move , especially Rose and Esther whose romances , friendships , and educational plans are threatened .
Esther is also aghast because they will miss the World 's Fair .
An elegant ball takes place on Christmas Eve .
Esther is devastated when John can not take her as his date , due to his leaving his tuxedo at the tailor 's and being unable to get it back .
She is relieved , however , when her grandfather ( Harry Davenport ) offers to take her to the ball instead .
At the ball , Esther and Rose plot to ruin the evening of Warren 's date and Rose 's rival Lucille Ballard ( played by June Lockhart ) by filling up her dance card with losers .
But when Lucille turns out to be interested in Lon , leaving Rose and Warren together , Esther switches her dance card with Lucille 's and instead dances in Lucille 's place with the clumsy and awkward partners .
After being rescued by Grandpa , Esther is overjoyed when John unexpectedly turns up after somehow managing to obtain a tuxedo , and the pair dance together for the rest of the evening .
Later on , John proposes to Esther and she accepts , but their future is uncertain because she must still move to New York .
Esther returns home to an upset Tootie .
She is soothed by the poignant " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " .
Tootie , however , becomes more upset at the prospect of the family 's move and runs downstairs , out into the cold to destroy the snowmen they have made .
Mr. Smith sees his daughter 's upsetting outburst from an upstairs window .
Mr. Smith later announces that the family will not leave St. Louis after all when he realizes how much the move will affect his family .
Warren boldly declares his love for Rose , stating that they will marry at the first possible opportunity .
On or after April 30 , 1904 , the family take two horse drawn buggies to the World 's Fair .
The film ends that night with the entire family ( including John , Lucille , and Warren ) overlooking the Grand Lagoon at the center of the World 's Fair just as thousands of lights illuminate the grand pavilions .
CAST
* Judy Garland as Esther Smith * Margaret O'Brien as " Tootie " Smith * Mary Astor as Mrs. Anna Smith
* Leon Ames as Mr. Alonzo Smith
* Lucille Bremer as Rose Smith
* Tom Drake as John Truett * Marjorie Main as Katie
the maid * Harry Davenport as Grandpa * Henry H. Daniels Jr. as Alonzo " Lon " Smith Jr. * Joan Carroll as Agnes Smith * June Lockhart as Lucille Ballard * Robert Sully as Warren Sheffield * Hugh Marlowe as Colonel Darly * Chill Wills as Mr. Neely the iceman MUSIC Section::::Music .
The musical score for the film was adapted by Roger Edens , who also served as an uncredited associate producer .
Georgie Stoll conducted the orchestrations of Conrad Salinger .
Some of the songs in the film are from around the time of the St Louis Exposition .
Others were written for the movie .
*
" Meet Me in St. Louis , Louis " Kerry Mills and Andrew B. Sterling , 1904
*
" The Boy Next Door " , Hugh Martin and Ralph Blane , 1944 , performed by Judy Garland .
* " Skip to My Lou " , Traditional , with section sung to the tunes of " Kingdom Coming " and " Yankee Doodle " arranged by Hugh Martin and Ralph Blane , 1944 *
" I Was Drunk Last Night , " performed by Margaret O'Brien .
*
" Under the Bamboo Tree , " Words and music by Robert Cole and The Johnson Bros. , 1902 , performed by Judy Garland and Margaret O'Brien .
*
" Over the Banister , " 19th - century melody adapted by Conrad Salinger , lyrics from the 1888 poem " Over the Banisters " by Ella Wheeler Wilcox , adapted by Roger Edens ( 1944 ) , performed by Judy Garland .
*
" The Trolley Song " , Hugh Martin and Ralph Blane , 1944 , performed by Chorus and Judy Garland .
* " You and I , " Nacio Herb Brown and Arthur Freed , sung by Arthur Freed and D. Markas , dubbing for Leon Ames and Mary Astor .
*
" Goodbye , My Lady Love " , ( Instrumental ) , Joseph E. Howard , 1904 .
* " Little Brown Jug " , ( Instrumental ) , Joseph Winner , 1869 .
*
" Down at the Old Bull and Bush , " ( Instrumental ) , Harry von Tilzer , 1903 .
* " Home !
Sweet Home !
" , ( Instrumental ) , Henry Bishop , 1823/1852 .
* " Auld Lang Syne " , ( Instrumental ) *
" The First Noel " , ( Instrumental ) *
" Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " , Hugh Martin and Ralph Blane , 1944 , performed by Judy Garland .
The lyrics for " Have Yourself A Merry Little Christmas " were originally different .
The lyricist , Hugh Martin , wrote opening lyrics which were deemed too depressing by Judy Garland , Tom Drake , and Vincente Minnelli
( They were :
" Have yourself a merry little Christmas /
It may be your last/ Next year we may all be living in the past " ) , so Martin changed the lyrics .
DELETED SONG
Section::::Deleted song .
Garland 's pre - recording of " Boys and Girls Like You and Me " survives today , but the cut film footage has been lost .
This song was originally composed by Rodgers & Hammerstein for their Broadway musical Oklahoma !
but cut prior to its opening .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Upon its 1944 release , Meet Me in St. Louis was a massive critical and commercial success .
During its initial theatrical release , it earned a then - massive $ 5,016,000 in the US and Canada and $ 1,550,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $ 2,359,000 .
Time called it " one of the year 's prettiest pictures " ; " Technicolor has seldom been more affectionately used than in its registrations of the sober mahoganies and tender muslins and benign gaslights of the period .
Now & then , too , the film gets well beyond the charm of mere tableau for short flights in the empyrean of genuine domestic poetry .
These triumphs are creditable mainly to the intensity and grace of Margaret O'Brien and to the ability of director Minnelli & Co. to get the best out of her . "
O'Brien drew further praise from Time ; " [ her ] song and her cakewalk done in a nightgown at a grown - up party , are entrancing acts .
Her self - terrified Halloween adventures richly set against firelight , dark streets , and the rusty confabulations of fallen leaves , bring this section of the film very near the first - rate .
" The film is a New York Times Critics ' Pick : after seeing it at the Astor Theatre , Bosley Crowther called it " a warm and beguiling picturization based on Sally Benson 's memoirs of her folks . "
Crowther concludes : " As a comparable screen companion to Life With Father , we would confidently predict that Meet Me in St. Louis has a future that is equally bright .
In the words of one of the gentlemen , it is a ginger - peachy show .
" Writing in The New Yorker , Wolcott Gibbs praised the film as " extremely attractive " and called the dialogue " funny in a sense rather rare in the movies , " although he thought it was too long .
In 2005 , Richard Schickel included the film on Time.com 's ALL - TIME 100 best films , saying " It had wonderful songs [ and ] a sweetly unneurotic performance by Judy Garland ...
Despite its nostalgic charm , Minnelli infused the piece with a dreamy , occasionally surreal , darkness and it remains , for some of us , the greatest of American movie musicals . "
Arthur Freed : " Meet Me in St. Louis is my personal favourite .
I got along wonderfully with Judy , but the only time we were ever on the outs was when we did this film .
She did n't want to do the picture .
Even her mother came to me about it .
We bumped into some trouble with some opinions – Eddie Mannix , the studio manager , thought the Halloween sequence was wrong , but it was left in .
There was a song that Rodgers and Hammerstein had written , called Boys and Girls Like You and Me , that Judy did wonderfully , but it slowed up the picture and it was cut out .
After the preview of the completed film , Judy came over to me and said , " Arthur remind me not to tell you what kind of pictures to make . "
[ It ] was
the biggest grosser Metro had up to that time , except for Gone With the Wind . "
The film currently holds a 100 % " Fresh " rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes , based on 30 critical reviews with an average score of 8.7/10 .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated for four Academy Awards :
Best Writing , Adapted Screenplay , Best Cinematography , Color , Best Music , Scoring of a Musical Picture , and Best Music , Song ( Ralph Blane and Hugh Martin for " The Trolley Song " ) .
Margaret O'Brien received an Academy Juvenile Award for her work that year , in which she appeared in several movies along with Meet Me in St. Louis .
In 1994 , the film has been deemed " culturally significant " by the Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry .
The American Film Institute ranked the film 10th on AFI 's Greatest Movie Musicals ; two songs from the film made AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs ( " The Trolley Song " at # 26 and " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " at # 76 ) .
Gerald Kaufman wrote a study of the film , with the same title , which was published by the British Film Institute in 1994 .
ADAPTATIONS
* Meet Me in St. Louis was remade in 1959 for television , starring Jane Powell , Jeanne Crain , Patty Duke , Walter Pidgeon , Ed Wynn , Tab Hunter and Myrna Loy .
It was directed by George Schaefer from the original Brecher and Finklehoffe screenplay .
* Meet Me in St. Louis was remade again for television in 1966 .
This was a non - musical version starring Shelley Fabares , Celeste Holm , Larry Merrill , Judy Land , Reta Shaw , Tammy Locke and Morgan Brittany .
It was directed by Alan D. Courtney from a script written by Sally Benson herself .
This was to be a pilot for a TV series , but no network picked it up .
It was later included as a special feature on the 2 disc DVD set released in 2004 .
* A Broadway musical based on the film was produced in 1989 , with additional songs .
Section::::Adaptations .
The late-19th century vintage carousel in this movie could be found at Bob - Lo Amusement Park in Amherstburg , Ontario until the park closed in September 1993 .
It was dismantled and sold to private collectors .
MOVIE REFERENCES
* The Family Stone ( 2005 ) shows two partial scenes from the movie ; one where Esther and John dance , and another where Esther sings " Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " to Tootie .
* Deck the Halls ( 2006 ) shows Steve ( Matthew Broderick ) watching the scene where Esther sings "
Have Yourself a Merry Little Christmas " to Tootie and she bashes the snowmen .
Steve is depressed that his family left him and watching this scene in the film makes him only more upset .
* Sex and the City ( 2008 ) shows Carrie 's ( Sarah Jessica Parker ) assistant , Louise from St. Louis , give her a DVD of the film as a Christmas gift , and later shows Carrie watching a bit of " The Trolley Song " .
The film is also divided into a series of seasonal vignettes following the same format as Meet Me in St. Louis .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Meet Me in St. Louis from TheJudyRoom.com
* Meet Me in St. Louis at Filmsite.org .
* Meet Me in St. Louis at the Museum of Modern Art .
* Meet Me in St. Louis on Lux Radio Theater : December 2 , 1946