FULL HOUSE Full House is an American television sitcom created by Jeff Franklin for ABC .
The show chronicles the events of widowed father Danny Tanner who enlists his brother - in - law Jesse Katsopolis and best friend Joey Gladstone to help raise his three daughters , oldest D.J. , middle child Stephanie and youngest Michelle in his San Francisco home .
It aired from September 22 , 1987 , to May 23 , 1995 , broadcasting eight seasons and 192 episodes .
While never a critical favorite , the series was consistently in the Nielsen Top 30 ( from 1988 onward ) and gained even more popularity in syndicated reruns and also aired internationally .
It has also had tie - in merchandise marketed , such as a series of paperback books .
A sequel series , Fuller House , premiered on Netflix on February 26 , 2016 .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
After the death of his wife Pam , sports anchor Danny Tanner recruits his brother - in - law Jesse ( John Stamos ) , a rock musician ; and his best friend since childhood , Joey ( Dave Coulier ) who works as a stand - up comedian , to help raise his three young daughters .
Over time , the three men , as well as the children , bond and become closer to one another .
In season two , Danny is re - assigned from his duties as sports anchor by his television station to become co - host of a new local breakfast TV show , Wake Up , San Francisco , and is teamed up with Nebraska native Rebecca Donaldson .
Jesse and Becky eventually fall in love and get married in season four .
In season five , Becky gives birth to twin sons , Nicky and Alex .
MAIN CAST
* John Stamos as Jesse Katsopolis * Bob Saget as Danny Tanner * Dave Coulier as Joey Gladstone * Candace Cameron as D.J. Tanner * Jodie Sweetin as Stephanie Tanner
* Mary - Kate and Ashley Olsen as Michelle Tanner
* Lori Loughlin as Rebecca Donaldson Katsopolis
* Andrea Barber as Kimmy Gibbler * Scott Weinger as Steve Hale
* Blake and Dylan Tuomy - Wilhoit as Nicky and Alex Katsopolis
PRODUCTION
CASTING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Casting .
The producers ' first choice to play the character of Danny Tanner was Bob Saget .
Saget was not available to appear in the pilot due to his commitment as an on - air contributor to CBS 's The Morning Program .
The producers instead cast actor John Posey to play Danny .
Posey only appeared in the unaired pilot ( which is included on the DVD release of Season 1 ) .
John Stamos 's character was originally named Jesse Cochran ; Stamos reportedly wanted his character to better reflect his Greek heritage , so producers decided to change the character 's surname to Katsopolis ( beginning with season two ) .
To comply with child labor laws , twins Ashley and Mary - Kate Olsen were cast to alternate in the role of Michelle during tapings .
The girls were jointly credited as " Mary Kate Ashley Olsen " in seasons two through seven because the producers did not want audiences to know that the Michelle character was played by twins .
( The sisters occasionally appeared together in fantasy sequences . )
All six of the original cast members remained with the show through its entire eight - year run , with five characters added to the main cast along the way .
D.J. 's best friend Kimmy was a recurring character in seasons one through four , who was upgraded to a regular in season five .
Rebecca originally appeared for six episodes in season two ; producers decided to expand her role and made her a regular the following season .
After marrying Jesse , they have twins Nicky and Alex , who make their debut in season five .
As babies , the children were played by Daniel and Kevin Renteria , and in season six , the roles of the twins were succeeded by Blake and Dylan Tuomy - Wilhoit .
The last main character added was Steve Hale , who was D.J. 's boyfriend in seasons six and seven .
He was played by Scott Weinger .
TAPING
Section::::Taping .
The series was created by Jeff Franklin and executive produced by Franklin , along with Thomas L. Miller and Robert L. Boyett .
The series was produced by Jeff Franklin Productions and Miller - Boyett Productions , in association with Lorimar - Telepictures ( 1987–1988 ) , Lorimar Television ( 1988–1993 ) , and then by Warner Bros. Television ( 1993–1995 ) after Lorimar was folded into Warner Bros. 's existing television production division .
Although the series was set in San Francisco , the sitcom itself was taped at the Warner Bros. Studios in Los Angeles .
Outside of certain excerpts in the opening title sequences , including Alamo Square Park 's Painted Ladies , the only episode to have actually been taped in San Francisco was the first episode of season eight , " Comet 's Excellent Adventure " .
There were also a few episodes which were filmed on - location elsewhere , most notably Hawaii in the season three premiere " Tanner 's Island " , and at Walt Disney World for the two - part sixth - season finale " The House Meets the Mouse " .
The series experienced heavy turnover with its writing staff throughout its run , the first season in particular had at least three writing staff changes with Lenny Ripps ( who remained with the show until the early part of the fourth season , by then serving as a creative consultant ) and Russell Marcus being the only writers surviving the changes through the entire season .
Show creator and executive producer Jeff Franklin was the only writer to remain with the series throughout its entire eight - season run ( Franklin also wrote and directed several episodes during the first five seasons ) .
Marc Warren and Dennis Rinsler joined the series ' writing staff in the second season as producers and remained with the show until its 1995 cancellation ; Warren and Rinsler took over as head writers by season five and assumed showrunning duties as executive producers for the sixth season to allow Franklin to focus on Hangin ' With Mr. Cooper ( Full House served as Coopers lead - in when the former aired on Tuesday nights during the 1992–93 season ) .
THEME SONG Section::::Theme song .
The show 's theme song , " Everywhere You Look " , was performed by Jesse Frederick , who co - wrote the song with writing partner Bennett Salvay and series creator Jeff Franklin .
Various instrumental versions of the theme song were used in the closing credits ; the version used during seasons three through eight was also used in the opening credits in some early syndication runs , although the song was almost always truncated to the chorus for broadcast .
Seasons one through five used a longer version of the theme song .
In syndicated airings , the line " you miss your old familiar friends , but waiting just around the bend " replaced the lines starting with " how did I get delivered here , somebody tell me please ... " ( after ABC Family acquired the series in 2003 , it became the first television outlet to air the long versions of the theme since the series ' ABC run , which were included only in select episodes from the first five seasons , whereas the full version was used in most episodes during those seasons ) .
Hallmark Channel reruns have used four different cuts of the theme song , including the full version .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
Full House originally aired on Fridays from September 1987 to August 1991 , which spanned the show 's first four seasons , and later became the flagship program of ABC 's newly launched TGIF block in September 1989 .
The show was briefly moved to Tuesdays during the 1987–88 season and then aired twice a week on Tuesdays and Fridays for a few months in order to help the series build an audience .
It remained on Fridays permanently for the next three seasons , as the show 's ratings increased .
Full House was moved to Tuesdays full - time for season five and remained there until the series ended in 1995 .
While the show 's first season was not very successful , finishing 71st that year , mostly because it was a new series placed in an 8 p.m. Eastern timeslot ( most freshman series start out in protected time slots preceded by successful lead - ins ) , the show quickly became popular during its second season as it was placed immediately following the established hit show Perfect Strangers ( which was also produced by Tom Miller and Bob Boyett ) .
From season three onwards , it was ranked among Nielsen 's Top 30 shows ( a ratings increase which allowed the series to move back to Fridays at 8 p.m. ) .
By the fourth season , the series jumped to the Top 20 and remained there until the seventh season ( the series peaked at the top ten during seasons five and six ) .
In 1995 , despite the fact the show was still rated in the top 25 , ABC announced that it was canceling the show after eight seasons due to the increasing costs of producing the series coupled with the decline in ratings .
The one - hour series finale was watched by 24.3 million viewers , ranking No . 7 for the week and attracting a 14.6 household rating and a 25 percent audience share .
U.S.
SYNDICATION Section::::U.S. syndication .
Warner Bros. Television Distribution handles the domestic and international syndication rights to the series .
During the summer of 1991 , reruns of the early seasons began airing in a daily daytime strip on NBC .
Starting in September 1991 , Warner Bros. Domestic Television Distribution began distributing Full House for broadcast in off - network syndication and was syndicated on various local stations nationwide until 2003 .
The series formerly aired on TBS , ABC Family , Nick at Nite , The N / TeenNick , and Hallmark Channel .
In 2014 , episodes have averaged 1.5 million viewers on Nick at Nite , which is up 7 percent from 2013 and a 0.4 rating in the key 18–49 demographic , up 8 percent from 2013 .
On September 29 , 2017 , Hulu acquired the streaming rights to Full House along with fellow Warner Bros. TV productions Family Matters , Hangin ' with Mr. Cooper , Perfect Strangers and Step by Step in addition to Disney - ABC TV productions Boy Meets World , Dinosaurs and Home Improvement .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Despite the show 's popularity , critical acclaim by viewers , and cult following , critics ' reviews for Full House were by most accounts mediocre , particularly in its early years but became more positive in later years .
The first season holds an aggregate score of 31/100 ( " Generally unfavorable reviews " ) on Metacritic .
In Slate , Willa Paskin referred to the series as " a hackneyed and saccharine family sitcom " .
Isaac Feldberg opined that it was " archetypally average , hiding behind a ubiquitous laugh track and obnoxiously on - the - nose life lessons . " REUNIONS Section::::Reunions .
During Bob Saget 's final season as host of America 's Funniest Home Videos , six other Full House cast alumni ( John Stamos , Dave Coulier , Candace Cameron , Jodie Sweetin , Andrea Barber , and Lori Loughlin ) reunited on the May 9 , 1997 , episode ( the episode which preceded Saget 's final episode as host of that series ) .
In a December 2008 news story , it was reported that John Stamos was planning a reunion movie .
This idea was quickly withdrawn , because reportedly most of the cast was not interested .
In 2009 , Stamos announced that a feature film based on the show was still planned .
Stamos told The New York Daily News , " I 'm working on a movie idea , but it would n't be us playing us .
I 'm not 100 % sure , but it would probably take place in the first few years . "
Stamos posited Steve Carell and Tracy Morgan for the roles of Danny and Joey respectively .
In 2012 , eight of the Full House cast members reunited in Los Angeles for their 25th anniversary .
Publicists for Mary - Kate and Ashley Olsen said that they " were n't able to attend , given their work schedules . "
On July 19 , 2013 , the original Jesse and the Rippers ( the band which Jesse Katsopolis served as frontman until he was voted out in season 8) reunited on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon .
The group performed a medley of covers including the Beach Boys ' "
Forever , " Elvis Presley 's " Little Sister , " " Hippy Hippy Shake " , and ending with the Full House theme "
Everywhere You Look " .
Bob Saget and Lori Loughlin made cameo appearances .
In January 2014 , Saget , Stamos , and Coulier appeared on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon .
They each reprised their characters , while Fallon dressed in child 's pajamas in a bed framed by four gigantic pencils , similar to Michelle Tanner 's bed from the show .
Saget , Stamos , and Coulier said some of their famous catchphrases from the show , as well as singing " The Teddy Bear " song .
Stamos , Saget and Coulier also appeared together in a 2014 commercial for Dannon Oikos Greek Yogurt ( for which Stamos serves as spokesperson ) that debuted during Super Bowl XLVIII , days after their appearance on Late Night .
SPIN - OFF SERIES Section::::Spin - off series .
In August 2014 , reports circulated that Warner Bros. Television was considering a series spin - off .
John Stamos , who has an ownership stake in the show , headed up the attempt to get the series back into production .
Netflix closed a deal to produce a 13-episode sequel series tentatively titled Fuller House , with many of the original series cast members reprising their roles .
Notably , Mary - Kate and Ashley Olsen both declined to reprise the role of Michelle in the first season , although the creators and producers said they could still possibly appear in future seasons .
Stamos would guest star as well and serve as producer .
Filming began on July 25 , 2015 .
Like the original series , the show is set in San Francisco .
The original series idea was focused on D.J. , a veterinarian struggling to raise three boys after her firefighter husband Tommy Fuller is killed in the line of duty ; Stephanie , who is aspiring to become a musician ; and Kimmy , who is a party planner and a single mother to a teenage daughter , Ramona .
The show 's premise follows one similar to the original series when Stephanie makes plans to put her career on hold for a while and move in with D.J. to help take care of her children .
Almost immediately afterward , Kimmy makes the same offer for her and Ramona to move in and help out .
Netflix premiered the series on February 26 , 2016 , with the premiere episode featuring a Tanner family reunion .
As of December 14 , 2018 there have been four seasons of the series .
OTHER MEDIA
HOME MEDIA
Section::::Other media .
Section::::Home media .
Warner Home Video released all eight seasons of the series on DVD in Region 1 between 2005 and 2007 .
A complete series box - set containing all 192 episodes was released on November 6 , 2007 .
As of 2016 , the complete series is available for purchase via online retailers such as Amazon .
Additionally , the first four seasons were also released on DVD in Region 2 and Region 4 . !
Title ! !
Region 1 ! !
Region 2 ! !
Region 4 BOOK SERIES Section::::Book series .
Books based on Full House are geared toward children primarily between the ages of 8 and 14 .
Warner Bros. , which holds the rights to Full House and its associated characters , would not permit others to use their characters and selected who could write books based on the television series .
The books are based on the Silhouette romance novels by Mills & Boon .
Full House
Michelle # 7 : Summer Rhapsody is a Silhouette Special Edition # 75 by Nancy John and Laura O'Neil in February 1983 .
The series includes the following : * Full House Stephanie : These 33 books were written from the point of view of the Tanners ' middle daughter , Stephanie Tanner .
They take place with Stephanie in a different middle school , likely because of a slightly different redistricting plan compared to the one mentioned in season seven 's " Fast Friends " .
She has different best friends as well , Allie Taylor and Darcy Powell .
Though these are book creations , she has known Allie since kindergarten , and there are several places in the first five seasons of Full House where fans think an unnamed extra could be Allie .
This series begins with Stephanie being pressured to join a clique called the Flamingos , by completing a series of dares .
She almost does the last one , though she is not sure if she wants to before D.J. catches her trying to steal Danny 's phone card .
Stephanie explains tearfully what was happening , and D.J. helps her to understand what the Flamingos were really up to : they wanted to use the phone card to call their boyfriends .
Stephanie and the Flamingos become fierce rivals .
Hip
Hop Til You Drop , Two for One Christmas Fun , and Ten Ways to Wreck a Date are the most popular .
* Full House Michelle : These 40 stories are told from Michelle 's point of view .
The first 27 feature more of her , and the other Tanners ' , home life than others , though some focus on events at school , whereas the last 14 , the " Michelle and Friends " series , focuses mostly on Michelle and her classmates .
Unlike Stephanie , Michelle goes to the same elementary school but is in a different class .
Two stories were translated and published in Japan in February 2007 .
Super special My Best Friend is a Movie Star
came out in September 1996 , and along with The Substitute Teacher and How to be Cool are the most popular .
* Full House Sisters :
These 14 books focus on Michelle and Stephanie 's friendship and comical situations that occur between them .
The sisters often alternate points of view in the story .
* Full House :
Dear Michelle : These four books were published several years after the others stopped being produced .
They take place with Michelle in the third grade , where she writes an advice column for her class paper .
* Club Stephanie : 1997 - 2001 revival series with the Sisters series .
Sweetin is younger than Nickelodeon 's Larisa Oleynik in Alex , You 're Glowing and Irene Ng in Hot Rock .
RUSSIAN ADAPTATION
Section::::Russian adaptation .
In 2006 , Full House was one of a group of Warner Brothers properties licensed to Moscow - based network STS for adaptation to Russian .
The show , followed the plots of the American version with changes to accommodate cultural differences .
It ran for two seasons , beginning in 2009 .
THE UNAUTHORIZED FULL HOUSE STORY Section::::The Unauthorized Full House Story .
On August 22 , 2015 , a television movie called The Unauthorized Full House Story was first released by Lifetime .
It tells the behind - the - scenes story of the series .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
colspan=4
Young Artist Awards !
Year !
Category !
Nominee(s ) !
Result
Outstanding Performance by an Actress Under Nine Years of Age Young Artist Award Best Young Actress Starring in a Television Series
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS