FOURTH WALL
The fourth wall is a performance convention in which an invisible , imagined wall separates actors from the audience .
While the audience can see through this " wall " , the convention assumes , the actors act as if they can not .
From the 16th century onwards , the rise of illusionism in staging practices , which culminated in the realism and naturalism of the theatre of the 19th century , led to the development of the fourth wall concept .
The metaphor suggests a relationship to the mise - en - scène behind a proscenium arch .
When a scene is set indoors and three of the walls of its room are presented onstage , in what is known as a box set , the " fourth " of them would run along the line ( technically called the " proscenium " ) dividing the room from the auditorium .
The " fourth wall " , though , is a theatrical convention , rather than of set design .
The actors ignore the audience , focus their attention exclusively on the dramatic world , and remain absorbed in its fiction , in a state that the theatre practitioner Konstantin Stanislavski called " public solitude " ( the ability to behave as one would in private , despite , in actuality , being watched intently while so doing , or to be ' alone in public ' ) .
In this way , the fourth wall exists regardless of the presence of any actual walls in the set , or the physical arrangement of the theatre building or performance space , or the actors ' distance from or proximity to the audience .
" Breaking the fourth wall " is any instance in which this performance convention , having been adopted more generally in the drama , is violated .
This can be done through either directly referencing the audience , the play as a play , or the characters ' fictionality .
The temporary suspension of the convention in this way draws attention to its use in the rest of the performance .
This act of drawing attention to a play 's performance conventions is metatheatrical .
A similar effect of metareference is achieved when the performance convention of avoiding direct contact with the camera , generally used by actors in a television drama or film , is temporarily suspended .
The phrase " breaking the fourth wall " is used to describe such effects in those media .
Breaking the fourth wall is also possible in other media , such as video games and books .
HISTORY OF THE CONVENTION Section::::History of the convention .
The concept is usually attributed to the philosopher , critic and dramatist Denis Diderot .
The term itself was used by Molière .
The presence of the fourth wall is an established convention of modern realistic theatre , which has led some artists to draw direct attention to it for dramatic or comic effect when a boundary is " broken " , when an actor or character addresses the audience directly .
Breaking the fourth wall is common in pantomime and children 's theatre where , for example , a character might ask the children for help , as when Peter Pan appeals to the audience to applaud in an effort to revive the fading Tinker Bell ( " If you believe in fairies , clap your hands ! " ) .
Many Shakespearian plays use this technique for comic effect .
The acceptance of the transparency of the fourth wall is part of the suspension of disbelief between a work of fiction and an audience , allowing them to enjoy the fiction as though they were observing real events .
Critic Vincent Canby described it in 1987 as " that invisible scrim that forever separates the audience from the stage " .
IN
CINEMA Section::::In cinema .
The earliest recorded breaking of the fourth wall in serious cinema was in Mary MacLane 's revolutionary 1918 silent film Men Who Have Made Love to Me , in which the enigmatic authoress - who portrays herself - interrupts the vignettes onscreen to address the audience directly .
Oliver Hardy was one of the first notable examples of breaking the fourth wall in his movies with Stan Laurel , when he would often stare directly at the camera to seek sympathy from viewers .
Groucho Marx spoke directly to the audience in Animal Crackers ( 1930 ) , and Horse Feathers ( 1932 ) , in the later film advising them to " go out to the lobby " during Chico Marx 's piano interlude .
Comedy films by Mel Brooks , Monty Python , and Zucker , Abrahams and Zucker frequently broke the fourth wall in some , such that with these films , " the fourth wall is so flimsy and so frequently shattered that it might as well not exist " , according to The A.V. Club .
Breaking the fourth wall is an integral part of the ending of Alejandro Jodorowsky 's 1973 film The Holy Mountain .
In the Mel Brooks film Blazing Saddles ( 1974 ) , the characters literally break the fourth wall .
Woody Allen broke the fourth wall several times in his movie Annie Hall ( 1977 ) , as he explained , " because I felt many of the people in the audience had the same feelings and the same problems .
I wanted to talk to them directly and confront them . "
His 1985 film
The Purple Rose of Cairo features the breaking of the fourth wall as a central plot point .
The John Hughes movie Ferris Bueller 's Day Off ( 1986 ) , is another well - known fourth - wall - breaking movie .
Bueller , played by Matthew Broderick , often turns to the camera and breaks character to tell his thought process or explain his reasoning .
Another Chicago area fourth - wall - breaking film , High Fidelity , has John Cusack 's character Rob intimately sharing his life struggles and confessions with the audience .
Two more recent examples are the 2016 film Deadpool , in which it is used as a comic device between the main character and the audience and the 2017 film I , Tonya , where Tonya Harding and the other characters tell a first person story of Tonya 's life as a black comedy .
Jerry Lewis wrote in his 1971 book The Total Filmmaker , " Some film - makers believe you should never have an actor look directly into the camera .
They maintain it makes the audience uneasy , and interrupts the screen story .
I think that is nonsense , and usually I have my actors , in a single , look direct into the camera at least once in a film , if a point is to be served . "
Martin and Lewis look directly at the audience in You 're Never Too Young ( 1955 ) , and Lewis and co - star Stella Stevens
each look directly into the camera several times in The Nutty Professor ( 1963 ) , and Lewis ' character holds a pantomime conversation with the audience in The Disorderly Orderly ( 1964 ) .
The final scene of The Patsy ( 1964 ) is famous for revealing to the audience the movie as a movie , and Lewis as actor / director .
ON TELEVISION Section::::On television .
On television , breaking the fourth wall has been done throughout the history of the medium .
George Burns did it numerous times on The George Burns and Gracie Allen Show , where he starred in with his real - life wife Gracie Allen from 1950 to 1958 .
Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis routinely broke the fourth wall in their 1950 to 1955 Colgate Comedy Hour sketches .
It 's Garry Shandling 's Show and Mrs. Brown 's
Boys both have their title character walking between sets mid - scene , and the latter occasionally shows characters retaking fluffed lines .
Another television character who regularly breaks the fourth wall is Francis Urquhart in the British TV drama series House of Cards , To Play the King and The Final Cut .
Urquhart addresses the audience several times during each episode , giving the viewer comments on his own actions on the show .
The same technique is also used , though less frequently , in the American adaptation of House of Cards by main character Frank Underwood and by his wife Claire .
The main character in Clarissa Explains It All addresses the audience at least once each episode .
Zack Morris frequently addresses the audience at the beginning and end of nearly every episode of Saved by the Bell .
Dobie Gillis , near a statue of The Thinker addresses the audience at the beginning and end of The Many Loves of Dobie Gillis .
During the 12th season of Dallas , Sue Ellen Ewing collaborates with a screenplay writer to retell the events that occurred in earlier episodes of the series .
In the " War and Peace " episode of the second season of Northern Exposure , Joel Fleischman defuses a crisis by announcing that the viewers would not accept either of the two possible outcomes of a particular scene in which a duel is about to take place , and the other characters agree to move on to the episode 's next scene .
On the 1977 - 1984 sitcom , Three 's Company , and later on the 1979 - 1980 sitcom , The Ropers , the husband character Stanley Roper ( played by Norman Fell ) would frequently break the fourth wall in a subtle manner , by turning to look at the camera while laughing after ridiculing his wife Helen , played by Audra Lindley .
A similar technique was often used in British television series Hustle , with characters winking or smiling knowingly at the camera at key points in the action .
The 2001–2006 Fox sitcom
The Bernie Mac Show had the lead character Bernie Mac breaking the fourth wall talking to " America " .
The convention of breaking the fourth wall is often seen on mockumentary sitcoms , including The Office .
Mockumentary shows which break the fourth wall poke fun at the documentary genre with the intention of increasing the satiric tone of the show .
Characters in The Office directly speak to the audience during interview sequences .
Characters are removed from the rest of the group to speak and reflect on their experiences .
When this occurs , the rules of an impersonal documentary are shattered .
The person behind the camera , the interviewer , is also referenced when the characters gaze and speak straight to the camera .
The interviewer , however , is only indirectly spoken to and remains hidden .
This technique , when used in shows with complex genres , serves to heighten the comic tone of the show while also proving that the camera itself is far from a passive onlooker .
Several Nick Jr. shows such as Blue 's Clues , Team Umizoomi , and Dora the Explorer as well as a few non - Nick Jr. cartoons had characters talking to the child watching the show and encouraging them to participate in the story , some shows used a child viewer voice calling the answer while some shows did n't use a voice at all , some of their shows though , such as the shows they distribute from Nelvana Limited , do n't use the fourth wall breaks .
The Netflix series A Series of Unfortunate Events , based on the Daniel Handler 's book series of the same name , incorporates some of the narrative elements from the books by having Lemony Snicket as a narrator character ( played by Patrick Warburton ) speaking directly to the television viewer that frequently breaks the fourth wall to explain various literary wordplay that was included in the books .
IN VIDEO GAMES Section::::In video games .
Given their interactive nature , nearly all video games break the fourth wall by asking for the player 's participation .
But beyond the obvious ways in which video games break the fourth wall ( e.g. by having UI elements on the screen , etc . ) , there are several other ways that games have done this .
These can include having the character face the direction of the player / screen , having a self - aware character that recognizes that they are in a video game , or having secret or bonus content set outside the game 's narrative that can either extend the game world ( such as with the use of false documents ) or provide " behind the scenes " type content .
But since video games are inherently much more interactive than traditional films and literature , defining what truly breaks the fourth wall in the video game medium becomes difficult .
Steven Conway , writing for Gamasutra , suggests that in video games , many purported examples of breaking the fourth wall are actually better understood as relocations of the fourth wall or expansions of the " magic circle " ( the fictional game world ) to encompass the player .
This is in contrast to traditional fourth wall breaks , which break the audience 's illusion or suspension of disbelief , by acknowledging them directly .
Conway argues that this expansion of the magic circle in video games actually serves to more fully immerse a player into the fictional world rather than take the viewer out of the fictional world , as is more common in traditional fourth wall breaks .
An example of this expansion of the magic circle can be found in the game , in which the player receives an in - game email at their real - life email address and must visit out - of - game websites to solve some of the puzzles in the game .
Other games may expand the magic circle to include the game 's hardware .
For example , X - Men for the Mega Drive / Genesis required players to reset their game console at a certain point to reset the X - Men 's in - game Hazard Room , while Metal Gear Solid asked the player to put the DualShock controller on their neck to simulate a back massage being given in - game .
Other examples include the idle animation of Sonic the Hedgehog in his games where the on - screen character would look to the player and tap his foot impatiently if left alone for a while , and one level of Max Payne has the eponymous character come to the realization they are in a video game , and narrate what the player sees as part of the UI .
Eternal Darkness , which included a sanity meter , would simulate various common computer glitches to the player as the sanity meter drained , including the Blue Screen of Death .
The Stanley Parable is also a well known example of this , as the narrator from the game constantly tries to reason with the player , even going so far as to beg the player to switch off the game at one point .
IN LITERATURE Section::::In literature .
The method of breaking the fourth wall in literature is typically referred to as metafiction .
Metafiction genre occurs when a character within a literary work acknowledges the reality that they are in fact a fictitious being .
The use of the fourth wall in literature can be traced back as far as The Canterbury Tales and Don Quixote .
However , it was popularized in the early 20 century during the Post - Modern literary movement .
Artists like Virginia Woolf in To the Lighthouse and Kurt Vonnegut in Breakfast of Champions used the genre to question the accepted knowledge and sources of the culture .
The use of metafiction or breaking the fourth wall in literature varies from that on stage in that the experience is not communal but personal to the reader and develops a self - consciousness within the character / reader relationship that works to build trust and expand thought .
This does not involve acknowledgment of a character 's fictive nature .
Breaking the fourth wall in literature is not always metafiction .
Modern examples of breaking the fourth wall include Ada Palmer 's Terra Ignota and William Goldman 's The Princess Bride .
SEE ALSO
* Aside * Audience participation * List of narrative techniques
* Meta - reference
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* List of films that break the fourth wall on the Art and Popular Culture Encyclopedia