CANOLA OIL Canola oil , or canola for short , is a vegetable oil derived from a variety of rapeseed that is low in erucic acid , as opposed to colza oil .
There are both edible and industrial forms produced from the seed of any of several cultivars of the plant family Brassicaceae , namely cultivars of Brassica napus L. , Brassica rapa subsp .
oleifera , syn .
B. campestris L. or Brassica juncea , which are also referred to as " canola " .
According to the Canola Council of Canada , an industry association , the official definition of canola is " Seeds of the genus Brassica ( Brassica napus , Brassica rapa or Brassica juncea ) from which the oil shall contain less than 2 % erucic acid in its fatty acid profile and the solid component shall contain less than 30 micromoles of any one or any mixture of 3-butenyl glucosinolate , 4-pentenyl glucosinolate , 2-hydroxy-3 butenyl glucosinolate , and 2-hydroxy- 4-pentenyl glucosinolate per gram of air - dry , oil - free solid . "
Consumption of the oil has become common in industrialized nations .
It is also used as a source of biodiesel .
HISTORY
ORIGIN Section::::History .
Section::::Origin .
The name for rapeseed comes from the Latin word rapum meaning turnip .
Turnip , rutabaga , cabbage , Brussels sprouts , and mustard are related to rapeseed .
Rapeseed belongs to the genus Brassica .
Brassica oilseed varieties are some of the oldest plants cultivated by humanity , with documentation of its use in India 4,000 years ago , and use in China and Japan 2,000 years ago .
Its use in Northern Europe for oil lamps is documented to the 13th century .
Its use was limited until the development of steam power , when machinists found rapeseed oil clung to water- and steam - washed metal surfaces better than other lubricants .
World War II caused high demand for the oil as a lubricant for the rapidly increasing number of steam engines in naval and merchant ships .
When the war blocked European and Asian sources of rapeseed oil , a critical shortage developed , and Canada began to expand its limited rapeseed production .
Rapeseed oil extracts were first put on the market in 1956–1957 as food products , but these suffered from several unacceptable characteristics .
Rapeseed oil had a distinctive taste and a disagreeable greenish color , due to the presence of chlorophyll .
It also contained a high concentration of erucic acid .
Canola was bred from rapeseed cultivars of B. napus and B. rapa at the University of Manitoba , Canada , by Keith Downey and Baldur R. Stefansson in the early 1970s , having then a different nutritional profile than present - day oil in addition to much less erucic acid .
Canola was originally a trademark name of the Rapeseed Association of Canada , and the name was a condensation of " Can " from Canada and " ola " from other vegetable oils like Mazola , but is now a generic term for edible varieties of rapeseed oil in North America and Australia .
The change in name serves to distinguish it from natural rapeseed oil , which has much higher erucic acid content .
A genetically engineered rapeseed that is tolerant to herbicide was first introduced to Canada in 1995 ( Roundup Ready canola ) .
A genetically modified variety developed in 1998 is considered to be the most disease- and drought - resistant canola variety to date .
In 2009 , 90 % of the Canadian crop was herbicide - tolerant .
As of 2005 , 87 % of the canola grown in the US was genetically modified .
A 2010 study conducted in North Dakota found glyphosate- or glufosinate - resistance transgenes in 80 % of wild natural rapeseed plants , and a few plants that were resistant to both herbicides .
The escape of the genetically modified plants has raised concerns that the build - up of herbicide resistance in feral canola could make it more difficult to manage these plants using herbicides .
However one of the researchers agrees that " .. feral populations could have become established after trucks carrying cultivated GM seeds spilled some of their load during transportation .
"
She also notes that the GM canola results they found may have been biased as they only sampled along roadsides .
In 2011 , out of the 31 million hectares of canola grown worldwide , 8.2 million ( 26 % ) were genetically modified .
PRODUCTION AND TRADE Source : FAOSTAT of the United Nations
In 2014 , world production of rapeseed oil was 26 million tonnes , led by China , Germany , and Canada as leading producers accounting together for 47 % of the world total .
Canada was the world 's largest exporter of rapeseed oil in 2016 , exporting 2.9 million tonnes or approximately 94 % of its total production .
The benchmark price for worldwide canola trade is the ICE Futures Canada ( formerly Winnipeg Commodity Exchange ) canola futures contract .
GMO REGULATION
Section::::GMO regulation .
There are several forms of genetic modification , such as herbicide ( glyphosate and glufosinate , for example ) tolerance and different qualities in canola oil .
Regulation varies from country to country ; for example , glyphosate - resistant canola has been approved in Australia , Canada , China , Japan , Korea , Mexico , Philippines , and the US , while Laurical , a product with a different oil composition , has been approved for growing only in Canada and the US .
In 2003 , Australia 's gene technology regulator approved the release of canola genetically modified to make it resistant to glufosinate ammonium , a herbicide .
The introduction of the genetically modified crop to Australia generated considerable controversy .
Canola is Australia 's third biggest crop , and is used often by wheat farmers as a break crop to improve soil quality .
As of 2008 , the only genetically modified crops in Australia were canola , cotton , and carnations .
GMO LITIGATION
Section::::GMO litigation .
Genetically modified canola has become a point of controversy and contentious legal battles .
In one high - profile case ( Monsanto Canada Inc. v. Schmeiser )
the Monsanto Company sued Percy Schmeiser for patent infringement after he replanted canola seed he had harvested from his field , which he discovered was contaminated with Monsanto 's patented glyphosate - tolerant canola by spraying it with glyphosate , leaving only the resistant plants .
The Supreme Court ruled that Percy was in violation of Monsanto 's patent because he knowingly replanted the resistant seed that he had harvested and also imposing fees of over $ 200,000 on Schmeiser , but he was not required to pay Monsanto damages since he did not benefit financially from its presence .
On 19 March 2008 , Schmeiser and Monsanto Canada Inc. came to an out - of - court settlement whereby Monsanto would pay for the clean - up costs of the contamination , which came to a total of C$ 660 .
BIODIESEL Section::::Biodiesel .
Europe has invested heavily in infrastructure to use canola oil for biodiesel , spurred by EU biodiesel policy initiatives .
PRODUCTION PROCESS Section::::Production process .
Canola oil is made at a processing facility by slightly heating and then crushing the seed .
Almost all commercial canola oil is then extracted using hexane solvent which is recovered at the end of processing .
Finally , the canola oil is refined using water precipitation and organic acid to remove gums and free fatty acids , filtering to remove color , and deodorizing using steam distillation .
The average density of canola oil is 0.92 g / ml .
Cold - pressed and expeller - pressed canola oil are also produced on a more limited basis .
About 44 % of a seed is oil , with the remainder as a canola meal used for animal feed .
About of canola seed makes of canola oil .
Canola oil is a key ingredient in many foods .
Its reputation as a healthy oil has created high demand in markets around the world , and overall it is the third - most widely consumed vegetable oil .
The oil has many non - food uses and , like soybean oil , is often used interchangeably with non - renewable petroleum - based oils in products , including industrial lubricants , biodiesel , candles , lipsticks , and newspaper inks , depending on the price on the spot market .
Canola vegetable oils certified as organic are required to be from non - GMO rapeseed .
HEALTH INFORMATION
Section::::Health information .
It is considered safe for people to eat , and has a relatively low amount of saturated fat , a substantial amount of monounsaturated fat , with roughly a 2:1 mono- to poly - unsaturated fats ratio .
Experiments on animals have pointed to the possibility that erucic acid , consumed in large quantities , may cause heart damage , although Indian researchers have published findings that call into question these conclusions and the implication that the consumption of mustard or rapeseed oil is dangerous .
Feed meal from the rapeseed plant also was not particularly appealing to livestock , because of high levels of sharp - tasting compounds called glucosinolates .
In 2006 , canola oil was given a qualified health claim by the United States Food and Drug Administration for lowering the risk of coronary heart disease , resulting from its significant content of cholesterol - lowering unsaturated fats ; the allowed claim for food labels states : " Limited and not conclusive scientific evidence suggests that eating about 1 ½ tablespoons ( 19 grams ) of canola oil daily may reduce the risk of coronary heart disease due to the unsaturated fat content in canola oil .
To achieve this possible benefit , canola oil is to replace a similar amount of saturated fat and not increase the total number of calories you eat in a day .
One serving of this product contains [ x ] grams of canola oil . "
A 2013 review , sponsored by the Canola Council of Canada and the U.S. Canola Association , concluded there was a substantial reduction in total cholesterol and low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) cholesterol , and an increase in tocopherol levels and improved insulin sensitivity , compared with other sources of dietary fat .
A 2014 review of health effects from consuming plant oils rich in alpha - linolenic acid , including canola , stated that there was moderate benefit for lower risk of cardiovascular diseases , bone fractures , and type-2 diabetes . !
Compound ! !
Family ! !
% of total 61 % 21 % 11 % 9 % 7 % 4 % Stearic acid 2 %
Trans fat 0.4 % Erucic acid 0.01 % < 0.1 %
Regarding individual components , canola oil is low in saturated fat and contains both omega-6 and omega-3 fatty acids in a ratio of 2:1 .
It is high in monounsaturated fats , which may decrease the risk of heart disease .
ERUCIC ACID Section::::Erucic acid .
Although wild rapeseed oil contains significant amounts of erucic acid , the cultivars used to produce commercial , food - grade canola oil were bred to contain less than 2 % erucic acid , an amount deemed not significant as a health risk .
To date , no health effects have been associated with dietary consumption of erucic acid by humans ; but tests of erucic acid metabolism in other species imply that higher levels may be detrimental .
Canola oil produced using genetically modified plants has also not been shown to explicitly produce adverse effects .
The erucic acid content in canola oil has been reduced over the years .
In western Canada , a reduction occurred from the average content of 0.5 % between 1987 and 1996 to a current content of 0.01 % from 2008 to 2015 .
Other reports also show a content lower than 0.1 % in Australia and Brazil .
Canola oil poses no unusual health risks , and its consumption in food - grade forms is generally recognized as safe by the United States Food and Drug Administration .
COMPARISON TO OTHER VEGETABLE OILS SEE ALSO
* Colza oil * List of canola diseases
* Triangle of U REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * USDA - ERS Topic - Canola Summary of canola production , trade , and consumption as well as links to relevant USDA reports .