PYRUVIC ACID Pyruvic acid ( CHCOCOOH ) is the simplest of the alpha - keto acids , with a carboxylic acid and a ketone functional group .
Pyruvate ( ) , the conjugate base , CHCOCOO , is a key intermediate in several metabolic pathways throughout the cell .
Pyruvic acid can be made from glucose through glycolysis , converted back to carbohydrates ( such as glucose ) via gluconeogenesis , or to fatty acids through a reaction with
acetyl - CoA. It can also be used to construct the amino acid alanine and can be converted into ethanol or lactic acid via fermentation .
Pyruvic acid supplies energy to cells through the citric acid cycle ( also known as the Krebs cycle )
when oxygen is present ( aerobic respiration ) , and alternatively ferments to produce lactate when oxygen is lacking ( lactic acid fermentation ) .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
In 1834 , Théophile - Jules Pelouze distilled both tartaric acid ( -tartaric acid ) and racemic acid ( a mix of and -tartaric acid ) and isolated pyrotartaric acid ( methyl succinic acid ) and another acid that Jöns Jacob Berzelius characterized the following year and named pyruvic acid .
Pyruvic acid is a colorless liquid with a smell similar to that of acetic acid and is miscible with water .
In the laboratory , pyruvic acid may be prepared by heating a mixture of tartaric acid and potassium hydrogen sulfate , by the oxidation of propylene glycol by a strong oxidizer ( e.g. , potassium permanganate or bleach ) , or by the hydrolysis of acetyl cyanide , formed by reaction of acetyl chloride with potassium cyanide : BIOCHEMISTRY Section::::Biochemistry .
Pyruvate is an important chemical compound in biochemistry .
It is the output of the metabolism of glucose known as glycolysis .
One molecule of glucose breaks down into two molecules of pyruvate , which are then used to provide further energy , in one of two ways .
Pyruvate is converted into acetyl - coenzyme A , which is the main input for a series of reactions known as the Krebs cycle ( also known as the citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle ) .
Pyruvate is also converted to oxaloacetate by an anaplerotic reaction , which replenishes Krebs cycle intermediates ; also , the oxaloacetate is used for gluconeogenesis .
These reactions are named after Hans Adolf Krebs , the biochemist awarded the 1953 Nobel Prize for physiology , jointly with Fritz Lipmann , for research into metabolic processes .
The cycle is also known as the citric acid cycle or tricarboxylic acid cycle , because citric acid is one of the intermediate compounds formed during the reactions .
If insufficient oxygen is available , the acid is broken down anaerobically , creating lactate in animals and ethanol in plants and microorganisms ( and carp ) .
Pyruvate from glycolysis is converted by fermentation to lactate using the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase and the coenzyme NADH in lactate fermentation , or to acetaldehyde ( with the enzyme pyruvate decarboxylase ) and then to ethanol in alcoholic fermentation .
Pyruvate is a key intersection in the network of metabolic pathways .
Pyruvate can be converted into carbohydrates via gluconeogenesis , to fatty acids or energy through acetyl - CoA , to the amino acid alanine , and to ethanol .
Therefore , it unites several key metabolic processes .
PYRUVIC ACID PRODUCTION
BY GLYCOLYSIS Section::::Pyruvic acid production by glycolysis .
In glycolysis , phosphoenolpyruvate ( PEP ) is converted to pyruvate by pyruvate kinase .
This reaction is strongly exergonic and irreversible ; in gluconeogenesis , it takes two enzymes , pyruvate carboxylase and PEP carboxykinase , to catalyze the reverse transformation of pyruvate to PEP .
DECARBOXYLATION TO ACETYL COA Section::::Decarboxylation to acetyl CoA. Pyruvate decarboxylation by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex produces acetyl - CoA. CARBOXYLATION TO OXALOACETATE Section::::Carboxylation to oxaloacetate .
Carboxylation by pyruvate carboxylase produces oxaloacetate .
TRANSAMINATION TO ALANINE Section::::Transamination to alanine .
Transamination by alanine transaminase produces alanine .
REDUCTION TO LACTATE Section::::Reduction to lactate .
Reduction by lactate dehydrogenase produces lactate .
USES Section::::Uses .
Pyruvate is sold as a weight - loss supplement , though credible science has yet to back this claim .
A systematic review of six trials found a statistically significant difference in body weight with pyruvate compared to placebo .
However , all of the trials had methodological weaknesses and the magnitude of the effect was small .
The review also identified adverse events associated with pyruvate such as diarrhea , bloating , gas , and increase in low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) cholesterol .
The authors concluded that there was insufficient evidence to support the use of pyruvate for weight loss .
There is also in vitro as well as in vivo evidence in hearts that pyruvate
improves metabolism by NADH production stimulation and increases cardiac function .
SEE ALSO
* Pyruvate scale
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Pyruvic acid mass spectrum