VANCOUVER CANUCKS
The Vancouver Canucks are a professional ice hockey team based in Vancouver , British Columbia .
They are members of the Pacific Division of the Western Conference of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) .
The Canucks play their home games at Rogers Arena , formerly known as General Motors Place , which has an official capacity of 18,910 .
Travis Green is the head coach and Jim Benning is the general manager .
The Canucks joined the league in 1970 as an expansion team along with the Buffalo Sabres .
In its NHL history , the team has advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals three times , losing to the New York Islanders in 1982 , the New York Rangers in 1994 and the Boston Bruins in 2011 .
They have won the Presidents ' Trophy in back - to - back seasons as the team with the league 's best regular season record in the 2010–11 and 2011–12 seasons .
They won three division titles as a member of the Smythe Division from 1974 to 1993 , and seven titles as a member of the Northwest Division from 1998 to 2013 .
The Canucks have retired four players ' jerseys in their history — Stan Smyl ( 12 ) , Trevor Linden ( 16 ) , Markus Naslund ( 19 ) and Pavel Bure ( 10 ) ; all but Bure have served as team captain .
Smyl has the distinction of being the only Canuck to have his jersey number retired at their former arena , the Pacific Coliseum , as well as the only Canuck to play his entire career with the team upon retiring it .
HISTORY BACKGROUND AND ESTABLISHMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Background and establishment .
The first professional ice hockey team based in Vancouver were the Vancouver Millionaires , formed by Frank and Lester Patrick .
Established in 1911 , the Millionaires were one of three teams in the new Pacific Coast Hockey Association .
To accommodate the Millionaires , the Patrick brothers directed the building of the Denman Arena , which was known at the time as the world 's largest artificial ice rink .
The arena was later destroyed in a fire in 1936 .
The Millionaires played for the Stanley Cup five times , winning over the Ottawa Senators in 1915 on home ice .
It marked the first time the Stanley Cup was won by a West Coast team in the trophy 's history .
Absorbed by the Western Canada Hockey League in 1924 , the team continued operations until folding at the end of the 1925–26 WHL season .
From 1926 to 1970 , Vancouver was home to only minor league teams .
Most notably the present - day Canucks ' minor league predecessor ( also known as the Vancouver Canucks ) played from 1945 to 1970 in the Pacific Coast Hockey League and the Western Hockey League .
NHL APPLICATION Section::::NHL application .
With the intention of attracting an NHL franchise , Vancouver began the construction of a new modern arena , the Pacific Coliseum , in 1966 ( with the arena opening in January 1968 ) .
The WHL 's Canucks were playing in a small arena at the time , the Vancouver Forum , situated on the same Pacific National Exhibition grounds as the Coliseum .
Meanwhile , a Vancouver group led by WHL Canucks owner and former Vancouver mayor Fred Hume made a bid to be one of the six teams due to join the league in 1967 , but the NHL rejected their application .
Bid leader Cyrus McLean called the denial a " cooked - up deal " , referring to several biases that factored against them .
Speculation long abounded afterwards that the bid was hindered by Toronto Maple Leafs president Stafford Smythe ; after a failed Vancouver - based business deal , he was quoted as saying that the city would not get a NHL franchise in his lifetime .
Additionally , along with the Montreal Canadiens , Smythe purportedly did not wish to split Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) hockey revenues three ways rather than two .
There were reports at the time , however , that the group had made a very weak proposal in expectation that Vancouver was a lock for one of the new franchises .
Less than a year later , the Oakland Seals were in financial difficulty and having trouble drawing fans .
An apparent deal was in place to move the team to Vancouver , but the NHL did not want to see one of their franchises from the expansion of 1967 move so quickly and vetoed the deal .
In exchange for avoiding a lawsuit , the NHL promised Vancouver would get a team in the next expansion round .
Another group , headed by Minnesota entrepreneur Tom Scallen , made a new presentation and was awarded an expansion franchise for the price of $ 6 million ( three times the cost in 1967 ) .
The new ownership group purchased the WHL Canucks , and brought the team into the league with the Buffalo Sabres as expansion teams for the 1970–71 season .
In preparation for joining the NHL , the WHL Canucks had brought in players with prior NHL experience .
Six of these players ( John Arbour , George Gardner , Len Lunde , Marc Reaume , Ted Taylor and Murray Hall ) would remain with the club for its inaugural NHL season .
The rest of the roster was built through an expansion draft .
1970–1982
: EARLY YEARS Section::::1970–1982 : Early years .
To fill the Canucks ' roster for their inaugural season , the league held an Expansion Draft in the preceding summer .
A draft lottery was held on June 9 , 1970 , determining who between the Canucks and Sabres would get the first selection in the Expansion Draft , as well as the 1970 NHL Amateur Draft ; the Sabres won both spins .
With his first selection in the Expansion Draft , Canucks General Manager Bud Poile chose defenceman Gary Doak .
Among the other players chosen by Vancouver were centre Orland Kurtenbach , who was named the Canucks ' first captain , as well as defenceman Pat Quinn , who later became the team 's general manager and coach in the 1990s .
Two days later , on June 11 , 1970 , the Canucks made defenceman Dale Tallon their first - ever Amateur Draft selection .
Tallon played three seasons with the club before being traded away to the Chicago Black Hawks .
By comparison , the Sabres chose centre Gilbert Perreault with the first overall selection they won from the lottery ; Perreault went on to become a nine - time All - Star and member of the Hockey Hall of Fame .
With the Canucks ' roster set , the team played its inaugural game against the Los Angeles Kings on October 9 , 1970 .
They lost the contest 3–1 ; defenceman Barry Wilkins scored the Canucks ' lone goal in the game and first in franchise history , a backhander against goaltender Denis DeJordy .
Two days later , the squad recorded the first win in franchise history , a 5–3 victory over the Toronto Maple Leafs .
The Canucks struggled in their early years , failing to make the playoffs in their first four seasons .
Placed in the competitive East Division , Poile assembled a core of players during this period led by Kurtenbach that included defencemen Tallon and Jocelyn Guevremont , as well as wingers Andre Boudrias and Dennis Ververgaert .
Boudrias emerged as the team 's leading point - scorer in four of their first five seasons .
Prior to the 1974–75 season , Scallen and his ownership group from Minnesota sold the team to local media mogul Frank Griffiths for $ 9 million .
Also in the summer of 1974 , the Canucks were re - aligned within the league and placed in the new Smythe Division .
They responded with their first winning record ( 38 wins , 32 losses and 10 ties ) , finishing first in the Division with 86 points .
Making their debut in the Stanley Cup playoffs , the Canucks lost the opening series of the 1975 playoffs in five games to the Montreal Canadiens .
Head Coach and General Manager Phil Maloney ( the third GM in team history after Poile and Hal Laycoe ) recalled the importance of a successful season for the Canucks in that year specifically , as the rival league World Hockey Association ( WHA ) had established another major professional team in the city , the Vancouver Blazers .
Competing for the same hockey market , the Canucks emerged over the Blazers as the latter relocated to Calgary , Alberta , the following season .
The Canucks posted a second consecutive winning record and made the playoffs in 1975–76 , but lost to the New York Islanders in a two - game preliminary series .
It would be another 16 years until the team would have another winning record though they made the playoffs nine times in that span .
Kurtenbach retired and assumed a coaching position with Vancouver .
His departure as a player marked the beginning of a seven - year period in which the Canucks had four different captains – Boudrias , Chris Oddleifson , Don Lever and Kevin McCarthy .
Following the 1976–77 season , Maloney was replaced as general manager by Jake Milford , who acquired such players as Stan Smyl , Thomas Gradin , Darcy Rota , Ivan Boldirev and Richard Brodeur , a core that would lead the team throughout the 1980s .
1982
STANLEY CUP RUN Section::::1982
Stanley Cup run .
The Canucks made their first significant playoff impact in the 1982 playoffs .
In their previous five playoff appearances , the team had failed to win a single series .
Though the Canucks finished three games under a .500 win percentage in the 1981–82 regular season , they began gaining momentum by finishing the campaign on a nine - game unbeaten streak .
Meanwhile , Smyl emerged as the club 's leader , replacing McCarthy as captain after the latter was sidelined with an injury late in the season ( he would retain that position for a team - record eight years ) .
Continuing their success in the playoffs , the Canucks made the Stanley Cup Finals with a combined 11–2 record in series against the Calgary Flames , Los Angeles Kings , and Chicago Black Hawks .
Despite having a losing regular season record , Vancouver had home ice advantage in the first series , having finished second in the Smythe Division to the Edmonton Oilers .
The Canucks also had home ice advantage during the second round series against the Kings , who upset the Oilers in the first round .
Late in Game 2 of the Conference Finals in Chicago , Vancouver Interim Head Coach Roger Neilson , frustrated with what he felt was the poor officiating in the game , placed a white towel on the end of a hockey stick and held it up in a gesture mocking surrender ( waving the white flag ) .
The players on the Canucks ' bench followed suit .
When the series shifted to Vancouver for the next two games , the team 's fans cheered them on by waving white towels above their heads .
The habit stuck , becoming an original Canuck fan tradition now seen across the league and in other sports , known as " Towel Power .
"
The Canucks proceeded to win the series in five games , making it to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time in their history .
Entering the Finals against the New York Islanders , the Canucks were the first team from Western Canada to play for the Stanley Cup in 56 years , when the Victoria Cougars reached the 1926 Stanley Cup Finals .
It also marked the first ever coast - to - coast Stanley Cup Finals .
Competing against the Islanders – the Stanley Cup champions of the previous two years , who had finished with 41 points more than Vancouver in the regular season standings – Vancouver took the first game to overtime .
In the final minute of the extra period , Canucks defenceman and fan favourite Harold Snepsts gave the puck away with an errant pass from behind his net , leading to a Mike Bossy goal .
Like the first game , the Canucks held a 3–2 lead after the first two periods in the second game , but were not able to keep their lead , and lost 6–4 .
The Canucks were unable to complete their Cinderella run and were swept , losing their next two games by 3–0 and 3–1 scores .
The 1982 playoffs proved to be the last year in which Vancouver won a playoff series until 1992 .
1982–1994
: DECLINE AND RESURGENCE Section::::1982–1994 : Decline and resurgence .
After their improbable Stanley Cup run , the Canucks slipped back into mediocrity for the rest of the 1980s , making the playoffs only four times for the rest of the decade .
Notable players that joined the Canucks ' core following the 1982 playoffs included offensively - skilled forwards Patrik Sundstrom and Tony Tanti .
Beginning in 1983–84 , the Canucks ' scoring title was held by either Sundstrom or Tanti for four of the next five seasons .
For most of the second half of the 1980s , the Canucks competed with the Los Angeles Kings for the final playoff spot in the Smythe Division .
In the years in which they qualified for the playoffs , the team was eliminated in the first round by either the Edmonton Oilers ( in ) or the Calgary Flames ( in , and the Flames championship season of , which was decided in Game 7 ) , both division rivals .
Following Milford 's tenure as general manager from 1977 to 1982 , the position was held by Harry Neale for three years , then Jack Gordon for two .
The latter was responsible for trading away power forward Cam Neely to the Boston Bruins in 1986 .
In addition to Neely , the Canucks gave up their 1987 first round draft pick , with which the Bruins chose Glen Wesley , and in return acquired centre Barry Pederson .
While Pederson collected back - to - back 70-point seasons with the Canucks in his first two seasons after the trade , he was traded away to the Pittsburgh Penguins in 1989 as his performance quickly declined .
Neely went on to have a Hall of Fame career with the Bruins , recording three 50-goal seasons , and Wesley had a solid 20-year career .
After the installation of former Canucks defenceman Pat Quinn as general manager in the summer of 1987 , the team underwent an immediate rebuilding process , trading away core veterans for younger prospects and players .
Among the more key transactions was a deal with the New Jersey Devils , in which Sundstrom was traded away in exchange for winger Greg Adams and goaltender Kirk McLean .
In addition to Quinn 's trades , the team improved through the draft route with two selections , in particular .
With the second overall selection in the 1988 NHL Entry Draft , the Canucks chose winger Trevor Linden from the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) .
The following year , the team made a controversial selection by choosing Russian winger Pavel Bure 113th overall .
Bure was believed by most teams to be ineligible for selection that year .
Consequently , his draft by the Canucks took a year to be verified by the league as team management went about procuring documents to prove his eligibility .
As the decade turned , a shift in the Canucks ' leadership occurred as Stan Smyl resigned his captaincy prior to the 1990–91 season due to a reduced on - ice role with the team .
In his place , the Canucks implemented a rotating captaincy of Linden , Dan Quinn and Doug Lidster ; of the three , Linden retained the captaincy thereafter , becoming the youngest permanent captain in team history at 21 years of age .
At the end of the season , Smyl retired as the team 's all - time leader in games played , goals , assists and points .
Led by Linden and in large part to Quinn 's dealings , the Canucks rose to prominence in the early 1990s .
This increased success came roughly around the time the Oilers and Flames began to sink in the standings .
As a result , Vancouver won their first division title in 17 years with 42 wins , 26 losses and 12 ties during the 1991–92 season ( it was also the team 's first winning season since the 1975 - 76 season ) .
During the campaign , the Canucks honoured Smyl , who had remained on the team as an assistant coach , by making him the first player in team history to have his jersey ( number 12 ) retired .
In the 1992 playoffs , the Canucks won their first series since 1982 before being eliminated by the Oilers in the second round .
Quinn and Bure became the first Canucks recipients of major NHL awards in the off - season , being awarded the Jack Adams Award as the best coach ( Quinn assumed a dual coaching and general managerial role starting that year ) and the top rookie in the league , respectively .
The following year , the Canucks repeated as regular season division champions , while Bure emerged as arguably the team 's first superstar with his first of back - to - back 60-goal seasons , totals which remain the highest recorded in Canucks history .
As the team struggled to score in the second half of the 1993–94 season , Bure recorded 49 goals in the club 's final 51 games and contributed to 46.45 % of his team 's goals in the final 47 games of the season to carry the Canucks into the 1994 postseason .
Jim Matheson of the Edmonton Journal called Bure " the NHL 's best forward the last 40 games , scoring almost a goal a game . " 1994
STANLEY CUP RUN
Section::::1994
Stanley Cup run .
In , the Canucks made their second trip to the Stanley Cup Finals , entering the playoffs as the seventh seed in the renamed Western Conference .
Despite underachieving in the regular season ( their points total decreased by 16 from the previous year , although they finished second in the newly - renamed Pacific Division ) , the Canucks played well in the playoffs and embarked on another unexpected run .
Opening the playoffs with a close first - round series against the Calgary Flames , Vancouver rallied from a three - games - to - one deficit to win the series in seven contests .
Games 5 through 7 were all won in overtime with goals from Geoff Courtnall , Trevor Linden and Pavel Bure .
The deciding seventh game featured two of the most recognizable and celebrated plays in Canucks history .
With the game tied 3–3 in the first overtime , goaltender Kirk McLean made what became known thereafter as " The Save " , sliding across the crease feet - first and stacking his pads on the goal line to stop Robert Reichel on a one - timer pass from Theoren Fleury .
The following period , Pavel Bure received a breakaway pass from defenceman Jeff Brown before deking Calgary goaltender Mike Vernon to score and win the series .
Fifteen years later , Bure 's goal and McLean 's save were ranked first and second in a Vancouver Sun article listing the " 40 most memorable moments in team history . "
Following their victory over the Flames , the Canucks then went on to defeat both the Dallas Stars and Toronto Maple Leafs ( both in five games )
en route to the franchise 's second Stanley Cup Finals appearance .
Forward Greg Adams sent the Canucks into the Finals with a double - overtime goal against Maple Leafs goaltender Felix Potvin in Game 5 .
Staging the second coast - to - coast Finals in league history , the Canucks were matched against the Presidents ' Trophy - winning New York Rangers .
Vancouver achieved victory in Game 1 by a score of 3–2 in overtime , largely due to a 52-save performance by goaltender McLean .
After losing Games 2 , 3 and 4 , the Canucks won the next two to force a seventh game at Madison Square Garden on June 14 , 1994 .
Despite a two - goal effort ( one on a shorthanded breakaway ) from Linden ( who was playing with cracked ribs ) , Vancouver lost the game by a 3–2 score .
The Canucks ' efforts to tie the game included a post hit by forward Nathan LaFayette with just over a minute remaining in regulation .
The loss was followed by a riot in Downtown Vancouver , which resulted in property damage , injuries and arrests .
Two days after the riots , the team held a rally at BC Place attended by 45,000 fans , who congratulated the team for their effort .
1994–2001 :
25TH ANNIVERSARY , NEW ARENA , AND A NEW BEGINNING
Section::::1994–2001 :
25th Anniversary , new arena , and a new beginning .
With a young core that included Linden , Bure and McLean still in their 20s after the 1994 playoffs , the Canucks appeared poised to remain contenders in the league .
However , the team failed to record a winning season in the six years following their Stanley Cup Finals appearance .
Prior to the lock - out shortened 1994–95 season , Quinn stepped down as head coach to focus on his managerial duties and was replaced by Rick Ley ; Vancouver finished with a .500 record that year .
Their elimination from the 1995 Stanley Cup playoffs in Game 4 of the second round marked the Canucks ' last game played at the Pacific Coliseum , as the team moved into the new General Motors Place ( since renamed Rogers Arena ) , a new $ 160 million arena situated in Downtown Vancouver , the following season .
The Canucks made another significant move in the off - season by acquiring high - scoring Russian forward Alexander Mogilny from the Buffalo Sabres , reuniting Bure with his former CSKA Moscow and national team linemate .
While Mogilny became the second player in team history to record 50 goals and 100 points in a season , chiefly playing with centre Cliff Ronning , the expected chemistry between Mogilny and Bure never materialized , with the latter suffering a season - ending knee injury early in the campaign .
Vancouver finished 1995–96 two games below .500 and were defeated in the first round of the playoffs by the Colorado Avalanche .
The season also marked the arrival of another future Canucks superstar , as Markus Naslund was acquired from the Pittsburgh Penguins in exchange for Alek Stojanov .
The deal is regarded as one of the most lopsided trades in NHL history , as Stojanov soon became a minor - leaguer , while Naslund became the team 's all - time leading goal- and point - scorer years later .
Despite a late season swoon , Ley was fired and replaced by Quinn down the stretch .
The team limped into the playoffs , losing to the Colorado Avalanche in the first round .
In the 1996 off - season , Quinn hired Tom Renney whose tenure as the team 's head coach lasted less than two seasons .
Despite strong performances from Mogilny and team - leading point - scorer Martin Gelinas in Bure and Linden 's absence ( both of whom were injured for long periods of time during the season ) , the Canucks missed the playoffs for the first of four consecutive seasons that year .
Making another high - profile acquisition on July 27 , 1997 , the Canucks signed free agent Mark Messier to a three - year deal .
They had come close to signing Wayne Gretzky the previous summer , but were reportedly spurned away when they refused to continue negotiations and gave Gretzky an ultimatum to sign .
Heading into the 1997–98 season , Linden resigned his captaincy for Messier , who had developed a strong reputation as a leader , having captained the New York Rangers over the Canucks in 1994 ( he also captained the Oilers to a Stanley Cup in 1990 ) .
Linden later recalled regretting the decision , feeling that Messier generated hostility and tension in the dressing room .
Messier later said if he could change one thing about his time in Vancouver , he would not have accepted the captaincy .
The Canucks began the campaign overseas in a two - game series against the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in Tokyo , Japan .
It marked the first time in NHL history that a regular season game was held outside of North America – an effort from the league to attract attention to the sport in anticipation of the 1998 Winter Olympics , which were held in Nagano , Japan .
As the team 's performance continued to worsen , starting the 1997–98 season with three wins in the first 16 games , Quinn was fired as general manager after ten years with the team .
Soon thereafter , Renney was fired and replaced as coach by Mike Keenan , reuniting him with Messier , another central figure from the Rangers ' 1994 team .
Keenan 's hiring reportedly exacerbated tensions between groups of Canucks players and his negative relationship with Linden was given ample media attention .
Two months into his tenure with the team , his role was expanded and he was made de facto general manager .
With control of player personnel , Keenan overhauled the roster , making ten trades within two months , most notably dealing Linden to the New York Islanders .
Although the trade was unpopular with fans , the Canucks received winger Todd Bertuzzi in return , who would later become an integral part of the team 's return to success in the next decade .
Defenceman Bryan McCabe was also part of the deal , who would eventually be involved in a key transaction in the 1999 NHL Entry Draft .
After the Canucks finished the 1997–98 season last in the Western Conference , former NHL Vice - President Brian Burke was named general manager in the summer .
Suffering their worst season since 1977–78 the subsequent year , Keenan was fired midway through and replaced with Marc Crawford ( who had won the Stanley Cup with the Colorado Avalanche in 1996 ) .
Meanwhile , Pavel Bure , unhappy in Vancouver , had withheld himself from the team and requested a trade at the beginning of the campaign .
By January 1999 , he was dealt to the Florida Panthers in a seven - player trade , which saw eventual five - time NHL All - Star Ed Jovanovski heading west .
The trade also involved two draft picks .
Finishing last in the Western Conference for a second - straight year , Vancouver possessed the fourth overall pick in the 1999 NHL Entry Draft .
Set on drafting highly touted Swedish forwards Daniel and Henrik Sedin , Burke orchestrated several transactions to move up to the second and third overall picks , with which he chose both players .
The Canucks began to show improvement in the 1999–2000 season , finishing four points out of a playoff spot .
During the campaign , Mogilny was traded to the New Jersey Devils for forwards Denis Pederson and Brendan Morrison .
With Bure gone and Messier in the last year of his contract , several previously under - achieving players began developing into key contributors for the team , most notably Markus Naslund and Todd Bertuzzi .
In the off - season , Messier left the team and returned to the Rangers ; during the team 's September 2000 training camp , held in Sweden , Naslund was selected to replace Messier as captain , a position he held for seven seasons .
As part of the team 's stay in Sweden , they played exhibition games against Swedish and Finnish teams as part of the NHL Challenge .
2001–2005
: " WEST COAST EXPRESS " YEARS
Section::::2001–2005 : " West Coast Express " years .
Under the leadership of General Manager Brian Burke and Head Coach Marc Crawford , the Canucks once again became a playoff team .
After qualifying for the postseason in 2001 and 2002 as the eighth and final seed in the Western Conference ( losing to the eventual Stanley Cup winners Colorado Avalanche and Detroit Red Wings , respectively ) , the Canucks became regular contenders for the Northwest Division title .
Coinciding with the team 's success in the early 2000s was the rise of captain Markus Naslund and power forward
Todd Bertuzzi into high - scoring wingers and NHL All - Stars .
Joined by centre Brendan Morrison during the 2001–02 season , the trio were nicknamed the " West Coast Express " ( after the Vancouver rail service of the same name ) among Canucks fans and media .
Over the next three years , Naslund ranked in the top five among league scorers and was a Lester B. Pearson Award winner and Hart Memorial Trophy finalist in 2003 .
Bertuzzi was also a top - five scorer in the league in 2001–02 and 2002–03 .
During this span , Burke made a trade with the Washington Capitals to facilitate the return of Trevor Linden .
The ex - captain returned to a markedly different Canucks team with a young core consisting of the aforementioned trio , defencemen Ed Jovanovski and Mattias Ohlund , as well as goaltender Dan Cloutier .
In 2002–03 , the Canucks lost the division title to the Colorado Avalanche on the last day of the regular season .
Individually , Naslund was surpassed the same night by Avalanche forwards Peter Forsberg and Milan Hejduk for the Art Ross Trophy and Maurice " Rocket " Richard Trophy , respectively .
Entering the 2003 playoffs with the fourth seed in the West , the Canucks won their first playoff series in eight years , defeating the St. Louis Blues in seven games before losing to the Minnesota Wild in the second round .
In both series , they were 3–1 comebacks ; the Canucks rallied to beat the Blues , but lost their own 3–1 lead to the Wild , who had also come back from a 3–1 deficit in the first round , against the Avalanche .
Amidst a run for the team 's first Northwest Division title the following season , the Canucks received significant media attention for their involvement in a violent on - ice attack during a game against the Avalanche .
On March 8 , 2004 , Bertuzzi grabbed Avalanche forward Steve Moore from behind and punched him in the head .
As Moore fell to the ice , Bertuzzi landed on top of him ; Moore suffered three fractured neck vertebrae , facial cuts and a concussion .
The incident was in retaliation of a hit that Moore landed on Naslund during a previous game between the two teams .
For his actions , Bertuzzi was suspended by the NHL and International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) through to the start of the 2005–06 season .
He also faced legal action in British Columbia court , while Moore filed lawsuits against him and the Canucks organization in Colorado and Ontario courts .
The Canucks went on to win their first Northwest Division title that season , but lost in the first round of the 2004 playoffs to the Calgary Flames .
After their elimination , Burke 's contract as general manager was not renewed and he was replaced by Assistant General Manager and Director of Hockey Operations Dave Nonis .
At 37 years of age , he became the youngest general manager in team history .
Due to the NHL lock - out , the 2004–05 season was not played .
Several Canucks players went overseas to Europe to play professionally , including Naslund and the Sedin twins , who all returned to their former Swedish team , Modo Hockey .
2005–2011 : AFTER THE LOCK - OUT AND THIRD STANLEY CUP RUN
Section::::2005–2011 : After the lock - out and third Stanley Cup run .
Upon the resolution of the labour dispute between NHL players and owners , new gameplay rules were set in place for the 2005–06 season that were intended to benefit skilled players and generate more goal - scoring .
As the Canucks ' basis of success in previous seasons was built on playing a fast - paced , high - scoring style of play , expectations for the team were high going into the season .
However , the team failed to qualify for the playoffs , completing the regular season ninth place in the West .
The first line of Naslund , Bertuzzi and Morrison suffered offensively , as all three players recorded decreased points totals .
Head Coach Marc Crawford later recalled the campaign as a turning point for the team 's offensive leadership as the Sedin twins began their rise to stardom , matching the top line 's production .
Crawford was fired in the off - season and replaced with Alain Vigneault , who had been coach of the team 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Manitoba Moose .
Three days after Vigneault 's hiring , Nonis dealt Bertuzzi to the Florida Panthers , ending the " West Coast Express " era .
( Naslund and Morrison would leave the team two years later . )
In return , the Canucks received All - Star goaltender Roberto Luongo as part of a six - player trade .
With the acquisition of Luongo , Cloutier was traded away to the Los Angeles Kings .
With widespread changes to team personnel in 2006–07 , the Canucks won the Northwest Division title for the second time in three seasons .
In his first season with the Canucks , Luongo was nominated for the Hart Memorial and Vezina Trophies .
He also tied Bernie Parent for the second - most wins in a single - season by an NHL goaltender , with 47 .
The Canucks opened the 2007 playoffs with a quadruple - overtime win against the Dallas Stars .
Ending at the 138-minute mark , the game was the longest in club history and the sixth - longest in NHL history .
The Canucks also set a league record for shots against in one game , allowing 76 .
Vancouver won the series in seven games despite a lack of goal - scoring ; Stars goaltender Marty Turco recorded three shutouts in the series , becoming the only goalie to achieve the feat and still lose a series .
Advancing to the second round , the team was defeated in five games by the Anaheim Ducks , who went on to win the Stanley Cup that year .
Following the playoffs , Head Coach Vigneault received the Jack Adams Award .
Suffering numerous injuries to players in the 2007–08 season , the Canucks struggled and finished three points out of a playoff spot .
The final game of the season , a 7–1 loss to the Calgary Flames , marked Trevor Linden 's last NHL game , as the former Canucks ' all - time leading scorer retired .
Having missed the playoffs for the second time in three years , the team underwent numerous personnel changes in the off - season .
After Nonis was fired and replaced with former player agent Mike Gillis in April 2008 , longtime Canucks captain Markus Naslund , as well as Brendan Morrison , were let go via free agency .
Also in the off - season , on May 29 , 2008 , the Canucks lost defensive prospect Luc Bourdon to a fatal motorcycle crash near his hometown of Shippagan , New Brunswick .
With Naslund 's departure , Gillis announced on September 30 , 2008 , that Luongo had been named team captain , marking the first time since Bill Durnan of the Montreal Canadiens in 1947 that a goaltender had been named the captain of an NHL team .
During the ensuing season , the Canucks retired their second jersey number in team history , hanging Linden 's number 16 beside Smyl 's number 12 in a pre - game ceremony on December 17 , 2008 .
Later that month , the Canucks acquired unrestricted free agent Mats Sundin .
The arrival of the former Toronto Maple Leafs captain and 500-goal scorer in the NHL came with high expectations .
However , Sundin scored at a pace below his usual pace and retired in the subsequent off - season .
The team finished the regular season with another Northwest Division title and the third seed in the Western Conference .
In the 2009 playoffs , the Canucks swept their first round series against the St. Louis Blues ( the first four - game sweep in franchise history ) , but were defeated in six games by the Chicago Blackhawks in the second round .
In the 2009–10 season , the Canucks faced the longest road trip in NHL history , with 14 games over six weeks , from January 27 to March 13 , 2010 .
The scheduling was a result of Vancouver hosting the 2010 Winter Olympics , which shut down the NHL for two weeks , facilitating General Motors Place 's use for ice hockey during the games .
It marked the first time that an NHL market hosted an Olympics since the league allowed its players to compete in the games , beginning with the 1998 Games in Nagano .
Among the several Canucks players named to their respective national teams , centre Ryan Kesler of the United States and goaltender Roberto Luongo of Canada played against each other in the gold medal game ; Luongo and Team Canada emerged with the win .
As the NHL season resumed , Henrik Sedin went on to become the first Canucks player to win the Art Ross and Hart Memorial Trophies as the league 's leading scorer and most valuable player , respectively .
He achieved the feat with a franchise - record 112 points , surpassing Pavel Bure 's mark of 110 set in 1991–92 .
Vancouver won the Northwest Division title and finished third in the Western Conference for the second - straight year .
They opened the playoffs by defeating the sixth - place Los Angeles Kings in six games , but were once again eliminated by Chicago , who went on to win the Stanley Cup that year , the following round in six games .
The 2010–11 season began on October 9 , 2010 , with a pre - game ceremony to commemorate the team 's 40-year anniversary .
Henrik Sedin was officially named in the ceremony as the team 's new captain , replacing Roberto Luongo , who had relinquished his captaincy in the off - season .
The Canucks played the Los Angeles Kings , their first opponent in their inaugural season in 1970 ; both teams wore their original uniforms used in the Canucks ' inaugural game .
Throughout the season , the Canucks continued to celebrate their 40th anniversary with the creation of the " Ring of Honour " , a permanent in - arena display commemorating their most significant players from past years .
Four players were inducted during the campaign – Orland Kurtenbach , Kirk McLean , Thomas Gradin and Harold Snepsts .
In December 2010 , the Canucks also honoured Markus Naslund by retiring his number 19 jersey .
Naslund had retired two years after leaving the Canucks in 2008 .
During the second half of the campaign , the Canucks pulled ahead in their battles for the Western Conference and Presidents ' Trophy titles with the Detroit Red Wings and Philadelphia Flyers , respectively , widening the gap as the season closed .
On March 29 , 2011 , the Canucks clinched first place in the West for the first time in team history .
Two days later , they accomplished another first by securing the Presidents ' Trophy .
Finishing with 54 wins and 117 points , the 2010–11 team broke the previous Canuck records in both categories by significant margins .
Individually , numerous Canucks players had career years .
Daniel Sedin won the Art Ross Trophy with a league - leading 104 points , marking the first time in NHL history that two brothers won the award in back - to - back years .
Meanwhile , Ryan Kesler tied Daniel Sedin for the team goal - scoring lead , with 41 goals .
In goal , Roberto Luongo and rookie backup Cory Schneider captured the William M. Jennings Trophy for recording the lowest team goals against average ( GAA ) in the NHL .
2011
STANLEY CUP RUN Section::::2011
Stanley Cup run .
Entering the 2011 Stanley Cup playoffs , the Canucks were paired with the eighth - seeded and defending Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks , who had eliminated Vancouver in the previous two years .
While Vancouver initially took a 3–0 lead in the series , Chicago came back to also win three straight games and force the series into a Game 7 .
Luongo , who had a history of struggling against the Blackhawks , was pulled in Games 4 and 5 ; he also began Game 6 on the bench in favour of Cory Schneider before returning as the starter in Game 7 .
In the deciding game , Vancouver held a 1–0 lead with less than two minutes remaining in regulation when they gave up a shorthanded goal to Chicago captain Jonathan Toews .
Forced into overtime , winger Alexandre Burrows scored his second goal of the game following a failed clearing attempt by Chicago defenceman Chris Campoli to win the series .
In the Conference Semi - finals , the Canucks faced the defensive - minded Nashville Predators , led by goaltender Pekka Rinne .
Of the 14 goals Vancouver scored in the low - scoring series , Canucks centre Ryan Kesler registered a point in 11 of them , helping the Canucks defeat the Predators in six games .
Facing the San Jose Sharks in the Conference Finals , captain Henrik Sedin led the Canucks with 12 points in the five - game series .
Vancouver defeated San Jose four - games - to - one with a double - overtime winner from defenceman Kevin Bieksa in the fifth game .
Advancing to the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time since 1994 , the Canucks opened the fourth round against the Boston Bruins with a 1–0 win in Game 1 .
Winger Raffi Torres scored the winning goal with 18.5 seconds remaining .
The following game , the Canucks won 3–2 in overtime with Burrows scoring the winner 11 seconds into the extra frame , making it the second fastest overtime goal in Stanley Cup Finals history .
As the series shifted from Rogers Arena to TD Garden for Games 3 and 4 , Boston tied the series with 8–1 and 4–0 victories .
Game 3 marked the highest score by one team in a Finals game since the Colorado Avalanche defeated the Florida Panthers in 1996 .
During the contest , the Bruins lost first - line forward Nathan Horton for the remainder of the series when he suffered a serious concussion from a controversial hit by Canucks defenceman Aaron Rome , who received a four - game suspension as a result .
Returning to Vancouver for Game 5 , the Canucks won 1–0 with a goal from late - season acquisition Maxim Lapierre in the third period .
With an opportunity to win the Stanley Cup in Boston , Vancouver lost Game 6 by a 5–2 score .
The Bruins ' first four goals occurred in a span of four minutes and 14 seconds during the first period , setting a Finals record for the fastest four goals scored by a team ( surpassing the previous mark of five minutes and 29 seconds set by the Montreal Canadiens in 1956 ) .
Hosting Game 7 , the Canucks were shut - out 4–0 as Boston won their first Stanley Cup in 39 years , setting off riots and looting in downtown Vancouver , repeating the events of 17 years earlier .
2011–2014
: DECLINE OF THE GILLIS ERA Section::::2011–2014 : Decline of the Gillis era .
During the season - opening game against the Pittsburgh Penguins on October 6 , 2011 , a tribute video was staged by the fans in Rogers Arena congratulating the Canucks for their record setting season and for making the Stanley Cup Finals .
The team also honoured the late Rick Rypien , who committed suicide during the off - season , on August 15 .
For the rest of the season , the players wore decals on their helmets saying " 37 RYP . "
The Canucks were strong contenders for much of the 2011–12 season , and clinched both the Western Conference and President 's Trophy , for the second consecutive year , in their last game of the season .
Despite projections for another Stanley Cup run at the outset of the 2012 playoffs , the Canucks were eliminated in five games to eventual Cup champion Los Angeles Kings .
Prior to the start of the 2012–13 season , the league 's collective bargaining agreement ( CBA ) expired .
Unable to agree on a new CBA , the NHL enacted a lock - out on September 15 , 2012 .
The lock - out continued on for days , which resulted in the need for a shortened season .
The Canucks wore Vancouver Millionaires
replica jerseys on March 16 , 2013 , to celebrate the 100-year anniversary of the Millionaires .
Vancouver finished the year winning their fifth consecutive Northwest Division title , but were swept in the first round of the playoffs by the San Jose Sharks .
Vigneault and his coaching staff were fired at the end of the season , and replaced by John Tortorella .
Not long after Tortorella was hired , Cory Schneider was traded to the New Jersey Devils .
The Canucks participated in their first outdoor NHL game on March 2 , 2014 , a match against the Ottawa Senators at BC Place .
The event was titled the 2014 Heritage Classic .
Luongo was traded back to the Panthers during the season , while the team failed to make the playoffs for the first time in six years .
This saw Gillis fired and Linden named president of hockey operations ; Tortorella was also relieved as coach after his one season .
2014–PRESENT
: THE BENNING ERA Section::::2014–present : The Benning era .
On May 21 , 2014 , Jim Benning was announced as general manager .
On June 23 , 2014 , Willie Desjardins was named the 18th head coach of the Canucks .
The team underwent a series of changes under the new management structure : veteran forward Ryan Kesler was traded to the Anaheim Ducks , and defenceman Jason Garrison was traded to the Tampa Bay Lightning , while Ryan Miller and Radim Vrbata were signed as free agents .
This season saw the team honour former general manager and head coach Pat Quinn , following his death , by renaming a city street after him ( Pat Quinn Way ) as well as having his family participate in a pregame ceremonial puck drop .
The Canucks finished second in the Pacific Division in the 2014–15 season , reaching the 100 point plateau for the ninth time in franchise history .
They faced the Calgary Flames in the first round of the playoffs , losing in six games .
As the team fared poorly throughout the 2016–17 season , more veteran players were traded away : both Alex Burrows and Jannik Hansen , were dealt in what was viewed as a shift to rebuild .
Desjardins and his coaching staff , ( with the exception of assistant coach Doug Jarvis ) , were let go at the end of the season , replaced by Travis Green who had been coaching their AHL affiliate in Utica .
They also added Nolan Baumgartner , Newell Brown , and Manny Malhotra .
On April 2 , 2018 , longtime Canucks Daniel and Henrik Sedin announced they would retire at the end of the 2017–18 season after 18 seasons , ending their careers on April 7 , 2018 , in a 3–2 shootout loss to the host Edmonton Oilers .
In June 2018 , longtime Canucks ' public address announcer John Ashbridge died , having worked in that capacity since 1987 .
During the offseason , Linden stepped down as president of hockey operations .
TEAM
INFORMATION HOME ARENAS Section::::Team information .
Section::::Home arenas .
The Canucks play their home games at Rogers Arena .
The stadium opened in 1995 as General Motors Place , and seats up to 18,890 for Canucks games .
Rogers Arena was also the 2010 Winter Olympics ' ice hockey venue .
The arena is owned and operated by Canucks Sports & Entertainment .
Before moving to Rogers Arena , the Canucks played their home games at Pacific Coliseum in Hastings Park for 25 years .
The arena currently holds 16,281 for ice hockey , though capacity at its opening was 15,713 .
During the 2010 Olympics , it was the venue for figure skating and short track speed skating .
The Pacific Coliseum was also the home of the Western Hockey League ( WHL ) 's Vancouver Giants from 2001 to 2016 .
LOGOS AND JERSEYS Section::::Logos and jerseys .
The team has gone through four primary logos and six major uniform designs over the years , with numerous minor changes to each , in addition to several alternate logos and jerseys .
The team 's first NHL jerseys , worn from the inaugural season of 1970–71 ( modified for the 1972–73 season ) until the end of the 1977–78 season , featured a hockey stick in the shape of a shallow " V " superimposed on a blue rink - shaped rectangle forming the letter " C " , designed by North Vancouver artist Joe Borovich .
A modified version of this logo is still in use , as a shoulder patch on the team 's current jerseys and as the primary logo of their alternate jerseys .
In 1978 , aiming for a more aggressive image , the organization asked San Francisco - based design agency Beyl & Boyd to design new uniforms .
These consisted of a huge , yellow , red - orange and black striped " V " coming down from the shoulders ( suggesting " victory " , according to its designers ) .
Hockey writer Stephen Cole described it as looking like " a punch in the eye " .
The colour of the home jerseys changed from white to yellow with the logo change .
The " Flying V " theme , which included several slight modifications over the years , was abandoned in 1985 , to feature the team 's emblem on the front rather than the " V " ( the emblem had previously been worn only on the sleeves ) .
The logo consisted of the word " Canucks " in a diagonal slant as part the blade of a skate and was designed by San Francisco graphic artist Mike Bull .
The logo , with its laser - like design , was sometimes referred to as the " Star Wars " logo , the " waffle iron " , the " plate of spaghetti " , and most commonly as the " Flying Skate . "
The yellow home jerseys were scrapped in 1989 in favour of more conventional white ones , and the triangular shoulder stripes which adorned the post-"V " jerseys were discarded as well .
The new incarnation was worn from 1989–92 , when a subtle change was made – and went largely unnoticed for the rest of the jersey 's lifespan .
The orange was changed to red , and the deep " gold " colour was changed to a much brighter yellow , reportedly because jersey - maker CCM no longer produced the required hues .
In 1996 , an alternate jersey was introduced , retaining the " Flying Skate " logo , but using a salmon colour graduating to black near the bottom .
In 1997 the Canucks unveiled a new logo , in which a Haida - style orca breaking out of a patch of ice forms a stylized " C.
" The logo has been much - maligned , accused of being a blatant reference to their parent company , Orca Bay ( now Canucks Sports and Entertainment ) .
At the time , General Manager Pat Quinn discussed wanting to have a West Coast colour scheme , and overall West Coast themes in the logo ; the colour scheme included blue , red and silver .
Beginning in 2001 , an alternate jersey was utilized , with contrasting shoulder patches and a blue - to - maroon graduated colour in the body .
In 2006 , these gradient - coloured alternate jerseys were officially replaced with the popular , royal blue " Stick - in - Rink " uniforms from the 1970s .
Little more than halfway through the 2006–07 season , the Canucks announced that they would be changing their jerseys once again .
The new uniform was unveiled prior to training camp , on August 29 , 2007 .
It featured the same orca design present on their previous jerseys , but the colour scheme was changed to their " retro " colours of royal blue and kelly green .
Additionally , the word " Vancouver " was added to the chest area above the orca .
This move was seen as a way to connect the NHL Canucks ' uniform to that of the WHL team , whose members wore uniforms with the word " Canucks " along the top in a similar arched design .
The actual jerseys themselves were changed to the Rbk Edge design , along with all other teams in the NHL .
The introduction was largely greeted with disappointment from fans and sports commentators , who criticized the uniforms for looking like a " copy and paste " of those from the past .
The Vancouver Sun described the new look as " decidedly unpopular . "
On November 14 , 2008 , prior to their Sport Celebrities Festival , the Canucks released their new RBK Edge Third Jersey .
While staying with the colours of Vancouver , and combining the old with the new , the jersey looks very similar to their home jersey .
The modernized " Stick - in - Rink " logo unveiled the previous year on the shoulder of the main jerseys is used as the main crest .
On the shoulder , a " V " with the head of Johnny Canuck on top is used .
This is the first time in team history since joining the NHL that Johnny Canuck has appeared on a Vancouver uniform .
Sports Illustrated rated it 13th overall out of the 19 third jerseys released for the 2008 season .
On opening night October 9 , 2010 , the Canucks revealed jerseys they would wear for select games during their 40th Anniversary season .
They look exactly like the jerseys the team wore in their early years , only with the addition of Reebok manufacturing the jerseys .
The jerseys sport a 40th Anniversary patch on the upper - right chest commemorating their 40th season .
Just like the early years , they also bear no player names , only numbers , with permission from the NHL .
On August 13 , 2015 , the Canucks announced that they would be wearing their 1990s Flying Skate jerseys for a February 13 , 2016 game against the Toronto Maple Leafs to honour the 20th Anniversary of Rogers Arena .
They attempted to do this in the previous season to honour Pat Quinn , but were unsuccessful .
The 1990s jerseys will be seen again for select games in the 2019–20 season ( the design was chosen via an online fan vote over two other throwback jerseys ) to concide with the team 's 50th anniversary .
MASCOT
Section::::Mascot .
The Vancouver Canucks ' mascot is an anthropomorphic killer whale ( orca ) named Fin the Whale .
He is often seen banging a First Nations drum or skating around during intermissions firing t - shirts out of a compressed air cannon .
On occasion , " smoke " also comes out of the blowhole on his head .
Fin is known for his " chomping " where he bites the heads of fans .
Two fans of the Canucks became unofficial mascots of the team at the end of the 2009 - 2010 season , donning zentai - style , skin - tight green bodysuits in slightly different shades of green as The Green Men , and have been known to accompany the team on road games , as they did in the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals to the TD Garden against the Boston Bruins .
On September 5 , 2012 , as an acknowledgement of their rising popularity , ESPN inducted The Green Men into the " Hall of Fans " , a semi - satirical take on a Hall of Fame .
In November 2014 , the Green Men announced that 2014–15 would be their final season .
MEDIA Section::::Media .
After a relationship with CKNW stretching since the Canucks joined the NHL in 1970 , the Canucks entered into a new radio broadcast deal in 2006 with CKST – an AM sports / talk station .
John Shorthouse continues to call the play - by - play , as he has since 1999 , though with his role on the Canucks ' television broadcasts becoming more prominent in recent years , he is replaced for approximately 50 games per season by Jon Abbott .
He is joined with colour commentary by Dave Tomlinson , who has been with the broadcasts since 2010 .
The games aired on 14 stations across British Columbia .
On March 9 , 2017 , it was announced that Rogers Media had acquired radio rights to the Canucks under a 5-year deal to begin in the 2017 - 18 season .
On April 25 , 2017 , Rogers announced that it would acquire CISL from Newcap Radio and convert it to a sports radio format to serve as team flagship .
Sportsnet and Rogers hold a monopoly on all broadcasts of the Canucks ; regional games are aired by Sportsnet Pacific , and occasionally on the overflow channel Sportsnet Canucks .
Sportsnet had held the television rights to the team since 1998 .
OWNERSHIP Section::::Ownership .
The initial owners were Tom Scallen 's Medicor group .
In 1972 , hints of impropriety were circulating about Scallen .
He was charged with stock fraud and spent the last two years of his Canuck ownership in prison .
In 1974 Scallen and Medicor sold the team to media executive Frank Griffiths .
From 1988 to 1997 , the Vancouver Canucks were owned by local businessman and philanthropist Arthur Griffiths , who had inherited ownership from his father , Frank .
However , he was forced to sell his majority interest in the Canucks after overextending his resources trying to build a new arena , GM Place ( currently known as Rogers Arena ) .
As a result , he sold his majority share to American billionaire John McCaw , Jr ..
On November 17 , 2004 , the Aquilini Investment Group , headed by Francesco Aquilini , purchased a 50 % share in Orca Bay Sports and Entertainment ( the owners of both the Canucks franchise and Rogers Arena ) from John McCaw ,
Jr. Prior to the sale , Aquilini and two business partners , Tom Gaglardi and Ryan Beedie , had negotiated with Orca Bay for several months without concluding an agreement .
In January 2005 , Gaglardi and Beedie filed a lawsuit against Aquilini and Orca Bay , alleging that Aquilini and Orca Bay had acted in bad faith in concluding a deal using information obtained from their joint offer .
On November 8 , 2006 , Aquilini , along with his brothers Roberto and Paolo , purchased the remaining 50 % of the Vancouver Canucks and Rogers Arena from McCaw .
In May 2007 , Gaglardi and Beedie 's civil lawsuit over Aquilini 's purchase reached the Supreme Court of British Columbia .
The court ruled for Aquilini , on January 10 , 2008 .
The court held that there was no legal partnership between Aquilini , Beedie , and Gaglardi , and that McCaw was free to sell the team to anyone he wished .
On January 29 , 2008 , the company responsible for operating the Vancouver Canucks and Rogers Arena , changed its name from Orca Bay Sports and Entertainment to Canucks Sports & Entertainment .
MINOR LEAGUE AFFILIATES TOP AFFILIATES Section::::Minor league affiliates .
Section::::Top affiliates .
1970–71 to 1971–72
Rochester Americans ( AHL ) 1972–73 to 1974–75 Seattle Totems ( WHL , CHL )
1975–76 to 1977–78 Tulsa Oilers ( CHL )
1978–79 to 1981–82 Dallas Black Hawks ( CHL )
1982–83 to 1987–88 Fredericton Express ( AHL ) 1988–89 to 1991–92 Milwaukee Admirals ( IHL )
1992–93 to 1993–94 Hamilton Canucks ( AHL ) 1994–95 to 1999–00 Syracuse Crunch ( AHL ) 2000–01 Kansas City Blades ( IHL )
2001–02 to 2010–11 Manitoba Moose ( AHL )
2011–12 to 2012–13
Chicago Wolves ( AHL )
2013–14 to present Utica Comets ( AHL ) SECONDARY AFFILIATES Section::::Secondary affiliates .
1987–88 Flint Spirits ( IHL ) 1991–92
Columbus Chill ( ECHL ) 2002–03 to 2005–06 Columbia Inferno ( ECHL ) 2006–07 to 2010–11 Victoria Salmon Kings ( ECHL )
2011–12 to 2014–15 Kalamazoo Wings ( ECHL ) 2016–17 Alaska Aces ( ECHL ) 2017–18 Kalamazoo Wings ( ECHL ) SEASON - BY - SEASON RECORD Section::::Season - by - season record .
This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Canucks .
For the full season - by - season history , see List of Vancouver Canucks seasons .
Note :
GP = Games played , W = Wins , L = Losses , T
= Ties , OTL = Overtime Losses , Pts = Points , GF = Goals for , GA = Goals against PLAYERS
CURRENT ROSTER RETIRED NUMBERS Notes
* Bure wore number 10 for five of his seven seasons in Vancouver .
He wore number 96 during the 1995–96 and 1996–97 seasons before returning to number 10 during the 1997–98 season .
*
The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky 's # 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All - Star Game .
* Daniel and Henrik Sedins will have their numbers 22 and 33 retired during the 2019–20 season , coinciding with the 50th season of the franchise .
NUMBERS TAKEN
OUT OF CIRCULATION
Section::::Numbers taken out of circulation .
Although not officially retired , the following numbers are no longer issued by the Canucks :
* 11 – Wayne Maki , LW , 1970–1973 , taken out of circulation following his death from brain cancer on May 1 , 1974 .
Chris Oddleifson ( C , 1974–1976 ) and Mark Messier ( C , 1997–2000 ) are the only Canucks players to have worn it since .
* 28 – Luc Bourdon , D , 2006–2008 , taken out of circulation following his death in a motorcycle crash on May 29 , 2008 .
* 37 – Rick Rypien , C , 2005–2011 , taken out of circulation following his death from suicide on August 15 , 2011 .
HALL OF FAMERS RING OF HONOUR
INDUCTEES
* Orland Kurtenbach , C , 1970–1974 , inducted October 26 , 2010 .
* Kirk McLean , G , 1987–1998 , inducted November 24 , 2010 .
* Thomas Gradin , C , 1978–1986 , inducted January 24 , 2011 .
* Harold Snepsts , D , 1974–1984 ; 1988–1990 , inducted March 14 , 2011 .
* Pat Quinn , D , 1970–1972 ; President & General manager , 1987–1997 ; Head Coach , 1991–1994 ; 1996 , inducted April 13 , 2014 .
* Mattias Ohlund , D , 1997–2009 , inducted December 16 , 2016 .
TEAM CAPTAINS Section::::Team captains .
There have been 13 Canucks players who have served as the captain .
The franchise 's first captain was Orland Kurtenbach , who captained the team until his retirement in 1974 .
The longest - tenured Canucks captains have been Stan Smyl and Henrik Sedin , who each served as captain for eight seasons ; each were also the only captains to have spent their entire NHL career with the Canucks .
Swedish winger Markus Naslund , who captained for seven seasons , was the first non - Canadian to have captained the Canucks .
Though goaltenders are not permitted to act as captains during games , Roberto Luongo served as the captain from 2008 to 2010 , but because of the NHL rule against goaltender captains , the league did not allow Luongo to serve as on - ice captain .
In his place , the three alternate captains were responsible for dealing with officials during games .
They also handled ceremonial face - offs .
Luongo was not permitted to wear the " C " on his jersey .
Instead , he incorporated it into the artwork on the front of one of his masks , which he occasionally wore for the early months of the 2008–09 season .
* Orland Kurtenbach , 1970–1974 * Andre Boudrias , 1975–1976
* Chris Oddleifson , 1976–1977
* Don Lever , 1977–1979 * Kevin McCarthy , 1979–1982 * Stan Smyl , 1982–1990 * Dan Quinn , Doug Lidster and Trevor Linden , 1990–1991
* Trevor Linden , 1991–1997
* Mark Messier , 1997–2000 * Markus Naslund , 2000–2008 * Roberto Luongo , 2008–2010 * Henrik Sedin , 2010–2018 DRAFT PICKS Section::::Draft picks .
The Canucks selected Dale Tallon , a defenceman from the Toronto Marlboros with their first pick , second overall in the 1970 NHL Amateur Draft .
In 1978 , they drafted Stan Smyl from the New Westminster Bruins .
Ten years later , the Canucks also drafted Trevor Linden from the Medicine Hat Tigers in 1988 .
The Canucks have had 13 top - five draft picks in franchise history , but have never had the first overall pick .
The Canucks are one of the two franchises in the NHL to have drafted two twin brothers in the same year .
They drafted Daniel Sedin second overall and Henrik Sedin third overall in 1999 .
Two players from British Columbia have been selected by the Canucks in the first round of an NHL Entry Draft :
Cam Neely in 1983 and Jake Virtanen , taken 6th overall in 2014 .
FRANCHISE SCORING
LEADERS
Section::::Franchise scoring leaders .
These are the top - ten point - scorers in franchise history .
Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season .
* – current Canucks player HEAD COACHES Section::::Head coaches .
There have been 19 head coaches for the Canucks .
The franchise 's first head coach was Hal Laycoe , who coached the Canucks for two seasons .
Alain Vigneault coached the most games of any Canucks head coach with 540 games , and has the most points all - time with the Canucks with 683 , from the 2006–07 season through the 2012–13 season .
He is followed by Marc Crawford , who has 586 points all - time with the Canucks .
Vigneault also has the most points in a season of any Canucks coach , with 117 in the 2010–11 season .
Roger Neilson is the only Hockey Hall of Fame inductee to coach the Canucks .
Quinn and Vigneault are the only two Canucks head coaches to win a Jack Adams Award with the team .
Bill LaForge , who coached the start of the 1984 season , has the least points with the Canucks , with 10 .
Harry Neale served the most terms as head coach of the Canucks with three while Pat Quinn served two .
The current head coach is Travis Green , who served in the same position with the Canucks ' AHL affiliate , the Utica Comets .
AWARDS AND TROPHIES NHL Section::::Awards and trophies .
Section::::NHL .
Clarence S. Campbell Bowl *
1981–82 , 1993–94 ,
2010–11 Presidents ' Trophy
*
2010–11 ,
2011–12
Calder Memorial Trophy
* Pavel Bure : 1991–92 Jack Adams Award
*
Pat Quinn : 1991–92 * Alain Vigneault : 2006–07 Budweiser NHL Man of the Year Award * Ryan Walter :
1991–92 King Clancy Memorial Trophy
* Trevor Linden : 1996–97 * Henrik Sedin : 2015–16 * Daniel Sedin and Henrik Sedin : 2017–18 Lester B. Pearson Award / Ted Lindsay Award
* Markus Naslund :
2002–03 * Daniel Sedin : 2010–11 NHL Plus / Minus Award
* Marek Malik :
2003–04 NHL Foundation Player Award
* Trevor Linden : 2007–08
Scotiabank Fan Fav Award
* Roberto Luongo :
2008–09 Art Ross Trophy
* Henrik Sedin :
2009–10 * Daniel Sedin : 2010–11 Hart Memorial Trophy * Henrik Sedin :
2009–10 William M. Jennings Trophy * Roberto Luongo and Cory Schneider :
2010–11
Frank J. Selke Trophy
* Ryan Kesler : 2010–11 NHL General Manager of the Year Award
* Mike Gillis : 2010–11 ALL - STAR Section::::All - Star .
First All - Star Team
* Pavel Bure :
1993–94 * Markus Naslund :
2001–02 , 2002–03 , 2003–04
*
Todd Bertuzzi :
2002–03 * Henrik Sedin :
2009–10 , 2010–11
* Daniel Sedin :
2010–11 Second All - Star Team * Kirk McLean : 1991–92
* Alexander Mogilny : 1995–96 * Roberto Luongo :
2006–07
* Daniel Sedin :
2009–10 NHL
All - Rookie Team
* Jim Sandlak :
1986–87
* Trevor Linden : 1988–89 * Corey Hirsch :
1995–96
* Mattias Ohlund : 1997–98 * Brock Boeser :
2017–18 FRANCHISE FRANCHISE INDIVIDUAL RECORDS
* Most goals in a season :
Pavel Bure , 60 ( 1992–93 and 1993–94 )
*
Most assists in a season : Henrik Sedin , 83 ( 2009–10 ) * Most points in a season : Henrik Sedin , 112 ( 2009–10 )
* Highest plus / minus in a season :
Christian Ehrhoff , 36 ( 2009–10 ) ; Daniel Sedin , 36 ( 2009–10 ) , tied *
Most penalty minutes in a season : Donald Brashear , 372 ( 1997–98 ) *
Most points in a season , defenceman :
Doug Lidster , 63 ( 1986–87 )
* Most points in a season , rookie :
Ivan Hlinka , 60 ( 1981–82 ) ; Pavel Bure , 60 ( 1991–92 ) , tied *
Most wins in a season :
Roberto Luongo , 47 ( 2006–07 )
* Most shutouts in a season :
Roberto Luongo , 9 ( 2008–09 )
* Lowest GAA in a season ( min .
30 GP ) :
Cory Schneider , 1.96 ( 2011–12 )
* Best SV% in a season ( min .
30 GP ) :
Cory Schneider , .937 ( 2011–12 )
* Fastest goal recorded by a Canuck :
Alexandre Burrows , 6 seconds ( 2012–13 ) NOTES REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS