AUSTRALIAN DOLLAR
The Australian dollar ( sign : $ ; code : AUD ) is the currency of the Commonwealth of Australia , including its external territories Christmas Island , Cocos ( Keeling ) Islands , and Norfolk Island , as well as the independent Pacific Island states of Kiribati , Nauru , Tonga , Tuvalu , and Vanuatu .
The Australian dollar was legal tender of Papua New Guinea until 1 January 1976 , when the Papua New Guinean kina became the sole legal tender .
Within Australia , it is almost always abbreviated with the dollar sign ( $ ) , with A$ or AU$ sometimes used to distinguish it from other dollar - denominated currencies .
It is subdivided into 100 cents .
In 2016 , the Australian dollar was the fifth most traded currency in the world , accounting for 6.9 % of the world 's daily share ( down from 8.6 % in 2013 ) .
It trades in the world foreign exchange markets behind the US dollar , the euro , the yen and the pound sterling .
The Australian dollar is popular with currency traders , because of the comparatively high interest rates in Australia , the relative freedom of the foreign exchange market from government intervention , the general stability of Australia 's economy and political system , and the prevailing view that the Australian dollar offers diversification benefits in a portfolio containing the major world currencies , especially because of its greater exposure to Asian economies and the commodities cycle .
The currency is commonly referred to by foreign - exchange traders as the " Aussie dollar " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
With pounds , shillings and pence to be replaced by decimal currency on 14 February 1966 , many names for the new currency were suggested .
In 1963 , Prime Minister , Sir Robert Menzies , a monarchist , wished to name the currency the royal .
Other proposed names from a public naming competition included more exotic suggestions such as the austral , the oz , the boomer , the roo , the kanga , the emu , the koala , the digger , the zac , the kwid , the dinkum , and the ming ( Menzies ' nickname ) .
Menzies ' influence resulted in the selection of the royal , and trial designs were prepared and printed by the Reserve Bank of Australia .
Australian treasurer and future Prime Minister , Harold Holt , announced the decision in Parliament on 5 June 1963 .
The royal would be subdivided into 100 cents , but the existing names shilling , florin and crown would be retained for the 10-cent , 20-cent and 50-cent coins respectively .
The name royal for the currency proved very unpopular , with Holt and his wife even receiving death threats .
On 24 July Holt told the Cabinet the decision had been a " terrible mistake " and it would need to be revisited .
On 18 September Holt advised Parliament that the name was to be the dollar , of 100 cents .
The Australian pound , introduced in 1910 and officially distinct in value from the pound sterling since devaluation in 1931 , was replaced by the dollar on 14 February 1966 .
The rate of conversion for the new decimal currency was two dollars per Australian pound , or ten Australian shillings per dollar .
The exchange rate was pegged to the pound sterling at a rate of $ 1 = 8 shillings ( $ 2.50 = UK £ 1 ) .
In 1967 , Australia effectively left the sterling area , when the pound sterling was devalued against the US dollar and the Australian dollar did not follow .
It maintained its peg to the US dollar at the rate of A$ 1 = US$ 1.12 .
On 27 September 2012 , the Reserve Bank of Australia stated that it had ordered work on a project to upgrade the current banknotes .
The upgraded banknotes would incorporate a number of new future proof security features and include Braille dots for ease of use of the visually impaired .
The first new banknotes ( of the five dollar denomination ) were issued from 1 September 2016 , with the remaining denominations to be issued in the coming years .
COINS Section::::Coins .
In 1966 , coins were introduced in denominations of 1 , 2 , 5 , 10 , 20 and 50 cents .
The initial 50-cent coins contained 80 % silver and were withdrawn after a year when the intrinsic value of the silver content was found to considerably exceed the face value of the coins .
One - dollar coins were introduced in 1984 , followed by two - dollar coins in 1988 to replace the banknotes of that value , while the one- and two - cent coins were discontinued in 1991 and withdrawn from circulation .
In commemoration of the 40th anniversary of decimal currency , the 2006 mint proof and uncirculated sets included one- and two - cent coins .
In early 2013 , Australia 's first triangular coin was introduced to mark the 25th anniversary of the opening of Parliament House .
The silver $ 5 coin is 99.9 % silver , and depicts Parliament House as viewed from one of its courtyards .
Cash transactions are rounded to the nearest five cents .
As with most public changes to currency systems , there has been a great amount of seignorage of the discontinued coins .
All coins portray the reigning Australian Sovereign , Queen Elizabeth II , on the obverse , and are produced by the Royal Australian Mint .
Australia has regularly issued commemorative 50-cent coins .
The first was in 1970 , commemorating James Cook 's exploration along the east coast of the Australian continent , followed in 1977 by a coin for Queen Elizabeth II 's Silver Jubilee , the wedding of Charles , Prince of Wales and Lady Diana Spencer in 1981 , the Brisbane Commonwealth Games in 1982 , and the Australian Bicentenary in 1988 .
Issues expanded into greater numbers in the 1990s and the 21st century , responding to collector demand .
Australia has also made special issues of 20-cent , one - dollar and two - dollar coins .
Current Australian 5- ,
10- and 20-cent coins are identical in size to the former Australian , New Zealand , and British sixpence , shilling , and two shilling ( florin ) coins .
In 1990 and 1993 , the UK replaced these coins with smaller versions , as did New Zealand in 2006 – at the same time discontinuing the five - cent coin .
With a mass of and a diameter of , the Australian 50-cent coin is one of the largest coins used in the world today .
In circulation , the old New Zealand 5- , 10- and 20-cent coins were often mistaken for Australian coins of the same value , owing to their identical size and shape .
Until the size of the New Zealand coins was changed in 2004 , Australian coins below the dollar in value were in circulation in both countries .
Still , some confusion occurs with the larger - denomination coins in the two countries ; Australia 's $ 1 coin is similar in size to New Zealand 's $ 2 coin , and the New Zealand $ 1 coin is similar in size to Australia 's $ 2 coin .
As a result , Australian coins are occasionally found in New Zealand and vice versa .
BANKNOTES FIRST SERIES Section::::Banknotes .
Section::::First series .
The first paper issues of the Australian dollar were issued in 1966 .
The $ 1 , $ 2 , $ 10 and $ 20 notes had exact equivalents in the former pound banknotes .
The $ 5 note was issued in 1967 , the $ 50 note was issued in 1973 and the $ 100 was issued in 1984 .
FIRST POLYMER SERIES
Section::::First polymer series .
The first polymer banknotes were issued in 1988 by the Reserve Bank of Australia , specifically polypropylene polymer banknotes ( produced by Note Printing Australia ) , to commemorate the bicentenary of European settlement in Australia .
All Australian notes are now made of polymer .
Australia was the first country to develop and use polymer banknotes .
SECOND POLYMER SERIES Section::::Second Polymer series .
A new series of banknotes has been introduced , starting with the $ 5 note from 1 September 2016 .
A new $ 10 banknote has been released into circulation from 20 September 2017 , and a new $ 50 note has been released starting from 18 October 2018 .
VALUE Section::::Value .
In 1966 , when the dollar was introduced , the international currency relationships were maintained under the Bretton Woods system , a fixed exchange rate system using a U.S. dollar standard .
The Australian dollar , however , was effectively pegged to the British pound at an equivalent value of approximately 1 gram of gold .
The highest valuation of the Australian dollar relative to the U.S. dollar was during the period of the peg to the U.S. dollar .
On 9 September 1973 , the peg was adjusted to US$ 1.4875 , the fluctuation limits being changed to US$ 1.485–US$1.490 ; on both 7 December 1973 and 10 December 1973 , the noon buying rate in New York City for cable transfers payable in foreign currencies reached its highest point of 1.4885 U.S. dollars to one dollar .
On 12 December 1983 , the dollar was floated , allowing its value to fluctuate dependent on supply and demand on international money markets .
The decision was made on 8 December 1983 and announced on 9 December 1983 .
In the two decades that followed , its highest value relative to the US dollar was $ 0.881 in December 1988 .
The lowest ever value of the dollar after it was floated was 47.75 US cents in April 2001 .
It returned to above 96 US cents in June 2008 , and reached 98.49 later that year .
Although the value of the dollar fell significantly from this high towards the end of 2008 , it gradually recovered in 2009 to 94 US cents .
On 15 October 2010 , the dollar reached parity with the US dollar for the first time since becoming a freely traded currency , trading above US$ 1 for a few seconds .
The currency then traded above parity for a sustained period of several days in November , and fluctuated around that mark into 2011 .
On 27 July 2011 , the dollar hit a record high since floating .
It traded at a $ 1.1080 against the US dollar .
Some commentators speculated that the value of the dollar in 2011 was related to Europe 's sovereign debt crisis , and Australia 's strong ties with material importers in Asia and in particular China .
Economists posit that commodity prices are the dominant driver of the Australian dollar , and this means changes in exchange rates of the Australian dollar occur in ways opposite to many other currencies .
For decades , Australia 's balance of trade has depended primarily upon commodity exports such as minerals and agricultural products .
This means the Australian dollar varies significantly during the business cycle , rallying during global booms as Australia exports raw materials , and falling during recessions as mineral prices slump or when domestic spending overshadows the export earnings outlook .
This movement is in the opposite direction to other reserve currencies , which tend to be stronger during market slumps as traders move value from falling stocks into cash .
The Australian dollar is a reserve currency and one of the most traded currencies in the world .
Other factors in its popularity include a relative lack of central bank intervention , and general stability of the Australian economy and government .
In January 2011 at the World Economic Forum in Davos , Switzerland , Alexey Ulyukaev announced that the Central Bank of Russia would begin keeping Australian dollar reserves .
EXCHANGE RATE POLICIES Section::::Exchange rate policies .
Prior to 1983 , Australia maintained a fixed exchange rate .
The first peg was between the Australian and British pounds , initially at par , and later at 0.8 GBP ( 16 shillings sterling ) .
This reflected its historical ties as well as a view about the stability in value of the British pound .
From 1946 to 1971 , Australia maintained a peg under the Bretton Woods system , a fixed exchange rate system that pegged the U.S. dollar to gold , but the Australian dollar was effectively pegged to sterling until 1967 .
With the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in 1971 , Australia converted the traditional peg to a fluctuating rate against the US dollar .
In September 1974 , Australia valued the dollar against a basket of currencies called the trade weighted index ( TWI ) in an effort to reduce the fluctuations associated with its tie to the US dollar .
The daily TWI valuation was changed in November 1976 to a periodically adjusted valuation .
On 12 December 1983 , the Australian Labor government led by Prime Minister Bob Hawke and Treasurer Paul Keating floated the dollar , with the exchange rate reflecting the balance of payments and other market drivers .
LEGAL TENDER Section::::Legal tender .
Australian banknotes are a legal tender throughout the Commonwealth of Australia and its territories , as provided in section 36(1 ) of the Reserve Bank Act 1959 .
For legal tender of Australian coinage , as outlined in section 16 of the Currency Act 1965 , the following limits are set out : * 5c , 10c , 20c , and 50c ( of any combination ) : for payments not exceeding $ 5 * 1c and 2c coins ( which have been withdrawn from circulation ) : for payments not exceeding 20 cents * One dollar and two dollar coins : for payments not exceeding 10 times the face value of a coin of the denomination concerned * Non - circulating ten dollar coins : for payments not exceeding $ 100 * Coins of other denominations : for payments of any amount DESIGN AND DENOMINATIONS Section::::Design and denominations .
Australia was the first country in the world to have a complete system of banknotes made from plastic ( polymer ) .
These notes provide much greater security against counterfeiting .
The polymer notes are cleaner than paper notes , are more durable and easily recyclable .
Australia 's currency comprises coins of 5 , 10 , 20 and 50 cent and one and two dollar denominations ; and notes of 5 , 10 , 20 , 50 and 100 dollar denominations .
Many forms of currency were used in the Australian colonies after the arrival of the first European settlers in 1788 .
In the rough early conditions barter was necessary , and payment in commodities like rum sometimes replaced money in transactions .
Some of the first official notes used in Australia were Police Fund Notes , issued by the Bank of New South Wales in 1816 .
After 1901 , when the Australian colonies federated into a single Commonwealth , the federal government became responsible for the currency .
The Bank Notes Tax Act 1910 effectively brought private and state currencies to an end .
In 1913 the first series of Australian notes was issued , based on the old British system of 12 pence to a shilling , 20 shillings to a pound .
In 1963 , Australia initiated the change to decimal currency .
More than 1000 submissions were made about the name of the new currency unit .
The Prime Minister of the day , Sir Robert Menzies , proposed the ' royal ' .
The ' dollar ' was eventually chosen as the name , and decimal currency was introduced on 14 February 1966 .
Shortly after the changeover , substantial counterfeiting of $ 10 notes was detected .
This provided an impetus for the Reserve Bank of Australia to develop new note technologies jointly with the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation .
The revolutionary polymer notes were first introduced in 1988 with the issue of a commemorative $ 10 note , marking Australia 's bicentenary by featuring the theme of settlement .
The note depicted on one side a young male Aboriginal person in body paint , with other elements of Aboriginal culture .
On the reverse side was the ship Supply from the First Fleet , with a background of Sydney Cove , as well as a group of people to illustrate the diverse backgrounds from which Australia has evolved over 200 years .
* The $ 100 note features world - renowned soprano Dame Nellie Melba ( 1861–1931 ) , and the distinguished soldier , engineer and administrator General Sir John Monash ( 1865–1931 ) .
* The $ 50 note features Aboriginal writer and inventor David Unaipon ( 1872–1967 ) , and Australia 's first female parliamentarian , Edith Cowan ( 1861–1932 ) .
* The $ 20 note features the founder of the world 's first aerial medical service ( the Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia ) , the Reverend John Flynn ( 1880–1951 ) , and Mary Reibey ( 1777–1855 ) , who arrived in Australia as a convict in 1792 and went on to become a successful shipping magnate and philanthropist .
* The $ 10 note features the poets AB " Banjo " Paterson ( 1864–1941 ) and Dame Mary Gilmore ( 1865–1962 ) .
This note incorporates micro - printed excerpts of Paterson 's and Gilmore 's work .
On 17 February 2017 , the Reserve Bank revealed the design of the new $ 10 banknote .
* The $ 5 note features Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II and Parliament House , Canberra , the national capital .
( Note that a special centenary issue of the $ 5 note featured Sir Henry Parkes and Catherine Helen Spence in 2001 . )
In 2015 - 2016 there was a petition to feature Fred Hollows on a new $ 5 note , the outcome of this campaign is yet to be announced .
On 11 February 2016 it was announced that on 1 September 2016 a new $ 5 banknote would be released featuring a depiction of native Australian wattle and bird .
On 12 April , the design of the new $ 5 banknote was released .
Polymer note technology was developed by Australia , and Australia prints polymer banknotes for a number of other countries .
In 1988 , Australia introduced its first polymer bank note and in 1996 , Australia became the first country in the world to have a complete series of polymer notes .
Australia 's notes are printed by Note Printing Australia , a wholly owned subsidiary of the Reserve Bank of Australia .
Note Printing Australia prints polymer notes or simply supplies the polymer substrate for a growing number of other countries including Bangladesh , Brunei , Chile , Indonesia , Kuwait , Malaysia , Mexico , Nepal , New Zealand , Papua New Guinea , Romania , Samoa , Singapore , Solomon Islands , Sri Lanka , Thailand and Vietnam .
Many other countries are showing a strong interest in the new technology .
All Australian coins depict Queen Elizabeth II on the obverse , with different images on the reverse of each coin .
* The $ 2 coin , which replaced the paper two dollar note in 1988 , depicts an Aboriginal tribal elder set against a background of the Southern Cross and native grasstrees .
( Designed by Horst Hahne )
* The $ 1 coin , which replaced the paper $ 1 note in 1984 , depicts five kangaroos .
( Designed by Stuart Devlin )
* The 50 cent coin carries the coat of arms of Australia : the six state badges on a central shield supported by a kangaroo and an emu , with a background of golden wattle , Australia 's floral emblem ( Designed by Stuart Devlin )
* The 20 cent coin carries a platypus , one of only two egg - laying mammals in the world .
It has webbed feet and a duck - like bill that it uses to hunt for food along the bottom of streams and rivers .
( Designed by Stuart Devlin )
* The 10 cent coin features a male lyrebird dancing .
A clever mimic , the lyrebird inhabits the dense , damp forests of Australia 's eastern coast .
( Designed by Stuart Devlin )
* The 5 cent coin depicts an echidna , or spiny anteater , the world 's only other egg - laying mammal .
( Designed by Stuart Devlin )
* The 2 cent coin ( withdrawn from circulation since 1992 ) depicted a frilled lizard .
( Designed by Stuart Devlin )
* The 1 cent coin ( withdrawn from circulation since 1992 ) depicted a feather tailed glider ( Designed by Stuart Devlin )
The 5 , 10 , 20 and 50 cent coins are made of cupronickel ( 75 percent copper and 25 percent nickel ) .
The one and two dollar coins are made of aluminium bronze ( 92 percent copper , 6 per cent aluminium and 2 per cent nickel ) .
The two dollar , one dollar , 50 and 20 cent circulating coins occasionally feature commemorative designs .
Australia 's coins are produced by the Royal Australian Mint , which is located in the nation 's capital , Canberra .
Since opening in 1965 , the Mint has produced more than 14 billion circulating coins , and has the capacity to produce more than two million coins per day , or more than 600 million coins per year .
The Royal Australian Mint has an international reputation for producing quality numismatic coins , and won an international award for ' Best Silver Coin 2006 ' for its Silver Kangaroo coin design .
AUSTRALIAN CURRENCY TACTILE
FEATURE
Section::::Australian currency tactile feature .
In early 2015 the Reserve Bank of Australia announced that a tactile feature will be added to all new notes .
The tactile feature is an embossed feature to assist the vision - impaired in identifying the denomination .
A similar feature is used on the Canadian currency .
CURRENT EXCHANGE RATES
SEE ALSO
* Banking in Australia
* Brass razoo * Coins of Australia * Economy of Australia *
Note Printing Australia * Section 51 ( xii ) of the Constitution of Australia
Other main currencies
* United States dollar *
Euro *
Japanese Yen *
Pound
sterling * Canadian dollar * Swiss franc
REFERENCES Notes
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sound recording of 1966 Decimal Currency radio advertisement held at the National Archives of Australia
* Reserve Bank of Australia : Current Banknotes
*
The Perth Mint is Australia 's precious metals mint , making non - circulating / collector coins in silver , gold , and platinum .
*
Note Printing Australia is the printer of Australia 's notes , and also inventor of the abovementioned polymer banknotes , and world exporter of this technology .
* The Money Tracker site allows users to track Australian banknotes as they circulate around Australia .
* Images of historic and modern Australian bank notes
* Reserve Bank of Australia – daily value of AUD against 13 currencies , special drawing right and trade weighted index * http://www.forexuklv.net/Major_Currency_Pairs/Chart_25.html - historical exchange rates of AUD / USD (
from the year 1800 to present time ) .
* http://www.forexuklv.net/Major_Currency_Pairs/Chart_03.html - historical chart of AUD / USD ( from the year 1800 to present time ) .
* The banknotes of Australia ( ) ( )