DALLAS STARS
The Dallas Stars are a professional ice hockey team based in Dallas .
They are members of the Central Division of the Western Conference of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) .
The team was founded during the 1967 NHL expansion as the Minnesota North Stars , based in Bloomington , Minnesota .
Before the beginning of the 1978–79 NHL season , the team merged with the Cleveland Barons after the league granted them permission due to each team 's respective financial struggles .
Ultimately , the franchise relocated to Dallas for the 1993–94 NHL season .
The Stars played out of Reunion Arena from their relocation until 2001 , when the team moved less than 1.5 miles into the American Airlines Center .
The Stars have won eight division titles in Dallas , two Presidents ' Trophies as the top regular season team in the NHL , the Western Conference championship twice , and in 1998–99 , the Stanley Cup .
Joe Nieuwendyk won the Conn Smythe Trophy as the most valuable player of the playoffs that year .
In 2000 , Neal Broten was inducted into the United States Hockey Hall of Fame .
In 2009 , Brett Hull became the first Dallas Stars player inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame , followed by Ed Belfour and Joe Nieuwendyk in 2011 and Mike Modano in 2014 .
In 2010 , brothers Derian and Kevin Hatcher were inducted to the United States Hockey Hall of Fame .
FRANCHISE HISTORY MINNESOTA NORTH STARS ( 1967–1993 ) Section::::Franchise history .
Section::::Minnesota North Stars ( 1967–1993 ) .
The Minnesota North Stars began play in 1967 as part of the NHL 's six - team expansion .
Home games were played at the newly constructed Metropolitan Sports Center ( " Met Center " ) in Bloomington , Minnesota .
Initially successful both on the ice and at the gate , the North Stars fell victim to financial problems after several poor seasons in the mid-1970s .
In 1978 , the North Stars were purchased by the owners of the Cleveland Barons ( formerly the California Golden Seals ) , the Gund brothers , George III and Gordon .
With both teams on the verge of folding , the NHL permitted the two failing franchises to merge .
The merged team continued as the Minnesota North Stars , but assumed the Barons ' place in the Adams Division in order to balance out the divisions , while the Seals / Barons franchise records were retired .
The merger brought with it a number of talented players , and the North Stars were revived — they reached the Stanley Cup Finals in 1981 , where they lost in five games to the New York Islanders .
However , by the early 1990s , declining attendance and the inability to secure a new downtown revenue - generating arena led ownership to request permission to move the team to the San Francisco Bay Area in 1990 .
The NHL rejected the request and instead agreed to award an expansion franchise , the San Jose Sharks , to the Gund brothers .
The North Stars were sold to a group of investors that were originally looking to place a team in San Jose , although one of the group 's members , Norman Green , would eventually gain control of the team .
In the following season , the Minnesota North Stars made it to the Stanley Cup Finals , only to lose to the Pittsburgh Penguins .
After the 1991 season , the North Stars suffered through poor attendance and profitability .
The team 's fortunes were further impeded by the terms of the settlement with the Gund brothers , in which they were permitted to take a number of North Stars players to San Jose .
New owner Norman Green explored the possibility of moving the team to Anaheim , however the NHL decided instead to place the expansion Mighty Ducks there in 1992 .
In their final two seasons in Minnesota , the team adopted a new logo which omitted the " North " from " North Stars " , leading many fans to anticipate the team heading south .
RELOCATION AND EARLY YEARS IN DALLAS ( 1993–1998 ) Section::::Relocation and early years in Dallas ( 1993–1998 ) .
In 1993 , amid further attendance woes and bitter personal controversy , Green obtained permission from the league to move the team to Dallas for the 1993 - 94 season , and the decision was announced on March 10 , 1993 .
Green was convinced by former Dallas Cowboys quarterback Roger Staubach that Dallas would be a suitable market for an NHL team .
The NHL , to quell the controversy , promised the fans of Minnesota a return in the future with a new franchise ; that promise was fulfilled in 2000 when Minnesota was awarded the Minnesota Wild as an expansion franchise .
The Stars would move into Reunion Arena , built in 1980 , the downtown arena already occupied by the Dallas Mavericks .
With the NHL changing the names of the conferences and divisions , the newly relocated Stars were placed in the Central Division of the Western Conference , and played their first game in Dallas on October 5 , 1993 , a 6–4 win against the Detroit Red Wings .
In that game , Neal Broten scored the first Stars goal in Dallas .
Dallas was an experiment for the NHL .
At that time , the Stars would be one of the three southern - most teams in the NHL , along with the newly - created Tampa Bay Lightning and Florida Panthers as the NHL 's first real ventures into southern non - traditional hockey markets .
Though the Stars were relatively still unknown in the area , word of the team spread rapidly , and the immediate success of the team on the ice , as well as Mike Modano 's career best season ( 50 goals , 93 points ) helped spur the team 's popularity in Dallas .
The Stars set franchise bests in wins ( 42 ) and points ( 97 ) in their first season in Texas , qualifying for the 1994 playoffs .
The Stars further shocked the hockey world by sweeping the St. Louis Blues in the first round , but lost to the eventual Western Conference Champion Vancouver Canucks in the second round .
The Stars ' success in their first season , along with American superstar Mike Modano 's spectacular on ice performances would be an integral part of the Stars ' eventual franchise success in the immediate years to come .
The almost immediate success of the Stars was also helped by a long history of second - tier hockey in the area .
The minor league Central Hockey League had two teams in the area , the Fort Worth Texans and the Dallas Blackhawks for almost 40 years before the Stars arrival .
These two teams were bitter rivals , and some of the traditions and famous rivalry incidents , including what is thought to be the first known use anywhere at an athletic event of " Rock and Roll Part 2 " by Fort Worth and the famous " 10 Cent Beer Night " near riot in 1978 helped create awareness of hockey .
Amateur and youth hockey was also extremely popular because of the long presence of the minor league teams .
Green , who had run into financial problems stemming from his business ventures outside of hockey , was forced to sell the team to businessman Tom Hicks in December 1995 .
BUILDING FOR A CHAMPIONSHIP Section::::Building for a championship .
The 1994–95 season was shortened by an owners ' lockout .
The Stars traded captain Mark Tinordi along with Rick Mrozik to the Washington Capitals before the season began for Kevin Hatcher .
Long time North Stars hold - over Neal Broten was named his replacement , although he was traded too after only 17 games to the New Jersey Devils .
Broten was replaced by Kevin 's younger brother Derian Hatcher as team captain , a role he would serve in for the next decade .
The Stars played only 48 games
that season posting a record of 17–23–8 .
Despite the shortened season and the losing record , the Stars again made the playoffs , losing in five games to the Red Wings in the first round .
1995–96 would be the first full season under new owner Tom Hicks .
In the offseason , the Stars traded for former Montreal Canadiens ' captain and three - time Frank J. Selke Trophy winner Guy Carbonneau , who was then with the St. Louis Blues .
With the Stars struggling to begin the season , general manager and head coach Bob Gainey traded for center Joe Nieuwendyk from the Calgary Flames for Corey Millen and Jarome Iginla , then a Stars prospect .
The Stars recorded only 11 wins in the first half of the season , and Bob Gainey relinquished his coaching duties in January to be the full - time general manager of the team .
The Stars soon hired Michigan K - Wings head coach Ken Hitchcock to replace him ; it would be his first NHL head coaching position .
The Stars then traded for Benoit Hogue from the Toronto Maple Leafs late in the season , but ultimately finished in sixth place in the Central Division , missing the playoffs for the first time since moving to Texas .
In the 1996 off - season , the Stars continued to revamp their roster , adding defensemen Darryl Sydor from the Los Angeles Kings followed by Sergei Zubov from the Pittsburgh Penguins for Kevin Hatcher .
Zubov would serve as the Stars ' top defenseman and powerplay quarterback until leaving the NHL in 2009 .
On the ice , Ken Hitchcock 's first season proved to be a good one .
The Stars bested their 1994 totals , posting 48 wins and reaching the 100-point mark for the first time in franchise history .
The Stars won the Central Division , their first division title since 1983–84 ( when they were still the Minnesota North Stars ) and were seeded second in the playoffs .
Despite the regular season success , the youthful Stars were upset in the first round by the Edmonton Oilers in seven games .
Defenseman Grant Ledyard tripped in overtime of Game 7 , allowing Todd Marchant to score the game- and series - winning goal on a breakaway against goaltender Andy Moog .
In the 1997 off - season , the Stars signed star goaltender Ed Belfour as a free agent after a well publicized falling - out with the San Jose Sharks , who had traded a number of players to the Chicago Blackhawks to obtain him in January in the previous season .
Andy Moog was allowed to leave via free agency , but later returned to the Stars as an assistant coach .
The 1997–98 season was another banner year for the Stars .
The Stars again set franchise records in wins ( 49 ) and points ( 109 ) .
Dallas acquired Mike Keane at the deadline from the New York Rangers .
The Stars won the franchise 's first Presidents ' Trophy as the NHL 's best regular season team , as well as the Central Division title for the second season in a row .
Belfour set franchise season records for goals against average ( 1.88 ) , wins ( 37 ) and just missed out on the Jennings Trophy by one goal to Martin Brodeur of the New Jersey Devils .
The Stars were the first overall seed for the 1998 Stanley Cup playoffs and defeated the eighth - seeded San Jose Sharks in six games in the first round .
Notorious enforcer Bryan Marchment injured Joe Nieuwendyk 's right knee , forcing him to miss the rest of the playoffs with torn ligaments .
In the second round , they again met the Edmonton Oilers , this time defeating them in five games .
Without Nieuwendyk , however , the Stars lacked the firepower to overcome the defending Stanley Cup champion Detroit Red Wings in the Western Conference Finals , and lost in six games .
The Red Wings went on to win their second consecutive Stanley Cup .
DOMINANCE , A STANLEY CUP , AND PLAYOFF DISAPPOINTMENT ( 1998–2004 ) Section::::Dominance , a Stanley Cup , and playoff disappointment ( 1998–2004 ) .
In the 1998 off - season , after falling just short in the Western Conference Finals , the Stars added what they believed was the final piece toward winning a championship : star goalscoring winger Brett Hull .
Hull had already had a magnificent career with the St. Louis Blues , with three consecutive 70-goal seasons and a Hart Memorial Trophy , but a fallout with Blues management led Hull to leave St. Louis via free agency .
Additionally , this was the first season for the Stars in the Pacific Division after the 1998 NHL division re - alignment .
The Stars 1998–99 season was excellent .
The Stars won 51 games , surpassing the 50-win mark for the first time in franchise history .
They also recorded 114 points , which still stands today as a franchise record .
They won the Pacific Division by 24 points , their third consecutive division title ; a second consecutive Presidents ' Trophy ; the Jennings Trophy as the league 's top defensive team ; and were awarded the top seed in the 1999 Stanley Cup playoffs .
Winger Jere Lehtinen was also awarded the Frank J. Selke Trophy .
In the first round of the playoffs , Dallas faced their playoff arch - rivals , the Edmonton Oilers .
The Stars swept the Oilers in four tough games , winning Game 4 in the third overtime on a goal by Joe Nieuwendyk .
They then faced the St. Louis Blues in the second round .
After taking a 2–0 series lead , the Blues stormed back to tie the series .
The Stars then won the next two games to beat the Blues in six games .
The series again ended on an overtime goal , this time from Mike Modano .
In the Conference Finals , they faced the Colorado Avalanche for the first time in Stars history .
This would be the first of four playoff meetings between the Stars and Avalanche in the next seven years .
After both the Stars and the Avalanche split the first four games at a 2–2 series tie , the Avalanche won Game 5 by a score of 7–5 , taking a 3–2 series lead , The Stars rallied winning game six on the road , and game seven at home , both by 4–1 scores .
This was the Stars ' first Stanley Cup Finals appearance as the Dallas Stars , although they made the finals twice as the Minnesota North Stars .
They faced the Eastern Conference champion Buffalo Sabres , who had defeated the Toronto Maple Leafs 4–1 in the Eastern Conference Finals .
After splitting the first four games , the Stars vaunted defense would hold the Sabres to only one goal in the next two , winning Game 5 2–0 and Game 6 2–1 on an overtime goal by Brett Hull .
Hull 's goal at 14:51 of the third overtime was remembered as one of the most controversial goals ever scored .
That season , the NHL still had the infamous " crease rule " in effect , which stated that if any player of the attacking team who did not have possession of the puck was in the crease before the puck , then any resulting goal was disallowed .
Hull had initially gained possession of the puck outside the crease and had made a shot that was blocked by Buffalo goaltender Dominik Hasek .
One of Hull 's skates entered the crease as he corralled the rebound , and Hull 's second shot scored the Cup - winning goal , followed by a lengthy official review .
The goal was eventually allowed , as having simply blocked Hull 's shot rather than catching it , Hasek never took possession of the puck away from Hull .
Officials therefore determined that rather than calling it a loose puck , Hull would be considered to have had continuous possession of the puck from before his first shot outside the crease .
The complexity of the crease rule , and the attendant difficulties in understanding its application by fans and players alike , combined with the controversy arising out of the disputed Cup - winning goal , resulted in the crease rule being repealed the following season .
Hull 's goal marked the 13th time a Stanley Cup - winning goal was scored in overtime , and only the fourth to be scored in multiple overtimes .
This was the only time between 1995 and 2003 that a team other than the New Jersey Devils , Colorado Avalanche or Detroit Red Wings won the Stanley Cup .
The team added veterans Kirk Muller , Dave Manson and Sylvain Cote in an effort to defend their Stanley Cup championship in .
On December 31 , 1999 , Brett Hull scored his 600 and 601st career goals in a 5–4 win over the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim .
The Stars ultimately won the Pacific Division for the second year in a row , and were seeded second in the Western Conference .
Dallas then defeated the Edmonton Oilers and San Jose Sharks in the first and second rounds , both 4–1 series victories .
The Stars , for the second season in a row , defeated the Colorado Avalanche in the Western Conference Finals in seven games to reach their second consecutive Stanley Cup Finals , where they met the New Jersey Devils .
Because the Devils finished the regular season with one more point than Dallas , the Stars had to play their first playoff series without home ice advantage since 1995 .
The Stars lost all three games in Reunion Arena in the Finals , and lost the series in Game 6 on a double - overtime goal by New Jersey forward Jason Arnott .
UNSUCCESSFUL PLAYOFF RUNS Section::::Unsuccessful playoff runs .
Hoping to win back the Stanley Cup , the Stars again captured the Pacific Division , posting a solid 48–24–8–2 record in the 2000–01 season .
In the playoffs , the Stars met the Edmonton Oilers in the first round , battling back - and - forth through the first four games , with each game decided by one goal , including three going into overtime .
Game 5 would also go to overtime , as the Stars took a 3–2 series lead on a goal by Kirk Muller .
In Game 6 in Edmonton , however , the Stars did not need overtime , advancing to the second round with a 3–1 win .
Facing the St. Louis Blues , the Stars would run out of gas , being swept in four straight games .
The Game 2 loss would be the last NHL game played in Reunion Arena .
Moving into the brand new American Airlines Center for the 2001–02 season , the Stars got off to a slow start to the season , as goaltender Ed Belfour struggled through one of his worst seasons .
Coach Ken Hitchcock was eventually fired , being replaced by Rick Wilson .
Despite the coaching change , the Stars continued to play poor hockey .
With the prospect of missing the playoffs , the Stars traded 1999 Conn Smythe winner Joe Nieuwendyk and Jamie Langenbrunner to the New Jersey Devils in exchange for Randy McKay and Jason Arnott , who scored the game - winning goal in the 2000 Finals against Dallas .
The Stars would eventually go on to post a respectable record of 35–28–13–5 .
However , it would not be enough for the playoffs , as they fell four points short of the final eighth spot in the Western Conference .
Following the season , coach Rick Wilson would return to assistant coaching duties , as the Stars brought in Dave Tippett as his replacement .
As in the 2002 off - season , Ed Belfour left via free agency to the Toronto Maple Leafs .
To begin the 2002–03 campaign , the Stars awarded the starting goaltending position to Marty Turco , who went on to have one of the best seasons in NHL history , posting the lowest goals against average ( GAA ) since 1940 , at 1.76 .
However , missing 18 games late in the season likely cost him a shot at the Vezina Trophy , awarded to the league 's top goaltender .
Regardless , the Stars posted the best record in the Western Conference at 46–17–15–4 , and along the way , two - way star Jere Lehtinen won his third Frank J. Selke Trophy .
In the playoffs , the Stars once again met the Edmonton Oilers , and once again the Oilers would prove a contentious opponent , winning two of the first three games .
However , the Stars would prove the better team again by winning the next three games to take the series in six games .
The Stars ' second round series against the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim got off to an unbelievable start , as the game went deep into overtime tied 3–3 .
However , Mighty Ducks goaltender
Jean - Sebastien Giguere stopped 60 shots as the Ducks scored early in the fifth overtime .
Game 2 would be more of the same , as the Ducks stunned the Stars in overtime .
Desperately needing a win , the Stars bounced back to take Game 3 in Anaheim .
However , the Ducks would take a 3–1 series lead by breaking a scoreless tie late in the third period of Game 4 .
In Game 5 , the Stars finally solved Giguere by scoring four goals to keep their playoff hopes alive .
However , the Stars dreams of a return trip to the Stanley Cup Finals would end in heartbreaking fashionm as the Ducks broke a 3–3 tie with 1:06 left in Game 6 on a goal by defenseman Sandis Ozolinsh .
Coming off their disappointing playoff loss , the Stars would get off to a shaky start to the 2003–04 season , as they played mediocre hockey through the first three months of the season , posting a sub-.500 record .
As the calendar turned to 2004 , however , the Stars began to find their game , as they posted a 9–4–3 record in January .
As the season wore on , the Stars would get stronger , climbing up the playoff ladder and eventually reaching second place in the Pacific Division , where they finished with a solid 41–26–13–2 record ; Marty Turco had another outstanding season , recording a 1.98 GAA .
However , the Stars could not carry their momentum into the playoffs , as they were beaten by the Colorado Avalanche in five games in the first round .
POST - LOCKOUT ERA ( 2005–2008 ) Section::::Post - lockout era ( 2005–2008 ) .
Coming out of the owners ' lockout that cancelled the entire 2004–05 season , the Stars remained one of the strongest teams in the Western Conference for the start of 2005–06 , as they won four of their first five games on the way to a solid October .
November would be even better for Dallas , as they won 10 of 13 games and took over first place in the Pacific Division , a position they would hold most of the season , as they went on to finish with a terrific record of 53–23–6 .
One reason for the Stars success was their strong play in shootouts , as forward Jussi Jokinen was nearly automatic , making 10-of-13 shot attempts .
Also performing strong in shootouts was Sergei Zubov , who used a slow - but - steady backhand to go 7-for-12 , as the Stars ultimately won 12 of 13 games that were settled by a shootout .
As the number two seed in the Western Conference , the Stars faced the seventh - seeded Colorado Avalanche .
The Stars were favorited to win the Western Conference , and some even predicted them to win the Stanley Cup .
However , the Stars would stumble right from the start , losing Game 1 by a score of 5–2 as the Avalanche scored five unanswered goals after the Stars jumped out to a promising 2–0 lead .
Game 2 would see the Stars suffer another setback at home , as the Stars lost in overtime 5–4 on a goal by Joe Sakic .
On the road in Game 3 , the Stars led 3–2 in the final minute before the Avalanche forced overtime on a goal by Andrew Brunette , while Alex Tanguay won the game just 69 seconds into overtime to put the Stars in a 3–0 hole .
The Stars would avoid the sweep with 4–1 win in Game 4 , but overtime would doom them again in Game 5 , as Andrew Brunette scored the series winner at 6:05 , ending the Stars ' playoffs hopes after just five games .
DALLAS HOSTS
THE ALL - STAR GAME ( 2006–2007 SEASON )
Section::::Dallas hosts the All - Star Game ( 2006–2007 season ) .
Following the previous season 's disappointing first round playoff upset at the hands of the seventh - seeded Avalanche , the Stars made a number of changes during the 2006 off - season .
Former Stars goalkeeper Andy Moog was promoted to assistant general manager for player development ( he kept his job as goaltending coach ) and former player Ulf Dahlen was hired as an assistant coach .
The Stars allowed center Jason Arnott , defenseman Willie Mitchell and goaltender Johan Hedberg to leave as free agents .
Forward Niko Kapanen was traded to the Atlanta Thrashers and the remaining two years on fan - favorite right - winger Bill Guerin 's contract were bought out .
The Stars also received Patrik Stefan and Jaroslav Modry in the Atlanta trade , and signed Eric Lindros , Jeff Halpern , Matthew Barnaby and Darryl Sydor as free agents .
Young goaltender Mike Smith was promoted to the NHL to serve as Marty Turco 's backup .
During the season , key future pieces – center Mike Ribeiro and defenseman Mattias Norstrom – were added through separate trades .
Young players Joel Lundqvist , Krys Barch , Nicklas Grossmann and Chris Conner all saw significant ice time while other players were out of the lineup with injuries .
On September 29 , 2006 , Brenden Morrow was announced as new team captain , taking the role over from Mike Modano , who had served as the incumbent since 2003 .
Jere Lehtinen remained the last Minnesota North Star still with the franchise , although he never wore a Minnesota North Stars jersey ; he was drafted by the club while it was still in Minnesota .
On March 13 , 2007 , Mike Modano scored his 500th career NHL goal , making him only the 39th player and second American to ever reach the milestone .
On March 17 , Modano scored his 502nd and 503rd NHL goals , breaking the record for an American - born player , previously held by Joe Mullen .
On January 24 , 2007 , the 55th National Hockey League All - Star Game was held at the American Airlines Center .
Defenseman Philippe Boucher and goaltender
Marty Turco would represent the Stars as part of the Western Conference All - Star roster .
The Stars qualified for the playoffs as the sixth seed in the Western Conference and squared off against the Vancouver Canucks in the first round .
Marty Turco delivered three shutout wins in Games 2 , 5 and 6 , but the Stars ' offense failed to capitalize and they lost the series in seven games , the third season in a row that they lost in the first round .
RETURN TO PLAYOFF PROMINENCE ( 2007–2008 SEASON )
Section::::Return to playoff prominence ( 2007–2008 season ) .
In the 2007 NHL Entry Draft , the Stars drafted the relatively unknown Jamie Benn 129th overall .
After starting a lackluster 7–7–3 in the 2007–08 season , General Manager Doug Armstrong was fired by the team .
He was replaced by an unusual " co - general manager " arrangement of former assistant GM Les Jackson and former Stars player Brett Hull .
On November 8 , 2007 , Mike Modano became the top American born point scorer of all - time , finishing off a shorthanded breakaway opportunity on San Jose Sharks goaltender Evgeni Nabokov .
On February 26 , 2008 , just hours before the trade deadline , the Stars traded for All - Star center Brad Richards from the Tampa Bay Lightning for backup netminder Mike Smith and forwards Jussi Jokinen and Jeff Halpern .
The Stars rallied to a final record of 45–30–7 and qualified for the playoffs as the fifth seed , matching up with the defending Stanley Cup champion , the Anaheim Ducks , in the first round .
After a rough end to the season , only winning two games in March of that year , the Stars shocked everyone by winning the first two games of the series in Anaheim , and then would go on to finish off the Ducks in six games , their first playoff series win since 2003 .
In the second round , the Stars matched up with the Pacific Division champion San Jose Sharks .
Once again , the Stars surprised everyone by winning the first two games of the series on the road .
In Game 2 , Brad Richards tied an NHL record by recording four points in the third period .
The Stars would then take a 3–0 lead after a Mattias Norstome overtime goal in Game 3 .
Captain Brenden Morrow finished the Sharks off in Game 6 with a powerplay goal nearly halfway into the fourth overtime .
The win sent the Stars to their first Conference Finals since 2000 , where they met the powerhouse Detroit Red Wings .
After falling behind 3–0 , the Stars made a series of it , however , winning two games before ultimately finally being ousted by the Red Wings in six games .
FAST STARTS TO SLOW FINISHES ( 2008–2011 )
Section::::Fast starts to slow finishes ( 2008–2011 ) .
The 2008–09 season saw the early loss for the season of captain Brenden Morrow to an ACL tear .
Off - season free agent acquisition Sean Avery caused a media uproar over comments he made to a Canadian reporter about ex - girlfriend Elisha Cuthbert and her relationship with Calgary Flames ' defenseman Dion Phaneuf before a game in Calgary .
The incident forced the team to suspend Avery for the season ; he was later waived by the Stars .
That incident , plus injuries to key players Brad Richards and Sergei Zubov , caused the Stars to tailspin to a 12th - place finish and the first missed playoffs for Dallas since 2002 .
In the wake of the season , the Stars hired a new general manager , former player and alternate captain Joe Nieuwendyk .
Hull and Jackson remained with the Stars , but were reassigned to new roles within the organization .
Less than a week after he was hired , Nieuwendyk fired six - season head coach Dave Tippett on June 10 , 2009 , and hired Marc Crawford the next day as his replacement .
Other off - season moves included the addition of Charlie Huddy as assistant coach in charge of defense and the promotions of Stu Barnes and Andy Moog to assistant coaches .
The Stars ' 2009–10 season was similar to the previous one .
Inconsistent play and defensive struggles plagued the team throughout the season , as they failed to adjust to Marc Crawford 's new offensively - minded system , and owner Tom Hicks ' financial troubles prevented the team from spending more than $ 45 million on payroll , over $ 11 million beneath the league salary cap .
The Stars failed to win more than three games in a row all season , finished in last in the Pacific Division and repeated their 12th place conference finish from the year before with a record of 37–31–14 for 88 points .
This was the first time that they would miss the playoffs two seasons in a row since the Stars moved to Texas .
In the off - season , longtime goaltender Marty Turco was let go in favor of Kari Lehtonen to become the team 's number one goaltender for the future .
In the last game of the season at the Minnesota Wild , Mike Modano was named the game 's first star and skated around the rink after the game wearing his North Stars uniform , receiving a rousing ovation .
In the 2010 off - season , the Stars released Marty Turco and Mike Modano , the face of the franchise for the past two decades .
Modano subsequently signed with the Detroit Red Wings while Turco joined the Chicago Blackhawks .
Winger Jere Lehtinen , who played his entire career with the Stars , announced his retirement in December 2010 .
The team also made key acquisitions , such as winger Adam Burish ( who was on the 2010 Stanley Cup champion Chicago Blackhawks ) and goaltender Andrew Raycroft .
They also gave Jonathan Cheechoo a try - out , but he was cut and later signed with division rivals San Jose Sharks .
To begin the 2010 season , the Stars won their first three games , going on a three - game win streak for the first time since the 2007–08 season by beating the New Jersey Devils in overtime , New York Islanders in a shootout and against Mike Modano and the Red Wings .
During the third game against the Red Wings , the Stars crowd gave Modano a standing ovation as he was shown on the Jumbotron .
After a hot start to the season , the Stars dominated the first half of the season , staying on the Pacific Division lead and staying in the top three spots of the conference .
It seemed like the old Stars were back , as through the first half of the season , they went 30–15–6 .
But after the All - Star Game , the Stars went into a slump , going on numerous losing streaks and blowing games .
Through this though , the Stars still remained in the playoff picture .
On the day of the trade deadline , the Stars traded James Neal and Matt Niskanen to the Pittsburgh Penguins for defenseman Alex Goligoski .
After an awful second half , the Stars still had a chance to make the playoffs by winning all their games in April .
They won all of them except for last , as they lost to the Minnesota Wild 5–3 , costing them a playoff spot .
After missing the playoffs for the third consecutive season , Dallas fired coach Marc Crawford on April 12 , 2011 .
In the spring of 2011 , according to Darren Dreger of TSN , the team has been " financially managed " by the NHL for over a year .
On June 16 , 2011 , Dallas hired Glen Gulutzan to be head coach , making him the sixth coach since the franchise 's move from Minnesota .
On September 13 , 2011 , lenders voted to agree to have the Stars file for bankruptcy and sold at auction .
On September 21 , 2011 , Mike Modano announced his retirement from the NHL .
By October 22 , 2011 , competing bids to buy the club were due .
Vancouver businessman and Kamloops Blazers owner Tom Gaglardi 's bid was the only one submitted , clearing the way for him to enter the final stages of taking over ownership of the team .
Gaglardi 's purchase was approved by the NHL Board of Governors on November 18 , 2011 .
A bankruptcy court judge approved the bid for an enterprise value of $ 240 million .
First lien creditors got about 75 cents on the dollar .
The Stars lost $ 38 million during their last fiscal year and $ 92 million over the last three seasons .
TOM GAGLARDI ERA ( 2011–PRESENT ) Section::::Tom Gaglardi era ( 2011–present ) .
As the new owner , Gaglardi 's first move was bringing back former Stars President Jim Lites to once again take the reins as team president and CEO .
To begin the 2011–12 season , the Stars once again jumped out to a fast start , going 22–15–1 through the first 38 games of the season .
When the second half of the season began , however , the Stars slumped through the months of January and February , before getting hot again in late February .
Throughout March , the Stars regained the lead of the Pacific Division .
Beginning on March 26 , 2012 , the Stars embarked on a western road trip that saw them visit the Calgary Flames , Edmonton Oilers , Vancouver Canucks and San Jose Sharks .
Going into the road trip , the Stars were in control of their own destiny , having to gain four points on the road trip to win their first Pacific Division title since the 2005–06 season .
After the Stars lost 5–4 in Calgary to the Flames , the Stars beat the Oilers two nights later , 3–1 .
This would be their last win of the season , as the Stars were rolled over by the Canucks and Sharks .
Even though they had lost the division crown , the Stars still had a chance to clinch a playoff spot .
The Stars , however , were eliminated from playoff contention on April 5 in a 2–0 loss to the playoff - bound Nashville Predators .
The team failed to qualify for the post - season for the fourth consecutive year , setting a franchise record for futility .
On July 1 , 2012 , the team signed free agent veterans Ray Whitney , Aaron Rome and future Hockey Hall of Famer Jaromir Jagr .
The next day , the Stars traded fan - favorite Steve Ott and Adam Pardy to the Buffalo Sabres for center Derek Roy .
When 2012–13 NHL lockout ended , the Stars began an up - and - down season , although staying in the race for one of the eight playoff spots in the shortened season , which had only 48 games .
In mid - season , forward Michael Ryder was traded to his former team , the Montreal Canadiens , for Erik Cole .
This shocked many Stars fans , as Ryder was a fan - favorite to Stars fans and had been producing good stats for the Stars throughout the shortened season .
Before the trade deadline in early April , the Stars began to falter , and the team 's captain , Brenden Morrow , was traded to the Pittsburgh Penguins ; Roy was traded to the Vancouver Canucks ; Jagr to the Boston Bruins ; and Tomas Vincour to the Colorado Avalanche to close out the trade deadline , all in exchange for draft picks and prospects .
After all of the trades at the NHL trade deadline , many counted the Stars out , as it seemed they were beginning to rebuild and throw in the towel during the season .
However , the Stars ' remaining young players pulled together to win six of their next eight games , thus propelling the Stars back into the 2013 playoff race .
The Stars soon became the new Cinderella team and were getting better as their new - found success went on .
However , the Stars dropped their final five games , losing all of them and gaining only one point in their final five games , which eliminated them from playoff contention .
The Stars had now missed the playoffs for five - straight seasons , continuing to set the all - time record in the franchise ( dating back to the Minnesota days ) for most consecutive seasons without a playoff appearance .
The day after their final regular season game of the 2012–13 season ( a 3–0 loss to the Detroit Red Wings ) , the Stars fired General Manager Joe Nieuwendyk .
The next day , the Stars introduced their 11th all - time general manager , Jim Nill , the former assistant general manager of the Red Wings .
On May 14 , 2013 , the coaching staff was also fired , and on May 31 , 2013 , Scott White was re - introduced as the director of hockey operations .
Nill made his first big trade as general manager when he acquired Tyler Seguin , Rich Peverley and Ryan Button from the Boston Bruins for Loui Eriksson , Reilly Smith , Matt Fraser and Joe Morrow .
Under new head coach Lindy Ruff , the Stars made it to the 2014 playoffs with a successful run on a 40–31–11 record , finishing fourth in the new - look Central Division for the 2013–14 season .
They lost in the first round of the playoffs to the Anaheim Ducks in six games with a 4–2 Game 6 loss .
Nill made another big trade as general manager when he acquired Jason Spezza and Ludwig Karlsson from the Ottawa Senators in exchange for Alex Chiasson , Nick Paul , Alex Guptill and a second - round pick in 2015 .
He also signed Senators player Ales Hemsky as a free agent on a three - year , $ 12 million contract on July 1 , 2014 .
Despite these moves , the Stars finished with the second - lowest goaltender save percentage in the NHL during the 2014–15 season , which resulted in them failing to qualify for the 2015 playoffs due to their sixth - place finish in the Central Division .
The lone bright spot of the 2014–15 season was Jamie Benn winning the Art Ross Trophy .
On April 11 , 2015 , Benn scored 4 points in the Stars ' last regular season game to finish with 87 points on the season and win the Art Ross Trophy .
His final point , a secondary assist with 8.5 seconds left in the game , allowed him to overtake John Tavares for the award .
In the 2015–16 season , the Stars won their first Central Division title since 1998 and posted the best regular season record in the Western Conference .
In the first round of the playoffs , they defeated the Minnesota Wild in six games .
In the second round , they faced the St. Louis Blues , for the first time since 2001 , and lost the series in seven games .
The Stars finished with a 34–37–11 record in the 2016–17 season , missing the playoffs for the seventh time in the past nine seasons .
As a result , the team announced that head coach Lindy Ruff 's contract would not be renewed .
Hitchcock returned as the coach for the following season , and once again , the Stars missed the playoffs .
Hitchcock retired after the season and was succeeded at the head coaching spot by Jim Montgomery .
TEAM
INFORMATION ARENA Section::::Team information .
Section::::Arena .
When the Stars first moved from Minnesota , the Stars moved into Reunion Arena , which was being shared with the NBA 's Dallas Mavericks .
For hockey , Reunion Arena held 17,001 for NHL games .
Throughout the hockey history of Reunion Arena , the arena was known for having one of the worst ice surfaces in the NHL , especially in its final days hosting the Stars .
The Stars played at Reunion for eight years , from 1993–2001 .
Before the 2001–02 NHL season , Both the Stars and the Mavericks moved into the new American Airlines Center , which is in the Victory Park neighborhood of Dallas , just north of Reunion Arena .
The American Airlines Center holds 18,584 for Stars and NHL games .
On January 24 , 2007 , the AAC hosted the 55th National Hockey League All - Star Game .
The AAC and the Dallas Stars have won several local and NHL awards for " Best Fan Experience " .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
All Dallas Stars games are broadcast on radio on KTCK under a five - year deal announced in January 2009 .
KTCK replaced WBAP , which had broadcast games since the beginning of the 1994 season after KLIF has broadcast the first season in Dallas in 1993 .
Television coverage occurs primarily on Fox Sports Southwest ( FSN ) , with KTXA ( Channel 21 ) or FSSW+ broadcasting games when FSSW has a conflict .
The Stars , along with the Buffalo Sabres and Carolina Hurricanes are one of only three NHL teams to simulcast the entirety of their games on TV and radio , which the team has done since their 1993 arrival in Dallas .
The original broadcast team from 1993 to 1996 was Mike Fornes ( play - by - play ) and Ralph Strangis ( color ) .
Fornes left the broadcast team after the 1995–96 season ; Strangis moved to the play - by - play role and color commentator Daryl " Razor " Reaugh was added .
Although both the DFW - area 's large media market and the team 's fan base could theoretically support separate television and radio broadcast teams , the Stars have continued simulcasting due to the popularity of " Ralph and Razor " ( as they are known ) among local listeners and viewers .
Like other NHL teams , the Stars now have a live radio broadcast transmitted inside American Airlines Center on 97.5 FM .
This is done because AM radio signals often can not penetrate concrete and steel building exteriors .
Strangis retired from the booth after the 2014–15 season and was replaced by Dave Strader .
In June 2016 , Strader was diagnosed with cholangiocarcinoma , a fairly rare and aggressive form of cancer of the bile duct .
To begin the 2016–17 season , Reaugh assumed play - by - play duties while Strader underwent treatment .
Studio analyst and former Stars defenseman , Craig Ludwig , took over as color commentator .
During a break in Strader 's treatment , he returned to the broadcast booth on February 18 , 2017 , a 4 - 3 overtime home win against the Tampa Bay Lightning .
After the game , the Stars saluted Strader at center ice .
On October 1 , 2017 , Strader died of cancer at the age of 62 , leaving Reaugh and Ludwig to call the 2017 - 18 season .
In July 2018 , the Stars announced that Reaugh would return to color commentary for 2018 - 19 , with former studio host Josh Bogorad taking over the play - by - play .
LOGO AND JERSEY DESIGN Section::::Logo and jersey design .
When they debuted in Dallas for the 1993–94 season , they kept the same uniform design from their later Minnesota days , except for the addition of the Texas logo patch on the shoulders .
Away uniforms were black and home uniforms were white .
With minor trim changes , a darker shade of green , and the word ' Dallas ' added in the 1994–95 season , they kept this design until their 1999 Stanley Cup - winning campaign .
The black pants have the word ' Dallas ' in gold run through the sides with green stripes .
In the 1997–98 season , the Stars introduced an alternate uniform that partly resembled those worn during the All - Star Game at the time .
The uniform was mostly green on top and black at the bottom , in a star - shaped design .
For the 1999–2000 season , it became the primary away uniform , and was paired with a new home uniform featuring the same basic design , with white on top and green at the bottom .
They kept this design until the 2006–07 season , during which the NHL switched color designations on home and away jerseys in the 2003–04 season .
The striping was also eliminated on the black pants .
The Stars introduced an alternate jersey for the 2003–04 season that proved both embarrassing and unpopular to critics and fans .
The uniform , which was black with a green bottom and red trim , featured a modern representation of the constellation Taurus topped by a trailing green star with red trail marks .
However , fans and critics derided the uniform crest for its resemblance to a uterus , nicknaming it the " Mooterus " .
The uniform was used until the 2005–06 season .
With the switch to the Reebok Edge uniform system , the jerseys underwent a complete redesign .
The home black jersey , introduced for the 2007–08 season , features the player 's number on the chest and an arched ' Dallas ' in white with gold trim , with the primary logo on the shoulders .
The primary away jerseys , which were used from 2007–10 and was used as an alternate for its final season , had the Stars logo crest in front and the uniform number on the top right , with the Texas alternate logo on the shoulders .
An alternate white jersey based on the home black jersey was introduced for the 2008–09 season ; they became the regular away uniforms for the 2010–11 season .
The lettering is in green with gold and black trim .
Both uniforms were used until the 2012–13 season .
A new logo and uniforms were introduced for the 2013–14 season .
Silver replaced gold as the tertiary color , while green ( in a bright new shade called " Victory Green " , similar to the old North Stars ' shade of green ) was reintroduced as a primary uniform color .
The new logo features the letter D centering a star , symbolizing Dallas ' nickname as " The Big D " .
The home uniforms are in green with black and white striping , while the away uniforms are in white with a green shoulder yoke , and black and green striping .
The inner collar features the team name on the home uniforms , and the city name on the away uniforms .
The secondary logo , with the primary inside a roundel with the team name , is featured in the shoulders .
MINOR LEAGUE AFFILIATES Section::::Minor league affiliates .
The Dallas Stars are presently affiliated with two minor league teams .
The Texas Stars are the American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate of the Dallas Stars , who after becoming unaffiliated with the Iowa Stars in 2008 , did not have an AHL affiliate for the 2008–09 season .
The Texas Stars began play in the AHL in the 2009–10 season as an affiliate for Dallas .
They are located in Cedar Park , Texas ( Northwest of Austin ) .
In addition to their AHL affiliate , the Dallas Stars are also affiliated with the Idaho Steelheads of the ECHL .
Based in Boise , the Steelheads have played home games in CenturyLink Arena Boise since 2003 .
TRADITIONS Section::::Traditions .
Since the 2005–06 season , the national anthems are performed by Celena Rae , a Fort Worth native and former semi - finalist on American Idol .
During The Star - Spangled Banner , the fans yell the word " stars " in the lines " whose broad stripes and bright stars " and " O say does that star spangled banner yet wave .
"
At games , as part of the entertainment , a Kahlenberg KDT-123
fog horn sounds after every Stars goal .
When the Stars take the ice at the beginning of each game , the song " Puck Off " ( also referred to as the " Dallas Stars Fight Song " ) by Pantera , is played in the arena .
Members of the Dallas – Fort Worth – Arlington metropolitan area band had become friends with members of the Stars in the 1990s , especially following the team 's Stanley Cup win in 1999 .
"
Puck Off " later also became the team 's goal celebration song .
During the song , fans chant the only lyrics in the song , " Dallas !
Stars !
Dallas !
Stars ! "
while pumping their fists in the air .
After each Stars win , the Stevie Ray Vaughan ( a Dallas native ) and Double Trouble song " The House is Rockin ' " is played .
A song of unknown origin called " The Darkness Music " is played after nearly every away goal .
In recent years , fans have usually yelled , " Who cares ! ? "
after away team goals are announced by the public address announcer .
The Stars have hosted a home game on New Year 's Eve every year since 1997 .
For a period of time , the game coincided with the Big D NYE celebration ( now on hiatus ) on the south side of the arena in AT&T Plaza .
SEASON - BY - SEASON RECORD
Section::::Season - by - season record .
This is a partial list of the last five seasons completed by the Stars .
For the full season - by - season history , see List of Dallas Stars seasons Note :
GP = Games played , W = Wins , L = Losses , OTL = Overtime losses , Pts = Points , GF
= Goals for , GA = Goals against PLAYERS CURRENT ROSTER
TEAM
CAPTAINS Section::::Players .
Section::::Team captains .
Note : This list does not include former captains of the Minnesota North Stars and Oakland Seals * Mark Tinordi , 1993–1995 * Neal Broten , 1995
* Derian Hatcher , 1995–2003 * Mike Modano , 2003–2006 * Brenden Morrow , 2006–2013 * Jamie Benn , 2013–present LEAGUE AND TEAM
HONORS AWARDS AND TROPHIES Section::::League and team honors .
Section::::Awards and trophies .
Stanley Cup
* 1998–99 Presidents ' Trophy
*
1997–98 , 1998–99 Clarence S. Campbell Bowl
*
1998–99 , 1999–2000 Art Ross Trophy
* Jamie Benn :
2014–15
Conn Smythe Trophy
* Joe Nieuwendyk :
1998–99 Frank J. Selke Trophy *
Jere Lehtinen : 1997–98 , 1998–99 , 2002–03 Lester Patrick Trophy
* Neal Broten : 1997–98 Roger Crozier Saving Grace Award
* Ed Belfour : 1999–2000 * Marty Turco :
2000–01 , 2002–03 William M. Jennings
Trophy
* Ed Belfour and Roman Turek
:
1998–99 FIRST - ROUND DRAFT PICKS Section::::First - round draft picks .
Note : This list does not include selections of the Minnesota North Stars .
* 1993 :
Todd Harvey ( 9th overall )
* 1994 :
Jason Botterill ( 20th overall ) * 1995 :
Jarome Iginla ( 11th overall ) * 1996 : Ric Jackman ( 5th overall ) * 1997 : Brenden Morrow ( 25th overall ) * 1998 : None * 1999 : None * 2000 : Steve Ott ( 25th overall ) * 2001 : Jason Bacashihua ( 26th overall )
* 2002 :
Martin Vagner ( 26th overall )
* 2003 :
None * 2004 : Mark Fistric ( 28th overall ) * 2005 : Matt Niskanen ( 28th overall ) * 2006 : Ivan Vishnevskiy ( 27th overall ) * 2007 :
None * 2008 : None * 2009 : Scott Glennie ( 8th overall ) * 2010 : Jack Campbell ( 11th overall )
* 2011 :
Jamie Oleksiak ( 14th overall )
* 2012 :
Radek Faksa ( 13th overall ) * 2013 : Valeri Nichushkin ( 10th overall ) * 2013 : Jason Dickinson ( 29th overall )
* 2014 :
Julius Honka ( 14th overall ) * 2015 : Denis Guryanov ( 12th overall ) * 2016 : Riley Tufte ( 25th overall ) * 2017 : Miro Heiskanen ( 3rd overall ) and Jake Oettinger ( 26th overall ) * 2018 :
Ty Dellandrea ( 13th overall ) HALL OF FAMERS Section::::Hall of Famers .
The Dallas Stars presently acknowledge an affiliation with a number of inductees to the Hockey Hall of Fame .
Hall of Fame inductees acknowledged by the Stars include 12 former players and three builders of the sport .
The three individuals recognized as builders by the Hall of Fame includes former Stars executives , and head coaches .
The tenure of five player inductees , and the three builders acknowledged by the Stars occurred when the franchise was based in Minnesota ( 1967 to 1993 ) .
Mike Modano is the only Hall of Fame inductee that played with the franchise before and after its relocation to Dallas .
In addition to players and builders , the Stars also acknowledge an affiliation Hockey Hall of Fame inductee Dave Strader .
Providing play - by - play for the Stars , he was a recipient of the Hall of Fame 's Foster Hewitt Memorial AwardEd BelfourEric Lindros
Leo BoivinSergei Makarov Dino CiccarelliMike Modano
Mike GartnerLarry Murphy Harry HowellJoe Nieuwendyk
Brett HullGump Worsley !
colspan=6 align =
centerHall of Fame builders Herb Brooks Walter Bush John Mariucci RETIRED NUMBERS
*
The NHL retired Wayne Gretzky 's No . 99 for all its member teams at the 2000 NHL All - Star Game .
FRANCHISE SCORING
LEADERS
Section::::Franchise scoring leaders .
These are the top - ten point - scorers in franchise ( Minnesota & Dallas ) history .
Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season .
* – current Stars player FRANCHISE INDIVIDUAL RECORDS * Most goals in a season :
Dino Ciccarelli ; Brian Bellows , 55 ( 1981–82 ; 1989–90 )
*
Most assists in a season : Neal Broten , 76
( 1985–86 )
* Most points in a season : Bobby Smith , 114 ( 1981–82 ) *
Most penalty minutes in a season : Basil McRae , 378 ( 1987–88 ) * Most points in a season , defenseman : Craig Hartsburg , 77 ( 1981–82 ) * Most points in a season , rookie : Neal Broten , 98 ( 1981–82 )
* Most goals in a season , rookie : Neal Broten , 38 ( 1981–82 )
*
* Most wins in a season : Marty Turco , 41 ( 2005–06 ) * Most shutouts in a season : Marty Turco , 9 ( 2003–04 ) SEE ALSO
* List of Dallas Stars head coaches
* List of Dallas Stars players
* List of Minnesota North Stars / Dallas Stars general managers REFERENCES Section::::References .
Footnotes Citations EXTERNAL LINKS