THE LAST SUPPER ( LEONARDO DA VINCI )
The Last Supper ( or L'Ultima Cena ) is a late 15th - century mural painting by Italian artist Leonardo da Vinci housed by the refectory of the Convent of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan , Italy .
It is one of the western world 's most recognizable paintings .
The work is presumed to have been started around 1495–96 and was commissioned as part of a plan of renovations to the church and its convent buildings by Leonardo 's patron Ludovico Sforza , Duke of Milan .
The painting represents the scene of the Last Supper of Jesus with his apostles , as it is told in the Gospel of John , 13:21 .
Leonardo has depicted the consternation that occurred among the Twelve Apostles when Jesus announced that one of them would betray him .
Due to the methods used , a variety of environmental factors , and intentional damage , very little of the original painting remains today despite numerous restoration attempts , the last being completed in 1999 .
PAINTING
Section::::Painting .
The Last Supper measures and covers an end wall of the dining hall at the monastery of Santa Maria delle Grazie in Milan , Italy .
The theme was a traditional one for refectories , although the room was not a refectory at the time that Leonardo painted it .
The main church building had only recently been completed ( in 1498 ) , but was remodeled by Bramante , hired by Ludovico Sforza to build a Sforza family mausoleum .
The painting was commissioned by Sforza to be the centerpiece of the mausoleum .
The lunettes above the main painting , formed by the triple arched ceiling of the refectory , are painted with Sforza coats - of - arms .
The opposite wall of the refectory is covered by the Crucifixion fresco by Giovanni Donato da Montorfano , to which Leonardo added figures of the Sforza family in tempera .
( These figures have deteriorated in much the same way as has The Last Supper . )
Leonardo began work on The Last Supper in 1495 and completed it in 1498—he did not work on the painting continuously .
The beginning date is not certain , as the archives of the convent for the period have been destroyed , and a document dated 1497 indicates that the painting was nearly completed at that date .
One story goes that a prior from the monastery complained to Leonardo about the delay , enraging him .
He wrote to the head of the monastery , explaining he had been struggling to find the perfect villainous face for Judas , and that if he could not find a face corresponding with what he had in mind , he would use the features of the prior who complained .
The Last Supper specifically portrays the reaction given by each apostle when Jesus said one of them would betray him .
All twelve apostles have different reactions to the news , with various degrees of anger and shock .
The apostles are identified from a manuscript ( The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci p. 232 ) with their names found in the 19th century .
( Before this , only Judas , Peter , John and Jesus were positively identified . )
From left to right , according to the apostles ' heads : * Bartholomew , James , son of Alphaeus , and Andrew form a group of three ; all are surprised .
* Judas Iscariot , Peter , and John form another group of three .
Judas is wearing green and blue and is in shadow , looking rather withdrawn and taken aback by the sudden revelation of his plan .
He is clutching a small bag , perhaps signifying the silver given to him as payment to betray Jesus , or perhaps a reference to his role within the 12 disciples as treasurer .
He is also tipping over the salt cellar .
This may be related to the near - Eastern expression to " betray the salt " meaning to betray one 's Master .
He is the only person to have his elbow on the table and his head is also horizontally the lowest of anyone in the painting .
Peter looks angry and is holding a knife pointed away from Christ , perhaps foreshadowing his violent reaction in Gethsemane during Jesus ' arrest .
He is leaning towards John and touching him on the shoulder , perhaps because in John 's Gospel he signals the " beloved disciple " to ask Jesus who is to betray him .
The youngest apostle , John , appears to swoon and lean towards Peter .
* Jesus * Apostle Thomas , James the Greater , and Philip are the next group of three .
Thomas is clearly upset ; the raised index finger foreshadows his incredulity of the Resurrection .
James the Greater looks stunned , with his arms in the air .
Meanwhile , Philip appears to be requesting some explanation .
* Matthew , Jude Thaddeus , and Simon the Zealot are the final group of three .
Both Jude Thaddeus and Matthew are turned toward Simon , perhaps to find out if he has any answer to their initial questions .
In common with other depictions of the Last Supper from this period , Leonardo seats the diners on one side of the table , so that none of them has his back to the viewer .
Most previous depictions excluded Judas by placing him alone on the opposite side of the table from the other eleven disciples and Jesus , or placing halos around all the disciples except Judas .
Leonardo instead has Judas lean back into shadow .
Jesus is predicting that his betrayer will take the bread at the same time he does to Saints Thomas and James to his left , who react in horror as Jesus points with his left hand to a piece of bread before them .
Distracted by the conversation between John and Peter , Judas reaches for a different piece of bread not noticing Jesus too stretching out with his right hand towards it ( Matthew 26 : 23 ) .
The angles and lighting draw attention to Jesus , whose turned right cheek is located at the vanishing point for all perspective lines ; his hands are located at the golden ratio of half the height of the composition .
The painting contains several references to the number 3 , which represents the Christian belief in the Holy Trinity .
The Apostles are seated in groupings of three ; there are three windows behind Jesus ; and the shape of Jesus ' figure resembles a triangle .
The painting can also be interpreted using the Fibonacci series : 1 table , 1 central figure , 2 side walls , 3 windows and figures grouped in threes , 5 groups of figures , 8 panels on the walls and 8 table legs , and 13 individual figures .
There may have been other references that have since been lost as the painting deteriorated .
IMPORTANT COPIES Section::::Important copies .
Two early copies of The Last Supper are known to exist , presumed to be work by Leonardo 's assistants .
The copies are almost the size of the original , and have survived with a wealth of original detail still intact .
One , by Giampietrino , is in the collection of the Royal Academy of Arts , London , and the other , by Cesare da Sesto , is installed at the Church of St. Ambrogio in Ponte Capriasca , Switzerland .
A third copy ( oil on canvas ) is painted by Andrea Solari ( c. 1520 ) and is on display in the Leonardo da Vinci Museum of the Tongerlo Abbey , Belgium .
MEDIUM Section::::Medium .
For this work , Leonardo sought a greater detail and luminosity than could be achieved with traditional fresco .
He painted The Last Supper on a dry wall rather than on wet plaster , so it is not a true fresco .
Because a fresco can not be modified as the artist works , Leonardo instead chose to seal the stone wall with a double layer of dried plaster .
Then , borrowing from panel painting , he added an undercoat of white lead to enhance the brightness of the oil and tempera that was applied on top .
This was a method that had been described previously , by Cennino Cennini in the 14th century .
However , Cennini had recommended the use of secco for the final touches alone .
These techniques were important for Leonardo 's desire to work slowly on the painting , giving him sufficient time to develop the gradual shading or chiaroscuro that was essential in his style .
DAMAGE AND RESTORATIONS Section::::Damage and restorations .
Because the painting was on a thin exterior wall , the effects of humidity were felt more keenly , and the paint failed to properly adhere to the wall .
Because of the method used , soon after the painting was completed on February 9 , 1498 it began to deteriorate .
As early as 1517 , the painting was starting to flake , and in 1532 Gerolamo Cardano described it as " blurred and colorless compared with what I remember of it when I saw it as a boy " .
By 1556—fewer than sixty years after it was finished — Leonardo 's biographer Giorgio Vasari described the painting as already " ruined " and so deteriorated that the figures were unrecognizable .
By the second half of the sixteenth century Gian Paolo Lomazzo stated that " the painting is all ruined " .
In 1652 , a doorway was cut through the ( then unrecognisable ) painting , and later bricked up ; this can still be seen as the irregular arch shaped structure near the center base of the painting .
It is believed , through early copies , that Jesus ' feet were in a position symbolizing the forthcoming crucifixion .
In 1768 , a curtain was hung over the painting for the purpose of protection ; it instead trapped moisture on the surface , and whenever the curtain was pulled back , it scratched the flaking paint .
A first restoration was attempted in 1726 by Michelangelo Bellotti , who filled in missing sections with oil paint then varnished the whole mural .
This repair did not last well and another restoration was attempted in 1770 by an otherwise unknown artist named Giuseppe Mazza .
Mazza stripped off Bellotti 's work then largely repainted the painting ; he had redone all but three faces when he was halted due to public outrage .
In 1796 , French revolutionary anti - clerical troops used the refectory as an armory ; they threw stones at the painting and climbed ladders to scratch out the Apostles ' eyes .
The refectory was then later used as a prison ; it is not known if any of the prisoners may have damaged the painting .
In 1821 , Stefano Barezzi , an expert in removing whole frescoes from their walls intact , was called in to remove the painting to a safer location ; he badly damaged the center section before realizing that Leonardo 's work was not a fresco .
Barezzi then attempted to reattach damaged sections with glue .
From 1901 to 1908 , Luigi Cavenaghi first completed a careful study of the structure of the painting , then began cleaning it .
In 1924 , Oreste Silvestri did further cleaning , and stabilised some parts with stucco .
During World War II , on August 15 , 1943 , the refectory was struck by Allied bombing ; protective sandbagging prevented the painting from being struck by bomb splinters , but it may have been damaged further by the vibration .
From 1951 to 1954 , another clean - and - stabilise restoration was undertaken by Mauro Pelliccioli .
MAJOR RESTORATION Section::::Major restoration .
The painting 's appearance by the late 1970s had become badly deteriorated .
From 1978 to 1999 , Pinin Brambilla Barcilon guided a major restoration project which undertook to stabilize the painting , and reverse the damage caused by dirt and pollution .
The 18th- and 19th - century restoration attempts were also reverted .
Since it had proved impractical to move the painting to a more controlled environment , the refectory was instead converted to a sealed , climate - controlled environment , which meant bricking up the windows .
Then , detailed study was undertaken to determine the painting 's original form , using scientific tests ( especially infrared reflectoscopy and microscopic core - samples ) , and original cartoons preserved in the Royal Library at Windsor Castle .
Some areas were deemed unrestorable .
These were re - painted using watercolor in subdued colors intended to indicate they were not original work , while not being too distracting .
This restoration took 21 years and , on 28 May 1999 , the painting was returned to display .
Intending visitors were required to book ahead and could only stay for 15 minutes .
When it was unveiled , considerable controversy was aroused by the dramatic changes in colors , tones , and even some facial shapes .
James Beck , professor of art history at Columbia University and founder of ArtWatch International , had been a particularly strong critic .
Michael Daley , director of ArtWatch UK , has also complained about the restored version of the painting .
He has been critical of Christ 's right arm in the image which has been altered from a draped sleeve to what Daley calls " muff - like drapery " .
THE LAST SUPPER IN CULTURE Section::::The
Last Supper in culture .
The Last Supper has frequently been referenced , reproduced , or parodied in Western culture .
Some of the more notable examples are : PAINTING , MOSAIC , AND PHOTOGRAPHY Section::::Painting , mosaic , and photography .
A 16th - century oil on canvas copy is conserved in the abbey of Tongerlo , Antwerp , Belgium .
It reveals many details that are no longer visible on the original .
The Roman mosaic artist Giacomo Raffaelli made another life - sized copy ( 1809–1814 ) in the Viennese Minoritenkirche .
MODERN ART Section::::Modern art .
In 1955 , Salvador Dalí painted The Sacrament of the Last Supper , with Jesus portrayed as blond and clean shaven , pointing upward to a spectral torso while the apostles are gathered around the table heads bowed so that none may be identified .
It is reputed to be one of the most popular paintings in the collection of the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C.
In 1986 , Andy Warhol was commissioned to produce a series of paintings based on The Last Supper that were exhibited initially in Milan .
This was his last series of paintings before his death .
Sculptor Marisol Escobar rendered The Last Supper as a life - sized , three - dimensional , sculptural assemblage using painted and drawn wood , plywood , brownstone , plaster , and aluminum .
This work , Self - Portrait Looking at The Last Supper , ( 1982–84 ) is in New York 's Metropolitan Museum of Art .
In 1988 , Susan Dorothea White painted The First Supper showing 13 women from all regions of the world , with the woman in the position of Leonardo 's Christ figure being an Australian aboriginal .
In 2001 , Chinese artist Zeng Fanzhi painted Last Supper , showing 13 mask - wearing people seated at a table strewn with watermelon fragments .
The oil painting was sold for $ 23.3 million at Sotheby 's auction on October 7 , 2013 , setting a new record for contemporary Asian artwork .
In 1998 , modern artist Vik Muniz displayed a recreation of The Last Supper , made entirely out of Bosco Chocolate Syrup .
LITERATURE
Section::::Literature .
Author Mary Shelley describes her impression of the painting in her travel narrative , Rambles in Germany and Italy published in 1844 : FILM AND TELEVISION Section::::Film and television .
In Luis Buñuel 's Spanish film Viridiana , a tableau vivant of Leonardo 's painting is staged with beggars .
Another beggar ' photographs ' the scene by flashing them .
This scene contributed to its refusal by the Vatican who called it " blasphemous . "
In Norman Jewison 's 1973 film version of " Jesus Christ Superstar " , in the Last Supper sequence , Jesus and the 12 apostles briefly mimic the posture of each character in Da Vinci 's painting
The painting is parodied in Mel Brooks 's movie History of the World , Part I , making Leonardo a contemporary of Jesus .
It is also parodied in the original movie MASH , in the scene where Hawkeye Pierce stages a " last supper " for Walt
( Painless ) Waldowski before his planned suicide .
The various doctors , all in surgical scrubs , pose in imitation of the painting .
Many parodies of the painting appear on the small screen , including The Simpsons ' Season 16 episode " Thank God , It 's Doomsday , " with Homer as Jesus and Moe and his other patrons as the disciples ; That
' 70s Show 's first - season episode " Streaking , " with Eric flanked by his friends ( and
Jackie wondering why everyone is sitting on the same side of the table ) ; and South Park 's Season 13 episode " Margaritaville , " with Kyle and his friends eating at a pizza parlor .
In one episode of the CBC drama Murdoch Mysteries called Barenaked Ladies , the suspects recreate the poses of Peter , Judas and Thomas in their victims .
OTHER SPECULATION
Section::::Other speculation .
The Last Supper has been the target of much speculation by writers and historical revisionists alike , usually centered on purported hidden messages or hints found within the painting , especially since the publication of the novel The Da Vinci Code by Dan Brown in 2003 .
Dan Brown proposed that the person to Jesus ' right ( left of Jesus from the viewer 's perspective ) is actually Mary Magdalene disguised as the Apostle John , being mirror images of one another .
It also states that there was a letter ' glaring in the center of the painting '
( M ) standing for Matrimonio or Mary Magdalene .
This speculation originated in earlier books The Templar Revelation ( 1997 ) by Lynn Picknett and The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail by Michael Baigent , Henry Lincoln and Richard Leigh ( 1982 ) .
Art historians hold that the figure is the Apostle John , who only appears feminine due to Leonardo 's characteristic fascination with blurring the lines between the sexes , a quality which is found in his other paintings , such as St. John the Baptist ( painted 1513–1516 ) .
Christopher Hodapp and Alice Von Kannon comment " If he [ John ] looks effeminate and needs a haircut , so does James , the second figure on the left . " .
Furthermore , according to Ross King , an expert on Italian art , Mary Magdalene 's appearance at the last supper would not have been controversial and Leonardo would have had no motive to disguise her as one of the other disciples , since she was widely venerated in her role as the " Apostle to the Apostles " and was the patron of the Dominican Order , for whom The Last Supper was painted .
There would have even been precedent for it , since the earlier Italian Renaissance painter Fra Angelico had included her in his painting of the Last Supper .
Giovanni Maria Pala , an Italian musician , has indicated that the positions of hands and loaves of bread can be interpreted as notes on a musical staff and , if read from right to left , as was characteristic of Leonardo 's writing , form a musical composition .
NOTES
FURTHER
READING
* Steinberg , Leo .
"
Leonardo 's Incessant ' Last Supper ' " .
New York : Zone Books , 2001 .
* Detailed review of Steinberg 's ' Incessant Last Supper ' at 3 Pipe Problem EXTERNAL LINKS
* Leonardo 's Last Supper and the three layers
* John the Apostle in Art * Leonardo da Vinci : anatomical drawings from the Royal Library , Windsor Castle , exhibition catalog fully online as PDF from The Metropolitan Museum of Art , which contains material on The Last Supper ( see index )
* Zoomable version * Tourist Information
* Tickets