PERSPIRATION Perspiration , also known as sweating , is the production of fluids secreted by the sweat glands in the skin of mammals .
Two types of sweat glands can be found in humans : eccrine glands and apocrine glands .
The eccrine sweat glands are distributed over much of the body .
In humans , sweating is primarily a means of thermoregulation , which is achieved by the water - rich secretion of the eccrine glands .
Maximum sweat rates of an adult can be up to 2–4 liters per hour or 10–14 liters per day ( 10–15 g / min·m ) , but is less in children prior to puberty .
Evaporation of sweat from the skin surface has a cooling effect due to evaporative cooling .
Hence , in hot weather , or when the individual 's muscles heat up due to exertion , more sweat is produced .
Animals with few sweat glands , such as dogs , accomplish similar temperature regulation results by panting , which evaporates water from the moist lining of the oral cavity and pharynx .
Although sweating is found in a wide variety of mammals , relatively few ( exceptions include humans and horses ) produce large amounts of sweat in order to cool down .
DEFINITIONS
* The words diaphoresis and hidrosis both can mean either perspiration ( in which sense they are synonymous with sweating ) or excessive perspiration ( in which sense they can be either synonymous with hyperhidrosis or differentiable from it only by clinical criteria involved in narrow specialist senses of the words ) .
* Hypohidrosis is decreased sweating from whatever cause .
*
Focal hyperhidrosis is increased or excessive sweating in certain regions such as the underarm , palms , soles , face , or groin .
*
Hyperhidrosis is excessive sweating , usually secondary to an underlying condition ( in which case it is called secondary hyperhidrosis ) and usually involving the body as a whole ( in which case it is called generalized hyperhidrosis ) .
* Hidromeiosis is a reduction in sweating that is due to blockages of sweat glands in humid conditions .
* A substance or medicine that causes perspiration is a sudorific or sudatory .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Sweat contributes to body odor when it is metabolized by bacteria on the skin .
Medications that are used for other treatments and diet also affect odor .
Some medical conditions , such as kidney failure and diabetic ketoacidosis , can also affect sweat odor .
Areas that produce excessive sweat usually appear pink or white , but , in severe cases , may appear cracked , scaly , and soft .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Diaphoresis is a non - specific symptom or sign , which means that it has many possible causes .
Some causes of diaphoresis include physical exertion , menopause , fever , ingestion of toxins or irritants , and high environmental temperature .
Strong emotions ( anger , fear , anxiety ) and recall of past trauma can also trigger sweating .
The vast majority of sweat glands in the body are innervated by sympathetic cholinergic neurons .
Sympathetic postganglionic neurons typically secrete norepinephrine and are named sympathetic adrenergic neurons ; however , the sympathetic postganglionic neurons that innervate sweat glands secrete acetylcholine and hence are termed sympathetic cholinergic neurons .
Sweat glands , piloerector muscles , and some blood vessels are innervated by sympathetic cholinergic neurons .
PATHOLOGICAL SWEATING
Section::::Pathological sweating .
Diaphoresis may be associated with some abnormal conditions , such as hyperthyroidism and shock .
If it is accompanied by unexplained weight loss or fever or by palpitations , shortness of breath , or chest discomfort , it suggests serious illness .
Diaphoresis is also seen in an acute myocardial infarction ( heart attack ) , from the increased firing of the sympathetic nervous system , and is frequent in serotonin syndrome .
Diaphoresis can also be caused by many types of infections , often accompanied by fever and/or chills .
Most infections can cause some degree of diaphoresis and it is a very common symptom in some serious infections such as malaria and tuberculosis .
In addition , pneumothorax can cause diaphoresis with splinting of the chest wall .
Neuroleptic malignant syndrome and other malignant diseases ( e.g. leukemias ) can also cause diaphoresis .
Diabetics relying on insulin shots or oral medications may have low blood sugar ( hypoglycemia ) , which can also cause diaphoresis .
Drugs ( including caffeine , morphine , alcohol , antidepressants and certain antipsychotics ) may be causes , as well as withdrawal from alcohol , benzodiazepines , nonbenzodiazepines or narcotic painkiller dependencies .
Sympathetic nervous system stimulants such as cocaine and amphetamines have also been associated with diaphoresis .
Diaphoresis due to ectopic catecholamine is a classic symptom of a pheochromocytoma , a rare tumor of the adrenal gland .
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors ( e.g. some insecticides ) also cause contraction of sweat gland smooth muscle leading to diaphoresis .
Mercury is well known for its use as a diaphoretic , and was widely used in the 19th and early 20th century by physicians to " purge " the body of an illness .
However , due to the high toxicity of mercury , secondary symptoms would manifest , which were erroneously attributed to the former disease that was being treated with mercurials .
Infantile acrodynia ( childhood mercury poisoning ) is characterized by excessive perspiration .
A clinician should immediately consider acrodynia in an afebrile child who is sweating profusely .
Some people can develop a sweat allergy .
The allergy is not due to the sweat itself but instead to an allergy - producing protein secreted by bacteria found on the skin .
Tannic - acid has been found to suppress the allergic response along with showering .
HYPERHIDROSIS
Section::::Hyperhidrosis .
In some people , the body 's mechanism for cooling itself is overactive — so overactive that they may sweat four or five times more than is typical .
Millions of people are affected by this condition , but more than half never receive treatment due to embarrassment or lack of awareness .
While it most commonly affects the armpits , feet , and hands , it is possible for someone to experience this condition over their whole body .
The face is another common area for hyperhidrosis to be an issue .
Sweating uncontrollably is not always expected and may be embarrassing to sufferers of the condition .
It can cause both physiological and emotional problems in patients .
It is generally an inherited problem that is found in each ethnic group .
It is not life - threatening , but it is threatening to a person 's quality of life .
A treatment modality is clipping of the sympathetic nerve at the level of T4 by thoracoscopic means .
NIGHT SWEATS
Section::::Night sweats .
Night sweats , also known as nocturnal hyperhidrosis , is the occurrence of excessive sweating during sleep .
The person may or may not also perspire excessively while awake .
One of the most common causes of night sweats in women over 40 is the hormonal changes related to menopause and perimenopause .
This is a very common occurrence during the menopausal transition years .
While night sweats might be relatively harmless , it can also be a sign of a serious underlying disease .
It is important to distinguish night sweats due to medical causes from those that occur simply because the sleep environment is too warm , either because the bedroom is unusually hot or because there are too many covers on the bed .
Night sweats caused by a medical condition or infection can be described as " severe hot flashes occurring at night that can drench sleepwear and sheets , which are not related to the environment " .
Some of the underlying medical conditions and infections that cause these severe night sweats can be life - threatening and should promptly be investigated by a medical practitioner .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
Sweating allows the body to regulate its temperature .
Sweating is controlled from a center in the preoptic and anterior regions of the brain 's hypothalamus , where thermosensitive neurons are located .
The heat - regulatory function of the hypothalamus is also affected by inputs from temperature receptors in the skin .
High skin temperature reduces the hypothalamic set point for sweating and increases the gain of the hypothalamic feedback system in response to variations in core temperature .
Overall , however , the sweating response to a rise in hypothalamic ( ' core ' ) temperature is much larger than the response to the same increase in average skin temperature .
Sweating causes a decrease in core temperature through evaporative cooling at the skin surface .
As high energy molecules evaporate from the skin , releasing energy absorbed from the body , the skin and superficial vessels decrease in temperature .
Cooled venous blood then returns to the body 's core and counteracts rising core temperatures .
There are two situations in which the nerves will stimulate the sweat glands , causing perspiration : during physical heat and during emotional stress .
In general , emotionally induced sweating is restricted to palms , soles , armpits , and sometimes the forehead , while physical heat - induced sweating occurs throughout the body .
People have an average of two to four million sweat glands .
But how much sweat is released by each gland is determined by many factors , including gender , genetics , environmental conditions , age or fitness level .
Two of the major contributors to sweat rate are an individual 's fitness level and weight .
If an individual weighs more , sweat rate is likely to increase because the body must exert more energy to function and there is more body mass to cool down .
On the other hand , a fit person will start sweating earlier and more readily .
As someone becomes fit , the body becomes more efficient at regulating the body 's temperature and sweat glands adapt along with the body 's other systems .
Sweat is not pure water ; it always contains a small amount ( 0.2–1 % ) of solute .
When a person moves from a cold climate to a hot climate , adaptive changes occur in the sweating mechanisms of the person .
This process is referred to as acclimatisation : the maximum rate of sweating increases and its solute composition decreases .
The volume of water lost in sweat daily is highly variable , ranging from 100 to 8,000 mL / day .
The solute loss can be as much as 350 mmol / d ( or 90 mmol / d acclimatised ) of sodium under the most extreme conditions .
During average intensity exercise , sweat losses can average up to 2 litres of water / hour .
In a cool climate and in the absence of exercise , sodium loss can be very low ( less than 5 mmol / d ) .
Sodium concentration in sweat is 30 - 65 mmol / l , depending on the degree of acclimatisation .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Sweat is mostly water .
A microfluidic model of the eccrine sweat gland provides details on what solutes partition into sweat , their mechanisms of partitioning , and their fluidic transport to the skin surface .
Dissolved in the water are trace amounts of minerals , lactic acid , and urea .
Although the mineral content varies , some measured concentrations are : sodium ( ) , potassium ( ) , calcium ( ) , and magnesium ( ) .
Relative to the plasma and extracellular fluid , the concentration of Na ions is much lower in sweat ( ~40 mM in sweat versus ~150 mM in plasma and extracellular fluid ) .
Initially , within eccrine glands sweat has a high concentration of Na ions .
In the sweat ducts , the Na ions are re - absorbed into tissue by epithelial sodium channels ( ENaC ) that are located on the apical membrane of epithelial cells that form the duct ( see Fig . 9 of the reference ) .
Many other trace elements are also excreted in sweat , again an indication of their concentration is ( although measurements can vary fifteenfold ) zinc ( ) , copper ( ) , iron ( ) , chromium ( ) , nickel ( ) , and lead ( ) .
Probably many other less - abundant trace minerals leave the body through sweating with correspondingly lower concentrations .
Some exogenous organic compounds make their way into sweat as exemplified by an unidentified odiferous " maple syrup " scented compound in several of the species in the mushroom genus Lactarius .
In humans , sweat is hypoosmotic relative to plasma ( i.e. less concentrated ) .
Sweat is found at moderately acidic to neutral pH levels , typically between 4.5 and 7.0 .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE ARTIFICIAL PERSPIRATION Section::::Society and culture .
Section::::Artificial perspiration .
Artificial skin capable of sweating similar to natural sweat rates and with the surface texture and wetting properties of regular skin has been developed for research purposes .
Artificial perspiration is also available for in - vitro testing , and contains 19 amino acids and the most abundant minerals and metabolites in sweat .
DIAGNOSTICS Section::::Diagnostics .
There is interest in its use in wearable technology .
Sweat can be sampled and sensed non - invasively and continuously using electronic tattoos , bands , or patches .
However , sweat as a diagnostic fluid presents numerous challenges as well , such as very small sample volumes and filtration ( dilution ) of larger - sized hydrophilic analytes .
Currently the only major commercial application for sweat diagnostics is for infant cystic fibrosis testing based on sweat chloride concentrations .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS