GREAT DANE
The Great Dane is a German breed of domestic dog known for its giant size .
The German name of the breed is Deutsche Dogge , or German Mastiff .
The French name is Dogue Allemand .
The record holder for tallest dog was a Great Dane called Zeus ( died September 2014 ; aged 5 ) , that measured from paw to shoulder .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Large boarhounds appear in ancient Greece , in frescoes from Tiryns dating back to the 14th–13th centuries BC .
These large boarhounds continue to appear throughout ancient Greece in subsequent centuries up to the Hellenistic era .
In Austria and Germany
the Molossian hound , Suliot dog , and specific imports from Greece were used in the 18th century to increase the stature of the boarhounds whereas , in Ireland , it was done for the wolfhounds .
Bigger dogs are depicted on numerous runestones in Scandinavia , on Danish coinage from the fifth century AD , and in the Poetic Edda ( a collection of Old Norse poems ) .
The University of Copenhagen Zoological Museum holds at least seven skeletons of very large hunting dogs , dating from the fifth century BC to 1000 AD .
HUNTING DOG Section::::Hunting dog .
In the middle of the 16th century , the nobility in many countries of Europe imported strong , long - legged dogs from England , which were descended from crossbreeds between English Mastiffs and Irish Wolfhounds .
They were dog hybrids in different sizes and phenotypes with no formal breed .
These dogs were called Englische Docke or Englische Tocke – later written and spelled : Dogge – or Englischer Hund in Germany .
The name simply meant " English dog . "
Since then , the English word " dog " has come to be associated with a molossoid dog in Germany and France .
These dogs were bred in the courts of German nobility , independent of the English methods , since the start of the 17th century .
The dogs were used for hunting bear , boar , and deer at princely courts , with the favorites staying at night in the bedchambers of their lords .
These Kammerhunde ( chamber dogs ) were outfitted with gilded collars , and helped protect the sleeping princes from assassins .
While hunting boar or bears , the Englische Dogge was a catch dog used after the other hunting dogs to seize the bear or boar and hold it in place until the huntsman was able to kill it .
When the hunting customs changed , particularly because of the use of firearms , many of the involved dog types disappeared .
The Englische Dogge became rare , and was kept only as a dog of hobby or luxury .
NAME CHANGE Section::::Name change .
In the 19th century , the dog was known as a " German boarhound " in English - speaking countries .
Some German breeders tried to introduce the names " German Dogge " and " German Mastiff " on the English market , because they believed the breed should be marketed as a dog of luxury and not as a working dog .
However , due to the increasing tensions between Germany and other countries , the dog later became referred to as a " Great Dane " , after the grand danois in Buffon 's Histoire naturelle , générale et particulière in 1755 .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The Great Dane is a large German domestic dog ( Canis lupus familiaris ) known for its giant size .
As described by the American Kennel Club :
The Great Dane combines , in its regal appearance , dignity , strength , and elegance with great size and a powerful , well - formed , smoothly muscled body .
It is one of the giant working breeds , but is unique in that its general conformation must be so well balanced that it never appears clumsy , and shall move with a long reach and powerful drive .
The Great Dane is a short - haired breed with a strong , galloping figure .
In the ratio between length and height , the Great Dane should be square .
The male dog should not be less than at the shoulders , a female .
Danes under minimum height are disqualified .
From year to year , the tallest living dog is typically a Great Dane .
Previous record holders include Gibson , Titan , and George ; however , the current record holder is a black Great Dane named Zeus that stood at the shoulder before his death in September 2014 .
He was also the tallest dog on record ( according to Guinness World Records ) , beating the previous holder , the aforementioned George that stood at the shoulder .
The minimum weight for a Great Dane over 18 months is for males , for females .
Unusually , the American Kennel Club dropped the minimum weight requirement from its standard .
The male should appear more massive throughout than the female , with a larger frame and heavier bone .
Great Danes have naturally floppy , triangular ears .
In the past , when Great Danes were commonly used to hunt boars , cropping of the ears was performed to make injuries to the dogs ' ears less likely during hunts .
Now that Danes are primarily companion animals , cropping is sometimes still done for traditional and cosmetic reasons .
In the 1930s when Great Danes had their ears cropped , after the surgery , two devices called Easter bonnets were fitted to their ears to make them stand up .
Today , the practice is common in the United States , but much less common in Europe .
In some European countries such as the United Kingdom , Ireland , Denmark , and Germany , and parts of Australia and New Zealand , the practice is banned or controlled to only be performed by veterinary surgeons .
COAT Section::::Coat .
The three varieties have five to six ( depending on the standard ) show - acceptable coat colors :
* Fawn and brindle
* Fawn : The colour is yellow gold with a black mask .
Black should appear on the eye rims and eyebrows , and may appear on the ears .
* Brindle : The colour is fawn and black in a chevron stripe pattern .
Often , also , they are referred to as having a stripe pattern .
* Harlequin and black *
Black
: The colour is a glossy black .
White markings on the chest and toes are not desirable and considered faults .
*
Harlequin : The base colour is pure white with black torn patches irregularly and well distributed over the entire body ; a pure white neck is preferred .
The black patches should never be large enough to give the appearance of a blanket , nor so small as to give a stippled or dappled effect .
Eligible , but less desirable , are a few small grey patches ( this grey is consistent with a merle marking ) or a white base with single black hairs showing through , which tend to give a salt and pepper or dirty effect .
Grey merle ( Grautiger ) dogs are acceptable in conformation shows under the FCI as the grey merle dogs can produce correctly marked black / white harlequin dogs , depending on the combinations .
The aim for deleting the colour grey merle as a disqualifying fault is to provide a wider gene pool .
Their status is that they are " neither desirable nor to be disqualified " .
Consequently , this colour must never obtain the highest grading at dog shows .
* Mantle ( in some countries referred to as Bostons due to the similar coloration and pattern as a Boston Terrier ) :
The colour is black and white with a solid black blanket extending over the body ; black skull with white muzzle ; white blaze is optional ; whole white collar preferred ; a white chest ; white on part or whole of forelegs and hind legs ; white tipped black tail .
A small white marking in the black blanket is acceptable , as is a break in the white collar .
* Blue : The colour is a pure steel blue .
White markings at the chest and toes are not desirable and considered faults .
Other colours occur occasionally , but are not acceptable for conformation showing , and they are not pursued by breeders who intend to breed show dogs .
These colours include white , fawnequin , brindlequin , merle , merlequin , blue merle , chocolate and fawn mantle .
The white Great Dane coloring is typically associated with vision and hearing impairment .
TEMPERAMENT Section::::Temperament .
The Great Dane 's large and imposing appearance belies its friendly nature .
They are known for seeking physical affection with their owners , and the breed is often referred to as a " gentle giant " .
Great Danes are generally well disposed toward other dogs , other noncanine pets , and familiar humans .
They generally do not exhibit extreme aggressiveness or a high prey drive .
The Great Dane is a very gentle and loving animal and with the proper care and training is great around children , especially when being raised with them .
However , if not properly socialized , a Great Dane may become fearful or aggressive towards new stimuli , such as strangers and new environments .
The Great Dane , although large in size , is comfortable and well - suited to life in a small apartment , or a large house with acres of land .
The Great Dane is a very adaptable breed , known for being " couch potatoes " .
Great Danes are a breed recommended for families provided that they get trained early and onwards , regarded by animal experts due to their preference for sitting on and leaning against owners as " the world 's biggest ' lapdog ' . "
EXERCISE Section::::Exercise .
Like most dogs , Great Danes require daily walks to maintain their health .
However , it is important not to over exercise this breed , particularly when young .
Great Dane puppies grow very large , very fast , which puts them at risk of joint and bone problems .
Because of a puppy 's natural energy , Dane owners often take steps to minimize activity while the dog is still growing .
Given their large size , Great Danes continue to grow ( mostly gaining weight ) longer than most dogs .
Even at one year of age , a Great Dane continues to grow for several more months .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
Great Danes , like most giant dogs , have a fairly slow metabolism .
This results in less energy and less food consumption per pound of dog than in small breeds .
They have some health problems that are common to large breeds , including bloat ( gastric dilatation volvulus ) .
To avoid bloat , a rest period of 40 minutes to one hour after meals is recommended before exercise .
Their average lifespan is 6 to 8 years ; however , some Great Danes have been known to reach 10 years of age or more .
Like many larger breeds , Great Danes are at particular risk for hip dysplasia .
Dilated cardiomyopathy and many congenital heart diseases are also commonly found in the Great Dane , leading to its nickname :
the heartbreak breed , in conjunction with its shorter lifespan .
Great Danes also may carry the merle gene , which is part of the genetic makeup that creates the harlequin coloring .
The merle gene is an incomplete dominant , meaning only one copy of the gene is needed to show the merle coloring ; two merle genes produce excessive white markings and many health issues such as deafness , blindness , or other debilitating ocular issues .
Great Danes can also develop wobbler disease , a condition affecting the vertebral column .
Since these dogs do grow at a rapid rate , the bones in their vertebae can push up against the spinal cord and cause weakness in the legs .
This can be treated with surgery or may heal itself over time .
CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE
* Animation designer Iwao Takamoto based the Hanna - Barbera character Scooby - Doo on a Great Dane .
He derived his design from sketches given to him by a Hanna - Barbera employee who bred Danes and then endeavoured to make Scooby the opposite of a perfect pedigree , with a longer tail , bowed legs , small chin and sloping back .
* Elmer , a Great Dane in Oswald the Lucky Rabbit by Walter Lantz
*
In the Harry Potter novels , Fang is said to be a Great Dane .
The movies used a Neapolitan Mastiff .
* Brad Anderson 's comic strip character , Marmaduke is a Great Dane .
* On 24 October 1975 Rinka , a Great Dane belonging to Norman Scott , was shot in a bungled attempt to murder Scott himself , in what became known as the Thorpe affair .
In 1996 , Scott Freeman and Barrie Penrose published Rinkagate : Rise and Fall of Jeremy Thorpe
*
The Great Dane was named the state dog of Pennsylvania in 1965 , and the University of Iowa had Great Danes , Rex I and Rex II , as mascots before the Hawkeye was chosen .
* " Great Danes " is the nickname of the University at Albany .
Their mascot is the Great Dane .
* McGruff the Crime Dog
*
Just Nuisance was the only dog to be officially enlisted in the Royal Navy .
Done mainly as a morale booster for World War II enlisted troops , Nuisance proved to be a lasting legacy of the small Cape Town suburb of Simon 's Town .
*
In each film version of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's The Hound of the Baskervilles , a Great Dane was cast as the cursed hellhound that kills the Baskerville family .
* revolves around the inventive ways the Great Dane is kept hidden from his new owners .
* Oliver & Company features Einstein , a Great Dane , and a member of Fagin 's dog - gang .
He is friendly but dull - witted , protective of his friends , and provides the muscle for the gang .
*
An unnamed Great Dane knocks Jean - Jacques Rousseau to the ground in Reveries of a Solitary Walker ; he describes the singular feeling of peace and suspended identity that the shock of the collision brings about in him .
SEE ALSO
* Reichshund , term used in Germany for Bismarck 's Great Danes and , for a while , the entire breed * Brindlequin * Scooby - Doo , Where Are You ! REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Giant George is the World 's Biggest Dog * The Great Dane Dog historical marker in Savannah , Georgia