PITA Pita ( or ) , sometimes spelled pitta ( mainly UK ) , is a yeast - leavened round flatbread baked from wheat flour , sometimes with a pocket .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The first mention of the word in English cited in the Oxford English Dictionary was in 1936 .
The English word is borrowed from Modern Greek πίτα , in turn from the Byzantine Greek πίτα " bread , cake , pie , pitta " ( attested in 1108 ) and possibly from the Ancient Greek πίττα or πίσσα " pitch / resin " ( for the gloss ) , or Ancient Greek πικτή ( pikte ) , " fermented pastry " , which may have passed to Latin as " picta " cf .
pizza .
It was received into Levantine Arabic ( as fatteh , since Arabic lacks the sound /p/ ) .
Other hypotheses trace the word back to the Classical Hebrew word
patt פת ( literally " a morsel of bread " ) .
It is spelled like the Aramaic pittəṭā / pittā ( פיתה ) , from which it was received into Byzantine Greek ( see above ) .
Hypotheses also exist for Germanic or Illyrian intermediaries .
The word has been borrowed by Turkish as pide , and appears in the Balkan languages as Serbo - Croatian pita , Romanian pită , Albanian pite , Kosovo Albanian pitalka , Bulgarian pitka or pita .
In Arabic , the phrase خبز البيتا ( pita bread ) is sometimes used ; other names are simply خبز ' khubz , bread ' or الخبز العربي ' Arab bread ' or خبز الكماج ' al - kimaj bread ' .
In Egypt , it is called ʿaish ( عيش ) or ʿaish baladi ( عيش بلدي ) .
" ' Aish " means life in Arabic , highlighting the importance of pita bread in Egyptian culture .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
Most pita are baked at high temperatures ( ) , which turns the water in the dough into steam , thus causing the pita to puff up and form a pocket .
When removed from the oven , the layers of baked dough remain separated inside the deflated pita , which allows the bread to be opened to form a pocket .
However , pita is sometimes baked without pockets and is called " pocket - less pita " .
Regardless of whether it is made at home or in a commercial bakery , pita is proofed for a very short time — only 15 minutes .
Modern commercial pita bread is prepared on advanced automatic lines .
These lines have high production capacities , processing 100,000 pound ( 45,000 kg ) silos of flour at a time and producing thousands of loaves per hour .
The ovens used in commercial baking are much hotter than traditional clay ovens —— so each loaf is only baked for one minute .
The pita are then air - cooled for about 20 minutes on conveyor belts before being shipped immediately or else stored in commercial freezers kept at a temperature of .
CULINARY USE Section::::Culinary use .
Pita can be used to scoop sauces or dips , such as hummus , or to wrap kebabs , gyros , or falafel in the manner of sandwiches .
It can also be cut and baked into crispy pita chips .
In Turkish cuisine , the word pide may refer to three different styles of bread : a flatbread similar to that eaten in Greece and Arab countries , a pizza - like dish where the filling is placed on the ( often boat - shaped ) dough before baking , and Ramazan pide .
The first type of pide is used to wrap various styles of kebab , while the second is topped with cheese , ground meat , or other fresh or cured meats , and/or vegetables .
Regional variations in the shape , baking technique , and toppings create distinctive styles for each region .
In Cyprus , pita is typically rounder , fluffier and baked on a cast iron skillet .
It is used for souvlakia , sheftalia , halloumi with lountza , and gyros .
Flat breads rarely appear in Greek cuisine ; the Greek word pita means " pastry " .
Various cakes and pastries are pitas , such as spanakopita ( spinach pie ) and karydopita ( walnut cake ) .
Traditional breads in Greek cuisine are leavened loaves , such as the round καρβέλι karvéli or the oblong φραντζόλα frantzóla .
The full name of the flat bread known in English as pita bread is aravikē pita ( lit . '
Arabic pastry ' ) , though it is also called simply " pita " .
In Greece , pita bread is almost exclusively used as a component of pita - souvlaki sandwich consisting of souvlaki or gyros with tzatziki , tomatoes , onions , french fries , and condiments stuffed into a pita bread pocket .
SEE ALSO * Chapati , unleavened flatbread from the Indian subcontinent * Flour tortilla , a thin unleavened flatbread from Mexico * Focaccia , a flat oven - baked bread from Italy
* Injera , a sourdough - risen flatbread from East Africa * Khachapuri , a breaded cheese dish from Georgia
* Khubz , a round bread from the Arabian Peninsula * Matnakash , a leavened bread from Armenia ( related to the Ramadan pita )
* Naan , a leavened , oven - baked flatbread from Central and South Asia
* Pită de Pecica , a round bread from Romania
* Rghaif , a pancake - like bread from Northwest Africa REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS