MS .
Ms or Ms. ( normally , but also , or when unstressed ) is an English honorific used with the last name or full name of a woman , intended as a default form of address for women regardless of their marital status .
Like Miss and Mrs. , the term Ms. has its origins in the female English title once used for all women , Mistress .
It has its origin in the 17th century and was revived into mainstream usage in the 20th century .
In the UK and the majority of Commonwealth countries , a full stop ( period ) is usually not used with the title ; in the United States and Canada a period is usually used ( see Abbreviation ) .
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT AND REVIVAL OF THE TERM Section::::Historical development and revival of the term .
Miss and Mrs. , derived from the then formal Mistress , like Mister did not originally indicate marital status .
Ms. was popularized in the 20th century .
The earliest known proposal for the modern revival of Ms. as a title appeared in The Republican of Springfield , Massachusetts , on November 10 , 1901 : The term was again suggested as a convenience to writers of business letters by such publications as the Bulletin of the American Business Writing Association ( 1951 ) and The Simplified Letter , issued by the National Office Management Association ( 1952 ) .
In 1961 , Sheila Michaels attempted to put the term into use when she saw what she thought was a typographical error on the address label of a copy of News & Letters sent to her roommate .
Michaels " was looking for a title for a woman who did not ' belong ' to a man .
"
She knew the separation of the now common terms Miss and Mrs. had derived from Mistress , but one could not suggest that women use the original title with its now louche connotations .
Her efforts to promote use of a new honorific were at first ignored .
In 1969 , in a lull during a WBAI - radio interview with The Feminists group , Michaels suggested the use of Ms. A friend of Gloria Steinem heard the interview and suggested it as a title for her new magazine .
The magazine Ms. debuted on newsstands in January 1972 , and its much - publicized name quickly led to widespread usage .
In February 1972 , the US Government Printing Office approved using Ms. in official government documents .
In 1976 Marvel Comics introduced a new superhero named Ms. Marvel , billing her as the " first feminist superhero " .
Even several public opponents of non - sexist language , such as William Safire , were finally convinced that Ms. had earned a place in English by the case of US Congresswoman Geraldine A. Ferraro .
Ferraro , a United States vice - presidential candidate in 1984 , was a married woman who used her birth surname professionally rather than her husband 's ( Zaccaro ) .
Safire pointed out in 1984 that it would be equally incorrect to call her " Miss Ferraro " ( as she was married ) or " Mrs. Ferraro " ( as her husband was not " Mr. Ferraro")—and that calling her " Mrs. Zaccaro " would confuse the reader .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
Suggestions about how Ms. should be used , or whether it should be used at all , are varied .
The Daily Telegraph states in its style guide that Ms should only be used if a subject requests it herself
and it " should not be used merely because we do not know whether the woman is Mrs or Miss " .
On the other hand , The Guardian , which restricts its use of honorific titles to leading articles , states in its style guide : " use Ms for women ... unless they have expressed a preference for Miss or Mrs " .
The Economist states that it generally uses the title a person adopts but warns that Ms. is an " ugly " title .
A BBC Academy style guide states , " In choosing between Miss , Mrs and Ms , try to find out what the person herself uses , and stick to that .
"
The New York Times embraces the use of all three : Mrs. , Miss , and Ms. , and will follow the individual 's preferences .
Some etiquette writers and famous figures do not support the use of Ms. , including Charles Kidd , the editor of Debrett 's Peerage and Baronetage , who claims the usage is " not very helpful " and that he had been " brought up to address a married woman as Mrs John Smith , for example " .
Debrett 's itself , concerning the case of a married woman who chooses not to take her husband 's name , states , " The ugly - sounding Ms is problematic .
Although many women have assumed this bland epithet , it remains incorrect to use it when addressing a social letter .
"
The former British Conservative Party MP Ann Widdecombe has stated , " I ca n't see the point of Ms
and I do n't see it as an issue " , whilst author and journalist Jessica Fellowes describes the title Ms. as " ghastly " .
The Queen 's English Society has criticised the use of Ms as " an abbreviation that is not short for anything " , describing it as a " linguistic misfit [ that ] came about because certain women suddenly became sensitive about revealing their marital status " .
On the other hand , the default use of Ms. , especially for business purposes , is championed by some American sources , including Judith Martin ( a.k.a . Miss Manners ) .
Concerning business , the Emily Post Institute states , " Ms. is the default form of address , unless you know positively that a woman wishes to be addressed as
Mrs. " The American Heritage Book of English Usage states , " Using Ms. obviates the need for the guesswork involved in figuring out whether to address someone as Mrs. or Miss : you ca n't go wrong with Ms. Whether the woman you are addressing is married or unmarried , has changed her name or not , Ms. is always correct . "
NOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* The Times style guide *
The Guardian style guide