FREE FALL
In Newtonian physics , free fall is any motion of a body where gravity is the only force acting upon it .
In the context of general relativity , where gravitation is reduced to a space - time curvature , a body in free fall has no force acting on it .
An object in the technical sense of the term " free fall " may not necessarily be falling down in the usual sense of the term .
An object moving upwards would not normally be considered to be falling , but if it is subject to the force of gravity only , it is said to be in free fall .
The moon is thus in free fall .
In a uniform gravitational field , in the absence of any other forces , gravitation acts on each part of the body equally and this is weightlessness , a condition that also occurs when the gravitational field is zero ( such as when far away from any gravitating body ) .
The term " free fall " is often used more loosely than in the strict sense defined above .
Thus , falling through an atmosphere without a deployed parachute , or lifting device , is also often referred to as free fall .
The aerodynamic drag forces in such situations prevent them from producing full weightlessness , and thus a skydiver 's " free fall " after reaching terminal velocity produces the sensation of the body 's weight being supported on a cushion of air .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the Western world prior to the 16th century , it was generally assumed that the speed of a falling body would be proportional to its weight — that is , a 10 kg object was expected to fall ten times faster than an otherwise identical 1 kg object through the same medium .
The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle ( 384–322 BC ) discussed falling objects in Physics ( Book VII ) which was perhaps the first book on mechanics ( see Aristotelian physics ) .
The Italian scientist Galileo Galilei ( 1564–1642 ) subjected the Aristotelian theories to experimentation and careful observation .
He then combined the results of these experiments with mathematical analysis in an unprecedented way .
According to a tale that may be apocryphal , in 1589–92 Galileo dropped two objects of unequal mass from the Leaning Tower of Pisa .
Given the speed at which such a fall would occur , it is doubtful that Galileo could have extracted much information from this experiment .
Most of his observations of falling bodies were really of bodies rolling down ramps .
This slowed things down enough to the point where he was able to measure the time intervals with water clocks and his own pulse ( stopwatches having not yet been invented ) .
This he repeated " a full hundred times " until he had achieved " an accuracy such that the deviation between two observations never exceeded one - tenth of a pulse beat .
"
In 1589–92 , Galileo wrote De Motu Antiquiora , an unpublished manuscript on the motion of falling bodies .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Examples of objects in free fall include : * A spacecraft ( in space ) with propulsion off ( e.g. in a continuous orbit , or on a suborbital trajectory ( ballistics ) going up for some minutes , and then down ) .
*
An object dropped at the top of a drop tube .
*
An object thrown upward or a person jumping off the ground at low speed ( i.e. as long as air resistance is negligible in comparison to weight ) .
Technically , an object is in free fall even when moving upwards or instantaneously at rest at the top of its motion .
If gravity is the only influence acting , then the acceleration is always downward and has the same magnitude for all bodies , commonly denoted formula_1 .
Since all objects fall at the same rate in the absence of other forces , objects and people will experience weightlessness in these situations .
Examples of objects not in free fall :
* Flying in an aircraft : there is also an additional force of lift .
* Standing on the ground : the gravitational force is counteracted by the normal force from the ground .
* Descending to the Earth using a parachute , which balances the force of gravity with an aerodynamic drag force ( and with some parachutes , an additional lift force ) .
The example of a falling skydiver who has not yet deployed a parachute is not considered free fall from a physics perspective , since he experiences a drag force that equals his weight once he has achieved terminal velocity ( see below ) .
However , the term " free fall skydiving " is commonly used to describe this case in everyday speech , and in the skydiving community .
It is not clear , though , whether the more recent sport of wingsuit flying fits under the definition of free fall skydiving .
Near the surface of the Earth , an object in free fall in a vacuum will accelerate at approximately 9.8 m / s , independent of its mass .
With air resistance acting on an object that has been dropped , the object will eventually reach a terminal velocity , which is around 53 m / s ( 195 km / h or 122 mph ) for a human skydiver .
The terminal velocity depends on many factors including mass , drag coefficient , and relative surface area and will only be achieved if the fall is from sufficient altitude .
A typical skydiver in a spread - eagle position will reach terminal velocity after about 12 seconds , during which time he will have fallen around 450 m ( 1,500 ft ) .
Free fall was demonstrated on the moon by astronaut David Scott on August 2 , 1971 .
He simultaneously released a hammer and a feather from the same height above the moon 's surface .
The hammer and the feather both fell at the same rate and hit the ground at the same time .
This demonstrated Galileo 's discovery that , in the absence of air resistance , all objects experience the same acceleration due to gravity .
( On the Moon , the gravitational acceleration is much less than on Earth , approximately 1.63 m / s . )
FREE FALL IN NEWTONIAN MECHANICS UNIFORM GRAVITATIONAL FIELD WITHOUT AIR RESISTANCE Section::::Free fall in Newtonian mechanics .
Section::::Uniform gravitational field without air resistance .
This is the " textbook " case of the vertical motion of an object falling a small distance close to the surface of a planet .
It is a good approximation in air as long as the force of gravity on the object is much greater than the force of air resistance , or
equivalently the object 's velocity is always much less than the terminal velocity ( see below ) .
where UNIFORM GRAVITATIONAL FIELD WITH AIR RESISTANCE Section::::Uniform gravitational field with air resistance .
This case , which applies to skydivers , parachutists or any body of mass , formula_10 , and cross - sectional area , formula_11 , with Reynolds number well above the critical Reynolds number , so that the air resistance is proportional to the square of the fall velocity , formula_12 , has an equation of motion where formula_14 is the air density and formula_15 is the drag coefficient , assumed to be constant although in general it will depend on the Reynolds number .
Assuming an object falling from rest and no change in air density with altitude , the solution is : where the terminal speed is given by The object 's speed versus time can be integrated over time to find the vertical position as a function of time : Using the figure of 56 m / s for the terminal velocity of a human , one finds that after 10 seconds he will have fallen 348 metres and attained 94 % of terminal velocity , and after 12 seconds he will have fallen 455 metres and will have attained 97 % of terminal velocity .
However , when the air density can not be assumed to be constant , such as for objects or skydivers falling from high altitude , the equation of motion becomes much more difficult to solve analytically and a numerical simulation of the motion is usually necessary .
The figure shows the forces acting on meteoroids falling through the Earth 's upper atmosphere .
HALO jumps , including Joe Kittinger 's and Felix Baumgartner 's record jumps ( see below ) , and the planned Le Grand Saut , also belong in this category .
INVERSE - SQUARE LAW GRAVITATIONAL FIELD Section::::Inverse - square law gravitational field .
It can be said that two objects in space orbiting each other in the absence of other forces are in free fall around each other , e.g. that the Moon or an artificial satellite " falls around " the Earth , or a planet " falls around " the Sun .
Assuming spherical objects means that the equation of motion is governed by Newton 's Law of Universal Gravitation , with solutions to the gravitational two - body problem being elliptic orbits obeying Kepler 's laws of planetary motion .
This connection between falling objects close to the Earth and orbiting objects is best illustrated by the thought experiment , Newton 's cannonball .
The motion of two objects moving radially towards each other with no angular momentum can be considered a special case of an elliptical orbit of eccentricity ( radial elliptic trajectory ) .
This allows one to compute the free - fall time for two point objects on a radial path .
The solution of this equation of motion yields time as a function of separation : where Substituting y = 0
we get the free - fall time .
The separation as a function of time is given by the inverse of the equation .
The inverse is represented exactly by the analytic power series : Evaluating this yields : where formula_22 FREE FALL IN GENERAL RELATIVITY Section::::Free fall in general relativity .
In general relativity , an object in free fall is subject to no force and is an inertial body moving along a geodesic .
Far away from any sources of space - time curvature , where spacetime is flat , the Newtonian theory of free fall agrees with general relativity .
Otherwise the two disagree ; e.g. , only general relativity can account for the precession of orbits , the orbital decay or inspiral of compact binaries due to gravitational waves , and the relativity of direction ( geodetic precession and frame dragging ) .
The experimental observation that all objects in free fall accelerate at the same rate , as noted by Galileo and then embodied in Newton 's theory as the equality of gravitational and inertial masses , and later confirmed to high accuracy by modern forms of the Eötvös experiment , is the basis of the equivalence principle , from which basis Einstein 's theory of general relativity initially took off .
RECORD FREE FALL PARACHUTE JUMPS Section::::Record free fall parachute jumps .
In 1914 , while doing demonstrations for the U.S. Army , a parachute pioneer named Tiny Broadwick deployed her chute manually , thus becoming the first person to jump free - fall .
According to the Guinness Book of Records , Eugene Andreev ( USSR ) holds the official FAI record for the longest free - fall parachute jump after falling for from an altitude of near the city of Saratov , Russia on November 1 , 1962 .
Although later on jumpers would ascend higher altitudes , Andreev 's record was set without the use of a drogue chute during the jump and therefore remains the longest genuine free fall record .
During the late 1950s , Captain Joseph Kittinger of the United States was assigned to the Aerospace Medical Research Laboratories at Wright - Patterson AFB in Dayton , Ohio .
For Project Excelsior ( meaning " ever upward " , a name given to the project by Colonel John Stapp ) , as part of research into high altitude bailout , he made a series of three parachute jumps wearing a pressurized suit , from a helium balloon with an open gondola .
The first , from 76,400 feet ( 23,290 m ) in November 1959 was a near tragedy when an equipment malfunction caused him to lose consciousness , but the automatic parachute saved him ( he went into a flat spin at a rotational velocity of 120 rpm ; the g - force at his extremities was calculated to be over 22 times that of gravity , setting another record ) .
Three weeks later he jumped again from 74,700 feet ( 22,770 m ) .
For that return jump Kittinger was awarded the A. Leo Stevens parachute medal .
On August 16 , 1960 he made the final jump from the Excelsior III at 102,800 feet ( 31,330 m ) .
Towing a small drogue chute for stabilization , he fell for 4 minutes and 36 seconds reaching a maximum speed of 614 mph ( 988 km / h ) before opening his parachute at 14,000 feet ( 4,270 m ) .
Pressurization for his right glove malfunctioned during the ascent , and his right hand swelled to twice its normal size .
He set records for highest balloon ascent , highest parachute jump , longest drogue - fall ( 4 min ) , and fastest speed by a human through the atmosphere .
The jumps were made in a " rocking - chair " position , descending on his back , rather than the usual arch familiar to skydivers , because he was wearing a 60-pound ( 27 kg ) " kit " on his behind and
his pressure suit naturally formed that shape when inflated , a shape appropriate for sitting in an airplane cockpit .
For the series of jumps , Kittinger was decorated with an oak leaf cluster to his Distinguished Flying Cross and awarded the Harmon Trophy by President Dwight Eisenhower .
In 2012 , the Red Bull Stratos mission took place .
On October 14 , 2012 , Felix Baumgartner broke the records previously set by Kittinger for the highest free fall , the highest manned helium balloon flight , and the fastest free fall ; he jumped from 128,100 feet ( 39,045 m ) , reaching .
Kittinger was a member of the mission control and helped design the capsule and suit that Baumgartner ascended and jumped in .
On October 24 , 2014 , Alan Eustace broke the record previously set by Baumgartner for the highest free fall .
He jumped from a height of 135,908 feet ( 41,425 m ) .
SURVIVING FALLS
Section::::Surviving falls .
A falling person at low altitude will reach terminal velocity after about 12 seconds , falling some 450 m ( 1,500 ft ) in that time .
The person will then maintain this speed without falling any faster .
Terminal velocity at higher altitudes is greater due to the thinner atmosphere and consequent lower air resistance ; free - fallers from high altitudes , including Kittinger , Baumgartner and Eustace discussed in this article , fell faster at higher altitudes .
The severity of injury increases with the height of a free fall , but also depends on body and surface features and the manner that the body impacts on to the surface .
The chance of surviving increases if landing on a soft surface , such as snow .
Overall , the height at which 50 % of children die from a fall is between four and five storey heights above the ground .
JAT stewardess Vesna Vulović survived a fall of on January 26 , 1972 when she was aboard JAT Flight 367 .
The plane was brought down by explosives over Srbská Kamenice in the former Czechoslovakia ( now the Czech Republic ) .
The Serbian stewardess suffered a broken skull , three broken vertebrae ( one crushed completely ) , and was in a coma for 27 days .
In an interview , she commented that , according to the man who found her , " … I was in the middle part of the plane .
I was found with my head down and my colleague on top of me .
One part of my body with my leg was in the plane and my head was out of the plane .
A catering trolley was pinned against my spine and kept me in the plane .
The man who found me , says I was very lucky .
He was in the German Army as a medic during World War Two .
He knew how to treat me at the site of the accident . "
In World War II there were several reports of military aircrew surviving long falls from severely damaged aircraft : Flight Sergeant Nicholas Alkemade jumped at without a parachute and survived as he hit pine trees and soft snow .
He suffered a sprained leg .
Staff Sergeant Alan Magee exited his aircraft at without a parachute and survived as he landed on the glass roof of a train station .
Lieutenant Ivan Chisov bailed out at .
While he had a parachute his plan was to delay opening it as he had been in the midst of an air - battle and was concerned about getting shot while hanging below the parachute .
He lost consciousness due to lack of oxygen and hit a snow - covered slope while still unconscious .
While he suffered severe injuries he was able to fly again in three months .
It was reported that two of the victims of the Lockerbie bombing survived for a brief period after hitting the ground ( with the forward nose section fuselage in freefall mode ) , but died from their injuries before help arrived .
Juliane Koepcke survived a long free fall resulting from the December 24 , 1971 , crash of LANSA Flight 508 ( a LANSA Lockheed Electra OB - R-941 commercial airliner ) in the Peruvian rainforest .
The airplane was struck by lightning during a severe thunderstorm and exploded in mid air , disintegrating up .
Köpcke , who was 17 years old at the time , fell to earth still strapped into her seat .
The German Peruvian teenager survived the fall with only a broken collarbone , a gash to her right arm , and her right eye swollen shut .
As an example of " freefall survival " that was not as extreme as sometimes reported in the press , a skydiver from Staffordshire was said to have plunged without a parachute in Russia and survived .
James Boole said that he was supposed to have been given a signal by another skydiver to open his parachute , but it came two seconds too late .
Boole , who was filming the other skydiver for a television documentary , landed on snow - covered rocks and suffered a broken back and rib .
While he was lucky to survive , this was not a case of true freefall survival , because he was flying a wingsuit , greatly decreasing his vertical speed .
This was over descending terrain with deep snow cover , and he impacted while his parachute was beginning to deploy .
Over the years , other skydivers have survived accidents where the press has reported that no parachute was open , yet they were actually being slowed by a small area of tangled parachute .
They might still be very lucky to survive , but an impact at is much less severe than the that might occur in normal freefall .
Parachute jumper and stuntman Luke Aikins successfully jumped without a parachute from about into a net in California , US , on 30 July 2016 .
SEE ALSO * Equations for a falling body * Reduced - gravity aircraft
* Weightlessness * Terminal velocity
* High - altitude military parachuting * G - force
* Micro - g environment
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Unplanned Freefall ?
A slightly tongue - in - cheek look at surviving free - fall without a parachute .
* Free fall accidents , mathematics of free fall – detailed research on the topic
* Freefall formula calculator * Chuteless jump survivors * detailed account of origins and development of EXCELSIOR project
*
The Way Things Fall an educational website *
H.S. Free fall lesson with videos and interactive flash animations .