RED RIVER ( 1948 FILM )
Red River is a 1948 American western film directed and produced by Howard Hawks and starring John Wayne and Montgomery Clift , giving a fictional account of the first cattle drive from Texas to Kansas along the Chisholm Trail .
The dramatic tension stems from a growing feud over the management of the drive , between the Texas rancher who initiated it ( Wayne ) and his adopted adult son ( Clift ) .
The film 's supporting cast features Walter Brennan , Joanne Dru , Coleen Gray , Harry Carey , John Ireland , Hank Worden , Noah Beery Jr. , Harry Carey Jr. and Paul Fix .
Borden Chase and Charles Schnee wrote the screenplay , based on Chase 's original story ( which was first serialized in The Saturday Evening Post in 1946 as " Blazing Guns on the Chisholm Trail " ) .
In 1990 , Red River was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant . "
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Thomas Dunson ( John Wayne ) is a stubborn man who wants nothing more than to start up a successful cattle ranch in Texas .
Shortly after he begins his journey to Texas with his trail hand Nadine Groot ( Walter Brennan ) , Dunson learns that his love interest Fen ( Coleen Gray ) , whom he had told to stay behind with the California - bound wagon train with the understanding that he would send for her later , was killed in an Indian attack .
Despite this tragedy , Dunson and Groot press on .
That night , Dunson and Groot fend off an attack by Indians , and on the wrist of one , Dunson finds a bracelet he had been left by his late mother , which he had given to Fen as she left .
The next day , an orphaned boy named Matthew Garth ( played as a boy by Mickey Kuhn and as an adult by Montgomery Clift ) wanders into Dunson and Groot 's camp , traumatized and babbling incoherently .
He is the sole survivor of the wagon train .
Dunson adopts him and ties the boy 's cow to his wagon , alongside his own bull .
With only the bull and the cow , Dunson , Groot , and Matt enter Texas by crossing the Red River .
They finally settle in deep South Texas near the Rio Grande .
After Dunson proudly proclaims all the land about them as his own , two Mexican men appear on horseback and inform Dunson that the land already belongs to their boss , a Spanish grandee whose family held the land by patent from the King of Spain .
Dunson dismisses this and , thanks to a quicker draw in a showdown , kills one of the men and tells the other to inform the Spanish don that Dunson now owns the land .
Dunson names his new spread the Red River D , after his chosen cattle brand for his herd .
Fatefully , he promises to add M ( for Matt ) to the brand , once Matt has earned it .
Fourteen years pass , and Dunson now has a fully operational cattle ranch .
With the help of Matt and Groot , his herd now numbers over ten thousand cattle , but he is also broke as a result of widespread poverty in the southern United States .
Due to its loss of the American Civil War , the South can not afford Dunson 's beef .
Dunson decides to drive his massive herd hundreds of miles north to the railhead at Sedalia , Missouri , where he believes they will fetch a good price .
After Dunson hires some extra men to help out with the drive , including professional gunman Cherry Valance ( John Ireland ) , the perilous northward drive starts .
Along the way , they encounter many troubles including a stampede sparked by one of the men ,
Bunk Kenneally ( Ivan Parry ) , making a clatter while trying to steal sugar from the chuck wagon .
This leads to the death of Dan Latimer ( Harry Carey Jr ) .
Dunson wants to make an example of him by whipping him , but when Bunk draws his gun in self - defense , Matt shoots Bunk in the arm , knowing that Dunson would have shot to kill .
The wounded Bunk is sent to make his way home on his own .
Continuing with the drive , Valance relates around the campfire one evening that the railroad has reached Abilene , Kansas , which is much closer than Sedalia .
When Dunson confirms that Valance had not actually seen the railroad , he ignores what he regards as a rumor in favor of continuing on to Missouri .
Deeper problems arise when Dunson 's tyrannical leadership style begins to affect the men .
One of the two chuck wagons was destroyed in the stampede , causing morale to drop as the men live on nothing but beef and roasted grain " coffee . "
Dunson tells the men he is broke and can not buy more supplies , even if they turned back to get them .
When he announces he intends to lynch two men who tried to desert , Matt rebels and takes control of the herd in order to drive it along the Chisholm Trail to the hoped - for railhead in Abilene , Kansas .
Valance and Buster ( Noah Beery Jr. ) become his right hand men .
Face to face , Dunson curses him and promises to kill him when next they meet .
The drive turns toward Abilene , leaving the lightly injured Dunson behind with his horse and a few supplies .
Matt and his men are well aware that Dunson will try to recruit a posse to pursue them .
On the way to Abilene , Matt and his men repel an Indian attack on a wagon train made up of gamblers and dance hall girls .
One of the people they save is Tess Millay ( Joanne Dru ) , who falls in love with Matt .
They spend a night together , and he gives her Dunson 's mother 's bracelet , evidently given to Matt by Dunson in earlier years .
Eager to beat Dunson to Abilene , he leaves early in the morning , the same way Dunson had left his lady love with the wagon train 14 years before .
Later , Tess encounters Dunson , who has followed Matt 's trail and now sees her wearing his mother 's bracelet .
Weary and emotional , he tells Tess what he wants most of all is a son .
She offers to bear him one if he will abandon his pursuit of Matthew Garth .
Dunson sees in her the same anguish that Fen had expressed when he left her , but he resumes the hunt with Tess Millay accompanying him .
When Matt reaches Abilene , he finds the town has been eagerly awaiting the arrival of such a herd to buy and ship it east by rail .
Unknowingly , he has completed the first cattle drive along what would become famous as the Chisholm Trail .
He accepts an excellent offer for the cattle and also meets Tess again .
Shortly thereafter , Dunson arrives in Abilene with his posse .
Valance tries to keep the two apart , but Dunson beats him to the draw , badly wounding him while Valance inflicts a flesh wound on Dunson .
Dunson and Matt begin a furious fistfight , which Tess interrupts by drawing a gun on both men , shooting wildly and demanding that they realize the love that they share .
Dunson and Matt see the error of their ways and make peace .
The film ends with Dunson advising Matt to marry Tess , and telling Matt that he will incorporate an M into the Red River D brand as he had promised 14 years before , because he has earned it .
CAST
* John Wayne as Thomas Dunson
* Montgomery Clift as Matthew " Matt " Garth * Walter Brennan as Nadine Groot * Joanne Dru as Tess Millay
* Coleen Gray as Fen * Harry Carey as Mr. Melville , representative of the Greenwood Trading Company
* John Ireland as Cherry Valance
* Noah Beery Jr. as Buster McGee ( Dunson Wrangler )
* Harry Carey Jr. as Dan Latimer ( Dunson Wrangler ) * Chief Yowlachie as Two Jaw Quo ( Dunson Wrangler )
* Paul Fix as Teeler Yacey ( Dunson Wrangler )
* Hank Worden as Sims Reeves ( Dunson Wrangler )
* Ray Hyke as Walt Jergens ( Dunson Wrangler )
* Wally Wales as Old Leather ( Dunson Wrangler )
* Mickey Kuhn as Young Matt
* Robert M. Lopez as an Indian * Shelley Winters as Dance Hall Girl in Wagon Train ( uncredited )
* Dan White as Laredo ( Dunson Wrangler )
( uncredited )
* Tom Tyler as Quitter ( Dunson Wrangler ) ( uncredited )
* Ray Spiker as Wagon Train Member ( uncredited ) * Glenn Strange as Naylor ( Dunson Wrangler )
( uncredited ) * Chief Sky Eagle as Indian Chief ( uncredited ) * Ivan Parry as Bunk Kenneally ( Dunson Wrangler ) ( uncredited )
* Lee Phelps as Gambler ( uncredited ) * William Self as Sutter ( Wounded Wrangler ) ( uncredited )
* Carl Sepulveda as Cowhand ( Dunson Wrangler ) ( uncredited )
* Pierce Lyden as Colonel 's Trail Boss ( uncredited ) *
Harry Cording as Gambler ( uncredited )
* George Lloyd as Rider with Melville ( uncredited ) * Frank Meredith as Train Engineer ( uncredited ) * John Merton as Settler ( uncredited ) * Jack Montgomery as Drover at Meeting ( uncredited )
* Paul Fierro as Fernandez ( Dunson Wrangler ) ( uncredited )
* Richard Farnsworth as Dunston Rider ( uncredited )
* Lane Chandler as Colonel ( uncredited )
* Davison Clark as Mr. Meeker ( uncredited )
* Guy Wilkerson as Pete ( Dunson Wrangler )
( uncredited ) PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Red River was filmed in 1946 , copyrighted in 1947 , but not released until September 30 , 1948 .
Footage from Red River was later incorporated into the opening montage of Wayne 's last film , The Shootist , to illustrate the backstory of Wayne 's character .
The film was nominated for Academy Awards for Best Film Editing ( Christian Nyby ) and Best Writing , Motion Picture Story ( Borden Chase ) .
John Ford — who worked with Wayne on many films ( such as Stagecoach , The Searchers and The Man
Who Shot Liberty Valance)—was so impressed with Wayne 's performance that he is reported to have said , " I did n't know the big son of a bitch could act ! "
In June 2008 , AFI listed Red River as the fifth - best film in the western genre .
Second unit director Arthur Rosson was given credit in the opening title crawl as co - director .
He shot parts of the cattle drive and some action sequences .
The film 's ending differed from that of the original story .
In Chase 's original Saturday Evening Post story , Valance shoots Dunson dead in Abilene and Matt takes his body back to Texas to be buried on the ranch .
During the production and while the film was still being shot , Howard Hawks was not satisfied with the editing and asked Christian Nyby to take over cutting duties .
Nyby worked about 1 year on the project .
After production , the pre - release version was 133 minutes and included book - style transitions .
Howard Hawks felt this version was too long , and that the inserts in the book were both difficult to read and awkward , slowing down the pace of the film .
He had a narration written and called Walter Brennan in to record it .
They removed the book - style transitions and , together with Brennan 's narration , tightened the running time and added a beneficial character intimacy to the film .
This version was briefly available for television in the 1970s , but was believed to be lost .
However , it was rediscovered after a long search as a Cinematheque Francaise 35 mm print and Brennan 's voiceover track was restored to the movie .
Before this version could be released , Howard Hughes sued Howard Hawks , claiming that the climactic scene between Dunson and Matt was taken from the film The Outlaw ( 1943 ) , which Hawks had worked on with Hughes .
To resolve the issue , editor Nyby and Hughes went back and forth trimming , re - cutting , and re - inserting until a compromise was reached .
This final product was the original theatrical version which was released at 127 minutes .
For unknown reasons , the 127-minute theatrical version , which was preferred by Howard Hawks , was lost , and it was the 133-minute pre - release version which was seen on television broadcasts and home video releases for decades .
The original theatrical cut was reassembled by Janus Films ( in co - operation with UA parent company MGM ) for their Criterion Collection Blu - ray / DVD release on May 27 , 2014 .
The song " Settle Down " , by Dimitri Tiomkin ( music ) and Frederick Herbert ( lyric ) , heard over the credits and at various places throughout the film score , was later adapted by Tiomkin , with a new lyric by Paul Francis Webster , as " My Rifle , My Pony , and Me " for the 1959 film Rio Bravo .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Bosley Crowther of The New York Times gave the film a mostly positive review , praising the main cast for " several fine performances " and Hawks ' direction for " credible substance and detail . "
He only found a " big let - down " in the Indian wagon train attack scene , lamenting that the film had " run smack into ' Hollywood ' in the form of a glamorized female , played by Joanne Dru .
" Variety called it " a spectacle of sweeping grandeur " with " a first rate script , " adding , " John Wayne has his best assignment to date and he makes the most of it . "
John McCarten of The New Yorker found the film " full of fine Western shots , " with the main cast 's performances " all first - rate . "
Harrison 's Reports called the film " an epic of such sweep and magnitude that it deserves to take its place as one of the finest pictures of its type ever to come out of Hollywood . "
According to Variety the film earned $ 4,150,000 in rentals in North America in 1948 .
Red River presently holds a perfect 100 % " Fresh " rating on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , with all 26 surveyed critics giving the film a positive review with an average rating of 8.8 out of 10 .
Roger Ebert considered it one of the greatest Western films of all time .
This movie was the last movie shown in the 1971 motion picture The Last Picture Show .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
*
Pippin , Robert B. Hollywood Westerns and American Myth :
The Importance of Howard Hawks and John Ford for Political Philosophy
( Yale University Press , 2010 )
208 pp .
EXTERNAL LINKS * on Lux Radio Theater : March 7 , 1949 .
14 Mb download .