INDIANA JONES AND THE TEMPLE OF DOOM Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom is a 1984 American action - adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg .
It is the second installment in the Indiana Jones franchise and a prequel to the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark , featuring Harrison Ford reprising his role as the title character .
After arriving in North India , Indiana Jones is asked by desperate villagers to find a mystical stone and rescue their children from a Thuggee cult practicing child slavery , black magic and ritual human sacrifice in honor of the goddess Kali .
Executive producer and co - writer George Lucas made the film a prequel as he did not want the Nazis to be the villains again .
After three rejected plot devices , Lucas wrote a film treatment that resembled the film 's final storyline .
Lawrence Kasdan , Lucas 's collaborator on Raiders of the Lost Ark , turned down the offer to write the script , and Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz were hired as his replacements , with the screenplay partly based upon the 1939 film Gunga Din .
The film was released to financial success but initial reviews were mixed , criticizing its violence .
However , critical opinion has improved since 1984 , citing the film 's intensity and imagination .
In response to some of the more violent sequences in the film , and with similar complaints about Gremlins , Spielberg suggested that the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) alter its rating system , which it did within two months of the film 's release .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1935 , Indiana Jones narrowly escapes the clutches of Lao Che , a crime boss in Shanghai , China .
With his 11-year - old Chinese sidekick Short Round and the nightclub singer Willie Scott in tow , Indy flees Shanghai on an airplane that , unbeknownst to them , is owned by Lao .
While the three of them are asleep on the plane , the pilots parachute out , and they leave the plane to crash over the Himalayas while dumping its fuel .
Indy , Shorty , and Willie discover this and narrowly manage to escape by jumping out of the plane on an inflatable raft , and then riding down the slopes into a raging river .
They come to Mayapore , a fictional village in northern India , where the poor villagers believe them to have been sent by Shiva to retrieve the sacred sivalinga stone stolen from their shrine , as well as the community 's children , from evil forces in the nearby Pankot Palace .
During the journey to Pankot , Indy hypothesizes that the stone may be one of the five fabled Sankara stones that promise fortune and glory .
The trio receive a warm welcome from the Prime Minister of Pankot Palace , Chattar Lal .
The visitors are allowed to stay the night as guests , during which they attend a lavish but grotesque banquet given by the young Maharaja , Zalim Singh .
Chattar Lal rebuffs
Indy 's questions about the villagers ' claims and his theory that the ancient Thuggee cult is responsible for their troubles .
Later that night , Indy is attacked by an assassin , leading Indy , Willie , and Shorty to believe that something is amiss .
They discover a series of tunnels hidden behind a statue in Willie 's room and set out to explore them , overcoming a number of booby - traps along the way .
The trio eventually reach an underground temple where the Thugs worship Kali with human sacrifice .
They watch as the Thugs chain one of their victims in a cage and slowly lower him into a ceremonial lava pit , burning him alive .
They discover that the Thugs , led by their high priest Mola Ram , are in possession of three of the five Sankara stones , and have enslaved the children to mine for the final two stones .
As Indy tries to retrieve the stones , he , Willie , and Shorty are captured and separated .
Indy is whipped and forced to drink a potion called the Blood of Kali , which places him in a trance - like state where he begins to mindlessly serve the Thugs .
Willie , meanwhile , is kept as a human sacrifice , while Shorty ( who was also whipped ) is put to work in the mines alongside the enslaved children .
Shorty breaks free and escapes back into the temple where he burns Indy with a torch , bringing him back to his senses .
After fighting off the guards and defeating Chattar Lal , Indy stops Willie 's cage and cranks it out of the pit just in time before it has a chance to enter the fire , while Mola Ram escapes .
Releasing Willie from the cage , Indy retrieves the Sankara stones , and they go back to the mines to free the children , but Indy is caught up in a fight with a hulking overseer .
The Maharaja , who is also under the Thugs ' control , attempts to cripple Indy with a voodoo doll .
Shorty spars with the Maharaja , ultimately burning him to free him from his trance .
With his strength returned , Indy kills the overseer .
The Maharaja then tells Shorty how to get out of the mines .
The trio escape from the temple in a mine cart , being chased by the Thugs , while Mola Ram dumps water in the tunnels in an attempt to drown them .
After barely avoiding the flood and coming above ground , they are again cornered by Mola Ram and his henchmen on a rope bridge high above a crocodile - infested river .
Using a sword , Indy cuts the rope bridge in half , leaving everyone to hang on for their lives .
Indy utters an incantation which causes the stones to glow red hot .
Two of the stones fall into the river , while the last falls into Mola Ram 's hand , burning it .
Indy catches the now - cool stone , while Mola Ram falls into the river below and is devoured by hungry crocodiles .
The Thuggees then attempt to shoot Indy with arrows , until a company of British Indian Army riflemen , summoned by the Maharaja , arrive and open fire on the Thuggee archers .
Indy , Willie , and Shorty return to the village with the children and give the missing stone back to the villagers .
CAST * Harrison Ford as Indiana Jones :
An archaeologist adventurer who is asked by a desperate Indian village to retrieve a mysterious stone and rescue the missing village children .
Ford undertook a strict physical exercise regimen headed by Jake Steinfeld to gain a more muscular tone for the part .
* Kate Capshaw as Willie Scott : An American nightclub singer working in Shanghai .
Willie is unprepared for her adventure with Indy and Short Round , and appears to be a damsel in distress .
She also forms a romantic relationship with Indy .
Over 120 actresses auditioned for the role , including Sharon Stone .
To prepare for the role , Capshaw watched The African Queen and A Guy Named Joe .
Spielberg wanted Willie to be a complete contrast to Marion Ravenwood from Raiders of the Lost Ark , so Capshaw dyed her brown hair blonde for the part .
Costume designer Anthony Powell wanted the character to have red hair .
* Amrish Puri as Mola Ram : A Thuggee priest who performs rituals of human sacrifices .
The character is named after a 17th - century Indian painter .
Lucas wanted Mola Ram to be terrifying , so the screenwriters added elements of Aztec and Hawaiian human sacrificers , and European devil worship to the character .
To create his headdress , make - up artist Tom Smith based the skull on a cow ( as this would be sacrilegious ) , and used a latex shrunken head .
* Jonathan Ke Quan as Short Round :
Indy 's eleven - year - old Chinese sidekick , who drives the 1936 Auburn Boat Tail Speedster which allows Indy to escape during the opening sequence .
Quan was chosen as part of a casting call in Los Angeles .
Around 6000 actors auditioned worldwide for the part : Quan was cast after his brother auditioned for the role .
Spielberg liked his personality , so he and Ford improvised the scene where Short Round accuses Indy of cheating during a card game .
He was credited by his birthname , Ke Huy Quan .
* Roshan Seth as Chattar Lal : The Prime Minister of the Maharaja of Pankot .
Chattar , also a Thuggee worshiper , is enchanted by Indy , Willie and Short Round 's arrival , but is offended by Indy 's questioning of the palace 's history and the archaeologist 's own dubious past .
* Philip Stone as Captain Philip Blumburtt :
A British Indian Army Captain called to Pankot Palace for " exercises " .
Alongside a unit of his riflemen , Blumburtt assists Indy towards the end in fighting off Thuggee reinforcements .
* Roy Chiao as Lao Che : A Shanghai crime boss who , with his sons , hires Indy to recover the cremated ashes of one of his ancestors , only to attempt to kill him and cheat him out of his fee , a large diamond .
* David Yip as Wu Han : A friend of Indy .
He is killed by one of Lao Che 's sons while posing as a waiter at Club Obi Wan .
* Raj Singh as Zalim Singh , the adolescent Maharajá of Pankot , who appears as an innocent puppet of the Thuggee faithful .
In the end , he helps to defeat them .
* D. R. Nanayakkara as Shaman : The leader of a small village that recruits Indy to retrieve their stolen sacred Shiva lingam stone .
Section::::Cast .
Actor Pat Roach plays the Thuggee overseer in the mines , Roach had previously appeared as a mechanic and the Grand Sherpa in Raiders of the Lost Ark. Spielberg , Lucas , Marshall , Kennedy , and Dan Aykroyd have cameos at the airport .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Spielberg later recalled that when Lucas first approached him for Raiders of the Lost Ark , " George said if I directed the first one then I would have to direct a trilogy .
He had three stories in mind .
It turned out George did not have three stories in mind and we had to make up subsequent stories .
" Both men later attributed the film 's tone , which was darker than Raiders of the Lost Ark , to their personal moods following the breakups of their relationships .
In addition , Lucas felt " it had to have been a dark film .
The way Empire Strikes Back was the dark second act of the Star Wars trilogy . "
Lucas set the film in an earlier year than the first to avoid repeating the use of Nazis as the villains .
Spielberg originally wanted to bring Marion Ravenwood back , with Abner Ravenwood considered as a possible character .
In developing the story , Lucas conceived of an opening chase scene with Indiana Jones on a motorcycle on the Great Wall of China , followed by the discovery of a " Lost World pastiche with a hidden valley inhabited by dinosaurs " .
Another idea was to feature the Monkey King as the plot device .
However , Chinese authorities refused permission for them to film in the country , requiring a different setting .
Lucas wrote a film treatment that included a haunted castle in Scotland , but Spielberg felt it was too similar to Poltergeist ; so the setting transformed into a demonic temple in India .
Lucas came up with ideas that involved a religious cult devoted to child slavery , black magic and ritual human sacrifice .
Lawrence Kasdan of Raiders of the Lost Ark was asked to write the script .
" I did n't want to be associated with Temple of Doom , " he reflected .
" I just thought it was horrible .
It 's so mean .
There 's nothing pleasant about it .
I think Temple of Doom represents a chaotic period in both their [ Lucas and Spielberg ] lives , and the movie is very ugly and mean - spirited . "
Lucas hired Willard Huyck and Gloria Katz to write the script because of their knowledge of Indian culture .
Gunga Din served as an influence for the film .
Huyck and Katz spent four days at Skywalker Ranch for story discussions with Lucas and Spielberg in early 1982 .
They later said the early plot consisted of two notions of Lucas ' : that Indy would recover something stolen from a village and decide whether to give it back , and that the picture would start in China and work its way to India .
Huyck says Lucas was very single - minded about getting through meetings , while " Steve would always stop and think about visual stuff . "
Lucas ' initial idea for Indiana 's sidekick was a virginal young princess , but Huyck , Katz , and Spielberg disliked the idea .
Just as Indiana Jones was named after Lucas ' Alaskan Malamute , the character of Willie was named after Spielberg 's Cocker Spaniel , and Short Round was named after Huyck 's dog , whose name was derived from The Steel Helmet .
Lucas handed Huyck and Katz a 20-page treatment in May 1982 titled Indiana Jones and the Temple of Death to adapt into a screenplay .
Scenes such as the fight scene in Shanghai , the escape from the airplane , and the mine cart chase came from earlier scripts of Raiders of the Lost Ark. Lucas , Huyck , and Katz had been developing Radioland Murders ( 1994 ) since the early 1970s .
The opening music was taken from that script and applied to Temple of Doom .
Spielberg reflected , " George 's idea was to start the movie with a musical number .
He wanted to do a Busby Berkeley dance number .
At all our story meetings he would say , ' Hey , Steven , you always said you wanted to shoot musicals . '
I thought , ' Yeah , that could be fun .
Lucas , Spielberg , Katz , and Huyck were concerned how to keep the audience interest while explaining the Thuggee cult .
Huyck and Katz proposed a tiger hunt but Spielberg said , " There 's no way I 'm going to stay in India long enough to shoot a tiger hunt .
" They eventually decided on a dinner scene involving eating bugs , monkey brains , and the like . " Steve and George both still react like children , so their idea was to make it as gross as possible , " says Katz .
Lucas sent Huyck and Katz a 500-page transcript of their taped conversations to help them with the script .
The first draft was written in six weeks , in early August 1982 .
" Steve was coming off an enormously successful movie and George did n't want to lose him , " said Katz .
"
He desperately wanted him to direct ( Temple of Doom ) .
We were under a lot of pressure to do it really , really fast so we could hold on to Steve . "
A second draft was finished by September .
Captain Blumburtt , Chattar Lal , and the boy Maharaja originally had more crucial roles .
A dogfight was deleted , as well as those who drank the Kali blood turned into zombies with physical superhuman abilities .
During pre - production , the Temple of Death title was replaced with Temple of Doom .
From March to April 1983 , Huyck and Katz simultaneously performed rewrites for a final shooting script .
Huyck and Katz later said Harrison Ford took many of the one liners originally given to Short Round .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Huyck later recalled " at one point when we were writing it
we told George
" We know a lot of Indians .
We 've been there ...
I do n't think they 're going to think this is really so cool .
Do you think you 're going to have trouble shooting there ? "
He said , " Are you kidding ?
It 's me and Steve .
"
Months later they called and said , " We ca n't shoot in India .
They 're really upset . "
So they shot in Sri Lanka and London , mostly . "
The filmmakers were denied permission to film in North India and Amer Fort due to the government finding the script offensive .
The government demanded many script changes , rewritings and final cut privilege .
As a result , location work went to Kandy , Sri Lanka , with matte paintings and scale models applied for the village , temple , and Pankot Palace .
Budgetary inflation also caused Temple of Doom to cost $ 28.17 million , $ 8 million more than Raiders of the Lost Ark. Filming began on April 18 , 1983 in Kandy , and moved to Elstree Studios in Hertfordshire , England on May 5 .
Producer Frank Marshall recalled , " when filming the bug scenes , crew members would go home and find bugs in their hair , clothes and shoes .
" Eight out of the nine sound stages at Elstree housed the filming of Temple of Doom .
Lucas biographer Marcus Hearn observed , " Douglas Slocombe 's skillful lighting helped disguise the fact that about 80 percent of the film was shot with sound stages . "
Danny Daniels choreographed the opening music number " Anything Goes " .
Capshaw learned to sing in Mandarin and took tap dance lessons .
However the dress was fitted so tightly that Capshaw was not able to dance in it .
Made by Barbara Matera out of original 1920s and 1930s beads , the dress was one of a kind .
The opening dance number was actually the last scene to be shot , but the dress did feature in some earlier location shots in Sri Lanka , drying on a nearby tree .
Unfortunately an elephant had started to eat it , tearing the whole back of the dress .
Consequently , some emergency repair work had to be done by Matera with what remained of the original beads , and it was costume designer Anthony Powell who had to fill in the insurance forms .
As to the reason for damage , he had no option but to put " dress eaten by elephant " .
Production designer Norman Reynolds could not return for Temple of Doom because of his commitment to Return to Oz .
Elliot Scott ( Labyrinth , Who Framed Roger Rabbit ) , Reynolds ' mentor , was hired .
To build the rope bridge the filmmakers found a group of British engineers from Balfour Beatty working on the nearby Victoria Dam .
Harrison Ford suffered a severe spinal disc herniation by performing a somersault while filming the scene with the assassin in Jones ' bedroom .
A hospital bed was brought on set for Ford to rest between takes .
Lucas stated , " He could barely stand up , yet he was there every day so shooting would not stop .
He was in incomprehensible pain , but he was still trying to make it happen . "
With no alternatives , Lucas shut down production while Ford was flown to Centinela Hospital on June 21 for recovery .
Stunt double Vic Armstrong spent five weeks as a stand - in for various shots .
Wendy Leech , Armstrong 's wife , served as Capshaw 's stunt double .
Macau ( then a Portuguese colony ) was substituted for Shanghai , while cinematographer Douglas Slocombe caught fever from June 24 to July 7 and could not work .
Ford returned on August 8 .
Despite the problems during filming , Spielberg was able to complete Temple of Doom on schedule and on budget , finishing principal photography on August 26 .
Various pick - ups took place afterwards .
This included Snake River Canyon , in Idaho , Mammoth Mountain , Tuolumne and American River , Yosemite National Park , San Joaquin Valley , Hamilton Air Force Base and Arizona .
Producer Frank Marshall directed a second unit in Florida in January 1984 , using alligators to double as crocodiles .
The mine chase was a combination of a roller coaster and scale models with dolls doubling for the actors .
Minor stop motion was also used for the sequence .
Visual effects supervisors Dennis Muren , Joe Johnston and a crew at Industrial Light & Magic provided the visual effects work , while Skywalker Sound , headed by Ben Burtt , commissioned the sound design .
Burtt recorded Willie Scott 's scream and roller coasters at Disneyland Park in Anaheim for the mine cart scene .
EDITING Section::::Editing .
" After I showed the film to George [ Lucas ] , at an hour and 55 minutes , we looked at each other , " Spielberg remembered .
" The first thing that we said was , ' Too fast ' .
We needed to decelerate the action .
I did a few more matte shots to slow it down .
We made it a little bit slower , by putting breathing room back in so there 'd be a two - hour oxygen supply for the audience . "
RELEASE BOX
OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
Temple of Doom was released on May 23 , 1984 in America , accumulating a record - breaking $ 45.7 million in its first week .
The film went on to gross $ 333.1 million worldwide , with $ 180 million in North America and $ 153.1 million in other markets .
The film had the highest opening weekend of 1984 , and was that year 's highest - grossing film ( third in North America , behind Beverly Hills Cop and Ghostbusters ) .
It was also the tenth highest - grossing film of all time during its release .
It sold an estimated 53,532,800 tickets in the United States .
PROMOTION
Section::::Promotion .
Marvel Comics published a comic book adaptation of the film by writer David Michelinie and artists Jackson Guice , Ian Akin , Brian Garvey , and Bob Camp .
It was published as Marvel Super Special # 30 and as a three - issue limited series .
LucasArts and Atari Games promoted the film by releasing an arcade game .
Hasbro released a toy line based on the film in September 2008 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film received mixed reviews upon its release , but over the years the film 's reception has shifted to a more positive tone .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 85 % , based on 66 reviews , with an average rating of 7.2/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " It may be too ' dark ' for some , but Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom remains an ingenious adventure spectacle that showcases one of Hollywood 's finest filmmaking teams in vintage form . "
On Metacritic the film has a rating of 57 out of 100 , based on reviews from 14 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Roger Ebert gave the film a perfect four - star rating , calling it " the most cheerfully exciting , bizarre , goofy , romantic adventure movie since Raiders , and it is high praise to say that it 's not so much a sequel as an equal .
It 's quite an experience . "
Vincent Canby felt the film was " too shapeless to be the fun that Raiders is , but shape may be beside the point .
Old - time , 15-part movie serials did n't have shape .
They just went on and on and on , which is what Temple of Doom does with humor and technical invention . "
Neal Gabler commented that " I think in some ways , Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom was better than Raiders of the Lost Ark.
In some ways it was less .
In sum total , I 'd have to say I enjoyed it more .
That does n't mean it 's better necessarily , but I got more enjoyment out of it .
"
Colin Covert of the Star Tribune called the film " sillier , darkly violent and a bit dumbed down , but still great fun . "
Pauline Kael , writing in The New Yorker , claimed it was " one of the most sheerly pleasurable physical comedies ever made .
" Halliwell 's Film Guide described the film as a " slow - starting adventure romp with much ingenuity and too much brutality and horror . "
Dave Kehr gave a largely negative review ; " The film betrays no human impulse higher than that of a ten - year - old boy trying to gross out his baby sister by dangling a dead worm in her face . "
Ralph Novak of People complained " The ads that say ' this film may be too intense for younger children ' are fraudulent .
No parent should allow a young child to see this traumatizing movie ; it would be a cinematic form of child abuse .
Even Harrison Ford is required to slap Quan and abuse Capshaw .
There are no heroes connected with the film , only two villains ; their names are Steven Spielberg and George Lucas .
"
The Observer described it as " a thin , arch , graceless affair . "
The Guardian summarized it as " a two - hour series of none too carefully linked chase sequences ... sitting on the edge of your seat gives you a sore bum but also a numb brain . "
Leonard Maltin gave the movie only 2 out of 4 stars , saying that the film is " headache inducing " and " never gives us a chance to breathe " , and chiding the gross - out ' gags . "
Some of the film 's cast and crew , including Spielberg , retrospectively view the film in a negative light , partly due to the film being the darkest and most overtly violent Indiana Jones film .
Both Lucas and Spielberg attributed the film 's darkness to their recent divorces from Marcia Lucas and Amy Irving , respectively .
Kate Capshaw called her character " not much more than a dumb screaming blonde .
"
Steven Spielberg said in 1989 , " I was n't happy with Temple of Doom at all .
It was too dark , too subterranean , and much too horrific .
I thought it out - poltered Poltergeist .
There 's not an ounce of my own personal feeling in Temple of Doom . "
He later added during the Making of Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom documentary , " Temple of Doom is my least favorite of the trilogy .
I look back
and I say , ' Well the greatest thing that I got out of that was I met Kate Capshaw . '
We married years later and that to me was the reason I was fated to make Temple of Doom . "
In 2014 , Time Out polled several film critics , directors , actors and stunt actors to list their top action films .
Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom was listed at 71st place on this list .
Vulture , in a 2015 compilation of Steven Spielberg 's films ranked from worst to best , ranked Temple of Doom # 11 , stating that " Jonathan Ke Quan 's Short Round character is ' " Mickey Rooney in Breakfast at Tiffany's"'-level offensive , and , fine , Kate Capshaw is no Karen Allen .
But other than that , this movie is nonstop adrenaline , with Spielberg hell - bent on topping Raiders ' stunt sequences . "
AWARDS Section::::Awards . Dennis Muren and Industrial Light & Magic 's visual effects department won the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects at the 57th Academy Awards .
Soundtrack composer John Williams was , as he had been for his work on Raiders of the Lost Ark , again nominated for Original Music Score .
The visual effects crew won the same category at the 38th British Academy Film Awards .
Cinematographer Douglas Slocombe , editor Michael Kahn , Ben Burtt and other sound designers at Skywalker Sound received nominations .
Spielberg , the writers , Harrison Ford , Jonathan Ke Quan , Anthony Powell and makeup designer Tom Smith were nominated for their work at the Saturn Awards .
Temple of Doom was nominated for Best Fantasy Film but lost to Ghostbusters .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
The film has also been the subject of controversy due to its portrayal of India and Hinduism .
The depiction of Hindus caused controversy in India , and brought it to the attention of the country 's censors , who placed a temporary ban on it .
The depiction of the goddess Kali as a representative of the underworld and evil was met with much criticism , as she is almost exclusively depicted as a goddess of change and empowerment ( Shakti ) , meaning that while she does destroy , she almost always does so in order to effect positive change .
The depiction of Indian cuisine was also criticized , as dishes such as baby snakes , eyeball soup , beetles , and chilled monkey brains are not actual Indian foods .
Shashi Tharoor has condemned the film and has criticized numerous parts of the film as offensive and factually inaccurate .
Yvette Rosser has criticized the film for contributing to negative stereotypes of Indians in Western society , writing " [ it ] seems to have been taken as a valid portrayal of India by many teachers , since a large number of students surveyed complained that teachers referred to the eating of monkey brains . "
SEE ALSO
* White savior narrative in film REFERENCES
Further reading EXTERNAL LINKS
* at