HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO YOU
" Happy Birthday to You " , also known as " Happy Birthday " , is a song traditionally sung to celebrate the anniversary of a person 's birth .
According to the 1998 Guinness World Records , it is the most recognized song in the English language , followed by " For He 's a Jolly Good Fellow " .
The song 's base lyrics have been translated into at least 18 languages .
The melody of " Happy Birthday to You " comes from the song " Good Morning to All " , which has traditionally been attributed to American sisters Patty and Mildred J. Hill in 1893 , although the claim that the sisters composed the tune is disputed .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Patty Hill was a kindergarten principal in Louisville , Kentucky , developing various teaching methods at what is now the Little Loomhouse ; her sister Mildred was a pianist and composer .
The sisters used " Good Morning to All " as a song that young children would find easy to sing .
The combination of melody and lyrics in " Happy Birthday to You " first appeared in print in 1912 , and probably existed even earlier .
None of the early appearances of the " Happy Birthday to You " lyrics included credits or copyright notices .
The Summy Company registered a copyright in 1935 , crediting authors Preston Ware Orem and Mrs. R. R. Forman .
In 1988 , Warner / Chappell Music purchased the company owning the copyright for 25 million , with the value of " Happy Birthday " estimated at 5 million .
Based on the 1935 copyright registration , Warner claimed that the United States copyright will not expire until 2030 , and that unauthorized public performances of the song are illegal unless royalties are paid to Warner .
In one specific instance in February 2010 , the royalty for a single use was said to be 700 .
By one estimate , the song is the highest - earning single song in history , with estimated earnings since its creation of 50 million .
In the European Union , the copyright for the song expired on January 1 , 2017 .
The American copyright status of " Happy Birthday to You " began to draw more attention with the passage of the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act in 1998 .
When the U.S. Supreme Court upheld the Act in Eldred v. Ashcroft in 2003 , Associate Justice Stephen Breyer specifically mentioned " Happy Birthday to You " in his dissenting opinion .
American law professor Robert Brauneis , who extensively researched the song , concluded in 2010 that " It is almost certainly no longer under copyright . "
In 2013 , based in large part on Brauneis 's research , Good Morning to You Productions , a company producing a documentary about " Good Morning to All " , sued Warner / Chappell for falsely claiming copyright to the song .
In September 2015 , a federal judge declared that the Warner / Chappell copyright claim was invalid , ruling that the copyright registration applied only to a specific piano arrangement of the song , and not to its lyrics and melody .
In 2016 , Warner / Chappell settled for US $ 14 million , and the court declared that " Happy Birthday to You " was in the public domain .
LYRICS
" HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO YOU " Section::::Lyrics .
Section::::"Happy birthday to you " .
The person whose birthday is being celebrated is filled in for " [ NAME ] " .
The earliest known publication used " John " as the example .
LYRICS WITH MELODY Section::::Lyrics with melody .
\relative c ' {
\key
f
\major \time 3/4 \partial 4 c8 .
c16 d4 c f e2 c8 .
c16 d4 c g ' f2 c8 .
c16 c'4
a f e ( d ) bes'8 .
bes16 a4 f g f2 \bar " .
" } \addlyrics { Hap -- py birth -- day to you , Hap -- py birth -- day to you , Hap -- py birth -- day dear [ NAME ] , _ _ Hap -- py birth -- day to you . } TRADITIONAL VARIATIONS
Section::::Traditional variations .
It is traditional , among English - speakers , that at a birthday party , the song " Happy Birthday to You " be sung to the birthday person by the other guests celebrating the birthday .
More specifically , the birthday person is traditionally presented with a birthday cake with lit candles , with the number of candles sometimes corresponding to the age of the person .
After the song is sung ( usually just once ) , party guests sometimes add wishes like " and many more ! "
expressing the hope that the birthday person will enjoy a long life .
The birthday person may be asked to make a wish ( " Make a wish!")—which
he or she does silently — and then is supposed to blow out the candles .
Traditionally , blowing out the candles is believed ( or is considered a lighthearted superstition ) to ensure that the wish will come true .
Once the candles have been blown out , people may applaud , after which the cake may be served , often with the first piece being served to the person whose birthday it is .
In the United Kingdom , Ireland , Australia and New Zealand , immediately after " Happy Birthday " has been sung , it is traditional for one of the guests to enthusiastically lead with " Hip hip ...
" and then for all of the other guests to join in and say " ... hooray !
" This is normally repeated three times .
In Canada , especially at young children 's birthdays , immediately after " Happy Birthday " has been sung , the singers segue into "
How old are you now ?
How old are you now ?
How old are you now - ow , how old are you now ? "
and then count up :
" Are you one ?
Are you two ?
Are you ... " until they reach the right age , at which the celebrant says " yes " , and everybody else , who presumably know the right number , all cheer .
COPYRIGHT
STATUS
Section::::Copyright status .
Both the music and lyrics are in public domain in both the European Union and United States .
The copyright expired in the European Union on January 1 , 2017 .
In the United States , a federal court ruled in 2016 that Warner / Chappell 's copyright claim was invalid and there was no other claim to copyright .
The origins of " Happy Birthday to You " date back to at least the late 19th century , when two sisters , Patty and Mildred J. Hill , introduced the song " Good Morning to All " to Patty 's kindergarten class in Kentucky .
Years later , in 1893 , they published the tune in their songbook Song Stories for the Kindergarten .
Kembrew McLeod stated that the Hill sisters likely copied the tune and lyrical idea from other popular and similar nineteenth - century songs that predated theirs , including Horace Waters ' " Happy Greetings to All " , " Good Night to You All " also from 1858 , " A Happy New Year to All " from 1875 , and " A Happy Greeting to All " , published 1885 .
However , American law professor Robert Brauneis disputes this , noting that these earlier songs had quite different melodies .
It is likely that teachers and students spontaneously adapted the published version of " Good Morning to All " to celebrate birthdays in the classroom , changing the lyrics to " Happy Birthday " in the process .
The complete text of " Happy Birthday to You " first appeared in print as the final four lines of Edith Goodyear Alger 's poem " Roy 's Birthday " , published in her book A Primer of Work and Play , copyrighted by D. C. Heath in 1901 , with no reference to the words being sung .
The first book including " Happy Birthday " lyrics set to the tune of " Good Morning to All " that bears a date of publication is from 1911 in The Elementary Worker and His Work , but earlier references exist to a song called " Happy Birthday to You " including an article from 1901 in the Inland Educator and Indiana School Journal .
Children 's Praise and Worship , edited by Andrew Byers , Bessie L. Byrum and Anna E. Koglin , published the song in 1918 .
In 1924 , Robert Coleman included " Good Morning to All " in a songbook with the birthday lyrics as a second verse .
Coleman also published " Happy Birthday " in The American Hymnal in 1933 .
In 1935 , several specific piano arrangements and an unused second verse of " Happy Birthday to You " were copyrighted as a work for hire crediting Preston Ware Orem for the piano arrangements and Mrs. R. R. Forman for the lyrics by the Summy Company , the publisher of " Good Morning to All " .
This served as the legal basis for claiming that Summy Company legally registered the copyright for the song , as well as the later renewal of these copyrights .
A later 2015 lawsuit would find this claim baseless .
That specific new lyrics that also included the full text of " Happy Birthday to You " , was a copyright on the derivative work .
A 1957 acquisition of C.C. Birchard & Company saw Summy Company becoming the Summy - Birchard Company .
A later corporate restructuring in the 1970s saw Summy - Birchard becoming a division of a new company : Birch Tree Group Limited .
Warner / Chappell Music acquired Birch Tree Group Limited in 1988 for 25 million .
The company continued to insist that one can not sing the " Happy Birthday to You " lyrics for profit without paying royalties : in 2008 , Warner collected about 5,000 per day ( 2 million per year ) in royalties for the song .
Warner / Chappell claimed copyright for every use in film , television , radio , anywhere open to the public , and for any group where a substantial number of those in attendance are not family or friends of whoever is performing the song .
Brauneis cited problems with the song 's authorship and the notice and renewal of the copyright , and concluded : " It is almost certainly no longer under copyright . "
In the European Union , copyright lasts for the life of the author(s ) plus 70 years ; since Patty Hill ( the last surviving author ) died in 1946 , the copyright in these countries expired on January 1 , 2017 .
2013 LAWSUIT Section::::2013 lawsuit .
On June 13 , 2013 , documentary filmmaker Jennifer Nelson filed a putative class action suit in federal court for the Southern District of New York against Warner / Chappell in the name of her production company , Good Morning to You Productions .
As part of a documentary she was making about the song and its history , she had paid 1,500 to secure the rights .
Her complaint relied heavily on Brauneis 's research , seeking not only the return of her money but all royalties collected by the company from other filmmakers since 2009 .
A week later a similar case was filed in the Central District of California , Rupa Marya v. Warner Chappell Music Inc , Case No . 2:13-cv-04460 .
Five weeks later , Nelson refiled the case there , and the cases were combined .
As of April 2014 , Warner 's motion to dismiss had been denied without prejudice , and discovery began under an agreed plan with respect to Claim One , declaratory judgment as to whether " Happy Birthday to You " is in the public domain .
The Motion Cut - Off as to Merits Issues on the Claim One deadline was November 7 , 2014 .
After that , the court was expected to rule on the motion for summary judgment as to the merits issues on Claim One .
A jury trial was requested .
On July 28 , 2015 , one day prior to a scheduled ruling , Nelson 's attorneys Betsy Manifold and Mark Rifkin presented new evidence that they argued was conclusive proof that the song was in the public domain , " thus making it unnecessary for the Court to decide the scope or validity of the disputed copyrights , much less whether Patty Hill abandoned any copyright she may have had to the lyrics " .
Several weeks prior , they had been given access to documents held back from them by Warner / Chappell , which included a copy of the 15th edition of The Everyday Song Book , published in 1927 .
The book contained " Good Morning and Happy Birthday " , but the copy was blurry , obscuring a line of text below the title .
Manifold and Rifkin located a clearer copy of an older edition , published in 1922 , that also contained the " Happy Birthday " lyrics .
The previously obscured line was revealed to be the credit " Special permission through courtesy of The Clayton F Summy Co. " .
Manifold and Rifkin argued that because the music and lyrics were published without a valid copyright notice as was required at the time , " Happy Birthday " was in the public domain .
Warner / Chappell disputed the evidence , arguing that unless there was " necessary authorization from the copyright owner " , the " Happy Birthday " lyrics and sheet music would still be subject to common law copyright as an unpublished work , and that it was unknown whether the " special permission " from the Summy Company covered " Good Morning to All " , " Happy Birthday " , or both , thus alleging that the publication in The Everyday Song Book was unauthorized .
The company also argued that it was not acting in bad faith in withholding the evidence of the 1927 publication .
On September 22 , 2015 , federal judge George H. King ruled that the Warner / Chappell copyright claim over the lyrics was invalid .
The 1935 copyright held by Warner / Chappell applied only to a specific piano arrangement of the song , not the lyrics or melody .
The court held that the question of whether the 1922 and 1927 publications were authorized , thus placing the song in the public domain , presented questions of fact that would need to be resolved at trial .
However , Warner / Chappell had failed to prove that it actually had ever held a copyright to the lyrics , so the court was able to grant summary judgment to the plaintiffs , thus resolving the case .
Some initial news sources characterized the decision as ruling that the song was in the public domain , but the decision did not go so far , holding only that Warner / Chappell did not prove they owned the copyright .
However , because there are no other claimants to the copyright , and the copyright to the melody long ago expired , the plaintiffs suggested that the song was de facto in the public domain .
Also , the judge ruled that the song was not copyrighted by Summy Co. , who had written in the song book , " Special permission through courtesy of
the Clayton F. Summy Co. " Since there was no evidence Summy Co. had copyright on the song , the song is still considered to be in the public domain .
Prior to the lawsuit , Warner / Chappell had been earning $ 2 million a year licensing the song for commercial use , with a notable example the $ 5,000 paid by the filmmakers of the 1994 documentary , Hoop Dreams , in order to safely distribute the film .
On February 8 , 2016 , Warner / Chappell agreed to pay a settlement of $ 14 million to those who had licensed the song , and would allow a final judgment declaring the song to be in the public domain , with a final hearing scheduled in March 2016 .
On June 28 , 2016 , the final settlement was officially granted and the court declared that the song was in the public domain .
The following week , Nelson 's short - form documentary , Happy Birthday : my campaign to liberate the people 's song , was published online by The Guardian .
In the wake of their success , the lawyers involved in the " Happy Birthday " lawsuit filed similar lawsuits regarding " We Shall Overcome " and " This Land Is Your Land " .
PUBLIC PERFORMANCES Section::::Public performances .
One of the most famous performances of " Happy Birthday to You " was Marilyn Monroe 's rendition to U.S. President John F. Kennedy in May 1962 .
Another notable use was by comedy pianist Victor Borge , who played the song in styles of various composers , or would begin playing Moonlight Sonata , smoothly transitioning into the song .
The documentary film The Corporation states that Warner / Chappell charged up to 10,000 for the song to appear in a film .
Because of the copyright issue , filmmakers rarely showed complete singalongs of " Happy Birthday " in films , either substituting the public - domain "
For He 's a Jolly Good Fellow " or avoiding using a song entirely .
Before the song was copyrighted it was used freely , as in Bosko 's Party , a Warner Bros. cartoon of 1932 , where a chorus of animals sings it twice through .
The copyright status of " Happy Birthday to You " is directly referenced in a 2009 episode of the TV series iCarly , " iMake Sam Girlier " , in which the main character as well as others begin to sing the song to Sam but are prevented from doing so by Freddie , who says the song is n't public domain ; " For She 's a Jolly Good Fellow " is then sung instead .
In a 1998 episode of the television show Sports Night , " Intellectual Property " , character Dan Rydell sings the song to his co - anchor during a telecast , forcing his network to pay royalties , and causing him to ask his colleagues to choose public - domain songs for him to sing for their birthdays .
The copyright is also referenced frequently in a Disney A.N.T. Farm episode where characters repeatedly try to sing the song , only to be stopped by others reminding them of the price .
The melody of the song is also featured in The Wrong Trousers but was replaced with " For He 's a Jolly Good Fellow " for DVD releases .
The use of the song is a problem even if it is sung in a made - up language , as a Klingon - language version was nixed in pre - production from the 7th - season episode of called " " , replaced with " For He 's a Jolly Good Fellow " in Klingon .
In the Futurama episode " I Second That Emotion " , they poke fun at the song and its copyright by making their own version with the lyrics " What day is today ?
/
It 's ( birthday person ) 's birthday /
What a day for a birthday / Let 's all have some cake . "
In The Goldbergs episode " Han Ukkah Solo " , Erica Goldberg is challenged to write a Hanukkah song .
She does , but her words are sung to the tune of " Happy Birthday To You " .
Her music teacher tells her she ca n't use it because " I 'd have to pay those old ladies hundreds of thousands of dollars , and I 've already spent our budget on construction paper . "
In the 30 Rock episode " Goodbye , My Friend " , TGS cast members begin to sing the song following an announcement about the royalty fee for singing " Happy Birthday to You " on a television show .
The cast is interrupted after the first line by a character entering the scene .
In the Community episode " Mixology Certification " , a scene starts with the last two words of the song ( " ... to you " ) , implying it had been sung in its entirety , before Pierce confusedly asks , " How come we only sang the last two words ? "
In the 1987 documentary Eyes on the Prize about the U.S. Civil Rights Movement , there was a birthday party scene in which Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 's discouragement began to lift .
After its initial release , the film was unavailable for sale or broadcast for many years because of the cost of clearing many copyrights , of which " Happy Birthday to You " was one .
Grants in 2005 for copyright clearances allowed PBS to rebroadcast the film as recently as February 2008 .
In 2010 , the Western classical music conductor Zubin Mehta conducted the orchestra to play variations of Happy Birthday in the styles of various Western classical music composers including Wagner , Bach , Mozart and Beethoven , and in the Viennese , New Orleans and Hungarian composition styles .
On August 5 , 2013 , the first anniversary of its landing on Mars , NASA 's Curiosity rover celebrated its " birthday " when engineers at Goddard Space Flight Center used the Sample Analysis at Mars ( SAM ) instrument to cause the rover to " sing " Happy Birthday on the Martian surface .
During the March 6 , 2014 episode of the Comedy Central series
The Colbert Report , Stephen Colbert planned to sing the song in honor of the 90th anniversary of its 1924 publication .
Due to the copyright issues , Colbert instead performed his new " royalty - free " birthday song , which is set to " The Star - Spangled Banner " .
SEE ALSO
* List of birthday songs *
Copyright troll
REFERENCES
FOOTNOTES WORKS
CITED
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The original edition of Song Stories For The Kindergarten in PDF ( public domain ) .
It contains the song " Good morning to you " .
* The Happy Birthday Song and The Little Loomhouse
* in 2013 * The Happy Birthday Song provides access to the " Good Morning and Birthday Song " from the 1927 edition of The Everyday Song Book held by the University of Pittsburgh Library System .