MARY - KATE AND ASHLEY
OLSEN Mary - Kate Olsen and Ashley Olsen ( born June 13 , 1986 ) , also known as the Olsen twins collectively , are American fashion designers and former child actresses .
The dizygotic twins made their acting debut as infants playing Michelle Tanner on the television series Full House .
At the age of six , Mary - Kate and Ashley Olsen began starring together in TV , film , and video projects , which continued to their teenage years .
Through their company Dualstar , the Olsens joined the ranks of the wealthiest women in the entertainment industry at a young age .
LIFE AND CAREER CHILDHOOD AND ACTING CAREER Section::::Life and career .
Section::::Childhood and acting career .
The twins were born in Sherman Oaks , California , to David " Dave " Olsen ( b. 1953 ) and Jarnette " Jarnie " ( née Jones ; b. 1954 ) .
They are dizygotic twins .
They have an elder brother , Trent , and a younger sister , actress Elizabeth , as well as a half - sister , Courtney Taylor , and a half - brother , Jake .
The twins ' parents divorced in 1995 ; Taylor and Jake are from their father 's second marriage to McKenzie .
The Olsen twins have English and Norwegian ancestry .
In 1987 , at the age of six months , the twins were cast in the role of Michelle Tanner on the ABC sitcom Full House .
They began filming at nine months old .
In order to comply with child labor laws that set strict limits on how long a child actor may work , the sisters took turns playing the role .
The Olsens continued to portray Michelle throughout the show 's run , which concluded in 1995 .
In 1992 , Mary - Kate and Ashley shared the role of Michelle Tanner when they guest - starred on the Full House crossover episode of Hangin ' with Mr. Cooper .
While starring on Full House , the Olsens also began appearing ( as separate characters ) in films for video and television .
The first such film , To Grandmother 's House
We Go , debuted in 1992 and featured cameos from several other Full House actors .
In 1993 , the Olsens established the company Dualstar , which would produce the twins ' subsequent films and videos , including 1993 's Double , Double , Toil and Trouble and 1994 's How the West Was Fun .
A series of musical mystery videos called The Adventures of Mary - Kate & Ashley premiered in 1994 and continued through 1997 .
In 1995 , following the end of Full House , the Olsens made their feature film debut in It Takes Two , co - starring Steve Guttenberg and Kirstie Alley .
In the same year , they introduced a second video series , You 're Invited to Mary - Kate & Ashley 's ... , which continued to release new entries until 2000 .
The following year , the Olsens appeared in an episode of All My Children .
In 1997 , they appeared once again as guest stars in an episode of Sister Sister .
Also , in 1998 , the twins returned to series television with another ABC sitcom , Two of a Kind , co - starring Christopher Sieber as their characters ' widowed father .
The series lasted only one season but aired in reruns on cable for several years afterward .
1998 also saw the release of Billboard Dad , the first of a new string of direct - to - video films starring the Olsens .
The final such film , The Challenge , debuted in 2003 .
In 2000 , the Olsens appeared in an episode of 7th Heaven as bad girls Sue and Carol Murphy .
The following year , the sisters starred in two new series :
So Little Time , a live - action sitcom on Fox Family ( later ABC Family ) ; and Mary - Kate and Ashley in Action ! , an animated series airing Saturday mornings on ABC .
Both shows were canceled after one season , although Mary - Kate received a Daytime Emmy Award nomination for her performance on So Little Time .
In early 2004 , Mary - Kate and Ashley had a cameo voice role in an episode of The Simpsons as the readers of Marge 's book - on - tape , The Harpooned Heart .
Also in 2004 , the twins starred in a second feature film , New York Minute .
It would be their last film together , as well as Ashley 's last acting role .
Mary - Kate has continued to appear in film and television .
Mary - Kate and Ashley had a fan club until 2000 , " Mary - Kate & Ashley 's Fun Club " , where fans would pay to receive Mary - Kate and Ashley collectibles and photos .
Each subscription included an issue of Our Funzine , Mary - Kate and Ashley 's fan club magazine , exclusively available through the club , and a collectibles catalog , where one could purchase T - shirts , posters , baseball caps , key rings , school folders , postcards , and various other items .
Subscribers would also receive " surprise gifts " ( usually key rings , book excerpts , or back issues of the Funzine ) , lyric sheets to Mary - Kate and Ashley 's songs , a school folder , a membership card , a full - sized poster , two black and white photos ( one of each girl ) , and a color photo with reprint autographs .
The club was advertised at the beginning of Mary - Kate and Ashley movies until 1998 .
Mary - Kate and Ashley were popular figures in the preteen market during the late 1990s and early 2000s .
Their names and likenesses extended , not only to movies and videos , but to clothes , shoes , purses , hats , books , CDs and cassette tapes , fragrances and makeup , magazines , video and board games , dolls , posters , calendars , and even telephones and CD players — with a market share made up mostly of the tween demographic .
Mattel produced various sets of Mary - Kate and Ashley fashion dolls from 2000 to 2005 , along with separate outfits and accessory packs .
The sisters became co - presidents of Dualstar on their 18th birthday in 2004 .
Upon taking control of the company , Mary - Kate and Ashley made moves to secure the future of the company by releasing products that appealed to the teen market , including home decoration and fragrances .
The Dualstar brand has been sold in more than 3,000 stores in the United States and over 5,300 stores worldwide .
The Olsens have appeared on the Forbes " Celebrity 100 " list since 2002 ; in 2007 , Forbes ranked them ( collectively ) as the eleventh - richest women in entertainment , with an estimated net worth of US $ 100 million .
FASHION CAREER
Section::::Fashion career .
As the sisters have matured , they expressed greater interest in their fashion choices , with The New York Times declaring Mary - Kate a fashion icon for pioneering her signature ( and now popular among celebrities and fans alike )
" homeless " look .
The style sometimes referred to by fashion journalists as " ashcan " or " bohemian - bourgeois " , is similar to the boho - chic style popularized in Britain by Kate Moss and Sienna Miller .
The look consists of oversized sunglasses , boots , loose sweaters , and flowing skirts , with an aesthetic of mixing high - end and low - end pieces .
The twins were tapped as the faces of upscale fashion line Badgley Mischka in 2006 .
The Olsens had a clothing line for girls ages 4–14 in Wal - Mart stores across North America , as well as a beauty line called " Mary - Kate and Ashley :
Real fashion for real girls " .
In 2004 , they made news by signing a pledge to allow full maternity leave to all the workers that sew their line of clothing in Bangladesh .
The National Labor Committee , which organized the pledge , praised the twins for their commitment to worker rights .
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography .
+ Television and Film !
Year(s ) !
Title !
Mary - Kate 's role !
Ashley 's role !
Notes colspan="2
" Michelle Tanner ( shared role ) colspan="2 " Michelle Tanner ( shared role ) colspan="2 " Future Angel ( shared role ) 2004
SEE ALSO
* List of twins REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Olsen , Mary - Kate and Ashley Olsen , with Damon Romine .
Mary - Kate and Ashley :
Our Story : Mary - Kate & Ashley Olsen 's Official Biography .
HarperEntertainment 2000 . .
* Tracy , Kathleen .
Mary - Kate and Ashley Olsen .
Mitchell Lane Publishers , 2003 . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Dualstar Entertainment Group Corporate Website