GREAT LAKES WATERWAY
The Great Lakes Waterway is a system of natural channels and canals which enable navigation between the North American Great Lakes .
Though all of the lakes are naturally connected as a chain , water travel between the lakes was impeded for centuries by obstacles such as Niagara Falls and the rapids of the St. Marys River .
Its principal civil engineering works are the Welland Canal between Lakes Ontario and Erie , and the huge Soo Locks between Huron and Superior .
Dredged channels were constructed in the St. Marys River , the Detroit River , Lake St. Clair and the St. Clair River between Huron and Erie .
Usually , one or more U.S. Coast Guard icebreakers help keep the water passage open for part of the fall and early winter , although shipping usually ceases for two to three months thereafter .
The Great Lakes Waterway is co - administered by the governments of Canada and the United States of America .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The waterway allows passage from the Atlantic Ocean to the inland port of Duluth on Lake Superior , a distance of and to Chicago , on Lake Michigan , at .
Together with the Saint Lawrence Seaway , the Waterway allows both ocean - going vessels and the ore , grain and coal - bearing lake freighters to travel from the system 's saltwater outlet to its far interior .
The Waterway has larger locks and deeper drafts than the lower Seaway , limiting large freighters to the four lakes upstream of the Welland Canal and Lake Ontario and similarly restricting passage beyond the canal by larger ocean vessels .
The two waterways are often jointly and simply referred to as the " St. Lawrence Seaway " , since the Great Lakes , together with the St. Lawrence River , comprise a single navigable body of freshwater linking the Atlantic Ocean to the continental interior .
Shipping channels separate upbound traffic from downbound traffic .
The upbound direction is away from the St. Lawrence River ( westerly or northerly except in Lake Michigan where upbound is southerly ) .
Channels are marked with navigation buoys in constricted areas and pilots are required on foreign boats .
Recreational boats can use or cross the ship channels , but the large boats , with limited maneuverability , have right of way .
MAP Section::::Map .
Map of the North American Great Lakes and the St. Lawrence Seaway from 1959 , depicting the entire length beginning at the Gulf of Saint Lawrence in the east to the western - most terminus at Lake Superior .
SEE ALSO
* Straits of Mackinac REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
The Great Waterway , South Ontario tourism site