HOOSIERS ( FILM )
Hoosiers is a 1986 sports film written by Angelo Pizzo and directed by David Anspaugh in his feature directorial debut .
It tells the story of a small - town Indiana high school basketball team that wins the state championship .
It is loosely based on the Milan High School team that won the 1954 state championship .
Gene Hackman stars as Norman Dale , a new coach with a spotty past .
The film co - stars Barbara Hershey and Dennis Hopper , whose role as the basketball - loving town drunk earned him an Oscar nomination .
Jerry Goldsmith was also nominated for an Academy Award for his score .
In 2001 , Hoosiers was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1951 , Norman Dale arrives in rural Hickory , Indiana , to become a high school teacher and head basketball coach of the Huskers .
He was hired by his longtime friend , principal Cletus Summers .
Speaking with Cletus , Dale thanks him for the opportunity and mysteriously mentions that he hopes things will work out for him this time .
The townspeople are passionate about basketball .
They are upset because the best player in town , Jimmy Chitwood , has left the team to focus on his schoolwork .
He also is still mourning the death of the previous coach .
At a meet - and - greet , Dale tells the townspeople he used to coach college ball and has been in the United States Navy for the past ten years .
Fellow teacher Myra Fleener , who senses something negative in Dale 's past , warns him not to try to persuade Jimmy to change his mind .
The school is so small that the Huskers have only seven players .
At the first practice , Dale quickly dismisses Buddy Walker for rudeness , and Whit Butcher also walks out .
Dale begins drilling the remaining five players ( Rade Butcher , Merle Webb , Everett Flatch , Strap Purl , and manager Ollie McLellan ) with fundamentals and conditioning but no scrimmages or shooting , much to the players ' dismay .
Whit returns to practice and after apologizing to Dale for walking out , is allowed back on the team .
With the team having worked on a four - pass offense , Dale remains committed to this approach in the opening game of the season , even when Rade disobeys him and repeatedly shoots successfully without passing .
Dale benches him and , when Merle fouls out , refuses to let Rade return to the game , leaving his team with only four players on the floor .
In a subsequent game , when an opposing player pokes Dale in the chest during an on - court argument , Rade jumps to his defense and hits the player .
After the ensuing brawl , Cletus , who has been assisting Dale in coaching , suffers a mild heart attack .
The coach further alienates the community by having the team play with a slow , defensive style that does not immediately produce results and also by losing his temper , causing him to be ejected from multiple games .
With Cletus laid up , Dale invites knowledgeable former Husker Wilbur " Shooter " Flatch , Everett 's alcoholic father , to join him on the bench as a new assistant .
This too confounds the town , including Everett .
The coach has one major requirement for Shooter : he must be sober at all times around the boys .
By the middle of the season , the townspeople decide to hold a meeting and vote on whether Dale should be dismissed .
Before the meeting , Fleener tells Dale she has learned from an old newspaper article that he was banned from coaching years ago after hitting one of his players .
She commends him for giving Shooter a chance to redeem himself and for leaving Jimmy alone , but warns him that he will not be treated well at the meeting .
At the meeting , Fleener starts to tell the townspeople what she found out , but she changes her mind and tells them to give Dale a chance .
As the ballots are being counted , Jimmy enters and announces that he is ready to rejoin the team , but only if Dale remains as coach .
The ballot count is reported , and it has gone against Dale , but everyone votes again , this time overwhelmingly choosing for Dale to stay .
With Jimmy back on the team , the re - energized Huskers rack up a series of wins .
Along the way , Dale proves Shooter 's value ( to the townspeople and to Shooter himself ) by intentionally getting himself ejected from a game and forcing Shooter to demonstrate his coaching ability .
Shooter does just that by designing a play that helps Hickory win the game on a last - second shot .
Shooter also regains his son 's respect .
Despite a setback in which Shooter arrives drunk at the sectional game and ends up in the hospital , the team advances through tournament play with contributions from unsung players , such as the devoutly religious Strap scoring back to back jumpshots against heavy defense and pint - sized Ollie scoring the game - winning free - throw shot .
Hickory reaches the state championship game in Indianapolis .
In a large fieldhouse , and before a crowd bigger than any they have ever seen , the Hickory players face long odds to defeat the South Bend Central Bears , whose players are taller and more athletic .
But with Jimmy scoring at the last second , Hickory wins the 1952 state championship .
CAST
* Gene Hackman as Norman Dale
* Barbara Hershey as Myra Fleener * Dennis Hopper as Shooter Flatch * Sheb Wooley as Cletus Summers * Maris Valainis as Jimmy Chitwood * David Neidorf as Everett Flatch
*
Brad Long as Buddy Walker * Steve Hollar as Rade Butcher * Brad Boyle as Whit Butcher * Wade Schenck as Ollie McLellan * Kent Poole as Merle Webb
* Scott Summers as Strap Purl * Fern Persons as Opal Fleener * Chelcie Ross as George Walker BASIS Section::::Basis .
The film is very loosely based on the story of the 1954 Indiana state champions , Milan High School ( ) , but the term " inspired by a true story " may be more appropriate , as there was little the two teams had in common .
In most U.S. states , high school athletic teams are divided into different classes , usually based on the number of enrolled students , with separate state championship tournaments held for each classification .
At the time , Indiana conducted a single state basketball championship for all of its high schools and continued to do so until 1997 .
Some elements of the film do match closely with those of Milan 's real story .
Like the film 's fictional " Hickory High School " , Milan was a very small high school in a rural , southern Indiana town .
Both schools had undersized teams .
Both Hickory and Milan won the state finals by two points : Hickory won 42–40 , and Milan won 32–30 .
The final seconds of the Hoosiers state final hold fairly closely to the details of Milan 's 1954 final ; the final shot in the film was taken from virtually the same spot on the floor as Bobby Plump 's actual game - winner .
The film 's final game was shot in the same building that hosted the 1954 Indiana final , Butler University 's Hinkle Fieldhouse ( called Butler Fieldhouse in 1954 ) in Indianapolis .
However , unlike the film 's plot , the 1954 Milan High School basketball team came into the season as heavy favorites and finished the ' 53-'54 regular season at 19–2 .
In addition , the previous 1952–1953 team went to the state semi - finals , and they were considered a powerhouse going into the championship season despite the school 's small enrollment .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
During filming in the autumn of 1985 , on location at Hinkle Fieldhouse , directors were unable to secure enough extras for shooting the final scenes even after casting calls through the Indianapolis media .
To help fill the stands , they invited two local high schools to move a game to the Fieldhouse .
Broad Ripple and Chatard , the alma mater of Maris Valainis who played the role of Jimmy Chitwood , obliged , and crowd shots were filmed during their actual game .
Fans of both schools came out in period costumes to serve as extras and to supplement the hundreds of locals who had answered the call .
At halftime and following the game , actors took to the court to shoot footage of the state championship scenes , including the game - winning shot by Hickory .
The film 's producers chose New Richmond to serve as the fictional town of Hickory and recorded most of the film 's location shots in and around the community .
Signs on the roads into New Richmond still recall its role in the film .
In addition , the old schoolhouse in Nineveh was used for the majority of the classroom scenes and many other scenes throughout the film .
The home court of Hickory is located in Knightstown and is now known as the " Hoosier Gym . "
Pizzo and Anspaugh shopped the script for two years before they finally found investment for the project .
Despite this seeming approval , the financiers only approved a production budget of $ 6 million , forcing the crew to hire most of the cast playing the Hickory basketball team and many of the extras from the local community around New Richmond .
Gene Hackman also predicted that the film was going to be a " career killer .
" Despite the small budget , dire predictions , and little help from distributor Orion Pictures , Hoosiers grossed over $ 28 million and received two Oscar nominations ( Dennis Hopper for Best Supporting Actor and Jerry Goldsmith for Best Original Score ) .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The music to Hoosiers was written by veteran composer Jerry Goldsmith .
Goldsmith used a hybrid of orchestral and electronic elements in juxtaposition to the 1950s setting to score the film .
He also helped tie the music to the film by using recorded hits of basketballs on a gymnasium floor to serve as additional percussion sounds .
Washington Post film critic Paul Attanasio praised the soundtrack , writing , "
And it 's marvelously ( and innovatively ) scored ( by composer Jerry Goldsmith ) , who weaves together electronics with symphonic effects to create a sense of the rhythmic energy of basketball within a traditional setting . "
The score would go on to garner Goldsmith an Oscar nomination for Best Original Score , though he ultimately lost to Herbie Hancock for Round Midnight .
Goldsmith would later work with filmmakers Angelo Pizzo and David Anspaugh again on their successful 1993 sports film Rudy .
Until 2012 , the soundtrack was primarily available under the European title Best Shot , with several of the film 's cues not included on the album .
In 2012 , Intrada Records released Goldsmith 's complete score , marking the first time the soundtrack has been released on CD in the United States .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
Hoosiers received positive reviews .
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 88 % based on reviews from 43 critics , with an average score of 7.5/10 .
The critical consensus is that " it may adhere to the sports underdog formula , but Hoosiers has been made with such loving craft , and features such excellent performances , that it 's hard to resist . "
Chicago Sun - Times critic Roger Ebert praised the film , writing : Ebert closed his review with the comment , " It 's a movie that is all heart . "
The New York Times ' Janet Maslin echoed Ebert 's sentiments , writing , Washington Post critics Rita Kempley and Paul Attanasio both enjoyed the film , despite its perceived sentimentalism and lack of originality .
Kempley wrote , Attanasio pointed out some problems with the film : Time magazine 's Richard Schickel praised the performance of Gene Hackman , writing that he was Variety wrote that the Pat Graham of the Chicago Reader was the rare dissenter , writing of the film that ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Hoosiers has been listed by many publications as one of the best sports movies ever made .
Hoosiers was ranked number 13 by the American Film Institute on its 100 Years ...
100 Cheers list of most inspirational films .
The film was the choice of the readers of USA Today as the best sports movie of all time .
In 2001 , Hoosiers was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
In June 2008 , AFI revealed its " Ten top Ten " — the best ten films in ten classic American film genres — after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community .
Hoosiers was acknowledged as the fourth best film in the sports genre .
A museum to commemorate the real life achievements of the 1954 Milan team has been established .
In July 2015 , MGM partnered with the Indiana Pacers , and together , they revealed that the Pacers will wear Hickory uniforms inspired by the film during select games in the 2015 - 16 NBA regular season in honor of the film 's 30th anniversary .
In April 2017 , Vice President Mike Pence said that Hoosiers is the " greatest sports movie ever made " while traveling on a flight from Indonesia to Australia with a pool of journalists .
American Film Institute Lists
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Cheers - # 13 SEE ALSO
*
Hoosier Hysteria
*
Hoosier Gym
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Hoosiers Archive