CONTIGUOUS UNITED STATES
The contiguous United States or officially the conterminous United States consists of the 48 adjoining U.S. states ( plus the District of Columbia ) on the continent of North America .
The terms exclude the non - contiguous states of Alaska and Hawaii , and all off - shore insular areas , These differ from the related term continental United States which includes Alaska ( also on the North American continent but separated from the 48 states by British Columbia , Canada ) but excludes Hawaii and insular territories .
The greatest distance ( on a great circle route ) entirely within the 48 contiguous states is 2,802 miles ( 4,509 km , between Florida and the State of Washington ) ; the greatest north - south line is 1,650 miles ( 2,660 km ) .
Together , the 48 contiguous states and the District of Columbia occupy a combined area of .
Of this area , is contiguous land , composing 83.65 % of total U.S. land area , similar to the area of Australia .
Officially , of the contiguous United States is water area , composing 62.66 % of the nation 's total water area .
The contiguous United States would be placed 5th in the list of sovereign states and dependencies by area ; the total area of the country , including Alaska and Hawaii , ranks fourth .
Brazil is the only country that is larger in total area than the contiguous United States , but smaller than the entire United States , while Russia , Canada and China are the only three countries larger than both .
The 2010 census population of this area was 306,675,006 , comprising 99.33 % of the nation 's population , and a density of 103.639 inhabitants / sq mi ( 40.015 / km ) , compared to 87.264 / sq mi ( 33.692 / km ) for the nation as a whole .
OTHER TERMS
Section::::Other terms .
While conterminous U.S. has the precise meaning of contiguous U.S. ( both adjectives meaning " sharing a common boundary " ) , other terms commonly used to describe the 48 contiguous states have a greater degree of ambiguity .
CONTINENTAL UNITED STATES Section::::Continental United States .
Because Alaska is also on the North American continent , the term continental United States would also include that state , so the term is sometimes qualified with the explicit inclusion or exclusion of Alaska to resolve any ambiguity .
The term was in use prior to the admission of Alaska and Hawaii as states of the United States and at that time usually excluded outlying territories of the United States .
However , even before Alaska became a state , it was sometimes included within the " Continental U.S. " CONUS AND OCONUS Section::::CONUS and OCONUS .
CONUS , a technical term used by the U.S. Department of Defense , General Services Administration , NOAA / National Weather Service , and others , has been defined both as the continental United States , and as the 48 contiguous states .
The District of Columbia is not always specifically mentioned as being part of CONUS .
OCONUS is derived from CONUS with O for outside added , thus referring to Outside of Continental United States ( OCONUS ) .
THE LOWER 48 Section::::The lower 48 .
The term lower 48 is also used to refer to the conterminous United States .
The National Geographic style guide recommends the use of contiguous or conterminous United States instead of lower 48 when the 48 states are meant , unless used in the context of Alaska .
ZONE OF THE INTERIOR Section::::Zone of the Interior .
During World War II , the first four numbered Air Forces of the USAAF were said to be assigned to the Zone of the Interior by the American military organizations of the time — the future states of Alaska and Hawaii , then each only territories of the Union , were respectively covered by the Eleventh Air Force and Seventh Air Force during WW II .
TERMS USED IN THE NON - CONTIGUOUS STATES Section::::Terms used in the non - contiguous states .
Both Alaskans and Hawaiians have unique labels for the contiguous United States because of their own locations relative to them .
ALASKA Section::::Alaska .
Alaska became the 49th state of the United States on January 3 , 1959 .
Alaska is on the northwest end of the North American continent , but separated from the rest of the United States Pacific coast by the Canadian province of British Columbia .
In Alaska , given the ambiguity surrounding the usage of continental , the term " continental United States " is almost unheard of when referring to the contiguous 48 states .
Several other terms have been used over the years .
The term Lower 48 has , for many years , been a common Alaskan equivalent for " contiguous United States " ;
today , more Alaskans use the term " Outside " , though a few persons may use " Outside " to refer to any location not within Alaska .
HAWAII Section::::Hawaii .
Hawaii became the 50th state of the United States on August 21 , 1959 .
It is the southernmost and so far , the latest state to join the Union .
Not part of any continent , Hawaii is located in the Pacific Ocean , about from North America and almost halfway to Asia .
In Hawaii and overseas American territories , for instance , the terms the Mainland or U.S. Mainland are often used to refer to the contiguous United States . NON - CONTIGUOUS AREAS WITHIN THE CONTIGUOUS UNITED STATES Section::::Non - contiguous areas within the contiguous United States .
Apart from off - shore US islands , a few continental portions of the contiguous US are accessible by road only by traveling through Canada .
Point Roberts , Washington ; Elm Point , Minnesota ; and the Northwest Angle in Minnesota are three such places .
Alburgh , Vermont , is not directly connected by land , but is accessible by road via bridges from within Vermont and from New York .
LIST OF CONTIGUOUS U.S. STATES Section::::List of contiguous U.S. states .
The 48 contiguous United States are : SEE
ALSO
* Extreme points of the United States * Mainland
NOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Definition of continental * Definition of contiguous * Definition of coterminous and conterminous