THE HERSHEY COMPANY The Hershey Company , ( known until April 2005 as the Hershey Foods Corporation ) commonly called Hershey 's , is an American company and one of the largest chocolate manufacturers in the world .
It also manufactures baked products , such as cookies , cakes , milk shake , drinks and many more , which increase its variety of range .
Its headquarters are in Hershey , Pennsylvania , which is also home to Hersheypark and Hershey 's Chocolate World .
It was founded by Milton S. Hershey in 1894 as the Hershey Chocolate Company , a subsidiary of his Lancaster Caramel Company .
The Hershey Trust Company owns a minority stake , but retains a majority of the voting power within the company .
Hershey 's chocolate is available across the United States , due to their wide network of distribution .
They have three mega distribution centers , with modern technology and labor management systems .
Hershey 's products are sold in over 60 countries worldwide .
In addition , Hershey is a member of the World Cocoa Foundation .
It is also associated with the Hersheypark Stadium and the Giant Center .
HISTORY EARLY YEARS Section::::History .
Section::::Early Years .
After an apprenticeship to a confectioner in 1873 , Milton S. Hershey founded a candy shop in Philadelphia .
This candy shop was only open for six years , after which Hershey apprenticed with another confectioner in Denver , where he learned to make caramel .
After another failed business attempt in New York , Hershey returned to Pennsylvania , where in 1886 he founded the Lancaster Caramel Company .
The use of fresh milk in caramels proved successful , and in 1900 , after seeing chocolate - making machines for the first time at the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition in Chicago , Hershey sold his caramel company for $ 1,000,000 ( equal to $ today ) , and began to concentrate on chocolate manufacturing , stating to people who questioned him , " Caramels are just a fad , but chocolate is a permanent thing . "
In 1896 , Milton built a milk - processing plant so he could create and refine a recipe for milk chocolate candies .
In 1899 , he developed the Hershey process , which is less sensitive to milk quality than traditional methods .
In 1900 , he began manufacturing Hershey 's Milk Chocolate Bars , also called Hershey 's Bars or Hershey Bars .
HERSHEY , PENNSYLVANIA Section::::Hershey , Pennsylvania .
In 1903 , Hershey began construction of a chocolate plant in his hometown of Derry Church , Pennsylvania , which later came to be known as Hershey , Pennsylvania .
The town was an inexpensive place for the workers and their families to live ; however the factory itself was built without windows so that employees would not be distracted .
To increase employee morale , Milton provided leisure activities and created what would later become Hersheypark to make sure the citizens enjoyed themselves .
The milk chocolate bars manufactured at this plant proved popular , and the company grew rapidly .
HERSHEY 'S KISSES
Section::::Hershey 's Kisses .
In 1907 , he introduced a new candy , bite - sized , flat - bottomed , conical - shaped pieces of chocolate that he named " Hershey 's Kiss " .
Initially , they were individually wrapped by hand in squares of aluminum foil , and the introduction of machine wrapping in 1921 simplified the process while adding the small paper ribbon to the top of the package to indicate that it was a genuine Hershey product .
Today , 80 million of the candies are produced each day .
Other products introduced included Mr. Goodbar ( 1925 ) , containing peanuts in milk chocolate , Hershey 's Syrup ( 1926 ) , semisweet chocolate chips ( 1928 ) , and the Krackel bar containing crisped rice ( 1938 ) .
UNIONIZATION
Section::::Unionization .
Labor unrest came to Hershey in the late 1930s as a Congress of Industrial Organizations - backed union attempted to organize the factory workers .
A failed sit - down strike in 1937 ended in violence , as loyalist workers and local dairy farmers beat many of the strikers as they attempted to leave the plant .
By 1940 , an affiliate of the American Federation of Labor had successfully organized Hershey 's workers under the leadership of John Shearer , who became the first president of Local Chapter Number 464 of the Bakery , Confectionery , Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers ' International Union .
Local 464 still represents the Hershey workforce .
M&M 'S Section::::M&M 's .
Shortly before World War II , Bruce Murrie , son of long - time Hershey 's president William F.R. Murrie , struck a deal with Forrest Mars to create a hard sugar - coated chocolate that would be called M&M 's ( for Mars and Murrie ) .
Murrie had 20 % interest in the confection , which used Hershey chocolate during the rationing era during World War II .
In 1948 , Mars bought out Murrie 's interest and became one of Hershey 's main competitors .
21ST CENTURY Section::::21st century .
In June 2006 , Philadelphia city councilman Juan Ramos called for Hershey 's to stop marketing " Ice Breakers Pacs " , a kind of mint , due to the resemblance of its packaging to a kind that was used for illegal street drugs .
In September 2006 , ABC News reported that several Hershey chocolate products were reformulated to replace cocoa butter with vegetable oil as an emulsifier .
According to the company , this change was made to reduce the costs of producing the products instead of raising their prices or decreasing the sizes .
Some consumers complained that the taste was different , but the company stated that in the company - sponsored blind taste tests , about half of consumers preferred the new versions .
As the new versions no longer met the Food and Drug Administration 's official definition of " milk chocolate " , the changed items were relabeled from stating they were " milk chocolate " and " made with chocolate " to " chocolate candy " and " chocolaty .
"
In April 2014 , the Hershey chocolate plant on East Chocolate Avenue in Hershey Pennsylvania was demolished to make way for mixed - use development .
A 2016 attempt to sell Hershey to Mondelez International was scuttled because of objections by the Hershey Trust .
REESE 'S PEANUT BUTTER CUPS
Section::::Reese 's Peanut Butter Cups .
Harry Burnett Reese invented Reese 's Peanut Butter Cups after founding the H.B. Reese Candy Company in 1923 .
Reese died on May 16 , 1956 in West Palm Beach , Florida leaving the company to his six sons .
On July 2 , 1963 the H.B. Reese Candy Company was acquired by the Hershey Chocolate Corporation in a tax free stock - for - stock merger .
In 2017 after 54-years of stock splits , the original 666,316 shares of Hershey common stock received by the Reese family represented 16 million Hershey shares valued at over $ 1.8 billion that pay annual cash dividends of $ 42 million .
In 1969 , only 6-years after the Reese / Hershey merger , Reese 's Peanut Butter Cups became The Hershey Company 's top seller .
As of September 20 , 2012 , Reese 's is the best - selling candy brand in the United States with sales of $ 2.603 billion , and is the fourth - best - selling candy brand globally with sales of $ 2.679 billion — only $ 76 million ( 2.8 % ) of its sales are from outside the United States market .
CADBURY 'S
Section::::Cadbury 's .
In 1988 , Hershey 's acquired the rights to manufacture and distribute many Cadbury - branded products in the United States ( except gum and mints , which are part of Mondelēz International ) .
In 2015 , they sued a British importer to halt imports of British Cadbury chocolate , angering consumers .
KRAVE JERKY Section::::Krave Jerky .
In 2005 , Krave Jerky was founded by Jon Sebastiani after he trained for a marathon and looked for a healthy source of energy .
Alliance Consumer Growth , a private equity group , invested in Krave Jerky in 2012 .
Hershey 's purchased the company in 2015 for $ 240 million .
MILTON HERSHEY SCHOOL ( MHS ) Section::::Milton Hershey School ( MHS ) .
Unable to have children of his own , Milton S. Hershey founded the Hershey Industrial School in 1909 for white orphaned boys .
In 1918 , three years after the death of his wife , Milton Hershey donated around $ 60 million to the boarding school in trust , as well as 40 % of the Hershey Company 's common stock .
The school 's initial purpose was to train young men in trades , but eventually shifted to focus on preparation for college .
The Hershey Trust Company has exercised voting rights for the school , and has been a trustee since its founding .
Many of its designs resemble Hershey chocolate products , such as the Hershey Kisses street lights .
Milton Hershey was involved in the school 's operations until his death in 1945 .
The Hershey Industrial School was renamed the Milton Hershey School in 1951 .
MANUFACTURING PLANTS
Section::::Manufacturing plants .
The first plant outside Hershey , opened on June 15 , 1963 , in Smiths Falls , Ontario , Canada , and the third opened on May 22 , 1965 , in Oakdale , California .
In February and April 2007 , Hershey 's announced that their Smiths Falls and Oakdale plants would close in 2008 , being replaced in part by a new facility in Monterrey , Mexico .
The Oakdale factory closed on February 1 , 2008 .
Hershey chocolate factory in São Roque , Brazil , was opened in August 2002 .
Hershey also has plants in Stuarts Draft , Virginia ; Lancaster , Pennsylvania ; Hazleton , Pennsylvania ; Memphis , Tennessee ; Robinson , Illinois , and Guadalajara , Mexico .
Visitors to Hershey can experience Hershey 's Chocolate World visitors center and its simulated tour ride .
Public tours were once operated in the Pennsylvania and California factories , which ended in Pennsylvania in 1973 as soon as Hershey 's Chocolate World opened , and later in California following the September 11 , 2001 , attacks , due to security concerns .
On September 18 , 2012 , Hershey opened a new and expanded West Hershey plant .
The plant was completed at a budget of $ 300 million .
On March 9 , 2018 Hershey broke ground to expand its Kit Kat manufacturing facility in Hazle Township , Pennsylvania .
The expansion project has a $ 60 million budget and is expected to create an additional 111 jobs at the facility .
OTHER SALES AND ACQUISITIONS
Section::::Other sales and acquisitions .
In 1969 , Hershey received a license from Rowntree 's to manufacture and market Kit Kat and Rolo in the United States .
As of September 2013 , Hershey continued to make and market these brands in the U.S. under license from Nestlé , owners of the Rowntree brand .
That license would be revoked and revert to Nestlé if Hershey is sold .
In 1977 , Hershey acquired Y&S Candies , founded in 1845 , and became the makers of Twizzlers licorice candies .
In 1986 , Hershey 's began a brief foray into cough drops when it acquired the Luden 's cough drops brand .
By 2001 , though , the brand had been sold to Pharmacia ( now part of Pfizer ) , and Luden 's eventually became a product of Prestige Brands .
Hershey 's kept Luden 's 5th Avenue bar .
In 1988 , Hershey 's acquired the rights to manufacture and distribute many Cadbury - branded products in the United States ( except gum and mints , which are part of Mondelēz International ) .
In 1996 , Hershey purchased the American operations of the Leaf Candy Company from Huhtamäki .
In 1999 , the Hershey Pasta Group was divested to several equity partners to form the New World Pasta company ( now part of Ebro Foods ) .
On July 25 , 2002 , it became public knowledge that the Hershey Trust Company was seeking to sell its controlling interest in the Hershey Foods Corporation .
The value of Hershey stock skyrocketed 25 % with over 19 million shares trading that day .
Over the following 55 days , widespread press coverage , as well as pressure from Pennsylvania Attorney General Mike Fisher , the community of Hershey , and Dauphin County Orphans ' Court Senior Judge Warren G. Morgan , led to the sale being abandoned .
The seven Hershey trustees who voted to sell Hershey Foods on September 17 , 2002 , for US$ 12.5 billion to the William Wrigley Jr. Company ( now part of Mars Incorporated ) were removed by Attorney General Fisher and Judge Morgan .
Ten of the 17 trustees were forced to resign and four new members who lived locally were appointed .
The former Pennsylvania Attorney General , LeRoy S. Zimmerman , became the new chairman of the reconstituted Milton Hershey School Trustees .
Mr. Zimmerman has publicly committed to having the Milton Hershey School Trust always retain its interest in The Hershey Company .
If Hershey was to be sold , the rights to make and market Kit Kat and Rolo products in the U.S. would have reverted to Nestlé .
In December 2004 , Hershey acquired the Mauna Loa Macadamia Nut Corp. from The Shansby Group .
In July 2005 , Hershey acquired the Berkeley , California - based boutique chocolate - maker Scharffen Berger .
In November 2005 , Hershey acquired Joseph Schmidt Confections , the San Francisco - based chocolatier , and in November 2006 , Hershey acquired Dagoba Organic Chocolate , a boutique chocolate maker based in Ashland , Oregon .
In December 2011 , Hershey reached an agreement to acquire Brookside Foods Ltd. , a privately held confectionery company based in Abbotsford , British Columbia .
In 2015 , Hershey announced that they had acquired Krave Jerky , marking the company 's first foray outside of the confectionery market in more than a decade .
In 2016 , Hershey acquired barkTHINS , a New York - based chocolate snack foods company which expected to generate between $ 65 million and $ 75 million in revenue for that year , for $ 290 million .
In 2017 , Hershey acquired Amplify Snack Brands , Austin , Texas based maker of SkinnyPop , in an all - cash transaction valued at approximately $ 1.6 billion .
In September 2018 , Hershey announced to buy Pirate Brands from B&G Foods for $ 420 million in an all - cash deal .
PRODUCT RECALLS
*
In July 1998 , a number of 100 g ( 3.5 oz )
milk chocolate bars being sold for fundraising events were recalled because they may have contained traces of almonds not listed in the ingredients .
*
In November 2006 , the Smiths Falls production plant in Ontario temporarily shut down and several products were voluntarily recalled after concerns over Salmonella contamination possibly found in soy lecithin within their production line .
It was believed that most of the products involved in the recall never made it to the retail level .
PHILANTHROPY Section::::Philanthropy .
Hershey has made large contributions to education .
One of their most notable contributions was the Elizabethtown College Honors Program .
The program was established in 1999 and is funded partially through the endowment .
In 2015 , Hershey announced a commitment with Clinton Global Initiative to help build a sustainable supply chain to support basic nutrition for children in Ghana .
Hershey 's long - term focus on children and families has yielded long - standing partnerships with organizations such as Children 's Miracle Network , Ronald McDonald House , and United Way ( UW ) .
In 2016 , the company donated more than $ 486,200 to those organizations .
CRITICISM COCOA PURCHASE Section::::Criticism .
Section::::Cocoa purchase .
Hershey has been criticized for not having programs to ensure sustainable and ethical cocoa purchase , lagging behind its competitors in fair trade measures .
The " Raise the Bar , Hershey ! "
campaign was launched in September 2010 by Global Exchange , Green America , the Oasis Trust , and the International Labor Rights Forum .
The purpose of the Raise the Bar Campaign is to pressure Hershey to commit " to take immediate action to eliminate forced and child labor … from Hershey 's cocoa supply " ; " to sourcing 100 % Fair Trade Certified ™ cocoa beans by 2012 for at least one of its top five selling chocolate bars … making at least one additional top five selling bar 100 % Fair Trade Certified ™ every two years thereafter " ; and that " the majority of Hershey 's cocoa across all products will be Fair Trade Certified ™ by 2022 .
" Pressure was particularly directed at Whole Foods Market , which announced on October 3 , 2012 that it would cease carrying Hershey 's Scharffen Berger line .
The Campaign stated that " Whole Foods ' decision follows more than 40 natural food retailers and coops publicly expressing concern about carrying Scharffen Berger and Dagoba products as a consequence of the giant chocolate maker 's refusal to address child labor in its supply chain .
" The same day , Hershey 's announced , " it will source 100 percent certified cocoa for its global chocolate product lines by 2020 and accelerate its programs to help eliminate child labor in the cocoa regions of West Africa . "
SEE ALSO
* List of products manufactured by The Hershey Company
* List of food companies * Pennsylvania chocolate workers ' strike , 1937 REFERENCES ADDITIONAL SOURCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Official Hershey 's chocolate and candy site * Official Hershey corporate site