SHAKESPEARE IN LOVE Shakespeare in Love is a 1998 American romantic period comedy - drama film directed by John Madden , written by Marc Norman and playwright Tom Stoppard .
The film depicts an imaginary love affair involving playwright William Shakespeare ( Joseph Fiennes ) and Viola de Lesseps ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) while Shakespeare was writing Romeo and Juliet .
Several characters are based on historical figures , and many of the characters , lines , and plot devices allude to Shakespeare 's plays .
Shakespeare in Love received favorable reviews from critics and was a box office success , grossing $ 289.3 million worldwide and was the ninth highest - grossing film of 1998 .
The film would go on to win seven Academy Awards , including Best Picture , Best Actress ( Gwyneth Paltrow ) , Best Supporting Actress ( Judi Dench ) , and Best Original Screenplay .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1593 London , William Shakespeare is a sometime player in the Lord Chamberlain 's Men and poor playwright for Philip Henslowe , owner of The Rose Theatre .
Shakespeare is working on a new comedy , Romeo and Ethel , the Pirate 's Daughter .
Suffering from writer 's block , he has barely begun the play , and is further distracted by attempts both to seduce Rosaline , the mistress of Richard Burbage , owner of the rival Curtain Theatre and to convince Burbage to buy the play from Henslowe .
Shakespeare receives helpful advice on his play from rival playwright Christopher " Kit " Marlowe , but becomes despondent when he learns Rosaline is sleeping with Edmund Tilney , the powerful Master of the Revels .
Henslowe , who is in debt to the ruthless moneylender Fennyman and in desperate need for a new play , begins auditions anyway .
Viola de Lesseps , the daughter of a wealthy merchant , who has seen Shakespeare 's plays at court , disguises herself as a man named Thomas Kent to audition .
" He " gains Shakespeare 's interest when he auditions with a speech from Two Gentlemen of Verona after a series of actors bore him by reciting from Marlowe 's Doctor Faustus , but when Shakespeare questions her , Viola runs away in fear of being discovered .
Shakespeare pursues Kent to Viola 's house and leaves a note with the nurse , asking Thomas Kent to begin rehearsals at the Rose .
He sneaks into the house with the minstrels playing that night at the ball , where Viola 's parents are arranging her betrothal to Lord Wessex , an impoverished aristocrat .
While dancing with Viola , Shakespeare is struck speechless , but is forcibly ejected by Wessex .
Wessex also asks Will 's name , to which he replies that he is Christopher Marlowe after Wessex threatens to kill him .
Shakespeare sneaks into Viola 's garden , finding her on her balcony , where they briefly confess their mutual attraction to each other before he is discovered by her nurse and flees .
Inspired by Viola , Shakespeare writes quickly , completely transforming the play into what will become Romeo and Juliet .
Rehearsals begin , with " Thomas Kent " as Romeo , the leading tragedian Ned Alleyn as Mercutio and the stagestruck Fennyman given a small role as the Apothocary .
Shakespeare soon discovers Viola 's true identity , and they begin a secret affair .
Viola is summoned to court to receive approval for her proposed marriage to Lord Wessex .
Shakespeare accompanies her , disguised as her female cousin .
There , he persuades Wessex to wager £ 50 that a play can capture the true nature of love , the exact amount Shakespeare requires to buy a share in the Chamberlain 's Men .
Queen Elizabeth
I declares that she will judge the matter when the occasion arises .
When Burbage finds out that Shakespeare has both seduced Rosaline and cheated him out of the money he was paid for the play , he goes to the Rose Theatre with his Curtain Theatre Company and starts a brawl .
The Rose Theatre company drives Burbage and his company out and then celebrate at the local pub , where a drunken Henslowe lets slip to a horrified Viola that Shakespeare is married , albeit separated from his wife .
News arrives that Marlowe has been murdered , and a guilt - ridden Shakespeare believes Wessex has had Marlowe killed , believing him to be Viola 's lover .
Viola briefly believes Shakespeare has been murdered but he appears at her church , terrifying Wessex who believes he is a ghost .
Viola confesses her love for Shakespeare , but both recognize she can not escape her duty to marry Wessex .
John Webster , an unpleasant young boy who hangs around the theatre , spies on Shakespeare and Viola making love and informs Tilney , who closes the Rose for breaking the ban on women actors .
Viola 's identity is exposed , leaving them without a stage or lead actor , until Richard Burbage offers them his theatre and the heartbroken
Shakespeare takes the role of Romeo .
Following her wedding , Viola learns that the play will be performed that day , and runs away to the Curtain .
Planning to watch with the crowd , Viola overhears that the boy playing Juliet can not perform , his voice having broken overnight , and Henslowe asks her to replace him .
She plays Juliet to Shakespeare 's Romeo to an enthralled audience .
Master Tilney arrives to arrest everyone for indecency due to Viola 's presence , but the Queen reveals herself having been in attendance and restrains Tilney , instead asserting that Kent 's resemblance to a woman is , indeed , remarkable .
However , even a queen is powerless to end a lawful marriage , and she orders Kent to " fetch " Viola because she must sail with Wessex to the Colony of Virginia .
The Queen also tells Wessex , who followed Viola to the theatre , that Romeo and Juliet has won the bet for Shakespeare , and has Kent deliver his £ 50 with instructions to write something " a little more cheerful next time , for Twelfth Night " .
Viola and Shakespeare say their goodbyes , and he vows to immortalise her , as he imagines the beginning of Twelfth Night , in character as a castaway disguised as a man after a voyage to a strange land .
CAST
* Gwyneth Paltrow as Viola de Lesseps * Joseph Fiennes as William Shakespeare
* Geoffrey Rush as Philip Henslowe
* Colin Firth as Lord Wessex
* Ben Affleck as Ned Alleyn * Judi Dench as Queen Elizabeth
I * Simon Callow as Edmund Tilney * Jim Carter as Ralph Bashford * Martin Clunes as Richard Burbage
* Antony Sher as Dr. Moth * Imelda Staunton as Nurse
* Tom Wilkinson as Hugh Fennyman * Mark Williams as Wabash * Daniel Brocklebank as Sam Gosse * Jill Baker as Lady
de Lesseps * Patrick Barlow as Will Kempe * Joe Roberts as John Webster
* John Inman as Lady Capulet
* Rupert Everett as Christopher ' Kit ' Marlowe * Sandra Reinton as Rosaline PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The original idea for Shakespeare in Love was suggested to screenwriter Marc Norman in the late 1980s by his son Zachary .
Norman wrote a draft screenplay which he presented to director Edward Zwick , which attracted Julia Roberts , who agreed to play Viola .
However , Zwick disliked Norman 's screenplay and hired the playwright Tom Stoppard to improve it
( Stoppard 's first major success had been with the Shakespeare - themed play
Rosencrantz & Guildenstern Are Dead ) .
The film went into production in 1991 at Universal , with Zwick as director , but although sets and costumes were in construction , Shakespeare had not yet been cast , because Roberts insisted that only Daniel Day - Lewis could play the role .
Day - Lewis was uninterested , and when Roberts failed to persuade him , she withdrew from the film , six weeks before shooting was due to begin .
The production went into turnaround , and Zwick was unable to persuade other studios to take up the screenplay .
Eventually , Zwick got Miramax interested in the screenplay , but Miramax chose John Madden as director .
Miramax boss Harvey Weinstein acted as producer , and persuaded Ben Affleck to take a small role as Ned Alleyn .
The film was considerably reworked after the first test screenings .
The scene with Shakespeare and Viola in the punt was re - shot , to make it more emotional , and some lines were re - recorded to clarify the reasons why Viola had to marry Wessex .
The ending was re - shot several times , until Stoppard eventually came up with the idea of Viola suggesting to Shakespeare that their parting could inspire his next play .
Among the locations used in the production were Hatfield House , Hertfordshire ( for the fireworks scene ) , Broughton Castle , Oxfordshire ( which played the role of the de Lesseps home ) , the beach at Holkham in Norfolk , the chapel at Eton College , Berkshire , and the Great Hall of Middle Temple , London .
REFERENCES TO ELIZABETHAN LITERATURE Section::::References to Elizabethan literature .
Much of the action of the film echoes that of Romeo and Juliet .
Will and Viola play out the famous balcony and bedroom scenes ; like Juliet , Viola has a witty nurse , and is separated from Will by a gulf of duty ( although not the family enmity of the play : the " two households " of Romeo and Juliet are supposedly inspired by the two rival playhouses ) .
In addition , the two lovers are equally " star - crossed " — they are not ultimately destined to be together ( since Viola is of rich and socially ambitious merchant stock and is promised to marry Lord Wessex , while Shakespeare himself is poor and already married ) .
There is also a Rosaline , with whom Will is in love at the beginning of the film .
There are references to earlier cinematic versions of Shakespeare , such as the balcony scene pastiching the Zeffirelli Romeo and Juliet .
Many other plot devices used in the film are common in Shakespearean comedies and other plays of the Elizabethan era : the Queen disguised as a commoner , the cross - dressing disguises , mistaken identities , the sword fight , the suspicion of adultery , the appearance of a " ghost " ( cf . Macbeth ) , and the " play within a play " .
According to Douglas Brode , the film deftly portrays many of these devices as though the events depicted were the inspiration for Shakespeare 's own use of them in his plays .
Christopher Marlowe is presented in the film as the master playwright whom the characters consider the greatest English dramatist of that time — this is historically accurate , yet also humorous , since the film 's audience knows what will eventually happen to Shakespeare 's reputation .
Marlowe gives Shakespeare a plot for his next play , " Romeo and Ethel the Pirate 's Daughter "
( " Romeo is Italian ... always in and out of love ... until he meets ... Ethel .
The daughter of his enemy !
His best friend is killed in a duel by Ethel 's brother or something .
His name is Mercutio . " )
Marlowe 's Doctor Faustus is quoted repeatedly :
" Was this the face that launched a thousand ships/ And burned the topless towers of Ilium ? "
A reference is also made to Marlowe 's final , unfinished play The Massacre at Paris in a scene wherein Marlowe ( Rupert Everett ) seeks payment for the final act of the play from Richard Burbage ( Martin Clunes ) .
Burbage promises the payment the next day , so Marlowe refuses to part with the pages and departs for Deptford , where he is killed .
The only surviving text of The Massacre at Paris is an undated octavo that is probably too short to represent the complete original play .
It has been suggested that it is a memorial reconstruction by the actors who performed the work .
The child John Webster ( Joe Roberts ) who plays with rats is a reference to the leading figure in the next , Jacobean , generation of playwrights .
His plays ( The Duchess of Malfi , The White Devil ) are known for their ' blood and gore ' , which is humorously referred to by the child saying that he enjoys Titus Andronicus , and also saying of Romeo and Juliet , when asked his opinion by the Queen , " I liked it when she stabbed herself . "
When the clown Will Kempe ( Patrick Barlow ) says to Shakespeare that he would like to play in a drama , he is told that " they would laugh at Seneca if you played it , " a reference to the Roman tragedian renowned for his sombre and bloody plot lines which were a major influence on the development of English tragedy .
Will is shown signing a paper repeatedly , with many relatively illegible signatures visible .
This is a reference to the fact that several versions of Shakespeare 's signature exist , and in each one he spelled his name differently .
PLOT PRECEDENTS AND SIMILARITIES Section::::Plot precedents and similarities .
After the film 's release , certain publications , including Private Eye , noted strong similarities between the film and the 1941 novel No Bed for Bacon , by Caryl Brahms and S. J. Simon , which also features Shakespeare falling in love and finding inspiration for his later plays .
In a foreword to a subsequent edition of No Bed for Bacon ( which traded on the association by declaring itself " A Story of Shakespeare and Lady Viola in Love " )
Ned Sherrin , Private Eye insider and former writing partner of Brahms ' , confirmed that he had lent a copy of the novel to Stoppard after he joined the writing team , but that the basic plot of the film had been independently developed by Marc Norman , who was unaware of the earlier work .
The film 's plot can claim a tradition in fiction reaching back to Alexandre Duval 's " Shakespeare amoureux ou la Piece a l'Etude " ( 1804 ) , in which Shakespeare falls in love with an actress who is playing Richard III .
The writers of Shakespeare in Love were sued in 1999 by bestselling author Faye Kellerman .
She claimed that the plotline was stolen from her 1989 novel
The Quality of Mercy , in which Shakespeare romances a Jewish woman who dresses as a man , and attempts to solve a murder .
Miramax Films spokesman Andrew Stengel derided the claim , filed in the US District Court six days before the 1999 Academy Awards , as " absurd " , and argued that the timing " suggests a publicity stunt " .
An out - of - court settlement was reached but the sum agreed between the parties indicates that the claim was " unwarranted " .
HISTORICAL INACCURACIES Section::::Historical inaccuracies .
The film is " not constrained by worries about literary or historical accuracy " and includes anachronisms such as a reference to Virginia tobacco plantations , at a time before the Colony of Virginia existed .
A leading character is a member of the House of Wessex , which died out in 1066 .
Queen Elizabeth I never entered a public theatre , as she does in the film .
Between Romeo and Juliet and Twelfth Night , Shakespeare wrote ten other plays over a period of six years .
The biggest historical liberty concerns the central theme of Shakespeare struggling to create the story of Romeo and Juliet as he simply adapted an existing story for theatre .
The Italian verse tale The Tragical History of Romeus and Juliet had been translated into English by Arthur Brooke in 1562 , 32 years before Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Janet Maslin made the film an " NYT Critics ' Pick " , calling it " pure enchantment " .
According to Maslin , " Gwyneth Paltrow , in her first great , fully realized starring performance , makes a heroine so breathtaking that she seems utterly plausible as the playwright 's guiding light . "
Roger Ebert , who gave the film four stars out of four , wrote : " The contemporary feel of the humor ( like Shakespeare 's coffee mug , inscribed " Souvenir of Stratford - Upon - Avon " ) makes the movie play like a contest between " Masterpiece Theatre " and Mel Brooks .
Then the movie stirs in a sweet love story , juicy court intrigue , backstage politics and some lovely moments from Romeo and Juliet ...
Is this a movie or an anthology ?
I did n't care .
I was carried along by the wit , the energy and a surprising sweetness . "
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a 92 % approval rating based on 135 critical reviews , with an average rating of 8.3/10 .
The website 's critical consensus states : " Endlessly witty , visually rapturous , and sweetly romantic , Shakespeare in Love is a delightful romantic comedy that succeeds on nearly every level . "
On Metacritic , the film holds a score of 87 out of 100 based on 33 critical reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Shakespeare in Love was among 1999 's box office number - one films in the United Kingdom .
The U.S. box office reached over $ 100 million ; including the box office from the rest of the world , the film took in over $ 289 million .
The Sunday Telegraph claimed that the film prompted the revival of the title of Earl of Wessex .
Prince Edward was originally to have been titled Duke of Cambridge following his marriage to Sophie Rhys - Jones in 1999 , the year after the film 's release .
However , after watching Shakespeare in Love , he reportedly became attracted to the title of the character played by Colin Firth , and asked her mother Queen Elizabeth II to be given the title of Earl of Wessex instead .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
American Film Institute recognition :
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Passions – # 50 !
Award !
Category !
Recipient(s ) !
Outcome
Art Direction :
Martin Childs ;
Set Decoration : Jill Quertier
In 2005 , the Writers Guild of America ranked its script the 28th greatest ever written .
STAGE ADAPTATION Section::::Stage adaptation .
In November 2011 , Variety reported that Disney Theatrical Productions intended to produce a stage version of the film in London with Sonia Friedman Productions .
The production was officially announced in November 2013 .
Based on the film screenplay by Norman and Stoppard , it was adapted for the stage by Lee Hall .
The production was directed by Declan Donnellan and designed by Nick Ormerod , the joint founders of Cheek by Jowl .
The production opened at the Noël Coward Theatre in London 's West End on 23 July 2014 , receiving rave reviews from critics .
It was called " A joyous celebration of theatre " in the Daily Telegraph , " Joyous " in The Independent , and " A love letter to theatre " in The Guardian .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website for stage adaptation