ST .
LOUIS COUNTY , MISSOURI St. Louis County is located in the far eastern portion of the U.S. state of Missouri .
It is bounded by the city of St. Louis and the Mississippi River to the east , the Missouri River to the north , and the Meramec River to the south .
As of the 2016 Census Bureau population estimate , the population was 998,581 , making it the most populous county in Missouri .
Its county seat is Clayton .
Saint Louis County was settled by French colonists in the late 1700s , before switching to U.S. rule following the Louisiana Purchase .
Saint Louis County split from St. Louis City in 1877 , after City residents voted to separate .
In the 1960s , with the growing suburbanization in Greater St. Louis , the County 's population overtook the City 's population for the first time .
St. Louis County borders , but does not include , the city of St. Louis , which is an independent city .
The county is included in the St. Louis , MO - IL Metropolitan Statistical Area .
HISTORY COLONIAL SETTLEMENT AND EARLY GOVERNMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Colonial settlement and early government .
During the 18th century , several European colonial settlements were established in the area that would become St. Louis County .
French colonists moved from east of the Mississippi River after France ceded those territories to Spain after losing the Seven Years ' War .
The earliest of these , Saint Louis , was founded by Pierre Laclède and Auguste Chouteau on February 14 , 1764 , who became major fur traders in the city .
Founded in about 1767 was Carondelet , which was at the southern end of what is now the city of St. Louis ( annexation of Carondelet took place in 1871 ) .
Florissant , then known as St. Ferdinand , was established in 1785 about twelve miles northwest of St. Louis on a tributary of the Missouri River .
During the 1790s , very small settlements known as Creve Coeur and Point Labadie were built north and west of St. Louis .
Upon the sale and transfer of French Louisiana to the United States on October 1 , 1804 , President Thomas Jefferson suggested that the territory retain the districts drawn by Spanish officials during their decades - long rule of the territory after an arrangement with the French .
During this time , the first governing body of St. Louis County was established ( following the earlier Spanish governors ) .
This government , called the Court of Quarter Sessions , was composed of Charles Gratiot , Auguste Chouteau , Jacques Clamorgan , and David DeLaunay , all ethnic French or French Canadians ; the court held judicial , executive , and legislative power .
On October 1 , 1812 , the District of St. Louis was renamed St. Louis County ( exactly eight years after its establishment ) during a federal reorganization of the Louisiana Territory 's status .
PREWAR GROWTH AND EARLY EDUCATION Section::::Prewar growth and early education .
After the transfer of Louisiana to the United States , the authority to grant incorporation to municipalities was delegated to the Territory and later was a state power .
The first to gain municipal status in St. Louis County was St. Louis , which incorporated on November 9 , 1809 , under the territorial legislature , and gained city status on December 9 , 1822 .
Only a handful of other municipal incorporations took place prior to the separation of the county and city : St. Ferdinand was granted incorporation in 1829 ( and reincorporated as Florissant in 1843 ) , while Bridgeton , a settlement along the Missouri River near Florissant , gained incorporation in 1843 .
Two towns grew substantially and incorporated in the 1850s , with their growth stimulated by the construction of the Pacific Railroad ( later the Missouri Pacific Railroad ) : Pacific and Kirkwood .
Pacific , a community along the Meramec River that was known before the railroad line connection as Franklin , straddles St. Louis and Franklin counties ; it incorporated as Pacific in 1859 .
Kirkwood was settled in 1853 after Hiram Leffingwell and Richard Elliott platted and auctioned land along the railroad line ; they named their settlement after James P. Kirkwood , who planned the route of the railroad through the area .
Leffingwell organized the town as a planned suburb ( the first west of the Mississippi ) , and Kirkwood was granted incorporation by the state in 1865 .
Other areas of the county began to be settled during this period but did not incorporate as towns .
Among these were Chesterfield , and Gumbo , Missouri , both settled in the 1820s in west St. Louis County , and Gravois and Affton , which were settled in south St. Louis County in the 1850s and 1860s .
The first St. Louis Public Schools were established in the major city in the 1830s .
It was a decade and more before some of the settlements of St. Louis County began providing public education .
In 1854 , the School District of Maplewood was established .
It included all of today 's Maplewood district , part of what became Webster Groves , Missouri , along the south and southwest , a large part of St. Louis in the east , and to the north up to Clayton Road .
The first school , originally called the Washington Institute and later renamed as Maplewood High School , opened as a one - room stone building at the crossing of Manchester Road over the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks .
Another antebellum school district was Rock Hill , which provided a one - room school across from the Rock Hill Presbyterian Church until about 1870 .
The first school in Florissant opened in 1819 under the direction of the Religious of the Sacred Heart , a Roman Catholic religious congregation .
The instructor , Rose Philippine Duchesne , was a French immigrant who has been described as " one of the foremost educators in the state of Missouri .
"
A second school , initially an Indian school known as the St. Regis Academy , was operated for young boys from 1823 to 1829 .
The complex included a Jesuit seminary known as St. Stanislaus Seminary , which continued to operate until 1971 .
The earliest public school in Florissant was the St. Ferdinand School , which was authorized by the General Assembly in 1845 and operated until 1871 , when the Florissant School District was formed .
GOVERNMENT CHANGES AND EARLY COURTHOUSES Section::::Government changes and early courthouses .
From 1813 to 1830 , the county initiated several changes to its government .
By an act of the territorial legislature , the Court of Quarter Sessions was succeeded by a panel of three judges of common pleas in 1813 .
Two years later , this panel was succeeded by a newly created county court in 1815 , composed of justices of the peace elected from the county to three - month terms .
The St. Louis County Circuit Court ( established in 1815 as the judicial branch of the county ) was given authority in 1816 over the executive and legislative affairs of the county , superseding the court of justices of the peace .
In 1821 , a hybrid County and Probate Court was established and given executive and legislative control , and in 1830 , its probate functions ceased .
This County Court operated as the government of St. Louis County until public scandals encouraged the state legislature to abolish it and replace it in 1859 with a Board of Commissioners .
Sessions of the County Court and other county governing bodies were held in a variety of locations during this early period .
The Court of Quarter Sessions held its first meeting in 1804 at a tavern in St. Louis , then regularly at a building at Third and Plum until 1817 .
The county seat moved that year to a newly built one - story log cabin on Third Street between Elm and Spruce , followed by a move to the brick Baptist Church at Third and Market in 1820 .
The County Court established a commission in 1822 to study a permanent courthouse ( previous facilities were rented ) , and in 1823 , Auguste Chouteau and John Baptiste Charles Lucas donated two tracts of land that formed a vacant square bounded by Broadway , Fourth , Chestnut , and Market .
Between the summer of 1826 and 1833 , on this vacant tract was built a low - roofed two - story brick structure fronting Fourth Street that was the first permanent courthouse for St. Louis County .
Within a few years , however , the building 's size was inadequate for the county government 's needs ; the original building was left in place during construction on the new building , which began in 1839 .
This new courthouse , now known as the Old Courthouse , included a finished rotunda , dome , and west wing by 1843 ; the 1833 courthouse was demolished in 1851 , and by 1856 , the east wing was complete .
SEPARATION OF ST .
LOUIS AND ST .
LOUIS
COUNTY Section::::Separation of St. Louis and St. Louis County .
It was during the antebellum period that the first attempts were made at separating the city of St. Louis , then the county 's largest municipality , from the county .
In 1843 , a group of St. Louis city residents petitioned the state legislature to separate the two entities .
The General Assembly passed a resolution calling for a referendum on the subject among county voters outside the city .
This vote , held on August 7 , 1844 , showed a majority of county voters opposed to separation .
Despite the vote , controversy continued and tension mounted between the county government and the city government during the 1840s and 1850s .
Much of the dispute involved the double taxation of city residents and their proportionally lesser representation in county government .
The reform of 1859 , in which the County Court was abolished by the state government and replaced by a Board of Commissioners , was in large part a reaction to city outcry over mismanagement of tax money .
More than a name change , the reform expanded the size of the county government council to seven members , with four seats set aside for city representation ( the city , however , had roughly ten times the population of the county at that time ) .
The reform temporarily ameliorated the tensions , and in 1863 , the General Assembly restored the name of the county government to its former name of County Court .
Despite some reforms , controversy returned and grew during the 1860s .
This was in much part because although representation on the County Court had improved for city residents , the county continued to tax city residents for the same services that the city provided and for which the city taxed them .
Several plans began to circulate during the late 1860s that would relieve this burden , including home rule status for St. Louis , further reorganization of the County Court to ensure greater representation , city - county government consolidation , and separation of the two entities .
The General Assembly considered several plans during this period , and in March 1871 , it passed a further reorganization of the County Court ; the new Court would have an at - large presiding judge , four seats reserved for city residents , and two seats for county residents .
This reform , however , pleased virtually no one pushing for reform , and it made little practical difference in the operation of the county government .
Thus a consolidation plan proceeded in the General Assembly in 1871 , backed by city political leaders Anthony Ittner and Roderick E. Rombauer .
The Missouri Republican newspaper strongly backed the approach , while the Missouri Democrat argued it would lead city leaders into corruption .
The latter pressed for a separation plan , support for which was led by David H. Armstrong .
The separation plan gained greater support when it became clear that the mistrust between city and county residents precluded consolidation .
A citizen group known as the Taxpayers League formed in 1872 to advance the separation cause , and city leaders looked to Baltimore , Maryland , which had separated from Baltimore County in 1853 , as an example .
The mechanism by which separation took place began in 1875 at the state constitutional convention .
At the convention , a committee examined the issues of St. Louis government , and it summarized the two options facing the region as consolidation and separation .
The full convention voted to include a provision in the constitution allowing for separation ; the vote was 53 in favor , 4 opposed , 11 absent .
Only one member of the St. Louis delegation opposed separation : In 1877 , the City of St. Louis separated from the county , creating an independent city .
The city in August 1876 narrowly approved the separation while county residents overwhelmingly opposed the separation .
City residents had argued they wanted to be " rid of county taxes and state influence over county government .
" At the time the city had 350,000 residents while the rural county had 30,000 .
The rural county also had only 150 miles of gravel roads .
Although the results were challenged in the courts , the two jurisdictions were formally separated in March 1877 .
POST - SEPARATION POLITICAL ISSUES Section::::Post - separation political issues .
The first meeting of the new County Court took place on January 22 , 1877 at the home of James C. Sutton , in what is now Maplewood .
The three judges appointed a new county clerk , sheriff , and treasurer .
They also announced at that meeting that the new Court was functional ( obviating the legal standing of the previous County Court , which continued to meet albeit without legal function until July 1877 ) and the transfer of all county buildings and property in the city of St. Louis to the city government .
Thus the county 's courthouse in St. Louis became city property .
The Court also requested that the city of St. Louis continue to provide police protection to some areas of the county until the county could provide these services .
On January 29 , 1877 , the Court considered a report that recommended Kirkwood as the new county seat , but did not decide the issue at that time .
The Court continued to meet at the Sutton House in Maplewood until February 1877 , when it convened at the Des Peres Grange Hall .
It agreed then to rent space at the Mount Olive Hotel , in what is now University City , until deciding on a new location for the courthouse .
The Court continued to meet at the Mount Olive Hotel from March 1877 to 1879 .
Throughout 1877 , the Court debated the question of the county seat ; rejecting several sites , including Kirkwood and Florissant .
In September 1877 the Court accepted the donation of 100 acres of land on Hanley Road by a farmer named Ralph Clayton .
In addition to the benefit of donated land , the site was chosen because it was on the route of the Hodiamont streetcar line , which connected from St. Louis to Florissant .
An additional four acres were given by M. F. Hanley , and in May 1878 , the cornerstone was laid for a new county courthouse .
In October 1878 the courthouse donation and streets were platted in what would become the town of Clayton .
The new courthouse and jail opened in December 1878 , at a cost of $ 38,000 .
Two additions were made to the courthouse in 1912 and in 1926 .
GROWTH OF EDUCATION AND MUNICIPALITIES
Section::::Growth of education and municipalities .
In the years from the Civil War to World War
I , relatively few new towns incorporated in St. Louis County ; the first to incorporate after the war , Fenton , was incorporated in 1874 in southwest St. Louis County .
Webster Groves incorporated in 1896 , prompted by residents ' demands for a police department after the murder of Bertram Atwater , a commercial artist from Chicago .
Webster had earlier been settled in 1853 as a stop on the Missouri Pacific line .
Other incorporations before World War
I included University City in 1906 near Washington University in St. Louis ;
Maplewood in 1908 , also along the Missouri Pacific railroad line ; Wellston in 1908 in inner north county ; Shrewsbury in 1913 north of Webster Groves ; Clayton in 1913 south of University City ; and Richmond Heights in 1913 south of Clayton .
State law required only that 50 % of residents agree to incorporation via a petition for a legal incorporation to take place ; the county government had no ability to restrict the incorporation if the 50 % threshold were met .
Significant suburban growth in the early 20th century stimulated a rapid increase in the number of incorporations after 1935 .
After the Civil War , dozens of school districts opened in St. Louis County to provide basic primary education .
In Eureka , along the Missouri Pacific line to Pacific , a one - room log school opened in the town in 1870 , which was expanded to two stories and four rooms in about 1900 .
In the towns of Old Orchard and Webster Groves along the Missouri Pacific line , schools opened in 1867 and 1868 , respectively .
In Kirkwood , private schools began operating within a few years of the first settlers purchasing lots in 1853 ; in the early 1860s , these included the Kirkwood Seminary ( which closed in 1889 ) , the Kirkwood Military Academy , St. Peter Catholic School , and Concordia Lutheran School .
The first public schools in Kirkwood opened in 1866 as part of the newly formed Kirkwood School District ; the district provided two years of high school from 1873 and opened a four - year Kirkwood High School in 1896 .
In some areas , formerly private schools became part of new public districts .
In Florissant , the St. Ferdinand School ( opened in 1845 ) became part of the Florissant School District in 1871 , although it continued to be staffed by nuns .
The first public school in the newly formed district opened in 1876 near St. Ferdinand and Washington Streets .
In Ballwin , a school opened in 1855 by German Methodists was bought by a newly formed Ballwin School District in 1869 ; the one - room schoolhouse operated until 1900 , when a two - room building opened as a replacement .
POST - WORLD WAR II ERA Section::::Post - World War II era .
A new courthouse was built in Clayton in 1945 ( it serves as the 21st - century County Police headquarters ) .
The original 1878 courthouse was torn down in 1971 to be replaced by county government plaza and modern six - story courthouse .
Several changes took place in St. Louis County education after World War II .
The Florissant School District and the Ferguson School District merged in October 1951 to form the Ferguson - Florissant School District .
As part of a court - ordered desegregation plan , in 1975 the Ferguson - Florissant district annexed the Kinloch and the Berkeley school districts to combine the schools .
In 1955 , St. Louis County established the St. Louis County Police Department , with jurisdiction throughout the county .
In 1977 , St. Louis County was terrorized by three car bombings , which killed two people .
The bomber was never caught .
In 1988 the Board of Freeholders proposed consolidating the county 's 89 municipalities into 37 cities , eliminating all unincorporated areas .
The vote in June 1989 was challenged by numerous groups on grounds questioning the board 's constitutional authority .
On June 25 , days after the scheduled vote would have occurred , the U.S. Supreme Court unanimously overturned the Missouri Supreme Court , arguing the board 's land ownership requirement violated the U.S. Constitution 's Equal Protection Clause .
The county passed the city in population in the 1970 U.S. Census when it had 951,353 compared to the city 's 622,236 .
Industrial restructuring cost the city many jobs and residents .
By the 2010 U.S. Census the city had fewer people than in the 19th century .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
According to the U.S. Census Bureau , the county has a total area of , of which is land and ( 2.9 % ) is water .
NATURAL BOUNDARIES Section::::Natural boundaries .
The Missouri River forms the northern border with St. Charles County , exclusive of a few areas where the river has changed its course .
The Meramec River forms most of its southern border with Jefferson County .
To the east is the City of St. Louis and the Mississippi River .
The western boundary with Franklin County is the north - south line where the distance between the Meramec and Missouri rivers is the shortest , bisecting the city of Pacific , roughly two blocks east of Hwy OO / F ( First street ) .
TOPOGRAPHY Section::::Topography .
The foothills of the Ozark Mountains begin in southwestern St. Louis County , with most of the rest of the county being a fairly level plateau .
This western part of the county is the least developed , due to rugged topography .
Bluffs along the Mississippi in the south of the county rise about 200–300 feet above the river .
A major floodplain area is the Chesterfield Valley , in the western part of the county , along the Missouri River .
It was formerly called " Gumbo Flats " after its rich , dark soil ; it was submerged by at least ten feet of water during the Great Flood of 1993 .
The Corps of Engineers constructed a higher levee , and the county has permitted construction in the floodplain .
The Columbia Bottom is a floodplain in the northeast of the county at the confluence of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers ; this is preserved as a conservation area open to the public .
The Missouri Bottom area between the two other floodplains had been developed for agriculture , but it is being increasingly developed for residential , business and industry .
The River des Peres drains the interior of county before flowing into constructed underground channels into the City of St. Louis .
It was allowed to resurface , where it forms the boundary between southern portions of St. Louis City and St. Louis County .
Other streams include Coldwater Creek , Bonhomme Creek , and Creve Coeur Creek , flowing into the Missouri River ; Keifer Creek , Fishpot Creek , and Grand Glaize Creek , flowing into the Meramec River ; Deer Creek and Gravois Creek , flowing into the River des Peres ; and Maline Creek , flowing into the Mississippi River .
The highest elevation is 904 feet/275 meters .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
The bedrock is mainly limestone and dolomite , and much of the county near the rivers is Karst terrain , with numerous caves , sinkholes , and springs .
No igneous or metamorphic rock is exposed on the surface .
A major outcropping of the St. Peter Sandstone formation , a fine white sandstone used for making clear glass , is mined in the southwest corner of the county in Pacific .
Brick clay mining was once a major industry in the county .
The Charbonier Bluff along the Missouri River is an outcropping of coal , and was used a fueling station for steamboats .
The " St. Louis Anticline " , an underground formation , has small petroleum deposits in north part of the county .
FLORA AND FAUNA Section::::Flora and fauna .
Before European settlement , the area was prairie and open parklike forest , maintained by Native Americans via burning .
Trees are mainly oak , maple , and hickory , similar to the forests of the Ozarks ; common understory trees include Eastern redbud , serviceberry , and flowering dogwood .
Riparian areas are heavily forested with mainly American sycamore .
By the 1920s most of the timber in the county was harvested .
Since that time , large parks and undeveloped areas in the western and southern parts of the county have grown dense forest cover .
Old pastures are usually colonized with Eastern red cedar .
Most of the residential area of the county is planted with large native shade trees .
In autumn , the changing color of the trees is notable .
St. Louis County has the most recorded native species of plants in the state , but this is probably due to the intensive botanical research done in the area .
Most species here are typical of the Eastern Woodland ; but some southern species are found in swampland , and typical northern species survive in sheltered hollows .
Invasive species , most notably Japanese honeysuckle , are common in some homesteads converted to parks ; these are actively removed .
Large mammals include growing populations of whitetail deer and coyotes , which are becoming increasingly urbanized .
Eastern gray squirrel , cottontail rabbit , and other rodents are abundant , as well as opossum , beaver , muskrat , raccoon , and skunk .
Large bird species include wild turkey , Canada goose , mallard duck , various raptors like the turkey vulture and red - tailed hawk , as well as shorebirds , including the great egret and great blue heron .
Winter populations of bald eagles are found by the Mississippi River around the Chain of Rocks Bridge .
The county is on the Mississippi Flyway , used by migrating birds , and has a large variety of small bird species , common to the eastern U.S.
The Eurasian tree sparrow , an introduced species , is limited in North America to the counties surrounding St. Louis .
Frogs are commonly found in the springtime , especially after extensive wet periods .
Common species include American toad and species of chorus frogs , commonly called " spring peepers " that are found in nearly every pond .
Some years have outbreaks of cicadas or ladybugs .
Mosquitos and houseflies are common insect nuisances ; because of this , windows are nearly universally fitted with screens , and " screened - in " porches are common in homes of the area .
Populations of honeybees have sharply declined in recent years , and numerous species of pollinator insects have filled their ecological niche .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
St. Louis County has a continental climate , with neither large mountains nor large bodies of water to moderate its temperature .
The area is affected by both cold Canadian Arctic air , and also hot , humid air from the Gulf of Mexico .
The county has four distinct seasons .
Spring is the wettest season and produces erratic severe weather ranging from tornadoes to winter storms .
Summers are hot , and the humidity can cause the heat index to rise to temperatures above .
Fall is mild , with lower humidity and can produce intermittent bouts of heavy rainfall with the first snow flurries usually forming in late November .
Winters are cool to cold with periodic snow and temperatures often below freezing .
Winter storm systems , such as Alberta clippers , can bring days of heavy freezing rain , ice pellets and snowfall .
The average annual temperature for the years 1971–2000 , recorded at Lambert –
St .
Louis International Airport , is , and average precipitation is .
The average high temperature in July is , and the average low temperature in January is , although these values are often exceeded .
Temperatures of or below occur three days per year on average .
The highest temperature ever recorded in St. Louis was , on July 14 , 1954 , while the lowest temperature on record is , on January 29 , 1873 .
Winter is the driest season , averaging about 6 inches of total precipitation .
Springtime ( March through May ) , is typically the wettest season , with just under 10.5 inches .
Dry spells of one or two weeks ' duration are common during the growing seasons .
Thunderstorms can be expected on 40 to 50 days per year .
A few of them will be severe with locally destructive winds and large hail , and occasionally accompanied by tornadoes .
A period of unseasonably warm weather late in Autumn known as Indian summer is common — roses will still be in bloom as late as November or early December in some years .
OTHER GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Other geography .
The largest natural lake in the state is Creve Coeur Lake .
It was originally an oxbow of the nearby Missouri River and is now the centerpiece of a popular county park .
Manchester Road ( Route 100 ) follows an ancient path westward out of St. Louis , following the boundary between the Missouri and Meramec watersheds .
It is one of only two routes to leave the county without crossing any rivers ( the other being State Highway T ) .
The Sinks is a karst area in the far northern part of the county , with numerous sinkholes .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
As of the census of 2010 , there were 998,954 people .
There were 404,765 households with 263,423 family households .
The population density was 1,966 people per square mile ( 773 / km² ) .
There were 423,749 housing units at an average density of 834 per square mile ( 322 / km² ) .
The racial makeup of the county was 58.3 % White ( 56.9 % Non - Hispanic White ) , 35.3 % African American , 0.2 % Native American , 3.5 % Asian ( 1.1 % Asian Indian , 1.0 % Chinese , 0.3 % Filipino , 0.3 % Korean , 0.3 % Vietnamese , 0.1 % Japanese , 0.4 % Other ) , 0.03 % Pacific Islander , 0.9 % from other races , and 1.9 % from two or more races and 2.5 % Hispanic or Latino ( 1.5 % Mexican , 0.2 % Puerto Rican , 0.1 % Cuban , 0.8 % Other ) .
There were 404,765 households out of which 31.0 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 51.00 % were married couples living together , 12.70 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 33.00 % were non - families .
28.00 % of all households were made up of individuals and 10.10 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The average household size was 2.47 and the average family size was 3.05 .
In the county , the age distribution of the population shows 25.20 % under the age of 18 , 8.30 % from 18 to 24 , 29.00 % from 25 to 44 , 23.50 % from 45 to 64 , and 14.10 % who were 65 years of age or older .
The median age was 38 years .
For every 100 females there were 90.00 males .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 85.70 males .
The median income for a household in the county was $ 50,532 , and the median income for a family was $ 61,680 .
Males had a median income of $ 45,714 versus $ 30,278 for females .
The per capita income for the county was $ 27,595 .
About 5.00 % of families and 6.90 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 9.30 % of those under age 18 and 5.30 % of those age 65 or over .
St. Louis County is the most affluent county in Missouri . !
Racial composition ! !
2010 ! !
2017 ECONOMY
Section::::Economy .
As of 2009 , the largest employment sectors in St. Louis County are education and health ( 25.2 % ) , trade and transportation ( 19.6 % ) , and professional business services ( 12.7 % ) .
The county also has the highest per capita income in Missouri ( $ 49,727 ) , and nearly one fourth of the state workforce is employed in St. Louis County , but it accounts for 27 % of the state 's wages .
It is home to the eighth - strongest market for technology hiring , and the world 's largest concentration of plant science Ph.D. 's .
The St. Louis County Economic Council is the economic development agency of St. Louis County , and it is operated under the authority of the St. Louis County government .
Among the largest employers in the county are Boeing ( 16,000 employees ) , Washington University in St. Louis ( 13,200 employees ) , and SSM Healthcare ( 12,400 employees ) .
As of 2013 , Express Scripts has approximately 4,500 employees , with a planned expansion of 1,500 jobs to be added over the five years from 2013 to 2018 .
Unemployment in St. Louis County is well below the national rate of 7.7 % ( November 2012 ) at 6.5 % ( October ) ; for monthly unemployment numbers since June 2012 , see below : + Unemployment in St. Louis County !
Month!!Civilian labor force!!Employed!!Unemployed!!Unemployment rate ARTS AND CULTURE Section::::Arts and culture .
Culturally , St. Louis County is often divided into Mid , North , West and South sections .
North County lies north of Interstate 70 , West County lies west of Interstate 270 , South County lies south of Interstate 44 and Mid County lies in the middle of the three main bordering highways ( I-70 , I-270 & I-44 ) and the St. Louis county - city line .
WEST COUNTY Section::::West County .
Some sections of West County are inhabited by pro athletes , professionals and new wealth , creating a large area of high - income residents .
Communities include : Chesterfield , Clarkson Valley , Des Peres , Eureka , Town and Country , Twin Oaks , Creve Coeur , Wildwood , Ellisville , Ballwin , parts of Maryland Heights , Manchester , and Winchester .
West County is home to two major shopping centers : Chesterfield Valley which has two major outdoor malls Taubman Prestige Outlets and St. Louis Premium outlet malls , while West County Center is located in Des Peres .
Local school districts include Valley Park School District , Rockwood School District , Parkway School District and Meramec Valley School District .
Leisure spots
/ parks in West County include Blue Bird Park and Faust Park , which is home to the Butterfly House .
MID COUNTY Section::::Mid County .
Mid County is made up of the central and eastern portion of St. Louis County .
The bulk of Mid County lies just west of the City of St. Louis .
Municipalities include Clayton , Maplewood , Brentwood , Richmond Heights , Frontenac , Warson Woods , Ladue , Rock Hill , Olivette , University City , St. Ann , and Overland .
With access to Interstate 70 and Interstate 44 to the north and south of Mid County , access to Interstate 270 and Interstate 170 on the west and east and Interstate 64 running through the middle of Mid County , the area is never far from highway transportation .
The closest major mall to Downtown St. Louis is the Saint Louis Galleria located in Richmond Heights .
Other popular areas are The Loop on Delmar Blvd .
in University City .
Clayton is also known for its wide variety of local shops , boutiques and original restaurants .
NORTH COUNTY Section::::North County .
North County is home to Boeing 's Defense , Space & Security unit , Lambert - St .
Louis International Airport , and Emerson Electric Company .
The population is one of the most diverse in St. Louis County .
Public transportation has been beneficial to North County and was the first area of Metro St. Louis served by the metropolitan rail system , MetroLink .
Cities of North County include Bellefontaine Neighbors , Black Jack , Bridgeton , Ferguson , Florissant , Hazelwood , Jennings , and Spanish Lake .
Residents of some communities , such as Bridgeton and Hazelwood , sometimes distinguish themselves from locations further north by labeling their area as " Northwest County . "
North St. Louis County is not only diverse in racial makeup but also by socioeconomic means .
There are numerous black and mixed raced villages located in North - Central county along the Natural Bridge Corridor east of Interstate 170 including Glen Echo Park , Bellerive , Bel - Ridge , Bel - Nor , and Pasadena Hills , second to Olympia Fields , Illinois as the most affluent majority black community north of the Mason – Dixon line .
Some of the inner - ring suburbs located between Interstate 70 and Interstate 270 along the city - county line show past and current signs of white flight .
North County is an area that has been very affected by " Redlining " real estate laws of the past .
SOUTH COUNTY Section::::South County .
While largely populated , much of South County is unincorporated .
Major communities in South St. Louis County include Green Park , Crestwood , Concord , Shrewsbury , Lemay , Mehlville , Oakville , Affton , south Webster Groves , Sappington and Sunset Hills .
South County Center , a major enclosed shopping mall is located in the Mehlville CDP .
School Districts in South County include , Mehlville - Oakville School District , Affton School District , Hancock Place School District , Bayless School District , Lindbergh School District , and Webster Groves School District .
The Ozark Mountains and Ozark Plateau begin in South St. Louis County and neighboring Jefferson County .
Many communities have an abundance of gently rolling hills .
There are a number of attractions within South County including the Ulysses S. Grant National Historic Site , Grant%27s Farm , and Jefferson Barracks National Cemetery .
PARKS AND RECREATION Section::::Parks and recreation .
St. Louis County owns and maintains more than forty parks as part of its county park system , including playgrounds and nature preserves .
It also operates several recreation centers , the Museum of Transportation , and the Affton Community Center .
In addition to parks owned by St. Louis County , the county is home to three Missouri state parks : Babler , Castlewood , and Route 66 State Park , and part of the Big Muddy National Fish and Wildlife Refuge and the Ulysses
S. Grant National Historic Site .
Several municipalities in the county also own and maintain their own park systems .
+
Parks owned by St. Louis County ! Name!!Area
( acres)!!class="unsortable"Region of
St. Louis County† class="sortbottom " GOVERNMENT Section::::Government . St. Louis County government is divided between executive power vested in the County Executive of St. Louis County and legislative power vested in the St. Louis County Council .
The current county executive is Steve Stenger , who was elected November 5 , 2014 .
The county executive 's term is four years without term limits , and the position is elected by the population of the entire county .
The council consists of seven members elected from separate districts within the county , with four year terms beginning on January 1 following elections .
In 1950 , St. Louis County became the first Missouri county to adopt a home - rule charter under the Missouri Constitution , and the current charter was adopted by voters on November 6 , 1979 .
CRIME AND PUBLIC SAFETY Section::::Crime and Public Safety .
The St. Louis County Police Department operates under the authority of the St. Louis County Board of Police Commissioners and is the largest law enforcement agency in St. Louis County .
Although it is directly responsible for law enforcement in unincorporated areas of the county , several municipalities contract with the county police for public safety services .
Municipalities that maintain service agreements with the county police are Black Jack , Clarkson Valley , Dellwood , Fenton , Ferguson , Grantwood Village , Green Park , Hanley Hills , Jennings , Marlborough , Norwood Court , Pasadena Hills , Twin Oaks , Valley Park , Vinita Terrace , Wilbur Park , Wildwood , and Winchester .
A total of 58 of the 90 municipalities in the county maintain their own police departments .
Eighty - one of the local towns run their own courts .
St. Louis County Fire Department services are provided by 20 municipal fire departments and 23 fire protection districts .
The fire protection districts exist as independent , taxing governments that are unrelated to the St. Louis County government , while the municipal fire departments are funded through municipal taxes and are administered by their respective cities .
Municipal fire departments include Berkeley , Brentwood , Clayton , Crestwood , Des Peres , Ferguson , Frontenac , Glendale , Hazelwood , Jennings , Kinloch , Kirkwood , Ladue , Maplewood , Olivette , Pacific , Richmond Heights , Rock Hill , Shrewsbury , University City , and Webster Groves .
Independent fire districts include Affton , Black Jack , Community , Creve Coeur , Eureka , Fenton , Florissant Valley , Kinloch , Lemay , Maryland Heights , Mehlville , Metro West , Mid - County , Moline , Monarch , Normandy , Pattonville Bridgeton Terrace , Riverview , Robertson , Spanish Lake , Valley Park , West County EMS and West Overland .
POLITICS Section::::Politics .
+ Presidential elections results !
Year !
Republican !
Democratic !
Third parties
As of March 2016 , there were 648,073 registered voters in St. Louis County , down from 708,283 registered voters in April 2013 .
Since 1992 , the county has favored Democratic candidates in the presidential elections , although the western part of the county tends to support the Republican Party .
It was one of only three counties in Missouri that Democrats won in the 2004 presidential election and one of only four to do so in 2012 .
In the 2008 presidential primaries , 41 % of Republicans in St. Louis County voted for John McCain with 37 % voting for Mitt Romney .
For Democrats in St. Louis County , 63 % voted for Barack Obama while 36 % voted for Hillary Clinton .
In total 187,234 votes were cast for Democratic Party candidates and 95,437 votes were cast for the Republican Party candidates .
In the 2012 presidential primaries , out of 36,463 votes cast in the Republican race , Rick Santorum came in first with 53.45 % , Mitt Romney came in second with 29.82 % , and Ron Paul came in third with 10.56 % .
Only 14,517 votes were cast in the Democratic primary , and incumbent President Obama won 93.31 % .
In the 2016 presidential primaries , with 134,284 votes cast in the Republican race , Donald Trump narrowly won with 35.73 % to Ted Cruz 's 35.54 % .
John Kasich had 17.53 % of the vote and Marco Rubio had 9.15 % .
In the Democratic race , with 161,950 votes cast , Hillary Clinton won with 55.30 % to Bernie Sanders 's 44.01 % .
As of the 2014 elections , of the five senators ( who have residences in St. Louis County ) elected to the Missouri Senate , four are Democrats and one is a Republican .
Of the 28 representatives elected to the Missouri House of Representatives , 19 are Democrats and 9 are Republicans .
All of North County elects Democrats to the Missouri General Assembly , most of Mid County also elect Democrats .
While most of West County and South County elects Republicans EDUCATION Section::::Education .
Education in St. Louis County is provided by 24 school districts , private schools , both a unified public library system and several municipal libraries , and several colleges and universities .
School districts operating within St. Louis County include Affton , Bayless , Brentwood , Clayton , Ferguson - Florissant , Hancock Place , Hazelwood , Kirkwood , Jennings , Ladue , Lindbergh , Maplewood - Richmond Heights , Mehlville , Normandy , Parkway , Pattonville , Ritenour , Riverview Gardens , Rockwood , Special School District , University City , Valley Park , and Webster Groves .
Several of the school districts in the county also maintain a voluntary student transfer agreement with the St. Louis Public Schools that allows county residents to attend magnet schools in the city of St. Louis .
In addition to public school districts , several private schools operate in the county .
These include independent secular and religious schools , and Catholic parochial schools operated by the Archdiocese of St. Louis .
LIBRARIES Section::::Libraries .
St. Louis County libraries include the unified St. Louis County Library and several municipal library systems .
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES Section::::Colleges and Universities .
Public and non - profit private colleges and universities in St. Louis County include Concordia Seminary , Eden Theological Seminary , Fontbonne University , Kenrick – Glennon Seminary , Logan College of Chiropractic , Maryville University , Missouri Baptist University , University of Missouri – St .
Louis , St. Louis Christian College , three campuses of the St. Louis Community College , Washington University in St. Louis , and Webster University .
INFRASTRUCTURE
TRANSPORTATION
MAJOR FREEWAYS AND HIGHWAYS Section::::Infrastructure .
Section::::Transportation .
Section::::Major freeways and highways .
valign="top " * ( 1926–1979 ) HEALTH CARE Section::::Health care .
In 1927 , a $ 1 million bond was issued allocating funds for the construction of the first St. Louis County Hospital .
Construction of the 200-bed , non - segregated hospital began in 1929 in the city of Clayton .
The hospital opened in July 1931 and ran until June 1986 .
Current list of hospitals in St. Louis County :
* Barnes – Jewish West County Hospital * Christian Hospital * DePaul Health Center * Des Peres Hospital * DuBuis Hospital of St. Louis
* Mercy Hospital St. Louis * Missouri Baptist Medical Center
* Northwest HealthCare * Ranken Jordan Pediatric Bridge Hospital * Shriners Hospital * St. Anthony 's Medical Center * St. Clare Health Center * St. John 's Mercy Medical Center * St. Joseph Hospital
* St. Luke 's Hospital * St. Mary 's Hospital } COMMUNITIES Section::::Communities .
One - third of the county population lives in unincorporated areas , for which the county government provides services such as zoning , code enforcement , refuse disposal , and police protection .
In addition to the county - level government , there are 90 municipal governments in St. Louis County that also provide services .
These vary widely in population and area .
The smallest towns in population are Champ with a 2010 population of 13 , Country Life Acres ( population 74 ) and Mackenzie ( population 134 ) ; fourteen county municipalities have a 2010 population under 500 , and fewer than a third exceed 10,000 .
In area , the smallest town is Mackenzie ( ) while 14 other towns are 0.1 square mile ( 0.26 km ) or less .
At the other end of the scale , Florissant has a population over 50,000 and Wildwood at the far west of the county is .
St. Louis County municipalities include : CITIES *
Ballwin * Bella Villa
* Bellefontaine Neighbors
* Berkeley * Beverly Hills * Black Jack * Breckenridge Hills * Brentwood * Bridgeton * Calverton Park * Charlack * Chesterfield * Clarkson Valley * Clayton ( county seat )
* Cool Valley * Country Club Hills
* Crestwood * Creve Coeur * Crystal Lake Park
* Dellwood * Des Peres
* Edmundson
* Ellisville * Eureka * Fenton * Ferguson * Flordell Hills
* Florissant * Frontenac * Glendale * Green Park
* Greendale * Hazelwood * Huntleigh * Jennings * Kinloch * Kirkwood * Ladue * Lakeshire * Manchester * Maplewood * Maryland Heights * Moline Acres
* Normandy * Northwoods * Oakland
* Olivette * Overland * Pacific ( mostly in Franklin County )
* Pagedale * Pasadena Hills * Pine Lawn
* Richmond Heights
* Rock Hill
* Shrewsbury * St. Ann * St. John * Sunset Hills * Town and Country * University City * Valley Park
* Velda City *
Velda Village Hills * Vinita Park *
Warson Woods * Webster Groves *
Wellston
* Wildwood
* Winchester *
Woodson Terrace VILLAGES
* Bellerive * Bel - Nor * Bel - Ridge
* Champ * Country Life Acres * Glen Echo Park * Grantwood Village
* Hanley Hills *
Hillsdale *
Marlborough * Norwood Court
* Pasadena Park * Riverview * Sycamore Hills * Twin Oaks * Uplands Park
* Westwood * Wilbur Park CENSUS - DESIGNATED PLACES *
Affton * Castle Point
* Concord * Glasgow Village
* Lemay * Mehlville * Oakville * Old Jamestown
* Sappington * Spanish Lake UNINCORPORATED COMMUNITIES
* Ascalon * Carsonville * Earth City
* Glencoe * Grover * Peerless Park
* St. George
* Sherman * Times Beach
SEE ALSO
* List of counties in Missouri * National Register of Historic Places listings in St. Louis County , Missouri REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * St. Louis County profile * St. Louis County Government
* St. Louis County Municipalities page
* St. Louis climate , from the National Weather Service * St. Louis County Economic Council * Digitized 1930 Plat Book of St. Louis County from University of Missouri Division of Special Collections , Archives , and Rare Books