RATIO
In mathematics , a ratio is a relationship between two numbers indicating how many times the first number contains the second .
For example , if a bowl of fruit contains eight oranges and six lemons , then the ratio of oranges to lemons is eight to six ( that is , 8:6 , which is equivalent to the ratio 4:3 ) .
Similarly , the ratio of lemons to oranges is 6:8 ( or 3:4 ) and the ratio of oranges to the total amount of fruit is 8:14 ( or 4:7 ) .
The numbers in a ratio may be quantities of any kind , such as counts of persons or objects , or such as measurements of lengths , weights , time , etc .
In most contexts both numbers are restricted to be positive , and the second to be not zero .
A ratio may be either specified by giving both constituting numbers , written as " a to b " or " a : b " , or by giving just the value of their quotient , since the product of the quotient and the second number yields the first , as required by the above definition .
Consequently , a ratio may be considered as an ordered pair of numbers , as a fraction with the first number in the numerator and the second as denominator , or as the value denoted by this fraction .
Ratios of counts , given by ( non - zero ) natural numbers , denote positive rational numbers , and as such may occasionally result in natural numbers .
When two quantities are measured with the same unit , as is often the case , their ratio is a dimensionless number .
A quotient of two quantities that are measured with different units is called a rate .
NOTATION AND TERMINOLOGY Section::::Notation and terminology .
The ratio of numbers A and B can be expressed as : * the ratio of A to B
* A is to B ( often followed by " as C is to D " )
* A∶B * a fraction with A as numerator and B as denominator , that represents the quotient : A divided by B : formula_1 .
This can be expressed as a simple or a decimal fraction , or as a percentage , etc .
There are several variants in the same vein as percentage , with the meaning of per hundred , equivalent to formula_2 for example , the per mill from Latin mille , meaning thousand , equivalent to ‰ formula_3 or , especially for particle densities , parts per billion , abbreviated as ppb .
There is also a specific unicode sign , the per sign , looking like ⅌ , for the use of arbitrary denominators , e.g. , ⅌ 12 as per dozen .
The numbers
A and B are sometimes called terms of the ratio with A being the antecedent and B being the consequent .
A statement expressing the equality of two ratios A∶B and C∶D is called a proportion , written as A∶B = C∶D or A∶B::C∶D.
This latter form , when spoken or written in the English language , is often expressed as A , B , C and D are called the terms of the proportion .
A and D are called its extremes , and B and C are called its means .
The equality of three or more ratios , like A∶B = C∶D = E∶F , is called a continued proportion .
Ratios are sometimes used with three or even more terms , e.g. , the proportion for the edge lengths of a " two by four " that is ten inches long is therefore a good concrete mix ( in volume units ) is sometimes quoted as For a ( rather dry ) mixture of 4/1 parts in volume of cement to water , it could be said that the ratio of cement to water is 4∶1 , that there is 4 times as much cement as water , or that there is a quarter ( 1/4 ) as much water as cement .
The meaning of such a proportion of ratios with more than two terms is that the ratio of any two terms on the LHS makes up a standard proportion with the corresponding two terms on the RHS .
The corresponding terms are called the homologues in the proportion .
HISTORY AND ETYMOLOGY Section::::History and etymology .
It is impossible to trace the origin of the concept of ratio because the ideas from which it developed would have been familiar to preliterate cultures .
For example , the idea of one village being twice as large as another is so basic that it would have been understood in prehistoric society .
However , it is possible to trace the origin of the word " ratio " to the Ancient Greek ( logos ) .
Early translators rendered this into Latin as ' ( " reason " ; as in the word " rational " ) .
( A rational number may be expressed as the quotient of two integers . )
A more modern interpretation of Euclid 's meaning is more akin to computation or reckoning .
Medieval writers used the word ' ( " proportion " ) to indicate ratio and ( " proportionality " ) for the equality of ratios .
Euclid collected the results appearing in the Elements from earlier sources .
The Pythagoreans developed a theory of ratio and proportion as applied to numbers .
The Pythagoreans ' conception of number included only what would today be called rational numbers , casting doubt on the validity of the theory in geometry where , as the Pythagoreans also discovered , incommensurable ratios ( corresponding to irrational numbers ) exist .
The discovery of a theory of ratios that does not assume commensurability is probably due to Eudoxus of Cnidus .
The exposition of the theory of proportions that appears in Book VII of The Elements reflects the earlier theory of ratios of commensurables .
The existence of multiple theories seems unnecessarily complex to modern sensibility since ratios are , to a large extent , identified with quotients .
This is a comparatively recent development however , as can be seen from the fact that modern geometry textbooks still use distinct terminology and notation for ratios and quotients .
The reasons for this are twofold .
First , there was the previously mentioned reluctance to accept irrational numbers as true numbers .
Second , the lack of a widely used symbolism to replace the already established terminology of ratios delayed the full acceptance of fractions as alternative until the 16th century .
EUCLID 'S DEFINITIONS
Section::::Euclid 's definitions .
Book V of Euclid 's Elements has 18 definitions , all of which relate to ratios .
In addition , Euclid uses ideas that were in such common usage that he did not include definitions for them .
The first two definitions say that a part of a quantity is another quantity that " measures " it and conversely , a multiple of a quantity is another quantity that it measures .
In modern terminology , this means that a multiple of a quantity is that quantity multiplied by an integer greater than one — and a part of a quantity ( meaning aliquot part ) is a part that , when multiplied by an integer greater than one , gives the quantity .
Euclid does not define the term " measure " as used here , However , one may infer that if a quantity is taken as a unit of measurement , and a second quantity is given as an integral number of these units , then the first quantity measures the second .
Note that these definitions are repeated , nearly word for word , as definitions 3 and 5 in book VII .
Definition 3 describes what a ratio is in a general way .
It is not rigorous in a mathematical sense and some have ascribed it to Euclid 's editors rather than Euclid himself .
Euclid defines a ratio as between two quantities of the same type , so by this definition the ratios of two lengths or of two areas are defined , but not the ratio of a length and an area .
Definition 4 makes this more rigorous .
It states that a ratio of two quantities exists when there is a multiple of each that exceeds the other .
In modern notation , a ratio exists between quantities p and q if there exist integers m and n so that mp > q and nq > p .
This condition is known as the Archimedes property .
Definition 5 is the most complex and difficult .
It defines what it means for two ratios to be equal .
Today , this can be done by simply stating that ratios are equal when the quotients of the terms are equal , but Euclid did not accept the existence of the quotients of incommensurate , so such a definition would have been meaningless to him .
Thus , a more subtle definition is needed where quantities involved are not measured directly to one another .
Though it may not be possible to assign a rational value to a ratio , it is possible to compare a ratio with a rational number .
Specifically , given two quantities , p and q , and a rational number m / n we can say that the ratio of p to q is less than , equal to , or greater than m / n when np is less than , equal to , or greater than mq respectively .
Euclid 's definition of equality can be stated as that two ratios are equal when they behave identically with respect to being less than , equal to , or greater than any rational number .
In modern notation this says that given quantities p , q , r and s , then p : q::r : s if for any positive integers m and n , npmq according as nrms respectively .
There is a remarkable similarity between this definition and the theory of Dedekind cuts used in the modern definition of irrational numbers .
Definition 6 says that quantities that have the same ratio are proportional or in proportion .
Euclid uses the Greek ἀναλόγον ( analogon ) , this has the same root as λόγος and is related to the English word " analog " .
Definition 7 defines what it means for one ratio to be less than or greater than another and is based on the ideas present in definition 5 .
In modern notation it says that given quantities p , q , r and s , then p : q > r :
s if there are positive integers m and n so that np > mq and nr≤ms .
As with definition 3 , definition 8 is regarded by some as being a later insertion by Euclid 's editors .
It defines three terms p , q and r to be in proportion when p :
q::q : r .
This is extended to 4 terms p , q , r and s as p :
q::q :
r::r : s , and so on .
Sequences that have the property that the ratios of consecutive terms are equal are called geometric progressions .
Definitions 9 and 10 apply this , saying that if p , q and r are in proportion then p : r is the duplicate ratio of p : q and if p , q , r and s are in proportion then p : s is the triplicate ratio of p : q .
If p , q and r are in proportion then q is called a mean proportional to ( or the geometric mean of ) p and r. Similarly , if p , q , r and s are in proportion then q and r are called two mean proportionals to p and s. NUMBER OF TERMS AND USE OF FRACTIONS Section::::Number of terms and use of fractions .
In general , a comparison of the quantities of a two - entity ratio can be expressed as a fraction derived from the ratio .
For example , in a ratio of 2:3 , the amount , size , volume , or quantity of the first entity is formula_6 that of the second entity .
If there are 2 oranges and 3 apples , the ratio of oranges to apples is 2:3 , and the ratio of oranges to the total number of pieces of fruit is 2:5 .
These ratios can also be expressed in fraction form : there are 2/3 as many oranges as apples , and 2/5 of the pieces of fruit are oranges .
If orange juice concentrate is to be diluted with water in the ratio 1:4 , then one part of concentrate is mixed with four parts of water , giving five parts total ; the amount of orange juice concentrate is 1/4 the amount of water , while the amount of orange juice concentrate is 1/5 of the total liquid .
In both ratios and fractions , it is important to be clear what is being compared to what , and beginners often make mistakes for this reason .
Fractions can also be inferred from ratios with more than two entities ; however , a ratio with more than two entities can not be completely converted into a single fraction , because a fraction can only compare two quantities .
A separate fraction can be used to compare the quantities of any two of the entities covered by the ratio : for example , from a ratio of 2:3:7 we can infer that the quantity of the second entity is formula_7 that of the third entity .
PROPORTIONS AND PERCENTAGE RATIOS Section::::Proportions and percentage ratios .
If we multiply all quantities involved in a ratio by the same number , the ratio remains valid .
For example , a ratio of 3:2 is the same as 12:8 .
It is usual either to reduce terms to the lowest common denominator , or to express them in parts per hundred ( percent ) .
If a mixture contains substances A , B , C and D in the ratio 5:9:4:2 then there are 5 parts of A for every 9 parts of B , 4 parts of C and 2 parts of D.
As 5 + 9 + 4 + 2=20 , the total mixture contains 5/20 of A ( 5 parts out of 20 ) ,
9/20 of B , 4/20 of C , and 2/20 of D.
If we divide all numbers by the total and multiply by 100 , we have converted to percentages : 25 % A , 45 % B , 20 % C , and 10 % D ( equivalent to writing the ratio as 25:45:20:10 ) .
If the two or more ratio quantities encompass all of the quantities in a particular situation , it is said that " the whole " contains the sum of the parts : for example , a fruit basket containing two apples and three oranges and no other fruit is made up of two parts apples and three parts oranges .
In this case , formula_8 , or 40 % of the whole is apples and formula_9 , or 60 % of the whole is oranges .
This comparison of a specific quantity to " the whole " is called a proportion .
If the ratio consists of only two values , it can be represented as a fraction , in particular as a decimal fraction .
For example , older televisions have a 4:3 aspect ratio , which means that the width is 4/3 of the height ( this can also be expressed as 1.33:1 or just 1.33 rounded to two decimal places ) .
Modern widescreen TVs have a 16:9 aspect ratio , or 1.78 rounded to two decimal places .
One of the popular widescreen movie formats is 2.35:1 or simply 2.35 .
Representing ratios as decimal fractions simplifies their comparison .
When comparing 1.33 , 1.78 and 2.35 , it is obvious which format offers wider image .
Such a comparison works only when values being compared are consistent , like always expressing width in relation to height .
REDUCTION Section::::Reduction .
Ratios can be reduced ( as fractions are ) by dividing each quantity by the common factors of all the quantities .
As for fractions , the simplest form is considered that in which the numbers in the ratio are the smallest possible integers .
Thus , the ratio 40:60 is equivalent in meaning to the ratio
2:3 , the latter being obtained from the former by dividing both quantities by 20 .
Mathematically , we write 40:60 =
2:3 , or equivalently 40:60::2:3 .
The verbal equivalent is " 40 is to 60 as 2 is to 3 . "
A ratio that has integers for both quantities and that can not be reduced any further ( using integers ) is said to be in simplest form or lowest terms .
Sometimes it is useful to write a ratio in the form 1 : x or x:1 , where x is not necessarily an integer , to enable comparisons of different ratios .
For example , the ratio 4:5 can be written as 1:1.25 ( dividing both sides by 4 )
Alternatively , it can be written as 0.8:1 ( dividing both sides by 5 ) .
Where the context makes the meaning clear , a ratio in this form is sometimes written without the 1 and the colon , though , mathematically , this makes it a factor or multiplier .
IRRATIONAL RATIOS
Section::::Irrational ratios .
Ratios may also be established between incommensurable quantities ( quantities whose ratio , as value of a fraction , amounts to an irrational number ) .
The earliest discovered example , found by the Pythagoreans , is the ratio of the length of the diagonal to the length of a side of a square , which is the square root of 2 , formally formula_10 Another example is the ratio of a circle 's circumference to its diameter , which is called , and is not just an algebraically irrational number , but a transcendental irrational .
Also well - known is the golden ratio of two ( mostly ) lengths and , which is defined by the proportion Taking the ratios as fractions and formula_13 as having the value , yields the equation which has the positive , irrational solution formula_16
Thus at least one of a and b has to be irrational for them to be in the golden ratio .
An example of an occurrence of the golden ratio in math is as the limiting value of the ratio of two consecutive Fibonacci numbers : even though all these ratios are ratios of two integers and hence are rational , the limit of the sequence of these rational ratios is the irrational golden ratio .
Similarly , the silver ratio of and is defined by the proportion
This equation has the positive , irrational solution formula_19 so again at least one of the two quantities a and b in the silver ratio must be irrational .
ODDS Section::::Odds .
Odds ( as in gambling ) are expressed as a ratio .
For example , odds of " 7 to 3 against " ( 7:3 ) mean that there are seven chances that the event will not happen to every three chances that it will happen .
The probability of success is 30 % .
In every ten trials , there are expected to be three wins and seven losses .
UNITS Section::::Units .
Ratios may be unitless , as in the case they relate quantities in units of the same dimension , even if their units of measurement are initially different .
For example , the ratio 1 minute : 40 seconds can be reduced by changing the first value to 60 seconds .
Once the units are the same , they can be omitted , and the ratio can be reduced to 3:2 .
On the other hand , there are non - dimensionless ratios , also known as rates .
In chemistry , mass concentration ratios are usually expressed as weight / volume fractions .
For example , a concentration of 3 % w / v usually means 3 g of substance in every 100 mL of solution .
This can not be converted to a dimensionless ratio , as in weight / weight or volume / volume fractions .
TRIANGULAR COORDINATES Section::::Triangular coordinates .
The locations of points relative to a triangle with vertices A , B , and C and sides AB , BC , and CA are often expressed in extended ratio form as triangular coordinates .
In barycentric coordinates , a point with coordinates
formula_20 is the point upon which a weightless sheet of metal in the shape and size of the triangle would exactly balance if weights were put on the vertices , with the ratio of the weights at A and B being formula_21 the ratio of the weights at B and C being formula_22 and therefore the ratio of weights at A and C being formula_23
In trilinear coordinates , a point with coordinates
x
: y : z has perpendicular distances to side BC ( across from vertex A ) and side CA ( across from vertex B ) in the ratio
x : y , distances to side CA and side AB (
across from C ) in the ratio y :
z , and therefore distances to sides BC and AB in the ratio
x : z .
Since all information is expressed in terms of ratios ( the individual numbers denoted by formula_24 x , y , and z have no meaning by themselves ) , a triangle analysis using barycentric or trilinear coordinates applies regardless of the size of the triangle .
SEE ALSO
* Dilution ratio
* Displacement – length ratio * Dimensionless quantity * Financial ratio *
Fold change *
Interval ( music )
* Odds ratio
* Parts - per notation * Price – performance ratio
* Proportionality ( mathematics ) * Ratio distribution
* Ratio estimator
* Rate ( mathematics ) * Rate ratio *
Relative risk
* Rule of three ( mathematics )
* Scale ( map ) * Sex ratio * Slope REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* " Ratio " The Penny Cyclopædia vol .
19 , The Society for the Diffusion of Useful Knowledge ( 1841 ) Charles Knight and Co. ,
London pp .
307ff
* " Proportion " New International Encyclopedia , Vol .
19 2nd ed .
( 1916 )
Dodd Mead & Co. pp270 - 271
* " Ratio and Proportion " Fundamentals of practical mathematics , George Wentworth , David Eugene Smith , Herbert Druery Harper ( 1922 )
Ginn and Co. pp .
55ff
* D.E. Smith , History of Mathematics , vol
2 Dover ( 1958 )
pp .
477ff EXTERNAL LINKS