CECUM
The cecum or caecum ( , plural ceca ; from the Latin caecus meaning blind ) is an intraperitoneal pouch that is considered to be the beginning of the large intestine .
It is typically located on the right side of the body ( the same side of the body as the appendix , to which it is joined ) .
It receives chyme from the ileum , and connects to the ascending colon of the large intestine .
It is separated from the ileum by the ileocecal valve ( ICV ) or Bauhin 's valve .
It is also separated from the colon by the cecocolic junction .
While the cecum is usually intraperitoneal , the ascending colon is retroperitoneal .
In herbivores , the cecum stores food material where bacteria are able to break down the cellulose .
This function no longer occurs in the human cecum ( see appendix ) , so in humans it is simply a dead - end pouch forming a part of the large intestine .
STRUCTURE
DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Structure . Section::::Development .
The cecum and appendix are formed by the enlargement of the postarterial segment of the midgut loop .
The proximal part of the bud grows rapidly to form the cecum .
The lateral wall of the cecum grows much more rapidly than the medial wall , with the result that the point of attachment of the appendix comes to lie on the medial side .
HISTORY ETYMOLOGY Section::::History .
Section::::Etymology .
The term cecum comes from the Latin ( intestinum ) caecum , literally " blind intestine " , here in the sense " blind gut " or " cul de sac " ..
It is a direct translation from Ancient Greek τυφλὸν ( ἔντερον ) - typhlòn ( énteron ) .
Thus the inflammation of the cecum is called typhlitis .
In dissections by the Greek philosophers , the connection between the ileum of the small intestines and the cecum was not fully understood .
Most of the studies of the digestive tract were done on animals and the results were compared to human structures .
The junction between the small intestine and the colon , called the ileocecal valve , is so small in some animals that it was not considered to be a connection between the small and large intestines .
During a dissection , the colon could be traced from the rectum , to the sigmoid colon , through the descending , transverse , and ascending sections .
The cecum is an end point for the colon with a dead - end portion terminating with the appendix .
The connection between the end of the small intestine ( ileum ) and the start ( as viewed from the perspective of food being processed ) of the colon ( cecum ) is now clearly understood , and is called the ileocolic orifice .
The connection between the end of the cecum and the beginning of the ascending colon is called the cecocolic orifice .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
A cecal carcinoid tumor is a carcinoid tumor of the cecum .
An appendiceal carcinoid tumor ( a carcinoid tumor of the appendix ) is sometimes found next to a cecal carcinoid .
Neutropenic enterocolitis ( typhlitis ) is the condition of inflammation of the cecum , primarily caused by bacterial infections .
Over 99 % of the bacteria in the gut are anaerobes , but in the cecum , aerobic bacteria reach high densities .
IN
ANIMALS Section::::In animals .
A cecum is present in most amniote species , and also in lungfish , but not in any living species of amphibian .
In reptiles , it is usually a single median structure , arising from the dorsal side of the large intestine .
Birds typically have two paired ceca , as , unlike other mammals , do hyraxes .
Parrots do not have ceca .
Most mammalian herbivores have a relatively large cecum , hosting a large number of bacteria , which aid in the enzymatic breakdown of plant materials such as cellulose ; in many species , it is considerably wider than the colon .
In contrast , obligatory carnivores , whose diets contain little or no plant material , have a reduced cecum , which is often partially or wholly replaced by the appendix .
Mammalian species which do not develop a cecum include raccoons , bears , and the red panda .
Over 99 % of the bacteria in the gut flora are anaerobes , but in the cecum , aerobic bacteria reach high densities .
Many fish have a number of small outpocketings , called pyloric ceca , along their intestine ; despite the name they are not homologous with the cecum of amniotes , and their purpose is to increase the overall area of the digestive epithelium .
Some invertebrates , such as squid , may also have structures with the same name , but these have no relationship with those of vertebrates .
GALLERY SEE ALSO
* McBurney 's point
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Photo at mgccc.cc.ms.us * — " Abdominal organs in situ . "
* — " The larger intestine . "
* — " The cecum with the distal portion of the ileum . "
* — " Incisions of the Cecum " * Video clip of worms in the Cecum