FERGUSON JENKINS Ferguson Arthur " Fergie " Jenkins CM ( born December 13 , 1942 ) is a Canadian former professional baseball player .
He was a Major League Baseball ( MLB ) pitcher for the Philadelphia Phillies , Chicago Cubs , Texas Rangers , and Boston Red Sox , from 1965 through 1983 .
He also played basketball in the off - season for the Harlem Globetrotters from 1967 to 1969 , and pitched two seasons in Canada for the minor league London Majors following his major league career .
In 1991 , Jenkins became the first Canadian to be inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame .
Jenkins played the majority of his career for the Cubs .
He was a National League ( NL ) and Cubs All - Star for three seasons , and in 1971 , he was the first Canadian and Cubs pitcher to win a Cy Young Award .
He was a 20-game winner for seven seasons , including six consecutive seasons for the Cubs .
He was the NL leader in wins , in 1971 , and the American League ( AL ) leader in wins , in 1974 .
He was also the NL leader in complete games in 1967 , 1970 , and 1971 , and the AL leader in complete games in 1974 .
He led the NL in strikeouts in 1969 and had over 3,000 strikeouts during his career .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Jenkins was born and raised in Chatham , Ontario , the only child of Delores Jackson and Ferguson Jenkins Sr .
His father , a chef and chauffeur , was the son of immigrants from Barbados , while his mother was a descendant of American slaves who escaped through the Underground Railroad before settling in Southwestern Ontario .
Both of his parents were good athletes ; his father was an amateur boxer and semi - professional baseball player for the Chatham Coloured All - Stars .
A talented athlete , Jenkins competed in track and field , ice hockey , and basketball in his school years , lettering five times .
When he began playing bantam baseball in his teens , he started out as a first baseman .
He honed his pitching skills by throwing pieces of coal from a local coal yard , aiming at either an open ice chute or the gaps of passing boxcars .
He was also encouraged to continue working on his pitching by Gene Dziadura , a former shortstop in the Chicago Cubs minor league system , and a Philadelphia Phillies scout .
Many training sessions between the two followed until Jenkins graduated from high school .
PROFESSIONAL BASEBALL
MLB CAREER
EARLY SEASONS Section::::Professional baseball .
Section::::MLB career .
Section::::Early seasons .
In , Jenkins was signed by Philadelphia Phillies scout Tony Lucadello .
Jenkins made his major - league debut as a 22-year - old in , as a relief pitcher .
He was traded the following year to the Chicago Cubs , along with Adolfo Phillips and John Herrnstein , for pitchers Larry Jackson and Bob Buhl .
Jenkins would become one of the best pitchers in the majors .
In his first full year as a starter for the Cubs ( ) , Jenkins recorded twenty wins while posting a 2.80 ERA and 236 strikeouts .
He finished tied for second in the Cy Young Award voting , following Mike McCormick of the San Francisco Giants .
He was also selected for the All - Star Game for the first time that season .
The following year his numbers improved ; once again he won twenty games , his ERA dropped to 2.63 and his strikeout total increased to 260 .
Jenkins established a reputation for achieving his pitching feats and his statistics while spending most of his career pitching in a " hitter 's ballpark"—Wrigley Field in Chicago .
Furthermore , in 1968 , Jenkins lost five of his starts in 1–0 ballgames .
1971 SEASON Section::::1971 season .
Jenkins had his best season in .
On April 6 , 1971 , Jenkins started the Cubs ' opening - day game .
The Cubs defeated the St. Louis Cardinals 2–1 in 10 innings at Wrigley Field .
Jenkins pitched a complete game for the Cubs , and Billy Williams hit a home run in the final inning for the victory .
On September 1 , 1971 , Jenkins threw another complete game against the Montreal Expos and had two home runs .
The Cubs won the game 5–2 .
He was named NL Player of the Month ( for the only time in his career ) in July , with a 6 - 1 record , a 2.14 ERA , and 49 strikeouts .
That season , Jenkins threw a complete game in 30 of 39 starts and received a decision in 37 of them , finishing with a 24–13 record ( .649 ) .
He walked only 37 batters versus 263 strikeouts across 325 innings .
He played in the All - Star Game and finished seventh in MVP voting .
Jenkins also posted a .478 slugging percentage , hitting six home runs and driving in twenty runs in just 115 at - bats .
Jenkins won the 1971 NL Cy Young Award .
Jenkins was the first Cubs pitcher and the first Canadian to win the Cy Young Award ( Quebec native Éric Gagné is the only other Canadian to match the feat ) .
He received 17 of 24 first - place votes .
He was outpitched in several statistical categories by New York Mets pitcher Tom Seaver , but Jenkins pitched in hitter - friendly Wrigley Field and Seaver worked in pitcher - friendly Shea Stadium .
LATER SEASONS Section::::Later seasons .
In 1972 , Jenkins completed his sixth consecutive season with 20 or more wins .
By the middle of the following season , Jenkins expressed that he did not feel like playing baseball anymore .
Jenkins finished the season , but registered a 14–16 win - loss record .
After that season , Jenkins was traded to the Texas Rangers .
Texas manager Billy Martin was pleased with the trade , describing Jenkins as a workhorse and a winner .
In 1974 , Jenkins achieved a personal best 25 wins during the season , setting a Rangers franchise record which still stands .
He finished second in Cy Young Award voting for the second time in his career behind Catfish Hunter in a very close vote ( 90 points to Jenkins 's 75 ) ; surprisingly , Jenkins actually finished ahead of Hunter in MVP voting ( 118 points to Hunter 's 107 ) , and his fifth - place finish on the MVP leader - board was the highest of his career .
He was named AL Comeback Player of the Year .
Jenkins achieved his 250th win against the Oakland Athletics on May 23 , 1980 .
Later that year , during a customs search in Toronto , Jenkins was found possessing 3.0 grams cocaine , 2.2 grams hashish , and 1.75 grams marijuana .
In response , on September 8 , Commissioner Bowie Kuhn suspended him indefinitely .
However , Jenkins ' suspension lasted only two weeks before , in an unprecedented action , an independent arbiter , Raymond Goetz , overturned the suspension and reinstated him and he returned to the league .
Eventually , when he went to trial , the judge gave him an absolute discharge for lack of some evidence .
Jenkins was not further punished by MLB for the incident , as he remained active until his retirement following the season .
It has been suggested that this incident delayed his induction into the Baseball Hall of Fame .
CANADIAN BASEBALL MINOR LEAGUE Section::::Canadian baseball .
Section::::Minor league .
Jenkins continued playing professional baseball in Canada after retiring from MLB in 1983 and pitched two seasons for the London Majors , a minor league team of the Intercounty Major Baseball League , operating in London , Ontario .
POST - BASEBALL Section::::Post - baseball .
Jenkins ran for the Ontario Liberal Party in the 1985 Ontario general election , in the riding of Windsor — Riverside , but placed third behind the NDP 's Dave Cooke .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Jenkins led the league in wins twice , ( 1971 , 1974 )
fewest walks per 9 innings five times , complete games nine times , and home runs allowed seven times .
He led the league in strikeouts once ( 1969 , with 273 ) .
His streak of six straight seasons with 20 or more wins ( 1967–1972 ) is the longest streak in the major leagues since Warren Spahn performed the feat between 1956 and 1961 .
Jenkins , fellow Cub Greg Maddux , Curt Schilling , and Pedro Martínez are the only major league pitchers to ever record more than 3,000 strikeouts with fewer than 1,000 walks .
Only Robin Roberts and Jamie Moyer allowed more home runs over a career than Jenkins .
Jenkins achieved his 3000th strikeout on May 25 , 1982 against Garry Templeton .
He is considered the anchor of the 12 Black Aces , a group of pitchers with at least twenty wins in one season .
HONORS AND AWARDS Section::::Honors and awards .
In Jenkins , then with the Texas Rangers , became the first baseball player to win the Lou Marsh Trophy , an award given annually to Canada 's top athlete .
He was also named the Canadian Press male athlete of the year four times ( , 1968 , 1971 , and 1974 ) .
Jenkins was inducted into the Canadian Baseball Hall of Fame in , and in , became the first Canadian ever elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown , New York .
The 1991 Major League Baseball All - Star Game , held in Toronto , was dedicated to Jenkins ; he threw out the ceremonial first pitch to conclude the pregame ceremonies .
Jenkins was inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame in 1995 , and was inducted onto Canada 's Walk of Fame in 2001 .
He was appointed the commissioner of the now - defunct Canadian Baseball League in 2003 ; the league 's Jenkins Cup went missing when the league folded and has been missing ever since .
He was inducted into the Texas Rangers Hall of Fame in .
In 2011 , the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame created the Ferguson Jenkins Heritage Award in his honour to commemorate those one - of - a - kind events or special moments in time that so embellish the long history of sports in Ontario .
On December 17 , 1979 , he was made a Member of the Order of Canada for being " Canada 's best - known major - league baseball player " .
Governor General Michaëlle Jean officiated at his investiture into the Order , which finally occurred on May 4 , 2007 : over 27 years after he was appointed .
On May 3 , 2009 , the Cubs retired jersey number 31 in honor of both Jenkins and Greg Maddux .
On December 13 , 2010 , Canada Post announced that Jenkins would be honoured in Canada with his own postage stamp .
The stamp would be issued in February 2011 to commemorate Black History Month .
SEE ALSO
* 3,000 strikeout club
* List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders * List of Major League Baseball players from Canada
* List of Major League Baseball annual strikeout leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career hit batsmen leaders * List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders
* List of members of Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame REFERENCES AND NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Fergie Jenkins Foundation
* BaseballLibrary.com – Biography * Sidebar " Texas Ranger Hall of Famer " * National Film Board of Canada documentary
* History by the Minute Ferguson Jenkins