ISLE OF DOGS
The Isle of Dogs , locally referred to as the island , is a geographic area made up of Millwall , Cubitt Town , Canary Wharf and parts of Blackwall , Limehouse and Poplar .
It is in the East End of London and is bounded on three sides ( east , south and west ) by one of the largest meanders in the River Thames .
The northern boundary has never been clearly or consistently defined but many accept it to be the ( former ) line of the West India South Dock .
The name Isle of Dogs had no official status until 1987 , with the creation of the Isle of Dogs Neighbourhood by Tower Hamlets London Borough Council .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
The soil is alluvial and silty in nature , underlaid by clay or mud , with a peat layer in places .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The first known written mention of the Isle of Dogs is in the ' Letters & Papers of Henry VIII ' .
In Volume 3 : 1519 - 1523 .
2 October 1520 .
No . 1009 – ' Shipping ' , there is a list of purchases , which includes : A hose for the Mary George , in dock at the Isle of Dogs , 10d
The 1898 edition of Brewer 's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable attributes the name : " So called from being the receptacle of the greyhounds of Edward III .
Some say it is a corruption of the Isle of Ducks , and that it is so called in ancient records from the number of wild fowl inhabiting the marshes .
" Other sources discount this , believing these stories to all derive from the antiquarian John Strype , and believe it might come from one of the following : * a nickname of contempt : Ben Jonson and Thomas Nashe wrote a satirical play in 1597 , which was a mocking attack on the island of Great Britain , titled The Isle of Dogs , which offended some in the nobility .
Jonson was imprisoned for a year ; Nashe avoided arrest by fleeing the area .
Samuel Pepys referred to the " unlucky Isle of Dogs . "
*
the presence of Dutch engineers reclaiming the land from a disastrous flood .
* the presence of gibbets on the foreshore facing Greenwich .
* a yeoman farmer called Brache , this being an old word for a type of hunting dog .
* the original docks located here were used for firewood importation and the phrase is linked to " fire dogs " , the cross - beams beneath a hearth fire , hence Isle of Dogs .
* the dogs of a later king , Henry VIII , who also kept deer in Greenwich Park .
Again it is thought that his hunting dogs might have been kept in derelict farm buildings on the Island .
Now known as the area West Ferry Circus .
* Isle of Dykes , which then got corrupted over the years .
DISTRICTS Section::::Districts .
The whole area was once simply known as Stepney Marsh ; Anton van den Wyngaerde 's " Panorama of London " dated 1543 depicts and refers to the Isle of Dogs .
Records show that ships preparing to carry the English royal household to Calais in 1520 docked at the southern bank of the Island .
The name Isle of Dogges occurs in the Thamesis Descriptio of 1588 , applied to a small island in the south - western part of the peninsula .
The name is next applied to the Isle of Dogs Fam ( originally known as Pomfret Manor ) shown on a map of 1683 .
At the same time , the area was variously known as Isle of Dogs or the Blackwell levels .
By 1855 , it was incorporated within the parish of Poplar under the aegis of the Poplar Board of Works .
This was incorporated into the Metropolitan Borough of Poplar on its formation in 1900 .
After the building of the Docks ( especially the West India Docks and the adjacent City Canal ) , and with an increasing population , locals increasingly referred to the area as The Island .
This area includes Millwall , Cubitt Town , and Blackwall .
The south of the isle opposite Greenwich was once known as North Greenwich , now applied to the area around the Millennium Dome on the Greenwich Peninsula .
Between 1986 and 1992 it enjoyed a brief formal existence , as the name Isle of Dogs was applied to one of seven neighbourhoods to which power was devolved from the council .
The neighbourhood was later abolished .
It was the site of the highest concentration of council housing in England but is now best known as the location of the Canary Wharf office complex .
One Canada Square , also known as the Canary Wharf Tower , is the second tallest habitable building in Britain at .
The peninsula is an area of social extremes , comprising some of the most prosperous and most deprived areas of the country ; in 2004 , nearby Blackwall was the 81st most deprived ward in England out of over 8,000 , while the presence of Canary Wharf gives the area one of the highest average incomes in the UK .
Lincoln Plaza was the 2016 winner of the Carbuncle Cup for the year 's " worst new building " and The Times described it as " mediocre at best , ugly at worst " .
HISTORY ORIGINS Section::::History .
Section::::Origins .
The Isle of Dogs is situated some distance downriver from the City of London .
The area was originally sparsely populated marshland before its drainage and planting in the 13th century .
A catastrophic flood occurred in 1488 , resulting in the area returning to its previous marshy condition .
This was not reversed until Dutch engineers re - drained it in the 17th century .
One road led across the Marshes to an ancient ferry , at Ferry Road .
There was rich grazing on the marsh , and cattle were slaughtered in fields known as the Killing Fields , south of Poplar High Street .
The western side of the island was known as Marsh Wall , and the district became known as Millwall with the building of the docks , and from the number of windmills constructed along the top of the flood defence .
DOCKS Section::::Docks .
The urbanisation of the Isle of Dogs took place in the 19th century following the construction of the West India Docks , which opened in 1802 .
This heralded the area 's most successful period , when it became an important centre for trade .
The East India Docks were subsequently opened in 1806 , followed by Millwall Dock in 1868 .
By the 1880s , the casual employment system caused Dock workers to unionise under Ben Tillett and John Burns .
This led to a demand for 6d per hour ( 2.5p ) , and an end to casual labour in the docks .
After a bitter struggle , the London Dock Strike of 1889 was settled with victory for the strikers , and established a national movement for the unionisation of casual workers .
The three dock systems were unified in 1909 when the Port of London Authority took control of the docks .
With the docks stretching across from East to West with locks at each end , the Isle of Dogs could now once again almost be described as a genuine island .
Dock workers settled on the " island " as the docks grew in importance , and by 1901 , 21,000 people lived there , largely dependent on the river trade on the Isle as well as in Greenwich and Deptford across the river to the south and west .
The Isle of Dogs was connected to the rest of London by the London and Blackwall Railway , opened in 1840 and progressively extended thereafter .
In 1902 , the ferry to Greenwich was replaced by the construction of the Greenwich foot tunnel , and Island Gardens park was laid out in 1895 providing views across the river .
The London and Blackwall Railway closed in 1926 .
Until the building of the Docklands Light Railway in 1987 , the only public transport accessing and exiting the Island consisted of buses using its perimeter roads .
These were frequently and substantially delayed by the movement of up to four bridges which allowed ships access to the West India Docks and Millwall Docks .
The insular nature of the Island caused its separateness from the rest of London , and its unique nature .
During World War II , the docks were a key target for the German Luftwaffe and were heavily bombed .
A number of local civilians were killed in the bombing and extensive destruction was caused on the ground , with many warehouses being totally destroyed and much of the dock system being put out of action for an extended period .
Unexploded bombs from this period continue to be discovered today .
Anti - aircraft batteries were based on Mudchute Farm ; their concrete bases remain today .
After the war , the docks underwent a brief resurgence and were even upgraded in 1967 .
However , with the advent of containerisation , which the docks could not handle , they became obsolete soon afterwards .
The docks closed progressively during the 1970s , with the last – the West India and Millwall docks – closing down in 1980 .
This left the area in a severely dilapidated state , with large areas being derelict and abandoned .
INDUSTRY Section::::Industry .
The Docks brought with them many associated industries , such as flour and sugar processing , and also ship building .
On 31 January 1858 the largest ship of that time , the SS Great Eastern designed by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , was launched from the yard of Messrs Scott , Russell & Co , of Millwall .
The length was too big for the river
so the ship had to be launched sideways .
Due to the technical difficulties of the launch this was the last big ship to be built on the Island and the industry fell into a decline .
However , parts of the launching slipway and plate works have been preserved in situ and may be seen close to Masthouse Terrace Pier .
LONDON DOCKLANDS DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION Section::::London Docklands Development Corporation .
The Isle of Dogs ' economic problems led to mass unemployment among the former dockyard workers and caused serious social deprivation .
Ted Johns , a local community campaigner , and his supporters , in protest at the lack of social provision from the state , proclaimed a unilateral declaration of independence for the area from the United Kingdom as the Republic of the Isles of Dogs and setting up a so - called ' Island Council ' with Johns himself as its elected president and blocked the two swing - bridges providing the only access to the area by road .
Successive Labour and Conservative governments proposed a number of action plans during the 1970s but it was not until 1981 that the London Docklands Development Corporation ( LDDC ) was established to redevelop the area .
The Isle of Dogs became part of an enterprise zone , which covered 1.95 km² of land and encompassed the West India , Millwall and East India Docks .
New housing was built , as was new office space and new transport infrastructure .
This included the Docklands Light Railway and later the Jubilee line extension , which eventually brought access to the London Underground to the area for the first time .
Since its construction in 1987 - 1991 , the area has been dominated by the expanding Canary Wharf development with over of office and retail space having been created ; 93,000 now work in Canary Wharf alone .
LDDC LEGACY Section::::LDDC legacy .
It has been stated by some , that the redevelopment has not benefited the long - term residents as much as it might , with accusations of a " land grab " of riverside sites for private apartment blocks during the period of relaxation of planning conditions under the LDDC .
Some tensions remain , as in most areas of central London , between the close - knit island community and professionals who have more recently moved to the area .
Today , this revolves around the former 's need for family homes , against further development of small high - priced apartments .
POLITICS Section::::Politics .
The Island achieved notoriety in 1993 when Derek Beackon of the British National Party became a councillor for Millwall ward , in a by election .
This was the culmination of years of resentment by local residents of perceived neglect by both Liberal Democrat and Labour Party politicians .
Labour regained the ward in the full council election of May 1994 , and held all three seats until a further by election in September 2004 .
INCIDENTS Section::::Incidents .
On 9 February 1996 , the IRA detonated a truck bomb near South Quay DLR station on the Isle of Dogs that killed two people and injured more than a hundred others .
EDUCATION Section::::Education .
There are four state primary schools located on the Isle of Dogs – Cubitt Town Junior School , Arnhem Wharf , Harbinger School and St Edmunds .
There is also an independent primary school , River House Montessori , located near South Quay .
George Green 's School is a secondary school and Specialist Humanities School at the southern tip of the island .
Canary Wharf College , is a free school on the Island which covers primary , secondary and sixth form education .
TRANSPORT NEAREST PLACES
* Deptford * Greenwich
* Limehouse * Poplar * Rotherhithe * Stepney * Bow * Bromley by Bow
*
Canning Town LONDON UNDERGROUND AND DLR STATIONS Section::::Transport .
Section::::London Underground and DLR stations .
The nearest London Underground station is Canary Wharf on the Jubilee line .
Key areas including Regent 's Park , The West End , Westminster , South Bank , Millennium Dome and the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park , are all within 20 minutes of Canary Wharf by Tube .
The DLR runs north - south through the Isle of Dogs .
Docklands Light Railway stations are West India Quay , Canary Wharf , Heron Quays , South Quay , Crossharbour , Mudchute and Island Gardens .
Key areas including the City of London , Tower Hill and Greenwich are all within 20 minutes of the Isle of Dogs by DLR .
CROSSRAIL
Section::::Crossrail .
Canary Wharf Crossrail station is currently under construction and is due to open in 2018 .
Situated at the north of the Island , it will provide high - frequency , fast connections to the heart of the West End , Paddington Station , Heathrow Airport and Abbey Wood .
LONDON BUS ROUTES *
London Buses route 135 *
London Buses route 277 *
London Buses route
D3
* London Buses
route D6
* London Buses route D7
* London Buses route D8
* London Buses route N550 RIVER BUS SERVICES Section::::River bus services .
Regular commuter boat services serve both Masthouse Terrace Pier and Canary Wharf Pier on the Isle of Dogs .
The Thames Clippers provides regular commuter services to Woolwich Arsenal Pier , Greenwich Pier in the east , and the City of London including St. Katherine 's Dock , Tower Bridge , , Greater London Authority building , Tate Modern , Blackfriars , as well as the West End of London in the west on the commuter service .
There is also a connecting shuttle service to Rotherhithe and the Tate to Tate service from Tate Modern to Tate Britain via London Eye .
From Summer 2007 , the service has been enhanced with express boats from central London to the O2 Arena ( former Millennium Dome ) .
PEDESTRIAN AND CYCLISTS Section::::Pedestrian and cyclists .
The Thames Path National Trail runs along the riverside .
At the southern end of the Isle of Dogs , the Greenwich foot tunnel provides pedestrian access to Greenwich , across the river .
National Cycle Network route 1 runs through the foot tunnel ( although cycles must not be ridden in the tunnel itself ) .
AIRPORT AND HELIPAD Section::::Airport and helipad .
The nearest airport is London City Airport , which is 25 minutes away from Canary Wharf by DLR .
There is also a helipad situated on the west of the Island and next to Ferguson 's Wharf , which is privately run by Vanguard .
IN THE MEDIA Section::::In the media .
The Isle of Dogs was the title of an early play by Ben Jonson and Thomas Nashe , briefly performed in 1597 and then thoroughly suppressed as slanderous .
T.S. Eliot 's The Waste Land contains the lines " The barges wash / Drifting logs /
Down Greenwich reach /
Past the Isle of Dogs . "
In modern times the Isle of Dogs has provided locations for many blockbuster films , including the opening scenes of the James Bond film The World Is Not Enough , and more recently Batman Begins ,
The Constant Gardener , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , and Love Actually .
The Isle of Dogs featured heavily in the 1980 British film The Long Good Friday .
In
28 Weeks Later , the Isle of Dogs is the primary location of the film , being the only secure and quarantined area in all of Britain suitable for recivilization after a massive epidemic of the " Rage Virus " kills the entire population of Britain .
The Isle of Dogs was also the setting for the 1986 Channel 4 series Prospects starring Gary Olsen and Brian Bovell .
While shooting in East London for his film Fantastic Mr. Fox , Wes Anderson spotted a road sign directing to the Isle of Dogs .
This sparked his imagination , becoming an eponymous source of inspiration for his animated 2018 film Isle of Dogs .
SEE ALSO * Crossrail * Honourable East India Company *
Island History Trust
* Islands in the River Thames * Museum in Docklands
* Samuda Estate * SS Robin * Burrells Wharf REFERENCES AND NOTES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Eve Hostettler , The Isle of Dogs : 1066–1918 : A Brief History , Volume I ( London :
Island History Trust , 2000 )
* Eve Hostettler , The Isle of Dogs : The Twentieth Century : A Brief History , Volume II
( London :
Island History Trust , 2001 )
EXTERNAL LINKS * Island Heritage & History Trust
* Isle of Dogs landscape architecture