GIANT ( 1956 FILM )
Giant is a 1956 American epic Western drama film , directed by George Stevens from a screenplay adapted by Fred Guiol and Ivan Moffat from Edna Ferber 's 1952 novel .
The film stars Elizabeth Taylor , Rock Hudson and James Dean and features Carroll Baker , Jane Withers , Chill Wills , Mercedes McCambridge , Dennis Hopper , Sal Mineo , Rod Taylor , Elsa Cardenas and Earl Holliman .
Giant was the last of James Dean 's three films as a leading actor , and earned him his second and last Academy Award nomination – he was killed in a car accident before the film was released .
Nick Adams was called in to do some voice dubbing for Dean 's role .
In 2005 , the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Wealthy Texas rancher Jordan " Bick " Benedict Jr. travels to Maryland to buy a horse .
There he meets and courts socialite Leslie Lynnton , who ends a budding relationship with British diplomat Sir David Karfrey and marries Bick after a whirlwind romance .
They return to Texas to start their life together on the family ranch , Reata , where Bick 's older sister Luz runs the household .
Leslie meets Jett Rink , a local handyman , and he becomes infatuated with her .
On a ride with Jett , Leslie discovers the local Mexican workers ' living conditions are terrible .
After tending to one of the Mexican children , Angel Obregon II , she presses Bick to take steps to improve their condition .
When riding Leslie 's beloved horse , War Winds , Luz expresses her hostility for Leslie by cruelly digging in her spurs .
War Winds bucks her off , killing her .
She leaves Jett a small piece of land on the Benedict ranch .
Bick , who despises Jett , tries to buy back the land , but Jett refuses to sell .
Jett makes the land his home and names it Little Reata .
Over the next ten years , Leslie and Bick have twins , Jordan III ( " Jordy " ) and Judy , and later have a daughter , Luz II .
After discovering oil within a footprint left by Leslie , Jett begins digging and strikes oil on his land .
He then drives to the Benedict house , covered in crude , to proclaim to the Benedicts that he will be richer than them .
Jett makes a pass at Leslie , and this leads to a brief fistfight with Bick before he drives off .
Jett 's oil drilling company prospers over the years , and he tries to persuade Bick to let him drill for oil on Reata .
Bick is determined to preserve his family legacy , however , and refuses .
Meanwhile , tensions arise regarding the now - grown children .
Bick insists that Jordy succeed him and run the ranch , but Jordy wants to become a doctor .
Leslie wants Judy to attend finishing school in Switzerland , but Judy wants to study animal husbandry at Texas Tech .
Both children succeed in pursuing their own vocations , each asking one parent to convince the other to let them have their way .
At the family Christmas party , Bick tries to interest Judy 's new husband , Bob Dace , in working on the ranch after he returns from the recently declared war , but Dace refuses .
Jett arrives and persuades Bick to allow oil production on his land .
Realizing that his children will not take over the ranch when he retires , Bick agrees .
Luz II , now in her teens , starts flirting with Jett .
Once oil production starts on the ranch , the Benedict family becomes even wealthier and more powerful .
Meanwhile , the now - grown Angel is killed in the war , and his body is sent home for burial .
The Benedict –
Rink rivalry comes to a head when the Benedicts discover that Luz II and the much older Jett have been dating .
At a huge party given by Jett in his own honor at his hotel in Austin , he orders his staff not to serve Jordy 's Mexican wife , Juana .
Enraged , Jordy tries to start a fight with Jett , who beats him and has him thrown out .
Fed up , Bick challenges Jett to a fight .
Drunk and almost incoherent , Jett leads the way to a wine storage room .
Seeing that Jett is in no state to defend himself , Bick lowers his fists , and instead topples Jett 's wine cellar shelves .
The Benedict family leaves the party .
Jett staggers into the banquet hall , takes his seat of honor , and passes out on the table .
Later , Luz II sees Jett drunkenly bemoaning his unrequited love for Leslie .
Luz II leaves , heartbroken , as Jett falls over onto the floor .
The next day , on their way home , the Benedicts stop at a diner with a sign at the counter saying , " We reserve the right to refuse service to anyone , " which during the mid - twentieth century in the southern United States was often taken as meaning that ethnic minorities were not welcome .
The racist owner , Sarge , insults Juana and her and Jordy 's son Jordan IV .
When the owner goes on to eject a Mexican family from the diner , Bick tells Sarge to leave them alone .
Bick fights Sarge , who beats him , but then takes down the sign and tosses it on top of Bick .
Back at the ranch , Bick laments that he has failed to preserve the Benedict family legacy .
Leslie replies that , after the fight in the diner , he was her hero for the first time , and that she considers their own family legacy a success .
They look at their two grandchildren , one white and one Hispanic .
CAST Section::::Cast .
Nick Adams recorded some of James Dean 's dialogue after Dean 's death .
PRODUCTION
WRITING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Writing .
Ferber 's character of Jordan Benedict II and her description of the Reata Ranch were based on Robert " Bob " J. Kleberg Jr. ( 1896–1974 ) and the King Ranch in Kingsville , Texas .
Like the over half - million - acre Reata , King Ranch comprises 825,000 acres ( 3,340 km ; 1,289 sq mi ) and includes portions of six Texas counties , including most of Kleberg County and much of Kenedy County , and was largely a livestock ranch before the discovery of oil .
The fictional character Jett Rink was inspired partly by the extraordinary rags - to - riches life story of the wildcatter oil tycoon Glenn Herbert McCarthy ( 1907–1988 ) .
Author Edna Ferber met McCarthy when she was a guest at his Houston , Texas , Shamrock Hotel ( known as the Shamrock Hilton after 1955 ) , the fictional Emperador Hotel in both the book and the film .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The Australian actor Rod Taylor was cast in one of his earliest Hollywood roles after being seen in an episode of Studio 57 , " The Black Sheep 's Daughter " .
Stevens gave Hudson a choice between Elizabeth Taylor and Grace Kelly to play his leading lady , Leslie .
Hudson chose Taylor .
After James Dean 's death late in production , Nick Adams overdubbed some of Dean 's lines , which were nearly inaudible , as Rink 's voice .
George Stevens had a reputation as a meticulous film editor , and the film spent an entire year in the editing room .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The film begins with Jordan " Bick " Benedict , played by Hudson , arriving at Ardmore , Maryland , to purchase a stallion from the Lynnton family .
The first part of the picture was actually shot in Albemarle County , Virginia , and used the Keswick , Virginia , railroad station as the Ardmore railway depot .
Much of the subsequent film , depicting " Reata " , the Benedict ranch , was shot in and around the town of Marfa , Texas , and
the remote , dry plains found nearby , with interiors filmed at the Warner Brothers studios in Burbank , California .
The " Jett Rink Day " parade and airport festivities were filmed at the Burbank Airport .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
During the restaurant fight scene at the film 's end , the jukebox plays The Yellow Rose of Texas by Mitch Miller .
That version of the song happened to be the # 1 pop single on the Billboard Magazine Best Sellers chart at the time of James Dean 's death .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
The movie is an epic portrayal of a powerful Texas ranching family challenged by changing times and the coming of big oil .
A major subplot concerns the racism of many Anglo - European Americans in Texas during the mid twentieth century and the discriminatory social segregation enforced against Mexican Americans .
In the first third of the film , Bick and Luz treat the Mexicans who work on their ranch condescendingly , which upsets the more socially - conscious Leslie .
Bick eventually comes to realize his moral shortcomings – in a climactic scene at a roadside diner he loses a fistfight to the racist owner , but earns Leslie 's respect for defending the human rights of his brown - skinned daughter - in - law and grandson .
Another subplot involves Leslie 's own striving for women 's equal rights as she defies the patriarchal social order , asserting herself and expressing her own opinions when the men talk .
She protests being expected to suppress her beliefs in deference to Bick 's ; this conflict leads to their temporary separation .
Giant is Edna Ferber 's third novel dealing with racism ; the first was Show Boat ( 1926 ) , which was adapted into the legendary Broadway musical Show Boat ( 1927 ) ; her second was Cimarron ( 1929 ) , which was adapted to film twice , in 1931 and 1960 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Giant premiered in New York City on October 10 , 1956 , with the local DuMont station , WABD , televising the arrival of cast and crew , as well as other celebrities and studio chief Jack L. Warner .
The picture was released to nationwide distribution on November 24 , 1956 .
Capitol Records , which had issued some of Dimitri Tiomkin 's music from the soundtrack ( with the composer conducting the Warner Brothers studio orchestra ) on an LP , later digitally remastered the tracks and issued them on CD , including two tracks conducted by Ray Heindorf .
Both versions used a monaural blend of the multi - channel soundtrack recording .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Giant won praise from both critics and the public , and according to the Texan author , Larry McMurtry , was especially popular with Texans , even though it was sharply critical of Texan society .
Bosley Crowther of the New York Times wrote that " George Stevens takes three hours and seventeen minutes to put his story across .
That 's a heap of time to go on about Texas , but Mr. Stevens has made a heap of film . "
He continued to write that " Giant , for all its complexity , is a strong contender for the year 's top - film award . "
Variety 's " Hift " claimed that Giant was " for the most part , an excellent film which registers strongly on all levels , whether it 's in its breathtaking panoramic shots of the dusty Texas plains ; the personal , dramatic impact of the story itself , or the resounding message it has to impart . "
TV Guide gave the film four stars out of five , saying of James Dean 's performance " This was the last role in Dean 's all - too - brief career – he was dead when the film was released – and his presence ran away with the film .
He performs his role in the overwrought method manner of the era , and the rest of the cast seems to be split between awe of his talent and disgust over his indulgence . "
The film received a 95 % approval rating on the review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes , based on 39 reviews , with an average rating of 7.6/10 .
Less praising was director and critic Francois Truffaut , who in an early review called Giant a " silly , solemn , sly , parternalistic , demagogic movie without any boldness , rich in all sorts of concessions , pettiness , and contemptible actions . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The movie earned $ 12 million in rentals in North America during its initial release .
It was one of the biggest hits of the year in France , with admissions of 3,723,209 .
ACCOLADES
ACADEMY AWARDS
Section::::Accolades .
Section::::Academy Awards .
Giant won the Academy Award for Best Director and was nominated nine other times , twice for Best Actor in a Leading Role ( James Dean and Rock Hudson ) .
The other nominations came in the categories of Best Actress in a Supporting Role ( Mercedes McCambridge ) ;
Best Art Direction – Set Decoration , Color ( Boris Leven , Ralph S. Hurst ) ; Best Costume Design , Color ; Best Film Editing ; Best Music , Scoring of a Dramatic or Comedy Picture ; Best Picture ; and Best Writing , Best Screenplay – Adapted .
OTHER HONORS American Film Institute recognition
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies – # 82 SEE ALSO * List of American films of 1956 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS