HILTON WORLDWIDE Hilton Worldwide Holdings Inc. , formerly Hilton Hotels Corporation , is an American multinational hospitality company that manages and franchises a broad portfolio of hotels and resorts .
Founded by Conrad Hilton in 1919 , the corporation is now led by Christopher J. Nassetta .
Hilton is headquartered in Tysons Corner , Virginia .
As of September 2018 , its portfolio includes more than 5,500 properties ( including timeshare properties ) with over 894,000 rooms in 109 countries and territories .
Prior to their December 2013 IPO , Hilton was ranked as the 36th largest privately held company in the United States by Forbes .
Hilton has 15 brands across different market segments , including Conrad Hotels & Resorts , Canopy by Hilton , Curio - A Collection by Hilton , Hilton Hotels & Resorts , DoubleTree by Hilton , Embassy Suites Hotels , Hilton Garden Inn , Hampton by Hilton , Homewood Suites by Hilton , Home2 Suites by Hilton , Hilton Grand Vacations , Waldorf Astoria Hotels & Resorts , Tru by Hilton , Tapestry Collection by Hilton , and Motto by Hilton .
On December 12 , 2013 , Hilton again became a public company , raising an estimated $ 2.35 billion in its second IPO .
At the time , The Blackstone Group held a 45.8 percent stake in the company .
In October 2016 , HNA Group agreed to acquire a 25 percent equity interest in Hilton from Blackstone .
The transaction was expected to close in the first quarter of 2017 .
Hilton 's largest stockholders are HNA Group , Blackstone , and Wellington Management Group , which own 25 % , 15.2 % , and 6.7 % of Hilton common stock respectively .
Hilton was founded by Conrad Hilton in Cisco , Texas , in 1919 and had its headquarters in Beverly Hills , California , from 1969 until 2009 .
In August 2009 , the company moved to Tysons Corner , unincorporated Fairfax County , Virginia , near McLean . HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1919 , Conrad Hilton purchased his first hotel , the 40-room Mobley Hotel in Cisco , Texas , and bought additional Texas hotels as years passed .
In 1925 , the Dallas Hilton became the first hotel to use the Hilton name .
In 1927 , Hilton expanded to Waco , Texas , where he opened the first hotel with air - conditioning in public areas and cold running water .
In 1943 , Hilton purchased the Roosevelt Hotel and the Plaza Hotel in New York , establishing the first hospitality company to span the contiguous United States .
The company incorporated in 1946 as the Hilton Hotels Corporation , and subsequently began public trading of shares on the New York Stock Exchange .
In 1947 , the Roosevelt Hotel became the first hotel in the world to have televisions in its rooms .
Hilton International was founded a few years later , in 1949 , with the opening of the Caribe Hilton Hotel in Puerto Rico .
Barman Ramon " Monchito " Marreno claimed he created the piña colada cocktail at this resort .
Hilton purchased the Waldorf Astoria New York in the same year .
The Hotels Statler Company was acquired in 1954 for $ 111 million in what was then the world 's most expensive real estate transaction .
One year later , Hilton created the world 's first central reservations office , titled " HILCRON " .
The reservations team in 1955 consisted of eight members on staff booking reservations for any of Hilton 's then 28 hotels .
Reservations agents used the " availability board " to track records .
The chalk board measured by and allowed HILCRON to make over 6,000 reservations in 1955 .
Bookings could be made for any Hilton via telephone , telegram , or Teletype .
Later in 1955 , Hilton launched a program to ensure every hotel room would include air conditioning .
In late 1955 , Hilton opened the first post – World War II property in Istanbul .
Hilton is credited with pioneering the airport hotel concept with the opening of the San Francisco Airport Hilton in 1959 .
In 1965 , Hilton launched Lady Hilton , the first hotel concept created specifically for women guests .
To appeal to female travelers , a number of properties offered floors occupied by only women along with distinct amenities for their usage .
In 1969 , the first DoubleTree Hotel opened .
However , Hilton was not affiliated with the brand until its acquisition of the parent company in 1999 .
Hilton purchased the Flamingo Las Vegas in 1970 , which would become the first in the domestic gaming business to be listed on the NYSE .
In 1979 , founder Conrad Hilton died at the age of 91 .
Hilton Hotels Corporation later created the Conrad Hotels brand in honor of Hilton .
Hilton Honors ( formerly Hilton HHonors ) , the company 's guest loyalty program , was initiated in 1987 .
In 1994 , the Honors surpassed competing hotel loyalty programs by offering members both hotel credit points and airline credit miles .
The company has been a sponsor of the United States Olympic Team .
TWO CHAINS WITH ONE NAME Section::::Two chains with one name .
The company spun off its international operations into a separately traded company on December 1 , 1964 , known as "
Hilton International Co. " It was acquired in 1967 by Trans World Corp. , the holding company for Trans World Airlines .
In 1986 , it was sold to UAL Corp. , the holding company for United Airlines , which became Allegis Corp. in an attempt to re - incarnate itself as a full - service travel company , encompassing Westin Hotels and Hertz rental cars in addition to Hilton International and United Airlines .
In 1987 , after a corporate putsch , the renamed UAL Corp. sold Hilton International to Ladbroke Group plc , a British leisure and gambling company , which , in May 1999 , adopted the name " Hilton Group plc . "
As a result , there were two separate , fully independent companies operating hotels under the Hilton name .
Those Hilton Hotels outside the U.S. were , until 2006 , styled as " Hilton International " hotels .
Because the two chains were contractually forbidden to operate hotels in the other 's territory under the Hilton name , for many years hotels run by Hilton International in the U.S. were called Vista International Hotels , while hotels operated by the American arm of Hilton outside the U.S. were named Conrad Hotels .
In 1997 , to minimize longtime consumer confusion , the American and British Hilton companies adopted a joint marketing agreement under which they shared the same logos , promoted each other 's brands and maintained joint reservation systems .
At that point , the Vista chain was phased out , while Conrad has been restyled as one of the luxury brands of Hilton ( along with the Waldorf - Astoria Collection ) and operates hotels within the US as well as abroad .
In 1971 , Hilton acquired International Leisure Company , including the Las Vegas Hilton and Flamingo Hilton .
In 1998 , Hilton spun off its gaming operations into a separate , publicly held company called Park Place Entertainment (
later Caesars Entertainment , Inc. ) In 1999 , Hilton acquired Promus Hotel Corporation , which included the DoubleTree , Red Lion , Embassy Suites , Hampton Inn and Homewood Suites brands .
21ST CENTURY Section::::21st century .
In 2001 , Hilton agreed to sell Red Lion to WestCoast Hospitality .
On December 29 , 2005 , Hilton Hotels Corporation agreed to re - acquire the Hilton International chain from its British owner , Hilton Group plc , for £ 3.3 billion ( $ 5.71 billion ) .
As well as bringing the two Hilton companies back together as a single entity , this deal also included Hilton plc properties operating as Conrad Hotels , Scandic Hotels and LivingWell Health Clubs .
On February 23 , 2006 , the deal closed , making Hilton Hotels the world 's fifth largest hotel operator in number of rooms .
Hilton Group PLC ( headquartered in the UK ) then renamed itself Ladbrokes plc .
Scandic Hotels was sold the next year on March 1 to EQT Partners .
On July 3 , 2007 , Hilton Hotels Corp. agreed to an all - cash buyout from the Blackstone Group LP in a $ 26 billion ( including debt ) deal that would make Blackstone the world 's largest hotel owner .
At $ 47.50 per share , the buyout price was 32 percent higher than the closing value of a share of Hilton stock on July 3 .
The deal was the culmination of a year of on and off discussions with Blackstone .
In October 2007 , Christopher J. Nassetta was appointed President and Chief Executive Officer of Hilton .
In February 2009 , Hilton Hotels Corp. announced that its headquarters were moving from Beverly Hills to Fairfax County , Virginia .
While Blackstone saw an opportunity to streamline the company and push Hilton 's expansion overseas when Blackstone pursued Hilton in 2006 and 2007 , the buyout saddled the company with $ 20 billion of debt just as the economy was turning down .
The debt had very liberal terms , so there was no danger of default , but when travel slowed , the company suffered .
In April 2010 , Hilton and Blackstone restructured the debt .
Blackstone invested a further $ 800 million of equity and the debt was reduced to $ 16 billion .
Hilton returned to being a public company on December 12 , 2013 .
This second IPO in the company 's history raised an estimated $ 2.35 billion .
The Blackstone Group retained a 45.8 % stake in the company .
The company announced in February 2016 that Hilton would turn its hotel holdings into a real estate investment trust .
Prior to making the announcement , the company went to the IRS for approval .
In February 2016 , Hilton announced its intention to spin off its timeshare and real estate businesses , creating three independent public companies .
The spin - offs of Park Hotels & Resorts and Hilton Grand Vacations were completed in January 2017 .
As of 2018 , the company is a fully independent publicly traded company ( just like it pre - buyout days ) after Blackstone and HNA exits BRANDS
LUXURY * Conrad Hotels & Resorts * Waldorf Astoria Hotels and Resorts FULL SERVICE
* Curio Collection by Hilton
* Hilton Hotels & Resorts ( Flagship Brand of Hilton Worldwide )
* Tapestry Collection by Hilton
* DoubleTree by Hilton FOCUSED SERVICE
* Motto by Hilton
* Hampton by Hilton
* Hilton Garden Inn
* Tru by Hilton
ALL SUITES
* Embassy Suites by Hilton
* Home2 Suites by Hilton
* Homewood Suites by Hilton LIFESTYLE
* Canopy by Hilton
TIMESHARE
*
Hilton Grand Vacations FORMER
* Coral by Hilton
* Denizen Hotels
*
Lady Hilton
* Scandic Hotels FRANCHISING Section::::Brands .
Section::::Franchising .
As of 2013 , about 70 % of the rooms branded under Hilton were franchised to independent operators and companies .
During its 2007–2013 ownership of Hilton , Blackstone Group pursued a strategy of predominantly expanding Hilton 's reach through franchise agreements , while relatively few new properties were actually operated by Hilton .
Hence , the proportion of franchised rooms grew significantly during this period .
The practice of franchising is popular within the hospitality industry among most major hotel chains , as the parent company does not have to pay for the maintenance and overhead costs of franchised properties .
Franchisees must follow strict brand standards in order to maintain a licensing agreement with Hilton .
Many of Hilton 's flagship properties , airport properties , and largest resorts , however , are corporately managed .
HILTON HONORS Section::::Hilton Honors .
Hilton Honors ( formerly Hilton HHonors ) is Hilton 's guest loyalty program through which frequent guests can accumulate points and airline miles by staying within the Hilton portfolio .
The program is one of the largest of its type , with approximately 71 million members .
Hilton renamed the Hilton HHonors program to Hilton Honors in February 2017 .
PROPERTIES CORPORATE AFFAIRS Section::::Corporate affairs .
The company has its headquarters in Tysons Corner , Virginia and an operations center in Memphis .
Its Asia - Pacific operations are managed out of Singapore , its Middle East and Africa operations are managed out of Dubai , and its European operations are based in the UK .
COMPANY CULTURE
Section::::Company culture .
According to Careerbliss.com , Hilton ranked first in the list of " 2012 Happiest Companies in America " , with a score of 4.36 out of 5 .
The survey looked at job reviews from more than 100,000 employees , with such characteristics life as work - life balance , company culture and reputation , and the relationships employees have with their bosses .
Hilton has scored 100 % on the Corporate Equality Index each year from 2014 to 2017 .
In 2016 , Hilton was named one of the " World 's 25 Best Multinational Workplaces " by Fortune and Great Place to Work .
In 2017 , Fortune ranked Hilton number 26 in their list of " The 100 Best Companies to Work For " .
HILTON IN POPULAR CULTURE * Keith Richards and Mick Jagger performed in the East Penthouse on the 45th floor of the New York Hilton on October 28 , 1965 .
*
On the rotating wheel space station in Stanley Kubrick 's 1968 film , a receptionist is shown sitting at the entrance to the Hilton Space Station 5 .
* John Lennon and Yoko Ono honeymooned in the presidential suite at the Hilton Amsterdam where they hosted one of their famous " Bed - Ins " for a full week in 1969 .
*
In 1971 , Diamonds Are Forever was filmed at the Las Vegas Hilton .
*
On April 3 , 1973 , Dr. Martin Cooper made the world 's first cell phone call in front of the New York Hilton Midtown .
A press conference was held at the hotel later that day to mark the milestone .
*
In 1976 , during a music tour , Ike and Tina Turner were staying at the Statler Hilton ( now the Statler Hotel & Residences ) in downtown Dallas when Tina decided to leave Ike .
Her moments of getting away from Ike and fleeing the hotel were included in her book I , Tina and in the movie
What 's Love Got to Do with It .
* The Bodyguard with Whitney Houston and Kevin Costner was filmed at the Fontainebleau Hilton in Miami in 1992 .
On February 11 , 2012 , Houston died in her bathtub in Suite 434 of the Beverly Hilton after a drug overdose .
Hotel management has since renovated the room .
*
In 1995 , the James Bond movie GoldenEye was filmed at the Langham Hilton .
*
The Insider was filmed in 1999 at the Seelbach Hilton .
*
In 2006 , several movies including Spider - Man 3 , Michael Clayton , and American Gangster were filmed at the New York Hilton .
* Conrad Hilton ( played by actor Chelcie Ross ) features as a major character in the third season of Mad Men , as lead character Don Draper creates a series of ad campaigns for Hilton Hotels .
The Drapers travel during one episode to the Cavalieri Hilton in Rome , though the scenes were actually shot at the Dorothy Chandler Pavilion in Los Angeles .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS