THE WALTONS
The Waltons is an American television series created by Earl Hamner Jr. , based on his book Spencer 's Mountain and a 1963 film of the same name , about a family in rural Virginia during the Great Depression and World War II .
The television movie
The Homecoming : A Christmas Story was broadcast on December 19 , 1971 .
Based on its success , the CBS television network ordered one season of episodes based on the same characters and that became the television series The Waltons .
Beginning in September 1972 , the series subsequently aired on CBS for nine seasons .
After the series was canceled by CBS in 1981 , NBC aired three television movie sequels in 1982 , with three more in the 1990s on CBS .
The Waltons was produced by Lorimar Productions and distributed by Warner Bros. Domestic Television Distribution in syndication .
PREMISE SETTING
Section::::Premise .
Section::::Setting .
The main story is set in Walton 's Mountain , a fictional mountain - area community in fictitious Jefferson County , Virginia .
The real place upon which the stories are based is the community of Schuyler in Nelson County , Virginia .
The time period is from 1933 to 1946 , during the Great Depression and World War II , during the presidential administrations of Franklin D. Roosevelt and Harry S Truman .
The year 1933 is suggested by a reference to the opening of the Century of Progress exposition in Chicago , a brief shot of an automobile registration , and it is divulged in episode 18 that the date is in the spring of 1933 .
The last episode of season one , " An Easter Story " , is set in February – April 1934 .
The year 1934 takes two seasons to cover , while some successive years are covered over the course of a few months .
The series finale , " The Revel " , revolves around a party and the invitation date is given as June 4 , 1946 .
A span of 13 years is therefore covered in nine seasons .
There are some chronological inconsistencies , which ostensibly do not hinder the storyline .
The first three reunion movies ( A Wedding on Walton 's Mountain , Mother 's Day on Walton 's Mountain , and A Day for Thanks on Walton 's Mountain ) , all produced in 1982 , are set in 1947 .
Of the later reunions , A Walton Thanksgiving Reunion , filmed in 1993 , is set in 1963 , and revolves around President John F. Kennedy 's assassination ;
A Walton Wedding , made in 1995 , is set in 1964 ;
A Walton Easter , filmed in 1997 , is set in 1969 .
The series began relating stories that occurred 38 years in the past and ended with its last reunion show set 28 years in the past .
STORY
Section::::Story .
The story is about the family of John Walton Jr. ( known as John - Boy ) : his six siblings , his parents John and Olivia Walton , and the elder John 's parents Zebulon " Zeb " and Esther Walton .
John - Boy is the oldest of the children ( 17 years old in the beginning ) , who becomes a journalist and novelist .
Each episode is narrated at the opening and closing by a middle - aged John Jr. ( voiced by author Earl Hamner on whom John - Boy is based ) .
John Sr . manages to eke out a living for his family by operating a lumber mill with his sons ' help as they grow older .
The family income is augmented by some small - scale farming , and John occasionally hunts to put meat on the table .
In the simpler days of their country youth , all of the children are rambunctious and curious , but as times grow tough and the Walton youths grow up to deal with them , the children slowly depart from the innocent , carefree days of walking everywhere barefoot while clad in overalls and hand - sewn pinafores , and into the harsh , demanding world of adulthood and responsibility .
The family shares hospitality with relatives and strangers as they are able .
The small community named after their property is also home to folk of various income levels , ranging from the well - to - do Baldwin sisters , two elderly spinsters who distill moonshine that they call " Papa 's recipe " ; Ike Godsey , postmaster and owner of the general store with his somewhat snobbish wife Corabeth ( a Walton cousin ; she calls her husband " Mr. Godsey " ) ; an African - American couple , Verdie and Harley Foster ; Maude , a sassy octogenarian artist who paints on wood ; Flossie Brimmer , a friendly though somewhat gossipy widow who runs a nearby boarding house ; and Yancy Tucker , a good - hearted handyman with big plans but little motivation .
Jefferson County sheriff Ep Bridges , who fought alongside John in World War I , keeps law and order in Walton 's Mountain .
The entire family ( except for John ) attends a Baptist church , of which Olivia and Grandma Esther are the most regular attendees .
The church that the Hamners actually attended was Schuyler Baptist Church , near the Hamner homeplace and is still in operation .
The church has helped host several events honoring Earl Hamner , Jr. , including one in 2014 .
In the signature scene that closes almost every episode , the family house is enveloped in darkness , save for one , two or three lights in the upstairs bedroom windows .
Through voice - overs , two or more characters make some brief comments related to that episode 's events , and then bid each other goodnight , after which the lights go out .
After completing high school , John - Boy attends fictional Boatwright University ( based on the University of Richmond ) in the fictional nearby town of Westham .
He later goes to New York City to work as a journalist .
During the latter half of the 1976–77 season , Grandma Esther Walton suffers a stroke and returns home shortly before the death of her husband , Grandpa Zeb Walton ( reflecting Ellen Corby 's real - life stroke and the death of Will Geer , the actors who portrayed the characters ) .
During the series ' last few years , Mary Ellen and Ben start their own families ; Erin , Jason and John - Boy are married in later television movie sequels .
Conversely , the younger children Jim - Bob and Elizabeth , struggle to find and cement true love .
World War II deeply affects the family .
All four Walton boys enlist in the military .
Mary Ellen 's physician husband , Curtis " Curt " Willard , is sent to Pearl Harbor and is reported to have perished in the Japanese attack on December 7 , 1941 .
Years later , Mary Ellen hears of sightings of her " late " husband , investigates and finds him alive ( played by another actor ) , but brooding over his war wounds and living under an assumed name .
She divorces him and later remarries .
John - Boy 's military plane is shot down , while Olivia becomes a volunteer at the VA hospital and is seen less and less ; she eventually develops tuberculosis and enters an Arizona sanitarium .
Olivia 's cousin , Rose Burton , moves into the Walton house to look after the brood .
Two years later , John Sr . moves to Arizona to be near Olivia .
Grandma appears in only a handful of episodes during the eighth season ( she was usually said to be visiting relatives in nearby Buckingham County ) .
Six feature - length movies were made after the series ' run ; set from 1947 to 1969 , they aired between 1982 and 1997 .
EPISODES
PRODUCTION
TELEVISION FILM
Section::::Production .
Section::::Television film .
The Homecoming : A Christmas Story ( 1971 ) was not made as a pilot for a series , but it was so popular that it led to the broadcaster , CBS , initially commissioning one season of episodes based on the same characters , and the result was The Waltons .
Except for the children and Grandma Walton , the actors for the movie were not the same as for the series .
The musical score was by Oscar - winning composer Jerry Goldsmith ( Goldsmith also scored several episodes of the first season , but the producers believed his TV movie theme was too gentle and requested he write a new theme for the series ) and was later released on an album by Film Score Monthly paired with James Horner 's score for the 1982 TV movie Rascals and Robbers : The Secret Adventures of Tom Sawyer and Huck Finn .
Patricia Neal ( as Olivia ) won a Golden Globe Award for Best Actress - Television Series Drama .
The movie was also nominated for three Emmys : Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie ( Neal ) , Outstanding Writing Achievement in Drama - Adaptation ( Earl Hamner ) , and Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Drama - A Single Program ( Fielder Cook ) .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
The following is a brief summary of the main characters .
See main article for a more complete list .
* John " John - Boy " Walton Jr. ( Richard Thomas , seasons 1–5 , guest season 6 , three movie sequels ; Robert Wightman , seasons 8–9 and one movie sequel ) , the eldest of the seven children * John Walton Sr . ( Ralph Waite ) , the family patriarch * Olivia Walton ( Michael Learned , seasons 1–7 , guest season 8 , and four movies ) , the matriarch * Zebulon " Grandpa " Walton ( Will Geer , seasons 1–6 ) , John 's father * Esther " Grandma " Walton ( Ellen Corby , seasons 1–5 & 7 , and two episodes in season 8 , and in five movies ) , John 's mother * Jason Walton ( Jon Walmsley , entire series and six movies ) , second - oldest brother ; musically talented * Mary Ellen Walton ( Judy Norton Taylor , entire series and six movies ) , headstrong oldest daughter ; becomes a nurse * Erin Walton ( Mary Elizabeth McDonough , entire series and six movies ) , second Walton daughter ; works as a telephone operator and as manufacturing supervisor
* Benjamin " Ben " Walton ( Eric Scott , entire series and six movies ) , third Walton son ; has an entrepreneurial spirit
* Anne Walton , daughter died at birth ( references in Season 2 , episode The Prize )
* James Robert " Jim - Bob " Walton ( David W. Harper , entire series and six movies ) , youngest Walton son ; mechanically inclined * Joseph Zebulon Walton , twin to " Jim Bob " , died at birth ( reference Season 4 , episode 16
The Secret )
* Elizabeth Walton ( Kami Cotler , entire series and six movies ) , youngest of the seven children * Curtis Willard ( Tom Bower , seasons 5 - 7 , and one episode in season 9 ) , Mary Ellen 's husband * Cindy Walton ( Leslie Winston , seasons 7 - 9 and four of the reunion movies ) , Ben 's wife * Rose Burton ( Peggy Rea , seasons 8–9 and one sequel ) , Olivia 's matronly cousin who fills in as matriarch during Olivia 's absence INSPIRATION Section::::Inspiration .
Earl Hamner 's rural childhood growing up in the unincorporated community of Schuyler , Virginia , provided the basis for the setting and many of the storylines of The Waltons .
His family and the community provided many life experiences which aided in the characters , values , area , and human - interest stories of his books , movies , and television series .
Hamner provided the voice - over of the older John - Boy , usually heard at the beginning and end of each episode .
John - Boy Walton 's fictional alma mater , Boatwright University , is patterned after Richmond College , which became part of the University of Richmond on Boatwright Drive near Westham Station in The West End of Richmond , Virginia , about seventy miles east of Schuyler .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The town of Walton 's Mountain was built in the rear area of the main lot at Warner Bros. Studios , bordering the Los Angeles River , but the mountain itself was part of the Hollywood Hills range opposite Warner studios in Burbank , California ( the reverse side of which , and slightly to the east , is Mount Lee and the Hollywood Sign .
The Waltons ' house façade was built in the back of the Warner Brothers lot .
After the series concluded , the set was destroyed .
For the reunion shows , a replica Waltons ' house façade was built on the Here
Come the Brides set on the Columbia Ranch studio , now part of the Warner Brothers studios .
The Waltons ' house is still used as scenery at Warner Brothers .
For example , it served as the Dragonfly Inn on " The Gilmore Girls .
BROADCAST AND RELEASE Section::::Broadcast and release .
Some sources indicate CBS put the show on its fall 1972 schedule in response to congressional hearings on the quality of television .
Backlash from a 1971 decision to purge most rural - oriented shows from the network lineup may have also been a factor .
The network gave The Waltons an undesirable timeslot – Thursdays at 8 p.m. , opposite two popular programs : The Flip Wilson Show on NBC and The Mod Squad on ABC .
" The rumor was that they put it against Flip Wilson and The Mod Squad because they did n't think it would survive .
They thought , ' We can just tell Congress America does n't want to see this ' , " Kami Cotler , who played Elizabeth Walton , said in a 2012 interview .
However , CBS had enough faith in the show to devise a full - page newspaper ad flanked with the show 's positive reviews , urging people to watch the show .
This ad was attributed to saving The Waltons , causing the ratings to radically increase .
Ralph Waite was reluctant to audition for the part of John Walton because he did n't want to be tied to a long - running TV series , but his agent persuaded him by saying , " It will never sell .
You do the pilot .
You pick up a couple of bucks and then you go back to New York . "
RECEPTION ACCOLADES Section::::Reception .
Section::::Accolades .
The Waltons won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series in 1973 .
Also in 1973 Richard Thomas won the Emmy for Lead Actor in a Drama Series .
Michael Learned won the Emmy for Lead Actress in a Drama Series three times ( 1973 , 1974 , and 1976 ) .
Ellen Corby was also a three - time winner in the Supporting Actress category , winning in 1973 , 1975 , and 1976 .
Will Geer was awarded the Supporting Actor Emmy in 1975 .
Veteran actress Beulah Bondi won an Emmy in 1977 for Lead Actress in a Single Performance for her guest appearance as Martha Corrine Walton in the episode " The Pony Cart " ( Episode # 111 ) .
She first appeared in The Waltons episode " The Conflict " ( Episode # 51 ) as the widow of Zeb Walton 's brother .
The series itself earned a Peabody Award for its first season .
In 2013 , TV Guide ranked The Waltons No . 34 on its list of the 60 Best Series of All Time .
In 2017 , from March 20 to March 24 INSP network remembered the life of Earl Hamner Jr. ( who had died in 2016 ) by featuring clips of interviews ( once per episode ) with him about his time involved with The Waltons during the breaks while its syndicated reruns aired from 3 - 5pm and again at 7 pm .
REUNION MOVIES Section::::Reunion movies .
The Walton 's Reunion Movie Collection : 1 .
A Wedding on Walton 's Mountain ( 1982 ) 2 .
Mother 's Day on Walton 's Mountain ( 1982 ) 3 .
A Day for Thanks on Walton 's Mountain ( 1982 ) 4 .
A Walton Thanksgiving Reunion ( 1993 ) 5 .
A Walton Wedding ( 1995 ) 6 .
A Walton Easter ( 1997 ) HOME MEDIA DVD RELEASES Section::::Home media .
Section::::DVD releases .
Warner Home Video has released all nine seasons and six TV movies of The Waltons on DVD in Region 1 .
Seasons 1–4 have been released in Region 2 .
The pilot movie , The Homecoming : A Christmas Story , was released by Paramount Home Entertainment .
Lorimar produced the series , CBS produced the pilot film , which is why Paramount , under CBS Home Entertainment , handles home video rights for The Homecoming .
German - release DVDs provide German or English soundtrack options , with dubbed German voices , or the original English soundtrack , although episode titles , in German , are not always either literal or precise translations of the original English - language titles . !
rowspan="2"DVD name !
rowspan="2"Episodes !
Region 1 !
Region 2 ( UK )
STREAMING
Section::::Streaming .
Seasons 1–9 are available via streaming in SD as well as HD through services such as Amazon Video .
SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
Lorimar sold the distribution rights of The Waltons to Warner Bros. Television to avoid a lawsuit owing to the similarities between the series and the film Spencer 's Mountain , which Warner owned .
Warner Bros. acquired Lorimar in 1989 , and has continued to syndicate the series ever since .
Reruns currently air in the U.S. on INSP , the Hallmark Channel .
In Canada , The Waltons airs on Vision TV and BookTelevision .
In the UK , the series was broadcast on BBC 1 and BBC 2 during the 1970s/1980s - the first three seasons were broadcast on BBC 2 from February 18 , 1974 to May 17 , 1976 , on Mondays at 20.00 GMT , and seasons 4 and 5 were shown on BBC 1 from September 5 , 1976 to August 30 , 1977 , on Sundays at 16.10 in 1976 and Tuesdays at 19.00 through 1977 .
After that , seasons 6 - 9 would be broadcast on BBC 2 again , starting on April 30 , 1979 and concluding in April 1983 .
The three reunion TV movies filmed in 1982 were also shown on BBC 2 from December 21 to December 28 , 1983 .
The show was repeated on Channel 4 in the 1990s .
It currently airs on True Entertainment in the UK .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
SEE ALSO
*
These Are the Days ; animated TV series produced by Hanna - Barbera which was inspired by The Waltons EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Shed Waltons Mountain
* The Waltons at the Encyclopedia of Television * Walton 's Mountain Museum official website
*
All About The Waltons
*
The Waltons website *
The Illustrated Waltons Episode Guide * Rockfish - river.com
* The Surviving Waltons : Where Are They Now ?
* A Walk with Grandpa Walton and the Walton family
* The Waltons at HallmarkChannel.com