ROO
Roo is a fictional character created in 1926 by A. A. Milne and first featured in the book Winnie – the – Pooh .
He is a young kangaroo ( known as a joey ) and his mother is Kanga .
Like most other Pooh characters , Roo is based on a stuffed toy animal that belonged to Milne 's son , Christopher Robin Milne , though stuffed Roo was lost a long time ago .
Roo participates in the adventures of a teddy bear called Winnie - the - Pooh and his friends Piglet , a small toy pig ; Eeyore , a toy donkey ; Owl , a live owl ; Rabbit , a live rabbit ; and Christopher Robin , a human boy .
Roo is introduced in the chapter entitled " In Which Kanga and Baby Roo Come to the Forest and Piglet has a Bath . "
Roo 's friend Tigger does not appear until the sequel , The House at Pooh Corner .
The character Roo would subsequently appear in various cartoons and other adaptations .
PROFILE
Section::::Profile .
Roo is a young kangaroo , or joey .
His mother is called Kanga .
The New York Times has noted that inquiring about the fate of Roo 's father is one of many questions that could be asked , such as " Where are Pooh 's pants ? "
Because of his young age , Roo is a very small animal , the smallest in the story ( other than Rabbit 's friends and relations , and Alexander Beetle ) , although he must be very close in size to Piglet since Kanga is unable to tell the difference when Piglet jumps into her pouch instead of Roo .
( In Ernest H. Shepard 's illustrations , Roo appears to be very slightly smaller than Piglet . )
He is also apparently small enough to fall down mouse holes while practicing jumps , and too small to reach the first rail of the Poohsticks bridge .
Like most of the characters in Winnie - the Pooh , Roo was based on one of Christopher Robin Milne 's stuffed toys .
The illustrations show Roo with brown fur and an upturned tail .
Roo and Kanga come to the Forest " in the usual way " in Chapter VII of Winnie – the – Pooh .
He also appears in Chapter VIII , is mentioned in Chapter IX , and appears again in Chapter X of that book .
In The House at Pooh Corner , Roo appears in chapters II , IV , VI , VII , IX , and X , and is mentioned in a few others .
Some of the adventures that Roo experiences include being " kidnapped " by Rabbit , accompanying the " expotition " to the North Pole ( and getting an impromptu swimming lesson ) , attending Christopher Robin 's party for Pooh , getting stuck in a tree with Tigger , and playing Poohsticks .
Unlike many of the other characters in the Pooh books , Roo does not have a known favorite food , although his mother makes him watercress sandwiches on occasion .
He dislikes the extract of malt that his mother gives him as " strengthening medicine " after meals , though he will reluctantly take it .
Some of Roo 's friends include Tigger , Winnie - the - Pooh , Piglet , Eeyore , Rabbit , Owl , and Christopher Robin .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Roo appears in the Shirley Temple 's Storybook episode , played by Louis Jean Norman .
Roo also appears in the Disney cartoon versions of the Winnie the Pooh stories .
He was originally voiced by Clint Howard .
Later performers include Dori Whitaker ( Winnie the Pooh and Tigger Too ) , Dick Billingsley ( Winnie the Pooh and a Day for Eeyore ) , Kim Christianson ( Welcome to Pooh Corner ) , Nicholas Melody ( The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh ) , Nikita Hopkins ( 2000 - 2005 ) , Jimmy Bennett ( Springtime with Roo ) , Max Burkholder ( My Friends Tigger and Pooh ) , and Wyatt Hall ( Winnie the Pooh ) .
In the cartoons , Roo is the smallest of the regularly appearing characters .
He has brown fur and wears a light blue shirt .
He often expresses thoughts and feelings that make him seem wiser than his years .
In fact , on occasion Roo seems even wiser than many of the older characters .
He also states that he 's got a mother ( Kanga ) when he tries to comfort Tigger in The Tigger Movie .
Some people think that he puts himself on a purple scarf Piglet has accidentally left in Piglet 's Big Movie .
Roo also stars in his own movie , Springtime with Roo .
Roo becomes good friends with Lumpy the Heffalump in Pooh 's Heffalump Movie .
Roo appeared as one of the guests in House of Mouse and .
Roo made his first live action appearance in the 2018 film Christopher Robin , voiced by Sara Sheen .
ALLEGED EMOTIONAL DIFFICULTIES Section::::Alleged emotional difficulties .
A tongue - in - cheek psychological study of Roo was published in the year 2000 , by pediatricians at Dalhousie University in Halifax , Nova Scotia in the Canadian Medical Association Journal .
This Canadian team was following the trend of analyzing famous art works , to point out that even wonderful people can have disorders .
Reuters reported as follows about the Canadian study :
The researchers said they are especially worried about baby Roo , who is growing up in a single - parent household and whose closest friend , Tigger , is not a good role model .
" We predict we will someday see a delinquent , jaded , adolescent Roo hanging out late at night at the top of the forest , the ground littered with broken bottles of extract of malt and the butts of smoked thistle , " the article said .
REFERENCES