TONIC WATER Tonic water ( or Indian tonic water ) is a carbonated soft drink in which quinine is dissolved .
Originally used as a prophylactic against malaria , tonic water usually now has a significantly lower quinine content and is consumed for its distinctive bitter flavor .
It is often used in mixed drinks , particularly in gin and tonic .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Quinine was added to the drink as a prophylactic against malaria , since it was originally intended for consumption in tropical areas of South Asia and Africa , where the disease is endemic .
Quinine powder is so bitter that British officials stationed in early 19th century India and other tropical posts mixed the powder with soda and sugar , and tonic water was created .
The first commercial tonic water was produced in 1858 .
The mixed drink gin and tonic also originated in British colonial India , when the British mixed their medicinal quinine tonic with gin .
Since 2010 , at least four tonic syrups have been available in the US .
Consumers add carbonated water to the syrup to make tonic water , allowing drinkers to adjust the flavor intensity .
QUININE CONTENT Section::::Quinine content .
Medicinal tonic water originally contained only carbonated water and a large amount of quinine .
However , most tonic water today contains less quinine and is used mostly for its flavor .
As a result of the lower quinine content , it is less bitter , and is also usually sweetened , often with high - fructose corn syrup or sugar .
Some manufacturers also produce diet ( or slimline ) tonic water , which may contain artificial sweeteners such as aspartame .
Traditional - style tonic water with little more than quinine and carbonated water is less common but may be preferred by those who desire the bitter flavor .
In the United States , the US Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) limits the quinine content in tonic water to 83 ppm ( 83 mg per liter if calculated by mass ) , while the daily therapeutic dose of quinine is in the range of 500–1000 mg , and 10 mg / kg every eight hours for effective malaria prevention ( 2100 mg daily for a 70 kg adult ) .
Still , it is often recommended as a relief for leg cramps but medical research suggests some care is needed in monitoring doses .
Because of quinine 's risks , the FDA cautions consumers against using " off - label " quinine drugs to treat leg cramps .
USE Section::::Use .
Tonic water is often used as a drink mixer for cocktails , especially gin and tonic .
Vodka tonic is also popular .
Tonic water with lemon or lime flavor added is known as bitter lemon or bitter lime , respectively .
FLUORESCENCE Section::::Fluorescence .
The quinine in tonic water will fluoresce under ultraviolet light .
In fact , the sensitivity of quinine to ultraviolet light is such that it will appear visibly fluorescent in direct sunlight .
SEE ALSO * Água de Inglaterra REFERENCES