STAND BY
ME ( FILM ) Stand by Me is a 1986 American coming - of - age film directed by Rob Reiner and starring Wil Wheaton , River Phoenix , Corey Feldman , and Jerry O'Connell .
The film is based on Stephen King 's 1982 novella The Body .
Its title is derived from Ben E. King 's eponymous song , which plays over the ending credits .
Stand by Me tells the fictional story of four boys in a small town in Oregon who go on a hike to find the dead body of another boy .
The film was nominated for one Academy Award ( for Best Adapted Screenplay ) and two Golden Globe Awards ( for Best Motion Picture - Drama and Best Director , respectively ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Author Gordie Lachance reads in the newspaper that his childhood friend Chris Chambers has been killed .
Gordie then narrates an extended flashback , later revealed to be a story he is writing .
The flashback tells the story of a childhood incident when he , Chambers , and two buddies journeyed to find the body of a missing boy near the town of Castle Rock , Oregon .
Twelve - year - old Gordie 's parents , grieving the recent death of Gordie 's older brother Denny , neglect Gordie .
Gordie 's friends are Chambers , who hails from a bad family ; Teddy Duchamp , whose violent father once burned his ear on a hot stove ; and Vern Tessio .
While looking for a jar of money that he buried underneath his parents ' porch , Vern overhears a conversation between his older brother Billy and Charlie Hogan .
Billy and Charlie say that recently , after having stolen a car , they saw the body of a missing boy named Ray Brower outside of town .
When Vern relates this information to Gordie , Chris , and Teddy , the four boys -- hoping to become local heroes -- decide to look for Ray 's body .
After Chris steals his father 's pistol , he and Gordie run into local hoodlum Ace Merrill and Chris 's older brother , Eyeball .
Ace threatens Chris with a lit cigarette and steals Gordie 's Yankees cap , which had been a gift from his brother .
The four boys begin their journey to find the body .
After the boys are caught trespassing by junkman Milo Pressman and his dog , Chopper , they jump a fence to escape .
An angry Pressman calls Teddy 's father a " loony " ; Teddy , enraged , tries to attack Pressman , but the other boys restrain him .
While the boys are crossing over a railroad bridge , a train approaches .
Chris and Teddy make it to the other side safely .
Just before the train catches up to Gordie and Vern , Gordie saves Vern by pulling him off of the bridge .
They both survive with no serious injuries .
At nighttime , Gordie tells the fictional story of Davie " Lard - Ass " Hogan , an obese boy who is constantly teased .
Lard - Ass enters a pie - eating contest to take revenge on his tormentors .
After eating several pies , Lard - Ass deliberately vomits , inducing mass vomiting among contestants and the audience .
Gordie describes the episode as a " barf - o - rama " .
Later that night , Chris tells Gordie that he hates being associated with his family and its bad reputation .
Chris admits that he stole milk money that he had been accused of stealing at school .
However , after feeling guilty , Chris confessed and returned the money ; despite his confession , he was suspended from school .
Chris breaks down and cries , stating that he wishes he could go somewhere where no one knows him .
Traveling through the woods , the boys swim across a pond and discover that it is filled with leeches .
Gordie briefly faints after finding a leech in his underwear .
After more hiking , the boys locate the body of Ray Brower .
The discovery is traumatic for Gordie , who asks Chris why his brother Denny had to die .
Gordie adds that his father hates him and that he is no good .
Chris tells Gordie that his father does not hate him , but does not really know him .
Ace and his gang arrive , announce that they are claiming the body , and threaten to beat the four boys if they interfere .
When Chris curses at Ace and refuses to back down , Ace draws a switchblade to kill him .
Gordie comes to Chris 's aid by firing a shot into the air with Chris 's father 's gun and threatening to shoot Ace .
Ace demands that Gordie give him the gun , but Gordie refuses , calling Ace a " cheap dime - store hood " .
Ace and his gang depart , vowing revenge .
The boys agree to report the body via an anonymous phone call .
They hike back to Castle Rock and bid each other farewell until junior high school begins , and the extended flashback ends .
The present - day Gordie writes that Chris later went to college and became a lawyer ; while attempting to break up a fight in a restaurant , he was stabbed to death .
Gordie ends his story with the following words : " ' I never had any friends later on like the ones I had when I was 12 .
Jesus , does anyone ? ' "
CAST * Wil Wheaton as Gordon " Gordie " Lachance ( aged 12 )
* Richard Dreyfuss as Gordie Lachance ( adult ; credited as " The Writer " )
* River Phoenix as Christopher
" Chris " Chambers * Corey Feldman as Theodore " Teddy " Duchamp * Jerry O'Connell as Vernon " Vern " Tessio * Kiefer Sutherland as John " Ace " Merrill , gang leader * Casey Siemaszko as Billy Tessio , gang member * John Cusack as Denny Lachance * Marshall Bell as Mr. Lachance * Frances Lee McCain as Mrs. Lachance * Gary Riley as Charlie Hogan , gang member * Bradley Gregg as Richard " Eyeball " Chambers , gang member * Jason Oliver as Vince Desjardins , gang member
* Bruce Kirby as Mr. Quidacioluo , store owner * William Bronder as Milo Pressman , junkyard owner * Scott Beach as Mayor Grundy * Andy Lindberg as Davie
" Lard - Ass " Hogan PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Bruce A. Evans sent a copy of Stephen King 's novella The Body to Karen Gideon , the wife of his friend and writing partner Raynold Gideon on August 29 , 1983 as a gift for her birthday .
Both Gideon and Evans quickly became fans of the novella and shortly thereafter contacted King 's agent , Kirby McCauley , seeking to negotiate film rights ; McCauley replied that King 's terms were $ 100,000 and 10 % of the gross profits .
Although the money was not an issue , the share of gross profits was considered excessive , especially considering that no stars could be featured to help sell the movie .
In response , Evans and Gideon pursued an established director , Adrian Lyne , to help sell the project .
After reading the novella , Lyne teamed up with Evans and Gideon , but all the studios the trio approached turned the project down except for Martin Shafer at Embassy Pictures .
Embassy spent four months negotiating the rights with McCauley , settling on $ 50,000 and a smaller share of the profits , and Evans and Gideon spent eight weeks writing the screenplay .
Evans and Gideon asked to also produce the film , but Shafer suggested they team up with Andy Scheinman , a more experienced producer .
Embassy was unwilling to meet Lyne 's salary for directing the film until Evans and Gideon agreed to give up half of their share of profits to meet Lyne 's asking price .
Rob Reiner later recalled that Lyne was going to direct the film , but had promised himself a vacation following the production of 9½ Weeks , and would not be available to start production until the spring of 1986 .
Reiner was better known at the time for playing Michael Stivic in All in the Family and had just starting a directing career , making comedies like This Is Spinal Tap and The Sure Thing .
He was sent the script by Scheinman , and his initial reaction was the script had promise but
" no focus " .
After Lyne withdrew from the project , Reiner signed on to direct in September 1984 .
In a 2011 interview , Reiner discussed his realization that the film should focus on the character of Gordie :
" In the book it was about four boys , but ...
once I made Gordie the central focus of the piece then it made sense to me : this movie was all about a kid who did n't feel good about himself and whose father did n't love him .
And through the experience of going to find the dead body and his friendship with these boys , he began to feel empowered and went on to become a very successful writer .
He basically became Stephen King . "
Reiner has said that he identified with Gordie , as he himself struggled with the shadow of fame cast by his comedian father , Carl Reiner .
The writers incorporated Reiner 's suggestions , producing a new script by December 1984 for Embassy 's review and approval .
Days before shooting started in the summer of 1985 , Embassy was sold to Columbia Pictures , who made plans to cancel the production .
Norman Lear , one of the co - owners of Embassy , gave $ 7.5 million of his own money to complete the film , citing his faith in Reiner and the script .
However , since Embassy also would have distributed the film , once the film was completed it had no distributor .
The producers showed a print to Michael Ovitz , head of the powerful Creative Artists Agency , and Ovitz promised to help them find a distributor .
Paramount , Universal Pictures , and Warner Bros. all passed on the film ; Columbia Pictures production head Guy McElwaine screened the film at his house because he was feeling ill , and the positive reaction of his daughters convinced him to distribute the film .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
In a 2011 interview with NPR , Wil Wheaton attributed the film 's success to the director 's casting choices :
Feldman recalled how his home life translated into his onscreen character : "
[ Most kids are n't ] thinking they 're going to get hit by their parents because they 're not doing well enough in school , which will prevent them from getting a work permit , which will prevent them from being an actor .
"
O'Connell agreed that he was cast based on how his personality fit the role , saying " Rob really wanted us to understand our characters .
He interviewed our characters .
[ ... ] I tried to stay like Vern and say the stupid things Vern would .
I think I was Vern that summer .
" Reiner and the producers interviewed more than 70 boys for the four main roles , out of more than 300 who auditioned ; Phoenix originally read for the part of Gordie Lachance .
Rather than start shooting right away , Reiner put the four main actors together for two weeks to play games from Viola Spolin 's Improvisation for the Theater ( which Reiner called " the bible " of theater games ) and build camaraderie , which led to a real friendship between them and several one - shot takes , where the young actors hit their cues perfectly .
Wheaton would recall " When you saw the four of us being comrades , that was real life , not acting . " Before settling on Richard Dreyfuss as the narrator ( and the role of the adult Gordie ) , Reiner considered David Dukes , Ted Bessell , and Michael McKean . LOCATIONS Section::::Locations .
Parts of the film were shot in Brownsville , Oregon , which stood in for the fictional town of Castle Rock .
The town was selected for its small - town 1950s ambience .
Approximately 100 local residents were employed as extras .
The " barf - o - rama " scene was also filmed in Brownsville .
A local bakery supplied the pies and extra filling , which was mixed with large - curd cottage cheese to simulate the vomit .
The quantity of simulated vomit varied per person , from as much as during the triggering event to little as .
The scene where the boys outrace a steam train engine across an 80-foot tall trestle was filmed on the McCloud River Railroad , above Lake Britton Reservoir near McArthur - Burney Falls Memorial State Park in California .
The scene took a full week to shoot , making use of four small adult female stunt doubles with closely cropped hair who were made up to look like the film 's protagonists .
Plywood planks were laid across the trestles to provide a safer surface on which the stunt doubles could run .
The locomotive used for the scene , M.C.R.R. 25 , is still in daily operation for excursion service on the Oregon Coast Scenic Railroad .
Telephoto compression was used to make the train appear much closer than it actually was .
The actors did not feel a sense of danger until Reiner threatened them as follows : " You see those guys ?
They do n't want to push that dolly down the track any more .
And the reason they 're getting tired is because of you ...
I told them if they were n't worried that the train was going to kill them , then they should worry that I was going to .
And that 's when they ran . "
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Jack Nitzsche composed the film 's musical score .
On August 8 , 1986 , a soundtrack album was released containing many of the 1950s and early 1960s
oldies songs featured in the film :
* " Everyday " ( Buddy Holly ) – 2:07
*
* " Let the Good Times Roll " ( Shirley and Lee ) – 2:22
*
* " Come Go with Me "
( The Del - Vikings )
– 2:40 * * " Whispering Bells " ( The Del - Vikings ) – 2:25
* * " Get a Job " ( The Silhouettes ) – 2:44
* * " Lollipop " ( The Chordettes ) – 2:09
*
* " Yakety Yak " ( The Coasters ) – 1:52
* * " Great Balls of Fire " ( Jerry Lee Lewis ) – 1:52
* * " Mr. Lee " ( The Bobbettes ) – 2:14
*
* " Stand by Me " ( Ben E. King ) – 2:55
*
The movie 's success sparked a renewed interest in Ben E. King 's song .
Initially a # 4 pop hit in 1961 , " Stand By Me " re - entered the Billboard Hot 100 in October 1986 , eventually peaking at # 9 in December of that year .
TITLE Section::::Title .
In March 1986 , Columbia Pictures , concerned that the original title , The Body , was misleading , renamed the film Stand by Me .
According to screenwriter Raynold Gideon , The Body " sounded like either a sex film , a bodybuilding film or another Stephen King horror film .
Rob came up with Stand by Me , and it ended up being the least unpopular option . "
RECEPTION AWARDS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Awards .
At the 8th Youth in Film Awards , the film received the Jackie Coogan Award for Outstanding Contribution to Youth Through Motion Picture / Ensemble Cast in a Feature Film ( Wil Wheaton , River Phoenix , Corey Feldman , and Jerry O'Connell ) .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The film was a box office success in North America .
It opened in a limited release on August 8 , 1986 , in 16 theaters and grossed $ 242,795 , averaging $ 15,174 per theater .
The film then had its wide opening in 745 theaters on August 22 and grossed $ 3,812,093 , averaging $ 5,116 per theater and ranking # 2 .
The film 's widest release was 848 theaters , and it ended up earning $ 52,287,414 overall , well above its $ 8 million budget .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Reviewing for The New York Times , Walter Goodman thought the direction was rather self - conscious , " looking constantly at his audience " ; Goodman called it a " trite narrative " and that " Reiner 's direction hammers in every obvious element in an obvious script .
"
Dave Kehr wrote " there 's nothing natural in the way Reiner has overloaded his film with manufactured drama " in his review for the Chicago Tribune .
In contrast , Sheila Benson called it " [ a treasure ] absolutely not to be missed " in her review for the Los Angeles Times .
Paul Attanasio , reviewing for The Washington Post , called the acting ensemble " wonderful " , and particularly praised the performances by Wheaton and Phoenix .
Stephen King was very impressed with the finished result .
On the special features of the 25th anniversary Blu - ray set , King indicated that he considered the film to be the first successful translation to film of any of his works .
According to a later interview with Gene Siskel , Reiner recalled that after a private early screening of the film , King excused himself for fifteen minutes to compose himself ; he later returned to remark , " ' That 's the best film ever made out of anything I 've written , which is n't saying much .
But you 've really captured my story .
It is autobiographical . ' "
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 91 % based on 53 reviews , with a rating average of 8/10 .
At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating to reviews , the film has score of 75 based on 20 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews . "
NOMINATIONS * Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay ( Raynold Gideon and Bruce A. Evans )
* Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directing – Feature Film ( Rob Reiner )
* Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama
* Golden Globe Award for Best Director ( Rob Reiner ) * Independent Spirit Award for Best Film ( Andrew Scheinman , Raynold Gideon , and Bruce A. Evans )
* Independent Spirit Award for Best Director ( Rob Reiner ) * Independent Spirit Award for Best Screenplay ( Raynold Gideon and Bruce A. Evans )
* National Board of Review Awards 1986
Top
Ten Films * WGA Award for Best Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium ( Raynold Gideon and Bruce A. Evans )
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
In a 2011 piece entitled " 25 years of ' Stand by Me ' " , writer Alex Hannaford opined that " [ for ] anyone older than about 33 , [ Stand by Me ] remains one of the greatest films to come out of the Eighties . "
Hannaford added that the film " has a charm and depth that seems to resonate with each generation " .
In 2016 , several writers commemorated the 30-year anniversary of the film 's release .
Rolling Stone 's Charles Bramesco called Stand By Me " timeless , " " a staple of youthful nostalgia for its deft straddling of the line between childhood and adulthood , " and " the rare movie that necessarily gets better with time . "
Others described the film as a " coming - of - age classic " and as a film that stood at " the apex of the ' 80s kids ' movie boom " .
EVENTS AND TOURISM Section::::Events and tourism .
Brownsville , Oregon has held an annual " Stand By Me Day " since 2007 .
Te event has attracted international participants .
On July 24 , 2010 , a 25th Anniversary celebration of the filming of Stand by Me was held in Brownsville .
The event included a cast and crew Q&A session , an amateur pie - eating contest , and an outdoor showing of the film .
In 2013 , July 23 was designated as Stand By Me Day by the Brownsville Chamber of Commerce .
To encourage tourism , the city has embedded a penny in the street at a location where the fictional Vern found one in the film .
An advertising mural painted for the movie production has survived .
MOVIES
*
The Oscar - nominated urban drama
Boyz n
the Hood has several direct references to Stand by Me , including a trip by four young boys to see a dead body , and the closing fade - out of one of the main characters .
Director John Singleton has stated that he included the references just because he was a fan of the movie , but they also serve to highlight the differences in experience between the movies ' settings , and their characters ' experiences .
* Jonathan Bernstein states the pop culture discussions between characters in films by Quentin Tarantino originate in the similar semi - serious banter between the boys of Stand by Me .
* Reviewers have seen an influence from Stand by Me in the 2011 movie Attack the Block , directed by Joe Cornish .
*
The movie Mud ( 2012 ) has a character ( Neckbone ) who has been called a " perfect fusion of River Phoenix and Jerry O'Connell in ' Stand by Me . '
"
The writer and director , Jeff Nichols , said of the film "
Yeah , you know , I basically remade Stand by Me " when defending the work - in - progress to studio executives .
* The Kings of Summer , a 2013 coming - of - age film by Jordan Vogt - Roberts , has been reviewed as being inspired by Stand by Me .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Dan Mangan 's song " Rows of Houses " ( 2011 ) is based on the film and takes the perspective of Gordie Lachance .
PRODUCTION COMPANY Section::::Production company .
In 1987 , following the success of Stand by Me , Reiner co - founded a film and television production company and named it Castle Rock Entertainment , after the fictional town in which the film is set .
TELEVISION
* Seinfeld , the first television show produced by Reiner 's Castle Rock production company , featured banter between Jerry Seinfeld and George Costanza that was reminiscent of the dialogue between the protagonists of Stand by Me .
*
The plotline of " The Blunder Years " , a 2001 episode from the thirteenth season of The Simpsons , revolves around a repressed childhood trauma in which Homer Simpson , along with his friends Lenny and Carl , discover a body blocking an inlet for the Springfield Quarry .
* Actors auditioning for roles on the Netflix show Stranger Things were asked to read lines from Stand by Me and one episode was titled " The Body " in homage to the source novella .
* The first part of the Family Guy episode Three Kings follows the storyline of this film
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Brownsville , Oregon Stand by Me film locations from Brownsville Chamber of Commerce REVIEWS