PIE
A pie is a baked dish which is usually made of a pastry dough casing that covers or completely contains a filling of various sweet or savoury ingredients .
Pies are defined by their crusts .
A filled pie ( also single - crust or bottom - crust ) , has pastry lining the baking dish , and the filling is placed on top of the pastry but left open .
A top - crust pie has the filling in the bottom of the dish and is covered with a pastry or other covering before baking .
A two - crust pie has the filling completely enclosed in the pastry shell .
Shortcrust pastry is a typical kind of pastry used for pie crusts , but many things can be used , including baking powder biscuits , mashed potatoes , and crumbs .
Pies can be a variety of sizes , ranging from bite - size to ones designed for multiple servings .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The need for nutritious , easy - to - store , easy - to - carry , and long - lasting foods on long journeys , in particular at sea , was initially solved by taking live food along with a butcher or cook .
However , this took up additional space on what were either horse - powered treks or small ships , reducing the time of travel before additional food was required .
This resulted in early armies adopting the style of hunter - foraging .
The introduction of the baking of processed cereals including the creation of flour , provided a more reliable source of food .
Egyptian sailors carried a flat brittle bread loaf of millet bread called dhourra cake , while the Romans had a biscuit called buccellum .
During the Egyptian Neolithic period or New Stone Age period , the use of stone tools shaped by polishing or grinding , the domestication of plants and animals , the establishment of permanent villages , and the practice of crafts such as pottery and weaving became common .
Early pies were in the form of flat , round or freeform crusty cakes called galettes consisting of a crust of ground oats , wheat , rye , or barley containing honey inside .
These galettes developed into a form of early sweet pastry or desserts , evidence of which can be found on the tomb walls of the Pharaoh Ramesses II , who ruled from 1304 to 1237 BC , located in the Valley of the Kings .
Sometime before 2000 BC , a recipe for chicken pie was written on a tablet in Sumer .
Ancient Greeks are believed to have originated pie pastry .
In the plays of Aristophanes ( 5th century BC ) , there are mentions of sweetmeats including small pastries filled with fruit .
Nothing is known of the actual pastry used , but the Greeks certainly recognized the trade of pastry - cook as distinct from that of baker .
( When fat is added to a flour - water paste it becomes a pastry . )
The Romans made a plain pastry of flour , oil , and water to cover meats and fowls which were baked , thus keeping in the juices .
( The covering was not meant to be eaten ; it filled the role of what was later called puff paste . )
A richer pastry , intended to be eaten , was used to make small pasties containing eggs or little birds which were among the minor items served at banquets .
The 1st - century Roman cookbook Apicius makes various mentions of recipes which involve a pie case .
By 160 BC , Roman statesman Marcus Porcius Cato ( 234–149 BC ) , who wrote De Agri Cultura , notes the recipe for the most popular pie / cake called placenta .
Also called libum by the Romans , it was more like a modern - day cheesecake on a pastry base , often used as an offering to the gods .
With the development of the Roman Empire and its efficient road transport , pie cooking spread throughout Europe .
Pies remained as a staple of traveling and working peoples in the colder northern European countries , with regional variations based on both the locally grown and available meats , as well as the locally farmed cereal crop .
The Cornish pasty is an adaptation of the pie to a working man 's daily food needs .
Medieval cooks had restricted access to ovens due to their costs of construction and need for abundant supplies of fuel .
Pies could be easily cooked over an open fire , while partnering with a baker allowed them to cook the filling inside their own locally defined casing .
The earliest pie - like recipes refer to coffyns ( the word actually used for a basket or box ) , with straight sealed sides and a top ; open - top pies were referred to as traps .
The resulting hardened pastry was not necessarily eaten , its function being to contain the filling for cooking , and to store it , though whether servants may have eaten it once their masters had eaten the filling is impossible to prove .
This may also be the reason why early recipes focus on the filling over the surrounding case , with the partnership development leading to the use of reusable earthenware pie cases which reduced the use of expensive flour .
The first reference to " pyes " as food items appeared in England ( in a Latin context ) as early as the 12th century , but no unequivocal reference to the item with which the article is concerned is attested until the 14th century
( Oxford English Dictionary sb pie ) .
Song birds at the time were a delicacy and protected by Royal Law .
At the coronation of eight - year - old English King Henry VI ( 1422–1461 ) in 1429 , " Partrich " and " Pecok enhakill " were served , alleged by some modern writers to consist of cooked peacock mounted in its skin on a peacock - filled pie .
Cooked birds were frequently placed by European royal cooks on top of a large pie to identify its contents , leading to its later adaptation in pre - Victorian times as a porcelain ornament to release of steam and identify a good pie .
The Pilgrim fathers and early settlers brought their pie recipes with them to America , adapting to the ingredients and techniques available to them in the New World .
Their first pies were based on berries and fruits pointed out to them by the Native North Americans .
Pies allowed colonial cooks to stretch ingredients and also used round shallow pans to literally " cut corners " and to create a regional variation of shallow pie .
REGIONAL VARIATIONS
Section::::Regional variations .
Meat pies with fillings such as steak , cheese , steak and kidney , minced beef , or chicken and mushroom are popular in the United Kingdom , Australia , South Africa and New Zealand as take - away snacks .
They are also served with chips as an alternative to fish and chips at British chip shops .
Pot pies with a flaky crust and bottom are also a popular American dish , typically with a filling of meat ( particularly beef , chicken , or turkey ) , gravy , and mixed vegetables ( potatoes , carrots , and peas ) .
Frozen pot pies are often sold in individual serving size .
Fruit pies may be served with a scoop of ice cream , a style known in North America as pie à la mode .
Many sweet pies are served this way .
Apple pie is a traditional choice , though any pie with sweet fillings may be served à la mode .
This combination , and possibly the name as well , is thought to have been popularized in the mid-1890s in the United States .
Apple pie can be done with a variety of apples : Golden Delicious , Pink Lady , Granny Smith , and Rome Beauty .
PIE THROWING Section::::Pie throwing .
Cream filled or topped pies are favorite props for slapstick humor .
Throwing a pie in a person 's face has been a staple of film comedy since Ben Turpin received one in Mr. Flip in 1909 .
More recently , pieing has also become a political act ; some activists throw cream pies at politicians and other public figures as a form of protest .
TYPES
SAVORY PIES
* Bacon and egg pie
* Butter pie * Chicken and mushroom pie * Corned beef pie *
Cottage pie ( or shepherds ' pie ) * Game pie * Fish pie * Frito pie * Homity pie * Meat pie * Pasty * Pizza * Pork pie * Pot pie * Quiche * Scotch pie * Curry pie * Stargazy pie * Steak pie * Steak and kidney pie
* Tourtière SWEET PIES Section::::Types .
Section::::Sweet pies .
Some of these pies are pies in name only , such as the Boston cream pie , which is a cake .
Many fruit and berry pies are very similar , varying only the fruit used in filling .
Fillings for sweet or fruity are often mixed , such as strawberry rhubarb pie .
*
Apple pie * Banoffee pie * Blackberry pie * Black bottom pie * Blueberry pie * Buko pie * Bundevara * Cherry pie * Chess pie * Chiffon pie * Cream pie
* Custard
pie * Turtle pie * Fried pie * Key lime pie *
Lemon pie
* Lemon meringue pie * Mince pie
* Pecan pie * Pumpkin pie * Rhubarb pie * Saskatoonberry pie * Shoofly pie — a pie filled with molasses
* Strawberry pie * Sugar pie * Sweet potato pie SEE
ALSO * American Pie Council * Crostata * Dabby - Doughs
* Empanada
* Flan * List of baked goods
* List of desserts
* List of pies , tarts and flans * List of foods
* Meringue * Pirog * Pirozhki
* Shortcrust pastry
* Tart
REFERENCES
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS *
A Tale of Two Tarts by Monica Gaudio ( contains info that can be added into article with references )
* Food Timeline , History Notes :
Pie & Pastry * A Wide Variety of Pie Recipes at recipeforpie.com