OEDIPUS REX Oedipus Rex , also known by its Greek title , Oedipus Tyrannus ( IPA : [ oidípuːs týranːos ] ) , or Oedipus the King , is an Athenian tragedy by Sophocles that was first performed around 429 BC .
Originally , to the ancient Greeks , the title was simply Oedipus ( Οἰδίπους ) , as it is referred to by Aristotle in the Poetics .
It is thought to have been renamed Oedipus Tyrannus to distinguish it from another of Sophocles ' plays , Oedipus at Colonus .
In antiquity , the term " tyrant " referred to a ruler , but it did not necessarily have a negative connotation .
Of his three Theban plays that have survived , and that deal with the story of Oedipus , Oedipus Rex was the second to be written .
However , in terms of the chronology of events that the plays describe , it comes first , followed by Oedipus at Colonus and then Antigone .
Prior to the start of Oedipus Rex , Oedipus has become the king of Thebes while unwittingly fulfilling a prophecy that he would kill his father , Laius ( the previous king ) , and marry his mother , Jocasta ( whom Oedipus took as his queen after solving the riddle of the Sphinx ) .
The action of Sophocles ' play concerns Oedipus ' search for the murderer of Laius in order to end a plague ravaging Thebes , unaware that the killer he is looking for is none other than himself .
At the end of the play , after the truth finally comes to light , Jocasta hangs herself while Oedipus , horrified at his patricide and incest , proceeds to gouge out his own eyes in despair .
Oedipus Rex is regarded by many scholars as the masterpiece of ancient Greek tragedy .
In his Poetics , Aristotle refers several times to the play in order to exemplify aspects of the genre .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Many parts or elements of the myth of Oedipus occur before the opening scene of the play , although some are alluded to in the text .
Oedipus is the son of Laius and Jocasta , the king and queen of Thebes .
The misfortunes of his house are the result of a curse laid upon his father for violating the sacred laws of hospitality .
In his youth , Laius was the guest of Pelops , the king of Elis , and he became the tutor of Chrysippus , the king 's youngest son , in chariot racing .
Laius seduced or abducted and raped Chrysippus , who according to some versions , killed himself in shame .
This murder cast a doom over Laius and all of his descendants ( although many scholars regard Laius ' transgressions against Chrysippus to be a late addition to the myth ) .
When his son is born , the king consults an oracle as to his fortune .
To his horror , the oracle reveals that Laius " is doomed to perish by the hand of his own son " .
Laius binds the infant 's feet together with a pin , and orders Jocasta to kill him .
Unable to kill her own son , Jocasta orders a servant to slay the infant for her .
The servant then exposes the infant on a mountaintop , where he is found and rescued by a shepherd ( in some versions , the servant gives the infant to the shepherd ) .
The shepherd names the child Oedipus , " swollen feet " , as his feet had been tightly bound by Laius .
The shepherd brings the infant to Corinth , and presents him to the childless king Polybus , who raises Oedipus as his own son .
As he grows to manhood , Oedipus hears a rumour that he is not truly the son of Polybus and his wife , Merope .
He asks the Delphic Oracle who his parents really are .
The Oracle seems to ignore this question , telling him instead that he is destined to " mate with [ his ] own mother , and shed / With [ his ] own hands the blood of [ his ] own sire " .
Desperate to avoid this terrible fate , Oedipus , who still believes that Polybus and Merope are his true parents , leaves Corinth for the city of Thebes .
On the road to Thebes , Oedipus encounters Laius and his retainers , and the two quarrel over whose chariot has the right of way .
The Theban king moves to strike the insolent youth with his sceptre , but Oedipus , unaware that Laius is his true father , throws the old man down from his chariot , killing him .
Thus , Laius is slain by his own son , and the prophecy that the king had sought to avoid by exposing Oedipus at birth is fulfilled .
Before arriving at Thebes , Oedipus encounters the Sphinx , a legendary beast with the head and breast of a woman , the body of a lioness , and the wings of an eagle .
The Sphinx was sent to the road approaching Thebes as a punishment from the gods , and would strangle any traveler who failed to answer a certain riddle .
The precise riddle asked by the Sphinx varied in early traditions , and is not stated in Oedipus Rex , as the event precedes the play ; but the most widely - known version is , " what is the creature that walks on four legs in the morning , two legs at noon , and three in the evening ? "
Oedipus correctly guesses , " man " , who crawls on all fours as an infant , walks upright in maturity , and leans on a stick in old age .
Bested by the prince , the Sphinx throws herself from a cliff , thereby ending the curse .
Oedipus ' reward for freeing Thebes from the Sphinx is its kingship , and the hand of the dowager queen , Jocasta ; none then realize that Jocasta is Oedipus ' true mother .
Thus , unknown to all of the characters , the prophecy has been fulfilled .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Oedipus , King of Thebes , sends his brother - in - law , Creon , to ask advice of the oracle at Delphi , concerning a plague ravaging Thebes .
Creon returns to report that the plague is the result of religious pollution , since the murderer of their former king , Laius , has never been caught .
Oedipus vows to find the murderer and curses him for causing the plague .
Oedipus summons the blind prophet Tiresias for help .
When Tiresias arrives he claims to know the answers to Oedipus 's questions , but refuses to speak , instead telling him to abandon his search .
Oedipus is enraged by Tiresias ' refusal , and verbally accuses him of complicity in Laius ' murder .
Outraged , Tiresias tells the king that Oedipus himself is the murderer ( " You yourself are the criminal you seek " ) .
Oedipus can not see how this could be , and concludes that the prophet must have been paid off by Creon in an attempt to undermine him .
The two argue vehemently , as Oedipus mocks Tiresias ' lack of sight , and Tiresias in turn tells Oedipus that he himself is blind .
Eventually Tiresias leaves , muttering darkly that when the murderer is discovered he shall be a native citizen of Thebes , brother and father to his own children , and son and husband to his own mother .
Creon arrives to face Oedipus 's accusations .
The King demands that Creon be executed ; however , the chorus persuades him to let Creon live .
Jocasta enters and attempts to comfort Oedipus , telling him he should take no notice of prophets .
As proof , she recounts an incident in which she and Laius received an oracle which never came true .
The prophecy stated that Laius would be killed by his own son ; however , Jocasta reassures Oedipus by her statement that Laius was killed by bandits at a crossroads on the way to Delphi .
The mention of this crossroads causes Oedipus to pause and ask for more details .
He asks Jocasta what Laius looked like , and Oedipus suddenly becomes worried that Tiresias 's accusations were true .
Oedipus then sends for the one surviving witness of the attack to be brought to the palace from the fields where he now works as a shepherd .
Jocasta , confused , asks Oedipus what the matter is , and he tells her .
Many years ago , at a banquet in Corinth , a man drunkenly accused Oedipus of not being his father 's son .
Oedipus went to Delphi and asked the oracle about his parentage .
Instead of answers he was given a prophecy
that he would one day murder his father and sleep with his mother .
Upon hearing this he resolved to leave Corinth and never return .
While traveling he came to the very crossroads where Laius was killed , and encountered a carriage which attempted to drive him off the road .
An argument ensued and Oedipus killed the travelers , including a man who matches Jocasta 's description of Laius .
Oedipus has hope , however , because the story is that Laius was murdered by several robbers .
If the shepherd confirms that Laius was attacked by many men , then Oedipus is in the clear .
A man arrives from Corinth with the message that Oedipus 's father has died .
Oedipus , to the surprise of the messenger , is made ecstatic by this news , for it proves one half of the prophecy false , for now he can never kill his father .
However , he still fears that he may somehow commit incest with his mother .
The messenger , eager to ease Oedipus 's mind , tells him not to worry , because Merope was not in fact his real mother .
It emerges that this messenger was formerly a shepherd on Mount Cithaeron , and that he was given a baby , which the childless Polybus then adopted .
The baby , he says , was given to him by another shepherd from the Laius household , who had been told to get rid of the child .
Oedipus asks the chorus if anyone knows who this man was , or where he might be now .
They respond that he is the same shepherd who was witness to the murder of Laius , and whom Oedipus had already sent for .
Jocasta , who has by now realized the truth , desperately begs Oedipus to stop asking questions , but he refuses and Jocasta runs into the palace .
When the shepherd arrives Oedipus questions him , but he begs to be allowed to leave without answering further .
However , Oedipus presses him , finally threatening him with torture or execution .
It emerges that the child he gave away was Laius 's own son , and that Jocasta had given the baby to the shepherd to secretly be exposed upon the mountainside .
This was done in fear of the prophecy that Jocasta said had never come true : that the child would kill his father .
Everything is at last revealed , and Oedipus curses himself and fate before leaving the stage .
The chorus laments how even a great man can be felled by fate , and following this , a servant exits the palace to speak of what has happened inside .
When Jocasta enters the house , she runs to the palace bedroom and hangs herself there .
Shortly afterward , Oedipus enters in a fury , calling on his servants to bring him a sword so that he might cut out his mother 's womb .
He then rages through the house , until he comes upon Jocasta 's body .
Giving a cry , Oedipus takes her down and removes the long gold pins that held her dress together , before plunging them into his own eyes in despair .
A blind Oedipus now exits the palace and begs to be exiled as soon as possible .
Creon enters , saying that Oedipus shall be taken into the house until oracles can be consulted regarding what is best to be done .
Oedipus 's two daughters ( and half - sisters ) , Antigone and Ismene , are sent out , and Oedipus laments their having been born to such a cursed family .
He asks Creon to watch over them and Creon agrees , before sending Oedipus back into the palace .
On an empty stage the chorus repeat the common Greek maxim , that no man should be considered fortunate until he is dead .
RELATIONSHIP WITH MYTHIC TRADITION Section::::Relationship with mythic tradition .
The two cities of Troy and Thebes were the major focus of Greek epic poetry .
The events surrounding the Trojan War were chronicled in the Epic Cycle , of which much remains , and those about Thebes in the Theban Cycle , which have been lost .
The Theban Cycle recounted the sequence of tragedies that befell the house of Laius , of which the story of Oedipus is a part .
Homer 's Odyssey ( XI.271ff . ) contains the earliest account of the Oedipus myth when Odysseus encounters Jocasta ( named Epicaste ) in the underworld .
Homer briefly summarises the story of Oedipus , including the incest , patricide , and Jocasta 's subsequent suicide .
However , in the Homeric version , Oedipus remains King of Thebes after the revelation and neither blinds himself , nor is sent into exile .
In particular , it is said that the gods made the matter of his paternity known , whilst in Oedipus the King , Oedipus very much discovers the truth himself .
In 467 BC , Sophocles 's fellow tragedian Aeschylus won first prize at the City Dionysia with a trilogy about the House of Laius , comprising Laius , Oedipus and Seven against Thebes ( the only play which survives ) .
Since he did not write connected trilogies as Aeschylus did , Oedipus Rex focuses on the titular character while hinting at the larger myth obliquely , which was already known to the audience in Athens at the time .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The trilogy containing Oedipus Rex took second prize in the City Dionysia at its original performance .
Aeschylus 's nephew Philocles took first prize at that competition .
However , in his Poetics , Aristotle considered Oedipus Rex to be the tragedy which best matched his prescription for how drama should be made .
Many modern critics agree with Aristotle on the quality of Oedipus Rex , even if they do n't always agree on the reasons .
For example , Richard Claverhouse Jebb claimed that " The Oedipus Tyrannus is in one sense the masterpiece of Attic tragedy .
No other shows an equal degree of art in the development of the plot ; and this excellence depends on the powerful and subtle drawing of the characters . "
Cedric Whitman noted that " the Oedipus Rex passes almost universally for the greatest extant Greek play ... "
Whitman himself regarded the play as " the fullest expression of this conception of tragedy , " that is the conception of tragedy as a " revelation of the evil lot of man , " where a man may have " all the equipment for glory and honor " but still have " the greatest effort to do good " end in " the evil of an unbearable self for which one is not responsible .
Edith Hall referred to Oedipus the King as " this definitive tragedy " and notes that " the magisterial subtlety of Sophocles ' characterization thus lend credibility to the breathtaking coincidences , " and notes the irony that " Oedipus can only fulfill his exceptional god - ordained destiny because Oedipus is a preeminently capable and intelligent human being . "
H. D. F. Kitto said about Oedipus Rex that " it is true to say that the perfection of its form implies a world order , " although Kitto notes that whether or not that world order " is beneficent , Sophocles does not say . "
The science revolution attributed to Thales began gaining political force , and this play offered a warning to the new thinkers .
Kitto interprets the play as Sophocles ' retort to the sophists , by dramatizing a situation in which humans face undeserved suffering through no fault of their own , but despite the apparent randomness of the events , the fact that they have been prophesied by the gods implies that the events are not random , despite the reasons being beyond human comprehension .
Through the play , according to Kitto , Sophocles declares " that it is wrong , in the face of the incomprehensible and unmoral , to deny the moral laws and accept chaos .
What is right is to recognize facts and not delude ourselves .
The universe is a unity ; if , sometimes , we can see neither rhyme nor reason in it
we should not suppose it is random .
There is so much that we can not know and can not control that we should not think and behave as if we do know and can control .
THEMES AND MOTIFS FATE , FREE WILL , OR TRAGIC FLAW Section::::Themes and motifs .
Section::::Fate , free will , or tragic flaw .
Fate is a theme that often occurs in Greek writing , tragedies in particular .
The idea that attempting to avoid an oracle is the very thing which brings it about is a common motif in many Greek myths , and similarities to Oedipus can for example be seen in the myth of the birth of Perseus .
Two oracles in particular dominate the plot of Oedipus Rex .
In lines 711 to 714 , Jocasta relates the prophecy that was told to Laius before the birth of Oedipus .
Namely : ( The oracle ) told him that it was his fate that he should die a victim at the hands of his own son , a son to be born of Laius and me .
The oracle told to Laius tells only of the patricide ; the incest is missing .
Prompted by Jocasta 's recollection , Oedipus reveals the prophecy which caused him to leave Corinth ( 791 - 93 ) : that I was fated to lie with my mother , and show to daylight an accursed breed which men would not endure , and I was doomed to be murderer of the father that begot me .
The implication of Laius 's oracle is ambiguous .
One interpretation considers that the presentation of Laius 's oracle in this play differs from that found in Aeschylus 's Oedipus trilogy produced in 467 BC .
Helaine Smith argues : Sophocles had the option of making the oracle to Laius conditional ( if Laius has a son , that son will kill him ) or unconditional ( Laius will have a son who will kill him ) .
Both Aeschylus and Euripides write plays in which the oracle is conditional ; Sophocles ... chooses to make Laius 's oracle unconditional and thus removes culpability for his sins from Oedipus , for he could not have done other than what he did , no matter what action he took .
This interpretation is supported by Jocasta 's repetition of the oracle at lines 854–55 : " Loxias declared that the king should be killed by/ his own son . "
In the Greek , Jocasta uses the verb chrênai : " to be fated , necessary .
"
This iteration of the oracle seems to suggest that it was unconditional and inevitable .
Other scholars have nonetheless argued that Sophocles follows tradition in making Laius 's oracle conditional , and thus avoidable .
They point to Jocasta 's initial disclosure of the oracle at lines 711–14 .
In the Greek , the oracle cautions : hôs auton hexoi moira pros paidos thanein/
hostis genoit emou te kakeinou para .
The two verbs in boldface indicate what is called a " future more vivid " condition : if a child is born to Laius , his fate to be killed by that child will overtake him .
Whatever the meaning of Laius 's oracle , the one delivered to Oedipus is clearly unconditional .
Given our modern conception of fate and fatalism , readers of the play have a tendency to view Oedipus as a mere puppet controlled by greater forces , a man crushed by the gods and fate for no good reason .
This , however , is not an entirely accurate reading .
While it is a mythological truism that oracles exist to be fulfilled , oracles do not cause the events that lead up to the outcome .
In his landmark essay " On Misunderstanding the Oedipus Rex " , E.R. Dodds draws a comparison with Jesus 's prophecy at the Last Supper that Peter would deny him three times .
Jesus knows that Peter will do this , but readers would in no way suggest that Peter was a puppet of fate being forced to deny Christ .
Free will and predestination are by no means mutually exclusive , and such is the case with Oedipus .
The oracle delivered to Oedipus what is often called a " self - fulfilling prophecy " , in that the prophecy itself sets in motion events that conclude with its own fulfilment .
This , however , is not to say that Oedipus is a victim of fate and has no free will .
The oracle inspires a series of specific choices , freely made by Oedipus , which lead him to kill his father and marry his mother .
Oedipus chooses not to return to Corinth after hearing the oracle , just as he chooses to head toward Thebes , to kill Laius , to marry and to take Jocasta specifically as his bride ; in response to the plague at Thebes , he chooses to send Creon to the Oracle for advice and then to follow that advice , initiating the investigation into Laius 's murder .
None of these choices are predetermined .
Another characteristic of oracles in myth is that they are almost always misunderstood by those who hear them ;
hence Oedipus 's misunderstanding the significance of the Delphic Oracle .
He visits Delphi to find out who his real parents are and assumes that the Oracle refuses to answer that question , offering instead an unrelated prophecy which forecasts patricide and incest .
Oedipus 's assumption is incorrect , the Oracle does , in a way , answer his question :
" On closer analysis the oracle contains essential information which Oedipus seems to neglect .
" The wording of the Oracle : I was doomed to be murderer of the father that begot me refers to Oedipus ' real , biological father .
Likewise the mother with polluted children is defined as the biological one .
The wording of the drunken guest on the other hand : you are not your father 's son defines Polybus as only a foster father to Oedipus .
The two wordings support each other and point to the " two set of parents " alternative .
Thus the question of two set of parents , biological and foster , is raised .
Oedipus 's reaction to the Oracle is irrational : he states he did not get any answer
and he flees in a direction away from Corinth , showing that he firmly believed at the time that Polybus and Merope are his real parents .
" The scene with the drunken guest constitutes the end of Oedipus ' childhood .
… he can no longer ignore a feeling of uncertainty about his parentage .
However , after consulting the Oracle this uncertainty disappears , strangely enough , and is replaced by a totally unjustified certainty that he is the son of Merope and Polybus .
We have said that this irrational behaviour - his hamartia in Aristotle 's sense - is due to the repression of a whole series of thoughts in his consciousness , in fact everything that referred to his earlier doubts about his parentage .
STATE
CONTROL Section::::State control .
The exploration of this theme in Oedipus Rex is paralleled by the examination of the conflict between the individual and the state in Antigone .
The dilemma that Oedipus faces here is similar to that of the tyrannical Creon : each man has , as king , made a decision that his subjects question or disobey ; each king also misconstrues both his own role as a sovereign and the role of the rebel .
When informed by the blind prophet Tiresias that religious forces are against him , each king claims that the priest has been corrupted .
It is here , however , that their similarities come to an end : while Creon , seeing the havoc he has wreaked , tries to amend his mistakes , Oedipus refuses to listen to anyone .
SIGHT AND BLINDNESS Section::::Sight and blindness .
Literal and metaphorical references to eyesight appear throughout Oedipus Rex .
Clear vision serves as a metaphor for insight and knowledge , but the clear - eyed Oedipus is blind to the truth about his origins and inadvertent crimes .
The prophet Tiresias , on the other hand , although literally blind , " sees " the truth and relays what is revealed to him . "
Though Oedipus ' future is predicted by the gods , even after being warned by Tiresias , he can not see the truth or reality beforehand because his excessive pride has blinded his vision … "
Only after Oedipus has physically blinded himself does he gain a limited prophetic ability , as seen in Oedipus at Colonus .
It is deliberately ironic that the " seer " can " see " better than Oedipus , despite being blind .
In one line ( Oedipus the king , 469 ) , Tiresias says : " So , you mock my blindness ?
Let me tell you this .
You [ Oedipus ] with your precious eyes , you 're blind to the corruption of your life ... "
( Robert Fagles 1984 )
SIGMUND
FREUD Section::::Sigmund Freud .
Sigmund Freud in Interpretation of Dreams wrote a notable passage regarding of the destiny of Oedipus as well as the Oedipus complex .
He analyzes why this play , Oedipus Rex , written in Ancient Greece , is so effective even to a modern audience .
Freud says , His destiny moves us only because it might have been ours — because the oracle laid the same curse upon us before our birth as upon him .
It is the fate of all of us , perhaps , to direct our first sexual impulse towards our mother and our first hatred and our first murderous wish against our father .
Our dreams convince us that this is so . "
In the same book , Freud indicates , however , that the " primordial urges and fears " that are his concern are not found primarily in the play by Sophocles , but exist in the myth the play is based on ; he refers to the play as a " further modification of the legend " , one that originates in a " misconceived secondary revision of the material , which has sought to exploit it for theological purposes . "
ADAPTATIONS FILM VERSIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Film versions .
The play has been filmed several times , twice in English .
The 1957 film version , directed by Tyrone Guthrie , starred Douglas Campbell as Oedipus and had the cast performing the entire play in masks , as in ancient Greek theatre .
The second English language film version , directed by Philip Saville and released in 1968 , was filmed in Greece .
This one showed the actors ' faces and boasted an all - star cast , including Christopher Plummer as Oedipus , Lilli Palmer as Jocasta , Orson Welles as Tiresias , Richard Johnson as Creon , Roger Livesey as the Shepherd , and Donald Sutherland as the Leading Member of the Chorus .
Sutherland 's voice , however , was dubbed by another actor .
The film went a step further than the play , however , by actually showing , in flashback , the murder of Laius ( Friedrich Ledebur ) .
It also showed Oedipus and Jocasta in bed together , making love .
Made in 1968 , this film was not seen in Europe and the U.S. until the 1970s and 1980s after legal release and distribution rights were granted to video and TV .
In 1967 Pier Paolo Pasolini directed Edipo Re , a modern interpretation of the play .
Toshio Matsumoto 's 1969 film , Funeral Parade of Roses , is a loose adaptation of the play and an important work of the Japanese New Wave .
In Colombia , writer Gabriel García Márquez adapted the story in Edipo Alcalde , bringing it to the real Colombian situation .
STAGE VERSIONS
Section::::Stage versions .
Composer Igor Stravinsky wrote an opera / oratorio version of Oedipus rex ( opera ) , premiered in 1927 by the Théâtre Sarah Bernhardt , Paris .
It is scored for orchestra , speaker , soloists , and male chorus .
The libretto , based on Sophocles 's tragedy , was written by Jean Cocteau in French and then translated by Abbé Jean Daniélou into Latin ; the narration , however , is performed in the language of the audience .
Oedipus rex was written towards the beginning of Stravinsky 's neoclassical period , and is considered one of the finest works from this phase of the composer 's career .
He had considered setting the work in Ancient Greek , but decided ultimately on Latin : in his words " a medium not dead but turned to stone . "
TV / RADIO VERSIONS Section::::TV / Radio versions .
Michael Pennington starred as Oedipus with Claire Bloom as Jocasta , Sir John Gielgud as Tiresias and John Shrapnel as Creon in Don Taylor 's 1986 translation / adaptation of the play , which formed part of the BBC 's The Theban Plays trilogy .
In 1977 , CBS Radio Mystery Theater broadcast a version of the story called " So Shall Ye Reap " , set in what was then the US Territory of New Mexico in 1851 .
Other television
Oedipus 's include Christopher Plummer ( 1957 ) , Ian Holm ( 1972 ) and Patrick Stewart ( 1977 ) .
In 2017 , BBC Radio 3 broadcast a production of Anthony Burgess ' translation of the play with Christopher Eccleston as Oedipus and Fiona Shaw as Tiresias / Second Elder .
John Shrapnel , who starred as Creon in the 1986 BBC television version , played The First Elder .
PARODIES Section::::Parodies .
Peter Schickele parodies both the story of Oedipus rex and the music of Stravinsky 's oratorio - opera of the same name in Oedipus Tex , a Western - themed oratorio purportedly written by P.D.Q. Bach , released in 1990 on the album Oedipus Tex and Other Choral Calamities .
Chrysanthos Mentis Bostantzoglou makes a parody of this tragedy in his comedy Medea ( 1993 ) .
In episode ten of the second season of ' CNNNN ' , an Australian satirical television program made by The Chaser , a short animation in the style of a Disney movie trailer , complete with jaunty music provided by Andrew Hansen , parodies Oedipus Rex .
Apart from being advertised as " Fun for the whole family " , the parody is also mentioned at other times during that same episode , such as in a satirical advertisement in which orphans are offered a free " Oedipus Rex ashes urn " as a promotional offer after losing a relative .
SEE ALSO
* Incest * Lille Stesichorus , a papyrus fragment of an alternative version by the lyric poet Stesichorus
* Oedipus * Oedipus complex *
Patricide NOTES
TRANSLATIONS
* Thomas Francklin , 1759 – verse * Edward H. Plumptre , 1865 –
verse : , rev . edition of 1878
* Richard C. Jebb , 1904 – prose : *
Sir George Young , 1906 - verse * Gilbert Murray , 1911 – verse * Francis Storr , 1912 –
verse : full text
* W. B. Yeats , 1928 – mixed prose and verse * David Grene , 1942 ( revised ed . 1991 ) –
verse * E. F. Watling , 1947 – verse * Dudley Fitts and Robert Fitzgerald , 1949 – verse
* F. L. Lucas , 1954 — verse *
Theodore Howard Banks , 1956 – verse * Albert Cook , 1957 – verse * Bernard Knox , 1959 – prose
* H. D. F. Kitto , 1962 – verse * Anthony Burgess , 1972 - prose and verse * Stephen Berg and Diskin Clay – verse
* Robert Bagg , 1982 ( revised ed . 2004 ) – verse * Sophocles ( 1984 )
The Three Theban Plays : Antigone ; Oedipus the King ; Oedipus at Colonus , Translated by Robert Fagles .
Penguin classics .
* Don Taylor , 1986 - prose
* Nick Bartel , 1999 – verse : abridged text
* Kenneth McLeish , 2001 - Verse * Luci Berkowitz and Theodore F. Brunner , 1970 – prose * Ian Johnston , 2004 – verse : full text
* George Theodoridis , 2005 – prose : full text
* J. E. Thomas , 2006 - verse
* David Mulroy , 2011 – verse * Rachel Pollack and David Vine , 2011 - verse ADDITIONAL
REFERENCES
* Brunner , M. " King Oedipus Retried
" Rosenberger & Krausz , London , 2001
* Foster , C. Thomas . "
How to Read Literature Like a Professor " HarperCollins , New York , 2003
EXTERNAL LINKS * Aristotle 's Poetics : Notes on Sophocles ' Oedipus , cached version of the original * Background on Drama , Generally , and Applications to Sophocles ' Play * Study Guide for Sophocles ' Oedipus
the King * Oedipus Rex - Annotated text and
analysis
* Full text English translation of Oedipus the King by Ian Johnston , in verse * Oedipus the King Book Notes from Literapedia
* Oedipus the King from Project Gutenberg
* Original Ancient Greek text from The Perseus Project