RABBIT ( WINNIE - THE - POOH )
Rabbit is a character in the fictional world of the book series and cartoons Winnie - the - Pooh .
He is a friend of Winnie - the - Pooh , regards himself as practical and tends to take the lead , though not always with the results that he intends .
IN THE BOOKS Section::::In the books .
The first appearance of Rabbit is in chapter II in the Winnie - the - Pooh book by A. A. Milne .
He also appears in chapters VII , VIII , IX and X of that book , as well as in chapters III , V , VI , VII , VIII , IX , and X in The House at Pooh Corner .
While most of the cast in the books are based on stuffed animals owned by Christopher Robin Milne , Ernest H. Shepard 's illustrations of Rabbit look more like a living animal .
Rabbit resembles an ordinary rabbit , except that he walks on two legs and uses his front paws as hands .
The top of his head reaches about to Pooh 's nose .
Rabbit lives in a house in the north - central part of the Hundred Acre Wood , between the sandy pit where Roo plays and the area where the animals he calls his " Friends - and - Relations " live .
Rabbit likes to take charge and come up with elaborate plans , such as the one to scare Kanga by hiding Roo , and the one to " unbounce " Tigger .
He is also an organizer , as in the case of the Search for Small .
As detailed as his plans are , they often miss certain key points and go wrong .
Rabbit tends to include Pooh and Piglet in his plans , and he goes to Owl when there is " thinking to be done " .
He likes to be put in charge of things and is sometimes bossy , and he sees his relationship to Christopher Robin as being the one that Christopher depends on .
While loyal to the friends he knows , Rabbit shows a certain reluctance to welcome newcomers , as evidenced by his initial negative reaction to the arrival of Kanga and Roo in the first book , and to Tigger in the second book .
Nonetheless , he warms up to all of them in time .
While the literacy ( or lack thereof ) of Pooh , Owl , and Eeyore becomes a plot point in The House at Pooh Corner , Rabbit 's ease with reading and writing is taken for granted .
Rabbit also has good relationships with the minor animals in the forest , known as " Rabbit 's Friends - and - Relations " .
Several are mentioned by name , including beetles called Small , Alexander Beetle and Henry Rush , and three unspecified creatures called Smallest - of - All , Late , and Early .
According to the illustrations of the book , his Friends - and - Relations include other rabbits , a squirrel , a hedgehog , mice , and insects .
At one point , Rabbit estimates that he would need " seventeen pockets " if he were going to carry all his family about with him .
Whether that number refers just to his relatives or to the friends - and - relations as a group is unknown , if it had any basis at all .
In Return to the Hundred Acre Wood , a sequel not written by A. A. Milne but by David Benedictus , Rabbit tries to organize things further .
He tries to have a census in the forest , but it does not work out very well .
Rabbit also attempts to teach a Household Management class and is the one who discovers Lottie the otter .
His grandfather , Grandad Buck , appears in the book .
DISNEY ADAPTATIONS Section::::Disney adaptations .
Rabbit appears in most Disney Winnie the Pooh cartoons , but he is yellow in color , instead of brown .
An added element is his keeping of a garden , of which he is strongly protective , becoming angered when any creature seeks to damage it .
Although he is not described as having a garden in either of the A. A. Milne books , he has one in David Benedictus 's Return to the Hundred Acre Wood .
The Disney adaptations also develop his personality further , expanding the original organized character into a control freak with a short temper , although his care for his friends remains .
The film character 's willingness to do things by the book appeared in , in which he consistently follows written instructions for fear of being unable to think well for himself , although he later produces a competent plan .
Despite occasional malevolent behavior , he always learns from his wrongdoing ; while a leading character in the film Springtime with Roo , he abandons his selfishness after considering the possibility that it will drive all of the other characters away from the forest .
In the Disney adaptations , Rabbit and Tigger are usually foils for each other .
In the original featurettes , Rabbit outright dislikes Tigger .
By The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh , however , they have become close friends , though very dysfunctional ones , who regularly work together .
Tigger 's antics continue to annoy Rabbit and make trouble for him , while Rabbit 's harsh attitude and attempts to teach Tigger a lesson still come off as unkind .
Nevertheless , Tigger is usually the first one to help Rabbit when he needs it and Rabbit can not deny their closeness .
His character is consistent in most of the Disney adaptations , although in Welcome to Pooh Corner , he is a talented magician and in The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh , he is pale green instead of yellow .
At one point in the latter series , Rabbit adopts a bluebird named Kessie .
, Rabbit now appears at Walt Disney World in Lake Buena Vista , FL and Disneyland in Anaheim , CA for meet and greets .
CASTING HISTORY
Section::::Casting history .
Junius Matthews was the voice of Rabbit in the first three Disney films .
After his death , Ray Erlenborn briefly voiced him in Winnie the Pooh Discovers the Seasons .
Will Ryan took over the role for Winnie the Pooh and a Day for Eeyore and performed both Rabbit and Tigger in Welcome to Pooh Corner .
Ken Sansom replaced Ryan beginning with The New Adventures of Winnie the Pooh and is to date Rabbit 's longest - running portrayer , having continued the voice up to and including My Friends Tigger and Pooh .
Tom Kenny most recently provided the voice for the 2011 film , Winnie the Pooh .
Peter Capaldi voiced Rabbit in Christopher Robin , the live - action extension of the Winnie the Pooh franchise .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS