COUNTY ( UNITED STATES )
In the United States of America , an administrative or political subdivision of a state is a county , which is a region having specific boundaries and usually some level of governmental authority .
The term " county " is used in 48 U.S. states , while Louisiana and Alaska have functionally equivalent subdivisions called parishes and boroughs respectively .
Most counties have subdivisions which may include municipalities and unincorporated areas .
Others have no further divisions , or may serve as a consolidated city - county .
Some municipalities are in multiple counties ; New York City is uniquely partitioned into multiple counties , referred to at the city government level as boroughs .
The United States Census Bureau uses the term " county equivalent " to describe places that are comparable to counties , but called by different names .
Louisiana parishes ; the organized boroughs of Alaska ; the District of Columbia ; and the independent cities of the states of Virginia , Maryland , Missouri , and Nevada are equivalent to counties for administrative purposes .
Alaska 's Unorganized Borough is divided into 10 census areas that are statistically equivalent to counties .
As of 2018 , there are currently 3,142 counties and county - equivalents in the 50 states and the District of Columbia .
If the 100 county equivalents in the U.S. territories are counted , then the total is 3,242 counties and county - equivalents in the United States .
The number of counties per state ranges from the 3 counties of Delaware to the 254 counties of Texas .
Counties have significant governmental functions in all states except Rhode Island and Connecticut , where county governments have been abolished but the entities remain for administrative or statistical purposes .
The Commonwealth of Massachusetts has removed most government functions from eight of its 14 counties .
The county with the largest population , Los Angeles County ( 10,170,292 ) , and the county with the largest land area , San Bernardino County , border each other in Southern California ( however four boroughs in Alaska are larger in area than San Bernardino ) .
Territories of the United States do not have counties ( except for American Samoa , which does have them ) ; instead , the United States Census Bureau divides them into county equivalents .
While America Samoa does have its own counties , the U.S. Census Bureau counts American Samoa 's districts and atolls as county - equivalents .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Counties were among the earliest units of local government established in the Thirteen Colonies that would become the United States .
Virginia created the first counties in order to ease the administrative workload in Jamestown .
The House of Burgesses divided the colony first into four " incorporations " in 1617 and finally into eight shires ( or counties ) in 1634 : James City , Henrico , Charles City , Charles River , Warrosquyoake , Accomac , Elizabeth City , and Warwick River .
America 's oldest intact county court records can be found at Eastville , Virginia , in Northampton ( originally Accomac ) County , dating to 1632 .
Maryland established its first county , St. Mary 's , in 1637 , and Massachusetts followed in 1643 .
Pennsylvania and New York delegated significant power and responsibility from state government to county governments and thereby established a pattern for most of the United States , although counties remained relatively weak in New England .
When independence came , " the framers of the Constitution did not provide for local governments .
Rather , they left the matter to the states .
Subsequently , early state constitutions generally conceptualized county government as an arm of the state . "
In the twentieth century , the role of local governments strengthened and counties began providing more services , acquiring home rule and county commissions to pass local ordinances pertaining to their unincorporated areas .
In some states , these powers are partly or mostly devolved to the counties ' smaller divisions usually called townships , though in New York , New England and Wisconsin they are called " towns " .
The county may or may not be able to override its townships on certain matters , depending on the state constitution .
The newest county in the United States is the city and county of Broomfield , Colorado , established in 2001 as a consolidated city - county .
The newest county - equivalents are the Alaskan boroughs of Skagway established in 2007 , Wrangell established in 2008 , and Petersburg established in 2013 .
COUNTY VARIATIONS CONSOLIDATED
CITY - COUNTIES
Section::::County variations .
Section::::Consolidated city - counties .
A consolidated city - county is simultaneously a city , which is a municipality ( municipal corporation ) , and a county , which is an administrative division of a state , having the powers and responsibilities of both types of entities .
There are 40 consolidated city - counties in the U.S. , including Augusta , Georgia ; Denver , Colorado ; Indianapolis , Indiana ; Jacksonville , Florida ; Louisville , Kentucky ; Lexington , Kentucky ; Nashville , Tennessee ; New Orleans , Louisiana ; Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; and San Francisco , California .
Similarly , some of Alaska 's boroughs have merged with their principal cities creating unified city - boroughs .
Some such consolidations and mergers have created cities that rank among the geographically largest cities in the world , though often with population densities far below those of most urban areas .
COUNTY EQUIVALENTS
Section::::County equivalents .
The term county equivalents is used to describe divisions whose organization differs from that of most counties : * Alaska census areas : Most of the land area of Alaska is not contained within any of Alaska 's 19 organized boroughs .
This vast area , larger than France and Germany combined , is officially referred to by the Alaska state government as the Unorganized Borough and outside of other incorporated borough limits , has no independent " county " government , although several incorporated city governments exist within its boundaries ; the majority of it is governed and run by the State of Alaska as an extension of state government .
The United States Census Bureau , in cooperation with the Alaska state government for census and electoral districting purposes , has divided the Unorganized Borough into 11 census areas for statistical purposes only .
* Louisiana parishes * Independent cities
: These are cities that legally belong to no county .
They differ from consolidated city - counties in that in the case of a consolidated city - county , the county at least nominally exists , whereas in the case of an independent city , no county even nominally exists .
, there are 41 such cities in the United States , including Baltimore , Maryland ; Carson City , Nevada ; St. Louis , Missouri ; and all 38 cities in Virginia , where any area incorporated as a city is outside of the county jurisdiction .
* District of Columbia , outside the jurisdiction of any state , has a special status .
The District of Columbia comprises the entirety of the District of Columbia , which , in accordance with Article 1 , Section 8 of the U.S. Constitution , is under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Congress .
When founded in 1801 , the District consisted of two counties and three cities .
In 1846 , Alexandria County ( which now forms Arlington County and a portion of the independent city of Alexandria)—including the then City of Alexandria — was given back to Virginia .
In 1871 , the three remaining entities — the City of Washington , City of Georgetown , and Washington County ( which was coterminous with the District)—were merged into a consolidated government of District of Columbia by an act of Congress .
Georgetown was abolished as a city by another act in 1895 .
Consolidated city - counties are not designated county - equivalents for administrative purposes ; since both the city and the county at least nominally exist , they are properly classified as counties in their own right .
The same is true of the boroughs of New York City , each of which is coextensive with a county of New York State .
TERRITORIES Section::::Territories .
There are no counties per se in U.S. territories .
American Samoa has its own counties , but the U.S. Census Bureau does not count them as counties ( instead , the U.S. Census Bureau counts American Samoa 's 3 districts and 2 atolls as county equivalents ) .
American Samoa 's counties are treated as minor civil divisions .
Most territories are directly divided into municipalities or similar units , which are treated as equivalent of counties for statistical purposes :
* The 78 municipalities of Puerto Rico * The 3 main islands of the United States Virgin Islands
* All of Guam
* The 4 municipalities of the Northern Mariana Islands
* The 3 districts of American Samoa * The 2 atolls of American Samoa * The 9 islands of the U.S. Minor Outlying Islands
The U.S. Census Bureau counts all of Guam as one county - equivalent ( with the FIPS code 66010 ) , while the USGS counts Guam 's election districts ( villages ) as county - equivalents .
The U.S. Census Bureau counts the 3 main islands in the U.S. Virgin Islands as county - equivalents , while the USGS counts the districts of the U.S. Virgin Islands ( of which there are 2 ) as county - equivalents .
ORGANIZATION Section::::Organization .
The site of a county 's administration , and often the county courthouse , is called the county seat ( " parish seat " in Louisiana , or " borough seat " in Alaska ) .
Several New England counties use the term " shire town " for the county seat .
Many counties are divided into smaller political or governmental units .
In Northeastern and Midwestern states , counties are divided into civil townships ( or " towns " in New England , New York , and Wisconsin ) , which may provide governmental or public services .
COUNTY NAMES
Section::::County names .
Common sources of county names are names of people , geographic features , places in other states or countries , Native American tribes , and animals .
Quite a few counties bear names of French or Spanish origin .
Counties are most often named for people , often political figures or early settlers , with over 2,100 of the 3,144 total so named .
The most common county name , with 31 , is Washington County , for America 's first president , George Washington .
Up until 1871 , there was a Washington County within the District of Columbia , but it was dissolved by the District of Columbia Organic Act .
Jefferson County , for Thomas Jefferson , is next with 27 .
The most recent president to have a county named for him was Warren G. Harding , reflecting the slowing rate of county creation since New Mexico and Arizona became states in 1912 .
The most common names for counties not named after a president are Franklin ( 25 ) , Clay ( 18 ) , and Montgomery ( 18 ) .
After people , the next most common source of county names are geographic features and locations , with some counties even being named after counties in other states , or for places in countries such as the United Kingdom .
The most common geographic county name is Lake .
Native American tribes and animals lend their names to some counties .
Quite a few counties bear names of French or Spanish origin , including Marquette County being named after French missionary Father Jacques Marquette .
The county 's equivalent in the state of Louisiana , the parish ( Fr .
paroisse civile and Sp .
parroquia ) took its name during the state 's French and Spanish colonial periods .
Before the Louisiana Purchase and granting of statehood , government was often administered in towns where major church parishes were located .
Of the original 19 civil parishes of Louisiana that date from statehood in 1807 , nine were named after the Roman Catholic parishes from which they were governed .
COUNTY GOVERNMENT
Section::::County government .
The powers of counties arise from state law and vary widely .
In Connecticut and Rhode Island , counties are geographic entities , but not governmental jurisdictions .
At the other extreme , Maryland counties and the county - equivalent City of Baltimore handle almost all services , including public education , although the state retains an active oversight authority with many of these services .
In most Midwestern and Northeastern states , counties are further subdivided into townships or towns , which sometimes exercise local powers or administration .
Throughout the United States , counties may contain other independent , self - governing municipalities .
Counties are usually governed by an elected body , variously called the county commission , board of supervisors , commissioners ' court , county council , board of chosen freeholders , county court , or county Legislature .
In some counties , there is a county executive .
In cases in which a consolidated city - county or independent city exists , a City Council usually governs city / county or city affairs .
In many states , the board in charge of a county holds powers that transcend all three traditional branches of government .
It has the legislative power to enact ordinances for the county ; it has the executive power to oversee the executive operations of county government ; and it has quasi - judicial power with regard to certain limited matters ( such as hearing appeals from the planning commission if one exists ) .
The day - to - day operations of the county government are sometimes overseen by an elected county executive or by a chief administrative officer or county administrator who reports to the board , the mayor , or both .
In many states , several important officials are elected separately from the board of commissioners or supervisors and can not be fired by the board .
These positions may include county clerk , county treasurer , county surrogate , sheriff , and others .
District attorneys or state attorneys are usually state - level as opposed to county - level officials , but in many states , counties and state judicial districts have coterminous boundaries .
The structure and powers of a county government may be defined by the general law of the state or by a charter specific to that county .
States may allow only general - law counties , only charter counties , or both .
Generally , general - law local governments have less autonomy than chartered local governments .
SCOPE OF POWER Section::::Scope of power .
The power of county governments varies widely from state to state , as does the relationship between counties and incorporated cities .
The government of the county usually resides in a municipality called the county seat .
However , some counties may have multiple seats or no seat .
In some counties with no incorporated municipalities , a large settlement may serve as the county seat .
MINIMAL SCOPE
Section::::Minimal scope .
In New England , counties function at most as judicial court districts and sheriff 's departments ( presently , in Connecticut only as judicial court districts — and in Rhode Island , they have lost both those functions and all others ) , and most of the governmental authority below the state level is in the hands of towns and cities .
In several of Maine 's sparsely populated counties , small towns rely on the county for law enforcement , and in New Hampshire several social programs are administered at the state level .
In Connecticut , Rhode Island , and parts of Massachusetts , counties are now only geographic designations , and they do not have any governmental powers .
All government is either done at the state level or at the municipal level .
In Connecticut and parts of Massachusetts , regional councils have been established to partially fill the void left behind by the abolished county governments .
The regional councils ' authority is limited compared with a county government — they have authority only over infrastructure and land use planning , distribution of state and federal funds for infrastructure projects , emergency preparedness , and limited law enforcement duties .
MODERATE SCOPE Section::::Moderate scope .
In the Mid - Atlantic and Midwest , counties typically provide , at a minimum , courts , public utilities , libraries , hospitals , public health services , parks , roads , law enforcement , and jails .
There is usually a county registrar , recorder , or clerk ( the exact title varies ) who collects vital statistics , holds elections ( sometimes in coordination with a separate elections office or commission ) , and prepares or processes certificates of births , deaths , marriages , and dissolutions ( divorce decrees ) .
The county recorder normally maintains the official record of all real estate transactions .
Other key county officials include the coroner / medical examiner , treasurer , assessor , auditor , comptroller , and district attorney .
In most states , the county sheriff is the chief law enforcement officer in the county .
However , except in major emergencies where clear chains of command are essential , the county sheriff normally does not directly control the police departments of city governments , but merely cooperates with them ( e.g. , under mutual aid pacts ) .
Thus , the most common interaction between county and city law enforcement personnel is when city police officers deliver suspects to sheriff 's deputies for detention or incarceration in the county jail .
In virtually all U.S. states , the state courts and local law enforcement are organized and implemented along county boundaries , but nearly all of the substantive and procedural law adjudicated in state trial courts originates from the state legislature and state appellate courts .
In other words , most criminal defendants are prosecuted for violations of state law , not local ordinances , and if they , the district attorney , or police seek reforms to the criminal justice system , they will usually have to direct their efforts towards the state legislature rather than the county ( which merely implements state law ) .
A typical criminal defendant will be arraigned and subsequently indicted or held over for trial before a trial court in and for a particular county where the crime occurred , kept in the county jail ( if he is not granted bail or can not make bail ) , prosecuted by the county 's district attorney , and tried before a jury selected from that county .
But long - term incarceration is rarely a county responsibility , execution of capital punishment is never a county responsibility , and the state 's responses to prisoners ' appeals is the responsibility of the state attorney general , who has to defend before the state appellate courts the prosecutions conducted by locally elected district attorneys in the name of the state .
Furthermore , county - level trial court judges are officers of the judicial branch of the state government rather than county governments .
In many states , the county controls all unincorporated lands within its boundaries .
In states with a township tier , unincorporated land is controlled by the townships .
Residents of unincorporated land who are dissatisfied with county - level or township - level resource allocation decisions can attempt to vote to incorporate as a city , town , or village .
A few counties directly provide public transportation themselves , usually in the form of a simple bus system .
However , in most counties , public transportation is provided by one of the following : a special - purpose district that is coterminous with the county ( but exists separately from the county government ) , a multi - county regional transit authority , or a state agency .
BROAD SCOPE Section::::Broad scope .
In western and southern states , more populated counties provide many facilities , such as airports , convention centers , museums , recreation centers , beaches , harbors , zoos , clinics , law libraries , and public housing .
They provide services such as child and family services , elder services , mental health services , welfare services , veterans assistance services , animal control , probation supervision , historic preservation , food safety regulation , and environmental health services .
They have many additional officials like public defenders , arts commissioners , human rights commissioners , and planning commissioners .
Finally , there may also be a county fire department and even a county police department ( as distinguished from fire and police departments operated by individual cities , special districts , or the state government ) .
For example , Gwinnett County , Georgia , and its county seat , the city of Lawrenceville , each have their own police departments .
( A separate county sheriff 's department is responsible for security of the county courts and administration of the county jail . )
In several southern states , public school systems are organized and administered at the county level .
STATISTICS Section::::Statistics .
, there were 3,007 counties , 64 parishes , 19 organized boroughs , 10 census areas , 41 independent cities , and the District of Columbia for a total of 3,142 counties and county - equivalents in the 50 states and District of Columbia .
There are an additional 100 county equivalents in the territories of the United States .
The average number of counties per state is 62 , with a range from the three counties of Delaware to the 254 counties of Texas .
Southern and Midwestern states generally tend to have more counties than Western or Northeastern states , as many Northeastern states are not large enough in area to warrant a large number of counties , and many Western states were sparsely populated when counties were created .
The five counties of Rhode Island , the eight counties of Connecticut , and eight of the 14 counties of Massachusetts no longer have functional county governments , but continue to exist as legal and census entities .
+ Number of counties and county - equivalents in the United States of America !
rowspan=2 State , federal district or territoryUnited StatesUnited States ( 50 states , the District of Columbia , and territories ) align = right326,836,260
align
= center align =
right3,007
align =
right235 align = right3,242
align =
right100,813 align = center
POPULATION Section::::Population .
The average U.S. county population was nearly 100,000 in 2015 .
The most populous county is Los Angeles County , California , with 10,170,292 residents in 2015 .
This number is greater than the populations of 41 U.S. states , and even about 900,000 larger than the population of the 10 lowest population counties combined .
It also makes Los Angeles County 17.4 times as large as the least populous state , Wyoming .
The second most populous county is Cook County , Illinois , with a population of 5,238,216 .
Cook County 's population is larger than that of 28 individual U.S. states and the combined populations of the six smallest states .
The least populous county is Kalawao County , Hawaii , with 89 residents in 2015 .
8 county - equivalents in the U.S. territories have a population of 0 :
Rose Atoll , Northern Islands Municipality , Baker Island , Howland Island , Jarvis Island , Johnston Atoll , Kingman Reef , and Navassa Island .
The remaining 3 islands in the U.S.
Minor Outlying Islands have small non - permanent human populations .
The least populous county - equivalent with a permanent human population is Swains Island , American Samoa ( 17 residents ) .
The most densely populated county or county - equivalent is New York County , New York ( coextensive with the New York City Borough of Manhattan ) , with 72,033 persons per square mile ( 27,812 / km ) in 2015 .
The Yukon - Koyukuk Census Area , Alaska , is both the most extensive and the least densely populated county or county - equivalent with 0.0380 persons per square mile ( 0.0147 / km ) in 2015 .
In the 50 states ( plus District of Columbia ) , a total of 981 counties have a population over 50,000 ; 592 counties have a population over 100,000 ; 137 counties have a population over 500,000 ; 45 counties have a population over 1,000,000 ; and 14 counties have a population over 2,000,000 .
At the other extreme , 35 counties have a population under 1,000 ; 307 counties have a population under 5,000 ; 709 counties have a population under 10,000 ; and 1,492 counties have a population between 10,000 and 50,000 .
AREA Section::::Area .
At the 2000 U.S. Census , the median land area of U.S. counties was , which is two - thirds of the median land area of a ceremonial county of England , and a little more than a quarter of the median land area of a French département .
Counties in the western United States typically have a much larger land area than those in the eastern United States .
For example , the median land area of counties in Georgia is , whereas in Utah it is .
The most extensive county or county - equivalent is the Yukon - Koyukuk Census Area , Alaska , with a land area of 145,505 square miles ( 376,856 km ) .
All nine of the most extensive county - equivalents are in Alaska .
The most extensive county is San Bernardino County , California , with a land area of 20,057 square miles ( 51,947 km ) .
The least extensive county is Kalawao County , Hawaii , with a land area of 11.991 square miles ( 31.058 km ) .
The least extensive county - equivalent in the 50 states is the independent City of Falls Church , Virginia , with a land area of 1.999 square miles ( 5.177 km ) .
If U.S. territories are included , the least extensive county - equivalent is Kingman Reef , with a land area of 0.01 square miles ( 0.03 km ) .
GEOGRAPHIC RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN CITIES AND COUNTIES
Section::::Geographic relationships between cities and counties .
In some states , a municipality may be in only one county and may not annex territory in adjacent counties , but in the majority of states , the state constitution or state law allows municipalities to extend across county boundaries .
At least 32 states include municipalities in multiple counties .
Dallas and Oklahoma City , for example , both contain portions of five counties .
New York City is an unusual case because it encompasses multiple entire counties in one city .
Each of those counties is coextensive with one of the five boroughs of the city : Manhattan ( New York County ) , The Bronx ( Bronx County ) , Queens ( Queens County ) , Brooklyn ( Kings County ) , and Staten Island ( Richmond County ) .
SEE ALSO
* Lists of counties in the United States
* List of United States counties and county equivalents
* Index of U.S. counties * List of former United States counties * List of the most common U.S. county names
* Flags of counties of the United States
* List of FIPS codes NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Geographic Areas Reference Manual by the United States Census Bureau
* National Association of Counties * Atlas of Historical County Boundaries
* Where Americans are moving , by county , in 2010