THE PARTRIDGE FAMILY
The Partridge Family is an American musical sitcom starring Shirley Jones and featuring David Cassidy .
Jones played a widowed mother , and Cassidy played the oldest of her five children who embarked on a music career .
It ran from September 25 , 1970 , until March 23 , 1974 , on the ABC network as part of a Friday - night lineup , and had subsequent runs in syndication .
The family was loosely based on the real - life musical family The Cowsills , a popular band in the late 1960s and early 1970s .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
In the pilot episode , a group of musical siblings in the fictitious city of San Pueblo , California ( said to be " 40 miles from Napa County " in episode 24 , " A Partridge By Any Other Name " ) convinces their widowed mother , bank teller Shirley Partridge , to help them out by singing as they record a pop song in their garage .
Through the efforts of precocious 10-year - old Danny they find a manager , Reuben Kincaid , who helps make the song a Top 40 hit .
After more persuading , Shirley agrees that the family can go on tour .
They acquire an old school bus , a 1957 Chevrolet Series 6800 Superior , for touring , paint it with Mondrian - inspired patterns , and head to Las Vegas , Nevada for their first live gig at Caesars Palace .
Subsequent episodes usually feature the band performing in various venues or in their garage .
The shows often contrast suburban life with the adventures of a show - business family on the road .
After the first season , more of the show 's action takes place in their hometown than on tour .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Partridge Family was created for television by Bernard Slade ; the series ' executive producer was Bob Claver .
The show was inspired by and loosely based on The Cowsills , a family pop music group that was famous in the late 1960s .
In the show 's early development , the Cowsill children were considered by the producers , but because the Cowsills were not trained actors and were too old for the roles as scripted , Slade and Claver abandoned that idea .
Shirley Jones had already been signed as mother Shirley Partridge and star of the show .
The pilot was filmed in December 1969 .
This unaired pilot differs from the pilot broadcast in 1970 .
In the unaired pilot , Shirley 's name is " Connie " and she has a boyfriend played by Jones ' real - life husband at the time , Jack Cassidy , father of David Cassidy .
Laurie mentions her late father once getting drunk at a Christmas party , and the family has a different address and live in Ohio .
The show proved popular , but the fame took its toll on several , if not most , of the starring cast , particularly David Cassidy .
In the midst of his rise to fame , Cassidy soon felt stifled by the show and trapped by the mass hysteria surrounding his every move .
In May 1972 , he appeared nude on the cover of Rolling Stone magazine in a cropped Annie Leibovitz photo .
He used the article to get away from his squeaky clean image .
Among other things , the article mentions Cassidy was riding around New York in the back of a car " stoned and drunk . "
Shortly after the series ended , scriptwriter Roberta Tatum launched a lawsuit against Screen Gems concerning the creation of the show .
Tatum claimed that she had submitted a similar premise to Screen Gems prior to 1970 called Baker 's Half - Dozen .
The matter was resolved out of court , with Tatum receiving a reported $ 150,000 from Screen Gems .
CAST AND CHARACTERS
* Shirley Jones as Shirley Partridge : vocals , keyboard , tambourine , percussion * David Cassidy as Keith Partridge :
lead vocals , rhythm guitar , electric lead guitar , banjo * Susan Dey as Laurie Partridge : vocals , harmony , piano , Hammond organ , percussion
* Danny Bonaduce as Danny Partridge : vocals , bass guitar
* Jeremy Gelbwaks as Chris Partridge ( season 1 ) :
vocals , drums * Brian Forster as Chris Partridge ( seasons 2–4 ) : vocals , drums * Suzanne Crough as Tracy Partridge : tambourine , percussion * Dave Madden as Reuben Kincaid : band manager * Ricky Segall as Ricky Stevens ( season 4 ) :
singer * Simone , the family 's pet dog ( season 1 only ) Section::::Cast and characters .
On the show 's soundtrack and records , none of the actors actually played the indicated instruments , and only Jones and primarily Cassidy sang .
The actors pretended while listening to recordings by session musicians who provided the real vocal and instrumental music attributed to The Partridge Family .
NOTABLE GUEST STARS Section::::Notable guest stars .
During its four - season run , many actors made guest appearances on the show .
Some of them were well known at the time , such as Morey Amsterdam , John Astin , Carl Ballantine , John Banner , Edgar Buchanan , George Chakiris , Dick Clark ( who later hosted The Other Half from 2001 to 2003 with Danny Bonaduce ) , Jackie Coogan , Howard Cosell , Jodie Foster , Bernard Fox , Ned Glass , James Gregory , Margaret Hamilton , Pat Harrington Jr. , Arte Johnson , Harvey Lembeck , Art Metrano , Mary Ann Mobley , Harry Morgan , Slim Pickens , Richard Pryor , Barbara Rhoades , William Schallert , Nita Talbot , Larry Wilcox , Dick Wilson , and William Windom .
Others would later become famous in other roles , such as Meredith Baxter , Richard Bull , Bert Convy , Farrah Fawcett , Norman Fell , Anthony Geary , Louis Gossett Jr. , Harold Gould , Jackie Earle Haley , Mark Hamill , Season Hubley , Ann Jillian , Gordon Jump , Cheryl Ladd , Michael Lembeck , William Lucking , Stuart Margolin , Richard Mulligan , Michael Ontkean , Noam Pitlik , Annette O'Toole , Charlotte Rae , Rob Reiner , Jack Riley , Jaclyn Smith , Vic Tayback , Nancy Walker , and Frank Welker .
Country singer Johnny Cash made an uncredited cameo appearance in the pilot episode .
Ray Bolger played Shirley 's father in three episodes , and Rosemary DeCamp played Shirley 's mother in four episodes .
Then - Governor Ronald Reagan 's daughter , Maureen Reagan , was also featured in one episode .
Future Charlie 's Angels stars Jaclyn Smith , Farrah Fawcett and Cheryl Ladd all made guest appearances on separate episodes .
Bobby Sherman appeared in the last episode of the first season ( Episode 25 ) as struggling songwriter Bobby Conway .
This episode led into a short - lived spinoff series on ABC , Getting Together , starring Sherman and Wes Stern as Bobby Conway 's business partner Lionel Poindexter .
EPISODES
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
At the end of the first season , Jeremy Gelbwaks ' family moved out of the Los Angeles area , and the part of Chris was recast with actor Brian Forster .
According to David Cassidy , Gelbwaks " had a personality conflict with every person in the cast and the producers " and especially did not get along with Cassidy or Bonaduce .
A dog named Simone was featured in the first season , but it was phased out during the second season .
At the beginning of the fourth season , a four - year - old neighbor , Ricky Stevens ( Ricky Segall ) , was featured and would sing a children 's song during each episode , but the character was dropped mid - season .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Music recorded for the pilot episode was produced by Monkees ' producer Shorty Rogers .
Songs for the ongoing series were recorded by music producer Wes Farrell .
The Partridge Family songs heard in the show , and on the several Partridge Family singles and albums , were not performed as seen on - screen .
Actor David Cassidy sang lead on most of the records , and actor Shirley Jones can be heard on a few .
But the other voices and all the instruments were recorded by session musicians .
The Partridge Family 's instrumental sound was provided by musicians informally known as The Wrecking Crew , who did many of the pop hits of the day attributed to other performers .
The actors pretended to play their instruments .
None of the actors sang background ; they lip - synched to recorded singing by the Ron Hicklin Singers , composed of brothers John and Tom Bahler , Jackie Ward ( who as Robin Ward had a # 14 hit " Wonderful Summer " on Dot Records in 1963 ) , and Ron Hicklin .
Actor David Cassidy was originally to lip sync with the rest of the cast , but convinced Farrell that he could sing and was allowed to join the studio ensemble as the lead singer .
He and his step - mother , Shirley , are the only two show actors allowed to sing for recording .
The Partridge Family theme song , produced by Rogers , was shown over opening credits .
More than one song was used as the theme song .
Season 1 episodes feature the song " When We 're Singin ' " , which was replaced in subsequent seasons with " C'mon Get Happy " .
" Five of us , and Mom working all day , we knew we could help her if our music would pay , Danny got Reuben to sell our song , and it really came together when Mom sang along ... "
( from " When We 're Singin ' " )
Later , under Farrell 's direction , the new version had new lyrics sung to the " When We 're Singin ' " tune .
With the new chorus finalized , " C'mon Get Happy " showcased the new verse :
" We had a dream , we 'd go travelin ' together ,
We 'd spread a little lovin'
then we 'd keep movin ' on .
Somethin' always happens whenever we 're together
We get a happy feelin ' when we 're singing a song ...
" ( from " C'Mon Get Happy " ) BROADCAST HISTORY Section::::Broadcast history .
For its final season , ABC moved the show from its 8:30 pm Friday night slot ( where it rated first in its timeslot ) to Saturday at 8:00 pm ( opposite CBS ' top - rated All in the Family , with which it could not compete successfully ) .
In the UK , the first three episodes were broadcast in a Friday children 's slot of 17:20 , starting on 17/09/1971 .
From 02/10/1971 , the programme moved to Saturdays at 17:10 , and eight episodes were shown at this time .
A further episode was shown on New Year 's Eve , after which the BBC dropped the programme .
After David Cassidy succeeded with UK Top 30 chart hits the following year , the show was picked up by independent commercial television .
On London Weekend Television , it was shown on Saturday lunchtimes .
After the show 's popularity began to decline in the US , it began to increase in the UK .
This new popularity in the UK gave them five UK Top 20 Hits , some of which were less popular in the States .
After 96 episodes and eight Partridge Family albums , ABC canceled the show .
RATINGS Section::::Ratings . !
Season ! !
Time slot ( ET ) ! !
Rank ! !
Estimated audience SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
Nickelodeon featured a run of The Partridge Family from 1993 to 1994 as part of its Nick at Nite lineup .
The network used interviews and commercials featuring cast members , and created a new version of the bus for promotion .
The show also aired at various times on USA Network , Fox Family , Ion Television , and Hallmark Channel .
, it airs on Antenna TV .
FETV also started airing The Partridge Family in December 2017 .
The cast was reunited in 1977 on the special Thanksgiving Reunion with The Partridge Family and My Three Sons .
Reunited again in the 1990s on The Arsenio Hall Show and The Danny Bonaduce Show and were featured on E !
True Hollywood Story , Biography and VH1 's Behind the Music .
When the digital subchannel Antenna TV premiered in January 2011 , The Partridge Family became one of its offerings through the network 's distribution agreement with Sony Pictures Television ( parent company and successor of series producer Screen Gems ) .
RECEPTION AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Awards and nominations .
Year Association
Category
Result
Grammy Awards
Best
New Artist
rowspan=2 Golden Globe Awards
Best TV Show –
Musical / Comedy Best TV Show –
Musical / Comedy
rowspan=7 TV Land Awards Quintessential Non - Traditional Family Hippest Fashion Plate – Male to David Cassidy Favorite Teen Dream – Female to Susan Dey Irreplaceable Replacement for Brian Forster replacing Jeremy Gelbwaks Favorite Singing Siblings
The Most Irreplaceable Replacement for Brian Forster replacing Jeremy Gelbwaks
Most Beautiful Braces –
Susan Dey
MEDIA DISCOGRAPHY Section::::Media .
Section::::Discography .
The Partridge Family was produced for ABC by Screen Gems .
The company promoted the show by releasing a series of albums featuring the family band , though David Cassidy and Shirley Jones , who sang background , were the only cast members who were actually featured on the recordings .
As the show and other associated merchandising soared , David Cassidy became a teen idol .
The producers signed Cassidy as a solo act as well .
Cassidy began touring with his own group of musicians , performing Partridge songs as well as hits from his own albums , to thousands of screaming teenagers in major stadiums across the USA , UK , Europe , Japan and Australia .
The Partridge Family 's biggest hit came in 1970 with the song "
I Think I Love You " , written by Tony Romeo ( who had previously written several of the Cowsills ' hits ) , peaked at Number 1 on the Billboard charts in December of that year .
It sold over five million copies , outselling the Beatles ' "
Let It Be " , was awarded a gold disc , and made the group the third fictional artist to have a No . 1 hit ( after The Chipmunks and The Archies ) .
The song 's companion LP , The Partridge Family Album , reached Number 4 in the Billboard 200 .
It was also awarded a gold disc by the RIAA in December 1970 , having sold over 500,000 copies .
A string of hit Partridge singles followed : " Does n't Somebody Want to Be Wanted " , " I 'll Meet You Halfway " , " I Woke Up In Love This Morning " , " It 's One of Those Nights ( Yes Love ) " , " Am I Losing You " , " Looking Through the Eyes of Love " , " Breaking Up Is Hard to Do " , and " A Friend and a Lover " .
These singles were showcased on million - selling albums including Up To Date , Sound Magazine , Shopping Bag , Notebook , Crossword Puzzle , and Bulletin Board .
Their holiday album A Partridge Family Christmas Card was the No . 1 selling Christmas record of 1971 .
Record sales success was replicated internationally , with both The Partridge Family ( group ) and David Cassidy ( solo ) achieving huge hits in Canada , Great Britain , Europe , Japan , Australia , New Zealand and South Africa .
In all , The Partridge Family released 89 songs on 9 albums between 1970 and 1973 .
DANNY BONADUCE ALBUM Section::::Danny Bonaduce album .
Though Danny Bonaduce was not part of the session band , he also got a recording contract , and released a self - titled album in 1972 , Danny Bonaduce .
Though Bonaduce was credited as lead singer on all songs , he insists that he had a weak voice and that Bruce Roberts provided most of the vocals on the album .
The first track , " I 'll Be Your Magician " , in which the 13-year - old Bonaduce seduces a woman into having sexual intercourse with him , has developed a cult following for its campy entertainment value .
The original , watered - down , version was recorded with Cassidy for the Sound Magazine album , but was discarded and never released .
In fall 2010 , Cassidy dared Bonaduce to learn how to play the bass guitar lines on the songs the Partridge Family performed .
Bonaduce learned the bass guitar line for " Does n't Somebody Want to Be Wanted " , stating that although he had no ability to read music , the song was relatively easy to learn ; Cassidy and Bonaduce subsequently performed together on rare occasions .
RICKY SEGALL
ALBUM
Section::::Ricky Segall album .
In conjunction with the songs featured by Ricky Segall in the fourth season of the TV show , Bell Records released the album Ricky Segall and The Segalls in 1973 .
Seven of the album 's ten tracks were featured on the TV show .
Two tracks were also released as a single : " Sooner or Later"/"Say Hey Willie " ( Bell 45429 ) .
ANIMATED
SPIN - OFF Section::::Animated spin - off .
The Partridges had a brief resurgence in animated form which saw the family propelled into the future .
The animated Partridges first appeared when the kids did a series of guest spots on Goober and the Ghost Chasers .
That idea evolved into a CBS Saturday morning Hanna - Barbera - produced cartoon in 1974 , Partridge Family 2200 A.D. ( also called The Partridge Family in Outer Space when rerun later as part of Fred Flintstone and Friends ) .
Shirley Jones and David Cassidy did not voice their animated characters and Susan Dey and Dave Madden had very limited involvement with this cartoon .
BOARD GAME Section::::Board game .
Released in 1971 by Milton Bradley , The Partridge Family Game offers a glimpse of what life on the road was like for one of TV 's favorite fictional pop bands .
The back of the box explains , " As on TV , many happenings occur to the Partridge family , this game describes one of them .
They have finished playing at a local arena and must hurry to their BUS to get traveling again .
On the way , they may have some delays .
" The object of the game is to be the first player to get back to the tour bus .
COMIC BOOKS Section::::Comic books .
Charlton Comics produced a comic book featuring The Partridge Family between March 1971 and December 1973 .
It features stories about the characters , song lyrics and features about David Cassidy .
The drawings were provided by Don Sherwood .
REUNION SPECIAL Section::::Reunion special .
Three years after the show 's cancellation , Shirley Jones and other cast members gathered with cast members of My Three Sons for the ABC special Thanksgiving Reunion with The Partridge Family and My Three Sons , that aired on November 25 , 1977 .
The show featured the casts discussing the histories of their shows , although other than Jones and Fred MacMurray both portraying single parents of large families , the two series had no narrative link .
REUNION ON DANNY !
Section::::Reunion on Danny !
In 1995 , a majority of the cast appeared on Bonaduce 's talk show Danny ! , including Shirley Jones , Dave Madden , Jeremy Gelbwaks , Brian Forster , Suzanne Crough , Ricky Segall and the show 's executive producer Bob Claver .
Susan Dey was working on a movie at the time but called into the show to briefly reminisce with Bonaduce .
David Cassidy was also unable to appear as he was working on a new album at that time .
THE NEW PARTRIDGE FAMILY Section::::The New Partridge Family .
In 2004 , VH1 produced a pilot for a syndicated The New Partridge Family , starring Suzanne Sole as Shirley , Leland Grant as Keith , Emma Stone as Laurie and Spencer Tuskowski as Danny .
The pilot was the only episode produced .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home Media .
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment has released all 4 Seasons of The Partridge Family in DVD Region 1 .
Seasons 1 and 2 have been released in Regions 2 and 4 .
On October 15 , 2013 , Sony released The Partridge Family – The Complete Series on DVD in Region 1 .
The 12-disc set features all 96 episodes of the series as well as bonus features .
The Screen Gems closing logo was removed from episodes for the first three seasons on DVD .
On August 27 , 2013 , it was announced that Mill Creek Entertainment had acquired the rights to various television series from the Sony Pictures library including The Partridge Family .
They subsequently re - released the first two seasons on June 24 , 2014 .
On September 22 , 2015 , Mill Creek re - released Partridge Family-
The Complete Series on DVD in Region 1 with the original Screen Gems logo reinstated at the end of the credits .
No U.S. DVD releases contain the epilogue to episode # 25 ( which does appear on Region 2 & 4 releases ) , nor the unaired 1969 pilot , nor any episodes of the spin - off series Getting Together . !
DVD name !
Ep .
# !
Release date
SEE ALSO
* Ron Hicklin Singers
*
The Cowsills
*
The Love Generation
*
The Brady Bunch NOTES REFERENCES *
" The Partridge Family Album " by Joey Green , 1994
HarperCollins Publisher *
* Sonypictures.com * * Vhi.com * EXTERNAL LINKS * Unofficial fan site *
Whatever happened to the Partridge Family ?