ELECTROMAGNET
An electromagnet is a type of magnet in which the magnetic field is produced by an electric current .
The magnetic field disappears when the current is turned off .
Electromagnets usually consist of wire wound into a coil .
A current through the wire creates a magnetic field which is concentrated in the hole in the center of the coil .
The wire turns are often wound around a magnetic core made from a ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic material such as iron ; the magnetic core concentrates the magnetic flux and makes a more powerful magnet .
The main advantage of an electromagnet over a permanent magnet is that the magnetic field can be quickly changed by controlling the amount of electric current in the winding .
However , unlike a permanent magnet that needs no power , an electromagnet requires a continuous supply of current to maintain the magnetic field .
Electromagnets are widely used as components of other electrical devices , such as motors , generators , electromechanical solenoids , relays , loudspeakers , hard disks , MRI machines , scientific instruments , and magnetic separation equipment .
Electromagnets are also employed in industry for picking up and moving heavy iron objects such as scrap iron and steel .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Danish scientist Hans Christian Ørsted discovered in 1820 that electric currents create magnetic fields .
British scientist William Sturgeon invented the electromagnet in 1824 .
His first electromagnet was a horseshoe - shaped piece of iron that was wrapped with about 18 turns of bare copper wire ( insulated wire did n't exist yet ) .
The iron was varnished to insulate it from the windings .
When a current was passed through the coil , the iron became magnetized and attracted other pieces of iron ; when the current was stopped , it lost magnetization .
Sturgeon displayed its power by showing that although it only weighed seven ounces ( roughly 200 grams ) , it could lift nine pounds ( roughly 4 kilos )
when the current of a single - cell battery was applied .
However , Sturgeon 's magnets were weak because the uninsulated wire he used could only be wrapped in a single spaced out layer around the core , limiting the number of turns .
Beginning in 1830 , US scientist Joseph Henry systematically improved and popularized the electromagnet .
By using wire insulated by silk thread , and inspired by Schweigger 's use of multiple turns of wire to make a galvanometer , he was able to wind multiple layers of wire on cores , creating powerful magnets with thousands of turns of wire , including one that could support .
The first major use for electromagnets was in telegraph sounders .
The magnetic domain theory of how ferromagnetic cores work was first proposed in 1906 by French physicist Pierre - Ernest Weiss , and the detailed modern quantum mechanical theory of ferromagnetism was worked out in the 1920s by Werner Heisenberg , Lev Landau , Felix Bloch and others .
USES OF ELECTROMAGNETS Section::::Uses of electromagnets .
A portative electromagnet is one designed to just hold material in place ; an example is a lifting magnet .
A tractive electromagnet applies a force and moves something .
Electromagnets are very widely used in electric and electromechanical devices , including : * Motors and generators * Transformers
* Relays * Electric bells and buzzers * Loudspeakers and headphones * Actuators such as valves * Magnetic recording and data storage equipment : tape recorders , VCRs , hard disks *
MRI machines
* Scientific equipment such as mass spectrometers
* Particle accelerators
* Magnetic locks * Magnetic separation equipment , used for separating magnetic from nonmagnetic material , for example separating ferrous metal from other material in scrap .
* Industrial lifting magnets
* magnetic levitation , used in a maglev train or trains
* Induction heating for cooking , manufacturing , and hyperthermia therapy
SIMPLE SOLENOID
Section::::Simple solenoid .
A common tractive electromagnet is a uniformly - wound solenoid and plunger .
The solenoid is a coil of wire , and the plunger is made of a material such as soft iron .
Applying a current to the solenoid applies a force to the plunger and may make it move .
The plunger stops moving when the forces upon it are balanced .
For example , the forces are balanced when the plunger is centered in the solenoid .
The maximum uniform pull happens when one end of the plunger is at the middle of the solenoid .
An approximation for the force is where is a proportionality constant , is the cross - sectional area of the plunger , is the number of turns in the solenoid , is the current through the solenoid wire , and is the length of the solenoid .
For units using inches , pounds force , and amperes with long , slender , solenoids , the value of is around 0.009 to 0.010 psi ( maximum pull pounds per square inch of plunger cross - sectional area ) .
For example , a 12-inch long coil ( ) with a long plunger of 1-square inch cross section ( ) and 11,200 ampere - turns ( ) had a maximum pull of 8.75 pounds ( corresponding to ) .
The maximum pull is increased when a magnetic stop is inserted into the solenoid .
The stop becomes a magnet that will attract the plunger ; it adds little to the solenoid pull when the plunger is far away but dramatically increases the pull when they are close .
An approximation for the pull is Here is the distance between the end of the stop and the end of the plunger .
The additional constant for units of inches , pounds , and amperes with slender solenoids is about 2660 .
The second term within the bracket represents the same force as the stop - less solenoid above ; the first term represents the attraction between the stop and the plunger .
Some improvements can be made on the basic design .
The ends of the stop and plunger are often conical .
For example , the plunger may have a pointed end that fits into a matching recess in the stop .
The shape makes the solenoid 's pull more uniform as a function of separation .
Another improvement is to add a magnetic return path around the outside of the solenoid ( an " iron - clad solenoid " ) .
The magnetic return path , just as the stop , has little impact until the air gap is small .
PHYSICS Section::::Physics .
An electric current flowing in a wire creates a magnetic field around the wire , due to Ampere 's law ( see drawing below ) .
To concentrate the magnetic field , in an electromagnet the wire is wound into a coil with many turns of wire lying side by side .
The magnetic field of all the turns of wire passes through the center of the coil , creating a strong magnetic field there .
A coil forming the shape of a straight tube ( a helix ) is called a solenoid .
The direction of the magnetic field through a coil of wire can be found from a form of the right - hand rule .
If the fingers of the right hand are curled around the coil in the direction of current flow ( conventional current , flow of positive charge ) through the windings , the thumb points in the direction of the field inside the coil .
The side of the magnet that the field lines emerge from is defined to be the north pole .
Much stronger magnetic fields can be produced if a " magnetic core " of a soft ferromagnetic ( or ferrimagnetic ) material , such as iron , is placed inside the coil .
A core can increase the magnetic field to thousands of times the strength of the field of the coil alone , due to the high magnetic permeability μ of the material .
This is called a ferromagnetic - core or iron - core electromagnet .
However , not all electromagnets use cores , and the very strongest electromagnets , such as superconducting and the very high current electromagnets , can not use them due to saturation .
AMPERE 'S
LAW
Section::::Ampere 's law .
For definitions of the variables below , see box at end of article .
The magnetic field of electromagnets in the general case is given by Ampere 's Law : which says that the integral of the magnetizing field H around any closed loop of the field is equal to the sum of the current flowing through the loop .
Another equation used , that gives the magnetic field due to each small segment of current , is the Biot – Savart law .
Computing the magnetic field and force exerted by ferromagnetic materials is difficult for two reasons .
First , because the strength of the field varies from point to point in a complicated way , particularly outside the core and in air gaps , where fringing fields and leakage flux must be considered .
Second , because the magnetic field B and force are nonlinear functions of the current , depending on the nonlinear relation between B and H for the particular core material used .
For precise calculations , computer programs that can produce a model of the magnetic field using the finite element method are employed .
MAGNETIC CORE Section::::Magnetic core .
The material of a magnetic core ( often made of iron or steel ) is composed of small regions called magnetic domains that act like tiny magnets ( see ferromagnetism ) .
Before the current in the electromagnet is turned on , the domains in the iron core point in random directions , so their tiny magnetic fields cancel each other out , and the iron has no large - scale magnetic field .
When a current is passed through the wire wrapped around the iron , its magnetic field penetrates the iron , and causes the domains to turn , aligning parallel to the magnetic field , so their tiny magnetic fields add to the wire 's field , creating a large magnetic field that extends into the space around the magnet .
The effect of the core is to concentrate the field , and the magnetic field passes through the core more easily than it would pass through air .
The larger the current passed through the wire coil , the more the domains align , and the stronger the magnetic field is .
Finally , all the domains are lined up , and further increases in current only cause slight increases in the magnetic field : this phenomenon is called saturation .
When the current in the coil is turned off , in the magnetically soft materials that are nearly always used as cores , most of the domains lose alignment and return to a random state and the field disappears .
However , some of the alignment persists , because the domains have difficulty turning their direction of magnetization , leaving the core a weak permanent magnet .
This phenomenon is called hysteresis and
the remaining magnetic field is called remanent magnetism .
The residual magnetization of the core can be removed by degaussing .
In alternating current electromagnets , such as are used in motors , the core 's magnetization is constantly reversed , and the remanence contributes to the motor 's losses .
MAGNETIC CIRCUIT – THE CONSTANT B FIELD APPROXIMATION Section::::Magnetic circuit – the constant B field approximation .
In many practical applications of electromagnets , such as motors , generators , transformers , lifting magnets , and loudspeakers , the iron core is in the form of a loop or magnetic circuit , possibly broken by a few narrow air gaps .
This is because the magnetic field lines are in the form of closed loops .
Iron presents much less " resistance " ( reluctance ) to the magnetic field than air , so a stronger field can be obtained if most of the magnetic field 's path is within the core .
Since most of the magnetic field is confined within the outlines of the core loop , this allows a simplification of the mathematical analysis .
See the drawing at right .
A common simplifying assumption satisfied by many electromagnets , which will be used in this section , is that the magnetic field strength B is constant around the magnetic circuit ( within the core and air gaps ) and zero outside it .
Most of the magnetic field will be concentrated in the core material ( C ) .
Within the core the magnetic field ( B ) will be approximately uniform across any cross section , so if in addition the core has roughly constant area throughout its length , the field in the core will be constant .
This just leaves the air gaps ( G ) , if any , between core sections .
In the gaps the magnetic field lines are no longer confined by the core , so they ' bulge ' out beyond the outlines of the core before curving back to enter the next piece of core material , reducing the field strength in the gap .
The bulges ( B ) are called fringing fields .
However , as long as the length of the gap is smaller than the cross section dimensions of the core , the field in the gap will be approximately the same as in the core .
In addition , some of the magnetic field lines ( B ) will take ' short cuts ' and not pass through the entire core circuit , and thus will not contribute to the force exerted by the magnet .
This also includes field lines that encircle the wire windings but do not enter the core .
This is called leakage flux .
Therefore , the equations in this section are valid for electromagnets for which : * the magnetic circuit is a single loop of core material , possibly broken by a few air gaps *
* the core has roughly the same cross sectional area throughout its length .
* * any air gaps between sections of core material are not large compared with the cross sectional dimensions of the core .
*
* there is
negligible leakage flux
*
The main nonlinear feature of ferromagnetic materials is that the B field saturates at a certain value , which is around 1.6 to 2 teslas ( T ) for most high permeability core steels .
The B field increases quickly with increasing current up to that value , but above that value the field levels off and becomes almost constant , regardless of how much current is sent through the windings .
So the maximum strength of the magnetic field possible from an iron core electromagnet is limited to around 1.6 to 2 T. MAGNETIC FIELD CREATED BY A CURRENT Section::::Magnetic field created by a current .
The magnetic field created by an electromagnet is proportional to both the number of turns in the winding , N , and the current in the wire , I , hence this product , NI , in ampere - turns , is given the name magnetomotive force .
For an electromagnet with a single magnetic circuit , of which length L of the magnetic field path is in the core material and length L is in air gaps , Ampere 's Law reduces to :
This is a nonlinear equation , because the permeability of the core , μ , varies with the magnetic field B.
For an exact solution , the value of μ at the B value used must be obtained from the core material hysteresis curve .
If B is unknown , the equation must be solved by numerical methods .
However , if the magnetomotive force is well above saturation , so the core material is in saturation , the magnetic field will be approximately the saturation value B for the material , and wo n't vary much with changes in NI .
For a closed magnetic circuit ( no air gap ) most core materials saturate at a magnetomotive force of roughly 800 ampere - turns per meter of flux path .
For most core materials , formula_9 .
So in equation ( 1 ) above , the second term dominates .
Therefore , in magnetic circuits with an air gap , the strength of the magnetic field B depends strongly on the length of the air gap , and the length of the flux path in the core does n't matter much .
Given an air gap of 1 mm , a magnetomotive force of about 796 Ampere - turns is required to produce a magnetic field of 1T. FORCE EXERTED BY MAGNETIC FIELD Section::::Force exerted by magnetic field .
The force exerted by an electromagnet on a section of core material is : where formula_11 is the cross - sectional area of the core .
The force equation can be derived from the energy stored in a magnetic field .
Energy is force times distance .
Rearranging terms yields the equation above .
The 1.6 T limit on the field mentioned above sets a limit on the maximum force per unit core area , or magnetic pressure , an iron - core electromagnet can exert ; roughly : In more intuitive units it 's useful to remember that at 1 T the magnetic pressure is approximately 4 atmospheres , or kg / cm .
Given a core geometry , the B field needed for a given force can be calculated from ( 2 ) ; if it comes out to much more than 1.6 T , a larger core must be used .
CLOSED MAGNETIC CIRCUIT Section::::Closed magnetic circuit .
For a closed magnetic circuit ( no air gap ) , such as would be found in an electromagnet lifting a piece of iron bridged across its poles ,
equation ( 1 ) becomes : Substituting into ( 2 ) , the force is : It can be seen that to maximize the force , a core with a short flux path L and a wide cross - sectional area
A is preferred ( this also applies to magnets with an air gap ) .
To achieve this , in applications like lifting magnets ( see photo above ) and loudspeakers a flat cylindrical design is often used .
The winding is wrapped around a short wide cylindrical core that forms one pole , and a thick metal housing that wraps around the outside of the windings forms the other part of the magnetic circuit , bringing the magnetic field to the front to form the other pole .
FORCE BETWEEN ELECTROMAGNETS Section::::Force between electromagnets .
The above methods are applicable to electromagnets with a magnetic circuit and do not apply when a large part of the magnetic field path is outside the core .
An example would be a magnet with a straight cylindrical core like the one shown at the top of this article .
For electromagnets ( or permanent magnets ) with well defined ' poles ' where the field lines emerge from the core , the force between two electromagnets can be found using the ' Gilbert model ' which assumes the magnetic field is produced by fictitious ' magnetic charges ' on the surface of the poles , with pole strength m and units of Ampere - turn meter .
Magnetic pole strength of electromagnets can be found from : formula_15
The force between two poles is : formula_16
This model does n't give the correct magnetic field inside the core and thus gives incorrect results if the pole of one magnet gets too close to another magnet .
SIDE EFFECTS Section::::Side effects .
There are several side effects which occur in electromagnets which must be provided for in their design .
These generally become more significant in larger electromagnets .
OHMIC HEATING Section::::Ohmic heating .
The only power consumed in a DC electromagnet under steady state conditions is due to the resistance of the windings , and is dissipated as heat .
Some large electromagnets require cooling water circulating through pipes in the windings to carry off the waste heat .
Since the magnetic field is proportional to the product NI , the number of turns in the windings N and the current I can be chosen to minimize heat losses , as long as their product is constant .
Since the power dissipation , P = IR , increases with the square of the current but only increases approximately linearly with the number of windings , the power lost in the windings can be minimized by reducing I and increasing the number of turns N proportionally , or using thicker wire to reduce the resistance .
For example , halving I and doubling N halves the power loss , as does doubling the area of the wire .
In either case , increasing the amount of wire reduces the ohmic losses .
For this reason , electromagnets often have a significant thickness of windings .
However , the limit to increasing N or lowering the resistance is that the windings take up more room between the magnet 's core pieces .
If the area available for the windings is filled up , more turns require going to a smaller diameter of wire , which has higher resistance , which cancels the advantage of using more turns .
So in large magnets there is a minimum amount of heat loss that ca n't be reduced .
This increases with the square of the magnetic flux
B.
INDUCTIVE
VOLTAGE SPIKES
Section::::Inductive voltage spikes .
An electromagnet has significant inductance , and resists changes in the current through its windings .
Any sudden changes in the winding current cause large voltage spikes across the windings .
This is because when the current through the magnet is increased , such as when it is turned on , energy from the circuit must be stored in the magnetic field .
When it is turned off the energy in the field is returned to the circuit .
If an ordinary switch is used to control the winding current , this can cause sparks at the terminals of the switch .
This does n't occur when the magnet is switched on , because the limited supply voltage causes the current through the magnet and the field energy to increase slowly , but when it is switched off , the energy in the magnetic field is suddenly returned to the circuit , causing a large voltage spike and an arc across the switch contacts , which can damage them .
With small electromagnets a capacitor is sometimes used across the contacts , which reduces arcing by temporarily storing the current .
More often a diode is used to prevent voltage spikes by providing a path for the current to recirculate through the winding until the energy is dissipated as heat .
The diode is connected across the winding , oriented so it is reverse - biased during steady state operation and does n't conduct .
When the supply voltage is removed , the voltage spike forward - biases the diode and the reactive current continues to flow through the winding , through the diode and back into the winding .
A diode used in this way is called a freewheeling diode or flyback diode .
Large electromagnets are usually powered by variable current electronic power supplies , controlled by a microprocessor , which prevent voltage spikes by accomplishing current changes slowly , in gentle ramps .
It may take several minutes to energize or deenergize a large magnet .
LORENTZ FORCES Section::::Lorentz forces .
In powerful electromagnets , the magnetic field exerts a force on each turn of the windings , due to the Lorentz force
formula_17 acting on the moving charges within the wire .
The Lorentz force is perpendicular to both the axis of the wire and the magnetic field .
It can be visualized as a pressure between the magnetic field lines , pushing them apart .
It has two effects on an electromagnet 's windings : * The field lines within the axis of the coil exert a radial force on each turn of the windings , tending to push them outward in all directions .
This causes a tensile stress in the wire .
*
The leakage field lines between each turn of the coil exert a repulsive force between adjacent turns , tending to push them apart .
The Lorentz forces increase with B.
In large electromagnets the windings must be firmly clamped in place , to prevent motion on power - up and power - down from causing metal fatigue in the windings .
In the Bitter design , below , used in very high field research magnets , the windings are constructed as flat disks to resist the radial forces , and clamped in an axial direction to resist the axial ones .
CORE LOSSES
Section::::Core losses .
In alternating current ( AC ) electromagnets , used in transformers , inductors , and AC motors and generators , the magnetic field is constantly changing .
This causes energy losses in their magnetic cores that is dissipated as heat in the core .
The losses stem from two processes :
* Eddy currents :
From Faraday 's law of induction , the changing magnetic field induces circulating electric currents inside nearby conductors , called eddy currents .
The energy in these currents is dissipated as heat in the electrical resistance of the conductor , so they are a cause of energy loss .
Since the magnet 's iron core is conductive , and most of the magnetic field is concentrated there , eddy currents in the core are the major problem .
Eddy currents are closed loops of current that flow in planes perpendicular to the magnetic field .
The energy dissipated is proportional to the area enclosed by the loop .
To prevent them , the cores of AC electromagnets are made of stacks of thin steel sheets , or laminations , oriented parallel to the magnetic field , with an insulating coating on the surface .
The insulation layers prevent eddy current from flowing between the sheets .
Any remaining eddy currents must flow within the cross - section of each individual lamination , which reduces losses greatly .
Another alternative is to use a ferrite core , which is a nonconductor .
* Hysteresis losses : Reversing the direction of magnetization of the magnetic domains in the core material each cycle causes energy loss , because of the coercivity of the material .
These losses are called hysteresis .
The energy lost per cycle is proportional to the area of the hysteresis loop in the BH graph .
To minimize this loss , magnetic cores used in transformers and other AC electromagnets are made of " soft " low coercivity materials , such as silicon steel or soft ferrite .
The energy loss per cycle of the AC current is constant for each of these processes , so the power loss increases linearly with frequency .
HIGH FIELD
ELECTROMAGNETS SUPERCONDUCTING ELECTROMAGNETS Section::::High field electromagnets .
Section::::Superconducting electromagnets .
When a magnetic field higher than the ferromagnetic limit of 1.6 T is needed , superconducting electromagnets can be used .
Instead of using ferromagnetic materials , these use superconducting windings cooled with liquid helium , which conduct current without electrical resistance .
These allow enormous currents to flow , which generate intense magnetic fields .
Superconducting magnets are limited by the field strength at which the winding material ceases to be superconducting .
Current designs are limited to 10–20 T , with the current ( 2017 ) record of 32 T.
The necessary refrigeration equipment and cryostat make them much more expensive than ordinary electromagnets .
However , in high power applications this can be offset by lower operating costs , since after startup no power is required for the windings , since no energy is lost to ohmic heating .
They are used in particle accelerators and MRI machines .
BITTER ELECTROMAGNETS Section::::Bitter electromagnets .
Both iron - core and superconducting electromagnets have limits to the field they can produce .
Therefore , the most powerful man - made magnetic fields have been generated by air - core nonsuperconducting electromagnets of a design invented by Francis Bitter in 1933 , called Bitter electromagnets .
Instead of wire windings , a Bitter magnet consists of a solenoid made of a stack of conducting disks , arranged so that the current moves in a helical path through them , with a hole through the center where the maximum field is created .
This design has the mechanical strength to withstand the extreme Lorentz forces of the field , which increase with B.
The disks are pierced with holes through which cooling water passes to carry away the heat caused by the high current .
The strongest continuous field achieved solely with a resistive magnet is 37.5 T , produced by a Bitter electromagnet at the Radboud University High Field Magnet Laboratory in Nijmegen , Holland .
The previous record was 35 T.
The strongest continuous magnetic field overall , 45 T , was achieved in June 2000 with a hybrid device consisting of a Bitter magnet inside a superconducting magnet .
EXPLOSIVELY PUMPED FLUX COMPRESSION
Section::::Explosively pumped flux compression .
The factor limiting the strength of electromagnets is the inability to dissipate the enormous waste heat , so more powerful fields , up to 100 T , have been obtained from resistive magnets by sending brief pulses of high current through them ; the inactive period after each pulse allows the heat produced during the pulse to be removed , before the next pulse .
The most powerful manmade magnetic fields have been created by using explosives to compress the magnetic field inside an electromagnet as it is pulsed ; these are called explosively pumped flux compression generators .
The implosion compresses the magnetic field to values of around 1000 T for a few microseconds .
While this method may seem very destructive , it is possible to redirect the brunt of the blast radially outwards so that neither the experiment nor the magnetic structure are harmed .
These devices are known as destructive pulsed electromagnets .
They are used in physics and materials science research to study the properties of materials at high magnetic fields .
DEFINITION OF TERMS Section::::Definition of terms .
width="40"formula_18width="130
" square metercross sectional area of core formula_19teslaMagnetic field ( Magnetic flux density ) formula_20newtonForce exerted by magnetic field formula_21ampere per meterMagnetizing field formula_22ampereCurrent in the winding wire
formula_23meterTotal length of the magnetic field path
formula_24 formula_25meterLength of the magnetic field path in the core material formula_26meterLength of the magnetic field path in air gaps
formula_27ampere meter
Pole strength of the electromagnet formula_28newton per square amperePermeability of the electromagnet core material formula_29newton per square amperePermeability of free space ( or air ) =
4π(10 )
formula_30 Relative permeability of the electromagnet core material
formula_31Number of turns of wire
on the electromagnet formula_32meter Distance between the poles of two electromagnets SEE ALSO * Dipole magnet – The most basic form of magnet
* Electromagnetism * Electropermanent magnet - a magnetically hard electromagnet arrangement
* Explosively pumped flux compression generator
* Field coil *
Magnetic bearing * Pulsed field magnet *
Quadrupole magnet – a combination of magnets and electromagnets used mainly to affect the motion of charged particles .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Magnets from Mini to Mighty : Primer on electromagnets and other magnets National High Magnetic Field Laboratory * Magnetic Fields and Forces Cuyahoga Community College * Fundamental Relationships School of Geology and Geophysics , University of Oklahoma