JUSTICE LEAGUE
The Justice League is a team of fictional superheroes appearing in American comic books published by DC Comics .
The Justice League was conceived by writer Gardner Fox , and they first appeared together , as Justice League of America ( JLA ) in The Brave and the Bold # 28 ( March 1960 ) .
The Justice League is an assemblage of superheroes who join together as a team .
The seven original members were Aquaman , Batman , The Flash , Green Lantern , Martian Manhunter , Superman and Wonder Woman .
The team roster has rotated throughout the years , consisting of various superheroes from the DC Universe , such as The Atom , Big Barda , Black Canary , Cyborg , Green Arrow , Elongated Man , The Flash , Green Lantern , Hawkgirl , Hawkman , Metamorpho , Plastic Man , Power Girl , Orion , Red Tornado , Stargirl , Captain Marvel / Shazam and Zatanna , among many others .
The team received its own comic book title called Justice League of America in November 1960 .
With the 2011 relaunch , DC Comics released a second volume of Justice League .
In July 2016 , the DC Rebirth initiative again relaunched the Justice League comic book titles with the third volume of Justice League .
Since its inception , the team has been featured in various films , television programs and video games .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Various comic book series featuring the Justice League have remained generally popular with fans since inception and , in most incarnations , its roster includes DC 's most popular characters .
The Justice League concept has also been adapted into various other entertainment media , including various forms of television from the classic Saturday morning
Super Friends animated series ( 1973–1986 ) , a live action series of specials Legends of the Superheroes ( 1979 ) , an unproduced Justice League of America live - action series ( for which the pilot film exists ) , the acclaimed Justice League animated series ( 2001–2004 ) , its sequel Justice League Unlimited ( 2004–2006 ) and Justice League Action ( 2016–present ) .
A live - action film was also in the works around 2008 before being shelved .
On June 6 , 2012 , Warner Bros. announced a new live action Justice League film was in development with Will Beall hired as screenwriter .
However , the project was scrapped again .
After the success of the Superman reboot Man of Steel , a film titled was released in March 2016 , directed by Zack Snyder .
Batman v Superman script writer Chris Terrio has also penned the script for Justice League .
VARIOUS ORIGINS OF THE JUSTICE LEAGUE Section::::Various origins of the Justice League .
In a story told in flashback in Justice League of America # 9 ( February 1962 ) , the Appelaxians infiltrated Earth .
Competing alien warriors were sent to see who could conquer Earth first , to determine who will become the new ruler of their home planet .
The aliens ' attacks drew the attentions of Aquaman , Batman , Flash ( Barry Allen ) , Green Lantern ( Hal Jordan ) , Martian Manhunter , Superman and Wonder Woman .
While the superheroes individually defeated most of the invaders , the heroes fell prey to a single competitor 's attack ; only by working together were they able to defeat the competitor .
For many years , the heroes heralded this adventure as the event that prompted them to agree to pool resources when confronted with similar menaces .
In Justice League of America # 144 ( July 1977 ) , Green Arrow uncovered inconsistencies in the team 's records and extracted admissions from his colleagues that the seven founders had actually formed the League after Martian Manhunter was rescued from Martian forces by the other six founders , along with several other heroes including Robin , Robotman , Congorilla , Rex the Wonder Dog , and even Lois Lane .
Green Lantern participated in this first adventure solely as Hal Jordan , as he had yet to become the costumed hero , the biggest inconsistency Arrow found , as they celebrated the earlier incident 's date , while recounting only the later one 's events .
When the group formalized their agreement , they suppressed news of it because of anti - Martian hysteria .
Because the heroes had not revealed their identities to each other at the time , they did not realize that Jordan and Green Lantern were one and the same when he turned up in costume during the event described in # 9 .
While most subsequent accounts of the League have made little mention of this first adventure , the animated Justice League series adapted this tale as the origin of the Justice League as well .
Secret Origins vol .
2 ,
# 32 ( Nov. 1988 ) updated Justice League of America # 9 's origin for post - Crisis continuity .
Differences included the inclusion of the Silver Age Black Canary as a founding member and the absence of Batman , Wonder Woman and Superman .
The JLA :
Year One limited series , by Mark Waid , Brian Augustyn and Barry Kitson , further expanded the Secret Origins depiction .
In Justice League Task Force # 16 ( Sept. 1994 ) , during Zero Hour , a then unknown superhuman named Triumph appeared .
Triumph was revealed to have been a founding member of the Justice League and was their leader .
On his first mission with the Justice League , Triumph seemingly " saved the world " but was teleported into a dimensional limbo that also affected the timestream , erasing all memory of him .
In Infinite Crisis # 7 ( June 2006 ) , the formation of " New Earth " ( the new name for the post - Crisis Earth ) restored Wonder Woman as a founding member of the Justice League .
In Brad Meltzer 's Justice League of America ( vol . 2 )
# 0 ( September 2006 ) , it was revealed that Superman and Batman were again founding members as well .
52
# 51 ( June 2007 ) confirmed that the 1989 Secret Origins and JLA :
Year One origins were still in continuity at that time , with Superman , Batman and Wonder Woman joining the team with founding members ' status shortly after the group 's formation with Aquaman , Black Canary , Flash , Green Lantern and Martian Manhunter .
In Justice League of America # 12 ( October 2007 ) , the founding members of the Justice League were shown to be Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Green Lantern ( Hal Jordan ) , Flash ( Barry Allen ) , Aquaman , and the Martian Manhunter .
With DC 's history rewritten due to the Flashpoint limited series , an entirely new origin for the Justice League appeared in the subsequent Justice League series which debuted with an October 2011 cover date as part of the company - wide event , The New 52 .
Issue # 1 portrayed the first meeting between Batman and Hal Jordan , with the two encountering each other during a battle against a Parademon in Gotham City .
After realizing the creature is extraterrestrial in origin , the two heroes head to Metropolis to seek out Superman only to be attacked by him .
Later , after a brief fight in which the Flash arrives and Batman convinces Superman they are on the same side , they move to an abandoned building to work on analyzing a mysterious alien box , when it suddenly activates and more Parademons arrive .
While fighting the Parademons , Aquaman and Wonder Woman appear and join forces with the other heroes .
The mysterious box leads to Darkseid 's arrival on Earth , and the heroes come together , along with the newcomer Cyborg , to defeat him .
The public becomes enamored with the heroes , and a writer dubs the group the " Justice League " , following the Flash 's suggestion of " Super Seven " .
JUSTICE LEAGUE Section::::Justice League .
!
width=22 % Character ! width=17
%
Real name !
width=21 % Joined in !
width=40 % Notes
The Justice League was rebooted in 2011 .
Aquaman Arthur Curry
rowspan=7Justice League Vol . 2
# 6 Batman Bruce Wayne
Cyborg Victor Stone Flash Barry Allen Green Lantern
Hal Jordan
Superman Kal - El / Clark Kent Wonder Woman Princess Diana / Diana Prince Co - Founder of the Justice League ; Active in the team and as leader in the Justice League Dark Martian Manhunter J'onn J'onzz / John Jones Between Justice League Vol .
2
# 6 and Justice League Vol .
2 # 7 Joined but later attacked the Justice League and left , as noted in Justice League vol . 2 # 8.Former member of Stormwatch .
Former member of the Justice League of America .
The Atom / Atomica Rhonda Pineda rowspan=3Justice League Vol .
2 # 18 Died in Forever Evil # 7 .
Element Woman
Emily Sung
rowspan=2 Left after Forever Evil # 7 Firestorm Ronnie Raymond and Jason Rusch Shazam
Billy Batson Justice League Vol .
2
# 31 rowspan=3
No longer a member after the DC Rebirth event Lex Luthor rowspan=2Justice League Vol .
2 # 33 Captain Cold Justice League Vol .
2 # 35 Left the team in Justice League Vol .
3 # 8 but returned in Vol .
3 # 11 Black Canary Dinah Drake
The Ray Ray Terrill Killer Frost Caitlin Snow
The Atom Ryan Choi Vixen Mari McCabe Co - Founder and former member of the Justice League of America II ; Active in the Justice Foundation and as a reserve member in the main Justice League ; former member of the Justice League International Justice League Vol . 3 # 24 Active as a reserve member ; Former member of the Justice League
United Green Arrow Oliver Queen Active as a reserve member ; Former member of the Justice League
United Hawkgirl Kendra Saunders
" Dark Nights Metal # 6 Former member of the BlackHawks Green Lantern John Stewart Also active in the Green Lantern Corps Active as a reserve member ; Former member of the Justice League United Animal Man Bernhard Baker Active as a reserve member ; Former member of the Justice League
United Hawkman Carter Hall
Mister Terrific Michael Holt Plastic Man Patrick O'Brian
Swamp Thing Alec Holland
Active in the Justice League Dark and as a reserve member in the Justice League
The Atom Ray Palmer Active as a reserve member
Miss Martian M'gann M'orzz
Active as a liaison of the league to the Titans Firestorm Ronnie Raymond and Martin Stein Green Lantern Guy Gardner ANTAGONISTS
Section::::Antagonists .
The Justice League often unite to face supervillains who pose catastrophic challenges to the world .
RELATED SERIES Section::::Related series .
Throughout the years , various incarnations or subsections of the team have operated as Justice League Dark , Justice League Europe , Justice League International , Justice League Task Force , Justice League Elite , Justice League United , and Extreme Justice .
FORMERLY KNOWN
AS THE JUSTICE LEAGUE Section::::Formerly Known as the Justice League .
In 2003 , Giffen , DeMatteis , and Maguire returned with a separate limited series called Formerly Known as the Justice League with the same humor as their Justice League run , and featuring some of the same characters in a team called the " Super Buddies " ( a parody of the Super Friends ) .
A follow - up limited series , entitled I Ca n't Believe It 's Not the Justice League , soon was prepared , although it was delayed due to the events shown in the Identity Crisis limited series , but was eventually released as the second arc in JLA :
Classified .
The Super Buddies consisted of Blue Beetle , Booster Gold , Captain Atom , Fire , Mary Marvel , the Elongated Man with his wife , Sue Dibny , Maxwell Lord , and L - Ron .
The second story arc of JLA :
Classified focuses on the Super Buddies in a humorous story that features Power Girl , Guy Gardner , with and associated by Doctor Fate .
JLA / AVENGERS Section::::JLA / Avengers .
In 2003–2004 , George Pérez and Kurt Busiek produced a JLA / Avengers crossover , an idea that had been delayed for 20 years for various reasons .
In this limited series , the Justice League and Marvel Comics ' superhero team the Avengers were forced to find key artifacts in one another 's universe , as well as deal with the threats of villains Krona and the Grandmaster .
JLA :
CLASSIFIED
Section::::JLA :
Classified .
In 2004 , DC began an anthology series titled JLA :
Classified , which would feature rotating writers and artists producing self - contained story arcs and aborted miniseries projects that were reappropriated for publication within the pages of the series , starring the JLA .
While the bulk of the stories took place within the continuity of the series ( circa JLA # 76–113 ) some of the stories take place outside of regular DC Universe canon .
The series was canceled as of issue # 54 ( May 2008 ) .
JUSTICE Section::::Justice .
In October 2005 , DC began publishing the 12-issue miniseries Justice by writer Jim Krueger , writer / illustrator Alex Ross , and artist Doug Braithwaite .
The story , which takes place outside regular DC continuity , has Lex Luthor assembling the Legion of Doom after he and several other villains begin to have nightmares about the end of the world and the failure of the Justice League to prevent the apocalypse .
As the Legion begins engaging in unprecedented humanitarian deeds throughout the world , they also launch a series of attacks on the Justice League and their families .
The threat that the Legion was warned about destroying the Earth turns out to be caused by Brainiac , who seeks to destroy Earth during the chaos .
JUSTICE LEAGUE :
CRY FOR JUSTICE Section::::Justice League : Cry for Justice .
Originally planned as an ongoing title , Justice League : Cry For Justice is a miniseries created by writer James Robinson and artist Mauro Cascioli .
The miniseries , set after the events of Final Crisis , has Hal Jordan leaving the League following the deaths of Batman and Martian Manhunter , as their deaths have caused Hal to seek a more proactive manner of dealing with supervillains .
Hal , along with Green Arrow , and later joined by Supergirl , Captain Marvel Jr. , and Batwoman are then recruited by Ray Palmer to investigate a murder of a former colleague that had been carried out on orders from Prometheus .
This ties into another string of murders , bringing Starman Mikaal Tomas and Congorilla together as their investigation of the murders of several European superheroes are also revealed to be the work of Prometheus .
With help from the Hawkman villain I.Q. , Prometheus plans on creating the ultimate weapon in mass murder , a massive doomsday device which he plans on using to destroy entire cities , as part of his revenge scheme against the JLA for lobotomizing him .
Disguised as Captain Marvel Jr. , Prometheus maims Roy Harper and brutally injures JLA members Dr. Light II , Vixen , and Plastic Man while using the JLA Satellite to activate his doomsday device , which destroys Star City , killing 90,000 innocent civilians , including Roy Harper 's young daughter Lian .
Prometheus ultimately extorts his freedom from the League in exchange for the codes that will shut down his weapon , much to the horror of the JLA members .
Green Arrow ( with help from reformed supervillain the Shade ) , tracks Prometheus down and kills him by firing an arrow into his head .
The miniseries leads directly into the formation of a brand new JLA roster with Green Lantern Hal Jordan , Donna Troy , Dick Grayson as Batman , Doctor Light ( Kimiyo Hoshi ) , Mon - El , Cyborg , Starfire , Congorilla , Guardian , and Mikaal Tomas .
JLA /
THE 99 Section::::JLA /
The 99 .
Launching in October 2010 , JLA / The 99 was a crossover mini - series featuring the Justice League teaming up with the heroes of Teshkeel Comics ' The 99 series .
The JLA consisted of Batman , Superman , Wonder Woman , Green Lantern ( John Stewart ) , The Flash ( Barry Allen ) , The Atom ( Ray Palmer ) , Doctor Light ( Kimiyo Hoshi ) , Hawkman , and Firestorm ( Jason Rusch ) .
PUBLICATION HISTORY
GOLDEN AGE Section::::Publication history .
Section::::Golden Age .
Having successfully reintroduced a number of DC Comics ' ( then known as National Periodical Publications )
Golden Age superhero characters ( Flash , Green Lantern , etc . )
during the late 1950s , editor Julius Schwartz asked writer Gardner Fox to reintroduce the Justice Society of America .
Schwartz , influenced by the popularity of Major League Baseball 's National League and American League , decided to change the name of the team from the Justice Society of America ( JSA ) to the Justice League of America ( JLA ) .
The Justice League of America debuted in The Brave and the Bold # 28 ( March 1960 ) , and after two further appearances in that title , got their own series which quickly became one of the company 's best - selling titles .
Fox and artist
Mike Sekowsky were the creative team for the title 's first eight years .
Sekowsky 's last issue was # 63 ( June 1968 ) and Fox departed with # 65 ( September 1968 ) .
Schwartz was the new title 's editor and oversaw it until 1979 .
SILVER AND BRONZE AGE Section::::Silver and Bronze Age .
The initial Justice League lineup included seven of DC Comics ' superheroes who were regularly published at that time : Superman , Batman , Aquaman , Flash , Green Lantern , Martian Manhunter , and Wonder Woman .
Rarely featured in most of the stories , Superman and Batman did not even appear on the cover most of the time .
Three of DC 's other surviving or revived characters , Green Arrow , the Atom , and Hawkman were added to the roster over the next four years .
The Justice League operated from a secret cave outside of the small town of Happy Harbor , Rhode Island .
A teenager named Lucas " Snapper " Carr tagged along on missions , becoming both the team 's mascot and an official member .
Snapper , noted for speaking in beatnik dialect and snapping his fingers , helped the group defeat the giant space starfish
Starro the Conqueror in the team 's first appearance .
The supervillain Doctor Light first battled the team in issue # 12 ( June 1962 ) .
Justice League of America # 21 and # 22 ( August – September 1963 ) saw the first team - up of the Justice League and the Justice Society of America as well as the first use of the term " Crisis " in reference to a crossover between the characters .
The following year 's team - up with the Justice Society introduced the threat of the Crime Syndicate of America of Earth - Three .
The character Metamorpho was offered membership in the Justice League but declined .
Following the departures of Gardner Fox and Mike Sekowsky , writer Denny O'Neil and artist Dick Dillin became the new creative team .
Dillin would draw the title from issue # 64 ( August 1968 ) through # 183 ( October 1980 ) .
O'Neil reshaped the Justice League 's membership by removing Wonder Woman in issue # 69 and the Martian Manhunter in issue # 71 .
Following the JLA – JSA team - up in issues # 73–74 and the death of her husband , the Black Canary decided to move from Earth - Two to Earth - One to make a fresh start , where she joins the Justice League .
The following issue saw the character develop the superpower known as her " canary cry " .
In issue # 77 ( December 1969 ) , Snapper Carr is tricked into betraying the cave headquarters ' secret location to the Joker , resulting in his resignation from the team .
SATELLITE YEARS
Section::::Satellite years .
In need of a new secure headquarters , the Justice League moved into an orbiting satellite headquarters in Justice League of America # 78 ( February 1970 ) .
The Elongated Man , the Red Tornado , Hawkgirl , Zatanna , and Firestorm joined the team , and Wonder Woman returned during this period .
Len Wein wrote issues # 100–114 , in which he and Dillin re - introduced the Seven Soldiers of Victory in issues # 100–102 and the Freedom Fighters in issues # 107–108 .
In the fall of 1972 , Wein and writers Gerry Conway and Steve Englehart crafted a metafictional unofficial crossover spanning titles from both Marvel and DC .
Each comic featured Englehart , Conway , and Wein , as well as Wein 's first wife Glynis , interacting with Marvel or DC characters at the Rutland Halloween Parade in Rutland , Vermont .
Beginning in Amazing Adventures # 16 ( by Englehart with art by Bob Brown and Frank McLaughlin ) , the story continued in Justice League of America # 103 ( by Wein , Dillin and Dick Giordano ) , and concluded in Thor # 207 ( by Conway and penciler John Buscema ) .
As Englehart explained in 2010 , " It certainly seemed like a radical concept and we knew that we had to be subtle ( laughs ) and each story had to stand on its own , but we really worked it out .
It 's really worthwhile to read those stories back to back to back — it did n't matter to us that one was at DC and two were at Marvel
— I think it was us being creative , thinking what would be really cool to do . "
Justice League of America # 103 also featured the Justice League offering membership to the Phantom Stranger .
Len Wein commented on the Phantom Stranger 's relationship with the JLA in a 2012 interview stating that the character " only sort of joined .
He was offered membership but vanished , as per usual , without actually accepting the offer .
Over the years , other writers have just assumed [ he ] was a member , but in my world , he never really said yes . "
Issues # 110 ( March – April 1974 ) to # 116 ( March – April 1975 ) of the series were in the 100 Page Super Spectacular format .
Libra , a supervillain created by Wein and Dillin in Justice League of America
# 111 ( May – June 1974 ) , would play a leading role in Grant Morrison 's Final Crisis storyline in 2008 .
Writers Cary Bates and Elliot S. Maggin wrote themselves into the 1975 JLA – JSA crossover in issues # 123 - 124 with Bates becoming a supervillain .
Wonder Woman rejoined the team following a major two - year story arc , largely written by Martin Pasko .
To prove her worthiness to rejoin the JLA , Wonder Woman voluntarily underwent twelve trials analogous to the labors of Hercules , each of which was monitored in secret by a member of the JLA .
After the conclusion of the storyline in Wonder Woman # 222 , the character 's return to the JLA occurred in a two - part story in Justice League of America
# 128–129 ( March – April 1976 ) .
Steve Englehart wrote the series beginning with issue # 139 and provided another unofficial crossover with Marvel Comics in issue # 142 by reworking his character Mantis into the DC Universe as a character named " Willow " .
Englehart left the title with issue # 150 .
From issue # 139 to # 157 on , the issues were giant - sized .
Writer Gerry Conway had a lengthy association with the title as well .
His first JLA story appeared in issue # 125 ( December 1975 ) and he became the series ' regular writer with issue # 151 ( February 1978 ) .
With a few exceptions , Conway would write the team 's adventures until issue # 255 ( October 1986 ) .
Julius Schwartz , who had edited the title since the first issue , left the series with issue # 165 ( April 1979 ) .
The 1979 crossover with the Justice Society in issues # 171 and 172 saw the death of the original Mister Terrific .
After Dick Dillin 's death , George Pérez , Don Heck , and Rich Buckler would rotate as artist on the title .
The double - sized anniversary issue # 200 ( March 1982 ) was a " jam " featuring a story written by Conway , a framing sequence drawn by Pérez , and chapters drawn by Pat Broderick , Jim Aparo , Dick Giordano , Gil Kane , Carmine Infantino , Brian Bolland , and Joe Kubert .
Bolland 's chapter gave the artist his " first stab at drawing Batman .
" Pérez would leave the title with issue # 200 to concentrate on The New Teen Titans although he would contribute covers to the JLA through issue # 220 ( November 1983 ) .
The 1982 team - up with the Justice Society in issues # 207–209 crossed over with All - Star Squadron # 14–15 .
A Justice League story by Gerry Conway and Rich Buckler originally intended for publication as an issue of All - New Collectors ' Edition saw print in Justice League of America # 210–212 ( January – March 1983 ) .
DETROIT Section::::Detroit .
Seeking to capitalize on the popularity of their other team books , which focused upon heroes in their late teens / early 20s , Gerry Conway and artist Chuck Patton revamped the Justice League series .
After most of the original heroes fail to help fend off an invasion of Martians , Aquaman dissolves the League and rewrites its charter to allow only heroes who will devote their full - time to the roster .
The new team initially consists of Aquaman , Zatanna , Martian Manhunter , Elongated Man , the Vixen , and a trio of teenage heroes Gypsy , Steel , and Vibe .
Aquaman leaves the team after a year , due to resolving marital problems , and his role as leader is assumed by the Martian Manhunter .
The final storyline for the original Justice League of America series ( # 258–261 ) , by writer J. M. DeMatteis and artist Luke McDonnell , concludes with the murders of Vibe and Steel at the hands of robots created by long - time League nemesis Professor Ivo , and the resignations of Vixen , Gypsy , and the Elongated Man during the events of DC 's Legends miniseries , which sees the team disband .
MODERN INCARNATIONS
JUSTICE LEAGUE
INTERNATIONAL Section::::Modern incarnations .
Section::::Justice League International .
The 1986 company - wide crossover " Legends " concluded with the formation of a new Justice League .
The new team was dubbed " Justice League " then " Justice League International " ( JLI ) and was given a mandate with less of an American focus .
The new series , written by Keith Giffen and J. M. DeMatteis with art by Kevin Maguire ( and later Adam Hughes ) , added quirky humor to the team 's stories .
In this incarnation , the membership consisted partly of heroes from Earths that , prior to their merging in the Crisis on Infinite Earths , were separate .
The initial team included Batman , Black Canary , Blue Beetle , Captain Marvel , Doctor Light ( a new Japanese female character , emerging from the Crisis on Infinite Earths , not the supervillain who had appeared previously ) , Doctor Fate , Martian Manhunter , Mister Miracle , and Guy Gardner ; and soon after inception , adds Booster Gold , Captain Atom , Fire ( then known as the Global Guardians ' Green Flame ) , Ice ( then known as the Global Guardians ' Icemaiden ) , and two Rocket Reds ( one was a Manhunter spy , and one was Dimitri Pushkin ) .
The Giffen / DeMatteis team worked on Justice League for five years and closed out their run with the " Breakdowns " storyline in 1991 and 1992 .
The series ' humorous tone and high level of characterization proved very popular .
After Giffen and DeMatteis ' departure DC created numerous spin - off titles .
In 1996 , the series was canceled , along with spinoffs Justice League Europe , Extreme Justice , and Justice League Task Force .
JLA Section::::JLA .
The low sales of the various Justice League spinoff books prompted DC to revamp the League as a single team ( all of the branch teams were disbanded ) in a single title .
A Justice League of America formed in the September 1996 limited series Justice League :
A Midsummer 's Nightmare by Mark Waid and Fabian Nicieza , which reunited the " Original Seven " of the League for the first time since Crisis on Infinite Earths .
In 1997 , DC Comics launched a new Justice League series titled JLA , written by Grant Morrison with art by Howard Porter and inker John Dell .
Morrison introduced the idea of the JLA allegorically representing a pantheon of gods , with their different powers and personalities , incorporating such characters as Zauriel , Big Barda , Orion , Huntress , Oracle ( Barbara Gordon ) , Steel ( John Henry Irons ) , and Plastic Man .
He also had Aztek , Tomorrow Woman , and Green Arrow ( Connor Hawke ) as temporaries .
Morrison revamped the League 's Rogues Gallery by introducing new powerful adversaries for them to face .
These include ; White Martians , Renegade Angels , a new incarnation of the Injustice Gang led by Lex Luthor , and the Key .
Other foes were the new villain Prometheus , the existing JLA villain Starro the Conqueror , " The Ultra - Marines " , and a futuristic Darkseid .
During the 2005–2006 event Infinite Crisis , the series ended as Green Arrow struggled in vain to keep the League afloat .
( JLA # 120–125 ) 52 Section::::52 .
In 52 Week 24 , Firestorm recruits a group to reform the Justice League .
It consists of Firehawk , Super - Chief , Bulleteer , and Ambush Bug .
They fight a deranged Skeets who takes Super - Chief 's powers , killing him and numerous people who had received powers through Lex Luthor 's Everyman Project .
Afterward , Firestorm breaks up the team .
Also in the series , Luthor 's new Infinity , Inc. was informally referred to as a " Justice League " in solicitations and on covers .
JUSTICE LEAGUE OF AMERICA ( VOL .
2 ) Section::::Justice League of America ( vol . 2 ) .
One year after the events of Infinite Crisis , Superman , Batman , and Wonder Woman reunite in the Batcave to re - form the League in Justice League of America # 0 , the kick - off for a new series by Brad Meltzer and Ed Benes .
The series featured a roster which included Green Lantern ( Hal Jordan ) , Black Canary , Red Arrow ( Green Arrow 's former sidekick ) , Red Tornado , Vixen , Black Lightning , and Hawkgirl .
The first arc of the series focused upon Red Tornado and pitted the team against a new intelligent incarnation of Solomon Grundy and the rebuilt Amazo .
The new incarnation of the team has two main headquarters , linked by a transporter .
At the first site is the Hall , which in the mainstream DC Universe is a refurnished version of the Justice Society of America and the All - Star Squadron 's former headquarters located in Washington , D.C ..
Black Canary is elected as the first official Chairperson after the fight against Amazo and Solomon Grundy , and led both the Justice League and Justice Society in a complex quest to reunite time - lost members of the pre - Crisis Legion of Super - Heroes , who had been sent back in time to free both Bart Allen and Flash from the other dimensional realm of the Speed Force .
Meltzer left the series at the end of issue # 12 , with one of his subplots ( Per Degaton , a pre - nuclear fire mutation version of Despero , and a circa 1948 version of the Ultra - Humanite gathering for an unknown plot ) resolved in the pages of Booster Gold .
Dwayne McDuffie took over the writing job with the Justice League Anniversary Special and the main book with issue # 13 .
Due to DC Comics seeking to launch a spin - off Justice League book led by Hal Jordan , the character was removed from the main League series and replaced by John Stewart .
Firestorm also joined the roster , with the series entering into a series of tie - in storylines towards Countdown to Final Crisis , with the arrest of a large number of supervillains ( gathered by Lex Luthor and Deathstroke to attack the League on the eve of the wedding of Black Canary and Green Arrow ) setting up the Salvation Run tie - in miniseries .
Also , roster members Red Tornado and Geo - Force were written out .
Jordan was restored to the roster by issue # 19 of the series , only to be removed once again by issue # 31 .
Issue # 21 saw the return of Libra and the Human Flame , setting up their appearances in Final Crisis .
Later issues would resolve issues involving Vixen 's power level increase and see the integration of the Milestone Comics characters the Shadow Cabinet and Icon , who fought the Justice League over the remains of the villainous Doctor Light .
The group suffered greater losses during Final Crisis with the deaths of Martian Manhunter and Batman , as well as the resignations of Superman and Wonder Woman , who could no longer devote themselves full - time to the League due to the events of the New Krypton and Rise of the Olympian storylines in their respective titles .
Hal Jordan would resign as well , clearing the way for John Stewart 's return to the team .
Black Canary found herself declaring the League no more , though the group would continue with Canary taking a secondary role .
Her last act as leader was to assign John Stewart and Firestorm the task of hunting down the Human Flame , for his part in the murder of Martian Manhunter , as seen in the Final Crisis Aftermath : Run ! miniseries .
Vixen would take over the team , with Plastic Man rejoining the group .
Len Wein wrote a three - part fill - in story for Justice League of America that ran from # 35 to # 37 .
McDuffie was fired from the title before he could return , after discussion postings to the DC Comics message board , detailing behind - the - scenes creative decisions on his run , which were republished in the rumor column " Lying In The Gutter " .
James Robinson was announced as the new Justice League of America writer .
Wein 's fill - in run would be published as Justice League :
Cry For Justice neared its conclusion , as Vixen and Black Canary 's group ( sans John Stewart ) would confront Hal Jordan and Green Arrow 's makeshift Justice League group , which had stumbled upon a plot by the villain Prometheus that had resulted in much death and carnage .
During the confrontation over Jordan 's group using torture to extract information from the villains being blackmailed into carrying out Prometheus ' plan , both Roy Harper and Supergirl would discover that one of Jordan 's heroes , Captain Marvel Jr. , was really Prometheus in disguise .
In the ensuing battle , the League would suffer horrible losses : Roy Harper was maimed and his daughter Lian and hundreds of thousands of people in Star City would be killed by a doomsday device that Prometheus had activated .
Vixen would have her leg broken and Plastic Man would have his powers permanently scrambled , making him a slowly disintegrating puddle creature .
To save other cities from being destroyed like Star City , the League reluctantly allowed Prometheus to go free .
Green Arrow ( with help from the Shade ) would later track down and kill Prometheus .
Following the events of " Blackest Night " , a reluctant Donna Troy began the task of rebuilding the League , with Hal Jordan , Green Arrow , the Atom , Batman , Mon - El , Donna , Cyborg , Doctor Light , Starfire , Congorilla , and the Guardian .
At the end of issue # 43 , the majority of the new members leave .
Mon - El and the Guardian leave after Mon - El returns to the future , Black Canary returns to the Birds of Prey , Starfire leaves to join the R.E.B.E.L.S. , Green Lantern leaves to locate the other Lantern Corps Entities , and Green Arrow is forced to leave due to his fugitive status .
James Robinson said this was due to having second thoughts about his decision to use so many characters , and that the team would have a different roster in the coming months .
To replace the departed members , Jade , Supergirl , and Jesse Quick were added to the team .
Cyborg remained with the team in a reduced capacity , and was eventually given his own co - feature storyline for issues # 48–50 .
DC announced that Saint Walker of the Blue Lantern Corps would be joining the Justice League during a tie - in to the Reign of Doomsday crossover , but the character did not become a full member due to the cancellation of the title .
The series ended with issue # 60 ( October 2011 ) , the title being one of the numerous DC books cancelled after the " Flashpoint " crossover .
The finale issue was set one year after the events of # 59 and saw Batman disbanding the League due to most of the individual members becoming preoccupied with personal commitments .
The final storyline recounted the League 's activities during the year - long gap , summarizing story arcs that had been planned for upcoming JLA issues but abandoned due to the transition to the New 52 continuity .
THE NEW 52 Section::::The New 52 .
In September 2011 , following the conclusion of the Flashpoint miniseries , all DC titles were canceled , relaunched as the New 52 , and started at issue # 1 , rebooting DC 's continuity .
Justice League of America was relaunched as Justice League , written by Geoff Johns and drawn by Jim Lee , and was the first of the new titles released , coming out the same day as the final issue of Flashpoint .
The first six - issue storyline is set five years in the past and features a new origin for the team .
The series then shifted to the present in issue # 7 .
After the first 12 issues , Jim Lee was succeeded as artist by Ivan Reis .
Subsequently , Jason Fabok succeeded Reis as the book 's regular penciller .
The initial roster of the team consists of Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Green Lantern ( Hal Jordan ; who has since left the team ) , Aquaman , the Flash ( Barry Allen ) , and Cyborg , while the Atom ( Rhonda Pineda ) , Firestorm ( Ronnie Raymond ) , and Element Woman join as additional members .
In addition to this series , two other Justice League - related titles were launched during the same month : a new Justice League International ; written by Dan Jurgens and drawn by Aaron Lopresti ; featuring an initial roster of Batman , Booster Gold , Rocket Red ( Gavril Ivanovich ) , Vixen , Green Lantern ( Guy Gardner ) , Fire , Ice , August General in Iron , and Godiva , and Justice League Dark ; written by Peter Milligan and drawn by Mikel Janin ; featuring an initial roster consisting of John Constantine , Shade , the Changing Man , Madame Xanadu , Deadman , Zatanna , and a new character called Mindwarp .
In May 2012 , DC announced the cancellation of Justice League International with issue 12 and an annual .
The cancellation of Justice League International led into the launch of a new Justice League of America title ( volume 3 ) .
The new Justice League of America is entirely separate from the main Justice League as the new team was formed by Amanda Waller and consists of Steve Trevor , Martian Manhunter , Green Arrow , Hawkman , Catwoman , the new Green Lantern Simon Baz , Stargirl , Katana , and Vibe .
Katana and Vibe later received their own ongoing titles , although both were cancelled after 10 issues .
The new Atom , Rhonda Pineda , is also a member of the Justice League of America .
She works as a spy to gain intel on the Justice League , reporting to Amanda Waller and Steve Trevor .
It is later revealed that , unknown to the members of either team , she is actually a member of Earth-3 's Crime Syndicate , and is betraying both teams .
Each member of the Justice League of America is intended to be a counterpart to the members of the Justice League , in case the Justice League would ever go rogue .
Catwoman and Green Arrow both serve as counterparts for Batman .
The Justice League , Justice League of America and Justice League Dark clash in the " Trinity War " storyline , and Shazam ( whose origin was told in a back - up feature in Justice League ) joins the Justice League .
Atom is revealed to be from a parallel universe ; she is in fact a mole spying on both teams for the evil Crime Syndicate of Earth-3 .
The Syndicate roundly defeats the assembled Leagues , triggering the Forever Evil crossover event .
In the aftermath of Forever Evil , following their crucial and public role in defeating the Crime Syndicate , Lex Luthor and Captain Cold join the Justice League .
A young woman named Jessica Cruz joins the team after becoming attached to Crime Syndicate 's sentient Power Ring and gaining control of its Green Lantern - like abilities .
In August 2013 , it was announced that Justice League of America would be retitled Justice League Canada following Forever Evil , with the team relocating to Canada , although in the end it launched as a new series , Justice League United in January 2014 .
Its team members are Animal Man , Martian Manhunter , Green Arrow , Hawkman , Stargirl , Supergirl , Adam Strange and his wife Alanna , along with new Canadian superhero Equinox , a 16-year - old Cree teenager from Moose Factory whose civilian name is Miiyahbin and whose powers change with the seasons .
The series , written by Lemire and drawn by Mike McKone .
This new team has taken part in mostly space - faring adventures , and its adventures have not involved the other Justice League .
In April 2015 , DC began " Justice League : The Darkseid War " , which would be the final installment in Geoff Johns ' five - year run of Justice League .
The event consisted of 10 Justice League issues , 6 one - shots , and one Special issue .
The story took hidden elements from Johns 's run as well as answering all questions posed since the beginning .
In June 2015 , DC launched a fourth volume , Justice League of America , written and illustrated by Bryan Hitch .
It features the same members from Justice League .
In this ten - issue run , the Justice League fights the Kryptonian deity Rao . DC REBIRTH Section::::DC Rebirth .
In February 2016 , DC announced a " Rebirth " event similar to the New 52 .
In March , they announced a new line of books , including a Justice League series written by Bryan Hitch and drawn by Tony Daniel and Fernando Pasarin , which debuted in June 2016 .
The team consists of Superman ( pre - Flashpoint version , prior to Superman Reborn event ) , Batman , Wonder Woman , the Flash ( Barry Allen ) , Aquaman , Cyborg , two Green Lanterns , Jessica Cruz and Simon Baz & Mera .
Starting in February 2017 as part of DC Rebirth 's second wave , a new Justice League of America series was released .
The team consists of the Atom , Vixen , the Ray , and Killer Frost .
The month prior to this , each of these members received a one - shot issue .
On October 28 , it was revealed that Batman , Black Canary , and Lobo would be joining the team as well .
Batman will have a dual membership in both Justice League teams .
This series is set to end in April 2018 with the release of issue # 29 .
During the events of Justice League vs. Suicide Squad , Maxwell Lord uses the Heart of Darkness to infect Superman , Wonder Woman , Aquaman , the Flash , Cyborg , and the two Green Lanterns .
In order to stop Lord and the infected League members , Batman recruits and temporarily inducts Suicide Squad members :
Deadshot , Harley Quinn , Killer Croc , Captain Boomerang , Killer Frost and Lobo ( a member of Waller 's first Suicide Squad ) into the Justice League .
Following this crisis , Batman , concluding that the world needs more human , relatable heroes to prepare for a new threat , assembles his new Justice League , selecting Killer Frost due to her actions in the battle with Lord , Black Canary to act as the team conscience , Lobo in return for a favor he owes Batman after beating Lord , the Atom and Ray as he sees their potential , and Vixen to act as the team 's core due to her ability to coordinate so much in her life .
In Justice League # 24 , Mera joins the team , but leaves in issue # 34 .
In the event series written by Scott Snyder and Greg Capullo , the league roster reverts to Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Green Lantern Hal Jordan , the Flash , Cyborg , and Aquaman .
In the event , the League fights against the Dark Knights with the assistance of Mr. Terrific , Hawkgirl and Doctor Fate .
DC UNIVERSE Section::::DC Universe .
DC Comics ended the Rebirth branding in December 2017 , opting to include everything under a larger " DC Universe " banner and naming .
The continuity established by Rebirth continues across DC 's comic book titles .
In March 2018 , it was announced that the Justice League series was going to be relaunched , written by Scott Snyder .
The new roster consists of Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Flash ( Barry Allen ) , Aquaman , Hawkgirl , Cyborg , Martian Manhunter , and Green Lantern ( John Stewart ) .
The first issue was released on June 6 , 2018 .
In addition , two more Justice League titles are in development .
A new volume of Justice League Dark will feature a team led by Wonder Woman .
The other , Justice League Odyssey , will feature Cyborg , Starfire , Green Lantern ( Jessica Cruz ) , Azrael , and Darkseid as they search for one of Brainiac 's old starships .
CULTURAL IMPACT Section::::Cultural impact .
The comic 's early success was indirectly responsible for the creation of the Fantastic Four .
When Marvel - Timely owner Martin Goodman heard in 1961 how well DC 's then - new book Justice League was selling , he told Stan Lee , his comics editor , to come up with a team of superheroes for Marvel .
The result was Fantastic Four # 1 by Lee and Jack Kirby , which debuted in November 1961 .
Marvel also introduced a team of villains in 1971 based on the Justice League called Squadron Sinister .
The characters are analogous to Superman ( Hyperion ) , Batman ( Nighthawk ) , Wonder Woman ( Power Princess ) , Green Lantern ( Doctor Spectrum ) , and Flash ( Speed Demon ) .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The original Justice League of America series has won : * 1961 Alley Awards for " Best Comic Book " * 1961 Alley Awards for " Best Adventure - Hero Group " * 1963 Alley Awards for " Favorite Novel " ( " Crisis on Earth - One / Crisis on Earth - Two " in Justice League of America
# 21–22 by Gardner Fox and Mike Sekowsky )
* 1963 Alley Awards for " Strip that Should Be Improved " * 1963 Alley Awards for " Artist Preferred on Justice League of America " ( Murphy Anderson )
* 1973 Shazam Awards for " Best Inker ( Dramatic Division ) "
( Dick Giordano )
IN OTHER MEDIA MOVIES JUSTICE LEAGUE :
THE NEW FRONTIER Section::::In other media .
Section::::Movies .
Section::::Justice League : The New Frontier .
Justice League : The New Frontier was based on Darwyn Cooke 's 2003–2004 comic book limited series where the heroes of Earth unite to take on an evil entity called the Centre .
It was released on February 26 , 2008 .
Justice League : The New Frontier received mostly positive reviews .
Screener copies were sent to website reviewers a month before the DVD 's official release .
Most of the reviews were positive and geared up the film 's release even more .
JUSTICE LEAGUE :
CRISIS ON TWO EARTHS Section::::Justice League : Crisis on Two Earths .
In 2004 , Bruce Timm revealed that a DCAU direct - to - video Justice League feature was in development to connect Justice League and Justice League Unlimited .
The film was titled as Justice League : Worlds Collide .
Later the film was rewritten by the late Dwayne
McDuffie for DC Universe
Animated Original Movies as Justice League
: Crisis on Two Earths , but removing all connections with the animated series Based on Grant Morrison 's 2000 comic book , Justice League : Crisis on Two Earths dealt with a heroic Lex Luthor from an alternate universe appearing to recruit the Justice League to help save his Earth from the Crime Syndicate , a gang of villainous characters who are essentially evil versions of the Justice League .
The good performance of the Justice League : Crisis on Two Earths release led Warner Premiere and DC Universe to release the sequel .
JUSTICE LEAGUE :
DOOM Section::::Justice League : Doom .
Justice League :
Doom , a sequel to , is a loose adaptation of Mark Waid 's JLA story arc , " " .
The plot follows the Justice League as Batman 's contingency plans against his fellow league members , which were only meant to be used if anyone of them went rogue , gets stolen and are used against them by Vandal Savage and his Legion of Doom while he preps a grave plan for the world .
It earned $ 6,543,809 from domestic home video sales .
JUSTICE LEAGUE :
GODS AND MONSTERS Section::::Justice League : Gods and Monsters .
In July 2014 , as part of the San Diego Comic - Con , DC Comics announced Justice League : Gods and Monsters for a 2015 release .
The movie , featuring an original plot , was written by Alan Burnett and directed by Sam Liu and executive produced by Bruce Timm and Sam Register .
Along with the film , a three - part animated series entitled was released before the film on Machinima with Timm as an executive producer in 2015 .
JUSTICE LEAGUE :
THE FLASHPOINT PARADOX Section::::Justice League : The Flashpoint Paradox .
Justice League :
The Flashpoint Paradox received very positive reviews .
The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported a 100 % approval rating .
Critics and audiences said that the film stays true to its source material .
It is generally praised for its mature storyline and the way Flash obtains justice , but criticized for its excessive violence and use of blood that exceeds the comics it is adapted from .
JUSTICE LEAGUE ( 2017 ) Section::::Justice League ( 2017 ) .
Justice League is a 2017 American superhero film based on the DC Comics superhero team of the same name , distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures .
It is the fifth installment in the DC Extended Universe .
The film was directed by Zack Snyder , with a screenplay by Chris Terrio and Joss Whedon , from a story by Snyder and Terrio .
In July 2015 , it was revealed that filming would begin in spring 2016 after Wonder Woman ended principal photography .
Principal photography commenced on April 11 , 2016 , with shooting taking place at Warner Bros. Studios , Leavesden , as well as various locations around London , Scotland , Los Angeles and in Djúpavík in the Westfjords of Iceland .
Snyder 's longtime cinematographer Larry Fong was replaced by Fabian Wagner due to scheduling conflicts .
The film premiered in Beijing on October 26 , 2017 , and was released in the United States in 2D , 3D , and IMAX on November 17 , 2017 .
It grossed over $ 650 million worldwide , against a production budget of $ 300 million .
DC ANIMATED MOVIE UNIVERSE Section::::DC Animated Movie Universe .
This sections covers the DC Animated Movie Universe movies focused on the justice league .
See all DC Animated Movie Universe movies JUSTICE LEAGUE :
WAR Section::::Justice League : War .
War was released on February 4 , 2014 .
The film is based on Geoff Johns and Jim Lee 's " Origin " storyline .
The film depicts an invasion of Earth by the alien Darkseid and the subsequent formation of the titular superhero team to counter it , which includes Superman , Batman , Wonder Woman , Flash , Green Lantern , Cyborg and Shazam .
JUSTICE LEAGUE : THRONE OF ATLANTIS Section::::Justice League : Throne of Atlantis .
The film is based on the 2012 storyline of the same name by Geoff Johns and Ivan Reis .
In the film , Arthur Curry , a half - Atlantean prince , discovers his heritage and aids the Justice League in preventing his half - brother Ocean Master from taking over Metropolis .
The film was released for downloading on January 13 , 2015 , and was released on Blu - ray and DVD formats on January 27 , 2015 .
JUSTICE LEAGUE VS .
TEEN TITANS Section::::Justice League vs. Teen Titans .
On July 11 , 2015 , it was announced that a film was in development and slated for release in 2016 ; it would feature the Justice League and the Teen Titans .
The film had its world premiere at
WonderCon on March 26 , 2016 , and was released through digital download on March 29 , 2016 .
It was released through home media on April 12 , 2016 by Warner Home Video .
JUSTICE LEAGUE DARK Section::::Justice League Dark .
An adaptation of Justice League Dark where the titular group will unite to deal with heavenly forces that the Justice League ca n't handle .
The Justice League will also have new members with them .
Matt Ryan , who portrayed John Constantine on NBC 's Constantine as well as The CW 's Arrow , returns to voice the character .
It is the first Justice League film and the second DC Universe animated film to be rated R by the MPAA .
TV SHOWS
SUPER FRIENDS Section::::TV shows .
Section::::Super Friends .
Super Friends is an American animated television series about the Justice League , which ran from 1973 to 1986 on ABC as part of its Saturday morning cartoon lineup .
It was produced by Hanna - Barbera and was based on the Justice League of America ( JLA ) and associated comic book characters published by DC Comics .
There were a total of 109 episodes and two backdoor - pilot episodes of The New Scooby - Doo Movies JUSTICE LEAGUE ( 2001 ) Section::::Justice League ( 2001 ) .
Justice League is an American animated television series which ran from 2001 to 2006 on Cartoon Network .
It is part of the DC animated universe .
The show was produced by Warner Bros. Animation .
It is based on the Justice League of America and associated comic book characters published by DC Comics .
After the second season , the series name changed to Justice League Unlimited .
JUSTICE LEAGUE :
ACTION Section::::Justice League : Action .
Justice League Action is an American animated television series based on the DC Comics superhero team of the same name .
The series is produced by Jim Krieg , Butch Lukic , and Alan Burnett .
This show debuted on Cartoon Network UK on November 26 , 2016 , and premiered in the United States on Cartoon Network on December 16 , 2016 .
ATTRACTIONS COLLECTED EDITIONS
SILVER AGE JUSTICE LEAGUE OF AMERICA Section::::Collected editions .
Section::::Silver Age Justice League of America .
This series has been collected in the following : !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
ISBN Justice League of America Archives volume 1
The Brave and the Bold # 28–30 , Justice League of America # 1–6 Justice League of America Archives volume 2 Justice League of America
# 7–14 Justice League of America Archives volume 3 Justice League of America # 15–22 Justice League of America Archives volume 4 Justice League of America # 23–30 Justice League of America Archives volume 5 Justice League of America # 31–38 , # 40 * Justice League of America Archives volume 6 Justice League of America # 41–47 ,
# 49–50 * Justice League of America Archives volume 7 Justice League of
America # 51–57 ,
# 59–60 * Justice League of America Archives volume 8 Justice League of
America # 61–66 ,
# 68–70 * Justice League of America Archives volume 9 Justice League of America # 71–80 Justice League of America Archives volume 10 Justice League of America # 81–93 Showcase Presents Justice League of America volume 1
The Brave and the Bold # 28–30 ; Justice League of America
# 1–16 ; Mystery in Space # 75 Showcase Presents Justice League of America volume 2 Justice League of America # 17–36 Showcase Presents Justice League of America volume 3 Justice League of America # 37–38 ; # 40–47 ; # 49–57 ; # 59–60 * Showcase Presents Justice League of America volume 4 Justice League of
America # 61–66 ; # 68–75 ;
# 77–83 * Showcase Presents Justice League of America volume 5 Justice League of America # 84 ; # 86–92 ; # 94–106 * Showcase Presents Justice League of America volume 6 Justice League of America
# 107–132 * Justice League of America Chronicles volume 1
The Brave and the Bold # 28–30 ; Justice League of America
# 1–3 * omitted issues that featured reprints of material from earlier volumes .
Also collected in Omnibus !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
Release Date ! !
ISBN Justice League of America Omnibus Volume 1
The Brave and the Bold # 28–30 , Justice League of America # 1–30 Justice League of America
Silver Age Omnibus Volume 2 Justice League of America
# 31–76 , Mystery in Space # 75 Justice League of America :
The Bronze Age Omnibus Volume 1 Justice League of America # 77–113 Justice League of America : The Bronze Age Omnibus Volume 2 *
Justice League of America # 114 - 146 , DC Super - Stars # 10 Justice League of America : The Detroit Era Omnibus Justice League of America # 233 - 261 , Justice League of America Annual # 2 - 3 , JLA Classified
# 22 - 25 , JSA Classified # 14 - 16 , DC Retroactive : JLA - the 80 's # 1 and Infinity Inc # 19 JUSTICE LEAGUE / JUSTICE LEAGUE INTERNATIONAL / JUSTICE LEAGUE AMERICA ( 1987–1996 ) Section::::Justice League / Justice League International / Justice League America ( 1987–1996 ) .
This series has been collected in the following collections ( there are hardcover and trade paperback versions of all volumes ) : !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
ISBN 1 2 1 2 Wonder Woman and Justice League America Volume 2 Justice League America # 86 - 91 , Justice League International Vol .
2 # 65 - 66 and Justice League Task Force # 13 - 14 JLA ( 1997–2006 ) Section::::JLA ( 1997–2006 ) .
This series has been collected in the following trade paperbacks : !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
ISBN
This series has been collected in the following Grant Morrison - centric hardcover collections : !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
ISBN Deluxe Trade Paperbacks !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
ISBN JUSTICE LEAGUE OF AMERICA ( VOL . 2 )
( 2006–2011 ) Section::::Justice League of America ( vol . 2 )
( 2006–2011 ) .
This series has been collected in the following hardcover collections : !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
ISBN
THE NEW 52 Section::::The New 52 . !
width="1 % "
# !
Title !
width="1 % " Part !
Material collected !
width="1 % " Pages !
width="1 % " Cover !
width="1 % " Publication date !
width="13.77 % "
ISBN ! colspan="11
" Justice League ( vol . 2 )
( 2011–2016 )
HC
SC
HC
SC
HC
SC
HC
SC
HC
SC
HC
SC
HC
SC
HC
SC !
colspan="11
" Justice League of America ( vol . 3 ) ( 2013–2014 ) HC SC HC
SC !
colspan="8 " Justice League of America ( vol . 4 ) ( 2015 - 2016 )
HC SC DC REBIRTH Section::::DC Rebirth . !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected !
colspan="2 " Publication Date ! !
ISBN !
colspan="6 " Justice League ( vol . 3 ) ( 2016–2018 )
January 978 - 1401267797
May 978 - 1401268701
July 978 - 1401271121
November 978 - 1401273972
March 978 - 1401277253
June 978 - 1401280765
September 978 - 1401284251 978 - 1401271138
April 978 - 1401278281
November 978 - 1401284367 978 - 1401288761 DC UNIVERSE JUSTICE LEAGUE ( VOL . 4 ) ( 2018–PRESENT ) Section::::DC Universe Justice League ( vol . 4 )
( 2018–present ) . !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected !
Pages !
Publication Date ! !
ISBN Justice League :
No Justice # 1 - 4 , story from DC Nation
# 0 144
The Totality 176 200 MISCELLANEOUS REPRINTS Section::::Miscellaneous reprints .
These trades reprint themed issues . !
# ! !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
ISBN 1 Justice League of America Hereby Elects Justice League of America
# 4 , 75 , 105–106 , 146 , 161 , and 173–174 2 JLA :
The Greatest Stories Ever Told Justice League of America # 19 , 77 , 122 , and 166–168 , Justice League # 1 , JLA Secret Files # 1 and JLA
# 61 3 Crisis on Multiple Earths volume 1 Justice League of America # # 21–22 , 29–30 , 37–38 , and 46–47 4 Crisis on Multiple Earths volume 2 Justice League of America # 55–56 , 64–65 , 73–74 , and 82–83 5 Crisis on Multiple Earths
volume 3 Justice League of
America # 91–92 , 100–102 , 107–108 , and 113 6 Crisis on Multiple Earths volume 4 Justice League of America # 123–124 , 135–137 , and 147–148 7 Crisis on Multiple Earths volume 5 Justice League of America # 159–160 , 171–172 , and 183–185 8 Crisis on Multiple Earths volume 6 Justice League of America # 195–197 , 207–209 and crossover
issues All - Star Squadron
# 14–15 SEE ALSO * Justice Society of America AFFILIATIONS AND SPIN - OFF GROUPS
* Extreme Justice * Justice League 3000
* Justice League Antarctica * Justice League Dark * Justice League Elite * Justice League Europe * Justice League International * Justice League Task Force
* Justice League United
* Justice Leagues * Super Buddies
* Super Friends
* Shadowpact
* Teen Titans * Young Justice * Justice Team REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Justice League at DC Comics.com
* Justice League of America at Don Markstein 's Toonopedia WebCitation Archive
* The Justice League Library