WRITTEN CHINESE
Written Chinese ( ) comprises Chinese characters used to represent the Chinese language .
Chinese characters do not constitute an alphabet or a compact syllabary .
Rather , the writing system is roughly logosyllabic ; that is , a character generally represents one syllable of spoken Chinese and may be a word on its own or a part of a polysyllabic word .
The characters themselves are often composed of parts that may represent physical objects , abstract notions , or pronunciation .
Literacy requires the memorization of a great many characters :
educated Chinese know about 4,000 .
The large number of Chinese characters has in part led to the adoption of Western alphabets as an auxiliary means of representing Chinese .
Various current Chinese characters have been traced back to the late Shang Dynasty about 1200–1050 BC , but the process of creating characters is thought to have begun some centuries earlier .
After a period of variation and evolution , Chinese characters were standardized under the Qin Dynasty ( 221–206 BC ) .
Over the millennia , these characters have evolved into well - developed styles of Chinese calligraphy .
As the varieties of Chinese diverged , a situation of diglossia developed , with speakers of mutually unintelligible varieties able to communicate through writing using Classical Chinese .
In the early 20th century , Classical Chinese was replaced in this role by written vernacular Chinese , corresponding to the standard spoken language ( " Mandarin " ) .
Although most other varieties of Chinese are not written , there are traditions of written Cantonese , written Shanghainese and written Hokkien , among others .
Some Chinese characters have been adopted into writing systems of other neighbouring East Asian languages , but are currently used only in Japanese and Korean , as Vietnamese is now written using alphabetic script .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
Written Chinese is not based on an alphabet or a compact syllabary .
Instead , Chinese characters are glyphs whose components may depict objects or represent abstract notions .
Occasionally a character consists of only one component ; more commonly two or more components are combined to form more complex characters , using a variety of different principles .
The best known exposition of Chinese character composition is the Shuowen Jiezi , compiled by Xu Shen around 120 AD .
Since Xu Shen did not have access to Chinese characters in their earliest forms , his analysis can not always be taken as authoritative .
Nonetheless , no later work has supplanted the Shuowen Jiezi in terms of breadth , and it is still relevant to etymological research today .
DERIVATION OF CHARACTERS Section::::Derivation of characters .
According to the Shuowen Jiezi , Chinese characters are developed on six basic principles .
( These principles , though popularized by the Shuowen Jiezi , were developed earlier ; the oldest known mention of them is in the Rites of Zhou , a text from about 150 BC . )
The first two principles produce simple characters , known as 文 wén : The remaining four principles produce complex characters historically called 字 zì ( although this term is now generally used to refer to all characters , whether simple or complex ) .
Of these four , two construct characters from simpler parts :
In contrast to the popular conception of Chinese as a primarily pictographic or ideographic language , the vast majority of Chinese characters ( about 95 % of the characters in the Shuowen Jiezi ) are constructed as either logical aggregates or , more often , phonetic complexes .
In fact , some phonetic complexes were originally simple pictographs that were later augmented by the addition of a semantic root .
An example is 炷 zhù " candle " ( now archaic , meaning " lampwick " ) , which was originally a pictograph 主 , a character that is now pronounced zhǔ and means " host " , or The character 火 huǒ " fire " was added to indicate that the meaning is fire - related .
The last two principles do not produce new written forms Instead , they transfer new meanings to existing forms : Chinese characters are written to fit into a square , even when composed of two simpler forms written side - by - side or top - to - bottom .
In such cases , each form is compressed to fit the entire character into a square .
STROKES
Section::::Strokes .
Character components can be further subdivided into strokes .
The strokes of Chinese characters fall into eight main categories : horizontal ( 一 ) , vertical ( 丨 ) , left - falling ( 丿 ) , right - falling ( 丶 ) , rising ( lower element of 冫 ) , dot ( 、 ) , hook ( 亅 ) , and turning ( 乛 , 乚 , 乙 , etc . ) .
There are eight basic rules of stroke order in writing a Chinese character :
* Horizontal strokes are written before vertical ones .
* * Left - falling strokes are written before right - falling ones .
*
* Characters are written from top to bottom .
*
* Characters are written from left to right .
*
* If a character is framed from above , the frame is written first .
*
* If a character is framed from below , the frame is written last .
*
* Frames are closed last .
*
*
In a symmetrical character , the middle is drawn first , then the sides .
*
These rules do not strictly apply to every situation and are occasionally violated .
LAYOUT Section::::Layout .
Chinese characters conform to a roughly square frame and are not usually linked to one another , so do not have a preferred direction of writing .
Traditionally Chinese text was written in vertical columns which were read from top to bottom , right - to - left ; the first column being on the right side of the page , and the last column on the left .
Text written in Classical Chinese also uses little or no punctuation , with sentence and phrase breaks being determined by context and rhythm .
Vertical Chinese is still used for effect or where space requires it , such as signs or on spines of books .
In modern times , the familiar Western layout , left - to - right horizontal Chinese , has become more popular .
Similar to Latin - letter text , the horizontal rows are read from left to right , then top of the page to the bottom .
This is used especially in the People 's Republic of China ( mainland China ) , where the government mandated left - to - right writing in 1955 .
The government of the Republic of China ( Taiwan ) followed suit in 2004 for official documents .
The use of punctuation has also become more common , whether the text is written in columns or rows .
The punctuation marks are clearly influenced by their Western counterparts , although some marks are particular to Asian languages : for example , the double and single quotation marks ( 『 』 and 「 」 ) ; the hollow period dot ( 。 ) , which is otherwise used just like an ordinary period full - stop ; and a special kind of comma called an enumeration comma ( 、 ) , which is used to separate items in a list , as opposed to clauses in a sentence .
Street and shop signs are a particularly challenging aspect of written Chinese layout , since they can be written either left - to - right , or right - to - left ( the latter can be thought of as the traditional layout with each " column " being one character high ) , as well as from top to bottom .
It is not uncommon to encounter all three orientations on signs on neighboring stores .
EVOLUTION Section::::Evolution .
Chinese is one of the oldest continually used writing systems still in use .
The earliest generally accepted examples of Chinese writing date back to the reign of the Shang Dynasty king Wu Ding ( 1250–1192 BC ) .
These were divinatory inscriptions on oracle bones , primarily ox scapulae and turtle shells .
Characters were carved on the bones in order to frame a question ; the bones were then heated over a fire and the resulting cracks were interpreted to determine the answer .
Such characters are called 甲骨文 jiǎgǔwén " shell - bone script " or oracle bone script .
In 2003 , some 11 isolated symbols carved on tortoise shells were found at Jiahu , an archaeological site in the Henan province of China , some bearing a striking resemblance to certain modern characters , such as 目 mù " eye " .
Since the Jiahu site dates from about 6600 BC , it predates the earliest confirmed Chinese writing by more than 5,000 years .
Dr Garman Harbottle , of the Brookhaven National Laboratory in New York , US , who headed a team of archaeologists at the University of Science and Technology of China , in Anhui province , has suggested that these symbols were precursors of Chinese writing , but Professor David Keightley , of the University of California , Berkeley , US whose field of expertise is the origins of Chinese civilization in the Neolithic and early Bronze Ages , employing archaeological and inscriptional evidence , suggests that the time gap is too great for a connection .
From the late Shang Dynasty , Chinese writing evolved into the form found in cast inscriptions on Chinese ritual bronzes made during the Western Zhou Dynasty ( c 1066–770 BC ) and the Spring and Autumn period ( 770–476 BC ) , a kind of writing called 金文 jīnwén " metal script " .
Jinwen characters are less angular and angularized than the oracle bone script .
Later , in the Warring States period ( 475–221 BC ) , the script became still more regular , and settled on a form , called 六國文字/六国文字 liùguó wénzì " script of the six states " , that Xu Shen used as source material in the Shuowen Jiezi .
These characters were later embellished and stylized to yield the seal script , which represents the oldest form of Chinese characters still in modern use .
They are used principally for signature seals , or chops , which are often used in place of a signature for Chinese documents and artwork .
Li Si promulgated the seal script as the standard throughout the empire during the Qin dynasty , then newly unified .
Seal script in turn evolved into the other surviving writing styles ; the first writing style to follow was the clerical script .
The development of such a style can be attributed to those of the Qin Dynasty who were seeking to create a convenient form of written characters for daily usage .
In general , clerical script characters are " flat " in appearance , being wider than the seal script , which tends to be taller than it is wide .
Compared with the seal script , clerical script characters are strikingly rectilinear .
In running script , a semi - cursive form , the character elements begin to run into each other , although the characters themselves generally remain separate .
Running script eventually evolved into grass script , a fully cursive form , in which the characters are often entirely unrecognizable by their canonical forms .
Grass script gives the impression of anarchy in its appearance , and there is indeed considerable freedom on the part of the calligrapher , but this freedom is circumscribed by conventional " abbreviations " in the forms of the characters .
Regular script , a non - cursive form , is the most widely recognized script .
In regular script , each stroke of each character is clearly drawn out from the others .
Even though both the running and grass scripts appear to be derived as semi - cursive and cursive variants of regular script , it is in fact the regular script that was the last to develop .
Seal
Clerical
Running ( semi - cursive ) Grass ( fully cursive ) Regular ( non - cursive )
Regular script is considered the archetype for Chinese writing , and forms the basis for most printed forms .
In addition , regular script imposes a stroke order , which must be followed in order for the characters to be written correctly .
( Strictly speaking , this stroke order applies to the clerical , running , and grass scripts as well , but especially in the running and grass scripts , this order is occasionally deviated from . )
Thus , for instance , the character 木 mù " wood " must be written starting with the horizontal stroke , drawn from left to right ; next , the vertical stroke , from top to bottom ; next , the left diagonal stroke , from top to bottom ; and lastly the right diagonal stroke , from top to bottom .
SIMPLIFIED AND TRADITIONAL CHINESE Section::::Simplified and traditional Chinese .
In the 20th century , written Chinese divided into two canonical forms , called simplified Chinese and traditional Chinese .
Simplified Chinese was developed in mainland China in order to make the characters faster to write ( especially as some characters had as many as a few dozen strokes ) and easier to memorize .
The People 's Republic of China claims that both goals have been achieved , but some external observers disagree .
Little systematic study has been conducted on how simplified Chinese has affected the way Chinese people become literate ; the only studies conducted before it was standardized in mainland China seem to have been statistical ones regarding how many strokes were saved on average in samples of running text .
The simplified forms have also been criticized for being inconsistent .
For instance , traditional 讓 ràng " allow " is simplified to 让 , in which the phonetic on the right side is reduced from 17 strokes to just three .
( The speech radical on the left has also been simplified . )
However , the same phonetic is used in its full form , even in simplified Chinese , in such characters as 壤 rǎng " soil " and 齉 nàng " snuffle " ; these forms remained uncontracted because they were relatively uncommon and would therefore represent a negligible stroke reduction .
On the other hand , some simplified forms are simply long - standing calligraphic abbreviations , as for example 万 wàn " ten thousand " , for which the traditional Chinese form is 萬. Simplified Chinese is standard in the mainland of China , Singapore and Malaysia .
Traditional Chinese is retained in Hong Kong , Macau , Taiwan and overseas Chinese communities ( except Singapore and Malaysia ) .
Throughout this article , Chinese text is given in both simplified and traditional forms when they differ , with the traditional forms being given first .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
At the inception of written Chinese , spoken Chinese was monosyllabic ; that is , Chinese words expressing independent concepts ( objects , actions , relations , etc . ) were usually one syllable .
Each written character corresponded to one monosyllabic word .
The spoken language has since become polysyllabic , but because modern polysyllabic words are usually composed of older monosyllabic words , Chinese characters have always been used to represent individual Chinese syllables .
For over two thousand years , the prevailing written standard was a vocabulary and syntax rooted in Chinese as spoken around the time of Confucius ( about 500 BC ) , called Classical Chinese , or 文言文 wényánwén .
Over the centuries , Classical Chinese gradually acquired some of its grammar and character senses from the various dialects .
This accretion was generally slow and minor ; however , by the 20th century , Classical Chinese was distinctly different from any contemporary dialect , and had to be learned separately .
Once learned , it was a common medium for communication between people speaking different dialects , many of which were mutually unintelligible by the end of the first millennium AD .
A Mandarin speaker might say yī , a Cantonese yāt , a Shanghainese iq , and a Hokkien chit , but all four will understand the character < > to mean " one " .
Chinese languages and dialects vary by not only pronunciation , but also , to a lesser extent , vocabulary and grammar .
Modern written Chinese , which replaced Classical Chinese as the written standard as an indirect result of the May Fourth Movement of 1919 , is not technically bound to any single variety ; however , it most nearly represents the vocabulary and syntax of Mandarin , by far the most widespread Chinese dialectal family in terms of both geographical area and number of speakers .
This version of written Chinese is called Vernacular Chinese , or 白話/白话 báihuà ( literally , " plain speech " ) .
Despite its ties to the dominant Mandarin language , Vernacular Chinese also permits some communication between people of different dialects , limited by the fact that Vernacular Chinese expressions are often ungrammatical or unidiomatic in non - Mandarin dialects .
This role may not differ substantially from the role of other linguae francae , such as Latin : For those trained in written Chinese , it serves as a common medium ; for those untrained in it , the graphic nature of the characters is in general no aid to common understanding ( characters such as " one " notwithstanding ) .
In this regard , Chinese characters may be considered a large and inefficient phonetic script .
However , Ghil'ad Zuckermann 's exploration of phono - semantic matching in Standard Chinese concludes that the Chinese writing system is multifunctional , conveying both semantic and phonetic content .
The variation in vocabulary among dialects has also led to the informal use of " dialectal characters " , as well as standard characters that are nevertheless considered archaic by today 's standards .
Cantonese is unique among non - Mandarin regional languages in having a written colloquial standard , used in Hong Kong and overseas , with a large number of unofficial characters for words particular to this language .
Written colloquial Cantonese has become quite popular in online chat rooms and instant messaging , although for formal written communications Cantonese speakers still normally use Vernacular Chinese .
To a lesser degree Hokkien is used in a similar way in Taiwan and elsewhere , although it lacks the level of standardization seen in Cantonese .
However , the Ministry of Education of the Republic of China is currently releasing a standard character set for Hokkien , which is to be taught in schools and promoted amongst the general population .
OTHER LANGUAGES
Section::::Other languages .
Chinese characters were first introduced into Japanese sometime in the first half of the first millennium AD , probably from Chinese products imported into Japan through Korea .
At the time , Japanese had no native written system , and Chinese characters were used for the most part to represent Japanese words with the corresponding meanings , rather than similar pronunciations .
A notable exception to this rule was the system of man'yōgana , which used a small set of Chinese characters to help indicate pronunciation .
The man'yōgana later developed into the phonetic syllabaries , hiragana and katakana .
Chinese characters are called hànzì in Mandarin , after the Han Dynasty of China ; in Japanese , this was pronounced kanji .
In modern written Japanese , kanji are used for most nouns , verb stems , and adjective stems , while hiragana are used for grammatical elements and miscellaneous words that have no common kanji rendition ; katakana are used for transliteration of loanwords from other languages , the names of plants , animals and certain scientific or technical words , onomatopoeia and emphasis .
The Jōyō kanji , a list of kanji for common use standardized by the Japanese government , contains 2,136 characters — about half the number of characters commanded by literate Chinese .
The role of Chinese characters in Korean and Vietnamese is much more limited .
At one time , many Chinese characters ( called hanja ) were introduced into Korean for their meaning , just as in Japanese .
Today , Korean is written almost exclusively using the Hangul alphabet with a small number of Chinese characters .
Each square block character contains Hangul symbols , or letters , that together represent a syllable .
Similarly , the use of Chinese and Chinese - styled characters in the Vietnamese chữ nôm script has been almost entirely superseded by the Latin - based Vietnamese alphabet .
Chinese characters are still actively used in South Korea today , mostly for signs , newspapers , books , and government documents .
Chinese characters are also used within China to write non - Han languages .
The largest non - Han group in China , the Zhuang , have for over 1300 years used Chinese characters .
Despite both the introduction of an official alphabetic script in 1957 and lack of a corresponding official set of Chinese characters , more Zhuang people can read the Zhuang logograms than the alphabetic script .
MEDIA Section::::Media .
Over the history of written Chinese , a variety of media have been used for writing .
They include : *
Bamboo and wooden slips , from at least the thirteenth century BC * Paper , invented no later than the second century
BC
* Silk , since at least the Han dynasty * Stone , metal , wood , bamboo , plastic and ivory on seals .
Since at least the Han dynasty , such media have been used to create hanging scrolls and handscrolls .
LITERACY Section::::Literacy .
Because the majority of modern Chinese words contain more than one character , there are at least two measuring sticks for Chinese literacy : the number of characters known , and the number of words known .
John DeFrancis , in the introduction to his Advanced Chinese Reader , estimates that a typical Chinese college graduate recognizes 4,000 to 5,000 characters , and 40,000 to 60,000 words .
Jerry Norman , in Chinese , places the number of characters somewhat lower , at 3,000 to 4,000 .
These counts are complicated by the tangled development of Chinese characters .
In many cases , a single character came to be written in multiple ways .
This development was restrained to an extent by the standardization of the seal script during the Qin dynasty , but soon started again .
Although the Shuowen Jiezi lists 10,516 characters—9,353 of them unique ( some of which may already have been out of use by the time it was compiled ) plus 1,163 graphic variants — the Jiyun of the Northern Song Dynasty , compiled less than a thousand years later in 1039 , contains 53,525 characters , most of them graphic variants .
DICTIONARIES Section::::Dictionaries .
Written Chinese is not based on an alphabet or syllabary , so Chinese dictionaries , as well as dictionaries that define Chinese characters in other languages , can not easily be alphabetized or otherwise lexically ordered , as English dictionaries are .
The need to arrange Chinese characters in order to permit efficient lookup has given rise to a considerable variety of ways to organize and index the characters .
A traditional mechanism is the method of radicals , which uses a set of character roots .
These roots , or radicals , generally but imperfectly align with the parts used to compose characters by means of logical aggregation and phonetic complex .
A canonical set of 214 radicals was developed during the rule of the Kangxi Emperor ( around the year 1700 ) ; these are sometimes called the Kangxi radicals .
The radicals are ordered first by stroke count ( that is , the number of strokes required to write the radical ) ; within a given stroke count , the radicals also have a prescribed order .
Every Chinese character falls ( sometimes arbitrarily or incorrectly ) under the heading of exactly one of these 214 radicals .
In many cases , the radicals are themselves characters , which naturally come first under their own heading .
All other characters under a given radical are ordered by the stroke count of the character .
Usually , however , there are still many characters with a given stroke count under a given radical .
At this point , characters are not given in any recognizable order ; the user must locate the character by going through all the characters with that stroke count , typically listed for convenience at the top of the page on which they occur .
Because the method of radicals is applied only to the written character , one need not know how to pronounce a character before looking it up ; the entry , once located , usually gives the pronunciation .
However , it is not always easy to identify which of the various roots of a character is the proper radical .
Accordingly , dictionaries often include a list of hard to locate characters , indexed by total stroke count , near the beginning of the dictionary .
Some dictionaries include almost one - seventh of all characters in this list .
Other methods of organization exist , often in an attempt to address the shortcomings of the radical method , but are less common .
For instance , it is common for a dictionary ordered principally by the Kangxi radicals to have an auxiliary index by pronunciation , expressed typically in either hanyu pinyin or zhuyin fuhao .
This index points to the page in the main dictionary where the desired character can be found .
Other methods use only the structure of the characters , such as the four - corner method , in which characters are indexed according to the kinds of strokes located nearest the four corners ( hence the name of the method ) , or the Cangjie method , in which characters are broken down into a set of 24 basic components .
Neither the four - corner method nor the Cangjie method requires the user to identify the proper radical , although many strokes or components have alternate forms , which must be memorized in order to use these methods effectively .
The availability of computerized Chinese dictionaries now makes it possible to look characters up by any of the indexing schemes described , thereby shortening the search process .
TRANSLITERATION AND ROMANIZATION Section::::Transliteration and romanization .
Chinese characters do not reliably indicate their pronunciation , even for one dialect .
It is therefore useful to be able to transliterate a dialect of Chinese into the Latin alphabet or the Perso - Arabic script Xiao'erjing for those who can not read Chinese characters .
However , transliteration was not always considered merely a way to record the sounds of any particular dialect of Chinese ; it was once also considered a potential replacement for the Chinese characters .
This was first prominently proposed during the May Fourth Movement , and it gained further support with the victory of the Communists in 1949 .
Immediately afterward , the mainland government began two parallel programs relating to written Chinese .
One was the development of an alphabetic script for Mandarin , which was spoken by about two - thirds of the Chinese population ; the other was the simplification of the traditional characters — a process that would eventually lead to simplified Chinese .
The latter was not viewed as an impediment to the former ; rather , it would ease the transition toward the exclusive use of an alphabetic ( or at least phonetic ) script .
By 1958 , however , priority was given officially to simplified Chinese ; a phonetic script , hanyu pinyin , had been developed , but its deployment to the exclusion of simplified characters was pushed off to some distant future date .
The association between pinyin and Mandarin , as opposed to other dialects , may have contributed to this deferment .
It seems unlikely that pinyin will supplant Chinese characters anytime soon as the sole means of representing Chinese .
Pinyin uses the Latin alphabet , along with a few diacritical marks , to represent the sounds of Mandarin in standard pronunciation .
For the most part , pinyin uses vowel and consonant letters as they are used in Romance languages ( and also in IPA ) .
However , although ' b ' and ' p ' , for instance , represent the voice / unvoiced distinction in some languages , such as French , they represent the unaspirated / aspirated distinction in Mandarin ; Mandarin has few voiced consonants .
Also , the pinyin spellings for a few consonant sounds are markedly different from their spellings in other languages that use the Latin alphabet ; for instance , pinyin ' q ' and ' x ' sound similar to English ' ch ' and ' sh ' , respectively .
Pinyin is not the sole transliteration scheme for Mandarin — there are also , for instance , the zhuyin fuhao , Wade - Giles , and Gwoyeu Romatzyh systems — but it is dominant in the Chinese - speaking world .
All transliterations in this article use the pinyin system .
SEE ALSO
* Mainland Chinese Braille * Taiwanese braille ( Taiwanese Mandarin )
* Cantonese braille * Chinese input methods for computers
REFERENCES
FOOTNOTES WORKS
CITED
FURTHER READING
* ( English translation of Wénzìxué Gàiyào 文字學概要 , Shangwu , 1988 . )
EXTERNAL LINKS * Yue E Li and Christopher Upward .
"
Review of the process of reform in the simplification of Chinese Characters " .
( Journal of Simplified Spelling Society , 1992/2 pp .
14–16 , later designated J13 )
* WrittenChinese .
Com English to Chinese Dictionary Includes example sentences , how to write the character , native Mandarin audio and more .
*
Free Online Dictionary Look up Chinese , Pinyin or English ; includes stroke animation and sound .
*
Mandarin Chinese children 's story in simplified Chinese showing the stroke order for every character .