BASAL GANGLIA
The basal ganglia ( or basal nuclei ) are a group of subcortical nuclei , of varied origin , in the brains of vertebrates , including humans , which are situated at the base of the forebrain and top of the midbrain .
There are some differences in the basal ganglia of primates .
Basal ganglia are strongly interconnected with the cerebral cortex , thalamus , and brainstem , as well as several other brain areas .
The basal ganglia are associated with a variety of functions , including control of voluntary motor movements , procedural learning , habit learning , eye movements , cognition , and emotion .
The main components of the basal ganglia – as defined functionally – are the striatum ; both dorsal striatum ( caudate nucleus and putamen ) and ventral striatum ( nucleus accumbens and olfactory tubercle ) , globus pallidus , ventral pallidum , substantia nigra , and subthalamic nucleus .
Each of these components has a complex internal anatomical and neurochemical organization .
The largest component , the striatum ( dorsal and ventral ) , receives input from many brain areas beyond the basal ganglia , but only sends output to other components of the basal ganglia .
The pallidum receives input from the striatum , and sends inhibitory output to a number of motor - related areas .
The substantia nigra is the source of the striatal input of the neurotransmitter dopamine , which plays an important role in basal ganglia function .
The subthalamic nucleus receives input mainly from the striatum and cerebral cortex , and projects to the globus pallidus .
Popular theories implicate the basal ganglia primarily in action selection – in helping to decide which of several possible behaviors to execute at any given time .
In more specific terms , the basal ganglia 's primary function is likely to control and regulate activities of the motor and premotor cortical areas so that voluntary movements can be performed smoothly .
Experimental studies show that the basal ganglia exert an inhibitory influence on a number of motor systems , and that a release of this inhibition permits a motor system to become active .
The " behavior switching " that takes place within the basal ganglia is influenced by signals from many parts of the brain , including the prefrontal cortex , which plays a key role in executive functions .
The basal ganglia are of major importance for normal brain function and behaviour .
Their dysfunction results in a wide range of neurological conditions including disorders of behaviour control and movement .
Those of behaviour include Tourette syndrome , obsessive – compulsive disorder , and addiction .
Movement disorders include , most notably Parkinson 's disease , which involves degeneration of the dopamine - producing cells in the substantia nigra , Huntington 's disease , which primarily involves damage to the striatum , dystonia , and more rarely hemiballismus .
The basal ganglia have a limbic sector whose components are assigned distinct names : the nucleus accumbens , ventral pallidum , and ventral tegmental area ( VTA ) .
There is considerable evidence that this limbic part plays a central role in reward learning , particularly the mesolimbic pathway from the VTA to the nucleus accumbens that uses the neurotransmitter dopamine .
A number of highly addictive drugs , including cocaine , amphetamine , and nicotine , are thought to work by increasing the efficacy of this dopamine signal .
There is also evidence implicating overactivity of the VTA dopaminergic projection in schizophrenia .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
In terms of development , the human central nervous system is often classified based on the original three primitive vesicles from which it develops : These primary vesicles form in the normal development of the neural tube of the embryo and initially include the prosencephalon , mesencephalon , and rhombencephalon , in rostral to caudal ( from head to tail ) orientation .
Later in development of the nervous system each section itself turns into smaller components .
During development , the cells that migrate tangentially to form the basal ganglia are directed by the lateral and medial ganglionic eminences .
The following table demonstrates this developmental classification and traces it to the anatomic structures found in the basal ganglia .
The structures relevant to the basal ganglia are shown in bold . ! scope="col " Primary division of the neural tube ! scope="col " Secondary subdivision ! scope="col " Final segments in a human adult !
scope="row " Prosencephalon
* Telencephalon * * Diencephalon * * On each side of the brain : the cerebral cortices , caudate , putamen , hypothalamus * * Globus pallidus , ventral pallidum , thalamus , subthalamus , epithalamus , subthalamic nucleus
* ! scope="row " Mesencephalon
* Mesencephalon * * Mesencephalon ( midbrain ) : substantia nigra pars compacta ( SNc ) , substantia nigra pars reticulata ( SNr ) * ! scope="row " Rhombencephalon
* Metencephalon * * Myelencephalon * * Pons and cerebellum * * Medulla * } The basal ganglia form a fundamental component of the cerebrum .
In contrast to the cortical layer that lines the surface of the forebrain , the basal ganglia are a collection of distinct masses of gray matter lying deep in the brain not far from the junction of the thalamus .
They lie to the side of and surround the thalamus .
Like most parts of the brain , the basal ganglia consist of left and right sides that are virtual mirror images of each other .
In terms of anatomy , the basal ganglia are divided into four distinct structures , depending on how superior or rostral they are ( in other words depending on how close to the top of the head they are ) : Two of them , the striatum and the pallidum , are relatively large ; the other two , the substantia nigra and the subthalamic nucleus , are smaller .
In the illustration to the right , two coronal sections of the human brain show the location of the basal ganglia components .
Of note , and not seen in this section , the subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra lie farther back ( posteriorly ) in the brain than the striatum and pallidum .
STRIATUM Section::::Striatum .
The striatum is a subcortical structure generally divided into the dorsal striatum and ventral striatum , although a medial lateral classification has been suggested to be more relevant behaviorally and is being more widely used .
The striatum is composed mostly of medium spiny neurons .
These GABAergic neurons project to the external ( lateral ) globus pallidus and internal ( medial ) globus pallidus as well as the substantia nigra pars reticulata .
The projections into the globus pallidus and substantia nigra are primarily dopaminergic , although enkephalin , dynorphin and substance P are expressed .
The striatum also contains interneurons that are classified into nitrergic neurons ( due to use of nitric oxide as a neurotransmitter ) , tonically active cholinergic interneurons , parvalbumin - expressing neurons and calretinin - expressing neurons .
The dorsal striatum receives significant glutamatergic inputs from the cortex , as well as dopaminergic inputs from the substantia nigra pars compacta .
The dorsal striatum is generally considered to be involved in sensorimotor activities .
The ventral striatum receives glutamatergic inputs from the limbic areas as well as dopaminergic inputs from the VTA , via the mesolimbic pathway .
The ventral striatum is believed to play a role in reward and other limbic functions .
The dorsal striatum is divided into the caudate and putamen by the internal capsule while the ventral striatum is composed of the nucleus accumbens and olfactory tubercle .
The caudate has three primary regions of connectivity , with the head of the caudate demonstrating connectivity to the prefrontal cortex , cingulate cortex and amygdala .
The body and tail show differentiation between the dorsolateral rim and ventral caudate , projecting to the sensorimotor and limbic regions of the striatum respectively .
Striatopallidal fibres connect the striatum to the pallidus .
PALLIDUM Section::::Pallidum .
The pallidum consists of a large structure called the globus pallidus ( " pale globe " ) together with a smaller ventral extension called the ventral pallidum .
The globus pallidus appears as a single neural mass , but can be divided into two functionally distinct parts , called the internal ( or medial ) and external ( lateral ) segments , abbreviated GPi and GPe .
Both segments contain primarily GABAergic neurons , which therefore have inhibitory effects on their targets .
The two segments participate in distinct neural circuits .
The GPe , receives input mainly from the striatum , and projects to the subthalamic nucleus .
The GPi , receives signals from the striatum via the " direct " and " indirect " pathways .
Pallidal neurons operate using a disinhibition principle .
These neurons fire at steady high rates in the absence of input , and signals from the striatum cause them to pause or reduce their rate of firing .
Because pallidal neurons themselves have inhibitory effects on their targets , the net effect of striatal input to the pallidum is a reduction of the tonic inhibition exerted by pallidal cells on their targets ( disinhibition ) with an increased rate of firing in the targets .
SUBSTANTIA NIGRA Section::::Substantia nigra .
The substantia nigra is a midbrain gray matter portion of the basal ganglia that has two parts – the pars compacta ( SNc ) and the pars reticulata ( SNr ) .
SNr often works in unison with GPi , and the SNr - GPi complex inhibits the thalamus .
Substantia nigra pars compacta ( SNc ) however , produces the neurotransmitter dopamine , which is very significant in maintaining balance in the striatal pathway .
The circuit portion below explains the role and circuit connections of each of the components of the basal ganglia .
SUBTHALAMIC NUCLEUS Section::::Subthalamic nucleus .
The subthalamic nucleus is a diencephalic gray matter portion of the basal ganglia , and the only portion of the ganglia that produces an excitatory neurotransmitter , glutamate .
The role of the subthalamic nucleus is to stimulate the SNr - GPi complex and it is part of the indirect pathway .
The subthalamic nucleus receives inhibitory input from the external part of the globus pallidus and sends excitatory input to the GPi .
CIRCUIT CONNECTIONS Section::::Circuit connections .
Multiple models of basal ganglia circuits and function have been proposed , however there have been questions raised about the strict divisions of the direct and indirect pathways , their possible overlap and regulation .
The circuitry models has evolved since the first proposed model in the 1990s by DeLong in the parallel processing model , in which the cortex and substantia nigra pars compacta project into the dorsal striatum giving rise to an inhibitory indirect and excitatory direct pathway .
*
The inhibitory indirect pathway involved the inhibition of the globus pallidus externus , allowing for the disinhibition of the globus pallidus internus ( through STN ) allowing it to inhibit the thalamus .
* The direct or excitatory pathway involved the disinhibition of the thalamus through the inhibition of the GPi / SNr .
However the speed of the direct pathway would not be concordant with the indirect pathway in this model leading to problems with it .
To get over this , a hyperdirect pathway where the cortex sends glutamatergic projections through the subthalamic nucleus exciting the inhibitory GPe under the center surround model , as well as a shorter indirect pathway have been proposed .
Generally , the basal ganglia circuitry is divided into a limbic , two associative(prefrontal ) , an oculomotor and one motor pathway .
The motor and oculomotor are sometimes grouped into one motor pathway .
The 5 general pathways are organized as follows : *
The motor loop involving projections from the supplementary motor area , arcuate premotor area , motor cortex and somatosensory cortex into the putamen , which projects into the ventrolateral GPi and caudolateral SNr which projects into the cortex through the ventralis lateralis pars medialis and ventralis lateralis pars orialis .
*
The oculomotor loop involved projections from the frontal eye fields , the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( DLPFC ) , and the posterior parietal cortex into the caudate , into the caudal dorsomedial GPi and ventrolateral SNr , finally looping back into the cortex through the lateral ventralis anterior pars magnocellularis(VAmc ) .
*
The first cognitive / associative pathway proposes a pathway from the DLPFC , into the dorsolateral caudate , followed by a projection into the lateral dosomedial GPi , and rostral SNr before projecting into the lateral VAmc and medial pars magnocellularis .
*
The second cognitive / associative pathway proposed is a circuit projecting from the lateral orbitofrontal cortex , the temporal gyrus , and anterior cingulate cortex into the ventromedial caudate , followed by a projection into the lateromedial GPi , and rostrolateral SNr before looping into the cortex via the medial VAmc and medial magnocellularis .
*
The limbic circuit involving the projections from the ACC , hippocampus , entorhinal cortex , and insula into the ventral striatum , then into the rostrodorsal GPi , ventral palladium and rostrodorsal SNr , followed by a loop back into the cortex through the posteromedial part of the medial dorsal nucleus .
However , more subdivisions of loops have been proposed , up to 20,000 .
The direct pathway , originating in the dorsal striatum inhibits the GPi and SNr , resulting in a net disinhibition or excitation of the thalamus .
This pathway consist of medium spiny neurons ( MSNs )
that express dopamine receptor D1 , muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M4 , and adenosine receptor A1 .
The direct pathway has been proposed to facilitate motor actions , timing of motor actions , gating of working memory , and motor responses to specific stimuli .
The ( long ) indirect pathway originates in the dorsal striatum and inhibits the GPe , resulting in disinhibition of the GPi which is then free to inhibit the thalamus .
This pathway consists of MSNs that express dopamine receptor D2 , muscarinic acetylcholine receptor M1 , and adenosine receptor A2a .
This pathway has been proposed to result in global motor inhibition(inhibition of all motor activity ) , and termination of responses .
Another shorter indirect pathway has been proposed , which involves cortical excitation of the subthalamic nucleus resulting in direct excitation of the GPe , and inhibition of the thalamus .
This pathway is proposed to result in inhibition of specific motor programs based on associative learning .
A combination of these indirect pathways resulting in a hyperdirect pathway that results in inhibition of basal ganglia inputs besides one specific focus has been proposed as part of the center surround theory .
This hyperdirect pathway is proposed to inhibit premature responses , or globally inhibit the basal ganglia to allow for more specific top down control by the cortex .
The interactions of these pathways are currently under debate .
Some say that all pathways directly antagonize each other in a " push pull " fashion , while others support the center surround theory , in which one focused input into the cortex is protected by inhibition of competing inputs by the rest of the indirect pathways .
NEUROTRANSMITTERS Section::::Neurotransmitters .
The basal ganglia contains many afferent glutamatergic inputs , with predominantly GABAergic efferent fibers , modulatory cholinergic pathways , significant dopamine in the pathways originating in the ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra , as well as various neuropeptides .
Neuropeptides found in the basal ganglia include substance P , neurokinin A , cholecystokinin , neurotensin , neurokinin B , neuropeptide Y , somatostatin , dynorphin , enkephaline .
Other neuromodulators found in the basal ganglia include nitric oxide , carbon monoxide , and phenylethylamine .
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
Section::::Functional connectivity .
The functional connectivity , measured by regional co - activation during functional neuroimaging studies , is broadly consistent with the parallel processing models of basal ganglia function .
The putamen was generally coactivated with motor areas such as the supplementary motor area , caudal anterior cingulate cortex and primary motor cortex , while the caudate and rostral putamen were more frequently coactivated with the rostral ACC and DLPFC .
The ventral striatum was significantly associated with the amygdala and hippocampus , which although was not included in the first formulations of basal ganglia models , has been an addition to more recent models .
FUNCTION EYE MOVEMENTS Section::::Function .
Section::::Eye movements .
One intensively studied function of the basal ganglia is its role in controlling eye movements .
Eye movement is influenced by an extensive network of brain regions that converges on a midbrain area called the superior colliculus ( SC ) .
The SC is a layered structure whose layers form two - dimensional retinotopic maps of visual space .
A " bump " of neural activity in the deep layers of the SC drives an eye movement directed toward the corresponding point in space .
The SC receives a strong inhibitory projection from the basal ganglia , originating in the substantia nigra pars reticulata ( SNr ) .
Neurons in the SNr usually fire continuously at high rates , but at the onset of an eye movement they " pause " , thereby releasing the SC from inhibition .
Eye movements of all types are associated with " pausing " in the SNr ; however , individual SNr neurons may be more strongly associated with some types of movements than others .
Neurons in some parts of the caudate nucleus also show activity related to eye movements .
Since the great majority of caudate cells fire at very low rates , this activity almost always shows up as an increase in firing rate .
Thus , eye movements begin with activation in the caudate nucleus , which inhibits the SNr via the direct GABAergic projections , which in turn disinhibits the SC .
ROLE IN MOTIVATION Section::::Role in motivation .
Extracellular dopamine in the basal ganglia has been linked to motivational states in rodents , with high levels being linked to satiated " euphoria " , medium levels with seeking , and low with aversion .
The limbic basal ganglia circuits are influenced heavily by extracellular dopamine .
Increased dopamine results in inhibition of the Ventral pallidum , entopeduncular nucleus , and substantia nigra pars reticulata , resulting in disinhibition of the thalamus .
This model of direct D1 , and indirect D2 pathways explain why selective agonists of each receptor are not rewarding , as activity at both pathways is required for disinhibition .
The disinhibition of the thalamus leads to activation of the prefrontal cortex and ventral striatum , selective for increased D1 activity leading to reward .
There is also evidence from non - human primate and human electrophysiology studies that other basal ganglia structures including the globus pallidus internus and subthalamic nucleus are involved in reward processing .
DECISION MAKING
Section::::Decision making .
Two models have been proposed for the basal ganglia , one being that actions are generated by a " critic " in the ventral striatum and estimates value , and the actions are carried out by an " actor " in the dorsal striatum .
Another model proposes the basal ganglia acts as a selection mechanism , where actions are generated in the cortex and are selected based on context by the basal ganglia .
The CBGTC loop is also involved in reward discounting , with firing increasing with an unexpected or greater than expected reward .
One review supported the idea that the cortex was involved in learning actions regardless of their outcome , while the basal ganglia was involved in selecting appropriate actions based on associative reward based trial and error learning .
WORKING MEMORY Section::::Working memory .
The basal ganglia has been proposed to gate what enters and what does n't enter working memory .
One hypothesis proposes that the direct pathway ( Go , or excitatory )
allows information into the PFC , where it stays independent of the pathway , however another theory proposes that in order for information to stay in the PFC the direct pathway needs to continue reverberating .
The short indirect pathway has been proposed to , in a direct push pull antagonism with the direct pathway , close the gate to the PFC .
Together these mechanisms regulate working memory focus .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
Basal ganglia disease is a group of movement disorders that result from either excessive output from the basal ganglia to the thalamus – hypokinetic disorders , or from insufficient output – hyperkinetic disorders .
Hypokinetic disorders arise from an excessive output from the basal ganglia , which inhibits the output from the thalamus to the cortex , and thus limits voluntary movement .
Hyperkinetic disorders result from a low output from the basal ganglia to the thalamus which gives not enough inhibition to the thalamic projections to the cortex and thus gives uncontrolled / involuntary movements .
Dysfunction of the basal ganglia circuitry can also lead to other disorders .
The following is a list of disorders that have been linked to the basal ganglia : HISTORY Section::::History .
The acceptance that the basal ganglia system constitutes one major cerebral system took time to arise .
The first anatomical identification of distinct subcortical structures was published by Thomas Willis in 1664 .
For many years , the term corpus striatum was used to describe a large group of subcortical elements , some of which were later discovered to be functionally unrelated .
For many years , the putamen and the caudate nucleus were not associated with each other .
Instead , the putamen was associated with the pallidum in what was called the nucleus lenticularis or nucleus lentiformis .
A thorough reconsideration by Cécile and Oskar Vogt ( 1941 ) simplified the description of the basal ganglia by proposing the term striatum to describe the group of structures consisting of the caudate nucleus , the putamen , and the mass linking them ventrally , the nucleus accumbens .
The striatum was named on the basis of the striated ( striped ) appearance created by radiating dense bundles of striato - pallido - nigral axons , described by anatomist Samuel Alexander Kinnier Wilson ( 1912 ) as " pencil - like " .
The anatomical link of the striatum with its primary targets , the pallidum and the substantia nigra , was discovered later .
The name globus pallidus was attributed by Déjerine to Burdach ( 1822 ) .
For this , the Vogts proposed the simpler " pallidum " .
The term " locus niger " was introduced by Félix Vicq - d'Azyr as tache noire in ( 1786 ) , though that structure has since become known as the substantia nigra , due to contributions by Von Sömmering in 1788 .
The structural similarity between the substantia nigra and globus pallidus was noted by Mirto in 1896 .
Together , the two are known as the pallidonigral ensemble , which represents the core of the basal ganglia .
Altogether , the main structures of the basal ganglia are linked to each other by the striato - pallido - nigral bundle , which passes through the pallidum , crosses the internal capsule as the " comb bundle of Edinger " , and finally reaches the substantia nigra .
Additional structures that later became associated with the basal ganglia are the " body of Luys " ( 1865 ) ( nucleus of Luys on the figure ) or subthalamic nucleus , whose lesion was known to produce movement disorders .
More recently , other areas such as the centromedian nucleus and the pedunculopontine complex have been thought to be regulators of the basal ganglia .
Near the beginning of the 20th century , the basal ganglia system was first associated with motor functions , as lesions of these areas would often result in disordered movement in humans ( chorea , athetosis , Parkinson 's disease ) .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
The nomenclature of the basal ganglia system and its components has always been problematic .
Early anatomists , seeing the macroscopic anatomical structure but knowing nothing of the cellular architecture or neurochemistry , grouped together components that are now believed to have distinct functions ( such as the internal and external segments of the globus pallidus ) , and gave distinct names to components that are now thought to be functionally parts of a single structure ( such as the caudate nucleus and putamen ) .
The term " basal " comes from the fact that most of its elements are located in the basal part of the forebrain .
The term ganglia is a misnomer :
In modern usage , neural clusters are called " ganglia " only in the peripheral nervous system ; in the central nervous system they are called " nuclei " .
For this reason , the basal ganglia are also occasionally known as the " basal nuclei " .
Terminologia anatomica ( 1998 ) , the international authority for anatomical naming , retained " nuclei basales " , but this is not commonly used .
The International Basal Ganglia Society ( IBAGS ) informally considers the basal ganglia to be made up of the striatum , the pallidum ( with two nuclei ) , the substantia nigra ( with its two distinct parts ) , and the subthalamic nucleus , whereas Terminologia anatomica excludes the last two .
Some neurologists have included the centromedian nucleus of the thalamus as part of the basal ganglia , and some have also included the pedunculopontine nucleus .
OTHER ANIMALS
Section::::Other animals .
The basal ganglia form one of the basic components of the forebrain , and can be recognized in all species of vertebrates .
Even in the lamprey ( generally considered one of the most primitive of vertebrates ) , striatal , pallidal , and nigral elements can be identified on the basis of anatomy and histochemistry .
The names given to the various nuclei of the basal ganglia are different in different species .
In cats and rodents the internal globus pallidus is known as the entopeduncular nucleus .
In birds the striatum is called the paleostriatum augmentatum and the external globus pallidus is called the paleostriatum primitivum .
A clear emergent issue in comparative anatomy of the basal ganglia is the development of this system through phylogeny as a convergent cortically re - entrant loop in conjunction with the development and expansion of the cortical mantle .
There is controversy , however , regarding the extent to which convergent selective processing occurs versus segregated parallel processing within re - entrant closed loops of the basal ganglia .
Regardless , the transformation of the basal ganglia into a cortically re - entrant system in mammalian evolution occurs through a re - direction of pallidal ( or " paleostriatum primitivum " ) output from midbrain targets such as the superior colliculus , as occurs in sauropsid brain , to specific regions of the ventral thalamus and from there back to specified regions of the cerebral cortex that form a subset of those cortical regions projecting into the striatum .
The abrupt rostral re - direction of the pathway from the internal segment of the globus pallidus into the ventral thalamus — via the path of the ansa lenticularis — could be viewed as a footprint of this evolutionary transformation of basal ganglia outflow and targeted influence .
SEE ALSO * Alexander Cools
* Nathaniel A. Buchwald
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Imaging of Basal Ganglia at USUHS * The International Basal Ganglia Society * Basal ganglia – Official journal of LIMPE ( Lega Italiana per la Lotta Contro
la Malattia di Parkinson , le Sindromi Extrapiramidali e le Demenze , Italy ) , the German Parkinson Society ( DPG , Deutsche Parkinson Gesellschaft ) , and the Japanese Basal Ganglia Society ( JBAGS Japan Basal Ganglia Society )