SUBTROPICAL CYCLONE
A subtropical cyclone is a weather system that has some characteristics of a tropical and an extratropical cyclone .
As early as the 1950s , meteorologists were uncertain whether they should be characterized as tropical or extratropical cyclones .
They were officially recognized by the National Hurricane Center in 1972 .
Beginning in 2002 , subtropical cyclones received names from the official tropical cyclone lists in the North Atlantic , South - west Indian Ocean , and South Atlantic basins .
There are two definitions currently used for subtropical cyclones .
Across the north Atlantic and southwest Indian Ocean , they require central convection fairly near the center and a warming core in the mid - levels of the troposphere .
Across the eastern half of the northern Pacific , they require a mid - tropospheric cyclone to be cut off from the main belt of the westerlies and only a weak surface circulation .
Subtropical cyclones have broad wind patterns with maximum sustained winds located farther from the center than typical tropical cyclones , and have no weather fronts linked into their center .
Since they form from initially extratropical cyclones which have colder temperatures aloft than normally found in the tropics , the sea surface temperatures required for their formation are lower than the tropical cyclone threshold by 3 ° C ( 5 ° F ) , lying around 23 ° C ( 73 ° F ) .
This also means that subtropical cyclones are more likely to form outside the traditional bounds of the North Atlantic hurricane season .
Subtropical cyclones are also observed to form in the South Atlantic ; South Atlantic subtropical cyclones are observed in all months .
HISTORY OF TERM Section::::History of term .
Throughout the 1950s and 1960s , the term semi - tropical and quasi - tropical were used for what would become known as subtropical cyclones .
The term subtropical cyclone merely referred to any cyclone located in the subtropical belt near and just north of the horse latitudes .
Intense debate ensued in the late 1960s , after a number of hybrid cyclones formed in the Atlantic Basin .
In 1972 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) finally designated these storms as subtropical cyclones in real - time , and updated the hurricane database to include subtropical cyclones from 1968 through 1971 .
The term " neutercane " began to be used for small subtropical cyclones which formed from mesoscale features , and the NHC began issuing public statements during the 1972 Atlantic hurricane season employing that classification .
This name was not noted as controversial in contemporary news reports , but it was dropped less than a year later .
Recent articles , published after the year 2000 , have suggested that the name " neutercane " was considered sexist in the 1970s , but there do not appear to be any published reports from that period making this claim .
NAMING
Section::::Naming .
In the North Atlantic basin , subtropical cyclones were initially named from the NATO phonetic alphabet list in the early to mid-1970s .
In the intervening years of 1975–2001 , subtropical storms were either named from the traditional list and considered tropical in real - time , or used a separate numbering system .
Between 1992 and 2001 , two different numbers were given to subtropical depressions or subtropical storms , one for public use , the other one for NRL and NHC reference .
For example , Hurricane Karen in 2001 was initially known as Subtropical Storm
One as well as AL1301 ( or 13L for short ) .
In 2002 , the NHC began giving numbers to subtropical depressions and names to subtropical storms from the same sequence as tropical cyclones .
From 2002 onward , Subtropical Depression 13L would be known as Subtropical Depression Thirteen instead .
Hurricane Gustav of 2002 was the first Subtropical Storm to receive a name but became tropical shortly after naming .
Subtropical Storm Nicole , from the 2004 Atlantic hurricane season was the first subtropical storm that did not become tropical since the policy change .
A subtropical storm from the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season also did not become tropical , but was not named since it was not recognized until post - season analysis .
In the southern Indian Ocean , subtropical cyclones are also named once winds reach tropical storm , or gale , force .
Since 2011 , subtropical storms in the western South Atlantic Ocean are named by the Brazilian Navy Hydrographic Center .
FORMATION Section::::Formation .
Subtropical cyclones form in a wide band of latitude , mainly south of the 50th parallel in the northern hemisphere .
Due to the increased frequency of cyclones which cut off from the main belt of the westerlies during the summer and fall , subtropical cyclones are significantly more frequent across the North Atlantic than the northwestern Pacific Ocean .
In the eastern half of the north Pacific Ocean and north Indian Ocean , the older subtropical cyclone definition term is still used , which requires a weak circulation forming underneath a mid to upper - tropospheric low which has cut off from the main belt of the westerlies during the cold season ( winter ) .
In the case of the north Indian Ocean , the formation of this type of vortex leads to the onset of monsoon rains during the wet season .
In the southern hemisphere , subtropical cyclones are regularly observed across southern portions of the Mozambique Channel .
Most subtropical cyclones form when a deep cold - core extratropical cyclone drops down into the subtropics .
The system becomes blocked by a high latitude ridge , and eventually sheds its frontal boundaries as its source of cool and dry air from the high latitudes diverts away from the system .
Temperature differences between the 500 hPa pressure level , or above ground level , and the sea surface temperatures initially exceed the dry adiabatic lapse rate , which causes an initial round of thunderstorms to form at a distance east of the center .
Due to the initial cold temperatures aloft , sea surface temperatures usually need to reach at least for this initial round of thunderstorms .
The initial thunderstorm activity moistens up the environment around the low , which destabilizes the atmosphere by reducing the lapse rate needed for convection .
When the next shortwave or upper level jet streak ( wind maximum within the jet stream ) moves nearby , convection reignites closer to the center and the system develops into a true subtropical cyclone .
The average sea surface temperature that helps lead to subtropical cyclogenesis is .
If the thunderstorm activity becomes deep and persistent , allowing its initial low level warm core to deepen , tropical cyclogenesis is possible .
The locus of formation for North Atlantic subtropical cyclones is out in the open ocean ; the island of Bermuda is regularly impacted by these systems .
The South Atlantic environment for formation of subtropical cyclones has both stronger vertical wind shear and lower sea surface temperatures , yet subtropical cyclogenesis is regularly observed in the open ocean in the South Atlantic .
A second mechanism for formation has been diagnosed for South Atlantic subtropical cyclones : lee cyclogenesis in the region of the Brazil Current .
TRANSITION FROM EXTRATROPICAL Section::::Transition from extratropical .
By gaining tropical characteristics , an extratropical low may transit into a subtropical depression or storm .
A subtropical depression / storm may further gain tropical characteristics to become a pure tropical depression or storm , which may eventually develop into a hurricane , and there are at least ten cases of tropical cyclones transforming into a subtropical cyclone ( Tropical Storm Gilda in 1973 , Subtropical Storm Four in 1974 , Tropical Storm Jose in 1981 , Hurricane Klaus in 1984 , Tropical Storm Allison in 2001 , Tropical Storm Lee in 2011 , Hurricane Humberto in 2013 , Tropical Storm Ian in 2016 , Typhoon Jelawat in 2018 , and Tropical Storm Gaemi in 2018 ) .
There have also been two recorded cases of a storm transitioning from tropical to extratropical to a subtropical cyclone ; as seen with Hurricane Georges in 1980 and Hurricane Beryl in 2018 .
Generally , a tropical storm or tropical depression is not called subtropical while it is becoming extratropical , after hitting either land or colder waters .
This transition normally requires significant instability through the atmosphere , with temperature differences between the underlying ocean and the mid - levels of the troposphere requiring over 20 ° C , or 72 ° F , of contrast in this roughly layer of the lower atmosphere .
The mode of the sea surface temperatures that subtropical cyclones form over is .
Transition from subtropical cyclones into tropical cyclones occurs only in very rare cases over the South Atlantic Ocean , such as Hurricane Catarina in 2004 .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
These storms can have maximum winds extending farther from the center than in a purely tropical cyclone and have no weather fronts linking directly to the center of circulation .
In the Atlantic Basin , the United States NOAA classifies subtropical cyclones similarly to their tropical cousins , based on maximum sustained surface winds .
Those with winds below 18 m / s , ( 65 km / h , 35 knots , or 39 mph ) are called subtropical depressions , while those at or above this speed are referred to as subtropical storms .
Subtropical cyclones with hurricane - force winds of 33 m / s , ( 119 km / h , 64 knots , or 74 mph ) or greater are not officially recognized by the National Hurricane Center .
Once a subtropical storm intensifies enough to have hurricane - force winds , it is then automatically assumed to have become a fully tropical hurricane .
Despite this , however , prior to the start of modern policies , two subtropical cyclones in the Atlantic hurricane database attained hurricane - force winds ; a subtropical storm in 1968 , and a subtropical storm in 1979 .
Subtropical cyclones are also more likely than tropical cyclones to form outside of a region 's designated hurricane season .
Recent North Atlantic examples of this include the following storms : * Subtropical Storm Ana ( which became Tropical Storm Ana ) in late - April of the 2003 hurricane season .
* Subtropical Storm Andrea in early - May of the 2007 hurricane season .
* Subtropical Storm Olga ( which became Tropical Storm Olga ) in mid - December of the 2007 hurricane season .
* Subtropical Storm Beryl ( which became Tropical Storm Beryl ) in late - May of the 2012 hurricane season .
*
An unnamed subtropical storm in early - December of the 2013 hurricane season .
* Subtropical Storm Ana ( which became Tropical Storm Ana ) in early - May of the 2015 hurricane season .
* Subtropical Storm Alex ( which became Hurricane Alex ) in mid - January of the 2016 hurricane season .
* Subtropical Depression One ( which became Tropical Storm Arlene ) in mid - April of the 2017 hurricane season .
* Subtropical Storm Alberto ( which became Tropical Storm Alberto ) in late - May of the 2018 Atlantic hurricane season .
Diagrams which depict a cyclone 's phase depict subtropical cyclones with a shallow warm core and as asymmetric systems , similar to tropical cyclones which have begun the transition to an extratropical cyclone .
TYPES UPPER - LEVEL LOW Section::::Types .
Section::::Upper - level low .
The most common type of subtropical storm is an upper - level cold low with circulation extending to the surface layer and maximum sustained winds generally occurring at a radius of about or more from the center .
In comparison to tropical cyclones , such systems have a relatively broad zone of maximum winds that is located farther from the center , and typically have a less symmetric wind field and distribution of convection .
MESOSCALE LOW Section::::Mesoscale
low .
A second type of subtropical cyclone is a mesoscale low originating in or near a frontolyzing zone of horizontal wind shear , also known as a dying frontal zone , with radius of maximum sustained winds generally less than .
The entire circulation may initially have a diameter of less than .
These generally short - lived systems may be either cold core or warm core , and in 1972 this type of subtropical cyclone was referred to as a " neutercane " .
KONA STORM Section::::Kona storm .
Kona storms ( or Kona lows ) are deep cyclones that form during the cool season of the central Pacific Ocean .
A definition change in the term during the early 1970s makes categorization of the systems more complex , as many kona lows are extratropical cyclones , complete with their own weather fronts .
Those across the northeast Pacific Ocean consider them subtropical cyclones as long as a weak surface circulation is present .
Kona is a Hawaiian term for leeward , which explains the change in wind direction for the Hawaiian Islands from easterly to southerly when this type of cyclone is present .
AUSTRALIAN EAST COAST LOWS Section::::Australian East Coast Lows .
Australian east coast lows ( known locally as east coast lows and sometimes as east coast cyclones ) are extratropical cyclones , the most intense of these systems have many of the characteristics of subtropical cyclones .
They develop between 25˚south and 40˚south and within 5˚ of the Australian coastline , typically during the winter months .
Each year there are about ten " significant impact " maritime lows .
Explosive cyclogenesis is seen on average just once per year , but these storms cause significant wind and flood damage when they occur .
Australian east coast cyclones vary in size from mesoscale ( approximately 10 km to 100 km ) to synoptic scale ( approximately 100 km to 1,000 km ) .
These storms which mostly affect the south east coast should not be confused with Australian region tropical cyclones which typically affect the northern half of the continent .
SEE ALSO
* Extratropical transition technique *
Mediterranean tropical - like cyclone * Australian east coast low
* Polar low * Subtropical Cyclone Katie REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * NOAA FAQ on tropical cyclones .
*
USA Today article on subtropical storms .