CUVETTE
A cuvette ( French :
cuvette =
" little vessel " ) is a small tube - like container with straight sides and a circular or square cross section .
It is sealed at one end , and made of a clear , transparent material such as plastic , glass , or fused quartz .
Cuvettes are designed to hold samples for spectroscopic measurement , where a beam of light is passed through the sample within the cuvette to measure the absorbance , transmittance , fluorescence intensity , fluorescence polarization , or fluorescence lifetime of the sample .
This measurement is done with a spectrophotometer .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Traditional ultraviolet – visible spectroscopy or fluorescence spectroscopy uses samples that are liquid .
Often the sample is a solution , with the substance of interest dissolved within .
The sample is placed in a cuvette and the cuvette is placed in a spectrophotometer for testing .
The cuvette can be made of any material that is transparent in the range of wavelengths used in the test .
The smallest cuvettes can hold 70 microliters , while the largest can hold 2.5 milliliters or more .
The width determines the length of the light path through the sample , which affects the calculation of the absorbance value .
Many cuvettes have a light path of , which simplifies calculation of the coefficient of absorption .
Most cuvettes have two transparent sides opposite one another so the spectrophotometer light can pass through , although some tests use reflection so only need a single transparent side .
For fluorescence measurements , two more transparent sides , at right angles to those used for the spectrophotometer light , are needed for the excitation light .
Some cuvettes have a glass or plastic cap for use with hazardous solutions .
TECHNIQUE Section::::Technique .
Scratches on the sides of the cuvette
the light passes through scatter light and cause errors .
A rubber or plastic rack protects the cuvette from accidentally hitting and being scratched by the machine casing .
The solvent and temperature can also affect measurements .
Cuvettes to be used in circular dichroism experiments should never be mechanically stressed , as the stress will induce birefringence in the quartz and affect measurements .
Fingerprints and droplets of water disrupt light rays during measurement , so low - lint gauze or cloth may be used to wipe clean the outer surface of a cuvette before use .
Paper towel or similar may scratch the cuvette .
Mild detergent or ethanol may be applied , followed by rinsing with tap water .
Acid and alkali are avoided due to their corrosive effects on glass , and acetone is unsuitable when working with plastic cuvettes .
If solution is transferred into a cuvette using a Pasteur pipette containing air , bubbles may form inside the cuvette , reducing the purity of a solution and scattering light beams .
The finger - clad finger method is used to remove bubbles .
The solution contained in the cuvette should be high enough to be in the path of the light source .
In case the sample needs incubation at a high temperature , care must be taken to avoid temperatures too hot for the cuvette .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Historically , reusable quartz cuvettes were required for measurements in the ultraviolet range , because glass and most plastics absorb ultraviolet light , creating interference .
Today there are disposable plastic cuvettes made of specialized plastics that are transparent to ultraviolet light .
Glass , plastic and quartz cuvettes are all suitable for measurements made at longer wavelengths , such as in the visible light range .
" Tandem cuvettes " have a glass barrier medium that extends two - thirds of the way up in the middle , so that measurements can be taken with two solutions separated and again when they are mixed .
PLASTIC Section::::Plastic .
Plastic cuvettes are often used in fast spectroscopic assays , where high speed is more important than high accuracy .
Plastic cuvettes with a usable wavelength range of 380–780 nm ( the visible spectrum ) may be disposed of after use , preventing contamination from re - use .
They are cheap to manufacture and purchase .
Disposable cuvettes can be used in some laboratories where the beam light is not high enough to affect the absorption tolerance and consistency of the value .
GLASS
Section::::Glass .
Crown glass has an optimal wavelength range of 340–2500 nm .
Glass cuvettes are typically for use in the wavelength range of visible light , whereas fused quartz tends to be used for ultraviolet applications .
QUARTZ Section::::Quartz .
Quartz cells provide more durability than plastic or glass .
Quartz excels at transmitting UV light , and can be used for wavelengths ranging from 190 to 2500 nm .
FUSED QUARTZ Section::::Fused quartz .
Fused quartz cells are used for wavelengths below 380 nm , i.e. ultraviolet light .
INFRARED
QUARTZ Section::::Infrared quartz .
IR quartz has a usable wavelength range of 220 to 3,500 nm .
It is more resistant to chemical attack from the sample solution than other types designed for fluorescence measurements .
SAPPHIRE Section::::Sapphire .
Sapphire cuvettes are the most expensive , though provide the most durable , scratch - resistant , and transmissible material .
The transmission extends from UV light to mid - infrared , ranging from 250 to 5,000 nm .
Sapphire can withstand the extreme natural condition of some sample solutions and variances in temperature .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1934 , James Franklin Hyde created a combined silica cell , which was free from other extraneous elements , as a liquefying technique of other glass products .
In the 1950s , Starna Ltd. improved the method to completely melt a segment of glass using heat without deforming its shape .
This innovation has altered the production of inert cuvettes without any thermosetting resin .
Before the rectangular cuvette was created , ordinary test tubes were used .
As innovation motivated changes in technique , cuvettes were constructed to have focal points over ordinary test tubes .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES SEE ALSO
* Calibration curve
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Spectrophotometry Handbooks * Standard Practice for Describing and Measuring Performance of Ultraviolet , Visible , and Near - Infrared Spectrophotometers