THE BLUES BROTHERS
The Blues Brothers are an American blues and soul revivalist band founded in 1978 by comedy actors Dan Aykroyd and John Belushi as part of a musical sketch on Saturday Night Live .
Belushi and Aykroyd fronted the band , in character , respectively , as lead vocalist " Joliet " Jake Blues and harmonica player / vocalist Elwood Blues .
The band was composed of previously well - known musicians , and debuted as the musical guest on the April 22 , 1978 , episode of Saturday Night Live , opening the show performing " Hey Bartender " , and later " Soul Man " .
In 1978 , the band released their debut album , Briefcase Full of Blues , and opened for the Grateful Dead at the closing of Winterland Arena in San Francisco .
They gained further notoriety after spawning a Hollywood comedy film in 1980 , The Blues Brothers .
After the Belushi 's death in 1982 , the Blues Brothers continued to perform with a rotation of guest singers and other band members .
The band reformed in 1988 for a world tour and again in 1998 for a sequel film , Blues Brothers 2000 .
BAND HISTORY
ORIGINS
Section::::Band history .
Section::::Origins .
The genesis of the Blues Brothers was a January 17 , 1976 , Saturday Night Live sketch .
In it , " Howard Shore and his All - Bee Band " play the Slim Harpo song "
I 'm a King Bee " , with Belushi singing and Aykroyd playing harmonica , dressed in the bee costumes they wore for " The Killer Bees " sketches .
Following tapings of SNL , it was popular among cast members and the weekly hosts to attend Aykroyd 's Holland Tunnel Blues bar , which he had rented not long after joining the cast .
Dan and John filled a jukebox with songs from Sam and Dave , punk band The Viletones and others .
John bought an amplifier and they kept some musical instruments there for anyone who wanted to jam .
It was here that Dan and Ron Gwynne wrote and developed the story which Dan turned into the draft screenplay for the Blues Brothers movie , better known as the " tome " because it contained so many pages .
It was at the bar that Aykroyd introduced Belushi to the blues .
An interest soon became a fascination , and it was not long before the two began singing with local blues bands .
Jokingly , SNL band leader Howard Shore suggested they call themselves " The Blues Brothers " .
In an April 1988 interview he gave to the Chicago Sun - Times , Aykroyd said the Blues Brothers act borrowed from Sam and Dave and others ; the Sun - Times quoted him as explaining : " Well obviously the duo thing and the dancing , but the hats came from John Lee Hooker .
The suits came from the concept that when you were a jazz player in the ' 40s , ' 50s ' 60s , to look straight , you had to wear a suit . "
The band was modeled in part on Aykroyd 's experience with the Downchild Blues Band , one of the first professional blues bands in Canada , with whom Aykroyd played on occasion .
Aykroyd encountered the band in the early 1970s , around the time of his attendance at Carleton University in Ottawa , Ontario , Canada , and where his interest in the blues developed through attending and occasionally performing at Ottawa 's Le Hibou Coffee House .
As Aykroyd described it : So I grew up ( in Ottawa ) , in this capital city .
My parents used to work for the government , and I went to elementary school , high school , and the university in the city .
And there was a place on Sussex Drive
( Sussex Drive is where the Prime Minister 's house is , right below Parliament Hill ) , and there was a little club there called Le Hibou , which in French means ' the owl . '
And it was run by a gentleman named Harvey Glatt , and he brought every , and I mean every blues star that you or I would ever have wanted to have seen through Ottawa in the late ' 50s
, well I guess more late ' 60s sort of , in around the Newport jazz rediscovery .
I was going to Le Hibou and hearing James Cotton , Otis Spann , Pinetop Perkins , and Muddy Waters .
I actually jammed behind Muddy Waters .
S. P. Leary left the drum kit one night , and Muddy said ' anybody out there play drums ?
I do n't have a drummer . '
And I walked on stage and we started , I do n't know , "
Little Red Rooster " , something .
He said ' keep that beat going , you make Muddy feel good . '
And I heard Howlin ' Wolf ( Chester Burnett ) .
Many , many times I saw Howlin ' Wolf .
And of course Buddy Guy , Buddy Guy and Junior Wells , Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee .
So I was exposed to all of these players , playing there as part of this scene to service the academic community in Ottawa , a very well - educated community .
Had I lived in a different town
I do n't think that this would have happened , because it was just the confluence of educated government workers , and then also all the colleges in the area , Ottawa University , Carleton , and all the schools — these people were interested in blues culture .
The Toronto - based Downchild Blues Band , co - founded in 1969 by two brothers , Donnie and Richard " Hock " Walsh , served as an inspiration for the two Blues Brothers characters .
Aykroyd modeled Elwood Blues in part on Donnie Walsh , a harmonica player and guitarist , while Belushi 's Jake Blues character was modeled after Hock Walsh , Downchild 's lead singer .
In their first album , Briefcase Full of Blues ( 1978 ) , Aykroyd and Belushi featured three well - known Downchild songs closely associated with Hock Walsh 's vocal style : " I 've Got Everything I Need ( Almost ) " , written by Donnie Walsh , " Shotgun Blues " , co - written by Donnie and Hock Walsh , and " Flip , Flop and Fly " , co - written and originally popularized by Big Joe Turner .
All three songs were on Downchild 's second album ,
Straight Up ( 1973 ) , with " Flip , Flop and Fly " becoming the band 's most successful single , in 1974 .
Belushi 's budding interest in the blues solidified in October 1977 when he was in Eugene , Oregon , filming National Lampoon 's Animal House .
He went to a local hotel to hear 25-year - old blues singer / harmonica player Curtis Salgado .
After the show , Belushi and Salgado talked about the blues for hours .
Belushi found Salgado 's enthusiasm infectious .
In an interview at the time with the Eugene Register - Guard , he said : In an interview with Crawdaddy magazine , he added : Salgado lent him some albums by Floyd Dixon , Charles Brown , Johnny " Guitar " Watson , and others .
Belushi was hooked .
Belushi began to join Salgado on stage , singing the Floyd Dixon song " Hey , Bartender " on a few occasions , and using Salgado 's humorous alternate lyrics to " I Do n't Know " : These lyrics were used in the band 's debut performance on SNL .
BAND FORMATION Section::::Band formation .
With the help of pianist - arranger Paul Shaffer , Belushi and Aykroyd started assembling a collection of studio talents to form their own band .
These included SNL band members , saxophonist " Blue " Lou Marini and trombonist - saxophonist Tom Malone , who had previously played in Blood , Sweat & Tears .
At Shaffer 's suggestion guitarist Steve Cropper and bassist Donald " Duck " Dunn , the powerhouse combo from Booker T and the M.G. 's and subsequently almost every hit out of Memphis ' Stax Records during the 1960s , were signed as well .
Belushi wanted a powerful trumpet player and a hot blues guitarist , so Juilliard - trained trumpeter Alan Rubin was brought in , as was guitarist Matt Murphy , who had performed with many blues legends .
For the brothers ' look , Belushi borrowed John Lee Hooker 's trademark Ray - Ban Wayfarer sunglasses and soul patch .
Their style was fresh and in many ways , different from prevailing musical trends : A very raw and " live " sound compared to the increasing use of sound synthesis and vocal - dominated music of the late 1970s and 80s .
SOUND Section::::Sound .
While the music of the Blues Brothers is based on R&B , blues , and soul , it also drew heavily on rock and jazz elements , usually taking a blues standard and bringing a rock sound and style to it .
The band could be drawn into three sections : the four - man horn section , the traditional rock instruments of the five - man rhythm section , and the two singing brothers .
The sound of the band was a synthesis of two different traditions : the horn players all came from the clean , precise , jazz - influenced sound of New York City ; while the rhythm section came from the grittier soul and blues sound of Chicago and Memphis .
The success of this meld was due both to Shaffer 's arrangements and to the musicians ' talents .
In Stories Behind the Making of The Blues Brothers , a 1998 documentary included on some DVD editions of the first Blues Brothers film , Cropper noted that some of his peers thought that he and the other musicians backing the Blues Brothers were selling out to Hollywood or using a gimmick to make some quick money .
Cropper responded by stating that he thought Belushi was as good as ( or even better than )
many of the singers he had backed ; he also noted that Belushi had , early in his career , briefly been a professional drummer , and had an especially keen sense of rhythm .
ALBUMS , EARLY GIGS , CHARACTER BACKGROUNDS Section::::Albums , early gigs , character backgrounds .
The Blues Brothers recorded their first album , Briefcase Full of Blues , in 1978 while opening for comedian Steve Martin at Los Angeles ' Universal Amphitheatre .
The album reached # 1 on the Billboard 200 , went double platinum , and featured Top 40 hit recordings of Sam and Dave 's " Soul Man " and The Chips ' " Rubber Biscuit " .
The album liner notes fleshed out the fictional back story of Jake and Elwood , having them growing up in a Roman Catholic orphanage in Calumet City , Illinois and learning the blues from a janitor named Curtis .
Their blood brotherhood was sealed by cutting their middle fingers with a string said to come from the guitar of Elmore James .
The band , along with the New Riders of the Purple Sage , opened for the Grateful Dead for the final show at Winterland , New Year 's Eve 1978 .
With the film , came the soundtrack album , which was the band 's first studio album .
"
Gimme Some Lovin' " was a Top 40 hit and the band toured to promote the film , The tour began on June 27 , 1980 at Poplar Creek Music Theater .
The tour also led to a third album ( and second live album ) , Made in America , recorded at the Universal Amphitheatre in 1980 .
The track " Who 's Making Love " peaked at No 39 .
It was the last recording the band would make with Belushi 's Jake Blues .
Belushi 's wife , Judith Jacklin , and his friend , Tino Insana , wrote a book , , that further fleshed out the Blues Brothers ' universe and gave a back story for the first movie .
In 1981 , Best of the Blues Brothers was released , with a previously unreleased track , a version of The Soul Survivors ' " Expressway to Your Heart " , and alternate live recordings of " Everybody Needs Somebody to Love " and " Rubber Biscuit " ; this album would be the first of several compilations and hits collections issued over the years .
A 1998 British CD compilation , The Complete Blues Brothers , exclusively features Lamont Cranston 's " Excuse Moi Mon Cheri " , from the L.A. Briefcase recordings , originally available only as the b - side to the " Soul Man " 45 rpm single .
On March 5 , 1982 , John Belushi died in Hollywood of an accidental overdose of heroin and cocaine .
After John Belushi 's death , updated versions of the Blues Brothers have performed on SNL and for charitable and political causes .
Aykroyd has been accompanied by Jim Belushi and John Goodman in character as " Zee " Blues and " Mighty Mack " McTeer .
The copyright owners have also authorized some copycat acts to perform under the Blues Brothers name ; one such act performs regularly at the Universal Studios Florida theme park in Orlando , Florida and Universal Studios Hollywood .
In 1995 the Band collaborated with the Italian singer Zucchero Fornaciari , who had been invited to the event in memory of the 46th John Belushi 's birthday .
After a concert together , they registered the videoclip of the famous Zucchero song " Per Colpa Di Chi ? " at the House of Blues .
In 1997 , an animated sitcom with Jake and Elwood was planned , but scrapped after only eight episodes were produced .
To promote Blues Brothers 2000 ( 1998 ) , Dan Aykroyd , James Belushi and John Goodman performed at the halftime of Super Bowl XXXI , along with ZZ Top and James Brown .
The performance was preceded with a faux news report stating the Blues Brothers had escaped custody and were on their way to the Louisiana Superdome .
Aykroyd has continued to be an active proponent of blues music and parlayed this avocation into foundation and partial ownership of the House of Blues franchise , a national chain of nightclubs .
In Italy the franchise is now owned by Zucchero , who used the brand during the tour promoting his album Black Cat of 2016 .
Jim Belushi toured with the band for a short time as " Zee Blues " , and recorded the album with Dan Aykroyd .
Jim would later reunite with Aykroyd to record yet another album , not as the Blues Brothers but as themselves : Belushi / Aykroyd - Have Love Will Travel ( Big Men - Big Music ) .
In 2004 , the musical The Blues Brothers Revival premiered in Chicago .
The story was about Elwood trying to rescue Jake from an eternity in limbo / purgatory .
The musical was written and composed with approval and permission from both the John Belushi estate ( including his widow , Judith Belushi - Pisano ) and Dan Aykroyd .
The Blues Brothers featuring Elwood and Zee regularly perform at House of Blues venues and various casinos across North America .
They are usually backed by James Belushi 's Sacred Hearts Band .
The Original Blues Brothers Band tours the world regularly .
The only original members still in the band are Steve Cropper and Lou Marini .
The lead singers are Bobby " Sweet Soul " Harden , Rob " The Honeydripper " Papparozi and Tommy " Pipes " McDonnel .
They are occasionally joined by Eddie Floyd .
Aykroyd currently reprises his character Elwood Blues as the host of the weekly House of Blues Radio Hour , heard nationwide on the Dial Global Radio Network .
FILMS
THE BLUES BROTHERS Section::::Films .
Section::::The Blues Brothers .
In 1980 , The Blues Brothers , directed by John Landis , was released .
Featuring epic car chases involving the Bluesmobile and musical performances by Aretha Franklin , James Brown , Cab Calloway , Ray Charles and John Lee Hooker .
The story is set in and around Chicago , Illinois .
It is a tale of redemption for the paroled convict Jake Blues and his brother Elwood as they choose to take on a " mission from God " and reform their blues band in order to raise funds to save the Catholic orphanage where they grew up .
Along the way , the brothers are targeted by a " mystery woman " ( Carrie Fisher ) and chased by the Illinois State Police , a country and western band called the Good Ol' Boys , and " Illinois Nazis " .
The film grossed $ 57 million domestically in its theatrical release , making it the 10th highest - grossing movie of 1980 , and grossed an additional $ 58 million in foreign release .
It is the second - highest grossing film based on a Saturday Night Live sketch and ninth - highest grossing musical film .
BLUES BROTHERS 2000
Section::::Blues Brothers 2000 .
With Landis again directing , the sequel to The Blues Brothers was made in 1998 .
It fared considerably worse than its predecessor with fans and critics , though it is more ambitious in terms of musical performances by the band and has a more extensive roster of guest artists than the first film .
The story picks up 18 years later with Elwood being released from prison , and learning that his brother has died .
He is once again prevailed upon to save some orphans , and with a 10-year - old boy named Buster Blues ( J. Evan Bonifant ) in tow , Elwood again sets about the task of reuniting his band .
He recruits some new singers , Mighty Mack ( John Goodman ) and Cab ( Joe Morton ) , a policeman who was Curtis ' son .
All the original band members are found , as well as some performers from the first film , including Aretha Franklin and James Brown .
There are dozens of other guest performers , including Eric Clapton , Steve Winwood , Junior Wells , Lonnie Brooks , Eddie Floyd , Wilson Pickett , Isaac Hayes , Sam Moore , Taj Mahal and Jonny Lang , Blues Traveler , as well as an all - star supergroup led by B.B. King called the Louisiana Gator Boys .
On the run from the police , Russian mafia and a racist militia , the band eventually ends up in Louisiana , where they enter a battle of the bands overseen by a voodoo practitioner named Queen Moussette ( Erykah Badu ) .
During a song by the Blues Brothers ( a Caribbean number called " Funky Nassau " ) , a character played by Paul Shaffer asks to cut in on keyboards , which Murph allows .
This marks the first time in a film that the Blues Brothers play with their original keyboardist .
DISCOGRAPHY
STUDIO ALBUMS * 1992 – Red , White & Blues ( WEA ) * 2017 -
The Last Shade Of Blue Before Black ( Severn Records ) LIVE ALBUMS * 1978 –
Briefcase Full of Blues ( Atlantic ) * 1980 – Made in America ( Atlantic ) * 1990 –
The Blues Brothers Band Live in Montreux ( WEA ) * 1997 – ( House Of Blues ) SOUNDTRACK ALBUMS
* 1980 –
The Blues Brothers : Music from the Soundtrack ( Atlantic ) * 1998 – Blues Brothers 2000 : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack ( Universal Records ) COMPILATION ALBUMS * 1981 – Best of the Blues Brothers ( Atlantic ) * 1983 – Dancin ' Wid Da Blues Brothers ( Atlantic )
* 1988
– Everybody Needs Blues Brothers ( Atlantic ) * 1992 – The Definitive Collection ( Atlantic ) * 1995 – The Very Best of The Blues Brothers ( Atlantic / EastWest ) * 1998 – The Blues
Brothers Complete ( Atlantic / EastWest ) * 2003 – The Essentials ( Atlantic ) * 2005 - Gimme
Some Lovin' & Other Hits ( Flashback Records )
* 2008 - American Music Legends ( Rhino Custom Products / Cracker Barrel Old Country Store )
* 2017 - An Introduction to Blues Brothers ( Atlantic Records / Rhino Records )
* 2017 - Drop the Needle on the Hits :
The Best of The Blues Brothers ( Rhino Records )
SINGLES
Section::::Discography .
Section::::Singles .
!
rowspan="2 "
Year !
rowspan="2 "
Single !
colspan="1 " Peak chart positions !
rowspan="2 "
Album !
width="40 " US BAND MEMBERS
ORIGINAL
LINEUP
Section::::Band members .
Section::::Original lineup .
While not all members appeared in the original film , the full band included : * " Joliet " Jake E. Blues – lead vocals * Elwood J. Blues – harmonica , vocals
* Steve " The Colonel " Cropper – lead and rhythm guitar ( former Booker T & the M.G. 's )
* Donald " Duck " Dunn – bass guitar ( former Booker T & the M.G. 's )
* Murphy Dunne – keyboards , tambourine ( appears in the film due to Paul Shaffer 's commitment to perform with Gilda Radner in Gilda Live ! , and toured with the band in the summer of 1980 )
* Willie " Too Big " Hall – drums , percussion ( formerly of the Bar - Kays , Isaac Hayes ' band , appears in the film )
* Steve " Getdwa " Jordan – drums , percussion ( Saturday Night Live Band , appears only on the albums )
* Birch " Crimson Slide " Johnson - trombone ( does not appear in the film )
* Tom " Bones " Malone – trombone , trumpet , saxophone ( Saturday Night Live Band )
* " Blue " Lou Marini – saxophone ( Saturday Night Live Band ) * Matt " Guitar " Murphy – lead and rhythm guitar ( Howlin ' Wolf , other artists )
* Alan " Mr. Fabulous " Rubin – trumpet
( Saturday Night Live Band )
* Paul " The Shiv " Shaffer – keyboards , arranger ( Saturday Night Live Band , does not appear in the film )
* Tom " Triple Scale " Scott – saxophone ( does not appear in the film , but played on the soundtrack ) OTHER MEMBERS Section::::Other members .
At times , other members have included :
* Jim Belushi ( as " Brother " Zee Blues ) – vocals * John Goodman ( as " Mighty Mack " McTeer ) – vocals * Buster Blues – harmonica , vocals ( acted by J. Evan Bonifant in Blues Brothers 2000 , actual harmonica recorded by John Popper )
* Joe Morton ( as Cabel " Cab " Chamberlain ) - vocals * Cab Calloway – vocals * Larry " T " Thurston – vocals
* Eddie " Knock on Wood " Floyd – vocals
* Sam " Soul Man " Moore - vocals * Bobby " Sweet Soul " Harden -vocals * Tommy " Pipes " McDonnell – harmonica , vocals
* Rob " The Honeydripper " Paparozzi – harmonica , vocals
* Leon " The Lion " Pendarvis – piano , vocals , arranger * Danny " G - Force " Gottlieb – drums * Jimmy " Jimmy B " Biggins – saxophone
* Anthony " Rusty " Cloud – keyboards
* Eric " The Red " Udel – bass * John " Smokin " Tropea – guitar * Jimmy " Mack " Hodge - guitar * Lee " Funky Time " Finkelstein – drums * Steve Potts – drums * Anton Fig - drums
* Larry " Trombonius Maximus " Farrell – trombone
* Alto Reed - saxophone
* Jonny " The Rock & Roll Doctor " Rosch - vocals , harmonica REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official DVD site
*
Fan Site * House of Blues Radio Hour ( Hosted by Dan Aykroyd )
* Interview ( MP3 ) with John Belushi biographer Tanner Colby and widow Judith Belushi Pisano on the public radio program
The Sound of Young America regarding their book , " Belushi " .
Includes clips from Belushi 's work on The National Lampoon Radio Hour .
*
The Blues Brothers DVD