VIDEO CARD
A video card ( also called a display card , graphics card , display adapter or graphics adapter ) is an expansion card which generates a feed of output images to a display ( such as a computer monitor ) .
Frequently , these are advertised as discrete or dedicated graphics cards , emphasizing the distinction between these and integrated graphics .
At the core of both is the graphics processing unit ( GPU ) , which is the main part that does the actual computations , but should not be confused as the video card as a whole , although " GPU " is often used to refer to video cards .
Most video cards are not limited to simple display output .
Their integrated graphics processor can perform additional processing , removing this task from the central processor of the computer .
For example , Nvidia and AMD ( ATi ) produced cards render the graphics pipeline OpenGL and DirectX on the hardware level .
In the later 2010s , there has also been a tendency to use the computing capabilities of the graphics processor to solve non - graphic tasks .
Usually the graphics card is made in the form of a printed circuit board ( expansion board ) and inserted into an expansion slot , universal or specialized ( AGP , PCI Express ) .
Some have been made using dedicated enclosures , which are connected to the computer via a docking station or a cable .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Standards such as MDA , CGA , HGC , Tandy , PGC , EGA , VGA , MCGA , 8514 or XGA were introduced from 1982 to 1990 and supported by a variety of hardware manufacturers .
3dfx Interactive was one of the first companies to develop a GPU with 3D acceleration ( with the Voodoo series ) and the first to develop a graphical chipset dedicated to 3D , but without 2D support ( which therefore required the presence of a 2D card to work ) .
Now the majority of modern video cards are built with either AMD - sourced or Nvidia - sourced graphics chips .
Until 2000 , 3dfx Interactive was also an important , and often groundbreaking , manufacturer .
Most video cards offer various functions such as accelerated rendering of 3D scenes and 2D graphics , MPEG-2 / MPEG-4 decoding , TV output , or the ability to connect multiple monitors ( multi - monitor ) .
Video cards also have sound card capabilities to output sound along with the video for connected TVs or monitors with integrated speakers .
Within the industry , video cards are sometimes called graphics add - in - boards , abbreviated as AIBs , with the word " graphics " usually omitted .
DEDICATED VS INTEGRATED GRAPHICS
Section::::Dedicated vs integrated graphics .
As an alternative to the use of a video card , video hardware can be integrated into the motherboard , CPU , or a system - on - chip .
Both approaches can be called integrated graphics .
Motherboard - based implementations are sometimes called " on - board video " .
Almost all desktop computer motherboards with integrated graphics allow the disabling of the integrated graphics chip in BIOS , and have a PCI , or PCI Express ( PCI - E ) slot for adding a higher - performance graphics card in place of the integrated graphics .
The ability to disable the integrated graphics sometimes also allows the continued use of a motherboard on which the on - board video has failed .
Sometimes both the integrated graphics and a dedicated graphics card can be used simultaneously to feed separate displays .
The main advantages of integrated graphics include cost , compactness , simplicity and low energy consumption .
The performance disadvantage of integrated graphics arises because the graphics processor shares system resources with the CPU .
A dedicated graphics card has its own random access memory ( RAM ) , its own cooling system , and dedicated power regulators , with all components designed specifically for processing video images .
Upgrading to a dedicated graphics card offloads work from the CPU and system RAM , so not only will graphics processing be faster , but the computer 's overall performance may also improve .
Both AMD and Intel have introduced CPUs and motherboard chipsets which support the integration of a GPU into the same die as the CPU .
AMD markets CPUs with integrated graphics under the trademark Accelerated Processing Unit ( APU ) , while Intel markets similar technology under the " Intel HD Graphics and Iris " brands .
With the 8th Generation Processors , Intel announced the Intel UHD series of Integrated Graphics for better support of 4 K Displays .
Although they are still not equivalent to the performance of discrete solutions , Intel 's HD Graphics platform provides performance approaching discrete mid - range graphics , and AMD APU technology has been adopted by both the PlayStation 4 and Xbox One video game consoles .
POWER DEMAND
Section::::Power demand .
As the processing power of video cards has increased , so has their demand for electrical power .
Current high - performance video cards tend to consume a great deal of power .
For example , the thermal design power ( TDP ) for the GeForce GTX TITAN is 250 Watts .
When tested while gaming , the GeForce GTX 1080
Ti Fe averaged 227 Watts of power consumption .
While CPU and power supply makers have recently moved toward higher efficiency , power demands of GPUs have continued to rise , so video cards may have the largest power consumption in a computer .
Although power supplies are increasing their power too , the bottleneck is due to the PCI - Express connection , which is limited to supplying 75 Watts .
Modern video cards with a power consumption of over 75 Watts usually include a combination of six - pin ( 75 W ) or eight - pin ( 150 W ) sockets that connect directly to the power supply .
Providing adequate cooling becomes a challenge in such computers .
Computers with multiple video cards may need power supplies in the 1000–1500 W range .
Heat extraction becomes a major design consideration for computers with two or more high - end video cards .
SIZE Section::::Size .
Video cards for desktop computers come in one of two size profiles , which can allow a graphics card to be added even to small - sized PCs .
Some video cards are not of usual size , and are thus categorized as being low profile .
Video card profiles are based on width only , with low - profile cards taking up less than the width of a PCIe slot .
Length and thickness can vary greatly , with high - end cards usually occupying two or three expansion slots , and with dual - GPU cards -such as the Nvidia GeForce GTX 690- generally exceeding in length .
Generally , most users will prefer a lower profile card if the intention is to fit multiple cards or they run into clearance issues with other motherboard components like the DIMM or PCIE slots .
This can be fixed with a larger case that comes in sizes like mid tower and full tower .
Full towers can usually fit larger motherboards in sizes like ATX and micro ATX .
The larger the case , the larger the motherboard , the larger the graphics card or multiple other components that will acquire case real - estate .
MULTI - CARD SCALING Section::::Multi - card scaling .
Some graphics cards can be linked together to allow scaling of the graphics processing across multiple cards .
This is done using either the PCIe bus on the motherboard , or , more commonly , a data bridge .
Generally , the cards must be of the same model to be linked , and most low power cards are not able to be linked in this way .
AMD and Nvidia both have proprietary methods of scaling , CrossFireX for AMD , and SLI ( since the Turing generation , renamed to NVLink ) for Nvidia .
Cards from different chipset manufacturers , architectures can not be used together for multi card scaling .
If a graphics card has different sizes of memory , the lowest value will be used , with the higher values being disregarded .
Currently , scaling on consumer grade cards can be done using up to four cards .
The use of four cards requires a large motherboard with a proper configuration .
Nvidia 's GeForce GTX 590 video card has the ability to be configured in this four card configuration .
As stated above , users will want to stick to the same performance card for optimal use .
Motherboards like ASUS Maximus 3 Extreme and Gigabyte
GA EX58 Extreme are certified to work with this configuration .
For proper performance of your 4 card configuration , it 's recommend to use a core i7 CPU with turbo boost to avoid the bottleneck throughput .
A certificated large power supply is necessary to run the cards in SLI or CrossFireX. Power demands must be known before a proper supply is installed .
For the four card configuration , a 1000 + watt supply is needed .
AcBel PC8055 - 000 G and Corsair AX1200 supplies are examples .
With any powerful video card like a GTX 1060 + or 1080 , thermal management can be overlooked .
Video cards require a well vented chassis and thermal solution .
Water or air cooling are required for all video cards , with larger configurations needing water solutions to achieve proper performance .
3D GRAPHIC APIS Section::::3D graphic APIs .
A graphics driver usually supports one or multiple cards by the same vendor , and has to be specifically written for an operating system .
Additionally , the operating system or an extra software package may provide certain programming APIs for applications to perform 3D rendering .
+3D
rendering API availability across operating systems !
OS !
Vulkan !
Direct X !
GNMX !
Metal !
OpenGL !
OpenGL ES !
Windows 10 !
macOS !
GNU
/ Linux !
Android !
iOS !
Tizen !
Sailfish !
Xbox One !
Orbis OS ( PS4 ) !
Nintendo Switch
USAGE SPECIFIC GPU Section::::Usage specific GPU .
Most GPUs are designed with specific usage in mind :
* Gaming
* * GeForce GTX * Nvidia
Titan X * Radeon HD * Radeon r5 , r7 , r9 , and RX series *
Cloud gaming
* * Nvidia Grid
* Radeon Sky
* Workstation * * Nvidia Quadro * Nvidia
Titan X * AMD FirePro *
Radeon Pro
* Cloud Workstation *
* Nvidia Tesla
*
AMD FireStream
* Artificial Intelligence Cloud *
* Nvidia Tesla
* Radeon Instinct
* Automated / Driverless car
*
* Nvidia Drive PX INDUSTRY Section::::Industry .
As of 2016 , the primary suppliers of the GPUs ( video chips or chipsets ) used in video cards are AMD and Nvidia .
In the third quarter of 2013 , AMD had a 35.5 % market share while Nvidia had a 64.5 % market share , according to Jon Peddie Research .
In economics , this industry structure is termed a duopoly .
AMD and Nvidia also build and sell video cards , which are termed graphics add - in - board ( AIBs ) in the industry .
( See Comparison of Nvidia graphics processing units and Comparison of AMD graphics processing units . )
In addition to marketing their own video cards , AMD and Nvidia sell their GPUs to authorized AIB suppliers , which AMD and Nvidia refer to as " partners " .
The fact that Nvidia and AMD compete directly with their customer / partners complicates relationships in the industry .
The fact that AMD and Intel are direct competitors in the CPU industry is also noteworthy , since AMD - based video cards may be used in computers with Intel CPUs .
Intel 's move to APUs may weaken AMD , which until now has derived a significant portion of its revenue from graphics components .
As of the second quarter of 2013 , there were 52 AIB suppliers .
These AIB suppliers may market video cards under their own brands , or produce video cards for private label brands or produce video cards for computer manufacturers .
Some AIB suppliers such as MSI build both AMD - based and Nvidia - based video cards .
Others , such as EVGA , build only Nvidia - based video cards , while XFX , now builds only AMD - based video cards .
Several AIB suppliers are also motherboard suppliers .
The largest AIB suppliers , based on global retail market share for graphics cards , include Taiwan - based Palit Microsystems , Hong Kong - based PC Partner ( which markets AMD - based video cards under its Sapphire brand and Nvidia - based video cards under its Zotac brand ) , Taiwan - based computer - maker Asustek Computer ( Asus ) , Taiwan - based Micro - Star International ( MSI ) , Taiwan - based Gigabyte Technology , Brea , California , USA - based EVGA ( which also sells computer components such as power supplies ) and Ontario , California USA - based XFX .
( The parent corporation of XFX is based in Hong Kong . )
MARKET Section::::Market .
Video card shipments peaked at a total of 114 million in 1999 .
By contrast , they totalled 14.5 million units in the third quarter of 2013 , a 17 % fall from Q3 2012 levels , and 44 million total in 2015 .
The sales of video cards have trended downward due to improvements in integrated graphics technologies ; high - end , CPU - integrated graphics are able to provide performance competitive with low - end video cards .
At the same time , video card sales have grown within the high - end segment , as manufacturers have shifted their focus to prioritize the gaming and enthusiast market .
Beyond the gaming and multimedia segments , video cards have been increasingly used for general - purpose computing , such as big data processing .
The growth of cryptocurrency has placed a severely high demand on high - end video cards , especially in large quantities , due to their advantages in the process of mining .
In January 2018 , mid - to - high - end video cards experienced a major surge in price , with many retailers having stock shortages due to the significant demand among this market .
PARTS Section::::Parts .
A modern video card consists of a printed circuit board on which the components are mounted .
These include : GRAPHICS PROCESSING UNIT Section::::Graphics Processing Unit .
A graphics processing unit ( GPU ) , also occasionally called visual processing unit ( VPU ) , is a specialized electronic circuit designed to rapidly manipulate and alter memory to accelerate the building of images in a frame buffer intended for output to a display .
Because of the large degree of programmable computational complexity for such a task , a modern video card is also a computer unto itself .
HEAT SINK Section::::Heat sink .
A heat sink is mounted on most modern graphics cards .
A heat sink spreads out the heat produced by the graphics processing unit evenly throughout the heat sink and unit itself .
The heat sink commonly has a fan mounted as well to cool the heat sink and the graphics processing unit .
Not all cards have heat sinks , for example , some cards are liquid cooled , and instead have a waterblock ; additionally , cards from the 1980s and early 1990s did not produce much heat , and did not require heatsinks .
Most modern graphics cards need a proper thermal solution .
This can be the liquid solution or heatsinks with an additional connected heat pipe usually made of copper for the best thermal transfer .
It should also be noted that the correct case ; either Mid - tower or Full - tower or some other derivative , has to be properly configured for thermal management .
This can be ample space with proper push pull or opposite configuration as well as liquid with a radiator either in lieu or with a fan setup .
VIDEO BIOS Section::::Video BIOS .
The video BIOS or firmware contains a minimal program for initial set up and control of the video card .
It may contain information on the memory timing , operating speeds and voltages of the graphics processor , RAM , and other details which can sometimes be changed .
The modern Video BIOS does not support all the functions of the video card , being only sufficient to identify and initialize the card to display one of a few frame buffer or text display modes .
It does not support YUV to RGB translation , video scaling , pixel copying , compositing or any of the multitude of other 2D and 3D features of the video card .
VIDEO MEMORY Section::::Video memory . !
Type !
Memory clock rate ( MHz ) !
Bandwidth ( GB / s ) 800 - 2133.33 DDR4 1600 - 4866 12.8 - 25.6 The memory capacity of most modern video cards ranges from 1 GB to 12 GB .
Since video memory needs to be accessed by the GPU and the display circuitry , it often uses special high - speed or multi - port memory , such as VRAM , WRAM , SGRAM , etc .
Around 2003 , the video memory was typically based on DDR technology .
During and after that year , manufacturers moved towards DDR2 , GDDR3 , GDDR4 , GDDR5 and GDDR5X.
The effective memory clock rate in modern cards is generally between 1 GHz to 10 GHz .
Video memory may be used for storing other data as well as the screen image , such as the Z - buffer , which manages the depth coordinates in 3D graphics , textures , vertex buffers , and compiled shader programs .
RAMDAC Section::::RAMDAC .
The RAMDAC , or random - access - memory digital - to - analog converter , converts digital signals to analog signals for use by a computer display that uses analog inputs such as cathode ray tube ( CRT ) displays .
The RAMDAC is a kind of RAM chip that regulates the functioning of the graphics card .
Depending on the number of bits used and the RAMDAC - data - transfer rate , the converter will be able to support different computer - display refresh rates .
With CRT displays , it is best to work over 75 Hz and never under 60 Hz , in order to minimize flicker .
( With LCD displays , flicker is not a problem . )
Due to the growing popularity of digital computer displays and the integration of the RAMDAC onto the GPU die , it has mostly disappeared as a discrete component .
All current LCD / plasma monitors and TVs and projectors with only digital connections , work in the digital domain and do not require a RAMDAC for those connections .
There are displays that feature analog inputs ( VGA , component , SCART , etc . )
only .
These require a RAMDAC , but they reconvert the analog signal back to digital before they can display it , with the unavoidable loss of quality stemming from this digital - to - analog - to - digital conversion .
With VGA standard being phased out in favor of digital , RAMDACs are beginning to disappear from video cards .
OUTPUT INTERFACES
Section::::Output interfaces .
The most common connection systems between the video card and the computer display are : VIDEO GRAPHICS ARRAY ( VGA )
( DE-15 ) Section::::Video Graphics Array ( VGA )
( DE-15 ) .
Also known as D - sub , VGA is an analog - based standard adopted in the late 1980s designed for CRT displays , also called VGA connector .
Some problems of this standard are electrical noise , image distortion and sampling error in evaluating pixels .
Today , the VGA analog interface is used for high definition video including 1080p and higher .
While the VGA transmission bandwidth is high enough to support even higher resolution playback , there can be picture quality degradation depending on cable quality and length .
How discernible this quality difference is depends on the individual 's eyesight and the display ; when using a DVI or HDMI connection , especially on larger sized LCD / LED monitors or TVs , quality degradation , if present , is prominently visible .
Blu - ray playback at 1080p is possible via the VGA analog interface , if Image Constraint Token ( ICT ) is not enabled on the Blu - ray disc .
DIGITAL VISUAL
INTERFACE ( DVI ) Section::::Digital Visual Interface ( DVI ) .
Digital - based standard designed for displays such as flat - panel displays ( LCDs , plasma screens , wide high - definition television displays ) and video projectors .
In some rare cases high end CRT monitors also use DVI .
It avoids image distortion and electrical noise , corresponding each pixel from the computer to a display pixel , using its native resolution .
It is worth noting that most manufacturers include a DVI - I connector , allowing ( via simple adapter )
standard RGB signal output to an old CRT or LCD monitor with VGA input .
VIDEO IN VIDEO OUT
( VIVO )
FOR S - VIDEO , COMPOSITE VIDEO AND COMPONENT VIDEO Section::::Video In Video
Out ( VIVO ) for S - Video , Composite video and Component video .
Included to allow connection with televisions , DVD players , video recorders and video game consoles .
They often come in two 10-pin mini - DIN connector variations , and the VIVO splitter cable generally comes with either 4 connectors ( S - Video in and out + composite video in and out ) , or 6 connectors ( S - Video in and out + component P out + component P out + component Y
out
[ also composite out ] + composite in ) .
HIGH - DEFINITION
MULTIMEDIA INTERFACE ( HDMI ) Section::::High - Definition Multimedia Interface ( HDMI ) .
HDMI is a compact audio / video interface for transferring uncompressed video data and compressed / uncompressed digital audio data from an HDMI - compliant device ( " the source device " ) to a compatible digital audio device , computer monitor , video projector , or digital television .
HDMI is a digital replacement for existing analog video standards .
HDMI supports copy protection through HDCP .
DISPLAYPORT Section::::DisplayPort .
DisplayPort is a digital display interface developed by the Video Electronics Standards Association ( VESA ) .
The interface is primarily used to connect a video source to a display device such as a computer monitor , though it can also be used to transmit audio , USB , and other forms of data .
The VESA specification is royalty - free .
VESA designed it to replace VGA , DVI , and LVDS .
Backward compatibility to VGA and DVI by using adapter dongles enables consumers to use DisplayPort fitted video sources without replacing existing display devices .
Although DisplayPort has a greater throughput of the same functionality as HDMI , it is expected to complement the interface , not replace it .
OTHER TYPES OF CONNECTION SYSTEMS
Section::::Other types of connection systems . !
Composite video rowspan="2 " Analog systems with resolution lower than 480i use the RCA connector .
The single pin connector carries all resolution , brightness and color information , making it the lowest quality dedicated video connection . !
Component video rowspan="2
" It has three cables , each with RCA connector ( YCC for digital component , or YPP for analog component ) ; it is used in older projectors , video - game consoles , DVD players .
It can carry SDTV 480i and EDTV 480p resolutions , and HDTV resolutions 720p and 1080i , but not 1080p due to industry concerns about copy protection .
Contrary to popular belief it looks equal to HDMI for the resolutions it carries , but for best performance from Blu - ray , other 1080p sources like PPV , and 4 K Ultra HD , a digital display connector is required . !
DB13W3 rowspan="2 " An analog standard once used by Sun Microsystems , SGI and IBM . !
DMS-59
rowspan="2 "
A connector that provides two DVI or VGA outputs on a single connector .
This is a DMS-59 port .
MOTHERBOARD INTERFACES Section::::Motherboard interfaces .
Chronologically , connection systems between video card and motherboard were , mainly : * S-100 bus : Designed in 1974 as a part of the Altair 8800 , it was the first industry - standard bus for the microcomputer industry .
* ISA :
Introduced in 1981 by IBM , it became dominant in the marketplace in the 1980s .
It was an 8- or 16-bit bus clocked at 8 MHz .
* NuBus : Used in Macintosh II , it was a 32-bit bus with an average bandwidth of 10 to 20 MB / s .
* MCA :
Introduced in 1987 by IBM it was a 32-bit bus clocked at 10 MHz .
* EISA :
Released in 1988 to compete with IBM 's MCA , it was compatible with the earlier ISA bus .
It was a 32-bit bus clocked at 8.33 MHz .
* VLB : An extension of ISA , it was a 32-bit bus clocked at 33 MHz .
Also referred to as VESA .
* PCI : Replaced the EISA , ISA , MCA and VESA buses from 1993 onwards .
PCI allowed dynamic connectivity between devices , avoiding the manual adjustments required with jumpers .
It is a 32-bit bus clocked 33 MHz .
* UPA : An interconnect bus architecture introduced by Sun Microsystems in 1995 .
It had a 64-bit bus clocked at 67 or 83 MHz .
* USB : Although mostly used for miscellaneous devices , such as secondary storage devices and toys , USB displays and display adapters exist .
* AGP : First used in 1997 , it is a dedicated - to - graphics bus .
It is a 32-bit bus clocked at 66 MHz .
* PCI - X : An extension of the PCI bus , it was introduced in 1998 .
It improves upon PCI by extending the width of bus to 64 bits and the clock frequency to up to 133 MHz .
* PCI Express : Abbreviated PCIe , it is a point to point interface released in 2004 .
In 2006 provided double the data - transfer rate of AGP .
It should not be confused with PCI - X , an enhanced version of the original PCI specification .
In the following table is a comparison between a selection of the features of some of those interfaces . !
Bus !
Width ( bits ) !
Clock rate ( MHz ) !
Bandwidth ( MB / s ) !
Style SEE ALSO
* List of computer hardware * ATI – defunct GPU company ( merged with AMD )
* AMD , NVIDIA – duopoly of 3D chip GPU and graphics card designers * Computer display standards – a detailed list of standards like SVGA , WXGA , WUXGA , etc .
* Diamond Multimedia – Alternative * Feature connector * GeForce , Radeon – examples of video cards
* GPGPU ( i.e. : CUDA , AMD FireStream ) * – about the available FOSS device drivers for graphic chips
* Mesa 3D – a free and open - source implementation of rendering APIs
* Framebuffer – the computer memory used to store a screen image * Hercules – monochrome
* Mini - DIN connector * List of video card manufacturers * Texture mapping – a means of adding image details to a 3D scene
* Video In Video Out ( VIVO )
* Z - buffering – a means of determining visibility * Capture card – the inverse of a video card
REFERENCES
* Mueller , Scott ( 2005 )
Upgrading and Repairing PCs .
16th edition .
Que Publishing .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Large image of graphic card history tree