CRATER LAKE Crater Lake
( Klamath : giiwas ) is a crater lake in south - central Oregon in the western United States .
It is the main feature of Crater Lake National Park and is famous for its deep blue color and water clarity .
The lake partly fills a nearly -deep caldera that was formed around 7,700 ( ± 150 ) years ago by the collapse of the volcano Mount Mazama .
There are no rivers flowing into or out of the lake ; the evaporation is compensated for by rain and snowfall at a rate such that the total amount of water is replaced every 250 years .
With a depth of , the lake is the deepest in the United States .
In the world , it ranks ninth for maximum depth , and third for mean ( average ) depth .
Crater Lake is also known for the " Old Man of the Lake " , a full - sized tree which is now a log that has been bobbing vertically in the lake for over a century .
The low temperature of the water has slowed the decomposition of the wood , hence its longevity .
Crater Lake features two small islands .
Wizard Island , located near the western shore of the lake , is a cinder cone approximately 316 acres ( 128 ha ) in size .
Phantom Ship , a natural rock pillar , is located near the southern shore .
While having no indigenous fish population , the lake was stocked from 1888 to 1941 with a variety of fish .
Since then , several species have formed self - sustaining populations .
Since 2002 , one of the state 's regular - issue license plate designs has featured Crater Lake .
The commemorative Oregon State Quarter , which was released by the United States Mint in 2005 , features an on its reverse .
LOCATION Section::::Location .
Crater Lake is in Klamath County , approximately northwest of the county seat of Klamath Falls , and about northeast of the city of Medford .
In June 1853 , John Wesley Hillman became the first non - Native American explorer to report sighting the lake he named the " Deep Blue Lake .
"
The lake was renamed at least three times , as Blue Lake , Lake Majesty , and finally Crater Lake .
DIMENSIONS AND DEPTH Section::::Dimensions and depth .
The lake is across , with a caldera rim ranging in elevation from and an average lake depth of .
The lake 's maximum depth has been measured at , which fluctuates slightly as the weather changes .
On the basis of maximum depth , Crater Lake is the deepest lake in the United States , the second - deepest in North America ( after Great Slave Lake in Canada ) , and the ninth - deepest lake in the world .
Crater Lake is often cited as the seventh - deepest lake in the world , but this ranking excludes Lake Vostok in Antarctica , which is beneath about of ice , and the recent depth soundings of O'Higgins / San Martín Lake , which is along the border of Chile and Argentina .
When considering the mean , or average depth of lakes , Crater Lake becomes the deepest lake in the Western Hemisphere and the third - deepest in the world .
Crater Lake Institute Director and limnologist Owen Hoffman states " Crater Lake is the deepest , when compared on the basis of average depth among lakes whose basins are entirely above sea level .
The average depths of Lakes Baikal and Tanganyika are deeper than Crater Lake ; however , both have basins that extend below sea level . "
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
Mount Mazama , part of the Cascade Range volcanic arc , was built up mostly of andesite , dacite , and rhyodacite over a period of at least 400,000 years .
The caldera was created in a massive volcanic eruption between 6,000 and 8,000 years ago
that led to the subsidence of Mount Mazama .
About of rhyodacite was erupted in this event .
Since that time , all eruptions on Mazama have been confined to the caldera .
Lava eruptions later created a central platform , Wizard Island , Merriam Cone , and other , smaller volcanic features , including a rhyodacite dome that was eventually created atop the central platform .
Sediments and landslide debris also covered the caldera floor .
Eventually , the caldera cooled , allowing rain and snow to accumulate and form a lake .
Landslides from the caldera rim thereafter formed debris fans and turbidite sediments on the lake bed .
Fumaroles and hot springs remained common and active during this period .
Also after some time , the slopes of the lake 's caldera rim more or less stabilized , streams restored a radial drainage pattern on the mountain , and dense forests began to revegetate the barren landscape .
It is estimated that about 720 years was required to fill the lake to its present depth of .
Much of this occurred during a period when the prevailing climate was less moist than at present .
Some hydrothermal activity remains along the lake floor , suggesting that at some time in the future , Mazama may erupt once again .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Crater Lake features a subalpine climate , with the rare dry - summer type ( Köppen classification Dsc ) owing to its high elevation and – like all of Oregon – the strong summer influence of the North Pacific High .
In the summer , the weather is mild and dry , but in the winter is cold and the powerful influence of the Aleutian Low allows for enormous snowfalls averaging per year and maximum snow cover averaging .
This snow does not usually melt until mid - July , and allows for substantial glaciers on adjacent mountains .
In the winter of 1949/1950 as much as of snow fell , while the less complete snow cover records show cover as high as occurred during another particularly unsettled winter in 1981/1982 .
The heaviest daily snowfall was , which occurred as recently as February 28 , 1971 ; or more in one storm has occurred in both June and September .
Hard frost is possible even into the summer , and the average window for freezing temperatures is August 19 through July 7 , while for measurable ( ≥ ) snowfall , October 1 through June 15 .
WATER QUALITY Section::::Water quality .
Due to several unique factors , mainly that the lake has no inlets or tributaries , the waters of Crater Lake are some of the purest in the world because of the absence of pollutants .
Clarity readings from a Secchi disk have consistently been in the high-30 meter to mid-20 meter ( 80 to 115-foot ) range , which is very clear for any natural body of water .
In 1997 , scientists recorded a record clarity of .
The lake has relatively high levels of dissolved salts , total alkalinity , and conductivity .
The average pH has generally ranged between 7 and 8 .
SACRED SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Sacred significance .
The Klamath tribe of Native Americans , whose oral history describes their ancestors witnessing the collapse of Mount Mazama and the formation of Crater Lake , regard the lake as an " abode to the Great Spirit " .
Klamath oral history tells of a battle between the sky god Skell and the god of the underworld Llao ( a prominent feature at Crater Lake is Llao Rock ) .
Mount Mazama was destroyed in the battle , creating Crater Lake , called giiwas in the Klamath language .
The Klamath people used Crater Lake in vision quests , which often involved climbing the caldera walls and other dangerous tasks .
Those who were successful in such quests were often regarded as having more spiritual powers .
The tribe still holds Crater Lake in high regard as a spiritual site .
SEE ALSO
* List of lakes in Oregon * Volcanic Legacy Scenic Byway NOTES
REFERENCES
* Fire Mountains of the West : The Cascade and Mono Lake Volcanoes , Stephen L. Harris , ( Mountain Press Publishing Company , Missoula ; 1988 )
* Geology of National Parks : Fifth Edition , Ann G. Harris , Esther Tuttle , Sherwood D. Tuttle , ( Iowa , Kendall / Hunt Publishing ; 1997 )
* Oregon , Moon Handbooks , Judy Jewell , W. C. McRae , ( Avalon Travel , Berkeley ; 2012 , 9th edition ) EXTERNAL LINKS * NPS : Crater Lake National Park
* USGS : Crater Lake Data Clearinghouse * Oregon Institute of Technology : Crater Lake Digital Research Collection