INGLEWOOD , CALIFORNIA Inglewood is a city in southwestern Los Angeles County , California in the Los Angeles metropolitan area .
As of the 2010 U.S. Census , the city had a population of 109,673 .
It was incorporated on February 14 , 1908 .
The city is in the South Bay region of Los Angeles County .
Los Angeles Stadium at Hollywood Park is currently under construction in the city and , when completed around 2020 , will be the new home of both the National Football League 's Los Angeles Rams and Los Angeles Chargers .
The city is also close to Los Angeles International Airport .
HISTORY PRE - AMERICAN ERA Section::::History .
Section::::Pre - American era .
The earliest residents of what is now Inglewood were Native Americans who used the natural springs in today 's Edward Vincent Jr. Park ( known for most of its history as Centinela Park ) .
Local historian Gladys Waddingham wrote that these springs took the name Centinela from the hills that rose gradually around them and which allowed ranchers to watch over their herds " ( thus the name centinelas or sentinels ) " .
Waddingham traced the written history of Inglewood back to the original settlers of Los Angeles in 1781 , one of whom was the Spanish soldier Jose Manuel Orchado Machado , " a 23-year - old muleteer from Los Alamos in Sinaloa " .
These settlers , she wrote , were ordered by the officials of the San Gabriel Mission " to graze their animals on the ocean side of Los Angeles in order not to infringe on Mission lands . "
As a result , the settlers , or pobladores , drove some of their cattle to the " lush pasture lands near Centinela Springs , " and the first construction there was done by one Ygnacio Avila , who received a permit in 1822 to build a " corral and hut for his herders . "
Later Avila constructed a three - room adobe on a slight rise overlooking the creek that ran from Centinela Springs all the way to the ocean .
According to the LAOkay web site , this adobe was built where the present baseball field is in the park .
It no longer exists .
In 1834 , Ygnacio Machado , one of the sons of Jose Machado , built the Centinela Adobe , which sits on a rise above the present 405 San Diego Freeway and is used as the headquarters of the Centinela Valley Historical Society .
Two years later , Waddingham writes , Ygnacio was granted the Rancho Aguaje de la Centinela even though this land had already been claimed by Avila .
AMERICAN ERA
THROUGH THE YEARS Section::::American era .
Section::::Through the years .
Inglewood Park Cemetery , a widely used cemetery for the entire region , was founded in 1905 .
The city has been home to the Hollywood Park Racetrack from 1938 to 2013 , one of the premier horse racing venues in the United States .
Fosters Freeze , the first soft serve ice cream chain in California , was founded by George Foster in 1946 in Inglewood .
Inglewood was named an All - America City by the National Civic League in 1989 and yet again recently in 2009 for its visible progress .
On January 12 , 2016 , Inglewood was selected to be the home of the Los Angeles Rams of the National Football League .
KU KLUX KLAN Section::::Ku Klux Klan .
Ku Klux Klan activities in Inglewood during the 20th century were highlighted by the 1922 arrest and trial of 37 men , most of them masked , for a night - time raid on a suspected bootlegger and his family .
The raid led to the shooting death of one of the culprits , an Inglewood police officer .
A jury returned a " not guilty " verdict for all defendants who completed the trial .
It was this scandal , according to the Los Angeles Times , that eventually led to the outlawing of the Klan in California .
The Klan had a chapter in Inglewood as late as October 1931 .
AFRICAN - AMERICAN
INFLUENCE
Section::::African - American influence .
" No blacks had ever lived in Inglewood , " Gladys Waddingham wrote , but by 1960 , " they lived in great numbers along its eastern borders .
This came to the great displeasure of the predominantly white residents already residing in Inglewood .
In 1960 , the census counted only 29 ' Negroes ' among Inglewood 's 63,390 residents .
Not a single black child attended the city 's schools .
Real estate agents refused to show homes to blacks .
A rumored curfew kept blacks off the streets at night .
Inglewood was a prime target because of its [ previous ] history of restrictions . "
" Fair housing and school busing were the main problems of 1964 .
The schools were not prepared to handle racial incidents , even though any that occurred were very minor .
Adults held many heated community meetings , since the Blacks objected to busing as much as did the Whites . "
In 1969 , an organization called " Morningside Neighbors " changed its name to " Inglewood Neighbors " " in the hope of promoting more integration . "
On February 3 , 1969 , Harold P. Moret became Inglewood 's first black police officer ( who is of Louisiana Creole Ancestry ) .
A full year later Jimmy Lee Worsham became the second .
He was followed by Barbara Harris , the first black female officer , then Otis Hendricks , Melvin Lovelace and Eugene Lindsey .
The 7th black officer in the history of the City of Inglewood was James T. Butts ,
Jr. He became Inglewood 's first black Motorcycle Traffic Enforcement Officer , 1st Black Lieutenant , Captain and only black Deputy Chief in the history of the Department .
Butts left Inglewood in September 1991 at the age of 38 to become the first person of color to command the Santa Monica Police Department as Chief of Police , and the youngest ever to do so .
Twenty years later , on February 1 , 2011 Butts returned to Inglewood by being elected as its fourth black mayor .
On July 22 , 1970 , Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Max F. Deutz ordered Inglewood schools to desegregate in response to a suit filed by 19 parents .
At least since 1965 , said Deutz , the Inglewood school board had been aware of a growing influx of black families into its eastern areas but had done nothing about the polarization of its pupils into an eastern black area and a western white one .
On August 31 , he rejected an appeal by four parents who said the school board was not responsible for the segregation but that the blacks " selected their places of residence by voluntary choice . "
The first black principal among the 18 Inglewood schools was Peter Butler at La Tijera Elementary , and in 1971 , Waddingham wrote , " Stormy racial meetings in 1971 " included a charge by " some real estate men in the overflowing Crozier Auditorium " that the Human Relations Commission was acting like " the Gestapo . "
In that year , Loyd Sterling Webb , president of Inglewood Neighbors , became the first black officeholder when voters elected him to the school board .
In 1972 , Curtis Tucker Sr . was appointed as the first black City Council member .
That year composer LeRoy Hurte , an African - American , took the baton of the Inglewood Symphony Orchestra and continued to work with it for 20 years .
Edward Vincent became Inglewood 's first black mayor in 1983 .
In that decade , whites left the city in increasing numbers , and Inglewood became the first city in California to declare the birthday of Martin Luther King , Jr. as a holiday .
RISE OF LATINO POPULATION Section::::Rise of Latino population .
The 1990 census showed that Hispanics in Inglewood had increased by 134 percent since 1980 , the largest jump in the South Bay .
Economic factors apparently played a role in where new arrivals settled , said David Heer , a USC professor of sociology and associate director of the university 's Population Research Laboratory .
" Housing is generally less expensive here than elsewhere . .
.
and I would say that they receive a warmer welcome here , " said Norm Cravens , assistant city manager in Inglewood , where the Anglo population dropped from nearly 21 percent in 1980 to 8.5 percent in 1990 .
In the 2000 census , blacks made up 47 percent of the city 's residents ( 53,060 people ) , and Hispanics made up 46 percent ( 51,829 ) , but the Census Bureau estimated that in 2007 the percentage of blacks had declined to 41 percent ( 48,252 ) and that of Hispanics of any race were at 52.5 percent ( 61,847 ) .
The white population declined from 19 percent ( 21,505 ) to 17.7 percent ( 20,853 ) .
But in that year , only one of the city 's five City Council members was Latino , Jose Fernandez .
There were no Latinos on the five - member Board of Education .
GEOGRAPHY LOCATION AND AREA
Section::::Geography .
Section::::Location and area .
According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of .
Downtown Inglewood is from Los Angeles International Airport ( LAX ) .
It is part of the Los Angeles - Long Beach - Anaheim , CA Metropolitan Statistical Area .
LANDMARKS Section::::Landmarks .
The Forum was built in 1967 and designed by architect Charles Luckman , who also designed Madison Square Garden .
The Forum was intended to evoke the Roman Forum in Rome .
For decades the Forum was one of LA 's biggest concert venues ; Elvis Presley , Led Zeppelin and the Jackson 5 were among the superstars to headline the arena .
The Forum also achieved its greatest fame as the home of the NBA 's Los Angeles Lakers and the NHL 's Los Angeles Kings .
In 1999 , both teams moved to the Staples Center and the Forum was sold to the Faithful Central Bible Church , which used it for Sunday services and rented it out periodically for concerts or sporting events .
In 2012 , the Forum was purchased by The Madison Square Garden Company , owners of New York 's Madison Square Garden , for $ 23.5 million ; MSG announced plans to spend $ 50 million to refurbish and renovate the arena for use as a " world - class " concert venue .
The " Fabulous " Forum presented by Chase re - opened on January 15 , 2014 with the first of six historic performances by the Eagles .
The reinvention of the Forum has created the largest indoor performance venue in the country designed with a focus on music and entertainment .
On February 24 , 2015 , the Inglewood City Council approved plans for the construction of a National Football League - capacity stadium and , later named Los Angeles Stadium at Hollywood Park , with a 5–0 unanimous vote to combine the 60-acre plot of land with the larger Hollywood Park development and rezone the area to include Sports / Entertainment capabilities .
This essentially cleared the way for developers to begin construction on the venue as planned in December 2015 .
On January 13 , 2016 , one day after the NFL approved of the Rams return to Los Angeles , construction began on the Inglewood site .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
According under to the Köppen Climate Classification system ( Csb on the coast , Csa on the inland ) Inglewood has a Mediterranean climate .
DEMOGRAPHICS 2010 CENSUS Section::::Demographics . Section::::2010 census .
The 2010 United States Census reported that Inglewood had a population of 109,673 .
The population density was 12,062.1 people per square mile ( 4,657.2 / km² ) .
The racial makeup of Inglewood was 55,449 ( 50.6 % ) Hispanics or Latinos ( of any race ) , 48,165 ( 43.9 % )
African American , 25,563 ( 23.3 % )
White ( 2.9 % Non - Hispanic White ) , 751 ( 0.7 % )
Native American , 1,484 ( 1.5 % )
Asian , 350 ( 0.3 % )
Pacific Islander , 28,860 ( 26.3 % )
from other races , and 4,502 ( 4.1 % ) from two or more races .
The Census reported that 108,171 people ( 98.6 % of the population ) lived in households , 987 ( 0.9 % ) lived in non - institutionalized group quarters , and 515 ( 0.5 % ) were institutionalized .
There were 36,389 households , out of which 15,315 ( 42.1 % ) had children under the age of 18 living in them ,
13,095 ( 36.0 % ) were married couples living together , 8,987 ( 24.7 % ) had a female householder with no husband present , and 2,937 ( 8.1 % ) had a male householder with no wife present .
There were 2,318 ( 6.4 % ) unmarried partnerships , and 234 ( 0.6 % ) same - sex partnerships , and 9,346 households ( 25.7 % ) were made up of individuals and 2,776 ( 7.6 % )
had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The average household size was 2.97 .
There were 25,019 families ( 68.8 % of all households ) ; the average family size was 3.59 .
The age distribution was spread out with 29,293 people ( 26.7 % ) under the age of 18 , 11,853 people ( 10.8 % ) aged 18 to 24 , 31,650 people ( 28.9 % ) aged 25 to 44 , 26,621 people ( 24.3 % ) aged 45 to 64 , and 10,256 people ( 9.4 % ) who were 65 years of age or older .
The median age was 33.4 years .
For every 100 females , there were 90.6 males .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 86.8 males .
There were 38,429 housing units at an average density of 4,226.5 per square mile ( 1,631.9 / km² ) , of which 13,447 ( 37.0 % ) were owner - occupied , and 22,942 ( 63.0 % ) were occupied by renters .
The homeowner vacancy rate was 1.5 % ; the rental vacancy rate was 5.5 % , while 43,040 people ( 39.2 % of the population ) lived in owner - occupied housing units and 65,131 people ( 59.4 % ) lived in rental housing units .
According to the 2010 United States Census , Inglewood had a median household income of $ 43,394 , with 22.4 % of the population living below the federal poverty line .
2006
SURVEY
Section::::2006 survey .
Source for this section is the American Community Survey conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau in 2006 .
Numbers may be rounded to the nearest whole figure .
Inglewood 's population of 129,900 in 2006 was relatively youthful , with a median age of 31 , compared to 36 in the nation as a whole .
Eleven percent of its residents were under 5 years of age , as against 7 percent in the rest of the country .
Some 8 percent were 65 or older , versus 12 percent elsewhere .
It was a city of renters squeezing into a limited amount of space .
Of Inglewood 's 37,562 occupied housing units ( houses and apartments ) , just 39 percent were owned by the people who lived in them ( compared to 67 percent in the U.S. as whole ) .
The other units were rented out .
Only 5 percent of its housing units were vacant , much less than the 12 percent across the country .
The number of people living in each unit was about 3.7 persons , versus 2.7 elsewhere .
Family size was 3.9 people , compared to 3.2 .
It was estimated that 18 percent of Inglewood families had incomes below the poverty level , about twice that of the country at large ( 9 percent ) .
About 17 percent of Inglewood 's residents had earned a bachelor 's degree or higher ( versus 27 percent across the country ) .
Twenty - nine percent of the city 's population were foreign - born , compared to 13 percent in the nation as a whole .
MAPPING L.A.
Section::::Mapping L.A ..
In 2009 , the Los Angeles Times 's " Mapping L.A. " project supplied these neighborhood statistics based on the 2000 census .
The population was 112,482 , or 12,330 people per square mile , among the highest densities for the South Bay and among the highest densities for the county .
The percentage of African Americans was high for the county , and the population was moderately diverse .
Median household income was $ 46,574 , low for both the South Bay and for the county .
The median age was 29 , young for the county ; the percentage of residents aged 10 or under was among the county 's highest .
Three people , on the average , lived in each household – high for the South Bay but about average for the county .
There was a higher percentage of families headed by single parents than elsewhere in the county .
The percentage of veterans who served during 1975–89 and 1990–99 was among the county 's highest . !
Inglewoodand nearbyareas !
Inglewood !
Hyde Park !
LaderaHeights !
Westchester !
Hawthorne TRANSPORTATION STREETS AND HIGHWAYS Section::::Transportation . Section::::Streets and highways .
A " grand avenue at least 150 feet wide " was being built in late 1887 from the end of Figueroa Street in Los Angeles " to the new town of Inglewood on the Centinela ranch , " to be " planted with a border of tropical trees , making it one of the handsomest five - mile drives " on the coast . "
PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION
Section::::Public transportation .
A $ 3,000 train station , described as a " natty and attractive building , " was constructed in 1887 at the temporary end of the Ballona railroad line outward bound from Los Angeles .
The tracks were to continue west through the Centinela ranch to the ocean .
The 18.03-mile line was opened for business on September 7 , 1887 , with stops ( from northeast to southwest ) at Ballona Junction , Nadeau Park , Baldwin , Slauson , Wildeson , Hyde Park , Inglewood , Danville , Mesmer , and Port Ballona .
A train left Los Angeles at 9:15 a.m. on the one - hour journey and returned from Port Ballona at 4 p.m.
In that year the Los Angeles Herald noted that Inglewood was " at the junction of two railroads , one branch going to Ballona Harbor and the other to the beautiful seaside resort , Redondo Beach . . . .
Two trains a day now pass Inglewood station . "
The Centinela - Inglewood Company used a four - horse coach to bring prospective buyers from Los Angeles , leaving at 9:30 a.m. and returning at 2 p.m. Being planned were " frequent fast trains between Los Angeles and Inglewood over the California Southern Railroad .
SPORTS
Section::::Sports .
Inglewood will once again become home to professional sports teams starting in 2020 when the Los Angeles Rams and Los Angeles Chargers of the NFL move into the $ 4.9 billion Los Angeles Stadium at Hollywood Park .
The stadium will host Super Bowl LVI in 2022 .
The Los Angeles Lakers and Los Angeles Kings played their home games at The Forum until the completion of the Staples Center in Downtown Los Angeles .
During the 2028 Summer Olympics , the opening and closing ceremonies will be held at the Los Angeles Stadium at Hollywood Park .
The venue will also host Soccer games during the Olympics while the grounds outside the stadium will host archery .
The Forum will host all the gymnastics events during the games . ! scope="col " Club ! scope="col " League ! scope="col " Venue ! scope="col "
Founded ! scope="col " Established Los Angeles Rams NEIGHBORHOODS Section::::Neighborhoods .
Inglewood consists of ten neighborhoods which are indicated by symbols on street signs .
The neighborhoods are the following areas :
Morningside Park , Downtown Inglewood , Fairview Heights , Arbor Village , Hollypark Knolls , Centinela Heights , Sports Village , Century Heights , Inglewood Knolls , and Lockhaven . CRENSHAW - IMPERIAL Section::::Crenshaw - Imperial .
The Crenshaw - Imperial district was a later annexation to Inglewood , California .
It has its own branch public library and an important shopping center for the area .
( Also see Inglewood Knolls )
MORNINGSIDE PARK Section::::Morningside Park .
Morningside Park is a commercial district in the eastern part of the city .
Though the city of Inglewood does not define the district 's boundaries , it may be delineated by Hyde Park on the north , Manchester Square on the east , Century Boulevard on the south and Prairie Avenue on the west .
The major streets that run through the area are Manchester and Crenshaw boulevards .
It is six miles ( 10 km ) from Los Angeles International Airport and about two miles ( 3 km ) from the under construction Los Angeles Stadium at Hollywood Park , the future home of the NFL 's Los Angeles Rams and the Los Angeles Chargers .
The district is also the location of The Forum , an entertainment venue and where for 32 years the NBA 's Los Angeles Lakers and NHL 's Los Angeles Kings played and The Village at Century shopping center .
This neighborhood was once the site of the Hollywood Park Racetrack .
It is also the home to three gated - communities called Carlton Square , Briarwood Village & The Renaissance .
NORTH INGLEWOOD AND FAIRVIEW HEIGHTS
Section::::North Inglewood and Fairview Heights .
North Inglewood is a neighborhood north of the former Santa Fe railroad tracks , where the Crenshaw / LAX Line will soon be .
In 2009 , it was reported to be the site of a " burgeoning arts scene " centered at East Hyde Park Boulevard and La Brea Avenue .
Fairview Heights is a signed area north of Florence and east of La Brea .
INGLEWOOD KNOLLS Section::::Inglewood Knolls .
Situated in the southeastern corner of the city , Inglewood Knolls is a subdivision of tract homes built in 1953–54 .
It is bordered by Crenshaw Blvd .
on the west , 108th St. on the north , Spinning Ave .
on the east , and Imperial Highway on the south .
A shopping center on the northeastern quadrant of the intersection of Crenshaw and Imperial was also constructed in the mid 1950s , originally including a Food Giant grocery store , Thrifty Drug , J.J. Newberrys , and Lishon 's Music Store , among others .
Century Park Elementary School on Spinning Ave . , although fully within Inglewood city limits , is actually part of the L.A. school district .
GOVERNMENT AND POLITICS GOVERNMENT MUNICIPAL GOVERNMENT Section::::Government and politics .
Section::::Government .
Section::::Municipal government .
The City of Inglewood has a council - city manager type of government .
The mayor is an elected office and is the chief executive officer , but in all other regards is an equal member of the city council .
The current Mayor of Inglewood is James T. Butts Jr. who took office after unseating Daniel K. Tabor who completed the term of Roosevelt Dorn .
The Inglewood Police Department is the city 's police department .
FEDERAL REPRESENTATION
Section::::Federal representation .
In the United States House of Representatives , Inglewood is split between , and .
STATE REPRESENTATION Section::::State representation .
In the California State Legislature , Inglewood is in , and in .
LOS ANGELES COUNTY Section::::Los Angeles County .
Inglewood is part of Los Angeles County , for which the Government of Los Angeles County is defined and authorized under the California Constitution , California law , and the Charter of the County of Los Angeles .
The county government is primarily composed of the elected five - member Board of Supervisors , other elected offices including the Sheriff , District Attorney , and Assessor , and numerous county departments and entities under the supervision of the chief executive officer .
REGIONAL
Section::::Regional .
The city is a member of the South Bay Cities Council of Governments .
POLITICS Section::::Politics .
Inglewood has the highest percentage of registered Democrats of any city in California , with 75.6 percent of its 48,615 voters registered in May 2009 as Democrats .
Seven percent were registered as Republicans , and 14.1 percent declined to state a preference .
In 2005 , the Bay Area Center for Voting Research , a nonpartisan organization in Berkeley , ranked Inglewood as the sixth - most - liberal city in the United States , after Oakland , California , and just ahead of Newark , New Jersey .
Researchers examined voting patterns of 237 American cities with populations over 100,000 and ranked them on liberal and conservative scales .
INFRASTRUCTURE FEDERAL OFFICES
Section::::Infrastructure .
Section::::Federal offices .
The United States Postal Service operates post offices in Inglewood .
The Hillcrest Inglewood Post Office is its main one .
It is located at 300 East Hillcrest Boulevard in Downtown Inglewood .
and the Morningside Park Post Office at 3212
West 85th Street is the secondary office .
The North Inglewood Post Office at 811 North La Brea Avenue , was converted to a Dollar Tree in 2013 .
The county government provides countywide services such as elections and voter registration , law enforcement , jails , vital records , property records , tax collection , public health , and social services .
Fire protection is provided by the Los Angeles County Fire Department stations 18 , 170 , 171 , and 173 .
The Los Angeles County Department of Health Services operates the Curtis Tucker Health Center in Inglewood .
The city was served by the Daniel Freeman Memorial Hospital for more than five decades , from 1954 until its closure in 2007 .
Inglewood is still served and the home to Centinela Hospital Medical Center .
PUBLIC LIBRARIES
Section::::Public libraries .
The City of Inglewood operates a main library in the city 's Civic Center , in addition to a branch in the southeastern corner of the city , near the intersection of Crenshaw and Imperial and a branch in Morningside Park near the intersection of 85th Street and Crenshaw Boulevard .
EDUCATION
PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SCHOOLS Section::::Education .
Section::::Public and private schools .
Most of Inglewood is served by the Inglewood Unified School District .
The district has two zoned high schools , Inglewood High School , Morningside High School , City Honors High School and an alternative high school , Hillcrest High School .
Some of it is zoned in the Los Angeles Unified School District .
LAUSD operates one school in the Inglewood city limits , Century Park Elementary .
When the Inglewood Union High School District , now known as the Centinela Valley Union High School District , opened in 1905 , the Inglewood School District , then only operating primary schools , was within the high school district .
The Centinela Valley district received its current name on November 1 , 1944 .
On July 1 , 1954 , the Inglewood elementary school district withdrew from the Centinela Valley district , becoming a unified school district .
Public charter schools include : * Ánimo Inglewood Charter High School of Green Dot Public Schools
* Ánimo Leadership Charter High School of Green Dot Private schools include : * St. John Chrysostom Elementary School is a private Catholic school .
* St. Mary 's Academy , " In 1966 St. Mary 's Academy left its home of many years on Slauson Avenue [ at Crenshaw Boulevard ] in Los Angeles for a new building on Grace Avenue across from [ Daniel ] Freeman Hospital " .
See also * Good Shepherd Lutheran School , 1936–2003 SCHOOLS HISTORY Section::::Schools history .
In 1888 , a school district was organized , trustees were elected and a building was chosen .
The school opened on May 21 that year on the second floor of a livery stable on Grevillea Avenue between Regent Street and Orchard ( today 's Florence Avenue ) , with 17 boys and 16 girls .
The first teacher was Minnie Walker , a graduate of Los Angeles State Normal School .
The schoolroom , named Bucephalus Hall , after a horse belonging to town founder Daniel Freeman , was also used for community meetings .
Meanwhile , a permanent school building was erected on Grevillea Avenue a block to the south , between Regent and Queen .
It remained Inglewood 's only school until 1911 .
It was destroyed by an earthquake in 1920 .
The Centinela Valley Union High School District was organized in 1904 to bring secondary education to the town .
Inglewood High opened in two rooms of the school building with 15 students taught by Nina Martin , principal , and Anna McClelland .
Four years later , a new building rose on of land , and the first graduation of one boy and four girls took place in 1908 .
Until 1912 there was a new principal every year at the grammar school , but on May 8 of that year George W. Crozier was named principal , and he held the post for 20 years .
The school was renamed in his honor in 1932 .
In 1913 , George M. Green was appointed principal of Inglewood Union High School ; he retired from that position in 1939 .
In 1914 , voters approved bonds for high school improvement .
Four more buildings and a power plant were erected , " joined by walks and arcades .
" The improvement included a " five - room model flat in the Home Economics Building . " Nine acres of land were bought at Kelso Avenue and Damask ( now Inglewood Avenue ) for an experimental agricultural statement , thenceforth known as " The Farm . " There were gardens , an orchard and an alfalfa field .
In 1915 Inglewood High won a first - place Los Angeles County prize for its beautiful ivy - covered brick buildings .
These buildings were destroyed in 1953 to make room for new ones .
In the mid-1920s , the high school district stretched all the way south to El Segundo , so two women teachers were asked to live in El Segundo and ride the school buses with the students every day to and from that city – for an extra dollar a day in pay .
In 1923 girls adopted a school uniform , " a dark blue skirt with a white middy . "
In 1925 a new fine arts building for the high school was erected on the southwest corner of Grevillea and Manchester , replacing the Truax Candy Kitchen , but it was severely damaged by the Long Beach earthquake of 1933 .
It was " later rebuilt with WPA help but lost its magnificent stairway and all its fireplaces .
"
Temporary classrooms were built on Olive Street , " all too cold in winter and too hot most of the time . "
The athletic field on the west side of the campus , later called Badenoch Field , was used for physical education and sporting events .
In 1937 , agricultural classes were ended at the Farm and Sentinel Field was dedicated there for sports activities .
By 1938 there were more than 3,000 students and 141 teachers at the high school .
The " startling news " of 1948 was the dismissal " of the entire administrative staff at Inglewood High School , beginning with Principal James R. Haines .
" He was replaced by Forrest Murdoch of Everett , Washington , as superintendent and Fred Heisner as principal .
In 1952 , another secondary school campus in Inglewood was opened in the east side neighborhood of Lockhaven as Morningside High School .
Center Park School of Los Angeles became part of the Inglewood School District in 1961 when its area ( Crenshaw - Imperial ) was annexed to the city .
In the 1970s , its name was changed to Worthington School to honor Frances and William Worthington .
RELIGION Section::::Religion .
In 2007 , the area served by the Inglewood post office ( including Lennox ) had 98 churches , temples , mosques , chapels and other houses of worship , according to the AreaConnect.com website .
The first church service was held on April 22 , 1888 , in the Inglewood House hotel on Commercial Street ( today 's La Brea Avenue ) , popularly called Mrs. Belden 's Boarding House , when Inglewood had only 300 residents and 112 registered voters .
Later services were in Bucephalus Hall , but eventually the congregation moved to Hyde Park , which left Inglewood with no church .
On January 19 , 1890 , Inglewood 's first permanent church – Presbyterian – was established on Market Street .
A bit later the [ United ] Brethren constructed a building on South Market Street .
In 1907 , a group of Episcopalians began services in a private home , and a few years later the first Catholic services were held in Bank Hall .
In 1910 , the Presbyterians moved their two buildings , a sanctuary and a manse , to the corner of Grevillea and Nutwood " because the streetcars [ on Market Street ] were so noisy and threw so much dust and sand fleas in the windows . "
In 1923 , St. John Chrysostom Catholic Church was founded .
The current church at the intersection of Centinela and Florence was built in 1959 and is the tallest point in the city .
It is the largest congregation in the city , consisting of almost 10,000 registered families .
Next door is St. John Chrysostom School , educating children since 1927 from Pre - K through 8th grade .
By 1940 , the Methodists had built a structure at Manchester and La Brea , but in that year they moved to a new building at Kelso and Spruce .
CONTROVERSIES AND CRITICISM Section::::Controversies and criticism .
Despite additions to the Inglewood such as the renovated Forum , the prospect of attracting NFL teams with a new stadium , and a new light rail line through the city , some critics has expressed skepticism as to whether these additions will contribute to any " local growth " .
SENATOR WRIGHT
VOTER FRAUD Section::::Senator Wright voter fraud .
In 2014 , former Senator Rod Wright resigned from the California Senate and served approximately seventy - one minutes of jail - time following his conviction of eight felonies , including perjury and voter fraud .
Additionally , Wright lived outside of the district for which he campaigned .
In 2018 , a senate bill was introduced with the purpose of clarifying that " a domicile is determined solely by where an individual is registered to vote and no other factors " .
2016 SHOOTING OF MARQUINTAN SANDLIN AND KISHA
MICHAEL
Section::::2016 shooting of Marquintan Sandlin and Kisha Michael .
The shooting of Kisha Michael , 31 , a single mother of three sons , and Marquintan Sandlin , 32 , a single father of four daughters , occurred on February 21 , 2016 , when police responded to a call of a suspicious vehicle parked on Manchester Boulevard around 3:10 am .
When police arrived , they engaged in a 45-minute - long standoff before opening fire on the man and the armed woman inside the vehicle , killing them both .
Michael was shot thirteen times and pronounced dead at the scene .
Sandlin was shot eight times and died at a hospital shortly thereafter .
Law enforcement officials involved in the shooting have claimed that Michael had a gun in her lap , although authorities have not stated whether either victim reached for or touched the weapon .
There has also been no indication that the victims ' vehicle was used in a violent manner toward the officers .
City of Inglewood
, California Mayor James T. Butts Jr. said that a man and a woman killed were unconscious when police first encountered them .
Following a private investigation , the City of Inglewood fired the five officers involved in the shooting in May 2017 , while the district attorney 's office has yet to reach a verdict regarding criminal liability of those officers .
In response to Inglewood 's investigation , former deputy district attorney Ambrosio Rodriguez stated , " This is the old way of doing things .
Inglewood has n't caught up to the times .
TRASH HAULING PACT Section::::Trash hauling pact .
In 2018 , an investigation began into a 2012 trash hauling pact contract .
The contract , valued at $ 100 million , went to a bidder with connections to current mayor James T. Butts .
The bidder , Consolidated Disposal Services , secured the contract soon after hiring Michael Butts , brother of Mayor Butts , as an operations manager .
COUNCILMAN MORALES CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Section::::Councilman Morales conflict of interest .
In May 2018 , the Los Angeles County District Attorney 's Office announced it was investigating a complaint that accused Inglewood Councilman Eloy Morales , Jr. of conflicts of interest in voting to award contracts to his own clients .
Since 2015 , Morales has earned an approximate $ 60,000 to $ 600,000 from two companies connected with Inglewood .
Under California law , no city council member may directly or indirectly benefit financially from their votes .
COMMUNITY RESOURCES Section::::Community resources .
D.A.R.E. America , an international education program that seeks to prevent use of controlled drugs , membership in gangs and violent behavior , has its headquarters in Inglewood .
CULTURAL RESOURCES SYMPHONY Section::::Cultural resources .
Section::::Symphony .
The Southeast Symphony Association is a non - profit , musical and cultural association located in Inglewood , California founded in 1948 whose goal continues to be to create an orchestra that welcomes African - American musicians .
OPEN STUDIOS Section::::Open Studios .
The annual Open Studios event features " drawing , painting , photography and more , " organized by a volunteer group of artists with support by the Inglewood Cultural Arts , Inc. ( ICA ) organization .
The first year of the event saw six artists featured , but at the November 2011 event " more than 30 " were expected , said Renee Fox , gallery director at the Beacon Arts Building on North La Brea Avenue .
The structure has been turned into 14 artists ' studios , with 16 more to be added by the end of 2011 .
A nearby former auto showroom has also been turned over to artists .
Arts and Culture Programs Inglewood Cultural Arts , Inc. , a nonprofit multidisciplinary arts organization was founded in 1999 by members of the City of Inglewood 's Cultural Arts Task Force .
The founding members implemented the Cultural Arts Master Plan by forming the independent entity which has provided visual music , dance and other performing arts since 1997 .
NEWSPAPERS
*
The Morningside Park Chronicle , Inglewood News and Inglewood
Today circulate in the city .
* Inglewood Daily News , defunct SISTER CITIES Section::::Sister cities .
Inglewood is affiliated with the following sister cities
* Bo , Sierra Leone * Pedavena Veneto , Italy * Port Antonio , Jamaica
* Tijuana , Baja California , Mexico NOTABLE PEOPLE BORN IN INGLEWOOD * Hassan Adams , retired NBA player
*
Don August , baseball player * Maybelle Blair ( born 1927 ) , All - American Girls Professional Baseball League player
* Tyra Banks , former fashion model , television personality , talk show host and actress * Shawn Chrystopher , recording artist , producer * Dottie Wiltse Collins , All - American Girls Professional Baseball League player * Todd Davis , NFL player
* Scott Eyre , baseball player
* Patricia Peck Gossel , medical historian and curator * Tanedra Howard , actress * Becky G , actress and singer * Flo Hyman , volleyball player , Morningside High School graduate
*
Vicki Lawrence , actress and comedian * Jim Lefebvre , retired MLB player and manager
* Mack 10 , rapper * Tanjareen Martin , actress * Len Maxwell , voice actor and announcer * Scott McGregor , baseball player
* Philip " Bishop Lamont " Martin , rapper * Kory Minor , NFL player
* Lisa Moretti , former WWE wrestler
* Valerie Ogoke , basketball player
* Omarion , R&B singer , songwriter , dancer and actor * Marcel Reece , NFL player * Brittney Reese , Olympic and World champion in long jump * Jamal Sampson , retired NBA player
* Donald Sanford , American - Israeli Olympic sprinter
* Shade Sheist , recording artist , singer - songwriter , actor
* Zoot Sims jazz saxophonist
* Craig Smith , retired NBA player
*
Bishop Jaime Soto of the Diocese of Sacramento
* Chris Strait , comedian * Esther Williams , swimmer and motion picture actress
* Brian Wilson , musician , singer , songwriter , and record producer ; co - founder of The Beach Boys OTHER RESIDENTS * Willam Belli , drag queen
* Salvatore ( Sonny ) Bono , singer , actor , and congressman , attended Inglewood High School
* Jeanne Crain , actress * Daniel Freeman , credited as the founder of Inglewood * Cali Swag District , hip hop group * Lisa Leslie , retired WNBA basketball player
* Don Megowan , actor * Frank D. Parent , municipal court judge
* Paul Pierce , retired NBA basketball player
* Cindy Sheehan , American anti - war activist
*
Chastin West , football player FILMING LOCATIONS
Section::::Filming locations .
Inglewood has been in several motion picture movies and television shows such as : * Inglewood City Hall ( 1 Manchester Boulevard ) :
The interior of City Hall was the fictional IADC ( Inter - Agency Defense Command )
Headquarters for The New Adventures of Wonder Woman and also the coroner 's office in Jack Klugman 's 1970 's Television Drama Series Quincy , M.E ..
* The city was a filming location for The Wood , a 1999 movie about three African - American men recalling their childhood in 1980s Inglewood .
* The 2015 film Dope is set in the Darby - Dixon neighborhood ( nicknamed " The Bottoms " ) of Inglewood .
SEE ALSO
* Los Angeles Times suburban sections , for a time capsule placed in the Inglewood City Hall
* List of cities and towns in California
* Largest cities in Southern California REFERENCES FURTHER READING * Constance Zillgitt Snowden , Men of Inglewood , 1924 .
* Roy Rosenberg , The History of Inglewood , published by Arthur Cawston , 1938 .
* Lloyd Hamilton , Inglewood Community Book , 1947 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Inglewood Unified School District * Inglewood Chamber of Commerce
*
Inglewood Today
* " Welcome to Inglewood – Leave Your Aspirations Behind . "
Los Angeles Weekly .
July 21 , 2005 .
* WikiMapia : Inglewood , California
* Online Archive of California.org : Images of Inglewood