INFECTIOUS MONONUCLEOSIS
Infectious mononucleosis ( IM , mono ) , also known as glandular fever , is an infection usually caused by the Epstein – Barr virus ( EBV ) .
Most people are infected by the virus as children , when the disease produces few or no symptoms .
In young adults , the disease often results in fever , sore throat , enlarged lymph nodes in the neck , and tiredness .
Most people recover in two to four weeks ; however , feeling tired may last for months .
The liver or spleen may also become swollen , and in less than one percent of cases splenic rupture may occur .
While usually caused by Epstein – Barr virus , also known as human herpesvirus 4 , which is a member of the herpes virus family , a few other viruses may also cause the disease .
It is primarily spread through saliva but can rarely be spread through semen or blood .
Spread may occur by objects such as drinking glasses or toothbrushes .
Those who are infected can spread the disease weeks before symptoms develop .
Mono is primarily diagnosed based on the symptoms and can be confirmed with blood tests for specific antibodies .
Another typical finding is increased blood lymphocytes of which more than 10 % are atypical .
The monospot test is not recommended for general use due to poor accuracy .
There is no vaccine for EBV , but infection can be prevented by not sharing personal items or saliva with an infected person .
Mono generally improves without any specific treatment .
Symptoms may be reduced by drinking enough fluids , getting sufficient rest , and taking pain medications such as paracetamol ( acetaminophen ) and ibuprofen .
Mono most commonly affects those between the ages of 15 to 24 years in the developed world .
In the developing world , people are more often infected in early childhood when the symptoms are less .
In those between 16 and 20 it is the cause of about 8 % of sore throats .
About 45 out of 100,000 people develop infectious mono each year in the United States .
Nearly 95 % of people have had an EBV infection by the time they are adults .
The disease occurs equally at all times of the year .
Mononucleosis was first described in the 1920s and is colloquially known as " the kissing disease " .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
The signs and symptoms of infectious mononucleosis vary with age .
CHILDREN Section::::Children .
Before puberty , the disease typically only produces flu - like symptoms , if any at all .
When found , symptoms tend to be similar to those of common throat infections ( mild pharyngitis , with or without tonsillitis ) .
ADOLESCENTS AND YOUNG ADULTS Section::::Adolescents and young adults .
In adolescence and young adulthood , the disease presents with a characteristic triad : *
Fever – usually lasting 14 days ; often mild
* Sore throat – usually severe for 3–5 days , before resolving in the next 7–10 days .
* Swollen glands – mobile ; usually located around the back of the neck ( posterior cervical lymph nodes ) and sometimes throughout the body .
Another major symptom is feeling tired .
Headaches are common , and abdominal pains with nausea or vomiting sometimes also occur .
Symptoms most often disappear after about 2–4 weeks .
However , fatigue and a general feeling of being unwell ( malaise ) may sometimes last for months .
Fatigue lasts more than one month in an estimated 28 % of cases .
Mild fever , swollen neck glands and body aches may also persist beyond 4 weeks .
Most people are able to resume their usual activities within 2–3 months .
The most prominent sign of the disease is often the pharyngitis , which is frequently accompanied by enlarged tonsils with pus — an exudate similar to that seen in cases of strep throat .
In about 50 % of cases , small reddish - purple spots called petechiae can be seen on the roof of the mouth .
Palatal enanthem can also occur , but is relatively uncommon .
A small minority of people spontaneously present a rash , usually on the arms or trunk , which can be macular ( morbilliform ) or papular .
Almost all people given amoxicillin or ampicillin eventually develop a generalized , itchy maculopapular rash , which however does not imply that the person will have adverse reactions to penicillins again in the future .
Occasional cases of erythema nodosum and erythema multiforme have been reported .
Seizures may also occasionally occur .
COMPLICATIONS Section::::Complications .
Spleen enlargement is common in the second and third weeks , although this may not be apparent on physical examination .
Rarely the spleen may rupture .
There may also be some enlargement of the liver .
Jaundice occurs only occasionally .
It generally gets better on its own in people who are otherwise healthy .
When caused by EBV , infectious mononucleosis is classified as one of the Epstein - Barr virus - associated lymphoproliferative diseases .
Occasionally the disease may persist and result in a chronic infection .
This may develop into systemic EBV - positive T cell lymphoma .
OLDER ADULTS Section::::Older adults .
Infectious mononucleosis mainly affects younger adults .
When older adults do catch the disease , they less often have characteristic signs and symptoms such as the sore throat and lymphadenopathy .
Instead , they may primarily experience prolonged fever , fatigue , malaise and body pains .
They are more likely to have liver enlargement and jaundice .
People over 40 years of age are more likely to develop serious illness .
( See Prognosis . )
INCUBATION PERIOD Section::::Incubation period .
The exact length of time between infection and symptoms is unclear .
A review of the literature made an estimate of 33–49 days .
In adolescents and young adults , symptoms are thought to appear around 4–6 weeks after initial infection .
Onset is often gradual , though it can be abrupt .
The main symptoms may be preceded by 1–2 weeks of fatigue , feeling unwell and body aches .
CAUSE EPSTEIN –
BARR VIRUS Section::::Cause .
Section::::Epstein – Barr virus .
About 90 % of cases of infectious mononucleosis are caused by the Epstein – Barr virus , a member of the Herpesviridae family of DNA viruses .
It is one of the most commonly found viruses throughout the world .
Contrary to common belief , the Epstein – Barr virus is not highly contagious .
It can only be contracted through direct contact with an infected person 's saliva , such as through kissing or sharing toothbrushes .
About 95 % of the population has been exposed to this virus by the age of 40 , but only 15–20 % of teenagers and about 40 % of exposed adults actually become infected .
CYTOMEGALOVIRUS Section::::Cytomegalovirus .
A minority of cases of infectious mononucleosis is caused by human cytomegalovirus ( CMV ) , another type of herpes virus .
This virus is found in body fluids including saliva , urine , blood , and tears .
A person becomes infected with this virus by direct contact with infected body fluids .
Cytomegalovirus is most commonly transmitted through kissing and sexual intercourse .
It can also be transferred from an infected mother to her unborn child .
This virus is often " silent " because the signs and symptoms can not be felt by the person infected .
However , it can cause life - threatening illness in infants , HIV patients , transplant recipients , and those with weak immune systems .
For those with weak immune systems , cytomegalovirus can cause more serious illnesses such as pneumonia and inflammations of the retina , esophagus , liver , large intestine , and brain .
Approximately 90 % of the human population has been infected with cytomegalovirus by the time they reach adulthood , but most are unaware of the infection .
Once a person becomes infected with cytomegalovirus , the virus stays in his / her body fluids throughout his or her lifetime .
TRANSMISSION Section::::Transmission .
Epstein – Barr virus infection is spread via saliva , and has an incubation period of four to seven weeks .
The length of time that an individual remains contagious is unclear , but the chances of passing the illness to someone else may be the highest during the first six weeks following infection .
Some studies indicate that a person can spread the infection for many months , possibly up to a year and a half .
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Section::::Pathophysiology .
The virus replicates first within epithelial cells in the pharynx ( which causes pharyngitis , or sore throat ) , and later primarily within B cells ( which are invaded via their CD21 ) .
The host immune response involves cytotoxic ( CD8-positive ) T cells against infected B lymphocytes , resulting in enlarged , atypical lymphocytes ( Downey cells ) .
When the infection is acute ( recent onset , instead of chronic ) , heterophile antibodies are produced .
Cytomegalovirus , adenovirus and Toxoplasma gondii ( toxoplasmosis ) infections can cause symptoms similar to infectious mononucleosis , but a heterophile antibody test will test negative and differentiate those infections from infectious mononucleosis .
Mononucleosis is sometimes accompanied by secondary cold agglutinin disease , an autoimmune disease in which abnormal circulating antibodies directed against red blood cells can lead to a form of autoimmune hemolytic anemia .
The cold agglutinin detected is of anti - i specificity .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Diagnostic modalities for infectious mononucleosis include : *
Patient age , with highest risk at 10 to 30 years .
* Medical history , such as close contact with other people with infectious mononucleosis , and the presence and time of onset of " mononucleosis - like symptoms " such as fever and sore throat * Physical examination , including palpation of any enlarged lymph nodes in the neck , or enlarged spleen .
*
The heterophile antibody test is a screening test that gives results within a day , but has significantly less than full sensitivity ( 70–92 % ) in the first two weeks after clinical symptoms begin .
* Serological tests take longer time than the heterophile antibody test , but are more accurate .
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Section::::Physical examination .
The presence of an enlarged spleen , and swollen posterior cervical , axillary , and inguinal lymph nodes are the most useful to suspect a diagnosis of infectious mononucleosis .
On the other hand , the absence of swollen cervical lymph nodes and fatigue are the most useful to dismiss the idea of infectious mononucleosis as the correct diagnosis .
The insensitivity of the physical examination in detecting an enlarged spleen means it should not be used as evidence against infectious mononucleosis .
A physical examination may also show petechiae in the palate .
HETEROPHILE ANTIBODY TEST
Section::::Heterophile antibody test .
The heterophile antibody test works by agglutination of red blood cells from guinea pig , sheep and horse .
This test is specific but not particularly sensitive ( with a false - negative rate of as high as 25 % in the first week , 5–10 % in the second , and 5 % in the third ) .
About 90 % of patients have heterophile antibodies by week 3 , disappearing in under a year .
The antibodies involved in the test do not interact with the Epstein – Barr virus or any of its antigens .
The monospot test is not recommended for general use by the CDC due to its poor accuracy .
SEROLOGY Section::::Serology .
Serologic tests detect antibodies directed against the Epstein – Barr virus .
Immunoglobulin G ( IgG ) , when positive , mainly reflects a past infection , whereas immunoglobulin M ( IgM ) mainly reflects a current infection .
EBV - targeting antibodies can also be classified according to which part of the virus they bind to : * Viral capsid antigen ( VCA ) : * Early antigen ( EA ) * EBV nuclear antigen ( EBNA )
When negative , these tests are more accurate than the heterophile antibody test in ruling out infectious mononucleosis .
When positive , they feature similar specificity to the heterophile antibody test .
Therefore , these tests are useful for diagnosing infectious mononucleosis in people with highly suggestive symptoms and a negative heterophile antibody test .
OTHER TESTS
* Epstein – Barr nuclear antigen detection .
While it is not normally recognizable until several weeks into the disease , and is useful for distinguishing between a recent - onset of infectious mononucleosis and symptoms caused by a previous infection .
* Elevated hepatic transaminase levels is highly suggestive of infectious mononucleosis , occurring in up to 50 % of patients .
*
By blood film , one diagnostic criterion for infectious mononucleosis is the presence of 50 % lymphocytes with at least 10 % atypical lymphocytes ( large , irregular nuclei ) , while the person also has fever , pharyngitis , and swollen lymph nodes .
The atypical lymphocytes resembled monocytes when they were first discovered , thus the term " mononucleosis " was coined .
* A fibrin ring granuloma may be present .
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS Section::::Differential diagnosis .
About 10 % of people who present a clinical picture of infectious mononucleosis do not have an acute Epstein – Barr - virus infection .
A differential diagnosis of acute infectious mononucleosis needs to take into consideration acute cytomegalovirus infection and Toxoplasma gondii infections .
Because their management is much the same , it is not always helpful , or possible , to distinguish between Epstein – Barr - virus mononucleosis and cytomegalovirus infection .
However , in pregnant women , differentiation of mononucleosis from toxoplasmosis is important , since it is associated with significant consequences for the fetus .
Acute HIV infection can mimic signs similar to those of infectious mononucleosis , and tests should be performed for pregnant women for the same reason as toxoplasmosis .
People with infectious mononucleosis are sometimes misdiagnosed with a streptococcal pharyngitis ( because of the symptoms of fever , pharyngitis and adenopathy ) and are given antibiotics such as ampicillin or amoxicillin as treatment .
Other conditions from which to distinguish infectious mononucleosis include leukemia , tonsillitis , diphtheria , common cold and influenza ( flu ) .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Infectious mononucleosis is generally self - limiting , so only symptomatic or supportive treatments are used .
The need for rest and return to usual activities after the acute phase of the infection may reasonably be based on the person 's general energy levels .
Nevertheless , in an effort to decrease the risk of splenic rupture experts advise avoidance of contact sports and other heavy physical activity , especially when involving increased abdominal pressure or the Valsalva maneuver ( as in rowing or weight training ) , for at least the first 3–4 weeks of illness or until enlargement of the spleen has resolved , as determined by a treating physician .
MEDICATIONS Section::::Medications .
Paracetamol ( acetaminophen ) and NSAIDs , such as ibuprofen , may be used to reduce fever and pain .
Prednisone , a corticosteroid , while used to try to reduce throat pain or enlarged tonsils , remains controversial due to the lack of evidence that it is effective and the potential for side effects .
Intravenous corticosteroids , usually hydrocortisone or dexamethasone , are not recommended for routine use but may be useful if there is a risk of airway obstruction , a very low platelet count , or hemolytic anemia .
There is little evidence to support the use of antivirals such as aciclovir and valacyclovir although they may reduce initial viral shedding .
Although antivirals are not recommended for people with simple infectious mononucleosis , they may be useful ( in conjunction with steroids ) in the management of severe EBV manifestations , such as EBV meningitis , peripheral neuritis , hepatitis , or hematologic complications .
Although antibiotics exert no antiviral action they may be indicated to treat bacterial secondary infections of the throat , such as with streptococcus ( strep throat ) .
However , ampicillin and amoxicillin are not recommended during acute Epstein – Barr virus infection as a diffuse rash may develop .
OBSERVATION Section::::Observation .
Splenomegaly is a common symptom of infectious mononucleosis and health care providers may consider using abdominal ultrasonography to get insight into the enlargement of a person 's spleen .
However , because spleen size varies greatly , ultrasonography is not a valid technique for assessing spleen enlargement and should not be used in typical circumstances or to make routine decisions about fitness for playing sports .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
Serious complications are uncommon , occurring in less than 5 % of cases :
* CNS complications include meningitis , encephalitis , hemiplegia , Guillain – Barré syndrome , and transverse myelitis .
Prior infectious mononucleiosis has been linked to the development of multiple sclerosis ( MS ) .
* Hematologic : Hemolytic anemia ( direct Coombs test is positive ) and various cytopenias , and bleeding ( caused by thrombocytopenia ) can occur .
* Mild jaundice
* Hepatitis with the Epstein – Barr virus is rare .
* Upper airway obstruction from tonsillar hypertrophy is rare .
*
Fulminant disease course of immunocompromised patients is rare .
* Splenic rupture is rare .
* Myocarditis and pericarditis are rare .
* Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome * Chronic fatigue syndrome * Cancers associated with the Epstein - Barr virus include : Burkitt 's lymphoma , Hodgkin 's lymphoma and lymphomas in general as well as nasopharyngeal and gastric carcinoma .
Once the acute symptoms of an initial infection disappear , they often do not return .
But once infected , the patient carries the virus for the rest of his or her life .
The virus typically lives dormantly in B lymphocytes .
Independent infections of mononucleosis may be contracted multiple times , regardless of whether the patient is already carrying the virus dormantly .
Periodically , the virus can reactivate , during which time the patient is again infectious , but usually without any symptoms of illness .
Usually , a patient has few , if any , further symptoms or problems from the latent B lymphocyte infection .
However , in susceptible hosts under the appropriate environmental stressors , the virus can reactivate and cause vague physical symptoms ( or may be subclinical ) , and during this phase the virus can spread to others .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The characteristic symptomatology of infectious mononucleosis does not appear to have been reported until the late nineteenth century .
In 1885 , the renowned Russian pediatrician Nil Filatov reported an infectious process he called " idiopathic denitis " exhibiting symptoms that correspond to infectious mononucleosis , and in 1889 a German balneologist and pediatrician , Emil Pfeiffer , independently reported similar cases ( some of lesser severity ) that tended to cluster in families , for which he coined the term Drüsenfieber ( " glandular fever " ) .
The word mononucleosis has several senses .
It can refer to any monocytosis ( excessive numbers of circulating monocytes ) , but today it usually is used in its narrower sense of infectious mononucleosis , which is caused by EBV and of which monocytosis is a finding .
The term " infectious mononucleosis " was coined in 1920 by Thomas Peck Sprunt and Frank Alexander Evans in a classic clinical description of the disease published in the Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital , entitled " Mononuclear leukocytosis in reaction to acute infection ( infectious mononucleosis ) " .
The Epstein – Barr virus was first identified in Burkitt 's lymphoma cells by Michael Anthony Epstein and Yvonne Barr at the University of Bristol in 1964 .
The link with infectious mononucleosis was uncovered in 1967 by Werner and Gertrude Henle at the Children 's Hospital of Philadelphia , after a laboratory technician handling the virus contracted the disease : comparison of serum samples collected from the technician before and after the onset revealed development of antibodies to the virus .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS