BLACK HAWK , COLORADO The City of Black Hawk is a Home Rule Municipality in Gilpin County , Colorado , United States .
The city population was 118 at the 2010 United States Census , making Black Hawk the least populous city ( rather than town ) in Colorado .
The tiny city is an historic mining settlement founded in 1859 during the Pike 's Peak Gold Rush .
Black Hawk is a part of the Denver - Aurora - Lakewood , CO Metropolitan Statistical Area .
Black Hawk is located adjacent to Central City , another historic mining settlement in Gregory Gulch .
The two cities form the federally designated Central City / Black Hawk National Historic District .
The area flourished during the mining boom of the late 19th century following the construction of mills and a railroad link to Golden .
The town declined during the 20th century , but has been revived in recent years after the 1991 establishment of casino gambling following a statewide initiative in 1990 .
In early 2010 , the Black Hawk city council passed a law banning the riding of bicycles in the town , drawing a reaction from bicycle advocacy groups and international press .
The ban was overturned by the Colorado Supreme Court in 2013 .
HISTORY MINING BOOM Section::::History .
Section::::Mining boom .
The town is located along the north fork of Clear Creek and Gregory Gulch .
Black Hawk was established in 1859 .
In May 1859 the discovery of gold in Gregory Gulch by its namesake , John H. Gregory , brought thousands of prospectors and miners into the area , combing the hills for more gold veins .
The Bobtail lode was discovered the following month .
Hardrock mining boomed for a few years , but then declined in the mid-1860s as the miners exhausted the shallow parts of the veins that contained free gold , and found that their amalgamation mills could not recover gold from the deeper sulfide ores .
Nathaniel P. Hill built Colorado 's first successful ore smelter in Black Hawk in 1868 .
Hill 's smelter could recover gold from the sulfide ores , an achievement that saved hardrock mining in Black Hawk , Central City , and Idaho Springs from ruin .
Other smelters were built nearby .
Black Hawk 's advantageous location on North Clear Creek made it the center of ore processing for the area , and it became known as the " City of Mills " .
The Colorado Central Railroad extended its line to the town in 1872 .
A restored depot and locomotive are on display on the east side of downtown .
Black Hawk was also served by the two - foot - gauge Gilpin Tramway which climbed from Black Hawk to the mines above Central City .
Many historic buildings in the town have been restored following the opening of the casinos in 1991 .
GAMBLING BOOM Section::::Gambling boom .
The town has been in heated competition for gambling revenue with its neighbor Central City since casinos opened in both towns in 1991 .
Development of the area down Clear Creek from the historic Black Hawk townsite lining State Highway 119 has flourished .
Gamblers from Denver pass the Blackhawk casinos before they arrive at Central City , and , as a result , Black Hawk has realized much more revenue from gambling than Central City .
Gambling in Black Hawk also benefits from less restrictive zoning codes ; while Central City until recently limited building heights to to preserve the historic character of the town , Black Hawk has no such limits .
In an attempt to close the competitive gap , Central City built the Central City Parkway from Interstate 70 near Idaho Springs as an alternative route , leading guests first to Central City , and then to Black Hawk .
The Central City Parkway opened November 19 , 2004 .
However , Black Hawk continues to have three times the number of casinos , and generates more than seven times the gambling revenue that Central City does .
Although the 1990 statewide referendum allowing casino gambling in Black Hawk was promoted as a way to promote historic preservation in Black Hawk , critics have charged that it has had the opposite effect , and that the historic appearance of Black Hawk has been sacrificed to allow construction of the large casinos .
Tax from the gambling revenue provides funding for the State Historical Fund , administered by the Colorado Office of Archaeology and Historic Preservation .
BICYCLING BAN
CONTROVERSY Section::::Bicycling ban controversy .
In February 2013 , the Colorado Supreme Court overturned a citywide ban on bicycle traffic through Black Hawk , ruling that the city had failed to comply with state traffic law .
In 2010 , the city of Black Hawk banned bicycle use on most of the streets in the city .
The ban was prompted by a surge in traffic following the change in maximum casino betting limits from $ 5 to $ 100 .
Black Hawk City Manager Michael Copp said that the city council , which passed the new law , believed it was best for the casinos and their patrons .
The penalty for riding a bicycle through Black Hawk was a $ 68 fine .
Bicycle advocacy groups challenged the bike ban , with the case ultimately going to the Colorado Supreme Court .
State Highway 119 and County Road 279 in Black Hawk are part of the Great Parks Bicycle Route and the Peak to Peak Scenic Byway touring route .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of .
TRANSPORTATION
Section::::Transportation .
The Black Hawk & Central City Tramway , operated by the cities of Black Hawk and Central City , provides a free shuttle between the two towns .
Ramblin Express and Ace Express Coaches provides transportation from Denver .
DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Demographics .
As of the census of 2000 , there were 118 people , 54 households , and 28 families residing in the city .
The population density was 80.9 people per square mile ( 31.2 / km² ) .
There were 79 housing units at an average density of 54.2 per square mile ( 20.9 / km² ) .
The racial makeup of the city was 84.75 % White , 3.39 % African American , 0.85 % Native American , 5.93 % from other races , and 5.08 % from two or more races .
Hispanic or Latino of any race were 10.17 % of the population .
There were 54 households out of which 18.5 % had children under the age of 18 living with them , 40.7 % were married couples living together , 5.6 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 46.3 % were non - families .
33.3 % of all households were made up of individuals and 9.3 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older .
The average household size was 2.19 and the average family size was 2.69 .
In the city , the population was spread out with 17.8 % under the age of 18 , 5.9 % from 18 to 24 , 33.1 % from 25 to 44 , 34.7 % from 45 to 64 , and 8.5 % who were 65 years of age or older .
The median age was 41 years .
For every 100 females , there were 131.4 males .
For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 131.0 males .
The median income for a household in the city was $ 44,583 , and the median income for a family was $ 52,500 .
Males had a median income of $ 29,688 versus $ 20,833 for females .
The per capita income for the city was $ 25,985 .
None of the population and none of the families were below the poverty line .
EDUCATION Section::::Education .
Black Hawk Public Schools are part of the Gilpin County School District RE-1 .
The district has one elementary school and one high school , Gilpin County Elementary School and Gilpin County Undivided High School .
Tina Goar is the Superintendent of Schools .
There are approximately 380 students enrolled in the district .
NOTABLE PEOPLE
* William Frederick Cody ( " Buffalo Bill " ) , briefly a resident of Black Hawk while searching for gold near the town for two months
* Nathaniel P. Hill , Brown University chemistry professor , Black Hawk smelter magnate ,
U.S. senator SEE ALSO * Index of Colorado - related articles * List of cities and towns in Colorado
* Outline of Colorado
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* City of Black Hawk official website
* Photos of Black Hawk Colorado Ghost Town site provided by Rocky Mountain Profiles * CDOT map of the City of Black Hawk
* Railroads , mines and mills of Gilpin County