TISSUE ( BIOLOGY )
In biology , tissue is a cellular organizational level between cells and a complete organ .
A tissue is an ensemble of similar cells and their extracellular matrix from the same origin that together carry out a specific function .
Organs are then formed by the functional grouping together of multiple tissues .
The English word is derived from the French tissu , meaning something that is woven , from the verb tisser , " to weave " .
The study of human and animal tissues is known as histology or , in connection with disease , histopathology .
For plants , the discipline is called plant anatomy .
The classical tools for studying tissues are the paraffin block in which tissue is embedded and then sectioned , the histological stain , and the optical microscope .
In the last couple of decades , developments in electron microscopy , immunofluorescence , and the use of frozen tissue sections have enhanced the detail that can be observed in tissues .
With these tools , the classical appearances of tissues can be examined in health and disease , enabling considerable refinement of medical diagnosis and prognosis .
ANIMAL TISSUES
Section::::Animal tissues .
Animal tissues are grouped into four basic types : connective , muscle , nervous , and epithelial .
Collections of tissues joined in structural units to serve a common function compose organs .
While all eumetazoan animals ( i.e. except Porifera ) can generally be considered to contain the four tissue types , the manifestation of these tissues can differ depending on the type of organism .
For example , the origin of the cells comprising a particular tissue type may differ developmentally for different classifications of animals .
The epithelium in all birds and animals is derived from the ectoderm and endoderm with a small contribution from the mesoderm , forming the endothelium , a specialized type of epithelium that composes the vasculature .
By contrast , a true epithelial tissue is present only in a single layer of cells held together via occluding junctions called tight junctions , to create a selectively permeable barrier .
This tissue covers all organismal surfaces that come in contact with the external environment such as the skin , the airways , and the digestive tract .
It serves functions of protection , secretion , and absorption , and is separated from other tissues below by a basal lamina .
CONNECTIVE TISSUE Section::::Connective tissue .
Connective tissues are fibrous tissues .
They are made up of cells separated by non - living material , which is called an extracellular matrix .
This matrix can be liquid or rigid .
For example , blood contains plasma as its matrix and bone 's matrix is rigid .
Connective tissue gives shape to organs and holds them in place .
Blood , bone , tendon , ligament , adipose , and areolar tissues are examples of connective tissues .
One method of classifying connective tissues is to divide them into three types : fibrous connective tissue , skeletal connective tissue , and fluid connective tissue .
MUSCULAR TISSUE
Section::::Muscular tissue .
Muscle cells form the active contractile tissue of the body known as muscle tissue or muscular tissue .
Muscle tissue functions to produce force and cause motion , either locomotion or movement within internal organs .
Muscle tissue is separated into three distinct categories : visceral or smooth muscle , found in the inner linings of organs ; skeletal muscle , typically attached to bones , which generate gross movement ; and cardiac muscle , found in the heart where it contracts to pump blood throughout an organism .
NERVOUS TISSUE
Section::::Nervous tissue .
Cells comprising the central nervous system and peripheral nervous system are classified as nervous ( or neural ) tissue .
In the central nervous system , neural tissues form the brain and spinal cord .
In the peripheral nervous system , neural tissues form the cranial nerves and spinal nerves , inclusive of the motor neurons .
EPITHELIAL TISSUE
Section::::Epithelial tissue .
The epithelial tissues are formed by cells that cover the organ surfaces such as the surface of skin , the airways , the reproductive tract , and the inner lining of the digestive tract .
The cells comprising an epithelial layer are linked via semi - permeable , tight junctions ; hence , this tissue provides a barrier between the external environment and the organ it covers .
In addition to this protective function , epithelial tissue may also be specialized to function in secretion , excretion and absorption .
Epithelial tissue helps to protect organs from microorganisms , injury , and fluid loss .
Functions of epithelial tissue :
* The cells of the body 's surface form the outer layer of skin .
*
Inside the body , epithelial cells form the lining of the mouth and alimentary canal and protect these organs .
* Epithelial tissues help in absorption of water and nutrients .
* Epithelial tissues help in the elimination of waste .
* Epithelial tissues secrete enzymes and/or hormones in the form of glands .
*
Some epithelial tissue perform secretory functions .
they secrete a variety of substance such as sweat , saliva(mucus),enzymes , etc .
There are many kinds of epithelium , and nomenclature is somewhat variable .
Most classification schemes combine a description of the cell - shape in the upper layer of the epithelium with a word denoting the number of layers : either simple ( one layer of cells ) or stratified ( multiple layers of cells ) .
However , other cellular features , such as cilia may also be described in the classification system .
Some common kinds of epithelium are listed below :
* Simple squamous epithelium
* Stratified squamous epithelium
* Simple cuboidal epithelium * Transitional epithelium
* Pseudostratified columnar epithelium ( also known as Ciliated columnar epithelium )
* Columnar epithelium
* Glandular epithelium
* Ciliated columnar epithelium
PLANT TISSUES Section::::Plant tissues .
In plant anatomy , tissues are categorized broadly into three tissue systems : the epidermis , the ground tissue , and the vascular tissue .
* Epidermis - Cells forming the outer surface of the leaves and of the young plant body .
*
Vascular tissue -
The primary components of vascular tissue are the xylem and phloem .
These transport fluids and nutrients internally .
*
Ground tissue - Ground tissue is less differentiated than other tissues .
Ground tissue manufactures nutrients by photosynthesis and stores reserve nutrients .
Plant tissues can also be divided differently into two types : * Meristematic tissues * * Permanent tissues .
* MERISTEMATIC TISSUES Section::::Meristematic tissues .
Meristematic tissue consists of actively dividing cells , and leads to increase in length and thickness of the plant .
The primary growth of a plant occurs only in certain , specific regions , such as in the tips of stems or roots .
It is in these regions that meristematic tissue is present .
Cells in these tissues are roughly spherical or polyhedral , to rectangular in shape , and have thin cell walls .
New cells produced by meristem are initially those of meristem itself , but as the new cells grow and mature , their characteristics slowly change and they become differentiated as components of the region of occurrence of meristematic tissues , they are classified as : * Apical Meristem - It is present at the growing tips of stems and roots and increases the length of the stem and root .
They form growing parts at the apices of roots and stems and are responsible for the increase in length , also called primary growth .
This meristem is responsible for the linear growth of an organ .
* Lateral Meristem -
This meristem consists of cells which mainly divide in one plane and cause the organ to increase in diameter and growth .
Lateral meristem usually occurs beneath the bark of the tree in the form of Cork Cambium and in vascular bundles of dicots in the form of vascular cambium .
The activity of this cambium results in the formation of secondary growth .
* Intercalary Meristem -
This meristem is located in between permanent tissues .
It is usually present at the base of the node , internode and on leaf base .
They are responsible for growth in length of the plant and increasing the size of the internode , They result in branch formation and growth .
The cells of meristematic tissues are similar in structure and have thin and elastic primary cell wall made up of cellulose .
They are compactly arranged without inter - cellular spaces between them .
Each cell contains a dense cytoplasm and a prominent nucleus .
Dense protoplasm of meristematic cells contains very few vacuoles .
Normally the meristematic cells are oval , polygonal or rectangular in shape .
Meristematic tissue cells have a large nucleus with small or no vacuoles , they have no intercellular spaces .
PERMANENT TISSUES Section::::Permanent tissues .
Permanent tissues may be defined as a group of living or dead cells formed by meristematic tissue and have lost their ability to divide and have permanently placed at fixed positions in the plant body .
Meristematic tissues that take up a specific role lose the ability to divide .
This process of taking up a permanent shape , size and a function is called cellular differentiation .
Cells of meristematic tissue differentiate to form different types of permanent tissues .
There are 3 types of permanent tissues : * simple permanent tissues * * complex permanent tissues * * special or secretory tissues ( glandular ) .
* SIMPLE TISSUES Section::::Simple tissues .
A group of cells which are similar in origin ; similar in structure and similar in function are called simple permanent tissue .
They are of four types : * Parenchyma
* * Collenchyma * * Sclerenchyma * * Epidermis ( botany ) * PARENCHYMA Section::::Parenchyma .
Parenchyma ( para - ' beside ' ; enchyma - ' tissue ' ) is the bulk of a substance .
In plants , it consists of relatively unspecialized living cells with thin cell walls that are usually loosely packed so that intercellular spaces are found between cells of this tissue .
These are generally isodiametric , in shape .
This tissue provides support to plants and also stores food .
In some situations , parenchyma contains chlorophyll and performs photosynthesis , in which case it is called a chlorenchyma .
In aquatic plants , large air cavities are present in parenchyma to give support to them to float on water .
Such a parenchyma type is called aerenchyma .
Some of the parenchyma cells have metabolic waste and is known as idioblast .
Spindle shape fiber also contained into this cell to support them and known as prosenchyma , succulent parenchyma also noted .
COLLENCHYMA Section::::Collenchyma .
Collenchyma is Greek word where " Collen " means gum and " chyma " means infusion .
It is a living tissue of primary body like Parenchyma .
Cells are thin - walled but possess thickening of cellulose , water and pectin substances ( pectocellulose ) at the corners where a number of cells join together .
This tissue gives tensile strength to the plant and the cells are compactly arranged and have very little inter - cellular spaces .
It occurs chiefly in hypodermis of stems and leaves .
It is absent in monocots and in roots .
Sometimes it contains chlorophyll which can help them photosynthesize .
Collenchymatous tissue acts as a supporting tissue in stems of young plants .
It provides mechanical support , elasticity , and tensile strength to the plant body .
It helps in manufacturing sugar and storing it as starch .
It is present in the margin of leaves and resists tearing effect of the wind .
SCHLERENCHYMA Section::::Schlerenchyma .
Schlerenchyma is Greek word where " Schlerena " means hard and " chyma " means infusion .
This tissue consists of thick - walled , dead cells and protoplasm is negligible .
These cells have hard and extremely thick secondary walls due to uniform distribution and high secretion of lignin .
They do not have intermolecular space between them .
Lignin deposition is so thick that the cell walls become strong , rigid and impermeable to water which is also known as a stone cell or sclereids .
These tissues are mainly of two types : sclerenchyma fiber and sclereids .
Schlerenchyma cells have a narrow lumen and are long , narrow and unicellular .
EPIDERMIS
Section::::Epidermis .
The entire surface of the plant consists of a single layer of cells called epidermis or surface tissue .
The entire surface of the plant has this outer layer of the epidermis .
Hence it is also called surface tissue .
Most of the epidermal cells are relatively flat .
The outer and lateral walls of the cell are often thicker than the inner walls .
The cells form a continuous sheet without intercellular spaces .
It protects all parts of the plant .
COMPLEX PERMANENT TISSUE Section::::Complex permanent tissue .
The complex tissue consists of more than one type of cells which work together as a unit .
Complex tissues help in the transportation of organic material , water , and minerals up and down the plants .
That is why it is also known as conducting and vascular tissue .
The common types of complex permanent tissue are : * Xylem or wood * Phloem or bast .
Xylem and phloem together form vascular bundles .
XYLEM Section::::Xylem .
Xylem consists of :
* Tracheids * Vessel members
* Xylem fibres *
Xylem parenchyma Xylem serves as a chief conducting tissue of vascular plants .
It is responsible for the conduction of water and mineral ions / salt .
Xylem tissue is organized in a tube - like fashion along the main axes of stems and roots .
It consists of a combination of parenchyma cells , fibers , vessels , tracheids , and ray cells .
Longer tubes made up of individual cells are vessels tracheids , while vessel members are open at each end .
Internally , there may be bars of wall material extending across the open space .
These cells are joined end to end to form long tubes .
Vessel members and tracheids are dead at maturity .
Tracheids have thick secondary cell walls and are tapered at the ends .
They do not have end openings such as the vessels .
The tracheids end overlap with each other , with pairs of pits present .
The pit pairs allow water to pass from cell to cell .
Though most conduction in xylem tissue is vertical , lateral conduction along the diameter of a stem is facilitated via rays .
Rays are horizontal rows of long - living parenchyma cells that arise out of the vascular cambium .
In trees and other woody plants , rays radiate out from the center of stems and roots and appear like spokes on a wheel in cross section .
Rays , unlike vessel members and tracheids , are alive at functional maturity .
PHLOEM Section::::Phloem .
Phloem consists of : *
Sieve tube * Companion cell * Phloem fibre * Phloem parenchyma .
Phloem is an equally important plant tissue as it also is part of the ' plumbing system ' of a plant .
Primarily , phloem carries dissolved food substances throughout the plant .
This conduction system is composed of sieve - tube member and companion cells , that are without secondary walls .
The parent cells of the vascular cambium produce both xylem and phloem .
This usually also includes fibers , parenchyma and ray cells .
Sieve tubes are formed from sieve - tube members laid end to end .
The end walls , unlike vessel members in xylem , do not have openings .
The end walls , however , are full of small pores where cytoplasm extends from cell to cell .
These porous connections are called sieve plates .
In spite of the fact that their cytoplasm is actively involved in the conduction of food materials , sieve - tube members do not have nuclei at maturity .
It is the companion cells that are nestled between sieve - tube members that function in some manner bringing about the conduction of food .
Sieve - tube members that are alive contain a polymer called callose , a carbohydrate polymer , forming the callus pad / callus , the colourless substance that covers the sieve plate .
Callose stays in solution as long as the cell contents are under pressure .
Phloem transports food and materials in plants upwards and downwards as required .
MINERALIZED TISSUES
Section::::Mineralized tissues .
Mineralized tissues are biological tissues that incorporate minerals into soft matrices .
Such tissues may be found in both plants and animals , as well as algae .
Typically these tissues form a protective shield against predation or provide structural support .
HISTORY OF THE CONCEPT Section::::History of the concept .
The term was introduced in anatomy by Marie François Xavier Bichat in 1801 .
He argued that the body functions would be better understood taking as unity of study the tissues , and not the organs .
Bichat distinguished 21 types of elementary tissues for the human body , a number later reduced by other authors .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES
* Raven , Peter H. , Evert , Ray F. , & Eichhorn , Susan E. ( 1986 ) .
Biology of Plants ( 4th ed . ) .
New York :
Worth Publishers . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* List of tissues in ExPASy