SEA TURTLE Sea turtles ( superfamily Chelonioidea ) , sometimes called marine turtles , are reptiles of the order Testudines and of the suborder cryptodira .
The seven existing species of sea turtles are : the green , loggerhead , Kemp 's ridley , olive ridley , hawksbill , flatback , and leatherback .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The majority of a sea turtle 's body is protected by its shell .
The turtle 's shell is divided into two sections : the carapace ( the dorsal portion ) and the plastron ( the ventral portion ) .
The shell is made up of smaller plates called scutes .
The leatherback is the only sea turtle that does not have a hard shell .
Instead , it bears a mosaic of bony plates beneath its leathery skin .
In general , sea turtles have a more fusiform body plan than their terrestrial or freshwater counterparts .
The reduced volume of a fusiform ( tapering at both ends ) body means sea turtles can not retract their head , legs , and arms into their shells for protection like other turtles can .
However this more stream - lined body plan reduces drag in the water and allows the turtle to swim more easily .
The leatherback is the largest species of sea turtle .
Measuring 2–3 meters ( 6–9 ft ) in length , and 1 - 1.5 m ( 3–5 ft ) in width , weighing up to 700 kilograms ( 1500 lb ) .
Other species are smaller , being mostly 60–120 cm ( 2–4 ft ) and proportionally narrower .
TAXONOMY AND EVOLUTION Section::::Taxonomy and evolution .
Sea turtles , along with other turtles and tortoises , are part of the order Testudines .
All species except the leatherback are in the family Cheloniidae .
The leatherback is the only extant member of the family Dermochelyidae .
The origin of sea turtles goes back to the Late Jurassic ( 150 million years ago ) with genera such as Plesiochelys , from Europe .
In Africa , the first marine turtle is Angolachelys , from the Turonian of Angola .
However , neither of these are related to extant sea turtles ; the oldest representative of the lineage leading to these was Desmatochelys padillai , from the Early Cretaceous .
A lineage of unrelated marine testudines , the pleurodire ( side - necked ) bothremydids , also survived well into the Cenozoic .
Other pleurodires are also thought to have lived at sea , such as Araripemys .
Sea turtles constitute a single radiation that became distinct from all other turtles at least 110 million years ago .
Sea turtles ' limbs and brains have evolved to adapt to their diets .
One of the main things sea turtles consume is jellyfish and the use of their limbs to hold , swipe , and forage their food has helped them eat more efficiently .
Originally sea turtles ' limbs have evolved for locomotion
but now they have evolved to aid them in the ability to get food .
In addition to the evolution of limbs , sea turtles ' brains have also evolved .
The frontal cortex of a sea turtle 's brain was not very developed .
This underdevelopment caused the sea turtles to not be able to learn from their surroundings .
CLADOGRAM Section::::Cladogram .
Below is a cladogram showing the phylogenetic relationships of living and extinct sea turtles in the Chelonioidea based on Peer and Lee ( 2005 ) DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
Sea turtles can be found in oceans except for the polar regions .
The flatback sea turtle is found solely on the northern coast of Australia .
The Kemp 's ridley sea turtle is found solely in the Gulf of Mexico and along the East Coast of the United States .
Sea turtles are generally found in the waters over continental shelves .
During the first three to five years of life , sea turtles spend most of their time in the pelagic zone floating in seaweed mats .
Green sea turtles in particular are often found in Sargassum mats , in which they find shelter and food .
Once the sea turtle has reached adulthood it moves closer to the shore .
Females will come ashore to lay their eggs on sandy beaches during the nesting season .
Sea turtles migrate to reach their spawning beaches , which are limited in numbers .
Living in the ocean therefore means they usually migrate over large distances .
All sea turtles have large body sizes , which is helpful for moving large distances .
Large body sizes also offer good protection against the large predators ( notably sharks ) found in the ocean .
LIFE CYCLE Section::::Life cycle .
It takes decades for sea turtles to reach sexual maturity .
Mature turtles may migrate thousands of miles to reach breeding sites .
After mating at sea , adult female sea turtles return to land to lay their eggs .
Different species of sea turtles exhibit various levels of philopatry .
In the extreme case , females return to the beach where they hatched .
This can take place every two to four years in maturity .
The mature nesting female hauls herself onto the beach , nearly always at night , and finds suitable sand in which to create a nest .
Using her hind flippers , she digs a circular hole deep .
After the hole is dug , the female then starts filling the nest with her clutch of soft - shelled eggs .
Depending on the species , a typical clutch may contain 50–350 eggs .
After laying , she re - fills the nest with sand , re - sculpting and smoothing the surface , and then camouflaging the nest with vegetation until it is relatively undetectable visually .
The whole process takes thirty to sixty minutes .
She then returns to the ocean , leaving the eggs untended .
Females may lay 1–8 clutches in a single season .
Female sea turtles alternate between mating in the water and laying their eggs on land .
Most sea turtle species nest individually .
But ridley sea turtles come ashore en masse , known as an arribada ( arrival ) .
With the Kemp 's ridley sea turtles this occurs during the day .
Sea turtles have temperature - dependent sex determination , meaning the developing turtle 's sex depends on the temperature it is exposed to .
Warmer temperatures produce female hatchlings , while cooler temperatures produce male hatchlings .
The eggs will incubate for 50–60 days .
The eggs in one nest hatch together over a short period of time .
The baby turtles break free of the egg shell , dig through the sand , and crawl into the sea .
Most species of sea turtles hatch at night .
However , the Kemp 's ridley commonly hatches during the day .
Turtle nests that hatch during the day are more vulnerable to predators , and may encounter more human activity on beach .
Larger hatchlings have a higher probability of survival than smaller individuals , which can be explained by the fact that larger offspring are faster and thus less exposed to predation .
Predators can only functionally intake so much ; larger individuals are not targeted as often .
A study conducted on this topic shows that body size is positively correlated with speed , so larger turtles are exposed to predators for a shorter amount of time .
The fact that there is size dependent predation on chelonians has led to the evolutionary development of large body sizes .
In 1987 , Carr discovered that the young of green and loggerhead seaturtles spent a great deal of their pelagic lives in floating sargassum mats .
Within these mats , they found ample shelter and food .
In the absence of sargassum , sea turtle young feed in the vicinity of upwelling " fronts " .
In 2007 , Reich determined that green sea turtle hatchlings spend the first three to five years of their lives in pelagic waters .
In the open ocean , pre - juveniles of this particular species were found to feed on zooplankton and smaller nekton before they are recruited into inshore seagrass meadows as obligate herbivores .
Sea turtles are a species that finds relatively low offspring survival rates .
If you were to start with 1000 sea turtle eggs , you would end up with only one sexually mature subject .
Starting with 1000 eggs , roughly 20 % would n't hatch which means from the start only 800 sea turtles will hatch and make it to the sand surface .
As the sea turtles begin to move down the beach and towards the waves , only 50 % or 400 of them will make it to the ocean .
This is due to predation and obstacles preventing the young turtles from reaching the ocean .
Continuing , once in the ocean 50 % of these sea turtles will survive to past juvenile stages of life .
Once they reach adulthood only 20 sea turtles will survive , and this is without human interference .
When human interference is factored in , only 2 out of 1000 sea turtles will survive to reproductive maturity .
PHYSIOLOGY OSMOREGULATION Section::::Physiology .
Section::::Osmoregulation .
Sea turtles maintain an internal environment that is hypotonic to the ocean .
To maintain hypotonicity they must excrete excess salt ions .
Like other marine reptiles , sea turtles rely on a specialized gland to rid the body of excess salt ions , because reptilian kidneys can not produce urine with a higher ion concentration than sea water .
All species of sea turtles have a lachrymal gland in the orbital cavity , capable of producing tears with a higher salt concentration than sea water .
Leatherbacks face an increased osmotic challenge compared to other species of sea turtle , since their primary prey are jellyfish and other gelatinous plankton , whose fluids have the same concentration of salts as sea water .
The much larger lachrymal gland found in leatherbacks may have evolved to cope with the higher intake of salts from their prey .
A constant output of concentrated salty tears may be required to balance the input of salts from regular feeding , even considering leatherback tears can have a salt ion concentration almost twice that of other species of marine turtle .
Hatchlings depend on drinking sea water immediately upon entering the ocean to replenish water lost during the hatching process .
Salt gland functioning begins quickly after hatching , so that the young turtles can establish ion and water balance soon after entering the ocean .
Survival and physiological performance hinge on immediate and efficient hydration following emergence from the nest .
THERMOREGULATION Section::::Thermoregulation .
Most sea turtles ( those in family Cheloniidae ) are poikilotherms .
However the leatherback ( family Dermochelyidae ) are endotherms because they can maintain a body temperature warmer than the ambient water .
Green sea turtles in the relatively cooler Pacific are known to haul themselves out of the water on remote islands to bask in the sun .
This behavior has only been observed in a few locations including the Galapagos , Hawaii , Europa Island , and parts of Australia .
DIVING PHYSIOLOGY
Section::::Diving physiology .
Sea turtles are air breathing reptiles that have lungs , so they regularly surface to breathe .
Sea turtles spend a majority of their time underwater , so they must be able to hold their breath for long periods .
Dive duration largely depends on activity .
A foraging turtle may typically spend 5–40 minutes under water while a sleeping sea turtle can remain under water for 4–7 hours .
Remarkably , sea turtle respiration remains aerobic for the vast majority of voluntary dive time .
When a sea turtle is forcibly submerged ( e.g. entangled in a trawl net )
its diving endurance is substantially reduced , so it is more susceptible to drowning .
When surfacing to breathe , a sea turtle can quickly refill its lungs with a single explosive exhalation and rapid inhalation .
Their large lungs permit rapid exchange of oxygen and avoid trapping gases during deep dives .
FLUORESCENCE Section::::Fluorescence .
Gruber and Sparks ( 2015 ) have observed the first fluorescence in a marine tetrapod ( four - limbed vertebrates ) .
Sea turtles are the first biofluorescent reptile found in the wild .
According to Gruber and Sparks ( 2015 ) fluorescence is observed in an increasing number of marine creatures ( cnidarians , ctenophores , annelids , arthropods , and chordates ) and is now also considered to be widespread in cartilaginous and ray - finned fishes .
The two marine biologists accidentally made the observation in the Solomon Islands on a hawksbill sea turtle , one of the rarest and most endangered turtle species in the ocean , during a night dive aimed to film the biofluorescence emitted by small sharks and coral reefs .
The role of biofluorescence in marine organisms is often attributed to a strategy for attracting prey or perhaps a way to communicate .
It could also serve as a way of defense or camouflage for the sea turtle hiding during night amongst other fluorescent organisms like corals .
Fluorescent corals and sea creatures are best observed during night dives with a blue LED light and with a camera equipped with an orange optical filter to capture only the fluorescence light .
ECOLOGY DIET Section::::Ecology .
Section::::Diet .
The loggerhead , Kemp 's ridley , olive ridley , and hawksbill sea turtles are omnivorous their entire life .
Omnivorous turtles may eat a wide variety of plant and animal life including decapods , seagrasses , seaweed , sponges , mollusks , cnidarians , echinoderms , worms and fish .
However some species specialize on certain prey .
The diet of green turtles changes with age .
Juveniles are omnivorous , but as they mature they become exclusively herbivorous .
This diet shift has an effect on the green turtle 's morphology .
Green sea turtles have a serrated jaw that is used to eat sea grass and algae .
Leatherback turtles feed almost exclusively on jellyfish and help control jellyfish populations .
Hawksbills principally eat sponges , which constitute 70–95 % of their diets in the Caribbean .
RELATIONSHIP WITH HUMANS Section::::Relationship with humans .
Marine sea turtles are caught worldwide , although it is illegal to hunt most species in many countries .
A great deal of intentional marine sea turtle harvests worldwide are for food .
Many parts of the world have long considered sea turtles to be fine dining .
Ancient Chinese texts dating to the fifth century
B.C.E. describe sea turtles as exotic delicacies .
Many coastal communities around the world depend on sea turtles as a source of protein , often harvesting several sea turtles at once and keeping them alive on their backs until needed .
Coastal peoples gather sea turtle eggs for consumption .
To a much lesser extent , specific species of marine sea turtles are targeted not for their flesh , but for their shells .
Tortoiseshell , a traditional decorative ornamental material used in Japan and China , comes from the carapace scutes of the hawksbill sea turtle .
Ancient Greeks and ancient Romans processed sea turtle scutes ( primarily from the hawksbill ) for various articles and ornaments used by their elites , such as combs and brushes .
The skin of the flippers is prized for use as shoes and assorted leather goods .
The Moche people of ancient Peru worshipped the sea and its animals .
They often depicted sea turtles in their art .
Leatherback sea turtles enjoy immunity from the sting of the deadly box jellyfish and regularly eat them , helping keep tropical beaches safe for humans .
Beach towns , such as Tortuguero , Costa Rica , have transitioned from a tourism industry that made profits from selling sea turtle meat and shells to an ecotourism - based economy .
Tortuguero is considered to be the founding location of sea turtle conservation .
In the 1960s the cultural demand for sea turtle meat , shells , and eggs was quickly killing the once abundant sea turtle populations that nested on the beach .
The Caribbean Conservation Corporation began working with villagers to promote ecotourism as a permanent substitute to sea turtle hunting .
Sea turtle nesting grounds became sustainable .
Tourists love to come and visit the nesting grounds , although it causes a lot of stress to the turtles because all of the eggs can get damaged or harmed .
Since the creation of a sea turtle , ecotourism - based economy , Tortugero annually houses thousands of tourists who visit the protected beach that hosts sea turtle walks and nesting grounds .
Walks to observe the nesting turtles require a certified guide and this controls and minimises disturbance of the beaches .
It also gives the locals a financial interest in conservation and the guides now defend the turtles from threats such as poaching .
Efforts in Costa Rica 's Pacific Coast are facilitated by a nonprofit organization , Sea Turtles Forever .
Thousands of people are involved in turtle walks , and substantial revenues accrue from the fees paid for the privilege .
In other parts of the world where turtles breeding sites are threatened by human activity , volunteers often patrol beaches as a part of conservation activities , which may include relocating turtle eggs to hatcheries , or assisting hatching turtles in reaching the ocean .
Locations in which such efforts exist include the east coast of India , São Tomé and Príncipe , Sham Wan in Hong Kong , and the coast of Florida .
IMPORTANCE TO ECOSYSTEMS Section::::Importance to ecosystems .
Sea turtles play key roles in two habitat types : oceans and beaches / dunes .
In the oceans , sea turtles , especially green sea turtles , are among very few creatures ( manatees are another ) that eat sea grass .
Sea grass needs to be constantly cut short to help it grow across the sea floor .
Sea turtle grazing helps maintain the health of the sea grass beds .
Sea grass beds provide breeding and developmental grounds for numerous marine animals .
Without them , many marine species humans harvest would be lost , as would the lower levels of the food chain .
The reactions could result in many more marine species eventually becoming endangered or extinct .
Sea turtles use beaches and the lower dunes to nest and lay their eggs .
Beaches and dunes are a fragile habitat that depend on vegetation to protect against erosion .
Eggs , hatched or unhatched , and hatchlings that fail to make it into the ocean are nutrient sources for dune vegetation .
Along a stretch of beach on the east coast of Florida sea turtles lay over of eggs in the sand .
Dune vegetation is able to grow and become stronger with the nutrients from sea turtle nests .
Stronger vegetation and root systems help to hold the sand in the dunes and help protect the beach from erosion .
CONSERVATION STATUS AND THREATS Section::::Conservation status and threats .
The IUCN Red List classifies three species of sea turtle as either " Endangered " or " Critically Endangered " .
An additional three species are classified as " Vulnerable " .
The flatback is considered as " Data Deficient " , meaning that its conservation status is unclear due to lack of data .
All species of sea turtle are listed in CITESAppendix I , restricting international trade of sea turtles and sea turtle products .
However , the usefulness of global assessments for sea turtles has been questioned , particularly due to the presence of distinct genetic stocks and spatially separated regional management units ( RMUs ) .
Each RMU is subject to a unique set of threats that generally cross jurisdictional boundaries , resulting in some sub - populations of the same species ' showing recovery while others continue to decline .
This has triggered the IUCN to conduct threat assessments at the sub - population level for some species recently .
These new assessments have highlighted an unexpected mismatch between where conservation relevant science has been conducted on sea turtles , and where these is the greatest need for conservation .
For example , as at August 2017 , about 69 % of studies using stable isotope analysis to understand the foraging distribution of sea turtles have been conducted in RMUs listed as ' Least Concern ' by the IUCN .
Additionally , all populations of sea turtles that occur in United States waters are listed as threatened or endangered by the US Endangered Species Act ( ESA ) .
The US listing status of the loggerhead is under review as of 2012 . !
IUCN Redlist !
United States
ESA * Green
Endangered
Endangered :
populations in Florida and Pacific coast of Mexico populations Threatened :
all other populations Loggerhead Vulnerable Endangered : NE Atlantic , Mediterranean , N Indian , N Pacific ,
S Pacific populations
Threatened :
NW Atlantic , S Atlantic , SE Indo - Pacific , SW Indian populations
Kemp 's ridley
Critically Endangered Endangered :
all populations
Olive ridley
Vulnerable
Endangered :
Pacific Coast of Mexico population Threatened :
all other populations Hawksbill Critically Endangered
Endangered :
all populations Flatback Data Deficient N /
A
Leatherback Vulnerable Endangered :
all populations
* The ESA manages sea turtles by population not by species .
MANAGEMENT Section::::Management .
In the Caribbean , researchers are having some success in assisting a comeback .
In September 2007 , Corpus Christi , Texas , wildlife officials found 128 Kemp 's ridley sea turtle nests on Texas beaches , a record number , including 81 on North Padre Island ( Padre Island National Seashore ) and four on Mustang Island .
Wildlife officials released 10,594 Kemp 's ridleys hatchlings along the Texas coast in recent years .
The Philippines has had several initiatives dealing with the issue of sea turtle conservation .
In 2007 , the province of Batangas declared the catching and eating of sea turtles ( locally referred to as Pawikans ) illegal .
However , the law seems to have had little effect as sea turtle eggs are still in demand in Batangan markets .
In September 2007 , several Chinese poachers were apprehended off the Turtle Islands in the country 's southernmost province of Tawi - Tawi .
The poachers had collected more than a hundred sea turtles , along with 10,000 sea turtle eggs .
Evaluating the progress of conservation programs is difficult , because many sea turtle populations have not been assessed adequately .
Most information on sea turtle populations comes from counting nests on beaches , but this does not provide an accurate picture of the whole sea turtle population .
A 2010 United States National Research Council report concluded that more detailed information on sea turtles ' life cycles , such as birth rates and mortality , is needed .
Nest relocation may not be a useful conservation technique for sea turtles .
In one study on the freshwater Arrau turtle ( Podocnemis expansa ) researchers examined the effects of nest relocation .
They discovered that clutches of this freshwater turtle that were transplanted to a new location had higher mortality rates and more morphological abnormalities compared to non transplanted clutches .
However , in a study of Loggerhead turtles ( Caretta caretta ) , Dellert et al . found that relocating nests at risk of inundation increased the success of eggs and hatchlings and decreased the risk of inundation .
PREDATORS AND DISEASE Section::::Predators and disease .
Most sea turtle mortality happens early in life .
Sea turtles usually lay around one hundred eggs at a time , but on average only one of the eggs from the nest will survive to adulthood .
Raccoons , foxes , and seabirds may raid nests or hatchlings may be eaten within minutes of hatching as they make their initial run for the ocean .
Once in the water , they are susceptible to seabirds , large fish and even other turtles .
Adult sea turtles have few predators .
Large aquatic carnivores such as sharks and crocodiles are their biggest threats ; however , reports of terrestrial predators attacking nesting females are not uncommon .
Jaguars have been reported to smash into the turtle 's shell with its paw , and scoop out the flesh .
Fibropapillomatosis disease causes tumors in sea turtles .
While many of the things that endanger sea turtles are natural predators , increasingly many threats to the sea turtle species have arrived with the ever - growing presence of humans .
BYCATCH Section::::Bycatch .
One of the most significant and contemporary threats to sea turtles comes from bycatch due to imprecise fishing methods .
Long - lining has been identified as a major cause of accidental sea turtle death .
There is also black - market demand for tortoiseshell for both decoration and supposed health benefits .
Sea turtles must surface to breathe .
Caught in a fisherman 's net , they are unable to surface and thus drown .
In early 2007 , almost a thousand sea turtles were killed inadvertently in the Bay of Bengal over the course of a few months after netting .
However , some relatively inexpensive changes to fishing techniques , such as slightly larger hooks and traps from which sea turtles can escape , can dramatically cut the mortality rate .
Turtle Excluder Devices ( TEDs ) have reduced sea turtle bycatch in shrimp nets by 97 percent .
BEACH DEVELOPMENT
Section::::Beach development .
Beach development is another area which threatens sea turtles .
Since many sea turtles return to the same beach each time to nest , development can disrupt the cycle .
There has been a movement to protect these areas , in some cases by special police .
In some areas , such as the east coast of Florida , conservationists dig up sea turtle eggs and relocate them to fenced nurseries to protect them from beach traffic .
Since hatchlings find their way to the ocean by crawling towards the brightest horizon , they can become disoriented on developed stretches of coastline .
Lighting restrictions can prevent lights from shining on the beach and confusing hatchlings .
Sea turtle - safe lighting uses red or amber LED light , invisible to sea turtles , in place of white light .
POACHING
Section::::Poaching .
Another major threat to sea turtles is black - market trade in eggs and meat .
This is a problem throughout the world , but especially a concern in China , the Philippines , India , Indonesia and the coastal nations of Latin America .
Estimates reach as high as 35,000 sea turtles killed a year in Mexico and the same number in Nicaragua .
Conservationists in Mexico and the United States have launched " Do n't Eat Sea Turtle " campaigns in order to reduce this trade in sea turtle products .
These campaigns have involved figures such as Dorismar , Los Tigres del Norte and Maná .
Sea turtles are often consumed during the Catholic season of Lent , even though they are reptiles , not fish .
Consequently , conservation organizations have written letters to the Pope asking that he declare sea turtles meat .
MARINE DEBRIS Section::::Marine debris .
Another danger comes from marine debris , especially plastics which may be mistaken for jellyfish , and abandoned fishing nets in which they can become entangled .
CLIMATE CHANGE Section::::Climate change .
Climate change may also cause a threat to sea turtles .
Since sand temperature at nesting beaches defines the sex of a sea turtle while developing in the egg , there is concern that rising temperatures may produce too many females .
However , more research is needed to understand how climate change might affect sea turtle gender distribution and what other possible threats it may pose .
OIL SPILLS Section::::Oil spills .
Sea turtles are very vulnerable to oil pollution , both because of the oil 's tendency to linger on the water 's surface , and because oil can affect them at every stage of their life cycle .
Oil can poison the sea turtles upon entering their digestive system .
REHABILITATION Section::::Rehabilitation .
Injured sea turtles are rescued and rehabilitated ( and , if possible , released back to the ocean ) by professional organizations , such as the Gumbo Limbo Nature Center in Boca Raton , Florida , the Karen Beasley Sea Turtle Rescue and Rehabilitation Center in Surf City , North Carolina , and Sea Turtles 911 in Hainan , China .
One rescued sea turtle , named Nickel for the coin that was found lodged in her throat , lives at the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago .
SYMBIOSIS WITH BARNACLES Section::::Symbiosis with barnacles .
Sea turtles are believed to have a commensal relationship with some barnacles , in which the barnacles benefit from growing on turtles without harming them .
Barnacles are small , hard shelled crustaceans found attached to multiple different substrates below or just above the ocean .
The adult barnacle is a sessile organism , however in its larval stage it is planktonic and can move about the water column .
The larval stage chooses where to settle and ultimately the habitat for its full adult life , which is typically between 5 and 10 years .
However , estimates of age for a common sea turtle barnacle species , Chelonibia testudinaria , suggest that this species lives for at least 21 months , with individuals older than this uncommon .
A favorite settlement for barnacle larvae is the shell or skin around the neck of sea turtles .
The larvae glue themselves to the chosen spot , a thin layer of flesh is wrapped around them and a shell is secreted .
Many species of barnacles can settle on any substrate , however some species of barnacles have an obligatory commensal relationship with specific animals , which makes finding a suitable location harder .
Around 29 species of " turtle barnacles " have been recorded .
However it is not solely on sea turtles that barnacles can be found ; other organisms also serve as barnacle 's settlements .
These organisms include mollusks , whales , decapod crustaceans , manatees and several other groups related to these species .
Sea turtle shells are an ideal habitat for adult barnacles for three reasons .
Turtles tend to live long lives , greater than 70 years , so barnacles do not have to worry about host death .
However , mortality in sea turtle barnacles is often driven by their host shedding the scutes on which the barnacle is attached , rather than the death of the turtle itself .
Secondly , barnacles are suspension feeders .
Sea turtles spend most of their lives swimming and following ocean currents and as water runs along the back of the turtle 's shell it passes over the barnacles , providing an almost constant water flow and influx of food particles .
Lastly , the long distances and inter - ocean travel these sea turtles swim throughout their lifetime offers the perfect mechanism for dispersal of barnacle larvae .
Allowing the barnacle species to distribute themselves throughout global waters is a high fitness advantage of this commensalism .
This relationship however is not truly commensal .
While the barnacles are not directly parasitic to their hosts , they have negative effects to the turtles on which they choose to reside .
The barnacles add extra weight and drag to the sea turtle , increasing the energy it needs for swimming and affecting its ability to capture prey , with the effect increasing with the quantity of barnacles affixed to its back .
SEE ALSO * Cultural depictions of turtles
* Kélonia -sea turtle observatory in Réunion
* Memorandum of Understanding concerning Conservation Measures for Marine Turtles of the Atlantic Coast of Africa * Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation and Management of Marine Turtles and their Habitats of the Indian Ocean and South - East Asia * Sandwatch * Sea Turtle Association of Japan , Kuroshima Research Station *
Sea Turtle Conservancy
* Sea turtle migration
* Sea Turtles 911 * Shrimp - Turtle Case
* Threats to sea turtles
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS * Sea Turtle Research and Conservation – Center for Biodiversity and Conservation , American Museum of Natural History