DEAD POETS SOCIETY Dead Poets Society is a 1989 American drama film directed by Peter Weir , written by Tom Schulman , and starring Robin Williams .
Set in 1959 at the fictional elite conservative Vermont boarding school Welton Academy , it tells the story of an English teacher who inspires his students through his teaching of poetry .
The film received critical acclaim and was a box office success .
It won the BAFTA Award for Best Film , and César Award and David di Donatello Award for Best Foreign Film .
Schulman received an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay for his work .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the autumn of 1959 , shy Todd Anderson begins his senior year of high school at Welton Academy , an all - male , elite prep school .
He is assigned one of Welton 's most promising students , Neil Perry , as his roommate and is quickly accepted by Neil 's friends : Knox Overstreet , Richard Cameron , Steven Meeks , Gerard Pitts , and Charlie Dalton .
On the first day of classes , they are surprised by the unorthodox teaching methods of the new English teacher John Keating , a Welton alumnus who encourages his students to " make your lives extraordinary " , a sentiment he summarizes with the Latin expression carpe diem .
Subsequent lessons include having them take turns standing on his desk to teach the boys how they must look at life in a different way , telling them to rip out the introduction of their poetry books which explains a mathematical formula used for rating poetry , and inviting them to make up their own style of walking in a courtyard to encourage them to be individuals .
His methods attract the attention of strict headmaster Gale Nolan .
Upon learning that Keating was a member of the unsanctioned Dead Poets Society while he was at Welton , Neil restarts the club and he and his friends sneak off campus to a cave where they read poetry and verse , including their own compositions .
As the school year progresses , Keating 's lessons and their involvement with the club encourage them to live their lives on their own terms .
Knox pursues Chris Noel , a girl who is dating a football player from a public school and whose family is friends with his .
Neil discovers his love of acting and gets the role as Puck in a local production of A Midsummer Night 's Dream , despite the fact that his domineering father wants him in the Ivy League ( and ultimately medical school ) .
Keating helps
Todd come out of his shell and realize his potential when he takes him through an exercise in self - expression , resulting in his composing a poem spontaneously in front of the class .
However , Charlie takes things too far when he publishes an article in the school newspaper in the club 's name demanding that girls be admitted to Welton .
Nolan uses corporal punishment to coerce Charlie into revealing who else is in the Dead Poets Society , but he resists .
Nolan also speaks with Keating , warning him that he should discourage his students from questioning authority .
Keating does admonish the boys ( in his manner ) , warning that one must assess all consequences .
Neil 's father discovers Neil 's involvement in the play and forces him to quit on the eve of the opening performance .
Devastated , Neil goes to Keating , who advises him to stand his ground and prove to his father that his love of acting is something he takes seriously .
Neil 's father unexpectedly shows up at the performance .
He takes Neil home and says he has been withdrawn from Welton , only to be enrolled in a military academy to prepare him for Harvard .
Unable to find the courage to stand up to his father and with no help from his mother , a distraught Neil commits suicide .
Nolan investigates Neil 's death at the request of the Perry family .
Cameron blames Neil 's death on Keating to escape punishment for his own participation in the Dead Poets Society , and names the other members .
Confronted by Charlie , Cameron urges the rest of them to let Keating take the fall .
Charlie punches Cameron and is expelled .
Each of the boys is called to Nolan 's office to sign a letter attesting to the truth of Cameron 's allegations , even though they know they are false .
When Todd 's turn comes , he is reluctant to sign , but does so after seeing that the others have complied and succumbing to his parents ' pressure .
Keating is fired and Nolan takes over teaching the class until the administration finds another English teacher during the winter break .
Keating interrupts the class to collect personal articles ; before he leaves , Todd shouts that all of them were forced to sign the letter that resulted in his dismissal and that Neil 's death was not his fault .
Todd stands on his desk and salutes Keating with the words " O Captain !
My Captain ! " .
Knox , Gerard , Steven , and over half of the class do the same , defying a furious Nolan 's orders to sit down .
Keating is deeply touched by their gesture .
He thanks the boys and departs .
CAST
* Robin Williams as John Keating
* Robert Sean Leonard as Neil Perry * Ethan Hawke as Todd Anderson
* Josh Charles as Knox Overstreet * Gale Hansen as Charlie Dalton * Norman Lloyd as Headmaster Gale Nolan * Kurtwood Smith as Mr. Perry
* Dylan Kussman as Richard Cameron
* James Waterston as Gerard Pitts *
Allelon Ruggiero as Steven Meeks
* Alexandra Powers as Chris Noel * Leon Pownall as McAllister * George Martin as Dr. Hager PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The script was written by Tom Schulman , based on his experiences at the Montgomery Bell Academy in Nashville , Tennessee , particularly with his inspirational teacher Samuel Pickering .
A scene in the original script showing Keating dying in a hospital was removed by film director Peter Weir .
Filming took place at St. Andrew 's School in Middletown , Delaware , and at locations in New Castle , Delaware , and in nearby Wilmington , Delaware .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The worldwide box office was reported as $ 235,860,579 , which includes domestic grosses of $ 95,860,116 .
The film 's global receipts were the fifth - highest for 1989 , and the highest for dramas .
The film was released in the United Kingdom on September 22 , 1989 , and topped the country 's box office that weekend .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Dead Poets Society holds an 86 % approval rating and average rating of 7.3/10 on Rotten Tomatoes based on 56 reviews .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Affecting performances from the young cast and a genuinely inspirational turn from Robin Williams grant Peter Weir 's prep school drama top honors .
" The film also holds a score of 79 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 14 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . "
The Washington Post reviewer called it " solid , smart entertainment " , and praised Robin Williams for giving a " nicely restrained acting performance " .
Vincent Canby of The New York Times also praised Williams ' " exceptionally fine performance " , while noting that " Dead Poets Society ... is far less about Keating than about a handful of impressionable boys " .
Pauline Kael was unconvinced by the film , and its " middlebrow highmindedness " , but praised Williams . "
Robin Williams ' performance is more graceful than anything he 's done before [ – ] he 's totally , concentratedly there –
[ he ] reads his lines stunningly , and when he mimics various actors reciting Shakespeare there 's no undue clowning in it ; he 's a gifted teacher demonstrating his skills . "
Roger Ebert 's review was largely negative , only giving the film two out of four stars .
He criticized Williams for spoiling an otherwise creditable dramatic performance by occasionally veering into his onstage comedian 's persona , and lamented that for a movie set in the 1950s there was no mention of the Beat Generation writers .
Additionally , Ebert described the film as an often poorly constructed " collection of pious platitudes ...
The movie pays lip service to qualities and values that , on the evidence of the screenplay itself , it is cheerfully willing to abandon . "
On their Oscar Nomination edition of Siskel & Ebert , both Gene Siskel ( who also gave the film a mixed review ) and Ebert disagreed with Williams ' Oscar nomination , with Ebert saying that he would have swapped Williams with either Matt Dillon for Drugstore Cowboy or John Cusack for Say Anything .
On their If We Picked the Winners special in March 1990 , moreover , Ebert chose the film 's Best Picture nomination as the worst nomination of the year , believing it took a slot that could have gone to Spike Lee 's Do the Right Thing .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Dead Poets Society won the Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay ( Tom Schulman ) .
Peter Weir received a nomination for Best Director and the film was nominated for Best Picture of 1989 .
Robin Williams received his second Best Actor in a Leading Role nomination and it has since been widely recognized as one of the actor / comedian 's best roles .
The movie also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film .
* Academy Awards ( USA ) 1990
* Won : Best Original Screenplay ( Tom Schulman )
* Nominated : Best Actor in a Leading Role ( Robin Williams )
* Nominated : Director ( Peter Weir )
* Nominated : Best Picture ( Steven Haft , Paul Junger Witt and Tony Thomas , Producers ) * BAFTA Awards ( UK ) 1989
* Won : Best Film
* Won : Best Original Film Score ( Maurice Jarre )
* Nominated : Best Actor in a Leading Role ( Robin Williams )
* Nominated : Best Achievement in Direction ( Peter Weir )
* Nominated : Best Editing ( William Anderson )
* Nominated : Best Original Screenplay ( Tom Schulman )
* Nominated : Best Picture ( Peter Weir )
* César Awards ( France )
* Won :
Best Foreign Film * David di Donatello Awards ( Italy )
* Won : Best Foreign Film * Directors Guild of America ( USA )
* Nominated : Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures ( Peter Weir )
* Golden Globe Awards ( USA )
* Nominated : Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama ( Robin Williams )
* Nominated : Best Director – Motion Picture ( Peter Weir )
* Nominated : Best Motion Picture – Drama
* Nominated : Best Screenplay – Motion Picture ( Tom Schulman )
* Writers Guild of America ( USA )
* Nominated : Best Screenplay – Original ( Tom Schulman )
The film was voted # 52 on the AFI 's 100 Years … 100 Cheers list , a list of the top 100 most inspiring films of all time .
The film 's line " Carpe diem .
Seize the day , boys .
Make your lives extraordinary .
" was voted as the 95th greatest movie quote by the American Film Institute .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
After Robin Williams ' death in August 2014 , fans of his work used social media to pay tribute to him with photo and video reenactments of the film 's final " O Captain !
My Captain ! " scene .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Nancy H. Kleinbaum 's novel , Dead Poets Society ( 1989 ) , is based on the movie .
STAGE PLAY
Section::::Stage play .
A theatrical adaptation written by Tom Schulman and directed by John Doyle opened Off - Broadway on October 27 , 2016 , and running through December 11 , 2016 .
Jason Sudeikis stars as John Keating with Thomas Mann as Neil Perry , David Garrison as Gale Nolan , Zane Pais as Todd Anderson , Francesca Carpanini as Chris , Stephen Barker Turner as Mr. Perry , William Hochman as Knox Overstreet , Cody Kostro as Charlie Dalton , Yaron Lotan as Richard Cameron and Bubba Weiler as Steven Meeks .
The production received a mixed review from The New York Times , with critic Ben Brantley calling the play " blunt and bland " and criticizing Sudeikis 's performance , citing his lack of enthusiasm when delivering powerful lines .
PARODIES Section::::Parodies .
The ending of the film was parodied in the Saturday Night Live sketch " Farewell , Mr. Bunting " , in which a student , upon climbing onto his desk , is decapitated by a ceiling fan .
SEE ALSO
* " The Changing of the Guard " , a June 1 , 1962 episode of The Twilight Zone starring Donald Pleasence as a retiring English teacher at a New England boys ' school , who questions whether he has made a difference in the boys ' lives .
* The Emperor 's Club ( 2002 ) , an American drama film set in a boys ' preparatory school in the northeast .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS