MANDAMUS Mandamus may be a command to do an administrative action or not to take a particular action , and it is supplemented by legal rights .
In the American legal system it must be a judicially enforceable and legally protected right before one suffering a grievance can ask for a mandamus .
A person can be said to be aggrieved only when he or she is denied a legal right by someone who has a legal duty to do something and abstains from doing it .
LEGAL REQUIREMENTS Section::::Legal requirements .
The party requesting a writ of mandamus to be enforced should be able to show that he or she has a legal right to compel the respondent to do or refrain from doing the specific act .
The duty sought to be enforced must have two qualities
: It must be a duty of public nature and the duty must be imperative and should not be discretionary .
Furthermore , mandamus will typically not be granted if adequate relief can be obtained by some other means , such as appeal .
PURPOSE
Section::::Purpose .
The purpose of mandamus is to remedy defects of justice .
It lies in the cases where there is a specific right but no specific legal remedy for enforcing that right .
Generally , it is not available in anticipation of any injury except when the petitioner is likely to be affected by an official act in contravention of a statutory duty or where an illegal or unconstitutional order is made .
The grant of mandamus is therefore an equitable remedy ; a matter for the discretion of the court , the exercise of which is governed by well - settled principles .
Mandamus , being a discretionary remedy , the application for that must be made in good faith and not for indirect purposes .
Acquiescence can not , however , bar the issue of mandamus .
The petitioner must , of course , satisfy the Court that he or she has the legal right to the performance of the legal duty as distinct from mere discretion of authority .
A mandamus is normally issued when an officer or an authority by compulsion of statute is required to perform a duty and that duty , despite demand in writing , has not been performed .
In no other case will a writ of mandamus issue unless it be to quash an illegal order .
TYPES Section::::Types .
There are three kinds of mandamus : * Alternative mandamus : A mandamus issued upon the first application for relief , commanding the defendant either to perform the act demanded or to appear before the court at a specified time to show cause for not performing it .
* * Peremptory mandamus : An absolute and unqualified command to the defendant to do the act in question .
It is issued when the defendant defaults on , or fails to show sufficient cause in answer to , an alternative mandamus .
*
* Continuing mandamus : A mandamus issued to a lower authority in general public interest asking the officer or the authority to perform its tasks expeditiously for an unstipulated period of time for preventing miscarriage of justice .
* IN
VARIOUS
COUNTRIES PARLIAMENTARY DEMOCRACIES
AUSTRALIA Section::::In various countries .
Section::::Parliamentary democracies .
Section::::Australia .
Under the Australian legal system , mandamus is available through section 75(v ) of the Constitution of Australia .
ENGLAND AND WALES Section::::England and Wales .
In England and Wales , mandamus was originally known as a writ of mandamus and more recently as an order of mandamus .
This procedure was renamed by the Civil Procedure ( Modification of Supreme Court Act 1981 ) Order 2004 to become a mandatory order .
INDIA Section::::India .
In India , the sine qua non for mandamus is the existence of a statutory public duty incumbent upon the person or body against whom the mandamus is sought .
There must equally co - exist a corresponding right in the petitioner entitling him to claim the enforcement of such public duty .
These two preconditions form the foundation for the issue of mandamus .
The primary scope and function of mandamus is to " command " and " execute " rather than to " enquire " and " adjudicate " .
It can not be issued to change the decision of a body so as to suit the petitioner .
Obligations which are not of statutory nature can not be enforced by mandamus .
The writ petition is not maintainable when a remedy provided for under the Code of Civil Procedure is available .
For example , the High Court can not entertain writ petitions for mandamus to the Government who fails to deposit and pay in the requisite time an enhanced compensation account as ordered by a lower Court .
The petitioners in this case would be directed to approach the executing Court for appropriate relief .
Only the Supreme Court and High Courts are empowered to exercise Writ Jurisdiction , under Art .
32 and 226 of Constitution .
No other courts are empowered to issue writ . mandmus:-
It means court can ask common people , authorities to do or no to do some task .
It does not come against president , governor , parliament , state legislature , private bodies , and individual persons .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the administrative law context in the United States , the requirement that mandamus can be used only to compel a ministerial act has largely been abandoned .
By statute or by judicial expansion of the writ of mandamus in most of the U.S. states , acts of administrative agencies are now subject to judicial review for abuse of discretion .
Judicial review of agencies of the United States federal government , for abuse of discretion , is authorized by the U.S. Administrative Procedures Act .
FEDERAL COURTS Section::::Federal courts .
The authority of the United States district courts ( trial courts ) to issue mandamus has been expressly abrogated by Rule 81(b ) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure , but relief in the nature of mandamus can be had by other remedies provided for in the Rules , where provided by statute , or by use of the District Court 's equitable powers .
In the context of mandamus from a United States Court of Appeals to a United States District Court , the Supreme Court has ruled that the appellate courts have discretion to issue mandamus to control an abuse of discretion by the lower court in unusual circumstances , where there is a compelling reason not to wait for an appeal from a final judgment .
This discretion is exercised very sparingly .
It is exercised with somewhat greater frequency , although still sparingly , in the context of discovery disputes involving privileged materials , since a district court order erroneously forcing the disclosure of privileged material may never be remediable through a later appeal .
In the case In Re Electronic Privacy Information Center ( 2013 ) , privacy advocates sought a writ of mandamus directly from the Supreme Court to halt the National Security Agency 's bulk phone record collection program .
The Supreme Court denied the petition .
More recently , the Supreme Court sided with the US Government and issued a writ of mandamus related to discovery in a court case involving the rescinding of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals policy .
STATE COURTS Section::::State courts .
In some state court systems , mandamus has evolved into a general procedure for discretionary appeals from non - final trial court decisions .
In some U.S. states , such as the courts of California , the writ is now called mandate instead of mandamus , and may be issued by any level of the state court system to any lower court or to any government official .
It is still common for Californians to bring " taxpayer actions " against public officials for wasting public funds through mismanagement of a government agency , where the relief sought is a writ of mandate compelling the official to stop wasting money and fulfill his duty to protect the public fisc .
The writ of mandate is also used in California for interlocutory appeals .
In this context , the party seeking the writ is treated on appeal like a plaintiff , the trial court becomes the defendant , and the opponent is designated as the " real party in interest . "
In Virginia , the Supreme Court has " original jurisdiction " under the state constitution for mandamus involving the Virginia courts .
Elsewhere , including the Courts of New York , have replaced mandamus ( as well as the other prerogative writs ) with statutory procedures .
In New York , this is known as an Article 78 review after the civil procedure law provision that created the relevant procedure .
In still other states , such as Illinois , the state court of last resort has original jurisdiction in mandamus actions .
In North Carolina state courts , mandamus is authorized as one of the Extraordinary Writs , under Rule 22 of the North Carolina Rules of Appellate Procedure .
The writ of mandamus may be issued in instances where , for instance , the lower court fails to timely issue a written order after rendition ( thus precluding both the possibility of an appeal or enforcement of the rendition and leaving the litigants in limbo ) .
The North Carolina Court of Appeals has spoken on the possible course of action in such situations , and confirmed that petitioning for a writ of mandamus is the only available route .
McKyer v. McKyer , 202 N.C.App .
771 at * 4 ( 2010 )
( unpublished )
In McKyer , the lawyer who was unable to persuade the trial court judge to enter an order for about a year , tried to remedy the problem by asking the trial court judge to hold another hearing .
Disapproving of the attempted resolution via a new hearing , the Court of Appeals , citing to the Supreme Court case
In re T.H.T. explained that a party seeking recourse where the trial court has not entered its orders timely should petition for writ of mandamus .
Similarly , the writ may issue where the trial court fails or refuses to timely dispose with the litigants ' business ( for instance , if the judge refuses to hear a case ) .
In North Carolina , as elsewhere , the writ is an action against the official , meaning that the petition must be styled " In RE Public Figure X " or " In RE Judge Y.
" Thus , a mandamus petition not only brings the strife of optically making the officer or judge the defendant , but also in theory requires the official / judge to respond " within ten days " " with supporting affidavits . "
Curiously , Rule 22(c ) provides that " any party " may respond to the petition for writ .
The North Carolina Court of Appeals has interpreted this to mean that where , for instance , one litigant demands that the judge enter a previously rendered order , the other litigant in the same case is free to respond instead of ( or in addition to )
the judge that presides over both of the litigants .
SEE ALSO
* Judicial review * Administrative law
*
Habeas corpus REFERENCES