THE PRINCE OF TIDES
The Prince of Tides is a 1991 American romantic drama film based on the 1986 novel of the same name by Pat Conroy ;
the film stars Barbra Streisand and Nick Nolte .
It tells the story of the narrator 's struggle to overcome the psychological damage inflicted by his dysfunctional childhood in South Carolina .
Streisand directed and produced the film in addition to starring in it .
Conroy and Becky Johnston adapted the screenplay .
The film was nominated for seven Academy Awards including Best Picture , but lost the award to The Silence of the Lambs .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Tom Wingo , a teacher and football coach from South Carolina , is asked by his mother , Lila , to travel to New York City to help his twin sister 's psychiatrist , Susan Lowenstein , after his sister Savannah 's latest suicide attempt .
Tom hates New York but reluctantly accepts , largely to take the opportunity to be alone and away from a life that does not satisfy him .
During his initial meetings with Lowenstein , Tom is reluctant to disclose many details of their dysfunctional family 's secrets .
In flashbacks , Tom relates incidents from his childhood to Lowenstein in hopes of discovering how to save Savannah 's life .
The Wingo parents were an abusive father and a manipulative , status - hungry mother .
The father was a shrimp boat operator and , despite being successful at that profession , spent all of his money on frivolous business pursuits , leaving the family in poverty .
Tom is also torn with his own problems but hides behind what he calls " the Southern way " ; i.e. laughing about everything .
For example , his wife Sallie is having an affair , and her lover wants to marry her .
Tom and Lowenstein begin having feelings for each other .
After Tom discovers that she is married to Herbert Woodruff , a famous concert violinist , Lowenstein introduces Tom to her son Bernard , who is being groomed to become a musician as well but who secretly wants to play football .
Tom starts coaching Bernard along with attending sessions with Lowenstein to help his sister .
Tom discovers that Savannah has been in such a dissociated state that she even had a different identity , Renata Halpern .
As Halpern , she wrote books to disguise the Savannah side of her troubled life .
Tom confronts Lowenstein over not revealing this information before , and they argue , during which she throws a dictionary at him .
To apologize , she asks him to dinner , and their relationship becomes closer .
Tom has a fateful meeting with his mother and stepfather , bringing up painful memories .
Tom reveals that , when he was 13 years old , three escaped convicts invaded his home and raped him , his mother , and his sister .
His older brother , Luke , killed two of the aggressors with a shotgun , while his mother stabbed the third with a kitchen knife .
They buried the bodies beneath the house and never spoke of it again .
Tom bursts into tears , having now let loose a key piece of Savannah 's troubled life .
After discovering that Tom has been coaching Bernard , Herbert orders Bernard to stop his football pursuits , return to his music lessons , to prepare to leave for Tanglewood , a prestigious music academy .
Tom is invited to a dinner at Lowenstein 's home , along with poets and intellectuals .
Herbert is overtly rude and reveals that Tom 's sister is in therapy with his wife .
Infuriated , Lowenstein voices her suspicions about her husband 's affair .
Tom takes Herbert 's " million dollar " violin and threatens to throw it off the high - rise balcony unless Herbert apologizes .
Tom throws the violin in the air , Herbert nervously apologizes , and Tom catches the violin before it falls .
Tom spends a romantic weekend with Lowenstein at her country house .
Savannah recovers and is released from the hospital .
This recovery is due to finally learning about things she has repressed from her childhood , most notably the rapes .
Her first suicide attempt at age 13 was after the rapes and murders of the three convicts .
Tom then receives a call from his wife , who has finally decided she wants him back .
He loves both Lowenstein and his wife , and tells Lowenstein he does n't love his wife more , " just longer " .
Tom ends his relationship with Lowenstein and reunites with his wife and family , but wishes that two lives could be given to each man and woman .
He is happy in his renewed life , after finally working out the traumatic events in his past with Lowenstein 's help .
Tom thinks of her daily as he reaches the top of the bridge on his drive home from work .
Her name comes to him as a kind of prayer , a blessing .
CAST
* Nick Nolte as Tom Wingo * Barbra Streisand as Dr. Susan Lowenstein
* Blythe Danner as Sally Wingo * Kate Nelligan as Lila Wingo Newbury
* Melinda Dillon as Savannah Wingo * Jeroen Krabbé as Herbert Woodruff , Lowenstein 's husband
* George Carlin as Eddie Detreville , Savannah 's gay neighbor * Jason Gould as Bernard Woodruff , Lowenstein 's son ( and Streisand 's real life son with Elliott Gould )
* Brad Sullivan as Henry Wingo RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Pat Conroy , author of the novel The Prince of Tides , gave Streisand a copy of his novel with the inscription : " To Barbra Streisand : The Queen of Tides ...
you are many things , Barbra , but you 're also a great teacher ...
one of the greatest to come into my life .
I honor the great teachers and they live in my work and they dance invisibly in the margins of my prose .
You 've honored me by taking care of it with such great seriousness and love .
Great thanks , and I 'll never forget that you gave ' The Prince of Tides ' back to me as a gift .
Pat Conroy . "
Roger Ebert gave the film three and 1/2 stars out of four , praising Streisand 's directing .
Ebert wrote , " By directing one good film , you prove that you had a movie inside of you .
By directing two , you prove you are a real director " .
He called the film " an assured and very serious love story that allows neither humor nor romance to get in the way of its deeper and darker subject " , adding that " Streisand shows herself as a director who likes emotional stories - but does n't simplify them , and pays attention to the human quirks and strangeness of her characters " .
Variety wrote : " A deeply moving exploration of the tangled emotions of a dysfunctional Southern family , this lovingly crafted ( though unevenly scripted ) film of Pat Conroy 's novel centers on Nick Nolte 's performance of a lifetime .
Bringing her usual strengths of character to her role as Nolte 's psychiatrist / lover , Barbra Streisand marks every frame with the intensity and care of a filmmaker committed to heartfelt , unashamed emotional involvement with her characters " .
Jonathan Rosenbaum of the Chicago Reader wrote : " The results may seem overripe and dated in spots , but ( Streisand ) coaxes a fine performance out of Nolte , and the other actors ( herself included ) acquit themselves honorably " .
As of July 2018 , The Prince of Tides holds a rating of 68 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 31 reviews .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
The Prince of Tides was a critical and box office success , opening at number four with a grossing of $ 10,035,412 behind Hook , Beauty and the Beast , and Father of the Bride , and remained in the top 10 for seven weeks .
Eventually the final gross was $ 74,787,599 .
The film grossed $ 36,100,000 in rentals , giving it a final gross of $ 110 million .
The film was among the top 20 highest - grossing movies of the year at the box office .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
Although the film , its cast , and its crew received many nominations for Academy Awards , Best Director was not among these , while Best Picture was .
At the following year 's Oscar ceremonies , host Billy Crystal sang , to the tune of " Do n't Rain on My Parade , " " did this film direct itself ? "
The following year , when A Few Good Men joined Prince of Tides and the previous year 's Awakenings in being nominated for the latter award , but not the former , Columbia Pictures president Mark Canton issued a statement , " This is unfortunately the third year in a row that Columbia has had a film nominated for Best Picture that seemingly directed itself . "
Wins * Golden Globe Award for Best Actor - Motion Picture
Drama
- Nick Nolte
* Boston Society of Film Critics Award for Best Actor - Nick Nolte
* Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award for Best Actor - Nick Nolte Nominations * Academy Award for Best Picture * Academy Award for Best Actor - Nick Nolte * Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress - Kate Nelligan * Academy Award for Writing Adapted Screenplay - Becky Johnston and Pat Conroy
* Academy Award for Best Art Direction – Set Decoration - Paul Sylbert and Caryl Heller * Academy Award for Best Cinematography - Stephen Goldblatt * Academy Award for Original Music Score - James Newton
Howard * Golden Globe Award for Best Director - Barbra Streisand * Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture - Drama
* Directors Guild of America Award for Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures - Barbra Streisand * WGA Award for Best Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium - Becky Johnston and Pat Conroy * American Society of Cinematographers Award for Outstanding Achievement in Cinematography in Theatrical Releases - Stephen Goldblatt DIFFERENCES FROM NOVEL Section::::Differences from novel .
While the film was a box office hit and raised Streisand 's reputation as a director , its numerous changes from the original novel upset some Conroy purists .
Conroy and Johnston eliminated most of the novel 's flashback scenes .
They describe Tom Wingo 's relationship with his siblings in great detail .
In the novel , these flashbacks form the main plot and take up more of the novel than the romance between Streisand 's character , Dr. Lowenstein , and Tom Wingo .
The removal of the flashbacks makes the relationship between Wingo and Lowenstein the central story in the film , whereas in the novel , it is not .
Another character in the novel - the second Wingo brother , Luke , who appears only in flashbacks onscreen - is vitally important to the novel , and his death is a major plot point .
In fact , the title of the book derives from a poem written by Savannah about Luke and his struggle against the government after the seizure of Colleton .
In the film , " The Prince of Tides " is the title of a book of poetry written by Savannah and dedicated to Tom .
Luke only appears intermittently , and his death is only vaguely described .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
Streisand initially hired English composer John Barry to write a score for the film , but Barry eventually left due to creative differences .
In a 7 March 1996 Cinemusic conference interview , Barry explained his exodus from the film , stating , " I was asked by Barbra Streisand to do The Prince of Tides – I live in New York , she lives in Los Angeles – and I went and met with her , and she showed me some footage , and she said , ' Why are n't you moving to Los Angeles ? '
and I said , ' Absolutely not . '
And she said , ' Well , I like to know what 's going on ' –
Barbra 's an extreme case , by the way –
and I said , ' Even if I did move to Los Angeles , I have no desire to meet with you once I know what I 'm going to do .
I ca n't work with someone over my shoulder , absolutely no way . '
" Barry later retitled his theme for The Prince of Tides " Moviola " and it was released on his 1992 movie theme album of the same name .
The theme also appeared in Barry 's 1995 score for the 3D IMAX film Across the Sea of Time , retitled " Flight Over New York " .
The final film score was composed by James Newton Howard and released 12 November 1991 .
It was well received by critics and garnered Howard his first Academy Award nomination for Best Original Score , though it lost to Alan Menken 's music for Beauty and the Beast .
The soundtrack contains two songs by Streisand , although they did not appear in the film ( one of those songs , " Places That Belong To You " , was at one point intended for the film 's end credits , but replaced with new music by Howard in the released version ) .
The film also includes songs and music that do not appear on any soundtracks .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Barbra Archives Prince of Tides page with cut scenes , and laser disc details Section::::External links .