PARALLELOGRAM
In Euclidean geometry , a parallelogram is a simple ( non - self - intersecting ) quadrilateral with two pairs of parallel sides .
The opposite or facing sides of a parallelogram are of equal length and the opposite angles of a parallelogram are of equal measure .
The congruence of opposite sides and opposite angles is a direct consequence of the Euclidean parallel postulate and neither condition can be proven without appealing to the Euclidean parallel postulate or one of its equivalent formulations .
By comparison , a quadrilateral with just one pair of parallel sides is a trapezoid in American English or a trapezium in British English .
The three - dimensional counterpart of a parallelogram is a parallelepiped .
The etymology ( in Greek παραλληλ - όγραμμον , a shape " of parallel lines " ) reflects the definition .
SPECIAL CASES
* Rhomboid – A quadrilateral whose opposite sides are parallel and adjacent sides are unequal , and whose angles are not right angles
* Rectangle – A parallelogram with four angles of equal size ( right angles ) .
* Rhombus – A parallelogram with four sides of equal length .
* Square – A parallelogram with four sides of equal length and angles of equal size ( right angles ) . CHARACTERIZATIONS Section::::Characterizations .
A simple ( non - self - intersecting ) quadrilateral is a parallelogram if and only if any one of the following statements is true : * Two pairs of opposite sides are equal in length .
* Two pairs of opposite angles are equal in measure .
*
The diagonals bisect each other .
* One pair of opposite sides is parallel and equal in length .
* Adjacent angles are supplementary .
*
Each diagonal divides the quadrilateral into two congruent triangles .
* The sum of the squares of the sides equals the sum of the squares of the diagonals .
( This is the parallelogram law . )
*
It has rotational symmetry of order 2 .
* The sum of the distances from any interior point to the sides is independent of the location of the point .
( This is an extension of Viviani 's theorem . )
*
There is a point
X in the plane of the quadrilateral with the property that every straight line through X divides the quadrilateral into two regions of equal area .
Thus all parallelograms have all the properties listed above , and conversely , if just one of these statements is true in a simple quadrilateral , then it is a parallelogram .
OTHER PROPERTIES *
Opposite sides of a parallelogram are parallel ( by definition ) and so will never intersect .
* The area of a parallelogram is twice the area of a triangle created by one of its diagonals .
* The area of a parallelogram is also equal to the magnitude of the vector cross product of two adjacent sides .
*
Any line through the midpoint of a parallelogram bisects the area .
*
Any non - degenerate affine transformation takes a parallelogram to another parallelogram .
* A parallelogram has rotational symmetry of order 2 ( through 180 ° ) ( or order 4 if a square ) .
If it also has exactly two lines of reflectional symmetry then it must be a rhombus or an oblong ( a non - square rectangle ) .
If it has four lines of reflectional symmetry , it is a square .
*
The perimeter of a parallelogram is 2(a + b ) where a and b are the lengths of adjacent sides .
*
Unlike any other convex polygon , a parallelogram can not be inscribed in any triangle with less than twice its area .
*
The centers of four squares all constructed either internally or externally on the sides of a parallelogram are the vertices of a square .
* If two lines parallel to sides of a parallelogram are constructed concurrent to a diagonal , then the parallelograms formed on opposite sides of that diagonal are equal in area .
*
The diagonals of a parallelogram divide it into four triangles of equal area .
AREA FORMULA Section::::Area formula .
All of the area formulas for general convex quadrilaterals apply to parallelograms .
Further formulas are specific to parallelograms : A parallelogram with base b and height h can be divided into a trapezoid and a right triangle , and rearranged into a rectangle , as shown in the figure to the left .
This means that the area of a parallelogram is the same as that of a rectangle with the same base and height :
The base × height area formula can also be derived using the figure to the right .
The area K of the parallelogram to the right ( the blue area ) is the total area of the rectangle less the area of the two orange triangles .
The area of the rectangle is and the area of a single orange triangle is Therefore , the area of the parallelogram is Another area formula , for two sides B and C and angle θ ,
is The area of a parallelogram with sides B and C ( B ≠ C ) and
angle formula_6 at the intersection of the diagonals is given by When the parallelogram is specified from the lengths B and C of two adjacent sides together with the length D of either diagonal , then the area can be found from Heron 's formula .
Specifically it is where formula_9 and the leading factor 2 comes from the fact that the chosen diagonal divides the parallelogram into two congruent triangles .
AREA IN TERMS OF CARTESIAN COORDINATES OF VERTICES Section::::Area in terms of Cartesian coordinates of vertices .
Let vectors formula_10 and let formula_11 denote the matrix with elements of a
and b. Then the area of the parallelogram generated by a and b is equal to formula_12 .
Let vectors formula_13 and let formula_14 .
Then the area of the parallelogram generated by a and b is equal to formula_15 .
Let points formula_16 .
Then the area of the parallelogram with vertices at a , b and c is equivalent to the absolute value of the determinant of a matrix built using a , b and c as rows with the last column padded using ones as follows :
PROOF THAT DIAGONALS BISECT
EACH OTHER Section::::Proof that diagonals bisect each other .
To prove that the diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other , we will use congruent triangles : ( since these are angles that a transversal makes with parallel lines AB and DC ) .
Also , side AB is equal in length to side DC , since opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal in length .
Therefore , triangles ABE and CDE are congruent
( ASA postulate , two corresponding angles and the included side ) .
Therefore , Since the diagonals AC and BD divide each other into segments of equal length , the diagonals bisect each other .
Separately , since the diagonals AC and BD bisect each other at point E , point
E is the midpoint of each diagonal .
PARALLELOGRAMS ARISING FROM OTHER FIGURES
AUTOMEDIAN TRIANGLE
Section::::Parallelograms arising from other figures .
Section::::Automedian triangle .
An automedian triangle is one whose medians are in the same proportions as its sides ( though in a different order ) .
If ABC is an automedian triangle in which vertex A stands opposite the side a , G is the centroid ( where the three medians of ABC intersect ) , and AL is one of the extended medians of ABC with L lying on the circumcircle of ABC , then BGCL is a parallelogram .
VARIGNON PARALLELOGRAM
Section::::Varignon parallelogram .
The midpoints of the sides of an arbitrary quadrilateral are the vertices of a parallelogram , called its Varignon parallelogram .
If the quadrilateral is convex or concave ( that is , not self - intersecting ) , then the area of the Varignon parallelogram is half the area of the quadrilateral .
TANGENT PARALLELOGRAM OF AN ELLIPSE Section::::Tangent parallelogram of an ellipse .
For an ellipse , two diameters are said to be conjugate if and only if the tangent line to the ellipse at an endpoint of one diameter is parallel to the other diameter .
Each pair of conjugate diameters of an ellipse has a corresponding tangent parallelogram , sometimes called a bounding parallelogram , formed by the tangent lines to the ellipse at the four endpoints of the conjugate diameters .
All tangent parallelograms for a given ellipse have the same area .
It is possible to reconstruct an ellipse from any pair of conjugate diameters , or from any tangent parallelogram .
FACES OF A PARALLELEPIPED Section::::Faces of a parallelepiped .
A parallelepiped is a three - dimensional figure whose six faces are parallelograms .
SEE ALSO * Fundamental parallelogram ( disambiguation )
* Antiparallelogram REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Parallelogram and Rhombus - Animated course ( Construction , Circumference , Area ) * Interactive Parallelogram --sides , angles and slope * Area of Parallelogram at cut - the - knot
* Equilateral Triangles On Sides of a Parallelogram at cut - the - knot * Definition and properties of a parallelogram with animated applet
* Interactive applet showing parallelogram area calculation interactive applet