GOLDEN GLOBE AWARD
The Golden Globe Awards are accolades bestowed by the 93 members of the Hollywood Foreign Press Association beginning in January 1944 , recognizing excellence in film and television , both domestic and foreign .
The annual ceremony at which the awards are presented is a major part of the film industry 's awards season , which culminates each year in the Academy Awards .
The eligibility period for the Golden Globes corresponds to the calendar year ( i.e. January 1 through December 31 ) .
The most recent ceremony , the 75th Golden Globe Awards , honoring the best in film and television in 2017 , was held on January 7 , 2018 .
The next ceremony , the 76th Golden Globe Awards , honoring the best in film and television in 2018 , will be held on January 6 , 2019 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1943 , a group of writers banded together to form the Hollywood Foreign Press Association , and by creating a generously distributed award called the Golden Globe Award , they now play a significant role in film marketing .
The 1st Golden Globe Awards , honoring the best achievements in 1943 filmmaking , was held in January 1944 , at the 20th Century - Fox studios .
Subsequent ceremonies were held at various venues throughout the next decade , including the Beverly Hills Hotel , and the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel .
In 1950 , the Hollywood Foreign Press Association made the decision to establish a special honorary award to recognize outstanding contributions to the entertainment industry .
Recognizing its subject as an international figure within the entertainment industry , the first award was presented to director and producer , Cecil B. DeMille .
The official name of the award thus became the Cecil B. DeMille Award .
Beginning in 1963 , the trophies commenced to be handed out by one or more persons ( exclusively female at first ) referred to as " Miss Golden Globe , " a title renamed on January 5 , 2018 to " Golden Globe Ambassador .
" The holders of the position were , traditionally , the daughters or sometimes the sons of a celebrity , and as a point of pride , these often continued to be contested among celebrity parents .
In 2009 , the Golden Globe statuette was redesigned ( but not for the first time in its history ) .
The New York firm Society Awards collaborated for a year with the Hollywood Foreign Press Association to produce a statuette that included a unique marble and enhanced the statuette 's quality and gold content .
It was unveiled at a press conference at the Beverly Hilton prior to the show .
Revenues generated from the annual ceremony have enabled the Hollywood Foreign Press Association to donate millions of dollars to entertainment - related charities , as well as funding scholarships and other programs for future film and television professionals .
The most prominent beneficiary being the Young Artist Awards , presented annually by the Young Artist Foundation , established in 1978 by late Hollywood Foreign Press member Maureen Dragone , to recognize and award excellence of young Hollywood performers under the age of 21 , and to provide scholarships for young artists who may be physically and/or financially challenged .
RULES ELIGIBILITY Section::::Rules .
Section::::Eligibility .
The qualifying eligibility period for all nominations is the calendar year from January 1 through December 31 .
Voice - over performances and cameo appearances in which persons play themselves are disqualified from all of the film and TV acting categories .
Films must be at least 70 minutes , and released for at least a seven - day run in the Greater Los Angeles area starting prior to midnight on December 31 .
Films can either be released in theaters , on pay - per - view , or digital delivery .
For the Best Foreign Language Film category , they do not need to be released in the United States .
At least 51 percent of the dialogue must still be in a language other than English , and they must first be released in their country of origin during a 14-month period from November 1 to December 31 prior to the Awards .
However , if a film was not released in its country of origin due to censorship , it can still qualify if it had a one - week release in the United States during the qualifying calendar year .
There is no limit to the number of submitted films from a given country .
A TV program must air in the United States between the prime time hours of 8:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m ( or 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m on Sundays ) .
A show can air on broadcast television , basic or premium cable , or digital delivery ; it does not qualify of it is only on pay - per - view or via digital delivery of film .
Also , a TV show must either be made in the United States , or is a co - production financially and creatively between an American and a foreign production company .
Furthermore , reality and non - scripted shows are disqualified .
For a television film , it can not be entered in both the film and TV categories , and instead should be entered based on its original release format .
If it was first aired on American television , then it can be entered into the TV categories .
If it was released in theaters or on pay - per - view , then it should instead to be entered into the film categories .
A film festival showing does not count towards disqualifying what would otherwise be a TV program .
Actors in a TV series must appear in at least six episodes during the qualifying calendar year .
Actors in a TV film or miniseries must appear in at least five percent of the time in that TV film or miniseries .
SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
Section::::Screening requirements .
Active HFPA members need to be invited to an official screening of each eligible film directly by its respective distributor or publicist .
The screening must take place in the Greater Los Angeles area , either before the film 's release or up to one week afterwards .
The screening can be a regular one in a theater with the public or a press screening ; it does not need to be an HFPA member - only event .
The screening must also be cleared with the Motion Picture Association of America so there are not scheduling conflicts with other official screening .
For TV programs , they must merely be available to be seen by HFPA members in any common format , such as the original TV broadcast .
NOMINATIONS AND VOTING Section::::Nominations and voting .
Entry forms for films need to be received by the HFPA within ten days of the official screening .
TV programs should be submitted " as early as possible " before the deadline .
As part of their regular journalistic jobs , active HFPA members will participate in covering the press conferences , and interviewing cast members , of selected films and TV programs .
The film press conferences need to take place either before the film 's release in the Greater Los Angeles area or up to one week afterwards .
Ballots to select the nominations are sent to HFPA members in November , along with a " Reminder List " of eligible film and TV programs .
Each HFPA member then votes for their top five choices in each category , numbering them 5 to 1 , with 5 being their top choice .
The nominees in each category are then the five selections that receive the most votes .
The ranked voting is only used to break ties , with number 5 worth 5 points , number 4 worth 4 points , and so on .
After the nominations are announced in mid - December , HFPA members receive the final ballots .
The winner in each category is selected from among the nominees by plurality voting .
In case of a tie , the winner is the one that had the most votes on the nomination ballot .
CEREMONY Section::::Ceremony .
The broadcast of the Golden Globe Awards , telecast to 167 countries worldwide , generally ranks as the third most - watched awards show each year , behind only the Oscars and the Grammy Awards .
Since 2010 , it was televised live in all United States time zones .
Until Ricky Gervais hosted in 2010 , the award ceremony was one of two major Hollywood award ceremonies ( the other being the Screen Actors Guild Awards ) that did not have a regular host ; every year a different presenter introduced the ceremony at the beginning of the broadcast .
Gervais returned to host the 68th and 69th
Golden Globe Awards the next two years .
Tina Fey and Amy Poehler hosted the 70th , 71st and 72nd Golden Globe Awards in 2015 .
The Golden Globe Awards ' theme song , which debuted in 2012 , was written by Japanese musician and songwriter Yoshiki Hayashi .
Since 1993 , Dick Clark Productions has produced the ceremony with NBC as broadcaster ; its involvement came at a time of instability for the Golden Globes , including reduced credibility and having lost its contract with CBS .
Enthusiastic over Clark 's commitment , the HFPA 's contract contained an unusual provision granting Dick Clark Productions the role of producer in perpetuity , as long as it continued to maintain a broadcast rights deal for the ceremony with NBC .
In 2010 , Dick Clark Productions reached an extension with NBC through 2018 .
However , the deal was negotiated without the HFPA 's knowledge .
The HFPA sued DCP over the deal , as well as claims that the company was attempting to sell digital rights that it did not hold ; the HFPA had wanted a new contract that would grant them a larger share of revenue from the telecast .
In April 2012 , judge Howard Matz upheld the NBC perpetuity clause and ruled in favor of DCP , noting that the HFPA had a history of " unbusiness - like display[s ] of misplaced priorities " and " [ succumbing ] to bouts of pronounced turmoil and personal feuds " , in contrast to DCP , which had been " represented by one experienced executive who was adept at dealing fairly and effectively with the often amateurish conduct of HFPA . "
Matz pointed out examples of the HFPA 's enthusiasm over the relationship and their desire to " not get cancelled " , such as having disregarded its own bylaws by approving an extension in 2001 without a formal vote .
The case was taken to the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals .
In 2014 , Dick Clark Productions and the HFPA reached a settlement ; details were not released , but DCP committed to continue its role as producer through at least the end of its current contract with NBC , and to work with the HFPA to " expand the brand with unique and exciting entertainment experiences " .
NBC held a right of first refusal to renew its contract beyond 2018 , but bidding was to be open to other broadcasters ; in September 2018 , NBC agreed to renew its rights to the Golden Globes through 2027 , maintaining the current broadcast arrangement and the involvement of Dick Clark Productions .
2008 DISRUPTION Section::::2008 disruption .
On January 7 , 2008 , it was announced that due to the 2007–2008 Writers Guild of America strike , the 65th Golden Globe Awards would not be telecast live .
The ceremony was faced with a threat by striking writers to picket the event and by actors threatening to boycott the ceremony rather than cross picket lines .
The Hollywood Foreign Press Association was forced to adopt another approach for the broadcast .
NBC originally had exclusive broadcast rights to the ceremonies , but on January 11 , HFPA President Jorge Camara announced there would be no restrictions placed on media outlets covering the January 13 press conference , announcing the winners at 6:00pm PST .
As a result , E ! , CNN , the TV Guide Network and KNBC - TV , the network 's Los Angeles owned - and - operated affiliate , aired the 31-minute event , emanating from the Grand Ballroom of the Beverly Hilton Hotel live , leaving NBC to fill the hour from 9:00–10:00pm ET with announcements , made after - the - fact by Access Hollywood hosts Billy Bush and Nancy O'Dell .
The remaining hours of programming , set aside for the ceremonies by the network , were filled with a special two - hour edition of Dateline , hosted by Matt Lauer , that included film clips , interviews with some of the nominees and commentary from comedian Kathy Griffin and the panelists from Football Night in America .
CATEGORIES MOTION PICTURE AWARDS * Best Motion Picture – Drama : since 1943 ( separated in 1951 )
* Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy : since 1951 * Best Director : since 1943 * Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama : since 1943 ( separated in 1951 )
* Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy : since 1951 * Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama : since 1943 ( separated in 1951 ) * Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy : since 1951 * Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture : since 1943 * Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture : since 1943 * Best Screenplay : since 1947 * Best Original Score : since 1947 * Best Original Song : since 1961 * Best Foreign Language Film : since 1948 * Best Animated Feature Film : since 2006 * Cecil B. DeMille Award for Lifetime Achievement in Motion Pictures : since 1951 TELEVISION AWARDS * Best Drama Series : since 1962 * Best Comedy Series : since 1962 * Best Actor in a Television Drama Series : since 1961 * Best Actor in a Television Comedy Series : since 1961 * Best Actress in a Television Drama Series : since 1961 * Best Actress in a Television Comedy Series : since 1961 * Best Limited Series or Motion Picture made for Television : since 1971 * Best Actor in a Limited Series or Motion Picture made for Television : since 1981 * Best Actress in a Limited Series or Motion Picture made for Television : since 1981 * Best Supporting Actor in a Series , Limited Series or Motion Picture made for Television : since 1970 * Best Supporting Actress in a Series , Limited Series or Motion Picture made for Television : since 1970 RETIRED AWARDS
* Best Documentary Film • Awarded from 1972 to 1976 *
Best English - Language Foreign Film •
Awarded from 1957 to 1973
* New Star of the Year – Actor • Awarded from 1948 to 1983
* New Star of the Year – Actress • Awarded from 1948 to 1983
* Henrietta Award ( World Film Favorite – Female ) • Awarded from 1950 to 1979 * Henrietta Award ( World Film Favorite – Male ) • Awarded from 1950 to 1979 * Best Film Promoting International Understanding • Awarded from 1945 to 1963 * Golden Globe Award for Best Cinematography •
Awarded from 1948 to 1953 , in 1955 and in 1963 .
SUPERLATIVES ACTING Section::::Superlatives .
Section::::Acting .
In acting categories , Meryl Streep holds the record for the most competitive Golden Globe wins with eight , while including her bestowment of the honorary Cecil B. DeMille Award she has nine wins .
Including honorary awards , such as the Henrietta Award , World Film Favorite Actor / Actress Award , or Cecil B. DeMille Award , Barbra Streisand tied this record with nine .
Additionally , Streisand won for composing the song Evergreen ( Love Theme from A Star Is Born ) , producing the Best Picture ( Comedy / Musical ) ( A Star Is Born in the ceremony held in 1977 ) , and directing Yentl in 1984 .
Jack Nicholson , Angela Lansbury , Alan Alda and Shirley MacLaine have six awards each .
Behind them are Ed Asner , Rosalind Russell and Jessica Lange with five wins .
At the 46th Golden Globe Awards an anomaly occurred : a three way - tie for Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama ( Sigourney Weaver for Gorillas in the Mist , Jodie Foster for The Accused , and Shirley MacLaine for Madame Sousatzka ) .
MOST NOMINATIONS
Section::::Most Nominations .
Meryl Streep also holds the record for most nominations with thirty - one ( as of the 2017 nominations ) and John Williams is second with twenty - six .
DIRECTING
Section::::Directing .
In the category Best Director , Elia Kazan leads with four wins , followed by Clint Eastwood , Oliver Stone , Miloš Forman , David Lean and Martin Scorsese with three wins each .
Steven Spielberg holds the record for most nominations with twelve ( as of the 2017 nominations ) .
Francis Ford Coppola , Clint Eastwood and Steven Soderbergh are the only directors to receive two nominations in the same year .
As of the 75th Golden Globe Awards , Barbra Streisand is the only woman to have won in this category ; she won for Yentl in 1983 .
OTHER
* Two Acting Wins in Same Year Only four people have won two acting awards in the same year : * Sigourney Weaver ( 1989 )
* Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama , Gorillas in the Mist
* Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture , Working Girl
* Joan Plowright ( 1993 )
* Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture , Enchanted April
* Best Supporting Actress in a Series , Miniseries or TV Film , Stalin * Helen Mirren ( 2007 )
* Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama , The Queen * Best Actress in a Miniseries or Television Film , Elizabeth
I
* Kate Winslet ( 2009 )
* Best Actress in a Motion Picture – Drama , Revolutionary Road
* Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture ,
The Reader
*
Most awards won by a single film
*
One film has won seven Golden Globe Awards .
* La La Land ( 2016 )
* Two films have won six Golden Globe Awards .
*
One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest ( 1975 )
* Midnight Express ( 1978 )
* Four films have won five Golden Globe Awards .
* Doctor Zhivago ( 1965 )
* Love Story ( 1970 )
* The Godfather ( 1972 )
*
A Star Is Born ( 1976 )
*
Most nominations received by a single film * Nashville , with nine nominations * Highest Sweep ( Winning every nominated category )
*
La La Land won all seven Golden Globes that it was nominated for .
*
One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest won all six of its nominations .
*
Both Doctor Zhivago and A Star Is Born won all five that they were respectively nominated for .
* Most nominations without winning an award * Motion Picture :
Who 's Afraid of Virginia Woolf ? ,
Foul Play and The Godfather Part III , all with seven nominations .
* Television :
Will & Grace with 30 nominations ( as of the 76th Golden Globe Awards ) .
* Youngest person to win an award * Ricky Schroder winning New Star of the Year – Actor in 1980 ( 9 years old ) .
*
Oldest person to win an award * Ennio Morricone winning Best Original Score for The Hateful Eight ( 87 years old ) .
RECORDS FILM
ACTORS WITH TWO OR MORE ACTING AWARDS IN MOTION PICTURES Section::::Records . Section::::Film .
Section::::Actors with two or more acting awards in motion pictures .
Actor / Actress Leading Role Supporting Role
Total awards
Total nominations
Notes :
* D - indicates a winning role in Drama categories
* C / M - indicates a winning role in Comedy or Musical categories .
ACTORS WITH FIVE OR MORE ACTING NOMINATIONS
( MOTION PICTURE )
Section::::Actors with five or more acting nominations ( motion picture ) .
Actor / Actress Total nominations
Total awards
TELEVISION
ACTORS WITH TWO OR MORE ACTING AWARDS
ON TELEVISION Section::::Television .
Section::::Actors with two or more acting awards on television .
Actor / Actress Leading Role Supporting Role
Total awards
Total nominations
Notes :
* D - indicates a winning role in Drama categories
* C / M - indicates a winning role in Comedy or Musical categories .
* M / T - indicates a winning role in Miniseries or Television Film categories .
ACTORS WITH FIVE OR MORE ACTING NOMINATIONS ( TELEVISION ) Section::::Actors with five or more acting nominations ( television ) .
Actor / Actress Total nominations
Total awards
CRITICISM 1968–1974 NBC BROADCAST BAN Section::::Criticism .
Section::::1968–1974 NBC broadcast ban .
The HFPA has had a lucrative contract with NBC for decades , which began broadcasting the award ceremony locally in Los Angeles in 1958 , then nationally in 1964 .
However , in 1968 , the Federal Communications Commission claimed the show " misled the public as to how the winners were determined "
( allegations included that winners were determined by lobby ; to motivate winners to show up to the awards ceremony winners were informed if they did not attend another winner would be named ) .
The FCC admonished NBC for participating in the scandal .
Subsequently , NBC refused to broadcast the ceremony from 1968 until after 1974 .
PIA ZADORA AWARDED " NEW STAR OF THE YEAR IN A MOTION PICTURE " IN 1982
Section::::Pia Zadora awarded " New Star of the Year in a Motion Picture " in 1982 .
In 1982 , Pia Zadora won a Golden Globe in the category " New Star of the Year in a Motion Picture – Female " for her performance in Butterfly , over such competition as Elizabeth McGovern ( Ragtime ) and Kathleen Turner ( Body Heat ) .
Accusations were made that the Foreign Press Association members had been bought off .
Zadora 's husband , multimillionaire Meshulam Riklis , flew voting members to his casino , the Riviera Hotel in Las Vegas , which gave the appearance that they voted for Zadora to repay this .
Riklis also invited voting members to his house for a lavish lunch and a showing of the film .
He also spent a great deal on advertising .
Furthermore , Zadora had made her film debut some 17 years earlier as a child performer in Santa Claus Conquers the Martians .
THE TOURIST FOR BEST MUSICAL / COMEDY NOMINATIONS IN 2011 Section::::The Tourist for Best Musical / Comedy nominations in 2011 .
The nominations for the 2011 Globes drew initial skepticism , as the Hollywood Foreign Press Association nominated The Tourist in its Best Musical / Comedy category , although it was originally advertised as a spy thriller , and also one of the most panned films of the season with host , Ricky Gervais , even joking to main star of the film , Johnny Depp , if he had seen the movie .
Rumors then surfaced that Sony , the distributor of The Tourist , had influenced Globes voters with an all - expenses - paid trip to Las Vegas , culminating in a concert by Cher .
SEE ALSO
* List of Golden Globe Awards ceremonies * List of Golden Globe Award winning films
* List of Golden Globe Award winners
* List of prizes , medals , and other awards
* Young Artist Award REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Golden Globes website
* Awards listing at the Internet Movie Database
* Awards listing at Official Golden Globes website