CEDAR OIL Cedar oil , also known as cedarwood oil , is an essential oil derived from various types of conifers , most in the pine or cypress botanical families .
It is produced from the foliage , and sometimes the wood , roots , and stumps which have been left after cutting of trees for timber extraction .
It has many uses in medicine , art , industry and perfumery , and while the characteristics of oils derived from various species may themselves vary , all have some degree of bactericidal and pesticidal effects .
SOURCES AND CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Sources and characteristics .
Although termed cedar or cedarwood oils , the most important oils are produced from distilling wood of a number of different junipers and cypresses ( of the family Cupressaceae ) , rather than true cedars ( of the family Pinaceae ) .
Similar oils are distilled , pressed or chemically extracted in small quantities from wood , roots , and leaves from plants of the genera Platycladus , Cupressus , Taiwania , and Calocedrus .
The cedarwood oil of the ancients , in particular the Sumerians and Egyptians , was derived from the Cedar of Lebanon , a true cedar native to the northern and western mountains of the Middle East .
The once - mighty Cedar of Lebanon forests of antiquity have been almost entirely eradicated , and today no commercial oil extraction is based on this species .
One of the elements found in many cedar trees is cedrol .
Depending on the amount of cedrol in a specific species of cedar can determine its pesticidal effect on insects .
Ancient Egyptians would use the oil from cedar trees in the embalming process , which in effect helped to keep the insects from disturbing the body .
USES Section::::Uses .
Cedarwood oils each have characteristic woody odours which may change somewhat in the course of drying out .
The crude oils are often yellowish or even darker in color and some , such as Texas cedarwood oil ( derived primarily from Juniperus ashei and J. deppeana ) , are quite viscous and deposit crystals on standing .
They find use ( sometimes after rectification ) in a range of fragrance applications such as soap perfumes , household sprays , floor polishes and insecticides .
Small quantities are used in microscope work as a clearing oil .
All the cedarwood oils of commerce contain a group of chemically related compounds , the relative proportions of which depend upon the species from which the oil is obtained .
These compounds include cedrol and cedrene , and while they contribute something to the odor of the whole oil they are also valuable to the chemical industry for conversion to other derivatives with fragrance applications .
The oils are therefore used both directly and as sources of chemical isolates .
Cedarwood oil was used as the base for paints by the ancient Sumerians .
They would grind cobalt compounds in a mortar to produce a blue pigment .
They could obtain green from copper , yellow from lead antimonate , black from charcoal , and white from gypsum .
Today , cedarwood oil is often used for its aromatic properties , especially in aromatherapy ; it can also be used to renew the smell of natural cedar furniture .
Cedarwood oil is used as an insect repellent , both directly applied to the skin and as an additive to sprays , candles and other products .
In India , oil from the deodar cedar ( Cedrus deodara , a true cedar ) has been shown to possess insecticidal and antifungal properties and to have some potential for control of fungal deterioration of spices during storage .
One of three methods of ancient Egyptian embalming practices employs the use of cedarwood oil .
This was a less costly method than the most well known of the ancient Egyptian practices of removing internal organs for separate preservation in canopic jars .
The practice ... called for the injection of cedar oil into body cavities without evisceration .
The body was laid in natrum or natron — a fixed alkali — for the prescribed period , after which the cedarwood oil , which had dissolved the soft organs , was released ; and the body , its flesh dissolved by the natron , was reduced to preserved skin and bones .
Until the development of synthetic immersion oil in the 1940s , cedarwood oil was widely used for the oil immersion objective in light microscopy .
It is still sometimes also used to clarify emeralds .
Cedar leaf oil from Cedrus atlantica does not contain thujone .
Cedarwood oil is a mixture of organic compounds considered generally safe by the FDA as a food additive preservative .
The oil is used as an antibacterial and fungicide .
Studies have shown that prolonged exposure to high levels of cedarwood oil can cause liver and pulmonary toxicity .
The United States EPA does not expect such effects to occur among users of currently registered products because their use and public exposure is at a much lower level and more intermittent than those in the case studies .
The EPA believes there is negligible human environmental risk posed by exposure to registered cedarwood pesticide or food preservative products if used in properly prescribed manner .
NOTES