FIGHTING WORDS
Fighting words are written or spoken words intended to incite hatred or violence from their target .
Specific definitions , freedoms , and limitations of fighting words vary by jurisdiction .
It is also used in a general sense of words that when uttered tend to create ( deliberately or not ) a verbal or physical confrontation by their mere usage .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , freedom of speech is generally protected under Section 2 of Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms .
The Criminal Code , however , limits these freedoms and provides for several forms of punishable hate speech .
The form of punishable hate speech considered to encompass fighting words is identified in Section 319 : UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The fighting words doctrine , in United States constitutional law , is a limitation to freedom of speech as protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution .
In 1942 , the U.S. Supreme Court established the doctrine by a 9–0 decision in Chaplinsky v. New Hampshire .
It held that " insulting or ' fighting words ' , those that by their very utterance inflict injury or tend to incite an immediate breach of the peace " are among the " well - defined and narrowly limited classes of speech the prevention and punishment of [ which ] … have never been thought to raise any constitutional problem . "
CHAPLINSKY DECISION
Section::::Chaplinsky decision .
Chaplinsky , a Jehovah 's Witness , had purportedly told a New Hampshire town marshal who was attempting to prevent him from preaching that he was " a damned racketeer " and " a damned fascist " and was arrested .
The court upheld the arrest and wrote in its decision that POST - CHAPLINSKY Section::::Post - Chaplinsky .
The court has continued to uphold the doctrine but also steadily narrowed the grounds on which fighting words are held to apply .
In Street v. New York ( 1969 ) , the court overturned a statute prohibiting flag - burning and verbally abusing the flag , holding that mere offensiveness does not qualify as " fighting words " .
In similar manner , in Cohen v. California ( 1971 ) , Cohen 's wearing a jacket that said " fuck the draft " did not constitute uttering fighting words since there had been no " personally abusive epithets " ; the Court held the phrase to be protected speech .
In later decisions — Gooding v. Wilson ( 1972 ) and Lewis v. City of New Orleans ( 1974)—the Court invalidated convictions of individuals who cursed police officers , finding that the ordinances in question were unconstitutionally overbroad .
In R.A.V. v. City of St. Paul ( 1992 ) , the Court overturned a statute prohibiting speech or symbolic expression that " arouses anger , alarm or resentment in others on the basis of race , color , creed , religion or gender " on the grounds that , even if the specific statute was limited to fighting words , it was unconstitutionally content - based and viewpoint - based because of the limitation to race-/religion-/sex - based fighting words .
The Court , however , made it repeatedly clear that the City could have pursued " any number " of other avenues , and reaffirmed the notion that " fighting words " could be properly regulated by municipal or state governments .
In Snyder v. Phelps ( 2011 ) , dissenting Justice Samuel Alito likened the protests of the Westboro Baptist Church members to fighting words and of a personal character , and thus not protected speech .
The majority disagreed and stated that the protesters ' speech was not personal but public , and that local laws which can shield funeral attendees from protesters are adequate for protecting those in times of emotional distress .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
The Australian Constitution does not explicitly protect freedom of expression .
However , the High Court has held that an implied freedom of political communication exists as an indispensable part of the system of representative and responsible government created by the Constitution .
It operates as a freedom from government restraint , rather than a right conferred directly on individuals .
In Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills , and Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth , the majority of the High Court held that an implied freedom of political communication exists as an incident of the system of representative government established by the Constitution .
This was reaffirmed in Unions NSW v New South Wales [ 2013 ] HCA 58 .
In 2004 the High Court considered the meaning of a statutory offence of using insulting words in a public place .
Justices Gummow and Hayne held that in the context of the section , ' " abusive " and " insulting " should be understood as those words which , in the circumstances in which they are used , are so hurtful as either they are intended to , or they are reasonably likely to provoke unlawful physical retaliation ' .
Judge Michael Kirby employed similar reasoning .
Chief Justice Gleeson took a slightly different approach to the construction of the section , finding that : It is open to parliament to form the view that threatening , abusive or insulting speech and behaviour may in some circumstances constitute a serious interference with public order , even where there is no intention , and no realistic possibility , that the person threatened , abused or insulted , or some third person , might respond in such a manner that a breach of the peace will occur .
This faithfully reflects the original ' fighting words ' doctrine and not how it is now understood and applied by the United States Supreme Court .
But , as Kent Greenawalt notes in the First Amendment context , the application of one part of the original Chaplinsky formula ( ' words likely to cause an average addressee to fight ' ) is problematic in important respects :
The first ambiguity concerns the persons to be counted among potential addressees : everyone , only people to whom a phrase really ' applies , ' or all those likely to be angered by having the label applied to them ?
Someone of French origin reacts differently to being called a ' Polack ' than someone of Polish origin … Another ambiguity is how an ' average addressee ' is to be conceived … [ And ] , [ c]an the same remark be punishable if directed at the one person able to respond and constitutionally protected if directed at people not able to match the speaker physically ?
So , even if one favours the proscription of the kinds of speech that fall within the ' fighting words ' category , it is worth noting that if the original Chaplinsky formula is invoked to identify those words , its application in Australian free speech law will not be straightforward or without controversy .
OFFENSIVE LANGUAGE THAT IS CONSIDERED CRIMINAL IN AUSTRALIA Section::::Offensive language that is considered criminal in Australia .
A number of criminal laws in Australia prohibit the use of offensive , obscene , abusive , insulting or indecent language in a public place .
One such example is section 4A of the Summary Offences Act 1988 ( NSW ) , which prohibits the use of offensive language in , near or within hearing from a public place or school .
The penalty for using offensive , indecent or obscene language in Australia ranges from a small fine ( for example , $ 660 in NSW ) to up to 6 months imprisonment .
Police in a number of Australian states and territories also have the power to issue on - the - spot fines ( infringement notices ) for offensive language .
Police commonly use these offences to target four - letter words ( such as ' cunt ' or ' fuck ' and their derivatives ) uttered towards them , or in their presence .
VERSUS INCITEMENT Section::::Versus incitement .
Incitement is a related doctrine , allowing the government to prohibit advocacy of unlawful actions if the advocacy is both intended to and likely to cause immediate breach of the peace .
In the United States , the modern standard was defined in Brandenburg v. Ohio ( 1969 ) , where the Supreme Court reversed the conviction of a Ku Klux Klan leader accused of advocating violence against racial minorities and the national government .
The Ohio statute under which the conviction occurred was overturned as unconstitutional because " the mere abstract teaching of the moral propriety or even moral necessity for a resort to force and violence is not the same as preparing a group for violent action and steeling it to such action . "
The difference between incitement and fighting words is subtle , focusing on the intent of the speaker .
Inciting speech is characterized by the speaker 's intent to make someone else the instrument of his or her unlawful will .
Fighting words , by contrast , are intended to cause the hearer to react to the speaker .
REFERENCES