GLENN QUINN Glenn Martin Christopher Francis Quinn ( May 28 , 1970 – December 3 , 2002 ) was an Irish actor .
While he was best known for his portrayal of Mark Healy on the popular ' 90s family sitcom Roseanne , Quinn also amassed a large fan base for his portrayal of Doyle , a half - demon , on Angel , a spin - off series of Buffy the Vampire Slayer .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Quinn was born in Dublin , Ireland on May 28 , 1970 , the son of Murty Quinn , a musician and singer with the Miami Showband who enjoyed seven # 1 hits in the ' 60s and ' 70s , and his wife , Bernadette Quinn ( nee Brady ) .
He was raised in Cabinteely , a suburb of Dublin , and attended Clonkeen College .
He emigrated from Ireland to the United States with his mother and two sisters , Sonja and Louisa , in 1988 , when he was still just a teenager , with the family settling in Los Angeles , California .
Quinn had a third sibling , a brother Ciaran , whom he never knew existed as the boy had been placed for adoption .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Quinn did commercials for Pepsi and Ray - Ban , appeared in the music video for the Richard Marx song " Satisfied , " and had his first speaking line in the pilot of Beverly Hills , 90210 after having endured eight separate auditions for the role of " Brandon Walsh " and then " Steve Sanders " ( played by Jason Priestley and Ian Ziering , respectively ) .
Casting director Johanna Ray gave him a small role with two lines in the pilot , but Quinn was barely visible in the final broadcast version .
In 1991 , Quinn had his first major role in the movie Shout , which starred John Travolta and in which Quinn shared an on - screen kiss with Gwyneth Paltrow in her debut film .
One of Quinn 's more visible roles began in 1990 as the character Mark Healy , Becky Conner 's boyfriend and later husband , in Roseanne .
He continued in this role until the show ended in 1997 ( seasons 3–9 ) .
In 2018 , the fourth episode of the revived show 's tenth season was dedicated to the memory of Quinn .
Quinn took on the role as youngest son Cedric on the 1992 U.S. and UK TV series Covington Cross .
In 1992 , he starred alongside Holly Marie Combs in Dr. Giggles .
In 1997 , he played dual roles in the horror anthology film Campfire Tales .
After seven years using an American accent on Roseanne , Quinn was pleased producers made Doyle on Angel Irish because it would allow him to use his native accent .
In an interview with The Irish Times , Quinn said of his accent , " I 've been hiding it for so long that it 's amazing to have some freedom .
It was like putting on an old pair of shoes .
It 's bringing my soul back to life . "
His last film work was in R.S.V.P. ( 2002 ) .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
On December 3 , 2002 , Quinn 's body was found at a friend 's home in North Hollywood , California .
An autopsy found that Quinn had died as the result of a heroin overdose .
In the months leading up to his death , Quinn had reportedly been struggling with homelessness and drug addiction .
His issues with substance abuse started in 1987 with the breakdown of his parents ' marriage .
Unable to maintain sobriety , he was eventually bought out as owner of Goldfingers nightclub in Los Angeles , California , for begging for money from customers and causing fights .
Quinn neither married nor had any children .
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography .
+ List of film roles !
Year !
Title !
Role !
class =
" unsortable " Notes +
List of television roles !
Year !
Title !
Role !
class =
" unsortable " Notes rowspan=41990 rowspan=21992 + List of video game roles !
Year !
Title !
Role !
class =
" unsortable " Notes rowspan=21997 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS