A NIGHT
AT
THE ROXBURY
A Night at the Roxbury is a 1998 American comedy film based on a recurring sketch on television 's long - running Saturday Night Live called " The Roxbury Guys " .
Saturday Night Live regulars
Will Ferrell , Chris Kattan , Molly Shannon , Mark McKinney and Colin Quinn star .
This film expands on the original Saturday Night Live sketches where the Roxbury Guys were joined by that week 's host , and bobbed their heads to Haddaway 's hit song " What Is Love " while being comically rejected by women at various clubs .
Other roles include Jennifer Coolidge as a police officer , Chazz Palminteri 's uncredited role as gregarious night club impresario Mr. Benny Zadir , and Colin Quinn as his bodyguard Dooey .
Ex - SNLer Mark McKinney has a cameo as a priest officiating a wedding .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Wealthy Yemeni - American brothers
Steve ( Will Ferrell ) and Doug Butabi ( Chris Kattan ) enjoy frequenting nightclubs , where they bob their heads in unison to Eurodance , a subgenre of dance music , and fail miserably at picking up women .
Their goal is to party at the Roxbury , a fabled Los Angeles nightclub where they are continually denied entry by a hulking bouncer .
By day , the brothers work at an artificial plant store owned by their wealthy father , Kamehl .
They spend most of their time goofing off , daydreaming about opening a club as cool as the Roxbury together , and Doug using credit card transactions as an excuse to flirt with a card approval associate via telephone that he calls " Credit Vixen .
" The store shares a wall with a lighting emporium owned by Fred Sanderson .
Mr. Butabi and Mr. Sanderson hope that Steve and Emily ( Molly Shannon ) , Sanderson 's daughter , will marry , uniting the families and the businesses to form the first plant - lamp emporium .
After a day at the beach the brothers decide that night was to be the night they would finally get into the Roxbury .
Returning home , Doug gets into a heated argument with their father about going out clubbing instead of staying home .
Their father has planned a dinner party with Emily and her parents .
The angered Mr. Butabi then refuses them access to their BMW car and their cell phones .
They are given enormous cell phones by their mother , Barbara , and allowed use of the fake - plant store 's delivery van , but they are immediately rejected once again by the doorman .
After discovering they might bribe their way into the club , the brothers drive around looking for an ATM .
They get into a fender - bender with Richard Grieco and , to avoid a lawsuit , Grieco uses his fame to get them into the popular club .
There , they meet the owner of the Roxbury , Benny Zadir , who listens to their idea for their own nightclub .
He likes them and sets up a meeting with them for the next day .
The brothers also meet a pair of women at the Roxbury : Vivica and Cambi , who see them talking to Zadir and think that the brothers are rich .
The women later sleep with Doug and Steve , leading the brothers to think they are in " serious relationships . "
On the way to the after - party at Mr. Zadir 's house , the brothers annoy his driver and bodyguard Dooey by making him stop to buy fluffy whip and making jokes about sleeping with his parents .
As revenge , the next day , Dooey refuses them entry into Zadir 's office for their meeting .
He tells the brothers that Zadir was drunk out of his mind last night and does not know who they are .
In reality , Zadir wanted to see them , but does not have their contact information .
Vivica and Cambi break up with the Butabi brothers after realizing they are not actually wealthy .
Afterwards , the brothers argue over who is at fault for their sudden misfortune and Doug moves out of their shared bedroom and into the guest house .
Meanwhile , Steve is forced into an engagement with Emily by his father .
The wedding is held in the backyard of the Butabi residence , but is interrupted by Doug .
Having gone on a fluffy whip - fueled bender , he interrupts the wedding , reconciles with his brother , and the wedding is called off , only to be restarted as Craig , the Butabi brothers ' personal trainer , reveals his feelings for Emily .
Afterwards , Grieco ( a guest at the wedding ) talks to Mr. Butabi to help him understand that Steve was not ready for marriage , and that Butabi is too hard on Doug .
After the Butabi brothers reconcile with their father and Doug moves back into their bedroom , the film ends as the brothers happen upon a hot new club .
The building is unique in that the exterior is constructed to resemble the interior of a nightclub , and the interior resembles a street — this was an idea pitched by Doug and Steve to Zadir earlier in the film .
Attempting to enter , they are surprised to find their names already on the VIP list .
In addition , Zadir reveals that to reward their idea , he has made them part - owners of the club .
Their new - found success comes full circle when they meet two women in the club : Doug 's phone operator from the credit card company ( " Credit Vixen " ) and a police officer with whom Steve flirted while getting a ticket .
CAST * Will Ferrell as Steve Butabi * Chris Kattan as Doug Butabi
* Loni Anderson as Barbara Butabi * Dan Hedaya as Kamehl Butabi * Molly Shannon as Emily Sanderson * Dwayne Hickman as Fred Sanderson * Maree Cheatham as Mabel Sanderson * Lochlyn Munro as Craig
* Richard Grieco as himself
* Kristen Dalton as Grieco 's lady
* Jennifer Coolidge as Hottie Police Officer
* Meredith Scott Lynn as Credit Vixen
* Gigi Rice as Vivica
* Elisa Donovan as Cambi * Michael Clarke Duncan as Roxbury bouncer
* Colin Quinn as Dooey * Twink Caplan as Crying
flower customer
* Eva Mendes as Bridesmaid
* Mark McKinney as Father Williams
* Chazz Palminteri as Mr. Benny Zadir * Christian Mixon as Guy in Corvette
* Viveca Paulin as Porsche girl
* Agata Gotova as Waitress * Rachel Galvin as Girl on beach SOUNDTRACK RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
A Night at the Roxbury was heavily panned by critics , earning an 11 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , with the consensus that A Night at the Roxbury " has the same problems as the worst SNL movies : one - note characters and plots unreasonably stretched to feature length runtime " .
Anita Gates of The New York Times acknowledged the film 's appeal , but reasoned that it was " a lot like the brothers themselves : undeniably pathetic but strangely lovable .
Still , do you really want to spend an hour and a half with them in a dark room ?
"
Roger Ebert observed that " the sad thing about A Night at the Roxbury is that the characters are in a one - joke movie , and they 're the joke ...
It 's the first comedy I 've attended where you feel that to laugh would be cruel to the characters . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS