BRIE Brie (; ) is a soft cow's - milk cheese named after Brie , the French region from which it originated ( roughly corresponding to the modern département of Seine - et - Marne ) .
It is pale in color with a slight grayish tinge under a rind of white mould .
The rind is typically eaten , with its flavor depending largely upon the ingredients used and its manufacturing environment .
It is similar to Camembert , which is native to a different region of France .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Brie may be produced from whole or semi - skimmed milk .
The curd is obtained by adding rennet to raw milk and warming it to a maximum temperature of .
The cheese is then cast into molds , sometimes with a traditional perforated ladle called a pelle à brie .
The mold is filled with several thin layers of cheese and drained for approximately 18 hours .
The cheese is then taken out of the molds , salted , inoculated with cheese culture ( Penicillium candidum , Penicillium camemberti ) or Brevibacterium linens , and aged in a controlled environment for at least four or five weeks .
If left to mature for longer , typically several months to a year , the cheese becomes stronger in flavor and taste , the pâte drier and darker , and the rind also darker and crumbly , and it is called Brie Noir ( French for " black brie " ) .
Around the Île - de - France where brie is made , people enjoy soaking this in café au lait and eating it for breakfast .
Overripe brie contains an unpleasant excessive amount of ammonia , produced by the same microorganisms required for ripening .
Some versions of brie cheese are smoked .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
A thirty - gram serving of brie contains and 8.4 grams of fat , of which 5.2 grams are saturated fat .
Brie is a good source of protein ; a serving of brie can provide 5 to 6 grams of protein .
Brie contains a good amount of both vitamin B12 and vitamin B2 .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
There are now many varieties of brie made all over the world , including plain brie , herbed varieties , double and triple brie and versions of brie made with other types of milk .
Indeed , although brie is a French cheese , it is possible to obtain Somerset and Wisconsin brie .
Despite the variety of bries , the French government officially certifies only two types of cheese to be sold under that name : Brie de Meaux and Brie de Melun .
BRIE DE
MEAUX Section::::Brie de Meaux .
Brie de Meaux is an unpasteurized brie , with an average weight of for a diameter of .
Manufactured in the town of Meaux in the Brie region of northern France since the 8th century , it was originally known as the " King 's Cheese " , or , after the French Revolution , the " King of Cheeses , " and was enjoyed by the peasantry and nobility alike .
It was granted the protection of Appellation d'origine contrôlée ( AOC ) status in 1980 , and it is produced primarily in the eastern part of the Parisian basin .
BRIE DE MELUN Section::::Brie de Melun .
This brie has an average weight of and a diameter of .
It is therefore smaller than Brie de Meaux but is considered to have a stronger flavor and more pungent smell .
It is made with unpasteurized milk .
Brie de Melun is also available in the form of " Old Brie " or black brie .
It was granted the protection of AOC status in 1980 .
FRENCH NON - AOC BRIES Section::::French non - AOC bries .
The following French bries do not have AOC certification :
Brie de Montereau , Île - de - France , Brie de Nangis , Brie de Provins , Brie noir , Brie fermier , Brie d'Isigny , Brie de Melun bleu , Brie petit moulé , Brie laitier Coulommiers .
INTERNATIONAL BRIES Section::::International bries .
Australia King Island Dairy , on King Island between Victoria and Tasmania , produces a range of cheeses sold as " brie " , as does Jindi Cheese in Victoria and the highly regarded High Valley Mudgee Cheese Co in Mudgee , NSW .
UK Cornish Brie ; Somerset Brie ; Baron Bigod ( made in Suffolk ) ; Cenarth Brie ( made in Wales ) ; Clava Brie ( made in Scotland ) .
US
The Marin French Cheese Company in California has made an unaged cheese since 1865 described as " fresh brie " .
Brazil Brazilian " brie " is made in the dairy region located in the Southern area of Minas Gerais state ( bordering São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro states ) and Southeast Minas Gerais ( bordering Rio de Janeiro and Espírito Santo states ) . SERVING Section::::Serving .
Brie is usually purchased either in a full wheel or as a wheel segment .
The white outside of the cheese is completely edible , and many eat brie whole .
The cheese is sometimes served slightly melted or baked , in a round , lidded ceramic dish , and topped with nuts or fruit .
STORAGE
Section::::Storage .
Brie cheese , like Camembert and Cirrus , is considered a soft cheese .
This particular type of cheese is very rich and creamy , unlike Cheddar .
This softness allows for the rapid widespread growth of bacteria if the cheese is not stored correctly .
It is recommended that brie cheese be refrigerated immediately after purchase , and stored in the refrigerator until it is consumed completely .
The optimal storage temperature for brie is or even lower .
The cheese should be kept in a tightly sealed container or plastic wrap to avoid contact with moisture and food - spoilage bacteria which will reduce the shelf life and freshness of the product .
The companies that produce this cheese usually recommend that their cheese be consumed before the best - before date and no later than a week after .
Although the cheese can still be consumed at this time , the quality of the cheese is believed to be reduced substantially .
In the case that blue or green mold appears to be growing on the cheese , it must no longer be consumed and must be discarded immediately so that food - borne illness is prevented .
The mold should not be cut off to continue consumption as there is a high risk of the mold 's spores being already spread throughout the entire cheese .
COMPARISON WITH CAMEMBERT Section::::Comparison with Camembert .
Camembert is a similar soft cheese which is also made from cow 's milk .
However , there are differences such as its origin , typical market shape , size , and flavour .
Brie originates from the Île - de - France while camembert comes from Normandy .
Traditionally , brie was produced in large wheels , 23 to 37 cm ( 9 to 14.5 in ) in diameter , and thus ripened more slowly than the smaller camembert cheeses .
When sold , brie segments typically have been cut from the larger wheels ( although some brie is sold as small , flat cylinders ) , and therefore its sides are not covered by the rind .
By contrast , camembert is ripened as a small round cheese 10 cm ( 4 in ) in diameter by about 3 cm ( 1.25 in ) thick and fully covered by rind .
This ratio change between rind and paste makes camembert slightly stronger when compared to a brie ripened for the same amount of time .
Once the rind is cut on camembert , the cheese typically has a more pungent aroma than does brie .
In terms of taste , camembert has a stronger , slightly sour , and sometimes chalky taste .
The texture of camembert is softer than that of brie , and if warmed , camembert will become creamier , whereas brie warms without losing as much structure .
SEE ALSO
*
Neufchatel cheese REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS