DEFIBRILLATION Defibrillation is a treatment for life - threatening cardiac dysrhythmias , specifically ventricular fibrillation ( VF ) and non - perfusing ventricular tachycardia ( VT ) .
A defibrillator delivers a dose of electric current ( often called a countershock ) to the heart .
Although not fully understood , this would depolarize a large amount of the heart muscle , ending the dysrhythmia .
Subsequently , the body 's natural pacemaker in the sinoatrial node of the heart is able to re - establish normal sinus rhythm .
In contrast to defibrillation , synchronized electrical cardioversion is an electrical shock delivered in synchrony to the cardiac cycle .
Although the person may still be critically ill , cardioversion normally aims to end poorly perfusing cardiac dysrhythmias , such as supraventricular tachycardia .
Defibrillators can be external , transvenous , or implanted ( implantable cardioverter - defibrillator ) , depending on the type of device used or needed .
Some external units , known as automated external defibrillators ( AEDs ) , automate the diagnosis of treatable rhythms , meaning that lay responders or bystanders are able to use them successfully with little or no training .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Defibrillation is often an important step in cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) .
CPR is an algorithm - based intervention aimed to restore cardiac and pulmonary function .
Defibrillation is indicated only in certain types of cardiac dysrhythmias , specifically ventricular fibrillation ( VF ) and pulseless ventricular tachycardia .
If the heart has completely stopped , as in asystole or pulseless electrical activity ( PEA ) , defibrillation is not indicated .
Defibrillation is also not indicated if the patient is conscious or has a pulse .
Improperly given electrical shocks can cause dangerous dysrhythmias , such as ventricular fibrillation .
Survival rates for out - of - hospital cardiac arrests are poor , often less than 10 % .
Outcome for in - hospital cardiac arrests are higher at 20 % .
Within the group of people presenting with cardiac arrest , the specific cardiac rhythm can significantly impact survival rates .
Compared to people presenting with a non - shockable rhythm ( such as asystole or PEA ) , people with a shockable rhythm ( such as VF or pulseless ventricular tachycardia ) have improved survival rates , ranging between 21 - 50 % .
TYPES
MANUAL EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR
Section::::Types .
Section::::Manual external defibrillator .
Manual external defibrillators require the expertise of a healthcare professional .
They are used in conjunction with an electrocardiogram , which can be separate or built - in .
A healthcare provider first diagnose the cardiac rhythm and then manually determine the voltage and timing for the electrical shock .
These units are primarily found in hospitals and on some ambulances .
For instance , every NHS ambulance in the United Kingdom is equipped with a manual defibrillator for use by the attending paramedics and technicians .
In the United States , many advanced EMTs and all paramedics are trained to recognize lethal arrhythmias and deliver appropriate electrical therapy with a manual defibrillator when appropriate .
MANUAL INTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR
Section::::Manual internal defibrillator .
Manual internal defibrillators delivers the shock through paddles placed directly on the heart .
They are mostly used in the operating room and , in rare circumstances , in the emergency room during an open heart procedure .
AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR ( AED ) Section::::Automated external defibrillator ( AED ) .
Automated external defibrillators are designed for use by untrained or briefly trained laypersons .
AEDs contain technology for analysis of heart rhythms .
As a result , it does not require a trained health provider to determine whether or not a rhythm is shockable .
By making these units publicly available , AEDs have improved outcomes for sudden out - of - hospital cardiac arrests .
Trained health professionals have more limited use for AEDs than manual external defibrillators .
Recent studies show that AEDs does not improve outcome in patients with in - hospital cardiac arrests .
AEDs have set voltages and does not allow the operator to vary voltage according need .
AEDs may also delay delivery of effective CPR .
For diagnosis of rhythm , AEDs often require the stopping of chest compressions and rescue breathing .
For these reasons , certain bodies , such as the European Resuscitation Council , recommend using manual external defibrillators over AEDs if manual external defibrillators are readily available .
As early defibrillation can significantly improve VF outcomes , AEDs have become publicly available in many easily accessible areas .
AEDs have been incorporated into the algorithm for basic life support ( BLS ) .
Many first responders , such as firefighters , policemen , and security guards , are equipped with them .
AEDs can be fully automatic or semi - automatic .
A semi - automatic AED automatically diagnoses heart rhythms and determines if a shock is necessary .
If a shock is advised , the user must then push a button to administer the shock .
A fully automated AED automatically diagnoses the heart rhythm and advises the user to stand back while the shock is automatically given .
Some types of AEDs come with advanced features , such as a manual override or an ECG display .
IMPLANTABLE CARDIOVERTER - DEFIBRILLATOR Section::::Implantable cardioverter - defibrillator .
Also known as automatic internal cardiac defibrillator ( AICD ) .
These devices are implants , similar to pacemakers ( and many can also perform the pacemaking function ) .
They constantly monitor the patient 's heart rhythm , and automatically administer shocks for various life - threatening arrhythmias , according to the device 's programming .
Many modern devices can distinguish between ventricular fibrillation , ventricular tachycardia , and more benign arrhythmias like supraventricular tachycardia and atrial fibrillation .
Some devices may attempt overdrive pacing prior to synchronised cardioversion .
When the life - threatening arrhythmia is ventricular fibrillation , the device is programmed to proceed immediately to an unsynchronized shock .
There are cases where the patient 's ICD may fire constantly or inappropriately .
This is considered a medical emergency , as it depletes the device 's battery life , causes significant discomfort and anxiety to the patient , and in some cases may actually trigger life - threatening arrhythmias .
Some emergency medical services personnel are now equipped with a ring magnet to place over the device , which effectively disables the shock function of the device while still allowing the pacemaker to function ( if the device is so equipped ) .
If the device is shocking frequently , but appropriately , EMS personnel may administer sedation .
WEARABLE CARDIOVERTER DEFIBRILLATOR Section::::Wearable cardioverter defibrillator .
A wearable cardioverter defibrillator is a portable external defibrillator that can be worn by at - risk patients .
The unit monitors the patient 24 hours a day and can automatically deliver a biphasic shock if VF or VT is detected .
This device is mainly indicated in patients who are not immediate candidates for ICDs .
INTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR Section::::Internal defibrillator .
A pair of electrodes used to defibrillate the heart during or after cardiac surgery such as a heart bypass .
INTERFACE WITH PERSON Section::::Interface with person .
The connection between the defibrillator and the patient consists of a pair of electrodes , each provided with electrically conductive gel in order to ensure a good connection and to minimize electrical resistance , also called chest impedance ( despite the DC discharge ) which would burn the patient .
Gel may be either wet ( similar in consistency to surgical lubricant ) or solid ( similar to gummi candy ) .
Solid - gel is more convenient , because there is no need to clean the used gel off the person 's skin after defibrillation .
However , the use of solid - gel presents a higher risk of burns during defibrillation , since wet - gel electrodes more evenly conduct electricity into the body .
Paddle electrodes , which were the first type developed , come without gel , and must have the gel applied in a separate step .
Self - adhesive electrodes come prefitted with gel .
There is a general division of opinion over which type of electrode is superior in hospital settings ; the American Heart Association favors neither , and all modern manual defibrillators used in hospitals allow for swift switching between self - adhesive pads and traditional paddles .
Each type of electrode has its merits and demerits .
PADDLE ELECTRODES Section::::Paddle electrodes .
The most well - known type of electrode ( widely depicted in films and television ) is the traditional metal paddle with an insulated ( usually plastic ) handle .
This type must be held in place on the patient 's skin with approximately 25 lbs of force while a shock or a series of shocks is delivered .
Paddles offer a few advantages over self - adhesive pads .
Many hospitals in the United States continue the use of paddles , with disposable gel pads attached in most cases , due to the inherent speed with which these electrodes can be placed and used .
This is critical during cardiac arrest , as each second of nonperfusion means tissue loss .
Modern paddles allow for monitoring ( electrocardiography ) , though in hospital situations , separate monitoring leads are often already in place .
Paddles are reusable , being cleaned after use and stored for the next patient .
Gel is therefore not preapplied , and must be added before these paddles are used on the patient .
Paddles are generally only found on manual external units .
SELF - ADHESIVE ELECTRODES Section::::Self - adhesive electrodes .
Newer types of resuscitation electrodes are designed as an adhesive pad , which includes either solid or wet gel .
These are peeled off their backing and applied to the patient 's chest when deemed necessary , much the same as any other sticker .
The electrodes are then connected to a defibrillator , much as the paddles would be .
If defibrillation is required , the machine is charged , and the shock is delivered , without any need to apply any additional gel or to retrieve and place any paddles .
Most adhesive electrodes are designed to be used not only for defibrillation , but also for transcutaneous pacing and synchronized electrical cardioversion .
These adhesive pads are found on most automated and semi - automated units and are replacing paddles entirely in non - hospital settings .
In hospital , for cases where cardiac arrest is likely to occur ( but has not yet ) , self - adhesive pads may be placed prophylactically .
Pads also offer an advantage to the untrained user , and to medics working in the sub - optimal conditions of the field .
Pads do not require extra leads to be attached for monitoring , and they do not require any force to be applied as the shock is delivered .
Thus , adhesive electrodes minimize the risk of the operator coming into physical ( and thus electrical ) contact with the patient as the shock is delivered by allowing the operator to be up to several feet away .
( The risk of electrical shock to others remains unchanged , as does that of shock due to operator misuse . )
Self - adhesive electrodes are single - use only .
They may be used for multiple shocks in a single course of treatment , but are replaced if ( or in case )
the patient recovers then reenters cardiac arrest .
PLACEMENT Section::::Placement .
Resuscitation electrodes are placed according to one of two schemes .
The anterior - posterior scheme is the preferred scheme for long - term electrode placement .
One electrode is placed over the left precordium ( the lower part of the chest , in front of the heart ) .
The other electrode is placed on the back , behind the heart in the region between the scapula .
This placement is preferred because it is best for non - invasive pacing .
The anterior - apex scheme can be used when the anterior - posterior scheme is inconvenient or unnecessary .
In this scheme , the anterior electrode is placed on the right , below the clavicle .
The apex electrode is applied to the left side of the patient , just below and to the left of the pectoral muscle .
This scheme works well for defibrillation and cardioversion , as well as for monitoring an ECG .
Researchers have created a software modeling system capable of mapping an individual 's chest and determining the best position for an external or internal cardiac defibrillator .
MECHANISM OF ACTION Section::::Mechanism of action .
The exact mechanism of defibrillation is not well understood .
One theory is that successful defibrillation affects a critical mass of the heart , resulting in insufficient remaining heart muscle to continue the arrhythmia .
Recent mathematical models of defibrillation are providing new insight into how cardiac tissue responds to a strong electrical shock .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Defibrillators were first demonstrated in 1899 by Jean - Louis Prévost and Frédéric Batelli , two physiologists from University of Geneva , Switzerland .
They discovered that small electrical shocks could induce ventricular fibrillation in dogs , and that larger charges would reverse the condition .
In 1933 , Dr. Albert Hyman , heart specialist at the Beth Davis Hospital of New York City and C. Henry Hyman , an electrical engineer , looking for an alternative to injecting powerful drugs directly into the heart , came up with an invention that used an electrical shock in place of drug injection .
This invention was called the Hyman Otor where a hollow needle is used to pass an insulated wire to the heart area to deliver the electrical shock .
The hollow steel needle acted as one end of the circuit and the tip of the insulated wire the other end .
Whether the Hyman Otor was a success is unknown .
The external defibrillator as known today was invented by Electrical Engineer William Kouwenhoven in 1930 .
William studied the relation between the electric shocks and its effects on human heart when he was a student at Johns Hopkins University School of Engineering .
His studies helped him to invent a device for external jump start of the heart .
He invented the defibrillator and tested on a dog , like Prévost and Batelli .
The first use on a human was in 1947 by Claude Beck , professor of surgery at Case Western Reserve University .
Beck 's theory was that ventricular fibrillation often occurred in hearts which were fundamentally healthy , in his terms " Hearts that are too good to die " , and that there must be a way of saving them .
Beck first used the technique successfully on a 14-year - old boy who was being operated on for a congenital chest defect .
The boy 's chest was surgically opened , and manual cardiac massage was undertaken for 45 minutes until the arrival of the defibrillator .
Beck used internal paddles on either side of the heart , along with procainamide , an antiarrhythmic drug , and achieved return of normal sinus rhythm .
These early defibrillators used the alternating current from a power socket , transformed from the 110–240 volts available in the line , up to between 300 and 1000 volts , to the exposed heart by way of " paddle " type electrodes .
The technique was often ineffective in reverting VF while morphological studies showed damage to the cells of the heart muscle post mortem .
The nature of the AC machine with a large transformer also made these units very hard to transport , and they tended to be large units on wheels .
CLOSED - CHEST METHOD Section::::Closed - chest method .
Until the early 1950s , defibrillation of the heart was possible only when the chest cavity was open during surgery .
The technique used an alternating voltage from a 300 or greater volt source derived from standard AC power , delivered to the sides of the exposed heart by " paddle " electrodes where each electrode was a flat or slightly concave metal plate of about 40 mm diameter .
The closed - chest defibrillator device which applied an alternating voltage of greater than 1000 volts , conducted by means of externally applied electrodes through the chest cage to the heart , was pioneered by Dr V. Eskin with assistance by A. Klimov in Frunze , USSR ( today known as Bishkek , Kyrgyzstan ) in the mid-1950s .
The duration of AC shocks was typically in the range of 100 - 150 milliseconds DIRECT CURRENT METHOD Section::::Direct current method .
Early successful experiments of successful defibrillation by the discharge of a capacitor performed on animals were reported by N. L. Gurvich and G. S. Yunyev in 1939 .
In 1947 their works were reported in western medical journals .
Serial production of Gurvich 's pulse defibrillator started in 1952 at the electromechanical plant of the institute , and was designated model ИД-1-ВЭИ ( Импульсный Дефибриллятор 1 , Всесоюзный Электротехнический Институт , or in English , Pulse Defibrillator 1 , All - Union Electrotechnical Institute ) .
It is described in detail in Gurvich 's 1957 book , Heart Fibrillation and Defibrillation .
The first Czechoslovak " universal defibrillator Prema " was manufactured in 1957 by the company Prema , designed by dr . Bohumil Peleška .
In 1958 his device was awarded Grand Prix at Expo 58 .
In 1958 , US senator Hubert H. Humphrey visited Nikita Khrushchev and among other things he visited the Moscow Institute of Reanimatology , where , among others , he met with Gurvich .
Humphrey immediately recognized importance of reanimation research and after that a number of American doctors visited Gurvich .
At the same time , Humphrey worked on establishing of a federal program in the National Institute of Health in physiology and medicine , telling to the Congress : " Let 's compete with U.S.S.R. in research on reversibility of death " .
In 1959 Bernard Lown commenced research in his animal laboratory in collaboration with engineer Barouh Berkovits into a technique which involved charging of a bank of capacitors to approximately 1000 volts with an energy content of 100 - 200 joules then delivering the charge through an inductance such as to produce a heavily damped sinusoidal wave of finite duration ( ~5 milliseconds ) to the heart by way of paddle electrodes .
This team further developed an understanding of the optimal timing of shock delivery in the cardiac cycle , enabling the application of the device to arrhythmias such as atrial fibrillation , atrial flutter , and supraventricular tachycardias in the technique known as " cardioversion " .
The Lown - Berkovits waveform , as it was known , was the standard for defibrillation until the late 1980s .
Earlier in the 1980s , the " MU lab " at the University of Missouri had pioneered numerous studies introducing a new waveform called a biphasic truncated waveform ( BTE ) .
In this waveform an exponentially decaying DC voltage is reversed in polarity about halfway through the shock time , then continues to decay for some time after which the voltage is cut off , or truncated .
The studies showed that the biphasic truncated waveform could be more efficacious while requiring the delivery of lower levels of energy to produce defibrillation .
An added benefit was a significant reduction in weight of the machine .
The BTE waveform , combined with automatic measurement of transthoracic impedance is the basis for modern defibrillators .
PORTABLE UNITS BECOME AVAILABLE Section::::Portable units become available .
A major breakthrough was the introduction of portable defibrillators used out of the hospital .
Already Peleška 's Prema defibrillator was designed to be more portable than original Gurvich 's model .
In Soviet Union , a portable version of Gurvich 's defibrillator , model ДПА-3 ( DPA-3 ) , was reported in 1959 .
In the west this was pioneered in the early 1960s by Prof. Frank Pantridge in Belfast .
Today portable defibrillators are among the many very important tools carried by ambulances .
They are the only proven way to resuscitate a person who has had a cardiac arrest unwitnessed by Emergency Medical Services ( EMS ) who is still in persistent ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia at the arrival of pre - hospital providers .
Gradual improvements in the design of defibrillators , partly based on the work developing implanted versions ( see below ) , have led to the availability of Automated External Defibrillators .
These devices can analyse the heart rhythm by themselves , diagnose the shockable rhythms , and charge to treat .
This means that no clinical skill is required in their use , allowing lay people to respond to emergencies effectively .
CHANGE TO A BIPHASIC WAVEFORM Section::::Change to a biphasic waveform .
Until the mid 90s , external defibrillators delivered a Lown type waveform ( see Bernard Lown )
which was a heavily damped sinusoidal impulse having a mainly uniphasic characteristic .
Biphasic defibrillation alternates the direction of the pulses , completing one cycle in approximately 12 milliseconds .
Biphasic defibrillation was originally developed and used for implantable cardioverter - defibrillators .
When applied to external defibrillators , biphasic defibrillation significantly decreases the energy level necessary for successful defibrillation , decreasing the risk of burns and myocardial damage .
Ventricular fibrillation ( VF ) could be returned to normal sinus rhythm in 60 % of cardiac arrest patients treated with a single shock from a monophasic defibrillator .
Most biphasic defibrillators have a first shock success rate of greater than 90 % .
IMPLANTABLE DEVICES Section::::Implantable devices .
A further development in defibrillation came with the invention of the implantable device , known as an implantable cardioverter - defibrillator ( or ICD ) .
This was pioneered at Sinai Hospital in Baltimore by a team that included Stephen Heilman , Alois Langer , Jack Lattuca , Morton Mower , Michel Mirowski , and Mir Imran , with the help of industrial collaborator Intec Systems of Pittsburgh .
Mirowski teamed up with Mower and Staewen , and together they commenced their research in 1969 but it was 11 years before they treated their first patient .
Similar developmental work was carried out by Schuder and colleagues at the University of Missouri .
The work was commenced , despite doubts amongst leading experts in the field of arrhythmias and sudden death .
There was doubt that their ideas would ever become a clinical reality .
In 1962 Bernard Lown introduced the external DC defibrillator .
This device applied a direct current from a discharging capacitor through the chest wall into the heart to stop heart fibrillation .
In 1972 , Lown stated in the journal Circulation — " The very rare patient who has frequent bouts of ventricular fibrillation is best treated in a coronary care unit and is better served by an effective antiarrhythmic program or surgical correction of inadequate coronary blood flow or ventricular malfunction .
In fact , the implanted defibrillator system represents an imperfect solution in search of a plausible and practical application . "
The problems to be overcome were the design of a system which would allow detection of ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia .
Despite the lack of financial backing and grants , they persisted and the first device was implanted in February 1980 at Johns Hopkins Hospital by Dr. Levi Watkins , Jr. assisted by Vivien Thomas .
Modern ICDs do not require a thoracotomy and possess pacing , cardioversion , and defibrillation capabilities .
The invention of implantable units is invaluable to some regular sufferers of heart problems , although they are generally only given to those people who have already had a cardiac episode .
People can live long normal lives with the devices .
Many patients have multiple implants .
A patient in Houston , Texas had an implant at the age of 18 in 1994 by the recent Dr. Antonio Pacifico .
He was awarded " Youngest Patient with Defibrillator " in 1996 .
Though today these devices are implanted into small babies shortly after birth .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE Section::::Society and culture .
As devices that can quickly produce dramatic improvements in patient health , defibrillators are often depicted in movies , television , video games and other fictional media .
Their function , however , is often exaggerated , with the defibrillator inducing a sudden , violent jerk or convulsion by the patient ; in reality , although the muscles may contract , such dramatic patient presentation is rare .
Similarly , medical providers are often depicted defibrillating patients with a " flat - line " ECG rhythm ( also known as asystole ) .
This is not normal medical practice , as the heart can not be restarted by the defibrillator itself .
Only the cardiac arrest rhythms ventricular fibrillation and pulseless ventricular tachycardia are normally defibrillated .
The purpose of defibrillation is to depolarize the entire heart all at once so that it is synchronized , in the hope that it will resume beating normally .
Someone who is already in asystole can not be helped by electrical means , and usually needs urgent CPR and intravenous medication .
There are also several heart rhythms that can be " shocked " when the patient is not in cardiac arrest , such as supraventricular tachycardia and ventricular tachycardia that produces a pulse ; this more - complicated procedure is known as cardioversion , not defibrillation .
TRIVIA Section::::Trivia .
In Australia up until the 1990s it was relatively rare for ambulances to carry defibrillators .
This changed in 1990 after Australian media mogul Kerry Packer had a heart attack and , purely by chance , the ambulance that responded to the call carried a defibrillator .
After recovering , Kerry Packer donated a large sum to the Ambulance Service of New South Wales in order that all ambulances in New South Wales should be fitted with a personal defibrillator , which is why defibrillators in Australia are sometimes colloquially called " Packer Whackers " .
SEE ALSO
* Advanced cardiac life support ( ACLS )
* Automated external defibrillator
* Ambulance * Cardiopulmonary resuscitation ( CPR ) * Cardioversion * Myocardial infarction ( heart attack )
* Wearable cardioverter defibrillator
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS * Sudden Cardiac Arrest Foundation * Center for Integration of Medicine and Innovative Technology
* American Red Cross : Saving a Life is as Easy as A - E - D *
FDA Heart Health
Online :
Automated External Defibrillator ( AED ) * Resuscitation Council ( UK ) *
How an internal defibrillator is implanted from Children 's Hospital Heart Center , Seattle .