JOHN WILLIAMS John Towner Williams ( born February 8 , 1932 ) is an American composer , conductor , and pianist .
With a career spanning over six decades , he has composed some of the most popular , recognizable , and critically acclaimed film scores in cinematic history , including those of the Star Wars series , Jaws , Close Encounters of the Third Kind , Superman , E.T. the Extra - Terrestrial , the Indiana Jones series , the first two Home Alone films , Hook , the first two Jurassic Park films , Schindler 's List , and the first three Harry Potter films .
Williams has been associated with director Steven Spielberg since 1974 , composing music for all but three of his feature films .
Other works by Williams include theme music for the 1984 Summer Olympic Games , NBC Sunday Night Football , " The Mission " theme used by NBC News and Seven News in Australia , the television series Lost in Space and Land of the Giants , and the incidental music for the first season of Gilligan 's Island .
Williams has also composed numerous classical concertos and other works for orchestral ensembles and solo instruments .
From 1980 to 1993 he served as the Boston Pops 's principal conductor , and is currently the orchestra 's laureate conductor .
Williams has won 24 Grammy Awards , seven British Academy Film Awards , five Academy Awards , and four Golden Globe Awards .
With 51 Academy Award nominations , Williams is the second most - nominated individual , after Walt Disney .
In 2005 , the American Film Institute selected Williams 's score to 1977 's Star Wars as the greatest American film score of all time .
The soundtrack to Star Wars was additionally preserved by the Library of Congress into the National Recording Registry , for being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
Williams was inducted into the Hollywood Bowl 's Hall of Fame in 2000 , and was a recipient of the Kennedy Center Honors in 2004 and the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2016 .
Williams composed the score for eight of the top twenty highest - grossing films at the U.S. box office ( adjusted for inflation ) .
EARLY LIFE AND FAMILY Section::::Early life and family .
John Towner Williams was born on February 8 , 1932 in Floral Park , New York , to Esther ( née Towner ) and Johnny Williams , a jazz percussionist who played with the Raymond Scott Quintet .
Williams has said of his lineage , " My father was a Maine man — we were very close .
My mother was from Boston .
My father 's parents ran a department store in Bangor , Maine , and my mother 's father was a cabinetmaker .
[ ... ] People with those roots are not inclined to be lazy . "
In 1948 , the Williams family moved to Los Angeles where John attended North Hollywood High School , graduating in 1950 .
He later attended the University of California , Los Angeles , and studied privately with the Italian composer Mario Castelnuovo - Tedesco .
Williams had originally briefly attended Los Angeles City College for one semester as the school had a Studio Jazz Band .
In 1952 , Williams was drafted U.S. Air Force , where he played the piano , brass and conducted and arranged music for The U.S. Air Force Band as part of his assignments .
In a 2016 interview with the US Air Force band , he recounted having attended basic Air Force training at Lackland base ( San Antonio , Texas )
following which he served as a pianist and brass player , with secondary duties of making arrangements for three years .
He also attended music courses at the University of Arizona as part of his service .
In 1955 , following his Air Force service , Williams moved to New York City and entered Juilliard School where he studied piano with Rosina Lhévinne .
During this time Williams worked as a jazz pianist in the city 's many jazz clubs .
After moving to Los Angeles , he began working as a session musician , most notably for composer Henry Mancini .
He worked with Mancini on the Peter Gunn soundtrack where his fellow musicians in the rhythm section included guitarist Bob Bain , bassist Rolly Bundock , and drummer Jack Sperling , many of whom were also featured on the Mr. Lucky television series .
Known as " Johnny " during the 1950s and early 1960s , Williams composed the music for many television programmes ( including several episodes of M Squad ) , and served as music arranger and bandleader for a series of popular music albums with the singer Frankie Laine .
FILM AND TELEVISION SCORING Section::::Film and television scoring .
While skilled in a variety of 20th - century compositional idioms , Williams 's most familiar style may be described as a form of neoromanticism , inspired by the late 19th century 's large - scale orchestral music — in the style of Tchaikovsky or Richard Wagner 's compositions and their concept of leitmotif — that inspired his film music predecessors .
After his studies at Juilliard , and the Eastman School of Music , Williams returned to Los Angeles , where he began working as an orchestrator at film studios .
Among other composers , Williams worked with Franz Waxman , Bernard Herrmann , and Alfred Newman , and also with his fellow orchestrators Conrad Salinger and Bob Franklyn .
Williams was also a studio pianist , performing on film scores by composers such as Jerry Goldsmith , Elmer Bernstein , and Henry Mancini .
Williams recorded with Henry Mancini the film scores of 1959 's Peter Gunn , 1962 's Days of Wine and Roses , and 1963 's Charade .
( Williams actually played the well - recognized opening riff to Mancini 's Peter Gunn theme . )
Williams ( sometimes credited as " Johnny Williams " , because of the already established actor of the same name ) composed music for various television programs in the 1960s : the pilot episode of Gilligan 's Island , Bachelor Father ( 1959–1960 ) , the Kraft Suspense Theatre , Lost in Space ( 1965–68 ) , The Time Tunnel ( 1966–67 ) , and Land of the Giants ( the last three created by the prolific TV producer , Irwin Allen ) .
Williams 's first film composition was for the 1958 B movie Daddy - O , and his first screen credit came two years later in Because They 're Young .
He soon gained notice in Hollywood for his versatility in composing jazz , piano , and symphonic music .
Williams received his first Academy Award nomination for his film score for 1967 's Valley of the Dolls , and was nominated again for his score for 1969 's Goodbye , Mr. Chips .
Williams broke through to win his first Academy Award for his film score in the 1971 film Fiddler on the Roof .
In 1972 , he composed the score for the Robert Altman - directed psychological thriller Images ( recorded in collaboration with noted percussionist Stomu Yamashta ) which earned him another nomination in the category Best Music , Original Dramatic Score at the 1973 Academy Awards .
During the early 1970s , Williams 's prominence grew thanks to his work for now – film producer Irwin Allen 's disaster films , composing the scores for 1972 's The Poseidon Adventure and 1974 's The Towering Inferno .
In addition , he scored Universal 's 1974 film Earthquake for director Mark Robson , completing a " trinity " of scores for the decade 's highest - grossing " disaster films " .
He also scored the 1972 film The Cowboys , a western starring John Wayne and directed by Mark Rydell .
In 1974 , director Steven Spielberg approached Williams to compose the music for his feature directorial debut , The Sugarland Express .
They teamed up again a year later for Spielberg 's second film , Jaws .
Widely considered to be a classic suspense film , its film score 's ominous , two - note ostinato has become synonymous with sharks and approaching danger .
The score earned Williams his second Academy Award , his first for an original composition .
Shortly thereafter , Spielberg and Williams began a long collaboration for their next feature film together , Close Encounters of the Third Kind .
During their two - year - long collaboration , they crafted its distinctive five - note figure that functions both in the background music and as the communications signal of the film 's extraterrestrials .
Williams also used a system of musical hand signals in the film that were based on hand signs created by John Curwen and refined by Zoltán Kodály .
During the same period , Spielberg recommended Williams to his friend and fellow director George Lucas , who needed a composer to score his ambitious 1977 space epic film Star Wars .
Williams delivered a grand symphonic score in the fashion of Richard Strauss , Antonín Dvořák , and Golden Age Hollywood composers Max Steiner and Erich Wolfgang Korngold .
Its main theme , " Luke 's Theme " is among the most widely recognized in film history , and the " Force Theme " and " Princess Leia 's Theme " are well - known examples of leitmotif .
Both the film and its score were immensely successful — it remains the highest grossing non - popular music recording of all - time — and Williams won another Academy Award for Best Original Score .
In 1980 , Williams returned to score The Empire Strikes Back , where he introduced " The Imperial March " as the theme for Darth Vader and the Galactic Empire , " Yoda 's Theme " , and " Han Solo and the Princess " .
The original Star Wars trilogy concluded with the 1983 film Return of the Jedi , for which Williams 's score provided most notably the " Emperor 's Theme " , " Parade of the Ewoks " , and " Luke and Leia " .
Both scores earned him Academy Award nominations .
For the 1976 Alfred Hitchcock film , Family Plot , Williams was not in love with this particular film , but did not want to turn down the chance to work for Hitchcock .
Hitchcock merely told him that in scoring the film to remember one thing , " Murder can be fun .
" Hitchcock was very satisfied with the result .
Williams worked with director Richard Donner to score the 1978 film Superman .
The score 's heroic and romantic themes , particularly the main march , the Superman fanfare and the love theme , known as " Can You Read My Mind , " appeared in the four sequel films .
For the 1981 film Raiders of the Lost Ark , created by Lucas and directed by Spielberg , Williams wrote a rousing main theme known as " The Raiders March " to accompany the film 's hero , Indiana Jones .
He composed separate themes to represent the Ark of the Covenant , the character Marion , and the story 's Nazi villains .
Additional themes were featured in his scores to the subsequent films in the franchise Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom , a prequel ( 1984 ) , Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade ( 1989 ) , and Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull ( 2008 ) .
Williams composed an emotional and sensitive score to Spielberg 's 1982 fantasy film E.T.
the Extra - Terrestrial .
Williams was awarded a fourth Academy Award for this score .
The Spielberg - Williams collaboration resumed with the director 's 1987 film Empire of the Sun , and has continued to the present , spanning genres from science fiction thrillers ( 1993 's Jurassic Park ) , to somber tragedies ( 1993 's Schindler 's List , 2005 's Munich ) , to Eastern - tinged melodramas ( 2005 's Memoirs of a Geisha , directed by Rob Marshall ) , to dramatic war films ( 1998 's Saving Private Ryan ) .
Spielberg has said , " I call it an honorable privilege to regard John Williams as a friend . "
In 1999 , George Lucas launched the first of a series of prequels to the original Star Wars trilogy .
Williams was asked to score all three films , starting with .
Along with themes from the previous films , Williams created new themes to be used as leitmotifs in 2002 's and 2005 's .
Most notable of these was " Duel of the Fates " , an aggressive choral movement in the style of Verdi 's Requiem , utilizing harsh Sanskrit lyrics that broadened the style of music used in the Star Wars films .
Also of note was " Anakin 's Theme " , which begins as an innocent childlike melody and morphs insidiously into a quote of the sinister " Imperial March . "
For Episode II , Williams composed " Across the Stars " , a love theme for Padmé Amidala and Anakin Skywalker ( mirroring the love theme composed for The Empire Strikes Back ) .
The final installment combined many of the themes created for the series ' previous films , including " The Emperor 's Theme , " " The Imperial March " , " Across the Stars " , " Duel of the Fates " , " The Force Theme " , " Rebel Fanfare " , " Luke 's Theme " , and " Princess Leia 's Theme " , as well as new themes for General Grievous and the film 's climax , entitled " Battle of the Heroes " .
In the new millennium , Williams was asked to score the film adaptations of J. K. Rowling 's widely successful book series , Harry Potter .
He went on to score the film franchise 's first three installments .
As with his Superman theme , the most important theme from Williams 's scores for the Harry Potter films , dubbed " Hedwig 's Theme " , has been used in the fourth through to the eighth films ( Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix , Harry Potter and the Half - Blood Prince , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ) , scored by Patrick Doyle ( Goblet of Fire ) , Nicholas Hooper ( Order of the Phoenix and Half - Blood Prince ) and Alexandre Desplat ( Deathly Hallows ) .
Like the main themes from Jaws , Star Wars , Superman , and Indiana Jones , fans have come to identify the Harry Potter films with Williams 's original compositions .
Williams was asked to return to score the film franchise 's final installment , Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 , but director David Yates stated that " their schedules simply did not align " as he would have had to provide Williams with a rough cut of the film sooner than was possible .
In the 20th anniversary edition of E.T.
The Extra - Terrestrial in 2002 , Williams composed a reorchestrated score for the Universal Pictures logo with the variant of the movie itself , segueing to the notes from the movie .
In 2006 , Superman Returns was completed under Bryan Singer 's direction , best known for directing the first two films in the X - Men series .
Although Singer did not request Williams to compose a score for the intentionally Donner - esque film , he employed the skills of X2 composer John Ottman to incorporate Williams 's original Superman theme , as well as those for Lois Lane , Krypton and Smallville .
In 2011 , the " Main Title Theme " and elements of " Can You Read My Mind " were notably used in the final scene of " Finale , " the series finale of the WB / CW television series Smallville .
Don Davis performed a similar role for Jurassic Park III , recommended by Williams himself to the producers .
In 2008 , Williams returned to the Indiana Jones series to score the fourth film — Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull .
He received a Grammy nomination for his work on the film .
Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull was also the only film score from the Indiana Jones film series not to be nominated for an Academy Award .
During 2008 , he also composed music for two documentaries , Warner at War , and A Timeless Call , the latter of which was directed by Steven Spielberg .
After a three - year absence from film scoring , Williams composed the scores for Spielberg 's The Adventures of Tintin and War Horse in 2011 .
Both scores received overwhelmingly positive reviews , with both scores earning Academy Award nominations , and the latter being nominated for a Golden Globe .
The Oscar nominations are Williams 's 46th and 47th , making him the most nominated musician in Academy Awards history ( having previously been tied with Alfred Newman 's 45 nominations ) , and the second most nominated overall , following Walt Disney .
Williams won an Annie Award for his score for The Adventures of Tintin in 2012 .
In 2012 , Williams scored Spielberg 's film Lincoln and subsequently received his 48th Academy Award nomination .
In February 2013 , Williams expressed his interest in working in the Star Wars sequel trilogy , stating : " Now we 're hearing of a new set of movies coming in 2015 , 2016 ...
so I need to make sure I 'm still ready to go in a few years for what I hope would be continued work with George . "
He also scored the 2013 film The Book Thief , which marked his first collaboration with a director other than Spielberg since 2005 .
The score earned him an Academy Award , Golden Globe and BAFTA nominations and earned him a Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Composition .
It was his 44th nomination for Best Original Score ( and 49th overall ) , setting a new record for the most nominations in that category ( he previously tied Alfred Newman 's record of 43 nominations in 2013 ) .
In 2015 , he scored , earning him his 50th Academy Award nomination .
Williams was also set to write the score for Bridge of Spies that year , which would have been his 27th collaboration with director Steven Spielberg .
However , in March 2015 , it was announced that Thomas Newman would replace Williams for the film , as Williams 's schedule was interrupted by a minor health issue and he became unavailable to score the film .
This is the first Spielberg film since The Color Purple ( 1985 ) not scored by Williams .
In 2016 , Williams composed the score for Spielberg 's The BFG , which opened in July 2016 .
In March 2017 , Williams scored the animated short film Dear Basketball directed by Glen Keane and based on a poem by Kobe Bryant .
Williams wrote the music for , the eighth episode of the saga , released on December 15 , 2017 , and is presumed to be working on Star Wars Episode IX .
Also in 2017 , he composed the score for Steven Spielberg 's drama film The Post .
Williams contributed " The Adventures of Han " for the 2018 standalone Star Wars film while John Powell wrote the film 's original score .
Williams is also currently attached to score the fifth Indiana Jones film .
A three - disc box set compilation of all of Williams ' musical scores for Steven Spielberg 's films , titled John Williams & Steven Spielberg : The Ultimate Collection , was released on March 17 , 2017 , which includes two previous score compilations from 1991 and 1995 .
Williams 's body of work in film composing was featured in the 2017 documentary film
SCORE : A Film Music Documentary .
In March 2018 , Williams announced that following , which is due for release on December 20 , 2019 , he will retire from composing music for the Star Wars franchise : " We know J. J. Abrams is preparing one Star Wars movie now that I will hopefully do next year for him .
I look forward to it .
It will round out a series of nine , that will be quite enough for me . "
CONDUCTING AND PERFORMING Section::::Conducting and performing .
From 1980–93 , Williams succeeded Arthur Fiedler as the Boston Pops Orchestra 's Principal Conductor .
Williams never met Fiedler in person but spoke with him by telephone .
His arrival as the Pops ' new leader in the spring of 1980 allowed him to devote part of the Pops ' first PBS broadcast of the season to presenting his new compositions for The Empire Strikes Back .
Williams almost ended his tenure with the Pops in 1984 .
Considered a customary practice of opinion , some players hissed while sight - reading a new Williams composition in rehearsal ; Williams abruptly left the session and turned in his resignation .
He initially cited mounting conflicts with his film composing schedule , but later admitted a perceived lack of discipline in , and respect from , the Pops ' ranks , culminating in this latest instance .
After entreaties by the management and personal apologies from the musicians , Williams withdrew his resignation and continued as principal conductor for nine more years .
In 1995 , he was succeeded by Keith Lockhart , the former associate conductor of the Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra and Cincinnati Pops Orchestra .
Williams is now the Pops ' Laureate Conductor , thus maintaining his affiliation with its parent , the Boston Symphony Orchestra ( BSO ) .
Williams leads the Pops on several occasions each year , particularly during their Holiday Pops season and typically for a week of concerts in May.
He conducts an annual Film Night at both Boston Symphony Hall and Tanglewood , where he frequently enlists the Tanglewood Festival Chorus , the BSO 's official chorus .
Williams has written many concert pieces , including a symphony ; a Concerto for Horn written for Dale Clevenger , the Chicago Symphony Orchestra 's Principal Hornist ; a Concerto for Clarinet written for Michele Zukovsky ( the Los Angeles Philharmonic 's Principal Clarinetist ) in 1991 ; a sinfonietta for wind ensemble ; a cello concerto premiered by Yo - Yo Ma and the Boston Symphony Orchestra at Tanglewood in 1994 ; concertos for the flute and violin recorded by the London Symphony Orchestra ; and a trumpet concerto , which was premiered by The Cleveland Orchestra and their principal trumpet Michael Sachs in September 1996 .
His bassoon concerto , " The Five Sacred Trees " , which was premiered by the New York Philharmonic and principal bassoon player Judith LeClair in 1995 , was recorded for Sony Classical by Williams with LeClair and the London Symphony Orchestra .
Williams was the subject of an hour - long documentary for the BBC in 1980 , and was featured in a report on 20/20 in 1983 .
In 1985 , Williams was commissioned by NBC to compose a television news music package for various network news spots .
The package , which Williams named " The Mission , " consists of four movements , two of which are still used heavily by NBC today for Today , NBC Nightly News , and Meet the Press .
He composed the " Liberty Fanfare " for the Statue of Liberty 's rededication , " We 're Lookin ' Good ! "
for the Special Olympics in celebration of the 1987 International Summer Games , and themes for the 1984 , 1988 , 1996 , and 2002 Olympic Games .
His most recent concert work , " Seven for Luck " , for soprano and orchestra , is a seven - piece song cycle based on the texts of former U.S. Poet Laureate Rita Dove . "
Seven for Luck " was given its world premiere by the Boston Symphony under Williams with soprano Cynthia Haymon .
Williams makes annual appearances with the Los Angeles Philharmonic at the Hollywood Bowl , and took part as conductor and composer in the orchestra 's opening gala concerts for the Walt Disney Concert Hall in 2003 .
In 2004 , Williams both served as the Grand Marshal for the Rose Parade , and directed " The Star Spangled Banner " at the Rose Bowl 's beginning .
In April 2005 , Williams and the Boston Pops performed the " Throne Room Finale " from Star Wars at opening day in Fenway Park as the Boston Red Sox , having won their first World Series championship since 1918 , received their championship rings .
For Game 1 of the 2007 World Series , Williams conducted a brass - and - drum ensemble through a new dissonant arrangement of the " Star Spangled Banner . "
In February 2004 , April 2006 , and September 2007 , he conducted the New York Philharmonic at Avery Fisher Hall in New York City .
The initial program was intended to be a one - time special event , and featured Williams 's medley of Oscar - winning film scores first performed at the previous year 's Academy Awards .
Its unprecedented popularity led to two concerts in 2006 : fundraising gala events featuring personal recollections by film directors Martin Scorsese and Steven Spielberg .
Continuing demand fueled three more concerts in 2007 , which all sold out .
These featured a tribute to the musicals of film director Stanley Donen , and had the distinction of serving as the New York Philharmonic season 's opening event .
After a three - season absence , Williams conducted the Philharmonic once again in October 2011 .
Maestro Williams also conducted the National Symphony Orchestra , the U.S. Army Herald Trumpets , the Joint Armed Forces Chorus , and the Choral Arts Society of Washington performing his new arrangement of " The Star - Spangled Banner " for its 200th anniversary .
The performance was held at A Capitol Fourth , an Independence Day celebration concert in Washington , D.C. , on July 4 , 2014 .
At Star Wars Celebration Orlando , Williams performed a surprise concert along with the Orlando Philharmonic Orchestra , featuring " Princess Leia 's Theme " ( a tribute to the recently deceased Carrie Fisher ) , " The Imperial March " and " Main Title " followed by George Lucas saying , " The secret sauce of Star Wars , the greatest composer - conductor in the universe , John Williams . "
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Williams married Barbara Ruick , an American actress and singer , in 1956 .
Together they had three children : Jennifer ( b. 1956 ) , Mark Towner Williams ( b. 1958 ) , and Joseph ( b. 1960 ) , who is the lead singer of Toto .
The two remained married until her death in 1974 .
In 1980 , Williams married Samantha Winslow , a photographer .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
John Williams has been nominated for 51 Academy Awards , winning 5 ; 6 Emmy Awards , winning 3 ; 25 Golden Globe Awards , winning 4 ; 67 Grammy Awards , winning 23 ; and has received 7 British Academy Film Awards .
With 51 Oscar nominations , Williams currently holds the record for the most Oscar nominations for a living person , and is the second most nominated person in Academy Awards history behind Walt Disney 's 59 .
Forty - six of Williams 's Oscar nominations are for Best Original Score and five are for Best Original Song .
He won four Oscars for Best Original Score and one for Best Scoring :
Adaptation and Original Song Score
( Fiddler on the Roof ) .
In 1980 , Williams received an Honorary Doctorate of Music from Berklee College of Music .
Williams has been inducted into the American Classical Music Hall of Fame and the Hollywood Bowl Hall of Fame .
Williams was honored with the annual Richard Kirk award at the 1999 BMI Film and TV Awards , recognizing his contribution to film and television music .
In 2004 , he received Kennedy Center Honors .
He won a Classic Brit Award in 2005 for his soundtrack work of the previous year .
Notably , Williams has won the Grammy Award for Best Instrumental Composition for his scores for Star Wars , Close Encounters of the Third Kind , Superman , The Empire Strikes Back , E.T.
the Extra - Terrestrial , Angela 's Ashes , Munich , Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull , and The Book Thief .
The competition includes not only composers of film scores , but also composers of instrumental music of any genre , including composers of classical fare such as symphonies and chamber music .
Williams received an Honorary Doctor of Music degree from Boston College in 1993 and from Harvard University in 2017 .
In 2003 , the International Olympic Committee accorded Williams its highest individual honor , the Olympic Order .
In 2009 , Williams received the National Medal of Arts in the White House in Washington , D.C. for his achievements in symphonic music for films , and " as a pre - eminent composer and conductor [ whose ] scores have defined and inspired modern movie - going for decades . "
Williams was made an honorary brother of Kappa Kappa Psi at Boston University in the late 1980s .
In 2013 , Williams was presented with the Ken Burns Lifetime Achievement Award .
AFI Section::::AFI .
In 2005 , the American Film Institute selected Williams 's richly thematic and highly popular score to 1977 's Star Wars as the greatest American film score of all time .
His scores for Jaws and E.T. also appeared on the list , at 6 and 14 , respectively .
He is the only composer to have three scores on the list .
Williams received the AFI Life Achievement Award in June 2016 , becoming the first composer to receive the award .
ACADEMY AWARDS
BAFTA
AWARDS Section::::BAFTA Awards . !
Year !
Project !
Category !
Result 2013
The Book Thief 2015 EMMY AWARDS Section::::Emmy Awards . !
Year !
Project !
Category !
Result
GOLDEN GLOBE
AWARDS Section::::Golden Globe Awards . !
Year !
Project !
Category !
Result GRAMMY AWARDS Section::::Grammy Awards . !
Year !
Project !
Category !
Result Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media
" Mine Mission " from Best Instrumental Composition CHARTING HITS ( U.S. , BILLBOARD ) Section::::Charting hits ( U.S. , Billboard ) . !
Year !
Title !
Billboard
Hot 100 !
Billboard AC 1975
Main Title ( Theme from " Jaws " ) 32 22 1977
Star Wars ( Main Title ) 10 4 1978 Theme from " Close Encounters of the Third Kind " 13 13 CONCERT WORKS
CONCERTOS * 1969 :
Concerto for Flute and Orchestra * 1976 : Concerto for Violin and Orchestra * 1985 : Concerto for Tuba and Orchestra * 1991 : Concerto for Clarinet and Orchestra * 1993 : Concerto for Bassoon and Orchestra , The Five Sacred Trees * 1994 : Concerto for Cello and Orchestra * 1996 : Concerto for Trumpet and Orchestra * 2000
: TreeSong for Violin and Orchestra * 2002
: Heartwood : Lyric Sketches for Cello and Orchestra * 2002
: Escapades for Alto Saxophone and Orchestra ( cut from the Catch Me If You Can film score ) * 2003 :
Concerto for Horn and Orchestra * 2007 : Duo Concertante for Violin and Viola * 2009 : Concerto for Viola and Orchestra * 2009 :
On Willows and Birches , for Harp and Orchestra * 2011 : Concerto for Oboe and Orchestra OTHER ORCHESTRAL WORKS * 1965 : Prelude and Fugue on Stan Kenton Conducts the Los Angeles Neophonic Orchestra ( Capitol , 1965 ) * 1965 : Symphony # 1 * 1968 : Sinfonietta for Wind Ensemble * 1975 : Thomas and the King – Musical * 1980 : Jubilee 350
Fanfare * 1984 : Olympic Fanfare & Theme * 1986 : Liberty Fanfare * 1987 : A Hymn to New England * 1988 : Fanfare for Michael Dukakis * 1988 :
For New York
* 1990 :
Celebrate Discovery
* 1993 : Sound the Bells !
* 1994 :
Song for World Peace
* 1995 :
Variations on Happy Birthday * 1999 : American Journey * 2003 : Soundings *
2007 :
Star Spangled Banner * 2008 : A Timeless Call * 2012
: Fanfare for Fenway * 2012 : Seven for Luck for soprano and orchestra * 2013 : For ' The President 's Own ' * 2014 :
Star Spangled Banner * 2014 : Scherzo for Piano and Orchestra * 2018 : Highwood 's Ghost CHAMBER WORKS * 1951 : Sonata for Piano *
1997
: Elegy for Cello and Piano * 2001 : Three Pieces for solo Cello
* 2009 : Air and Simple Gifts for violin , cello , clarinet and piano * 2011 :
Quartet La Jolla for violin , cello , clarinet and harp
* 2012 : Rounds for solo guitar * 2013 :
Conversations for solo Piano * 2014 : Music for Brass for Brass Ensemble and Percussion DISCOGRAPHY SEE
ALSO
* List of compositions by John Williams
* Music of Harry Potter * Music of Star Wars * Music of Superman REFERENCES FURTHER READING *
Audissino , Emilio : John Williams 's Film Music . '
Jaws , ' ' Star Wars , ' ' Raiders of the Lost Ark , ' and the Return of the Classical Hollywood Music Style ( Madison , WI : University of Wisconsin Press , 2014 ) ,
346 pp .
* Audissino , Emilio : " Golden Age 2.0 : John Williams and the Revival of the Symphonic Film Score " .
In :
* Paulus , Irena : " Williams versus Wagner – Or an Attempt at Linking Musical Epics " .
In :
* Riedlinger , Stefan : 50 Best Soundtracks .
A guide to the music of Jerry Goldsmith , John Williams , Hans Zimmer and many more with an exclusive interview with Michael J. Lewis ( 2018 ) . . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* John Williams
Fan Network
* John Williams music listings