HINNY
A hinny is a domestic equine hybrid that is the offspring of a male horse , a stallion , and a female donkey , a jenny .
It is the reciprocal cross to the more common mule , which is the product of a male donkey , a jack , and a female horse , a mare .
The hinny is distinctive from the mule both in physiology and temperament as a consequence of genomic imprinting .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Hinnies are the reciprocal cross to the more common mule .
Comparatively , the average hinny has a smaller stature , shorter ears , stronger legs , and a thicker mane than the average mule .
The distinct phenotypes of the hinny and the mule are partly attributable to genomic imprinting — an element of epigenetic inheritance .
Physiological arguments for the differing stature of the hinny and the mule cite the smaller womb of the female donkey ( dam ) versus the larger womb of the female horse ( mare ) .
Growth potential of equine offspring may be influenced by the size of the dam 's womb .
The American Donkey and Mule Society ( ADMS ) appears to interpret these differences as wholly physiological , stating : " The genetic inheritance of the hinny is exactly the same as the mule .
"
Be that as it may , the epigenetic inheritance of the hinny is not the same as the mule , as " the differences between the mule and the hinny are now known to be caused by genomic imprinting , whereby the expression of a gene is determined by its origin rather than its DNA sequence . "
Like mules , hinnies express broad variation in stature .
This is because donkeys come in many sizes , from miniatures , as small as at the withers , to American mammoth donkeys that may be over at the withers .
Thus , a hinny is restricted to being about the size of the largest breed of donkey .
Mules , however , have a female horse as a parent , so they can be as large as the size of the largest breed of horse , such as those foaled from work horse mares such as the Belgian .
Physical differences between hinnies and mules are not restricted to stature .
The head of a hinny is said to resemble that of a horse more than it does a mule 's , with shorter ears ( although these are still longer than those of horses ) , and more horse - like manes and tails than mules .
Beyond the physiological , hinnies and mules differ in temperament " despite sharing nuclear genomes .
" This , too , is believed to be " attributable to the action of imprinted genes . "
A male hinny is properly called a horse hinny , and a female hinny is properly called a mare hinny , though in British English both female hinnies and female donkeys are sometimes called jennets .
FERTILITY , STERILITY , AND RARITY Section::::Fertility , sterility , and rarity .
Hinnies are difficult to obtain because of the differences in the number of chromosomes of the horse and the donkey .
A donkey has 62 chromosomes , whereas a horse has 64 .
Hinnies , being hybrids of those two species , have 63 chromosomes and are sterile .
The uneven number of chromosomes results in an incomplete reproductive system .
According to the ADMS : " The equine hybrid is easier to obtain when the lower chromosome count , the donkey , is in the male .
Therefore breeding for hinnies is more hit - and - miss than breeding for mules . "
The male hinny or mule can and will mate , but the emission is not fertile .
Male hinnies and mules are usually castrated to help control their behavior by eliminating their interest in females .
Female hinnies and mules are not customarily spayed , and may or may not go through estrus .
Female mules have been known , on rare occasions , to produce offspring when mated to a horse or donkey , although this is extremely uncommon .
Since 1527 , sixty cases of foals born to female mules around the world have been documented .
In contrast , according to the ADMS , there is only one known case of a female hinny doing so .
Namely , in China , in 1981 , a hinny mare proved fertile with a donkey sire .
When the Chinese hinny was bred to a jack , she produced the so - called " Dragon Foal " , which resembled a donkey with mule - like features .
In Morocco , in 2002 , a mule mare bred to a donkey sire produced a male foal .
DNA testing revealed the foal has a mixed karyotype hybrid like the Chinese hinny offspring " Dragon Foal " .
Hinnies are rare for many other reasons .
Donkey jennies and horse stallions can be choosier about their mates than horse mares and donkey jacks .
Thus , the two parties involved may not even care to mate .
Even if they do cooperate , donkey jennies are less likely to conceive when bred to a horse stallion than horse mares are when bred to a donkey jack .
Breeding large hinnies is an even bigger challenge , as it requires stock from a jenny of large size , such as the Baudet de Poitou or American Mammoth Donkey .
Mammoth donkey stock is becoming increasingly rare and has been declared an endangered domestic breed .
Fanciers are unlikely to devote a Mammoth jenny 's valuable breeding time to producing sterile hinny hybrids , when Mammoth jennies are in high demand to produce fertile purebred Mammoth foals .
SEE ALSO
*
Messara horse
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The American Donkey and Mule Society
*
Why Not Hinnies ?