T - MOBILE T - Mobile ( stylised as · T···Mobile · ) is the brand name used by the mobile communications subsidiaries of the German telecommunications company Deutsche Telekom AG .
The brand is active in Austria ( under the subsidiary T - Mobile Austria ) , the Czech Republic ( T - Mobile Czech Republic ) , the Netherlands ( T - Mobile Nederland ) , Poland ( T - Mobile Polska ) , and the United States ( T - Mobile US ) .
The name was previously used by subsidiaries in other countries , including Albania ( now Telekom Albania ) , Croatia ( now Hrvatski Telekom ) , Germany ( now Deutsche Telekom ) , Hungary ( now Magyar Telekom ) , Macedonia ( now Makedonski Telekom ) , Montenegro ( now Crnogorski Telekom ) , the United Kingdom ( now EE Limited ) , Romania ( now Telekom Romania ) , and Slovakia ( now Slovak Telekom ) .
Since 1999 , Deutsche Telekom owned the holding company T - Mobile International AG for its mobile communications subsidiaries .
From 2003 to 2007 , T - Mobile International was one of Deutsche Telekom 's segments beside the segments of ' Broadband / Fixnet ' , ' Business Customers ' and ' Group HQ and Shared Services ' .
In 2009 , Deutsche Telekom transformed its structure to adopt a regional setup ( Germany , Europe , USA ) by combining its previously separated fixed and mobile subsidiaries to form integrated local businesses , T - Mobile International itself was merged into Deutsche Telekom AG .
When T - Mobile International AG existed , the holding company was based in Bonn , Germany and its subsidiaries operated GSM , UMTS and LTE - based cellular networks in Europe , the United States , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands .
The company had financial stakes in mobile operators in both Central and Eastern Europe .
Globally , T - Mobile International 's subsidiaries had a combined total of approximately 230 million subscribers .
T - Mobile International was the world 's thirteenth - largest mobile - phone service provider by subscribers and the fourth - largest multinational after the UK 's Vodafone , India 's Airtel , and Spain 's Telefónica .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Germany 's first mobile - communications services were radiotelephone systems that were owned and operated by the state postal monopoly , Deutsche Bundespost .
It launched the analog first - generation C - Netz ( " C Network " , marketed as C - Tel ) , Germany 's first true mobile phone network in 1985 .
On July 1 , 1989 , West Germany reorganized Deutsche Bundespost and consolidated telecommunications into a new unit , Deutsche Bundespost Telekom .
On July 1 , 1992 , it began to operate Germany 's first GSM network , along with the C - Netz , as its DeTeMobil subsidiary .
The GSM 900 MHz frequency band was referred to as the " D - Netz " , and Telekom named its service D1 ; the private consortium awarded the second license ( now Vodafone Germany ) chose the name D2 .
Deutsche Bundespost Telekom was renamed Deutsche Telekom AG on January 1 , 1995 as part of phase two of the German communications reform .
This process of deregulation continued in November 1996 , when DT was privatized and had the largest European IPO at the time , with the stock abbreviation ' DT 1 ' .
In 1999 , T - Mobile International AG & Co. KG holding company was founded ( later renamed to T - Mobile International AG ) .
In 2002 , as DT consolidated its international operations , it anglicized the T - Mobil name to T - Mobile .
On July 5 , 2005
Deutsche Telekom transformed its structure and adopted a regional setup ( Germany , Europe , USA ) .
Where available , the local mobile businesses were combined with the respective local wireline businesses to follow the integrated business approach .
In 2009 T - Mobile International AG was merged into Deutsche Telekom AG .
OPERATIONS !
Market share !
Ranking 2nd
AUSTRIA
Section::::Austria .
Until 2000 , T - Mobile was a shareholder of the former max.mobil .
network .
In April 2001 , it acquired one hundred percent and subsequently introduced the T - Mobile brand in Austria by rebranding max.mobil .
in April 2002 as T - Mobile Austria .
In 2005 , it acquired former competitor tele.ring from Western Wireless International .
It is now used as a discount brand .
tele.ring is an Austrian mobile network operator .
Since it was bought by T - Mobile in 2006 , it is no longer a legally independent company .
Tele.ring is administratively independent and now acts primarily as a discount - offer , similar to Yesss and BoB of A1 .
In the past , tele.ring was known for their aggressive price - politics .
CROATIA Section::::Croatia .
T - Mobile entered the Croatian market in October 1999 when DT initially acquired a thirty - five percent interest in Hrvatski telekom , including its cell phone service provider Cronet .
Two years later , DT signed an agreement with the Croatian government to acquire the additional 16 percent needed for a majority holding .
In January 2003 , Hrvatski Telekom assembled all of its mobile activities under a single brand HTmobile .
Finally , in October 2004 , HTmobile became T - Mobile Hrvatska , or T - Mobile Croatia , thus joining the global T - Mobile family also by name .
Since January 1 , 2010 , Hrvatski Telekom and T - Mobile Croatia merged into one company on the Croatian market under the name Hrvatski Telekom ( in English : Croatian Telecom ) ; the T - Mobile brand remained active in the mobile - business area and T - Com in the fixed - business area until 2013 when they were replaced by unified brand " Hrvatski Telekom " .
CZECH REPUBLIC Section::::Czech Republic .
T - Mobile was previously known as Paegas in the Czech Republic .
T - Mobile Czech Republic a.s . has been operating in the Czech market since 1996 .
As of December 31 , 2014 , 6 million customers were using T - Mobile services .
T - Mobile Czech Republic a.s . operates a public mobile communications network on the GSM standard in the 900 and 1800 MHz bands and is also authorized to operate a UMTS network .
On October 19 , 2005 , T - Mobile was the first operator in the Czech Republic to launch this third - generation technology under the name Internet 4G.
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
Germany 's initial mobile communications services were radiotelephone systems that were owned and operated by the state postal monopoly , Deutsche Bundespost .
These early mobile communications networks were referred to as the " A " and " B " networks .
Deutsche Bundespost Telekom built Germany 's first cellular mobile network , an analog , first - generation system referred to as the " C " network or C - Netz .
The network became operational in 1985 and services were marketed under the C - Tel brand .
Following German reunification in 1990 , the " C " network was extended to the former East Germany .
On July 1 , 1992 , Deutsche Bundespost Telekom 's DeTeMobil subsidiary began operating Germany 's first GSM 900 MHz frequency cellular network , which the organization referred to as D - Netz .
Digital GSM services were marketed under the " D1 " brand and DeTeMobil continued to sell analog cellular services concurrently under the existing C - Tel brand .
In 1994 , DeTeMobil introduced short message service ( SMS ) services .
In 1996 , DT began to brand its subsidiaries with the T- prefix , renaming the DeTeMobil subsidiary T - Mobil and rebranding the GSM cellular network T - D1 .
C - Netz was renamed to T - C - Tel .
The T - C - Tel / C - Netz services were fully discontinued in 2000 .
D1 introduced prepaid service called Xtra in 1997 .
Despite the numerous changes in subsidiary names and brands , Germans sometimes continue to use the T - D1 name within Germany and refer to T - Mobile as D1 .
On 1 April 2010 , after the T - Home and T - Mobile German operations merged to form Telekom Deutschland GmbH , a wholly owned DT subsidiary ; the T - Mobile brand was discontinued in Germany and replaced with the Telekom brand .
HUNGARY Section::::Hungary .
On May 1 , 2004 , the same day as Hungary joined the European Union , the former company , named Westel ( which was owned entirely by the former Matáv ) changed its name , and the entire marketing .
Westel was the most popular cellphone network in Hungary at the time .
The company was called T - Mobile Hungary , but after some financial decisions , as with the other T- companies , it formed to Magyar Telekom Nyrt .
Mobil Szolgáltatások Üzletág ( Hungarian Telekom , Mobile Services Business Unit ) , and its branding started to use Telekom instead of T - Mobile .
T - Mobile also provides high - speed services , like EDGE , 3 G , and HSDPA in Hungary 's major cities .
MACEDONIA Section::::Macedonia .
In Republic of Macedonia , T - Mobile was previously known as Mobimak .
The company has been operating in the Macedonian market since 1996 .
On 7 September 2006 , Mobimak accepted the international T - Mobile branding .
By June 2007 , T - Mobile reached one million subscribers , out of which 85 percent were active and using their services .
T - Mobile MK covers 98 percent of the population .
It has a GSM 900 licence , offers GPRS , MMS and mobile internet services using T - Mobile HotSpots and has implemented the EDGE fast mobile internet specification .
T - Mobile Macedonia applied for a UMTS licence on 1 August 2007 .
From 1 July T - Mobile ceased to exist as a legal entity and was replaced by the Telekom brand .
The carrier name is now Telekom.mk .
The codes are 070/071/072 .
MONTENEGRO Section::::Montenegro .
The T - Mobile brand entered the Montenegrin market in 2006 through the acquisition of MoNet GSM mobile provider .
T - Mobile Montenegro ( T - Mobile Crna Gora ) is fully owned by T - Crnogorski Telekom , which is itself owned by Magyar Telekom , a DT subsidiary .
Although the acquisition by Magyar Telekom was done in 2005 , it was not until 26 September 2006 , that the MoNet GSM operator was re - branded as T - Mobile Montenegro .
MoNet GSM launched on July 1 , 2000 , as part of Telecom Montenegro .
It became an independent incorporated limited - liability company a month later , on 1 August 2000 .
The company currently holds around 34 percent of the Montenegrin market and uses GSM 900 , GPRS , and EDGE technologies .
Since 21 June 2007 , 3G / UMTS services have been available in larger cities as well as on the coast .
NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
Deutsche Telekom entered the Dutch market by the acquisition of Ben on 20 September 2002 .
In 2007 , T - Mobile Netherlands , a wholly owned subsidiary of T - Mobile International , acquired Orange Netherlands from France Télécom for EUR 1.33 billion .
This makes it the third largest mobile telephone operator in the country behind KPN and Vodafone .
POLAND
Section::::Poland .
T - Mobile Polska serves over thirteen million customers , and owns licenses for 900 , 1800 , 2100 MHz bands which are used for GSM , WCDMA and LTE .
Formerly Era , rebranding took place on 5 June 2011 .
T - Mobile Poland with Orange Polska have consolidated their infrastructure and used this opportunity to roll out 3 G coverage using 900 MHz band .
SLOVAKIA Section::::Slovakia .
The T - Mobile brand entered the Slovak market in May 2005 , after rebranding the EuroTel network from Eurotel Bratislava to T - Mobile Slovensko nowadays Telekom .
The company Eurotel Bratislava was partially owned by Slovak Telekom , an incumbent fixed - line operator , which later acquired a one hundred percent stake in Eurotel Bratislava .
T - Mobile International and DT never owned T - Mobile Slovensko directly ; DT is partially owner of Slovak Telekom and thus T - Mobile International has procurement managing function within T - Mobile Slovensko .
On 1 July 2010 , Slovak Telekom and T - Mobile Slovensko merged into one company on the Slovak market under the name Telekom ; T - Mobile brand no more remains active in the mobile - business area , as well as the T - Com in the fixed - business area .
The Telekom network provides services on three networks GSM ( 900/1800 MHz ) , UMTS ( 2100 MHz ) , Flash OFDM ( 450 MHz ) .
Mobile data services are provided on 4 G , 3 G , GSM network with EDGE extension and on UMTS with DC - HSPA+ 42 Mbit / s and HSUPA 5,8 Mbit / s .
Flash OFDM is one of two commercially successfully launched solely data networks in the world .
It supports upload speed up to 5.8 Mbit / s .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
T - Mobile UK started life as Mercury One2One , the world 's first GSM 1800 mobile network .
It was originally operated by the now - defunct Mercury Communications .
Later known simply as One 2 One , it was purchased by DT in 1999 and rebranded as T - Mobile in 2002 .
T - Mobile offered both pay - as - you - go and pay - monthly contract phones .
T - Mobile launched their 3 G UMTS services in the Autumn of 2003 .
T - Mobile UK 's network was also used as the backbone network behind the Virgin Mobile virtual network .
In late 2007 , it was confirmed that the merger of the high - speed 3 G and HSDPA networks operated by T - Mobile UK and 3 ( UK ) was to take place starting January 2008 .
This left T - Mobile and 3 with the largest HSDPA mobile phone network in the country .
In 2009 , France Télécom 's Orange and DT , T - Mobile 's parent , announced they were in advanced talks to merge their UK operations to create the UK 's largest mobile operator .
In March 2010 , the European Commission approved this merger on the condition that the combined company sell 25 % of the spectrum it owns on the 1800 MHz radio band and amend a network sharing agreement with smaller rival 3 .
The merger was completed the following month , the new company 's name later being announced as EE .
Orange and T - Mobile continued as separate brands in the market until 2015 , both run by the new parent company .
T - Mobile UK and Orange UK announced on 15th February 2015 the sale of EE_Limited to BT Group for £ 12.5B and to take shares of 12 % within the BT Group as part of the deal .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
T - Mobile US provides wireless voice , messaging , and data services in the United States , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands under the T - Mobile , Metro by T - Mobile brands .
The company operates the third largest wireless network in the U.S. market with over 65.5 million customers and annual revenues of $ 32 billion .
Its nationwide network reaches 98 percent of Americans , through its EDGE 2G / HSPA 3G / HSPA+ 4G/4 G LTE networks , as well as through roaming agreements ( see section : Radio frequency spectrum chart ) . , J. D. Power and Associates , a global marketing - information - services firm , ranked the company highest among major wireless carriers for retail - store satisfaction four years consecutively and highest for wireless customer care two years consecutively .
The company owns licences to operate a 1900 MHz GSM PCS digital cellular network and AWS UMTS digital cellular networks using 600MHz , 700MHz , 850MHz , 1700 MHz and 2100 MHz covering areas of the continental U.S. , Alaska , Hawaii , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands .
It provides coverage in areas where it does not own radio frequency spectrum licenses via roaming agreements with other operators of compatible networks .
In addition to its cellular mobile network , T - Mobile US operates a nationwide Wi - Fi Internet - access network under the T - Mobile HotSpots brand .
The T - Mobile HotSpot service offers access to a nationwide network of approximately 8,350 access points , installed in venues such as Starbucks coffeehouses , FedEx Office Office and Print Centers , Hyatt hotels and resorts , Red Roof Inns , Sofitel hotels , Novotel hotels , the airline clubs of American Airlines , Delta Air Lines , United Airlines and US Airways , and airports .
T - Mobile US , Inc. traces its roots to the 1994 establishment of VoiceStream Wireless PCS as a subsidiary of Western Wireless Corporation .
Spun off from parent Western Wireless on 3 May 1999 , VoiceStream Wireless Corporation was purchased by Deutsche Telekom on 31 May 2001 , for $ 35 billion and renamed T - Mobile USA , Inc. in July 2002 .
This legacy is reflected in some mismatch between US and German T - Mobile service , notably the frequency mismatch making phones inoperative in the other country , and picture messaging issues ( non - delivery of pictures in text messages ) between those networks .
After a failed attempt by AT&T in 2011 to purchase the company in an $ 39 billion stock and cash offer ( which was withdrawn after being faced with significant regulatory and legal hurdles , along with heavy resistance from the U.S. government ) , T - Mobile USA announced its intent to merge with MetroPCS Communications , Inc. , the sixth largest carrier in the U.S. , to improve its competitiveness with other national carriers ; the deal was approved by the Department of Justice and Federal Communications Commission in March 2013 .
The merger agreement gave Deutsche Telekom the option to sell its 72 % stake in the merged company , valued at around $ 14.2 billion , to a third - party before the end of the 18-month lock - up period .
On 1 May 2013 , the combined company , now known as T - Mobile US , began trading on the New York Stock Exchange as a public company .
SPRINT MERGER Section::::Sprint Merger .
On April 29 , 2018 , T - Mobile and Sprint announced in a $ 26 billion deal that they would merge to form a new company under the name T - Mobile .
MARKETING Section::::Marketing .
The five - note T - Mobile audio logo was composed by Lance Massey in 1999 , and was originally part of the song ( " Hello Ola " by Clan Chi ) used to promote DT 's Tour de France bicycle team .
SPONSORSHIPS Section::::Sponsorships .
T - Mobile , specifically the T - Mobile US subsidiary in the United States , holds the naming rights to T - Mobile Arena on the Las Vegas Strip near Las Vegas .
T - Mobile 's parent company , Deutsche Telekom , currently serves as the kit sponsor for German Bundesliga club FC Bayern Munich .
T - Mobile was also the official sponsor of English Football League Championship side West Bromwich Albion and previously sponsored Rotherham United as well as Scottish Premier League clubs Rangers and Celtic .
T - Mobile co - sponsored Everton with the One2One brand
and they also sponsored the 2002 FA Youth Cup Final .
T - Mobile was also a kit sponsor for English club Birmingham City .
The phone company is also involved in sponsoring leagues such as the Austrian Football Bundesliga , which is named the T - Mobile Bundesliga .
It was also the official global mobile phone carrier for the 2006 FIFA World Cup football tournament in Germany and sponsored its own cycling team , the T - Mobile Team ( later Team HTC - High Road ) .
T - Mobile also has banner ads at some matches of Mexico 's top association football league , Liga MX , despite not having a presence in that country .
Since 2016 , the wireless company sponsors the Home Run Derby .
SEE ALSO
* Electronic Beats
* Microsoft data loss 2009
* Open Handset Alliance * T - Mobile Ekstraklasa
* T - Mobile Team *
T - Online REFERENCES