RADIOLOGY Radiology is the medical specialty that uses medical imaging to diagnose and treat diseases within the body .
A variety of imaging techniques such as X - ray radiography , ultrasound , computed tomography ( CT ) , nuclear medicine including positron emission tomography ( PET ) , and magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) are used to diagnose or treat diseases .
Interventional radiology is the performance of ( usually minimally invasive ) medical procedures with the guidance of imaging technologies .
The modern practice of radiology involves several different healthcare professions working as a team .
The radiologist is a medical doctor who has completed the appropriate post - graduate training and interprets medical images , communicates these findings to other physicians by means of a report or verbally , and uses imaging to perform minimally invasive medical procedures .
The nurse is involved in the care of patients before and after imaging or procedures , including administration of medications , monitoring of vital signs and monitoring of sedated patients .
The radiographer , also known as a " radiologic technologist " in some countries , is a specially trained healthcare professional that uses sophisticated technology and positioning techniques to produce medical images .
Depending on the individual 's training and country of practice , the radiographer may specialize in one of the above - mentioned imaging modalities or have expanded roles in image reporting .
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING MODALITIES
PROJECTION ( PLAIN ) RADIOGRAPHY Section::::Diagnostic imaging modalities .
Section::::Projection ( plain ) radiography .
Radiographs ( originally called roentgenographs , named after the discoverer of X - rays , Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen ) are produced by transmitting X - rays through a patient .
The X - rays are projected through the body onto a detector ; an image is formed based on which rays pass through ( and are detected ) versus those that are absorbed or scattered in the patient ( and thus are not detected ) .
Röntgen discovered X - rays on November 8 , 1895 and received the first Nobel Prize in Physics for their discovery in 1901 .
In film - screen radiography , an X - ray tube generates a beam of X - rays , which is aimed at the patient .
The X - rays that pass through the patient are filtered through a device called an grid or X - ray filter , to reduce scatter , and strike an undeveloped film , which is held tightly to a screen of light - emitting phosphors in a light - tight cassette .
The film is then developed chemically and an image appears on the film .
Film - screen radiography is being replaced by phosphor plate radiography but more recently by digital radiography ( DR ) and the EOS imaging .
In the two latest systems , the X - rays strike sensors that converts the signals generated into digital information , which is transmitted and converted into an image displayed on a computer screen .
In digital radiography the sensors shape a plate , but in the EOS system , which is a slot - scanning system , a linear sensor vertically scans the patient .
Plain radiography was the only imaging modality available during the first 50 years of radiology .
Due to its availability , speed , and lower costs compared to other modalities , radiography is often the first - line test of choice in radiologic diagnosis .
Also despite the large amount of data in CT scans , MR scans and other digital - based imaging , there are many disease entities in which the classic diagnosis is obtained by plain radiographs .
Examples include various types of arthritis and pneumonia , bone tumors ( especially benign bone tumors ) , fractures , congenital skeletal anomalies , etc .
Mammography and DXA are two applications of low energy projectional radiography , used for the evaluation for breast cancer and osteoporosis , respectively .
FLUOROSCOPY Section::::Fluoroscopy .
Fluoroscopy and angiography are special applications of X - ray imaging , in which a fluorescent screen and image intensifier tube is connected to a closed - circuit television system .
This allows real - time imaging of structures in motion or augmented with a radiocontrast agent .
Radiocontrast agents are usually administered by swallowing or injecting into the body of the patient to delineate anatomy and functioning of the blood vessels , the genitourinary system , or the gastrointestinal tract ( GI tract ) .
Two radiocontrast agents are presently in common use .
Barium sulfate ( BaSO ) is given orally or rectally for evaluation of the GI tract .
Iodine , in multiple proprietary forms , is given by oral , rectal , vaginal , intra - arterial or intravenous routes .
These radiocontrast agents strongly absorb or scatter X - rays , and in conjunction with the real - time imaging , allow demonstration of dynamic processes , such as peristalsis in the digestive tract or blood flow in arteries and veins .
Iodine contrast may also be concentrated in abnormal areas more or less than in normal tissues and make abnormalities ( tumors , cysts , inflammation ) more conspicuous .
Additionally , in specific circumstances , air can be used as a contrast agent for the gastrointestinal system and carbon dioxide can be used as a contrast agent in the venous system ; in these cases , the contrast agent attenuates the X - ray radiation less than the surrounding tissues .
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY Section::::Computed tomography .
CT imaging uses X - rays in conjunction with computing algorithms to image the body .
In CT , an X - ray tube opposite an X - ray detector ( or detectors ) in a ring - shaped apparatus
rotate around a patient , producing a computer - generated cross - sectional image ( tomogram ) .
CT is acquired in the axial plane , with coronal and sagittal images produced by computer reconstruction .
Radiocontrast agents are often used with CT for enhanced delineation of anatomy .
Although radiographs provide higher spatial resolution , CT can detect more subtle variations in attenuation of X - rays ( higher contrast resolution ) .
CT exposes the patient to significantly more ionizing radiation than a radiograph .
Spiral multidetector CT uses 16 , 64 , 254 or more detectors during continuous motion of the patient through the radiation beam to obtain fine detail images in a short exam time .
With rapid administration of intravenous contrast during the CT scan , these fine detail images can be reconstructed into three - dimensional ( 3D ) images of carotid , cerebral , coronary or other arteries .
The introduction of computed tomography in the early 1970s revolutionized diagnostic radiology by providing Clinicians with images of real three - dimensional anatomic structures .
CT scanning has become the test of choice in diagnosing some urgent and emergent conditions , such as cerebral hemorrhage , pulmonary embolism ( clots in the arteries of the lungs ) , aortic dissection ( tearing of the aortic wall ) , appendicitis , diverticulitis , and obstructing kidney stones .
Continuing improvements in CT technology , including faster scanning times and improved resolution , have dramatically increased the accuracy and usefulness of CT scanning , which may partially account for increased use in medical diagnosis .
ULTRASOUND Section::::Ultrasound .
Medical ultrasonography uses ultrasound ( high - frequency sound waves ) to visualize soft tissue structures in the body in real time .
No ionizing radiation is involved , but the quality of the images obtained using ultrasound is highly dependent on the skill of the person ( ultrasonographer ) performing the exam and the patient 's body size .
Examinations of larger , overweight patients may have a decrease in image quality as their subcutaneous fat absorbs more of the sound waves .
This results in fewer sound waves penetrating to organs and reflecting back to the transducer , resulting in loss of information and a poorer quality image .
Ultrasound is also limited by its inability to image through air pockets ( lungs , bowel loops ) or bone .
Its use in medical imaging has developed mostly within the last 30 years .
The first ultrasound images were static and two - dimensional ( 2D ) , but with modern ultrasonography , 3D reconstructions can be observed in real time , effectively becoming " 4D " .
Because ultrasound imaging techniques do not employ ionizing radiation to generate images ( unlike radiography , and CT scans ) , they are generally considered safer and are therefore more common in obstetrical imaging .
The progression of pregnancies can be thoroughly evaluated with less concern about damage from the techniques employed , allowing early detection and diagnosis of many fetal anomalies .
Growth can be assessed over time , important in patients with chronic disease or pregnancy - induced disease , and in multiple pregnancies ( twins , triplets , etc . ) .
Color - flow Doppler ultrasound measures the severity of peripheral vascular disease and is used by cardiologists for dynamic evaluation of the heart , heart valves and major vessels .
Stenosis , for example , of the carotid arteries may be a warning sign for an impending stroke .
A clot , embedded deep in one of the inner veins of the legs , can be found via ultrasound before it dislodges and travels to the lungs , resulting in a potentially fatal pulmonary embolism .
Ultrasounds is useful as a guide to performing biopsies to minimise damage to surrounding tissues and in drainages such as thoracentesis .
Small , portable ultrasound devices now replace peritoneal lavage in trauma wards by non - invasively assessing for the presence of internal bleeding and any internal organ damage .
Extensive internal bleeding or injury to the major organs may require surgery and repair .
MAGNETIC RESONANCE IMAGING Section::::Magnetic resonance imaging .
MRI uses strong magnetic fields to align atomic nuclei ( usually hydrogen protons ) within body tissues , then uses a radio signal to disturb the axis of rotation of these nuclei and observes the radio frequency signal generated as the nuclei return to their baseline states .
The radio signals are collected by small antennae , called coils , placed near the area of interest .
An advantage of MRI is its ability to produce images in axial , coronal , sagittal and multiple oblique planes with equal ease .
MRI scans give the best soft tissue contrast of all the imaging modalities .
With advances in scanning speed and spatial resolution , and improvements in computer 3D algorithms and hardware , MRI has become an important tool in musculoskeletal radiology and neuroradiology .
One disadvantage is the patient has to hold still for long periods of time in a noisy , cramped space while the imaging is performed .
Claustrophobia ( fear of closed spaces ) severe enough to terminate the MRI exam is reported in up to 5 % of patients .
Recent improvements in magnet design including stronger magnetic fields ( 3 teslas ) , shortening exam times , wider , shorter magnet bores and more open magnet designs , have brought some relief for claustrophobic patients .
However , for magnets with equivalent field strengths , there is often a trade - off between image quality and open design .
MRI has great benefit in imaging the brain , spine , and musculoskeletal system .
The use of MRI is currently contraindicated for patients with pacemakers , cochlear implants , some indwelling medication pumps , certain types of cerebral aneurysm clips , metal fragments in the eyes and some metallic hardware due to the powerful magnetic fields and strong fluctuating radio signals to which the body is exposed .
Areas of potential advancement include functional imaging , cardiovascular MRI , and MRI - guided therapy .
NUCLEAR MEDICINE
Section::::Nuclear medicine .
Nuclear medicine imaging involves the administration into the patient of radiopharmaceuticals consisting of substances with affinity for certain body tissues labeled with radioactive tracer .
The most commonly used tracers are technetium-99 m , iodine-123 , iodine-131 , gallium-67 , indium-111 , thallium-201 and fludeoxyglucose ( 18F ) ( 18F - FDG ) .
The heart , lungs , thyroid , liver , brain , gallbladder , and bones are commonly evaluated for particular conditions using these techniques .
While anatomical detail is limited in these studies , nuclear medicine is useful in displaying physiological function .
The excretory function of the kidneys , iodine - concentrating ability of the thyroid , blood flow to heart muscle , etc .
can be measured .
The principal imaging devices are the gamma camera and the PET Scanner , which detect the radiation emitted by the tracer in the body and display it as an image .
With computer processing , the information can be displayed as axial , coronal and sagittal images ( single - photon emission computed tomography - SPECT or Positron - emission tomography - PET ) .
In the most modern devices , nuclear medicine images can be fused with a CT scan taken quasisimultaneously , so the physiological information can be overlaid or coregistered with the anatomical structures to improve diagnostic accuracy .
Positron emission tomography ( PET ) scanning deals with positrons instead of gamma rays detected by gamma cameras .
The positrons annihilate to produce two opposite traveling gamma rays to be detected coincidentally , thus improving resolution .
In PET scanning , a radioactive , biologically active substance , most often 18F - FDG , is injected into a patient and the radiation emitted by the patient is detected to produce multiplanar images of the body .
Metabolically more active tissues , such as cancer , concentrate the active substance more than normal tissues .
PET images can be combined ( or " fused " ) with anatomic ( CT ) imaging , to more accurately localize PET findings and thereby improve diagnostic accuracy .
The fusion technology has gone further to combine PET and MRI similar to PET and CT .
PET / MRI fusion , largely practiced in academic and research settings , could potentially play a crucial role in fine detail of brain imaging , breast cancer screening , and small joint imaging of the foot .
The technology recently blossomed after passing the technical hurdle of altered positron movement in strong magnetic field thus affecting the resolution of PET images and attenuation correction .
INTERVENTIONAL RADIOLOGY Section::::Interventional radiology .
Interventional radiology ( IR or sometimes VIR for vascular and interventional radiology ) is a subspecialty of radiology in which minimally invasive procedures are performed using image guidance .
Some of these procedures are done for purely diagnostic purposes ( e.g. , angiogram ) , while others are done for treatment purposes ( e.g. , angioplasty )
The basic concept behind interventional radiology is to diagnose or treat pathologies , with the most minimally invasive technique possible .
Minimally invasive procedures are currently performed more than ever before .
These procedures are often performed with the patient fully awake , with little or no sedation required .
Interventional Radiologists and Interventional Radiographers diagnose and treat several disorders , including peripheral vascular disease , renal artery stenosis , inferior vena cava filter placement , gastrostomy tube placements , biliary stents and hepatic interventions .
Images are used for guidance , and the primary instruments used during the procedure are needles and catheters .
The images provide maps that allow the Clinician to guide these instruments through the body to the areas containing disease .
By minimizing the physical trauma to the patient , peripheral interventions can reduce infection rates and recovery times , as well as hospital stays .
To be a trained interventionalist in the United States , an individual completes a five - year residency in radiology and a one- or two - year fellowship in IR .
ANALYSIS OF IMAGES
TELERADIOLOGY Section::::Analysis of images .
Section::::Teleradiology .
Teleradiology is the transmission of radiographic images from one location to another for interpretation by an appropriately trained professional , usually a Radiologist or Reporting Radiographer .
It is most often used to allow rapid interpretation of emergency room , ICU and other emergent examinations after hours of usual operation , at night and on weekends .
In these cases , the images can be sent across time zones ( e.g. to Spain , Australia , India ) with the receiving Clinician working his normal daylight hours .
However at present , large private teleradiology companies in the U.S. currently provide most after - hours coverage employing night working Radiologists in the U.S. Teleradiology can also be used to obtain consultation with an expert or subspecialist about a complicated or puzzling case .
Teleradiology requires a sending station , a high - speed internet connection , and a high - quality receiving station .
At the transmission station , plain radiographs are passed through a digitizing machine before transmission , while CT , MRI , ultrasound and nuclear medicine scans can be sent directly , as they are already digital data .
The computer at the receiving end will need to have a high - quality display screen that has been tested and cleared for clinical purposes .
Reports are then transmitted to the requesting clinician .
The major advantage of teleradiology is the ability to use different time zones to provide real - time emergency radiology services around - the - clock .
The disadvantages include higher costs , limited contact between the referrer and the reporting Clinician , and the inability to cover for procedures requiring an onsite reporting Clinician .
Laws and regulations concerning the use of teleradiology vary among the states , with some requiring a license to practice medicine in the state sending the radiologic exam .
In the U.S. , some states require the teleradiology report to be preliminary with the official report issued by a hospital staff Radiologist .
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE Section::::Artificial intelligence .
Existing AI systems can outperform radiologists on many diagnostic tasks , and as of 2017 , AI systems are continuing to rapidly advance .
Many economists and AI researchers believe that most tasks that consist of visually interpreting medical images are likely to be automated in the near future .
PROFESSIONAL TRAINING
UNITED STATES Section::::Professional training .
Section::::United States .
Radiology is an expanding field in medicine .
Applying for residency positions in radiology is competitive .
Applicants are often near the top of their medical school classes , with high USMLE ( board ) scores .
The field is rapidly expanding due to advances in computer technology , which is closely linked to modern imaging .
Diagnostic radiologists must complete prerequisite undergraduate education , four years of medical school to earn a medical degree ( D.O. or M.D. ) , one year of internship , and four years of residency training .
After residency , radiologists may pursue one or two years of additional specialty fellowship training .
The American Board of Radiology ( ABR ) administers professional certification in Diagnostic Radiology , Radiation Oncology and Medical Physics as well as subspecialty certification in neuroradiology , nuclear radiology , pediatric radiology and vascular and interventional radiology . "
Board Certification " in diagnostic radiology requires successful completion of two examinations .
The Core Exam is given after 36 months of residency .
This computer - based examination is given twice a year in Chicago and Tucson .
It encompasses 18 categories .
A pass of all 18 is a pass .
A fail on 1 to 5 categories is a Conditioned exam and the resident will need to retake and pass the failed categories .
A fail on over 5 categories is a failed exam .
The Certification Exam , can be taken 15 months after completion of the Radiology residency .
This computer - based examination consists of 5 modules and graded pass - fail .
It is given twice a year in Chicago and Tucson .
Recertification examinations are taken every 10 years , with additional required continuing medical education as outlined in the Maintenance of Certification document .
Certification may also be obtained from the American Osteopathic Board of Radiology ( AOBR ) and the American Board of Physician Specialties .
Following completion of residency training , Radiologists may either begin practicing as a general Diagnostic Radiologist or enter into subspecialty training programs known as fellowships .
Examples of subspeciality training in radiology include abdominal imaging , thoracic imaging , cross - sectional / ultrasound , MRI , musculoskeletal imaging , interventional radiology , neuroradiology , interventional neuroradiology , paediatric radiology , nuclear medicine , emergency radiology , breast imaging and women 's imaging .
Fellowship training programs in radiology are usually one or two years in length .
Some medical schools in the US have started to incorporate a basic radiology introduction into their core MD training .
New York Medical College , the Wayne State University School of Medicine , the Uniformed Services University , and the University of South Carolina School of Medicine offer an introduction to radiology during their respective MD programs .
Campbell University School of Osteopathic Medicine also integrates imaging material into their curriculum early in the first year .
Radiographic exams are usually performed by Radiographers .
Qualifications for Radiographers vary by country , but many Radiographers now are required to hold a degree .
Veterinary Radiologists are veterinarians who specialize in the use of X - rays , ultrasound , MRI and nuclear medicine for diagnostic imaging or treatment of disease in animals .
They are certified in either diagnostic radiology or radiation oncology by the American College of Veterinary Radiology .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Radiology is a competitive speciality in the UK , attracting applicants from a broad range of backgrounds .
Applicants are welcomed directly from the foundation programme , as well as those who have completed higher training .
Recruitment and selection into training post in clinical radiology posts in England , Scotland and Wales is done by an annual nationally coordinated process lasting from November to March .
In this process , all applicants are required to pass a Specialty Recruitment Assessment ( SRA ) test .
Those with a test score above a certain threshold are offered a single interview at the London and the South East Recruitment Office .
At a later stage , applicants declare what programs they prefer , but may in some cases be placed in a neighbouring region .
The training programme lasts for a total of five years .
During this time , doctors rotate into different subspecialities , such as paediatrics , musculoskeletal or neuroradiology , and breast imaging .
During the first year of training , radiology trainees are expected to pass the first part of the Fellowship of the Royal College of Radiologists ( FRCR ) exam .
This comprises a medical physics and anatomy examination .
Following completion of their part 1 exam , they are then required to pass six written exams ( part 2A ) , which cover all the subspecialities .
Successful completion of these allows them to complete the FRCR by completing part 2B , which includes rapid reporting , and a long case discussion .
After achieving a certificate of completion of training ( CCT ) , many fellowship posts exist in specialities such as neurointervention and vascular intervention , which would allow the Doctor to work as an Interventional Radiologist .
In some cases , the CCT date can be deferred by a year to include these fellowship programmes .
UK radiology registrars are represented by the Society of Radiologists in Training ( SRT ) , which was founded in 1993 under the auspices of the Royal College of Radiologists .
The society is a nonprofit organisation , run by radiology registrars specifically to promote radiology training and education in the UK .
Annual meetings are held by which trainees across the country are encouraged to attend .
Currently , a shortage of radiologists in the UK has created opportunities in all specialities , and with the increased reliance on imaging , demand is expected to increase in the future .
Radiographers , and less frequently Nurses , are often trained to undertake many of these opportunities in order to help meet demand .
Radiographers often may control a " list " of a particular set of procedures after being approved locally and signed off by a Consultant Radiologist .
Similarly , Radiographers may simply operate a list for a Radiologist or other Physician on their behalf .
Most often if a Radiographer operates a list autonomously then they are acting as the Operator and Practitioner under the Ionising Radiation ( Medical Exposures )
Regulations 2000 .
Radiographers are represented by a variety of bodies , most often this is the Society and College of Radiographers .
Collaboration with Nurses is also common , where a list may be jointly organised between the Nurse and Radiographer .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
After obtaining medical licensure , German Radiologists complete a five - year residency , culminating with a board examination ( known as Facharztprüfung ) .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
The radiology training program in Italy increased from four to five years in 2008 .
Further training is required for specialization in radiotherapy or nuclear medicine .
THE NETHERLANDS Section::::The Netherlands .
Dutch radiologists complete a five - year residency program after completing the 6-year MD program .
INDIA Section::::India .
The radiology training course is a post graduate 3-year program ( MD / DNB Radiology ) or a 2-year diploma ( DMRD ) .
SINGAPORE
Section::::Singapore .
Radiologists in Singapore complete a five - year undergraduate medicine degree followed by a one - year Internship ( medical ) and then a five - year residency program .
Some Radiologists may elect to complete a one or two - year fellowship for further sub - specialization .
SEE ALSO * Digital mammography : use of a computer to produce images of the breast * Global radiology : improving access to radiology resources in poor and developing countries
* Medical radiography : the use of ionizing electromagnetic radiation , such as X - rays , in medicine * Radiation protection : the science of preventing people and the environment from suffering harmful effects from ionizing radiation
* Radiosensitivity : measure of the susceptibility of organic tissues to the harmful effects of radiation * X - ray image intensifier : equipment that uses x - rays to produce an image feed displayed on a TV screen * International Day of Radiology : an awareness day for medical imaging REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS