CREEDENCE
CLEARWATER REVIVAL Creedence Clearwater Revival ( often referred to as Creedence or CCR ) was an American rock band active in the late 1960s and early 1970s which consisted of lead vocalist , lead guitarist , and primary songwriter John Fogerty , his brother rhythm guitarist Tom Fogerty , bassist Stu Cook , and drummer Doug Clifford .
These members had played together since 1959 , first as The Blue Velvets , then as The Golliwogs .
Their musical style encompassed roots rock , swamp rock , and blues rock .
They played in a Southern rock style , despite their San Francisco Bay Area origin , with lyrics about bayous , catfish , the Mississippi River , and other popular elements of Southern United States iconography , as well as political and socially conscious lyrics about topics including the Vietnam War .
The band performed at the 1969 Woodstock Festival in Upstate New York .
The group disbanded acrimoniously in late 1972 after four years of chart - topping success .
Tom Fogerty had officially left the previous year , and John was at odds with the remaining members over matters of business and artistic control , all of which resulted in subsequent lawsuits among the former bandmates .
Fogerty 's ongoing disagreements with Fantasy Records owner Saul Zaentz created further protracted court battles , and John Fogerty refused to perform with the two other surviving members at CCR 's 1993 induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame .
Creedence Clearwater Revival 's music is still a staple of US radio airplay ; the band has sold 26 million albums in the United States alone .
Rolling Stone ranked them 82nd on its Rolling Stone 's 100 Greatest Artists of All Time list .
HISTORY
THE BLUE VELVETS / THE GOLLIWOGS : 1959–1967 Section::::History .
Section::::The Blue Velvets /
the Golliwogs : 1959–1967 .
John Fogerty , Doug Clifford , and Stu Cook met at Portola Junior High School in El Cerrito , California .
Calling themselves The Blue Velvets , the trio began playing instrumentals and " juke box standards " , as well as backing Fogerty 's older brother Tom at live gigs and in the recording studio .
Tom soon joined the band , and in 1964 they signed with Fantasy Records , an independent jazz label in San Francisco that had released Cast Your Fate To The Wind , a national hit for jazz pianist Vince Guaraldi .
The record 's success was the subject of a National Educational Television special , which prompted budding songwriter John Fogerty to contact the label .
For the band 's first release , Fantasy co - owner Max Weiss renamed the group the Golliwogs ( after the children 's literary character , Golliwogg ) .
Bandmembers ' roles and the instruments they played changed during this period .
Stu Cook switched from piano to bass guitar and Tom Fogerty from lead vocals to rhythm guitar ; John became the band 's lead vocalist and primary songwriter .
In Tom Fogerty 's words : " I could sing , but John had a sound ! "
EARLY SUCCESS : 1967–1968
Section::::Early success : 1967–1968 .
In 1966 , the group suffered a setback when John Fogerty and Doug Clifford received draft notices and chose to enlist in the military instead to avoid conscription .
Fogerty joined the Army Reserve while Clifford joined the Coast Guard Reserve .
In 1967 , Saul Zaentz bought Fantasy Records and offered the band a chance to record a full - length album on the condition that they change their name .
He had never liked " the Golliwogs " , in part because of the racial charge of the name , and the four readily agreed .
Zaentz and the band agreed to come up with 10 suggestions each , but he enthusiastically agreed to their very first : Creedence Clearwater Revival ( CCR ) , which they took in January 1968 .
According to interviews with band members 20 years later , the name 's elements come from three sources :
*
Tom Fogerty 's friend Credence Newball , whose name they changed to form the word Creedence ( as in creed ) * a television commercial for Olympia Brewing Company ( " clear water " ) * the four members ' renewed commitment to their band Rejected contenders for the band 's name included Muddy Rabbit , Gossamer Wump , and Creedence Nuball and the Ruby , but the last was the start that led to their finalized name .
Cook described the name as " weirder than Buffalo Springfield or Jefferson Airplane " .
By 1968 , Fogerty and Clifford had been discharged from military service , and all four members had quit their jobs to begin an intense schedule of rehearsing and playing full - time at clubs .
AM radio programmers around the US took note when their cover of the 1956 rockabilly song " Susie Q " received substantial airplay in the San Francisco Bay Area and on Chicago 's WLS .
It was the band 's second single , its first to reach the Top 40 ( No . 11 ) , and its only Top 40 hit not written by John Fogerty .
Two other singles were released from the debut : a cover of Screamin ' Jay Hawkins 's " I Put A Spell On You " ( No . 58 ) and " Porterville " ( released on the Scorpio label with writing credited to " T. Spicebush Swallowtail " ) , written during Fogerty 's time in the Army Reserve .
PEAK SUCCESS : 1969–1970
Section::::Peak success : 1969–1970 .
After their breakthrough , CCR began touring and started work on their second album , Bayou Country ( 1969 ) , at RCA Studios in Los Angeles .
A No . 7 platinum hit , the record was their first in a string of hit albums and singles that continued uninterrupted for three years .
The single " Proud Mary " , backed with " Born on the Bayou " , reached No .
2 on the national Billboard chart .
The former would eventually become the group 's most - covered song , with some 100 versions by other artists to date , including the # 4 1971 hit by Ike & Tina Turner , two years to the week after the CCR version peaked .
John Fogerty cites this song as being the result of high spirits on gaining his discharge from the Army Reserve .
The album also featured a remake of the rock & roll classic " Good Golly , Miss Molly " and the band 's nine - minute live - show closer , " Keep On Chooglin ' " .
Weeks later , during March 1969 , " Bad Moon Rising " backed with " Lodi " was released and peaked at No .
2 .
In the United Kingdom , " Bad Moon Rising " spent three weeks at number one on the UK Singles Chart during September and October 1969 , becoming the band 's only number one single in the UK .
The band 's third album , Green River , followed in August 1969 and went gold along with the single " Green River " , which again reached No .
2 on the Billboard charts .
The B - side of " Green River " , " Commotion " , peaked at No .
30 and the band 's emphasis on remakes of their old favorites continued with " Night Time Is the Right Time " .
CCR continued to tour incessantly with performances in July 1969 at the Atlanta Pop Festival and in August 1969 at the Woodstock Festival .
Their set was not included in the Woodstock film or soundtrack because John Fogerty felt the band 's performance was subpar .
Four tracks from the event ( out of a total of eleven ) were eventually included in the 1994 commemorative box set .
Stu Cook , however , held an opposing view , saying " The performances are classic CCR and I 'm still amazed by the number of people who do n't even know we were one of the headliners at Woodstock ' 69 .
"
John Fogerty later complained the previous band , the Grateful Dead , put the audience to sleep ; as John scanned the audience he saw a " Dante scene , just bodies from hell , all intertwined and asleep , covered with mud . "
After Woodstock , CCR was busy honing material for a fourth album , Willy and the Poor Boys , released in November 1969 .
" Down on the Corner " and " Fortunate Son " climbed to No .
3 and No .
14 , respectively , by year 's end .
The album was CCR in its standard form , featuring Fogerty originals and two reworked Lead Belly covers , " Cotton Fields " and " Midnight Special " .
Both of the latter songs had also been performed by actor Harry Dean Stanton in the movie Cool Hand Luke .
The year 1969 had been a remarkable chart year for the band : three Top Ten albums , four hit singles ( charting at No .
2 ,
No .
2 ,
No . 2 , and No . 3 )
with three additional charting B - sides .
On November 16 , 1969 , they performed " Fortunate Son " and " Down on the Corner " on The Ed Sullivan Show .
CCR released another two - sided hit , " Travelin ' Band"/"Who'll
Stop the Rain " in January 1970 .
Except for Elvis Presley , Ricky Nelson , The Everly Brothers , and The Beatles , Creedence had more success with two sided hit singles than any band up to that point in time .
John Fogerty has said that the flip side was inspired by the band 's experience at Woodstock .
The speedy " Travelin ' Band " , with a strong Little Richard sound , however , bore enough similarities to " Good Golly , Miss Molly " to warrant a lawsuit by the song 's publisher ; it was eventually settled out of court .
The song ultimately topped out at No .
2 .
The band also recorded its January 31 , 1970 , live performance at the Oakland Coliseum Arena , which would later be marketed as a live album and television special .
In February , CCR was featured on the cover of Rolling Stone , although only John Fogerty was interviewed in the accompanying article .
In April 1970 , CCR was set to begin its first European tour .
To support the upcoming live dates , Fogerty wrote " Up Around the Bend " and " Run Through the Jungle " ; the single reached
No .
4 that spring .
The band returned to Wally Heider 's San Francisco studio in June to record Cosmo 's Factory .
The title was an in - joke about their various rehearsal facilities and factory work ethic over the years .
( Drummer Doug Clifford 's longtime nickname is " Cosmo " , due to his keen interest in nature and all things cosmic . )
The album contained the earlier Top 10 hits " Travelin ' Band " and " Up Around the Bend " plus popular album tracks such as the opener " Ramble Tamble " .
Cosmo 's Factory was released in July 1970 , along with the band 's fifth and final No .
2 national hit , " Lookin ' Out My Back Door"/"Long as I Can See the Light " .
Although they topped some international charts and local radio countdowns , CCR has the odd distinction of having five No . 2 singles , without ever having had a No . 1 , on the Hot 100 , the most of any group .
Their five
No .
2 singles were exceeded only by Elvis Presley and Madonna with six each and tied with The Carpenters .
Curiously , on WLS , the band had three
No .
1 ,
four No . 3 , two No .
4 , but no
No .
2 , singles , with " Down on the Corner "
the only top ten CCR single registering the same peak position ( No . 3 ) on the Hot 100 and WLS .
Other cuts on the Cosmo 's Factory album included an eleven - minute jam of the 1968 Marvin Gaye "
I Heard It Through the Grapevine "
( a minor hit when an edited version was released as a single in 1976 ) , and a nearly note - for - note homage to Roy Orbison 's " Ooby Dooby " .
The album was CCR 's best seller and went to No .
1 on the Billboard 200 album charts and No . 11 on Billboard 's Soul Albums chart .
INTERNAL DISCORD AND TOM FOGERTY 'S
DEPARTURE
Section::::Internal discord and Tom Fogerty 's departure .
The Cosmo 's Factory sessions had seen the stirrings of tensions within the foursome as the incessant touring and heavy recording schedules took their toll .
John Fogerty had taken complete control of the group in matters of both business and artistic output , to the chagrin of Tom Fogerty , Cook , and Clifford .
Fogerty resisted , feeling that a " democratic " process would threaten their success .
Other issues included Fogerty 's decision at a 1970 Nebraska gig that the band would no longer give encores at its live shows .
Pendulum , released in December 1970 , was another top seller , spawning a Top 10 hit with "
Have You Ever Seen The Rain ? " .
John Fogerty included Hammond B3 Organ on many of the Pendulum tracks , notably " Have You Ever Seen The Rain ? " , in recognition of the deep respect and influence of Booker T. & the M.G. 's , with whom the members of the band had jammed .
The single 's flip side , " Hey Tonight " , was also a hit .
Tom Fogerty decided he had had enough of his younger brother and resigned from CCR in late 1970 after the recording of Pendulum ; his departure was made public the following February .
At first , the remaining members considered replacing him but ultimately continued as a trio .
He later stated on an Australian television broadcast that no new member could endure being in CCR .
DECLINE AND BREAKUP :
1971–1972 Section::::Decline and breakup : 1971–1972 .
In spring 1971 , John Fogerty did an about - face and informed Cook and Clifford that CCR would continue only by adopting a " democratic " approach : each member would now write and perform his own material .
Fogerty also would contribute only rhythm guitar to his bandmates ' songs .
Cook and Clifford , who had wanted more input in CCR 's artistic and business decisions , resisted this arrangement .
Fogerty insisted they accept it
or he would quit the band .
Despite the dissension , the trio put its new work ethic to the test in the studio , releasing the Top 10 single " Sweet Hitch - Hiker " in July 1971 , backed with Stu Cook 's " Door To Door " .
The band toured both the U.S. and Europe that summer and autumn , with Cook 's song a part of the live set .
In spite of their continuing commercial success , however , relations among the three had become increasingly strained .
The band 's final album , Mardi Gras , was released in April 1972 , featuring songs written by Fogerty , Cook , and Clifford and a cover of " Hello Mary Lou " ( a song Gene Pitney had originally written for Ricky Nelson ) .
The album was a critical failure , with Rolling Stone reviewer Jon Landau deeming it "
the worst album I have ever heard from a major rock band .
" The sales of Mardi Gras were weaker than previous albums , ultimately peaking at No . 12 , though still became the band 's 7th consecutive studio album to be certified Gold .
Fogerty 's " Someday Never Comes " , backed with Clifford 's " Tearin ' Up The Country " , also cracked the U.S. Top 40 .
By this point , Fogerty was not only at direct odds with his bandmates , but he had also come to see the group 's relationship with Fantasy Records as onerous , feeling that label owner Saul Zaentz had reneged on his promise to give the band a better contract .
Cook — who held a degree in business — claimed that because of poor judgment on Fogerty 's part , CCR had to abide by the worst record deal of any major US recording artist .
Despite the relatively poor reception of Mardi Gras and deteriorated relationships among the remaining band members , CCR embarked upon a two - month , 20-date U.S. tour .
However , on October 16 , 1972—less than six months after the tour ended —
Fantasy Records and the band officially announced its disbanding .
CCR never formally reunited after the break - up , although Cook and Clifford eventually started the band Creedence Clearwater Revisited .
John Fogerty later commented on the demise of CCR in a 1997 edition of the Swedish magazine Pop : POST - BREAKUP JOHN FOGERTY Section::::Post - breakup .
Section::::John Fogerty .
In 1973 , Fogerty began his solo career with The Blue Ridge Rangers , his one - man band collection of country and gospel songs .
Under his old CCR contract , however , Fogerty owed Fantasy eight more records .
In the end , he refused to work for the label .
The impasse was resolved only when Asylum Records ' David Geffen bought Fogerty 's contract for $ 1,000,000 .
In 1975 he then released his only Asylum album , the self - titled John Fogerty .
His next major hit was Centerfield , a chart - topping success in 1985 .
On tour in 1986 , however , Fogerty suffered complaints over his steadfast refusal to perform CCR songs and suffered with recurring vocal problems which he blamed on having to testify in court .
Fogerty 's explanation for not playing CCR material songs was that he would have had to pay performance royalties to copyright holder Saul Zaentz , and that it was " too painful " to revisit the music of his past .
With the Centerfield album , Fogerty also found himself entangled in new , tit - for - tat lawsuits with Zaentz over the song " The Old Man Down
The Road " which was , according to Zaentz , a blatant re - write of Fogerty 's own 1970 CCR hit " Run Through the Jungle " .
Since Fogerty had traded his rights to CCR 's songs in 1980 to cancel his remaining contractual obligations , Fantasy now owned the rights to " Run Through the Jungle " and sued Fogerty essentially for plagiarizing himself .
While a jury ruled in Fogerty 's favor , he did settle a defamation suit filed by Zaentz over the songs " Mr. Greed " and " Zanz Kant Danz " .
Fogerty was forced to edit the recording , changing the " Zanz " reference to " Vanz . "
On February 19 , 1987 , at the Palomino Club ( North Hollywood ) in Los Angeles , Fogerty broke his self - imposed 1972 ban on performing CCR hits .
Bob Dylan and George Harrison had joined him onstage , admonishing " if you do n't , the whole world 's gon na think ' Proud Mary ' is Tina Turner 's song .
" At a 1987 Independence Day benefit concert for the Vietnam War veterans , Fogerty finally ran through the list of CCR hits , beginning with " Born on the Bayou " and ending with " Proud Mary " .
In 1986 he also released his second Warner Bros. album Eye of the Zombie .
He retreated from music again in the late 1980s but returned in 1997 with the Grammy - winning Blue Moon Swamp .
Fogerty still tours frequently and performs CCR classics alongside solo material .
TOM FOGERTY Section::::Tom Fogerty .
Tom Fogerty released several solo albums , though none reached the success of CCR .
Fogerty 's 1974 solo album Zephyr National was the last to feature the four original CCR band members .
Several tracks sound very much like the CCR style , particularly the aptly titled " Joyful Resurrection " on which all four members played , even though John Fogerty recorded his part separately .
Tom Fogerty died at his home in Scottsdale , Arizona in September 1990 of an AIDS complication , which he contracted via a tainted blood transfusion he received while undergoing back surgery .
Tom and John barely reconciled before Tom 's death , and in the eulogy that he delivered at Tom 's funeral , John said , " We wanted to grow up and be musicians .
I guess we achieved half of that , becoming rock ' n roll stars .
We did n't necessarily grow up . "
STU COOK , DOUG CLIFFORD Section::::Stu Cook , Doug Clifford .
Junior high school friends Doug Clifford and Stu Cook continued to work together following the demise of CCR both as session players and members of the Don Harrison Band .
They also founded Factory Productions , a mobile recording service in the Bay Area .
Clifford released a solo record , Cosmo , in 1972 .
Cook produced artist Roky Erickson 's The Evil One and was a bassist with the popular country act Southern Pacific in the 1980s .
Doug Clifford also produced Groovers Paradise for former Sir Douglas Quintet and Texas Tornados frontman Doug Sahm .
Both Clifford and Stu Cook played on the album which was released on Warner Bros. in 1974 .
Clifford continued to perform and record with Doug Sahm through the 1980s .
Following a relatively long period of musical inactivity , Cook and Clifford formed Creedence Clearwater Revisited in 1995 with several well - known musicians .
Revisited continues to tour globally performing the original band 's classics .
John Fogerty 's 1997 injunction forced Creedence Clearwater Revisited to temporarily change its name to " Cosmo 's Factory , " but the courts later ruled in Cook 's and Clifford 's favor .
FANTASY RECORDS Section::::Fantasy Records .
After CCR , Fantasy Records released several greatest - hits packages such as 1972 's Creedence Gold , 1973 's More Creedence Gold and 1975 's Pre - Creedence , a compilation album of The Golliwogs ' early recordings .
Fantasy also released the highly successful double album Chronicle , Vol . 1 , a collection of Creedence 's twenty hit singles , in 1976 .
Several years later , the label released a live recording entitled The Royal Albert Hall Concert .
Contrary to its title , the 1970 performance was recorded in Oakland , California , not at the Royal Albert Hall in London , England .
Subsequent issues of the original 1981 album have been retitled simply The Concert .
Another double album of their best material was issued in 1986 as Chronicle , Vol . 2 .
The success of CCR made Fantasy and Saul Zaentz a great deal of money .
Indeed , Fantasy built a new headquarters building in 1971 at 2600 Tenth Street in Berkeley , California .
Zaentz also used his wealth to produce a number of successful films including Best Picture Oscar winners One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest , Amadeus , and The English Patient .
In 2004 , he sold Fantasy to Concord Records .
As a goodwill gesture , Concord honored the unfulfilled contractual promises Fantasy made nearly forty years earlier , finally paying the band a higher royalty rate on their sales and restoring John Fogerty 's ownership of his songs back to him .
One decision made by John Fogerty rankled his bandmates and would leave all without most of their hard - earned money and facing legal and financial problems for years .
Without the other three band members ' knowledge , Fogerty agreed to a tax shelter scheme proposed by Saul Zaentz and his lawyers in which most of the bandmembers ' assets were transferred to Castle Bank & Trust of Nassau , Bahamas .
Zaentz and his associates withdrew their assets before the bank eventually dissolved — along with the savings of the four CCR band members .
A series of lawsuits began in 1978 and eventually ended with a California court awarding $ 8.6 million to the band members in April 1983 .
Despite this legal victory , very little money was recovered .
John Fogerty , seeing that Zaentz was no longer involved with the company , also signed a new contract with Concord / Fantasy .
In 2005 , the label released The Long Road Home , a collection of Creedence and Fogerty solo classics .
After Revival came out on the Fantasy label in October 2007 but before his following album Blue Ridge Rangers Rides Again was issued in 2009 , Fogerty switched from Fantasy to Verve Forecast Records .
REUNIONS Section::::Reunions .
The original CCR lineup rarely reunited after their breakup .
All four members jammed together at Tom Fogerty 's wedding on October 19 , 1980 .
John Fogerty , Cook , and Clifford played at their 20th El Cerrito High School reunion in 1983 , but as their original incarnation , The Blue Velvets .
In the 1980s and 1990s , new rounds of lawsuits between the band members , as well as against their former management , deepened their animosities .
By the time CCR was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1993 , John Fogerty refused to perform with Cook and Clifford .
The pair were barred from the stage , while Fogerty played with an all - star band that included Bruce Springsteen and Robbie Robertson .
Tom Fogerty 's widow Tricia had expected a Creedence reunion and even brought the urn containing her husband 's ashes to the ceremony .
In a July 2011 interview with the Calgary Herald , John Fogerty admitted that he would at least be willing to consider reuniting with Cook and Clifford : When asked again in October 2011 about the prospect of a reunion , Fogerty said : " I 'm saying it 's possible ,
yeah .
I think the call [ laughs ] would maybe have to come from outside the realm .
Somebody would have to get me to look at things in a fresh way . "
However , Cook and Clifford both stated in the February 2012 edition of Uncut Magazine that they are not interested in a CCR reunion .
" Leopards do n't change their spots .
This is just an image - polishing exercise by John .
My phone certainly has n't rung , " Cook said .
Added Clifford : " It might have been a nice idea 20 years ago , but it 's too late . "
In May 2013 , Fogerty once again said he would be open to a reunion , but he does not see Cook and Clifford being willing to change their stance .
He told Charlie Rose on CBS This Morning : " From time to time , I 'll say something and it 'll get in print that maybe that will happen , and then immediately I 'll hear back stuff that does n't sound like it 's possible .
...
I think it 's a possibility in the future , you know .
It 's not something I 'm actively seeking , but I 'm not totally against the idea either . "
In September 2017 Clifford ruled out any chance of Cook and himself reuniting with Fogerty , stating " It would have been great 20 , 25 years ago .
It 's way too late now . "
LEGAL RIGHTS Section::::Legal rights .
CCR 's catalogue of songs has frequently been used or referenced in popular culture , partly because John Fogerty " long ago signed away legal control of his old recordings to Creedence 's record label , Fantasy Records .
" In an NPR interview , Fogerty objected to what he regarded as a misuse of his music : Of particular interest was the use of his protest song " Fortunate Son " in a blue jeans commercial .
In this case , the advertiser eventually stopped using the song , as Fogerty related in a later interview : MEMBERS * Doug Clifford – drums , percussion , backing vocals
* Stu Cook – bass guitar , backing vocals
* John Fogerty – lead vocals , lead guitar , keyboards , harmonica , saxophone * Tom Fogerty – rhythm guitar , backing vocals
DISCOGRAPHY Studio albums
* Creedence Clearwater Revival ( 1968 )
* Bayou Country ( 1969 )
* Green River ( 1969 )
* Willy and the Poor Boys ( 1969 )
* Cosmo 's Factory ( 1970 ) * Pendulum ( 1970 ) * Mardi Gras ( 1972 ) See also *
The Golliwogs discography
* John Fogerty discography
* Tom Fogerty discography * Cosmo REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Creedence Clearwater
Revisited official site *
Creedence Clearwater Revival , The Ed Sullivan Show
* Creedence Clearwater Revival at WorldMusicDatabase
* Creedence Clearwater Revival - The History