COUNTDOWN ( GAME SHOW )
Countdown is a British game show involving word and number puzzles .
It is produced by ITV Studios and broadcast on Channel 4 .
It is currently presented by Nick Hewer , assisted by Rachel Riley , with regular lexicographer Susie Dent .
It was the first programme to be aired on Channel 4 , and 77 series have been broadcast since its debut on 2 November 1982 .
With over 6,500 episodes , Countdown is one of the longest - running game shows in the world , along with the original French version , Des chiffres et des lettres ( Numbers & Letters ) , which has been running on French television continuously since 1965 .
Countdown was initially recorded at The Leeds Studios for 27 years , before moving to Manchester - based Granada Studios in 2009 .
Following the development of MediaCityUK , Countdown moved again in 2013 to the new purpose build studios at Dock10 , Greater Manchester .
The programme was presented by Richard Whiteley for over 20 years , until his sudden death in June 2005 .
It was then presented by Des Lynam until the end of 2006 , Des O'Connor until the end of 2008 , and Jeff Stelling until the end of 2011 ; Nick Hewer has presented the show since 2012 .
Carol Vorderman , the show 's co - host , who had also been on the programme since it began , left the show in December 2008 , at the same time as Des O'Connor .
She was replaced by Rachel Riley .
Cathy Hytner originally placed letters on the board for the letters games and in series 1 and 2
Beverly Isherwood placed the numbers up on the board from series 3 Cathy Hytner put the numbers up on the board , in 1987 Karen Loughlin took over from Hytner but only lasted 3 series after this Lucy Summers took over but she only lasted 3 months and Countdown stayed they could n't be bothered to hunt for another hostess and gave all the hostess roles to Carol Vordeman .
A celebrity guest features in every programme , and provides a brief interlude midway between the two advertisement breaks .
The two contestants in each episode compete in three disciplines : ten letters rounds , in which the contestants attempt to make the longest word possible from nine randomly chosen letters ; four numbers rounds , in which the contestants must use arithmetic to reach a random target number from six other numbers ; and the conundrum , a buzzer round in which the contestants compete to solve a nine - letter anagram .
During the series heats , the winning contestant returns the next day until they either lose or retire with eight wins as an undefeated " Octochamp .
" The best eight contestants are invited back for the series finals , which are decided in knockout format .
Contestants of exceptional skill have received national media coverage , and the programme as a whole is widely recognised and parodied within British culture .
HISTORY
ORIGIN Section::::History .
Section::::Origin .
Countdown is based on the French game show Des chiffres et des lettres ( Numbers and Letters ) , created by Armand Jammot .
The format was brought to Britain by Marcel Stellman , a Belgian record executive , who had watched the French show and believed it could be popular overseas .
Yorkshire Television purchased the format and commissioned a series of eight shows under the title Calendar Countdown , which was to be a spin - off of their regional news programme Calendar .
As the presenter of Calendar , Richard Whiteley was the natural choice to present Calendar Countdown with his daily appearances on both shows earning him the nickname " Twice Nightly " .
These shows were only broadcast in the Yorkshire area .
An additional pilot episode was made , with a refined format , although it was never broadcast .
A new British television channel , Channel 4 , was due to launch in November 1982 , and bought the newly renamed Countdown on the strength of this additional episode .
Countdown was the first programme to be broadcast on the new channel .
JUNIOR COUNTDOWN Section::::Junior Countdown .
Channel 4 originally planned a parallel Junior Countdown in which the contestants were children .
The pilot episode was filmed on 26 November 1982 , less than a month after the first adult version was broadcast .
The presenter was Gyles Brandreth , with Ted Moult in Dictionary Corner .
The format mirrored that of the adult version .
No further episodes were filmed , and the pilot episode was never broadcast .
Brandreth , speaking on Countdown in November 2012 , stated that the concept had proved disastrous , and was abandoned .
PRESENTERS Section::::Presenters .
Calendar Countdown was presented by Richard Whiteley , with Cathy Hytner and Denise McFarland - Cruickshanks managing the numbers and letters rounds respectively .
When Countdown was commissioned for Channel 4 , the number of hostesses expanded further : Cathy Hytner and Beverley Isherwood selected the letters and numbers tiles respectively , and calculations in the numbers rounds were checked by Linda Barrett or Carol Vorderman .
Vorderman , a Cambridge graduate and member of Mensa , was appointed as one of the numbers experts after responding to an advertisement in a national newspaper which asked for a young woman who would like to become a game show hostess .
Unlike almost any other game show hostess of the time , however , the advertisement also made it clear that the applicants ' appearance would be less important than their talent as a mathematician .
Gradually the tasks performed by the extra presenters were taken over by Carol Vorderman , whose role within the show essentially became that of co - presenter .
Whiteley fell ill with septicaemia in 2005 , and as a result he was no longer able to record Countdown .
Although Whiteley made a slow recovery from his illness , he died on 26 June 2005 , after a failed operation to correct a problem that had been detected in his heart .
Channel 4 took the following show off the air as a mark of respect , and the next programme was preceded by a tearful tribute from Carol Vorderman .
The final five shows Whiteley had filmed ( the conclusion of Series 53 ) were aired , after which the show was placed on hiatus before returning in October 2005 , with Des Lynam ( who had featured on Celebrity Countdown in 1998 ) as the main presenter .
On 30 September 2006 , Lynam said that he had decided to leave the programme after Christmas 2006 .
Lynam 's departure was due to travel requirements for the demanding filming schedule , with the show recorded in Leeds and Lynam living away in Worthing , West Sussex .
Channel 4 had tried an extra programme on Saturday in early 2006 which Lynam had agreed to , subject to part of the filming schedule being moved nearer to his home .
However , viewers reacted angrily to the idea of the show leaving Leeds , and when Lynam found out that a move would cause considerable disruption for many of the programme 's camera crew , he decided to leave .
On 7 November 2006 , it was announced that Des O'Connor would succeed Lynam as host .
Lynam 's final show as Countdown presenter was broadcast on 22 December 2006 .
O'Connor first presented Countdown on 2 January 2007 .
The other studio mainstay is Dictionary Corner , which houses a lexicographer and that week 's celebrity guest ( referred to as " GoD " or " Guardian of the Dictionaries " ) .
Initially farmer and broadcaster Ted Moult was on hand for verification .
The role of the lexicographer is to verify the words offered by the contestants ( see Letters round rules ) and point out any longer or otherwise interesting words available .
The lexicographer is aided in finding these words by the show 's producers , Michael Wylie ( until his death in November 2008 ) and Damian Eadie .
The production team is insistent that no computer program is used in this role , and that the words suggested in Dictionary Corner have been found manually .
Many lexicographers have appeared over the years , but since her debut in 1992 , Susie Dent has become synonymous with the role , and has made over three thousand appearances , becoming the permanent lexicographer in 2003 .
The celebrity guest , sometimes known as the " Dictionary Dweller " , also contributes words , and provides a short interlude halfway through the second section of the show .
These guests have included Nigel Rees , Jo Brand , Martin Jarvis , Richard Digance , Geoffrey Durham , Ken Bruce , Magnus Magnusson , Pam Ayres , Paul Zenon and John Sergeant , and , most regularly , Gyles Brandreth , providing poems , anecdotes , puzzles and magic tricks .
Alison Heard replaced Susie Dent over the winter of 2007–08 , whilst Dent was on maternity leave .
Dent returned to the series on 6 February 2008 .
It was announced in July 2008 that Des O'Connor would be stepping down as host in December 2008 .
In the same month , Carol Vorderman announced that she would also leave the show at the same time .
On 21 November 2008 , Jeff Stelling was confirmed as the new host , with Oxford graduate Rachel Riley in the Vorderman role .
It was announced on 24 May 2011 that Stelling would be leaving the programme , and he presented his final show on 16 December 2011 .
On 16 November 2011 , it was announced that Nick Hewer would be taking over as host , with his first show broadcast on 9 January 2012 .
CHARACTER Section::::Character .
Countdown quickly established cult status within British television – an image which it maintains today , despite numerous changes of rules and personnel .
The programme 's audience comprises mainly students , homemakers and pensioners , owing to the " teatime " broadcast slot and inclusive appeal of its format and presentation .
Countdown has been one of Channel 4 's most - watched programmes for over twenty years , but has never won a major television award .
When Des Lynam became the new presenter after Whiteley 's death in 2005 , the show regularly drew an average 1.7 million viewers every day — which was around half a million more than in the last few years of Richard Whiteley presenting — and the Series 54 final , on 26 May 2006 , attracted 2.5 million viewers .
From 3–4 million viewers had watched the show daily in its previous 16:15 slot .
The drop in viewers following the scheduling change , coupled with the show 's perceived educational benefits , even caused Labour MP Jonathan Shaw to table a motion in the UK Parliament , requesting that the show be returned to its later time .
Minor scheduling changes have subsequently seen the show move from 15:15 to 15:30 , to 15:45 to 15:25 , and 15:10 .
As of 2018 , it is broadcast at 14:10 .
Contestants on each episode compete for a teapot that is styled to resemble the 30-second time clock used in each round .
Introduced in December 1998 , the pot is custom - made and can only be obtained by winning a game on the programme .
Defeated contestants receive an assortment of Countdown - themed merchandise as a parting gift .
Until 2009 , the prize for the series winner was a leather - bound copy of the twenty - volume Oxford English Dictionary , worth £ 4,000 .
Since then , the prize consists of ordinary hardback twenty - one volume dictionaries , a laptop computer and a lifetime subscription to Oxford Online .
David Acton , winner of Series 31 , opted for a CD - ROM version of the dictionaries , not wanting to accept leather - bound books owing to his strict veganism , and he donated the monetary difference to charity .
Since 2006 , the series champion also receives the Richard Whiteley Memorial Trophy , in memory of the show 's original presenter .
Though the style and colour scheme of the set have changed many times ( and the show itself moved to Manchester , after more than 25 years in Leeds )
the clock has always provided the centrepiece and , like the clock music composed by Alan Hawkshaw , is an enduring and well - recognised feature of Countdown .
Executive producer John Meade once commissioned Hawkshaw to revise the music for extra intensity ; after hundreds of complaints from viewers , the old tune was reinstated .
The original clock featured until September 2013 , when it was replaced .
CELEBRATIONS Section::::Celebrations .
The first episode of Countdown was repeated on 1 October 2007 on More4 and on 2 November 2007 on Channel 4 , as part of Channel 4 at 25 , a season of celebratory Channel 4 programmes as it celebrated its 25th birthday .
On 2 November 2007 , Countdown celebrated its twenty - fifth anniversary and aired a special ' birthday episode ' .
The two players were 2006 winner Conor Travers and 2002 winner Chris Wills .
However , for the rounds , VIP guests selected the letters and numbers .
Guests included Gordon Brown , Amir Khan and Richard Attenborough .
A statement from the French TV network France Télévisions was read out on air by Carol Vorderman to commend Channel 4 on its success of Countdown .
On 26 March 2010 , Queen Elizabeth II congratulated Countdown for amassing 5,000 episodes .
On 5 September 2014 , the programme received a Guinness World Record at the end of its 6,000th show for the longest - running television programme of its kind during the course of its 71st series .
DEPARTURES OF VORDERMAN AND O'CONNOR Section::::Departures of Vorderman and O'Connor .
On 23 July 2008 , it was announced that O'Connor would be leaving the show at the end of the 59th series in December 2008 to concentrate on other projects .
ITV Studios announced on 25 July 2008 that Carol Vorderman would also be leaving at the end of the same series .
Vorderman had been willing to accept a 33 % salary decrease in line with a 33 % budget cut being imposed on the show , but felt she was ' forced ' to leave after being asked to accept a 90 % pay cut .
Her agent , John Miles , claims Vorderman had been told the show had survived the death of host Richard Whiteley in 2005 and could " easily survive without you . "
The early favourite in the betting to replace Des O'Connor , Rory Bremner , ruled himself out .
Later reports suggested Alexander Armstrong and Jeff Stelling as potential hosts , although Armstrong later revealed he had refused the job .
Anthea Turner , Ulrika Jonsson , and Myleene Klass were all linked with Vorderman 's job ; however , Channel 4 then began to search for a previously unknown male or female arithmetician with " charm and charisma " .
Eventually , on 21 November 2008 , after O'Connor and Vorderman had finished filming , it was confirmed that Stelling and Oxford maths graduate Rachel Riley would join the show , with Susie Dent continuing as resident lexicographer .
FORMAT Section::::Format .
Countdown has occupied a tea - time broadcast slot since its inception .
Currently an episode lasts around 45 minutes including advertising breaks .
During the normal series , the winner of each game returns for the next day 's show .
A player who wins eight games is declared an " octochamp " and retires until the series finals .
At the end of the series , the eight players with most wins ( or the highest total score in the event of a tie ) are invited back to compete in the series finals .
They are seeded in a knockout tournament , with the first seed playing the eighth seed , the second playing the seventh , and so on .
The winner of this knockout , which culminates in the Grand Final , becomes the series champion .
Each series lasts around six months , with about 125 episodes .
Approximately every four series , a Champion of Champions tournament takes place .
For this , sixteen of the best players to have appeared since the previous Championship are invited back for another knockout tournament .
The producer , former contestant Damian Eadie , decides which players to include , but typically the tournament includes the series winners and other noteworthy contestants .
Series 33 was designated a " Supreme Championship " , in which 56 of the best contestants from all the previous series returned for another knockout tournament .
Series 10 champion Harvey Freeman was declared Supreme Champion after beating Allan Saldanha in the final .
There are also occasional special episodes , in which past contestants return for themed matches .
For example , David Acton and Kenneth Michie returned for a rematch of their Series 31 final , while brothers and former contestants Sanjay and Sandeep Mazumder played off against each other on 20 December 2004 .
The game is split into three sections , separated by advertising breaks .
The first section contains two letters rounds and a numbers round , the second has four letters rounds and two numbers rounds , while the last section has four letters rounds , a numbers round and a final " Conundrum " puzzle .
With the exception of the Conundrum , the contestants swap control after every round so that each of them has control for five letters rounds and two numbers rounds .
At the end of the first two sections , Hewer poses a Teatime Teaser for the viewers , giving a set of short words and a cryptic clue to a single word that can be anagrammed from them .
The solution is revealed at the start of the next section .
( Example : Given the words SAD MOODY and the clue
" We 'll all be sad and moody when this arrives , " the solution would be DOOMSDAY . )
When the Teatime Teaser was first introduced , the anagrams were seven letters long ; they were later extended to eight , and then to nine in late 2016 .
LETTERS ROUND
Section::::Letters round .
The contestant in control chooses between two stacks of letter tiles , one containing vowels and the other consonants , and Riley reveals the top tile from that stack and places it on the board .
This is done nine times , and the final grouping must contain at least three vowels and four consonants .
The contestants then have 30 seconds to form the longest single word they can , using the nine revealed letters ; no letter may be used more often than it appears in the selection .
The frequencies of the letters within each stack are weighted according to their frequency in natural English , in the same manner as Scrabble .
For example , there are many Ns and Rs in the consonant stack , but only one Q.
The letter frequencies are altered by the producers from time to time , so any published list does not necessarily reflect the letters used in any particular programme .
Both contestants write down the words they form , in case they select the same one .
After time runs out , the host asks the contestants to declare their word lengths , starting with the contestant who chose the letters .
The host then asks the discovered words , starting with the shorter declared length .
However , if a contestant fails to write a word in time , they must declare this fact and state their word first to prevent cheating .
The contestant with the longer word scores one point per letter , or 18 points if they have used all nine .
If the words are identical or of the same length , both contestants score .
In the former case , the contestants must show their written word to prove that they are the same .
Each round ends with Dictionary Corner revealing the longest words that can be formed from the available letters , aided by the production team .
Any word which appears in the Oxford Dictionary of English is valid , as well as accepted forms of them that may not be explicitly listed .
Examples include : * Common nouns and their plurals * Verbs and their inflections ( e.g. " escape , " " escaped , " " escaping " )
* Comparative and superlative forms of adjectives ( if the adjective is more than one syllable , the form must be explicitly listed )
* Plurals of foods specified as mass nouns that may be ordered in restaurants ( e.g. " pastas " as in , " I 'll have two pastas " )
Words that are not allowed include : * Capitalised words , including proper nouns ( e.g. " Jane " or " London " )
* Hyphenated terms * Words that are never used alone ( e.g. " gefilte " ; only used as part of " gefilte fish " ) * American spellings of words ( e.g. " flavour " and " signalled " are allowed , but " flavor " and " signaled " are not ) NUMBERS ROUND
Section::::Numbers round .
The contestant in control chooses six of 24 shuffled face - down number tiles , arranged into two groups : 20 " small numbers " ( two each of 1 through 10 ) , and four " large numbers " of 25 , 50 , 75 and 100 .
Some special episodes replace the large numbers with 12 , 37 , 62 and 87 .
The contestant decides how many large numbers are to be used , from none to all four , after which the six tiles are randomly drawn and placed on the board .
A random three - digit target number is then generated by an electronic machine , known as " CECIL " ( which stands for Countdown 's Electronic Calculator In Leeds ) .
The contestants have 30 seconds to work out a sequence of calculations with the numbers whose final result is as close to the target number as possible .
They may use only the four basic operations of addition , subtraction , multiplication and division , and do not have to use all six numbers .
A number may not be used more times than it appears on the board .
Fractions are not allowed , and only positive integers may be obtained as a result at any stage of the calculation .
As in the letters rounds , any contestant who does not write down their calculations in time must go first , and both contestants must show their work to each other if their results and calculations are identical .
Only the contestant whose result is closer to the target number scores points : 10 for reaching it exactly , 7 for being 1 - 5 away , 5 for being 6 - 10 away .
Contestants score no points for being more than 10 away , if their calculations are flawed , or if they take too long to give a solution after saying they have not written it down .
Both score if they reach the same result , or if their results are the same distance away .
In some games , there are many ways to reach the target exactly — the example target above could also be reached by 7 × ( 75 + 50 + 2 – 8 – 3 ) =
812 .
Not all games are solvable , and for a few selections it is impossible even to get within 10 , most commonly when a contestant picks six small numbers and the target number is quite large .
There is a tactical element in selecting how many large numbers to include .
One large and five small numbers is the most popular selection , despite two large numbers giving the best chance of the game being solvable exactly .
Selections with zero or four large numbers are generally considered the hardest .
The 24 tiles are laid out in four rows , the topmost of which contains only the four large numbers .
The contestant may specify how many tiles to draw from each row , or simply state how many large and small numbers will be used ; in the latter case , the assistant draws the tiles randomly .
The numbers are usually placed on the board from right to left , starting with the small ones , but have occasionally been displayed in scrambled order .
On rare occasions , the contestant has declined to make any choices , in which case the assistant selects the tiles .
A special edition , broadcast on 15 March 2010 , for two previous series champions , Kirk Bevins and Chris Davies , used instead of the usual four large numbers , the numbers 12 , 37 and two numbers unrevealed for the duration of the show .
In a further special broadcast on 16 August 2010 between the Series 59 finalists Charlie Reams and Junaid Mubeen , the other two numbers were revealed to be 62 and 87 .
CONUNDRUM Section::::Conundrum .
The final round of the game is the Countdown Conundrum , in which the contestants are shown a combination of two or three words with a total of nine letters .
They have 30 seconds to form a single word using all the letters , and must buzz in to respond ( a bell for the champion , a buzzer for the challenger ) .
Each contestant is allowed only one guess , and the first to answer correctly scores 10 points .
If a contestant buzzes - in and either responds incorrectly or fails to give any response , the remaining time is given to the opponent .
If neither contestant can solve it , the presenter asks whether anyone in the audience knows the answer and , if so , chooses someone to call it out .
( This practice was stopped temporarily in 2009 due to difficulties with camera angles after the studio layout was changed . )
The Conundrum is designed to have only one solution , but on occasion more than one valid word is found by happenstance ( e.g. REACH SORT can become both CARTHORSE and ORCHESTRA ) .
If this happens , any of these results is accepted .
If the contestants ' scores are within 10 points of each other going into this round , it is referred to as a Crucial Countdown Conundrum .
Since 10 points are at stake , the contestant who solves it will either win the game or force a tiebreaker .
If the scores are tied after the Conundrum , additional Conundrums are played until the tie is broken .
There have been several instances in which two Conundrums were used to decide the winner , but only a handful of episodes have required three .
( There have also been cases when even more Conundrums have been required to provide a winner , but not all have been included in the transmitted programme . )
EVOLUTION Section::::Evolution .
The rules of Countdown are derived from those of Des chiffres et des lettres .
Perhaps the biggest difference is the length of the round ; DCedL 's number rounds are each 45 seconds long to Countdown 's 30 .
DCedL also feature " duels " , in which players compete in short tasks such as mental arithmetic problems , extracting two themed words from another , or being asked to spell a word correctly .
Other minor differences include a different numbers scoring system ( 9 points for an exact solution , or 6 points for the closest inexact solution in DCedL ) and the proportion of letters to numbers rounds ( 10 to 4 in Countdown , 8 to 4 in DCedL ) .
The pilot episode followed significantly different rules from the current ones .
Most noticeably , only eight letters were selected for each letters round .
If two contestants offered a word of the same length , or an equally close solution to a numbers game , then only the contestant who made the selection for that round was awarded points .
Also , only five points were given for an exact numbers solution , three for a solution within 5 , and one point for the closer solution , no matter how far away .
Until the end of Series 21 , if the two contestants had equal scores after the first conundrum , the match was considered a draw and they both returned for the next show .
A significant change in the format occurred in September 2001 , when the show was expanded from nine rounds and 30 minutes to the current fifteen rounds and 45 minutes .
The older format was split into two halves , each having three letters and one numbers game , with the conundrum at the end of the second half .
When the format was expanded to fifteen rounds , Richard Whiteley continued to refer jokingly to the three segments of the show as " halves " .
Under the old format , Grand Finals were specially extended shows of fourteen rounds , but now all shows use a fifteen - round format .
The rules regarding which words are permitted have changed with time .
American spelling was allowed until 2002 , and more unspecified inflections were assumed to be valid .
In September 2007 , a new feature was added to the show in which Susie Dent explains the origin of a word or phrase which she has been researching .
This Origin of Words spot currently follows the eighth letters round , almost midway through the third section of the programme .
The feature was omitted during the time that Dent was absent for maternity leave , and was reinstated upon her return .
When the fifteen round format was first introduced in September 2001 , the composition of the rounds was different from that used by the programme today .
The three sections each had five rounds , four letters rounds and one numbers round in each of the first two sections , with three letters rounds , one numbers round and the conundrum in the third section .
This meant that there was a slight imbalance , whereby one contestant made the letters sections for six rounds , but had the choice of the numbers selection just once , whereas the other contestant chose letters five times and numbers twice .
The dictionary corner guest 's spot was immediately before the first advertising break , and Susie Dent 's Origin of Words spot preceded the second numbers game shortly before the second break .
The change to the present format was made on 25 March 2013 , three weeks into the second section of Series 68 , to comply with Channel 4 's decision to increase the amount of adverts and alter the times when they occur during the programme , therefore reducing Countdown 's actual show length from 36 to 35 minutes .
NOTABLE CONTESTANTS Section::::Notable contestants .
Since Countdown 's debut in 1982 , there have been over 6,500 televised games and 76 complete series .
There have also been fourteen Champion of Champions tournaments , with the most recent starting in January 2016 .
Several of Countdown 's most successful contestants have received national media coverage .
Teenager Julian Fell set a record score of 146 in December 2002 .
In 2006 , 14-year - old Conor Travers became the youngest series champion in the show 's history , and 11-year - old Kai Laddiman became the youngest octochamp for 20 years .
Conor Travers went on to win the 30th Anniversary Champion of Champions series in March 2013 with a record equalling top score of 146 .
At eight years old , Tanmay Dixit was the youngest player ever to appear on the show , where he achieved two wins in March 2005 .
He also received press attention for his offerings in the letters round , which included fannies and farted .
In April 2013 , Giles Hutchings , a student at Royal Grammar School , Guildford broke the record for the highest octochamp score , amassing 965 points over 8 games .
He went on to win series 68 .
This record has since been beaten by Dylan Taylor , who achieved an octochamp score of 974 in August 2013 , but he lost the Grand Final of that series .
Three former contestants have returned to Countdown as part of the production team : Michael Wylie , Mark Nyman ( as producer , and occasional lexicographer in Dictionary Corner ) and Damian Eadie ( the current series producer ) .
In 1998 , sixteen celebrities were invited to play Celebrity Countdown , a series of eight games broadcast every Thursday evening over the course of eight weeks .
The celebrities included Whiteley 's successor Des Lynam , who beat Siân Lloyd .
The highest and lowest scores were posted in the same game when TV 's Hugh Fearnley - Whittingstall beat wine critic Jilly Goolden 47–9 .
Richard Whiteley and Carol Vorderman competed in another special episode on Christmas Day 1997 .
For this game , the presenter 's chair was taken by William G. Stewart , the host of fellow Channel 4 game show Fifteen to One .
Susie Dent took over Vorderman 's duties , and Mark Nyman occupied Dictionary Corner , accompanied by Magnus Magnusson .
The game was close - fought , and decided only by the crucial Countdown conundrum mistletoe which Vorderman solved in two seconds , after Whiteley had inadvertently buzzed after one second , because when he regularly hosted the show , he hit the button to reveal the conundrum and kept his old habit up .
Contestants who have or had become notable for other reasons include Nuts magazine editor - at - large Pete Cashmore , rugby player Ayoola Erinle , footballers Neil MacKenzie , Clarke Carlisle and Matt Le Tissier , musicians
Jon Marsh and Nick Saloman , comedian Alex Horne , and noted Irish playwright Peter Sheridan .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Countdown is often referenced and parodied in British culture .
ASSORTED ALLUSIONS
Section::::Assorted allusions .
The Doctor Who episode " Bad Wolf " ( 2005 ) mentions a futuristic version of Countdown , in which the goal is to stop a bomb from exploding in 30 seconds .
Countdown was referenced again in a later series in " Last of the Time Lords " ( 2007 ) , where Professor Docherty expresses a keen fondness for the show and how it " has n't been the same since Des took over —
Both Deses " .
In the 2002 film About a Boy , protagonist Will Freeman is a regular viewer of Countdown .
Fairport Convention guitarist Simon Nicol named one of his solo records Consonant Please , Carol , echoing one of the show 's catchphrases .
OUTTAKES
Section::::Outtakes .
Countdown has also generated a number of widely - viewed outtakes , with the letters occasionally producing a word that was deemed unsuitable for the original broadcast .
A round in which Dictionary Corner offered the word gobshite featured in TV 's Finest Failures in 2001 ( The actual episode aired on 10 January 2000 ) , and in one episode from 1991 , contestants Gino Corr and Lawrence Pearse both declared the word wankers .
This was edited out of the programme but has since appeared on many outtakes shows .
When contestant Charlie Reams declared " wankers " on 21 October 2008 edition , the declaration was kept in but the word itself was bleeped .
Other incidents with only marginally rude words ( including wanker , singular ) have made it into the programme as they appeared , such as those with Tanmay Dixit referenced above , a clip from a 2001 episode in which the word fart appeared as the first four letters on the board ( which also featured on 100 Greatest TV Moments from Hell ) , and a round where an anagram of the word fucked appeared on the board in the string " A U O D F C K E G " , although neither player chose to use the word , and Dictionary Corner was able to find two seven - letter words that could have been made from the board 's offerings .
On 2 February 2017 , the board for the letters round was " M T H
I A E D H S " , and with both players offering sevens , Dictionary Corner found the word " shithead " , which was bleeped out in the audio and censored on - screen with the poo emoji .
HUMOUR
Section::::Humour .
The programme is mentioned in an episode of Irish sitcom Father Ted entitled " The Old Grey Whistle Theft " , Still Game ( in the episode " Wireless " ) and is also referenced in the very first episode of Little Britain from 2003 .
BBC impression sketch show , Dead Ringers , parodies Countdown numerous times , and another television programme , The Big Breakfast , parodied Countdown in a feature called " Countdown Under " .
In a sketch " Countdown to Hell " from the comedy show A Bit of Fry and Laurie , Stephen Fry lampooned Richard Whiteley 's punning style and Hugh Laurie played one of the contestants , while Gyles Brandreth ( played by Steve Steen ) , presented with the letters " " , got the ( non-)word " sloblock " ( supposedly meaning exactly the same as " bollocks " ) .
The show also has a fleeting reference in British sitcom The Office when Chris ' Finchy '
Finch attempts to insult temporary worker Ricky when he explains he had a job to pay for his studies .
Finchy states that it probably was ' professor in charge of watching Countdown every day ' , commenting on its student audience , and referring to the fact anyone watching Countdown during its ' hometime ' time slot can not be out at work .
In the BBC sitcom
My Family , Nick is a fan of Countdown .
In the 2003 Christmas special , Richard Whiteley even made a special guest appearance , which amuses Nick .
In another episode , Nick is taken aback when he thinks that bad news about his father is really about a cancellation of Countdown .
The format of the show has been parodied on
Have I Got News for You .
In 1999 , when Richard was a guest , the numbers game was copied along with the clock music and at the end of the show was a conundrum , the conundrum was " PHANIOILS " , to which the answer was IAN HISLOP .
In 2004 , when Carol was a guest one of the usual rounds was replaced with a conundrum round based on the week 's news .
When Carol hosted the show in 2006 , one of the rounds was the " Spinning Conundrum Numbers Round " , altering the " Spinning Headlines " round , by adding a number to a picture relating to the week 's news , then at the end of the round the 6 numbers from the picture were used for a numbers game .
Richard Whiteley was the victim of a practical joke while presenting the show .
The contestants and rounds had been planted as part of a " Gotcha ! " , a regular prank feature on the light entertainment show Noel 's House Party .
In the prank , both the two contestants and Dictionary Corner missed the word " something " from the letters OMETHINGS , and from another selection , both of the contestants declared " I 've got diarrhoea " referring to the selection .
In the numbers round that followed , the male contestant " answered " the puzzle by reading out the numbers .
Whiteley did not uncover the joke until House Party presenter Noel Edmonds appeared on the set , having revealed the unusually short conundrum of HOGCAT to be " gotcha " at the end of the programme .
In a 2003 episode of Top Gear , Richard Whitely participated in the " Star in a Reasonably Priced Car " segment .
Before Whiteley 's lap was shown , presenter Jeremy Clarkson played a game of Countdown with Whitely , using words such as IMIN , SEXUL , NEVOR LARD , I MUSHI BITS , and PIANOS SHIAZU .
It was also referred to on Harry Hill 's TV Burp twice .
The first time it was referred to was when " Dev " ( Coronation Street ) made a sound like the countdown end of thirty seconds time .
The second time was when the competition " Where Has The Knitted Character Been This Week ? " had the answer : On Rachel Riley 's chair .
On 2 July 2010 , the game was featured in the episode " The Final Countdown " of The IT Crowd .
Moss stuns everyone by declaring that the 9 letter string TNETENNBA is in fact a word .
Later , Moss becomes an octochamp and is consequently invited into an underground club named " 8 + " , where he competes in a game of " Street Countdown " as part of a spoof of Boogie Town .
The episode featured a cameo from Gyles Brandreth a regular contributor to Dictionary Corner .
British entertainer Stevie Riks has parodied the show on one of his many YouTube comedy videos .
In an episode from spring 2011 , the Blackpool supporting producer of the show arranged the conundrum PNECRISIS ( " priciness " ) , poking fun at their local rivals Preston North End 's relegation from the Championship in the 2010–11 season . NON - CANON GAMES Section::::Non - canon games .
The game has also been played on a number of different programmes , notably as the first challenge in " What 's Next " on Ant and Dec 's Saturday Night Takeaway , featuring the pair versus one of the duo 's old head teachers .
In 2010 , it was played as a shopping task on the final Channel 4 series of Celebrity Big Brother , with a team of housemates competing in the house against the - then current champion , Chris Davies , in the Countdown studio via satellite .
The housemates failed this task .
TRANSMISSIONS
REGULAR SERIES MASTERS SERIES Section::::Masters series . !
Series ! !
Start date ! !
End date ! !
Episodes CELEBRITY SERIES Section::::Celebrity series . !
Series ! !
Start date ! !
End date ! !
Episodes SPECIALS Section::::Specials . !
Date ! !
Special MERCHANDISE Section::::Merchandise .
Several boardgames , books and video games have been released under the franchise .
Many boardgames have been developed to replicate the rules and game play of the television show .
The boardgame will often consist of a board to place letters and number on , several scorecards , a selection of numbers and letters , a number generator and a timing device ( older models use an hourglass whilst newer models contain a battery powered timer ) .
In the late 80s / early 90s , LexiBook released digital handheld version of Countdown .
These contained LCD black and white displays and a variety of physical controls .
Many of these often bore the official Countdown logo .
In 2006 , University Games released a Countdown DVD game , which contained recorded clips specifically for the game .
Gameplay is achieved via a DVD player and the remote control .
The DVD was sold disk only , or as a bundle containing notepads and pencils .
In 2009 , Mindscape released Countdown games for the Nintendo DS and the Wii .
Gameplay is replicated as it is on the show .
On the DS version , players can compete against each other via Download Play , using a single game card .
INTERNATIONAL VERSIONS NETHERLANDS
Section::::International versions .
Section::::Netherlands .
In the eighties the Dutch version " Cijfers en letters " ran for many years and was broadcast by the public TV station KRO .
Presenters were Bob Bouma , Maartje van Weegen and Robert ten Brink , who later also presented the Dutch version of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? .
From 1989 to 1993 a Flemish version was produced by the Belgian commercial TV station VTM .
In Belgium many local clubs were founded where people could play the game themselves .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
An American version of Countdown was taped in 1990 as an unsold pilot .
Hosted by British expat Michael Jackson ( a Los Angeles - based radio personality ) , and announced by game show veteran Charlie O'Donnell , this version followed closely to the British version , with a few changes .
Everyday contestants were paired up with celebrities and played two games each .
Three rounds were played in each game , with a bonus round to the higher scoring team .
The first two rounds , like the British version , had each contestant taking turns picking nine letter tiles and attempting to form one word in 30 seconds .
Like the British version , the team that formed the longest word was awarded the points based on how many letters were used .
Teams were allowed to confer with each other in the first two rounds .
The third round , only eight - letter titles were picked , with the ninth being a " wild card " that the contestant could use any way they would like .
In this round , the contestant is not allowed to confer with their celebrity partner .
The player with the highest score after three rounds wins the game and plays the bonus round .
Any player that forms a word using all nine letters wins a progressive jackpot ( on the pilot episode , that was $ 25,000 ) .
In the bonus round , the contestant works with their celebrity partner to unscramble six words in 45 seconds .
Each word gets longer , starting with a four - letter word , then a five - letter word , then a six - letter word , then a seven - letter word , then an eight - letter word , and finally a nine - letter word .
The contestant would earn $ 200 for every unscrambled word , with a prize of $ 10,000 for unscrambling all six words .
Contestants would switch celebrity partners and play another game in the same format ( three rounds , with another chance at the bonus round ) .
The contestant with the higher total score at the end of both games would return to the next show .
If the contestants tied , both would return to the next show .
Five - day champions would win a new car and retire undefeated .
The Numbers round and the Conundrum round were both eliminated from the American version .
SPAIN & LATIN AMERICAN SPANISH Section::::Spain & Latin American Spanish .
In 1991 , a Spanish version of this show was released : Cifras y Letras ( numbers and letters ) .
The show was originally presented by Elisenda Roca , along with a word expert and mathematician .
As this show progressed , a second version of the same show was also produced , which covered Latin American Spanish .
The current Peninsular Spanish edition is presented by Paco Lodeiro .
Shortly after this , a Galician version was also released : Cifras e Letras , differing from the above only in the fact that it used Galician instead of Spanish , and a studio design variation .
This version is also presented by Paco Lodeiro , assisted by the physicist Jorge Mira and the poet Yolanda Castaño , and broadcast by the Galician TV channels in Spain , Europe and South America .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
On 2 August 2010 , the new Australian version entitled Letters and Numbers ( to avoid confusion with the Australian music program Countdown )
debuted on SBS , hosted by Richard Morecroft .
Each episode was 30 minutes long and consisted of five letters rounds , three numbers rounds and the conundrum .
The last episode was aired on 27 June 2012 , after five series and one masters series .
As of 2018 SBS continues to screen re - runs of the series .
ELSEWHERE
Section::::Elsewhere .
Other versions include A Word or 2 ( South Africa ) and Bir Kelime , Bir İşlem ( Turkey ) , Paroliamo ( Italy ) aired on Telemontecarlo until 1977 to 1982 and after Rai 2 until 1982 to 1989 .
In September 2012 , an Isle of ManLetters and Numbers Richard MorecroftDavid AstleLily Serna SBS OneWalter De MeyereCarine Van de Ven VTMHRTGrámmata kai Arithmoí Christos Oikonomou Kostas Papadonopoulos
ERT1 Mega ChannelTik - Tek Ronit KfirEyal KitzisAfrt RiitnShron Tiicr Israeli Educational TelevisionLea Pericoli ( 1977–1982)Fabrizio Frizzi Telemontecarlo (
1977–1982)Rai 2Robert ten Brink KROSVT 1TV
Slagalica Marija VeljkovićKristina
RadenkovićMilica Gacin
RTSJeremy Mansfield SABC2La 2 ( 1991–1996)Telemadrid and FORTATRT
1Michael Jackson ( 1990 ) colspan=2 VARIATIONS
*
Countdown Masters was a regular spot within The Channel Four Daily from 1989 to 1992 .
It had the same hosts and rules as the standard game but was played in shorter chunks .
It was abbreviated , for example the letters were chosen all in one go as " x vowels and y consonants " .
* 8 Out of 10 Cats Does Countdown has comedian Jimmy Carr as host and Jon Richardson and Sean Lock as permanent contestants .
Susie Dent and Rachel Riley fill their normal roles .
It uses similar rules to the standard game , but has a strong comedy element , a reduced number of rounds , and two - person teams .
It began in 2012 and continues airing new episodes .
WORLD RECORD Section::::World record .
In 2014 , Countdown entered the Guinness World Records for the most series of a TV game show broadcast .
SEE ALSO
* List of Countdown champions
REFERENCES
* Countdown : Spreading the Word ( Granada Media , 2001 )
EXTERNAL LINKS
* .
* .
* The Countdown Page , results from every game .
* The Countdown Wiki .
*
An analysis of the game based on a scientific article published at the 2015 Global Conference on Artificial Intelligence .
*
An online version of the game featuring Des Lynam , Carol , and Susie .