SODIUM BICARBONATE Sodium bicarbonate ( IUPAC name : sodium hydrogen carbonate ) , commonly known as baking soda , is a chemical compound with the formula
NaHCO .
It is a salt composed of a sodium cation ( Na ) and a bicarbonate anion ( HCO ) .
Sodium bicarbonate is a white solid that is crystalline , but often appears as a fine powder .
It has a slightly salty , alkaline taste resembling that of washing soda ( sodium carbonate ) .
The natural mineral form is nahcolite .
It is a component of the mineral natron and is found dissolved in many mineral springs .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
Because it has long been known and is widely used , the salt has many related names such as baking soda , bread soda , cooking soda , and bicarbonate of soda .
In colloquial usage , the names sodium bicarbonate and bicarbonate of soda are often truncated ; forms such as sodium bicarb , bicarb soda , bicarbonate , and bicarb are common .
The word saleratus , from Latin sal æratus meaning " aerated salt " , was widely used in the 19th century for both sodium bicarbonate and potassium bicarbonate .
It is known as one of the E number food additives E500 .
The prefix " bi " in " bicarbonate " comes from an outdated naming system and is based on the observation that twice as much carbonate ( CO ) per sodium IS in sodium bicarbonate ( NaHCO )
as in sodium carbonate ( NaCO ) .
The modern chemical formulas of these compounds express their precise chemical compositions ( which were unknown when the names sodium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate were coined ) and show the same ratio the other way around : half as much sodium percarbonate is in NaHCO as in NaCO ( disodium carbonate ) .
USES COOKING Section::::Uses .
Section::::Cooking .
In cooking , baking soda is primarily used in baking as a leavening agent .
When it reacts with acid , carbon dioxide is released , which causes expansion of the batter and forms the characteristic texture and grain in pancakes , cakes , quick breads , soda bread , and other baked and fried foods .
Acidic compounds that induce this reaction include phosphates , cream of tartar , lemon juice , yogurt , buttermilk , cocoa , and vinegar .
Baking soda may be used together with sourdough , which is acidic , making a lighter product with a less acidic taste .
Heat can also by itself cause sodium bicarbonate to act as a raising agent in baking because of thermal decomposition , releasing carbon dioxide .
When used this way on its own , without the presence of an acidic component ( whether in the batter or by the use of a baking powder containing acid ) , only half the available CO is released .
Additionally , in the absence of acid , thermal decomposition of sodium bicarbonate also produces sodium carbonate , which is strongly alkaline and gives the baked product a bitter , " soapy " taste and a yellow color .
To avoid an over - acidic taste from added acid , nonacid ingredients such as whole milk or Dutch - processed cocoa are often added to baked foods .
Carbon dioxide production from exposure to heat starts at temperatures above .
Since the reaction occurs slowly at room temperature , mixtures ( cake batter , etc . ) can be allowed to stand without rising until they are heated in the oven .
Sodium bicarbonate was sometimes used in cooking green vegetables , as it gives them a bright green colour — which has been described as artificial - looking — due to its reacting with chlorophyll to produce chlorophyllin .
However , this tends to affect taste , texture and nutritional content , and is no longer common .
Baking soda is still used , though , in the traditional British mushy peas recipe for soaking the peas .
It is also used in Asian and Latin American cuisine to tenderize meats .
Baking soda may react with acids in food , including vitamin C ( -ascorbic acid ) .
It is also used in breading , such as for fried foods , to enhance crispness and allow passages for steam to escape , so the breading is not blown off during cooking .
BAKING POWDER
Section::::Baking powder .
Baking powder , also sold for cooking , contains around 30 % of bicarbonate , and various acidic ingredients which are activated by the addition of water , without the need for additional acids in the cooking medium .
Many forms of baking powder contain sodium bicarbonate combined with calcium acid phosphate , sodium aluminium phosphate , or cream of tartar .
Baking soda is alkaline ; the acid used in baking powder avoids a metallic taste when the chemical change during baking creates sodium carbonate .
PEST CONTROL Section::::Pest control .
Sodium bicarbonate can be used to kill cockroaches .
Once consumed , it causes internal organs of cockroaches to burst due to gas collection .
Sodium bicarbonate can be an effective way of controlling fungal growth , and in the United States is registered by the Environmental Protection Agency as a biopesticide .
ALKALINITY / PH INCREASE
Section::::Alkalinity / pH increase .
Sodium bicarbonate can be administered to pools , spas , and garden ponds to raise the total alkalinity .
This will also raise the pH level and make maintaining proper pH easier .
In the event that the pH is high , sodium bicarbonate should not be used to adjust the pH. PYROTECHNICS Section::::Pyrotechnics .
Sodium bicarbonate is one of the main components of the common " black snake " firework .
The effect is caused by the thermal decomposition , which produces carbon dioxide gas to produce a long snake - like ash as a combustion product of the other main component , sucrose .
MILD DISINFECTANT Section::::Mild disinfectant .
It has weak disinfectant properties , and it may be an effective fungicide against some organisms .
Because baking soda will absorb musty smells , it has become a reliable method for used - book sellers when making books less malodorous .
FIRE EXTINGUISHER Section::::Fire extinguisher .
Sodium bicarbonate can be used to extinguish small grease or electrical fires by being thrown over the fire , as heating of sodium bicarbonate releases carbon dioxide .
However , it should not be applied to fires in deep fryers ; the sudden release of gas may cause the grease to splatter .
Sodium bicarbonate is used in BC dry chemical fire extinguishers as an alternative to the more corrosive diammonium phosphate in ABC extinguishers .
The alkaline nature of sodium bicarbonate makes it the only dry chemical agent , besides Purple - K , that was used in large - scale fire suppression systems installed in commercial kitchens .
Because it can act as an alkali , the agent has a mild saponification effect on hot grease , which forms a smothering , soapy foam .
NEUTRALIZATION OF ACIDS AND BASES Section::::Neutralization of acids and bases .
Sodium bicarbonate is amphoteric , reacting with acids and bases .
It reacts violently with acids , releasing CO gas as a reaction product .
It is commonly used to neutralize unwanted acid solutions or acid spills in chemical laboratories .
MEDICAL USES AND HEALTH
Section::::Medical uses and health .
Sodium bicarbonate mixed with water can be used as an antacid to treat acid indigestion and heartburn .
Its reaction with stomach acid produces salt , water , and carbon dioxide :
Intravenous sodium bicarbonate in an aqueous solution is sometimes used for cases of acidosis , or when insufficient sodium or bicarbonate ions are in the blood .
In cases of respiratory acidosis , the infused bicarbonate ion drives the carbonic acid / bicarbonate buffer of plasma to the left , and thus raises the pH.
For this reason , sodium bicarbonate is used in medically supervised cardiopulmonary resuscitation .
Infusion of bicarbonate is indicated only when the blood pH is markedly low ( < 7.1–7.0 ) .
HCO is used for treatment of hyperkalemia , as it will drive K back into cells during periods of acidosis .
Since sodium bicarbonate can cause alkalosis , it is sometimes used to treat aspirin overdoses .
Aspirin requires an acidic environment for proper absorption , and the basic environment diminishes aspirin absorption in the case of an overdose .
Sodium bicarbonate has also been used in the treatment of tricyclic antidepressant overdose .
It can also be applied topically as a paste , with three parts baking soda to one part water , to relieve some kinds of insect bites and stings ( as well as accompanying swelling ) .
Sodium bicarbonate has been found to have no effect on the blood pressure of several types of rat models susceptible to salt - sensitive hypertension , in contrast with sodium chloride .
This was ascribed to the high concentration of chloride , rather than the sodium content in dietary salts .
Sodium bicarbonate can be used to treat an allergic reaction to plants such as poison ivy , poison oak , or poison sumac to relieve some of the associated itching .
Bicarbonate of soda can also be useful in removing splinters from the skin .
Some alternative practitioners , such as Tullio Simoncini , have promoted baking soda as a cancer cure , which the American Cancer Society has warned against due to both its unproven effectiveness and potential danger in use .
Sodium bicarbonate can be added to local anesthetics , to speed up the onset of their effects and make their injection less painful .
It is also a component of Moffett 's solution , used in nasal surgery .
As early as the 1920s , bicarbonate was found to cause increased bone strength in patients who were losing calcium in their urine .
In 1968 , diets producing too much acid were thought to put bones at risk .
Experiments by Anthony Sebastian of the University of California , San Francisco starting in the late 20th century found that the body was breaking down bones and muscles to release carbonates , phosphates , and ammonia , which neutralize acid .
Adding bicarbonate to the diet ( he used potassium bicarbonate ) reduced loss of calcium in postmenopausal women , amounting to the equivalent of " an arm - and - a - leg 's worth " of bone if this continued for two decades .
A wide variety of applications follows from its neutralization properties , including reducing the spread of white phosphorus from incendiary bullets inside an afflicted soldier 's wounds .
Antacid ( such as baking soda ) solutions have been prepared and used by protesters to alleviate the effects of exposure to tear gas during protests .
In a recent study published in the Journal of Immunology , oral baking soda was found to activate a splenic anti - inflammatory pathway that seems to reduce the destructive inflammation of autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis .
Proinflammatory molecules were reduced and anti - inflammatory molecules were released .
Similarly to its use in baking , sodium bicarbonate is used together with a mild acid such as tartaric acid as the excipient in effervescent tablets : when such a tablet is dropped in a glass of water , the carbonate leaves the reaction medium as carbon dioxide gas ( HCO + H → HO + CO↑ or , more precisely , HCO + HO → 2 HO + CO↑ )
leaving the medication dissolved in the water together with the resulting salt ( in this example , sodium tartrate ) .
PERSONAL HYGIENE Section::::Personal hygiene .
Toothpaste containing sodium bicarbonate has in several studies been shown to have a better whitening and plaque removal effect than toothpastes without it .
Sodium bicarbonate is also used as an ingredient in some mouthwashes .
It has anticaries and abrasive properties .
It works as a mechanical cleanser on the teeth and gums , neutralizes the production of acid in the mouth , and also acts as an antiseptic to help prevent infections .
Sodium bicarbonate in combination with other ingredients can be used to make a dry or wet deodorant .
Sodium bicarbonate may be used as a buffering agent , combined with table salt , when creating a solution for nasal irrigation .
It is used in eye hygiene to treat blepharitis .
This is done by addition of a teaspoon of sodium bicarbonate to cool water that was recently boiled , followed by gentle scrubbing of the eyelash base with a cotton swab dipped in the solution .
VETERINARY USES Section::::Veterinary uses .
Sodium bicarbonate is used as a cattle feed supplement , in particular as a buffering agent for the rumen .
IN SPORTS Section::::In sports .
Small amounts of sodium bicarbonate have been shown to be useful as a supplement for athletes in speed - based events , such as middle - distance running , lasting about 1–7 minutes .
However , overdose is a serious risk because sodium bicarbonate is slightly toxic ; and gastrointestinal irritation is of particular concern .
Additionally , this practice causes a significant increase in dietary sodium .
CLEANING AGENT Section::::Cleaning agent .
Sodium bicarbonate is used in a process for removing paint and corrosion called sodablasting ; the process is particularly suitable for cleaning aluminium panels which can be distorted by other types of abrasives .
A manufacturer recommends a paste made from baking soda with minimal water as a gentle scouring powder , and is useful in removing surface rust , as the rust forms a water - soluble compound when in a concentrated alkaline solution ; cold water should be used , as hot - water solutions can corrode steel .
Baking soda is commonly added to washing machines as a replacement for water softener and to remove odors from clothes .
It is also effective in removing heavy tea and coffee stains from cups when diluted with warm water .
Also , baking soda can be used as a multipurpose odor remover .
During the Manhattan Project to develop the nuclear bomb in the early 1940s , the chemical toxicity of uranium was an issue .
Uranium oxides were found to stick very well to cotton cloth , and did not wash out with soap or laundry detergent .
However , the uranium would wash out with a 2 % solution of sodium bicarbonate .
Clothing can become contaminated with toxic dust of depleted uranium ( DU ) , which is very dense , hence used for counterweights in a civilian context , and in armour - piercing projectiles .
DU is not removed by normal laundering ; washing with about 6 ounces ( 170 g ) of baking soda in 2 gallons ( 7.5 l ) of water will help to wash it out .
CHEMISTRY Section::::Chemistry .
Sodium bicarbonate is an amphoteric compound .
Aqueous solutions are very mildly alkaline due to the formation of carbonic acid and hydroxide ion : Sodium bicarbonate can be used as a wash to remove any acidic impurities from a " crude " liquid , producing a purer sample .
Reaction of sodium bicarbonate and an acid produces a salt and carbonic acid , which readily decomposes to carbon dioxide and water : Sodium bicarbonate reacts with acetic acid ( found in vinegar ) , producing sodium acetate , water , and carbon dioxide : Sodium bicarbonate reacts with bases such as sodium hydroxide to form carbonates : Sodium bicarbonate reacts with carboxyl groups in proteins to give a brisk effervescence from the formation of .
This reaction is used to test for the presence of carboxylic groups in protein .
THERMAL DECOMPOSITION
Section::::Thermal decomposition .
Above , sodium bicarbonate gradually decomposes into sodium carbonate , water , and carbon dioxide .
The conversion is fast at :
Most bicarbonates undergo this dehydration reaction .
Further heating converts the carbonate into the oxide ( above ):
These conversions are relevant to the use of NaHCO as a fire - suppression agent ( " BC powder " ) in some dry - powder fire extinguishers .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1791 , French chemist Nicolas Leblanc produced sodium carbonate , also known as soda ash .
In 1846 , two New York bakers , John Dwight and Austin Church , established the first factory in the United States to produce baking soda from sodium carbonate and carbon dioxide .
Saleratus , potassium or sodium bicarbonate , is mentioned in the novel Captains Courageous by Rudyard Kipling as being used extensively in the 1800s in commercial fishing to prevent freshly caught fish from spoiling .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
NaHCO is mainly prepared by the Solvay process , which is the reaction of sodium chloride , ammonia , and carbon dioxide in water .
Calcium carbonate is used as the source of CO and the resultant calcium oxide is used to recover the ammonia from the ammonium chloride .
The product shows a low purity ( 75 % ) .
Pure product is obtained from sodium carbonate , water , and carbon dioxide as reported in one of the following reactions .
It is produced on the scale of about 100,000 tonnes / year ( as of 2001 ) .
NaHCO may be obtained by the reaction of carbon dioxide with an aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide .
The initial reaction produces sodium carbonate :
Further addition of carbon dioxide produces sodium bicarbonate , which at sufficiently high concentration will precipitate out of solution : Commercial quantities of baking soda are also produced by a similar method : soda ash , mined in the form of the ore trona , is dissolved in water and treated with carbon dioxide .
Sodium bicarbonate precipitates as a solid from this method : MINING
Section::::Mining .
Naturally occurring deposits of nahcolite ( NaHCO ) are found in the Eocene - age ( 55.8–33.9 Mya )
Green River Formation , Piceance Basin in Colorado .
Nahcolite was deposited as beds during periods of high evaporation in the basin .
It is commercially mined using common underground mining techniques such as bore , drum , and longwall mining in a fashion very similar to coal mining .
Limited amounts of product are further obtained by solution mining , pumping heated water through previously mined nahcolite beds and reconstituting the dissolved nahcolite above ground through a natural cooling crystallization process .
Currently , only Genesis Alkali ( formerly Tronox , formerly FMC ) in the Green River Wyoming basin has successfully commercially solution mined the product .
IN POPULAR CULTURE FILM Section::::In popular culture .
Section::::Film .
Sodium bicarbonate , as " bicarbonate of soda " , was a frequent source of punch lines for Groucho Marx in Marx brothers movies .
In Duck Soup , Marx plays the leader of a nation at war .
In one scene , he receives a message from the battlefield that his general is reporting a gas attack , and Groucho tells his aide : " Tell him to take a teaspoonful of bicarbonate of soda and a half a glass of water . "
In A Night at the Opera , Groucho 's character addresses the opening night crowd at an opera by saying of the lead tenor : " Signor Lassparri comes from a very famous family .
His mother was a well - known bass singer .
His father was the first man to stuff spaghetti with bicarbonate of soda , thus causing and curing indigestion at the same time . "
SEE ALSO
* Carbonic acid
* List of ineffective cancer treatments * List of minerals *
Natron
* Natrona ( disambiguation )
* Trona REFERENCES
CITED
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* International Chemical Safety Card 1044