LINEAR FUNCTION
In mathematics , the term linear function refers to two distinct but related notions : *
In calculus and related areas , a linear function is a function whose graph is a straight line , that is a polynomial function of degree at most one .
*
In linear algebra , mathematical analysis , and functional analysis , a linear function is a linear map .
In this case , and in case of possible ambiguity , the name affine function is often used for the concept above .
AS A POLYNOMIAL FUNCTION Section::::As a polynomial function .
In calculus , analytic geometry and related areas , a linear function is a polynomial of degree one or less , including the zero polynomial ( the latter not being considered to have degree zero ) .
When the function is of only one variable , it is of the form where and are constants , often real numbers .
The graph of such a function of one variable is a nonvertical line .
is frequently referred to as the slope of the line , and as the intercept .
For a function formula_2 of any finite number of independent variables , the general formula is and the graph is a hyperplane of dimension .
A constant function is also considered linear in this context , as it is a polynomial of degree zero or is the zero polynomial .
Its graph , when there is only one independent variable , is a horizontal line .
In this context , the other meaning ( a linear map ) may be referred to as a homogeneous linear function or a linear form .
In the context of linear algebra , this meaning ( polynomial functions of degree 0 or 1 ) is a special kind of affine map .
AS
A LINEAR MAP Section::::As a linear map .
In linear algebra , a linear function is a map f between two vector spaces that preserves vector addition and scalar multiplication :
Here denotes a constant belonging to some field of scalars ( for example , the real numbers ) and and are elements of a vector space , which might be itself .
Some authors use " linear function " only for linear maps that take values in the scalar field ; these are also called linear functionals .
The " linear functions " of calculus qualify as " linear maps " when ( and only when )
formula_6 , or , equivalently , when the constant formula_7 .
Geometrically , the graph of the function must pass through the origin .
SEE ALSO * Homogeneous function
* Nonlinear system *
Piecewise linear function
* Linear interpolation * Discontinuous linear map NOTES
REFERENCES
* Izrail Moiseevich Gelfand ( 1961 ) , Lectures on Linear Algebra , Interscience Publishers , Inc. , New York .
Reprinted by Dover , 1989 .
* Thomas S. Shores ( 2007 ) , Applied Linear Algebra and Matrix Analysis , Undergraduate Texts in Mathematics , Springer .
* James Stewart ( 2012 ) , Calculus :
Early Transcendentals , edition 7E , Brooks / Cole .
* Leonid N. Vaserstein ( 2006 ) , " Linear Programming " , in Leslie Hogben , ed . , Handbook of Linear Algebra , Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications , Chapman and Hall / CRC , chap .
50 . EXTERNAL LINKS