HEAT INDEX
The heat index ( HI ) or humiture is an index that combines air temperature and relative humidity , in shaded areas , to posit a human - perceived equivalent temperature , as how hot it would feel if the humidity were some other value in the shade .
The result is also known as the " felt air temperature " , " apparent temperature " , " real feel " or " feels like " .
For example , when the temperature is with 70 % relative humidity , the heat index is .
This heat index temperature has an implied ( unstated ) humidity of 20 % .
This is the value of relative humidity for which the heat index number equals the actual air temperature .
The human body normally cools itself by perspiration , or sweating .
Heat is removed from the body by evaporation of that sweat .
However , high relative humidity reduces the evaporation rate .
This results in a lower rate of heat removal from the body , hence the sensation of being overheated .
This effect is subjective , with different individuals perceiving heat differently for various reasons ( such as differences in body shape , metabolic differences , differences in hydration , pregnancy , menopause , effects of drugs and/or drug withdrawal ) ; its measurement has been based on subjective descriptions of how hot subjects feel for a given temperature and humidity .
This results in a heat index that relates one combination of temperature and humidity to another .
Because the humidity index is based on temperatures in the shade , while people often move across sunny areas , then the heat index can give a much lower temperature than actual conditions of typical outdoor activities .
Also , for people exercising or active , at the time , then the heat index could give a temperature lower than the felt conditions .
For example , with a temperature in the shade of only at 60 % relative humidity , then the heat index would seem , but movement across sunny areas of , would give a heat index of over , as more indicative of the oppressive and sweltering heat .
Plus when actively working , or not wearing a hat in sunny areas , then the feels - like conditions would seem even hotter .
Hence , the heat index could seem unrealistically low , unless resting inactive ( idle ) in heavily shaded areas .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The heat index was developed in 1978 by George Winterling as the " humiture " and was adopted by the USA 's National Weather Service a year later .
It is derived from work carried out by Robert G. Steadman .
Like the wind chill index , the heat index contains assumptions about the human body mass and height , clothing , amount of physical activity , thickness of blood , sunlight and ultraviolet radiation exposure , and the wind speed .
Significant deviations from these will result in heat index values which do not accurately reflect the perceived temperature .
In Canada , the similar humidex ( a Canadian innovation introduced in 1965 ) is used in place of the heat index .
While both the humidex and the heat index are calculated using dew point , the humidex uses a dew point of as a base , whereas the heat index uses a dew point base of .
Further , the heat index uses heat balance equations which account for many variables other than vapor pressure , which is used exclusively in the humidex calculation .
A joint committee formed by the United States and Canada to resolve differences has since been disbanded .
The heat index is referenced to any combination of air temperature and humidity where the partial pressure of water vapor is equal to a baseline value of .
For example , this corresponds to an air temperature of and relative humidity of 50 % in the sea - level psychrometric chart .
At standard atmospheric pressure ( 101.325 kPa ) , this baseline also corresponds to a dew point of and a mixing ratio of 0.01 ( 10 g of water vapor per kilogram of dry air ) .
A given value of relative humidity causes larger increases in the heat index at higher temperatures .
For example , at approximately , the heat index will agree with the actual temperature if the relative humidity is 45 % , but at , any relative - humidity reading above 18 % will make the heat index higher than .
It has been suggested that the equation described is valid only if the temperature is or more , and the relative humidity is 40 % or more .
However , a recent analysis by iWeatherNet found the assumption to be erroneous given that the heat index / relative humidity relationship and the corresponding equilibrium temperature ( the point at which the air temperature and the heat index are equal ) are nonlinear .
The heat index and humidex figures are based on temperature measurements taken in the shade and not the sun , so extra care must be taken while in the sun .
The heat index also does not factor in the effects of wind , which lowers the apparent temperature , unless the air is above body temperature .
Sometimes the heat index and the wind chill are denoted collectively by the single term apparent temperature , " relative outdoor temperature " , or " feels like " .
METEOROLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Section::::Meteorological considerations .
Outdoors in open conditions , as the relative humidity increases , first haze and ultimately a thicker cloud cover develops , reducing the amount of direct sunlight reaching the surface .
Thus , there is an inverse relationship between maximum potential temperature and maximum potential relative humidity .
Because of this factor , it was once believed that the highest heat index reading actually attainable anywhere on Earth was approximately .
However , in Dhahran , Saudi Arabia on July 8 , 2003 , the dew point was while the temperature was , resulting in a heat index of .
TABLE OF VALUES Section::::Table of values .
The table below is from the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration .
The columns begin at , but there is also a heat index effect at and similar temperatures when there is high humidity .
For example , if the air temperature is and the relative humidity is 65 % , the heat index is 121 ° F / 49 ° C . EFFECTS OF THE HEAT INDEX ( SHADE VALUES )
Section::::Effects of the heat index ( shade values ) . !
Celsius Fahrenheit Notes Exposure to full sunshine can increase heat index values by up to 8 ° C ( 14 ° F ) .
FORMULA Section::::Formula .
There are many formulae devised to approximate the original tables by Steadman .
Anderson et al ( 2013 ) , NWS ( 2011 ) , Jonson and Long ( 2004 ) , and Schoen ( 2005 ) have lesser residuals in this order .
The former two are a set of polynomials , but the third one is by a single formula with exponential functions .
The formula below approximates the heat index in degrees Fahrenheit , to within ±.
It is the result of a multivariate fit ( temperature equal to or greater than and relative humidity equal to or greater than 40 % ) to a model of the human body .
This equation reproduces the above NOAA National Weather Service table ( except the values at & 45%/70 % relative humidity vary unrounded by less than ±1 , respectively ) .
where An alternative set of constants for this equation that is within ± of the NWS master table for all humidities from 0 to 80 % and all temperatures between and all heat indices below is : A further alternate is this : where For example , using this last formula , with temperature and relative humidity ( RH ) of 85 % , the result would be : .
SEE ALSO
* Apparent temperature * Humidex * Wind chill
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Description of wind chill & apparent temperature Formulae in metric units * Heat Index Calculator Calculates both ° F and °
C
* Current map of global heat index values