LONG ISLAND
ICED TEA
A Long Island Iced Tea is a type of alcoholic mixed drink typically made with vodka , tequila , light rum , triple sec , gin , and a splash of cola , which gives the drink the same amber hue as its namesake .
A popular version mixes equal parts vodka , gin , rum , triple sec , with parts sour mix and a splash of cola .
Lastly , it is decorated with the lemon and straw , after stirring with bar spoon smoothly .
Most variants use equal parts of the main liquors , but include a smaller amount of triple sec ( or other orange - flavored liqueur ) .
Close variants often replace the sour mix with lemon juice , replace the cola with diet cola or actual iced tea , or add white crème de menthe .
Most variants do not include any tea .
The drink has a much higher alcohol concentration ( approximately 22 percent ) than most highball drinks due to the relatively small amount of mixer .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
Robert " Rosebud " Butt claims to have invented the Long Island Iced Tea as an entry in a contest to create a new mixed drink with triple sec in 1972 while he worked at the Oak Beach Inn on Long Island , New York .
A slightly different drink is claimed to have been invented in the 1920s during Prohibition in the United States by an " Old Man Bishop " in a local community named Long Island in Kingsport , Tennessee .
The drink was then perfected by Ransom Bishop , Old Man Bishop 's son .
This drink included whiskey and maple syrup , and varied quantities of the five liquors , rather than the modern one with cola and five equal portions of the five liquors .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
The popularity of the Long Island has spawned its own family of highballs .
Many drinks remain popular in their own right in numerous locales throughout the United States , while owing their existence to the success of the original Long Island Iced Tea .
An example of a variation to the Long Island is the Purple Rain , which uses the same mix as a Long Island but the Triple Sec is replaced with a shot of Chambord Liqueur and the cola replaced with lemonlime soda .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS