STRAIT OF DOVER
The Strait of Dover or Dover Strait , historically known as the Dover Narrows ( - Strait of Calais ) ; or Straat van Dover ) , is the strait at the narrowest part of the English Channel , marking the boundary between the Channel and North Sea , separating Great Britain from continental Europe .
The shortest distance across the strait , , is from the South Foreland , northeast of Dover in the English county of Kent , to Cap Gris Nez , a cape near to Calais in the French département of Pas - de - Calais .
Between these points lies the most popular route for cross - channel swimmers .
The entire strait is within the territorial waters of France and the United Kingdom , but a right of transit passage under the UNCLOS exists allowing unrestricted shipping .
On a clear day , it is possible to see the opposite coastline of England from France and vice versa with the naked eye , with the most famous and obvious sight being the white cliffs of Dover from the French coastline and shoreline buildings on both coastlines , as well as lights on either coastline at night , as in Matthew Arnold 's poem " Dover Beach " .
SHIPPING TRAFFIC
Section::::Shipping traffic .
Most maritime traffic between the Atlantic Ocean and the North Sea and Baltic Sea passes through the Strait of Dover , rather than taking the longer and more dangerous route around the north of Scotland .
The strait is the busiest international seaway in the world , used by over 400 commercial vessels daily .
This has made traffic safety a critical issue , with HM Coastguard and the Maritime Gendarmerie maintaining a 24-hour watch over the strait and enforcing a strict regime of shipping lanes .
In addition to the intensive east – west traffic , the strait is crossed from north to south by ferries linking Dover to Calais and Dunkirk .
Until 1994 these provided the only route across it for land transport .
The Channel Tunnel now provides an alternative route , crossing beneath the strait at an average depth of below the seabed .
The town of Dover gives its name to one of the sea areas of the British Shipping Forecast .
GEOLOGICAL FORMATION
Section::::Geological formation .
The strait is believed to have been created by the erosion of a land bridge that linked the Weald in Great Britain to the Boulonnais in the Pas de Calais .
The predominant geology on both the British and French sides and on the seafloor is chalk .
Although somewhat resistant to erosion , erosion of both coasts has created the famous white cliffs of Dover in the UK and the Cap Blanc Nez in France .
The Channel Tunnel was bored through solid chalk .
The Rhine ( as the Urstrom ) flowed northwards into the North Sea as the sea level fell during the start of the first of the Pleistocene Ice Ages .
The ice created a dam from Scandinavia to Scotland , and the Rhine , combined with the Thames and drainage from much of north Europe , created a vast lake behind the dam , which eventually spilled over the Weald into the English Channel .
This overflow channel became the Strait of Dover about 425,000 years ago .
A narrow deep channel along the middle of the strait was the bed of the Rhine in the last Ice Age .
A geological deposit in East Anglia marks the old preglacial northward course of the Rhine .
A 2007 study concluded the English Channel was formed by erosion caused by two major floods .
The first was about 425,000 years ago , when an ice - dammed lake in the southern North Sea overflowed and broke the Weald - Artois chalk range in a catastrophic erosion and flood event .
Afterwards , the Thames and Scheldt flowed through the gap into the English Channel , but the Meuse and Rhine still flowed northwards .
In a second flood about 225,000 years ago the Meuse and Rhine were ice - dammed into a lake that broke catastrophically through a high weak barrier ( perhaps chalk , or an end - moraine left by the ice sheet ) .
Both floods cut massive flood channels in the dry bed of the English Channel , somewhat like the Channeled Scablands or the Wabash River in the USA .
A further update in 2017 , attributed a series of previously described underwater holes in the Channel floor -"100 m deep " and in places " several kilometres in diameter " to lake water plunging over a rock ridge causing isolated depressions or plunge pools .
The melting ice and rising sea levels submerged Doggerland , the area linking Britain to France 6,500–6,200 BCE .
The Lobourg strait , a major feature of the strait 's seafloor , runs its wide slash on a NNE – SSW axis .
Nearer to the French coast than to the English coast , it runs along the Varne sandbank where it plunges to at its deepest , and along the latter 's south - east neighbour the Ridge bank ( French name " Colbart " ) with a maximum depth of .
MARINE WILDLIFE Section::::Marine wildlife .
The submarine depth of the strait varies between at the Lobourg strait and at the highest banks .
It presents a succession of rocky areas relatively deserted by ships wanting to spare their nets , and of sandy flats and sub - aqueous dunes .
The strong currents of the Channel are slowed down around the rocky areas of the strait , with formation of countercurrents and calmer zones where many species can find shelter .
In these calmer zones , the water is clearer than in the rest of the strait ; thus algae can grow despite the average depth and help increase diversity in the local species – some of which are endemic to the strait .
Moreover , this is a transition zone for the species of the Atlantic Ocean and those of the southern part of the North Sea .
This mix of various environments promotes a wide variety of wildlife .
The de Boulogne , a deep rocky high ground partially covered with sand located to the west of Boulogne , boasts the highest production of maerl in the strait .
A area of the strait is classified as a Natura 2000 protection zone listed under the name et dunes hydrauliques
du Pas de Calais (
Ridens and sub - aqueous dunes of the Dover Strait ) .
This area includes the sub - aqueous dunes of Varne , Colbart , Vergoyer and Bassurelle , the Ridens de Boulogne , and the Lobourg channel which provides calmer and clearer waters due to its depth reaching .
UNUSUAL CROSSINGS Section::::Unusual crossings .
Many crossings other than in conventional vessels have been attempted , including by pedalo , jetpack , bathtub , amphibious vehicle and more commonly by swimming .
French law bans many of these while English law does not , so most such crossings originate in England .
ICE Section::::Ice .
In the late 17th century during the " Little Ice Age " , there were reports of severe winter ice in the Strait of Dover , including a case in 1684 of only a league of open water remaining between Dover and Calais . ; see for another report of severe ice in the English Channel .
SEE ALSO
* Battle of Dover Strait
* Calais Lighthouse *
South Foreland Lighthouse *
Cap Gris - Nez
NOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Channel Navigation Information Service * Channel Swimming & Piloting Federation * Channel Swimming Association
*
Depth Chart showing straits and former course of Rhine