CYTOSKELETON
A cytoskeleton is present in all cells of all domains of life ( archaea , bacteria , eukaryotes ) .
It is a complex network of interlinking filaments and tubules that extend throughout the cytoplasm , from the nucleus to the plasma membrane .
The cytoskeletal systems of different organisms are composed of similar proteins .
In eukaryotes , the cytoskeletal matrix is a dynamic structure composed of three main proteins , which are capable of rapid growth or disassembly dependent on the cell 's requirements at a certain period of time .
The structure , function and dynamic behavior of the cytoskeleton can be very different , depending on organism and cell type .
Even within one cell the cytoskeleton can change through association with other proteins and the previous history of the network .
A multitude of functions can be performed by the cytoskeleton .
Its primary function would arguably be to give the cell its shape and mechanical resistance to deformation , and through association with extracellular connective tissue and other cells it stabilizes entire tissues .
The cytoskeleton can also contract , thereby deforming the cell and the cell 's environment and allowing cells to migrate .
Moreover , it is involved in many cell signaling pathways : in the uptake of extracellular material ( endocytosis ) , segregates chromosomes during cellular division , is involved in cytokinesis ( the division of a mother cell into two daughter cells ) , provides a scaffold to organize the contents of the cell in space and for intracellular transport ( for example , the movement of vesicles and organelles within the cell ) ; and can be a template for the construction of a cell wall .
Furthermore , it forms specialized structures , such as flagella , cilia , lamellipodia and podosomes .
A large - scale example of an action performed by the cytoskeleton is muscle contraction .
In the muscle , there are groups of highly specialized cells that work together to perform a function known as muscle contraction .
A main component in the cytoskeleton that helps show the true function of this muscle contraction is known as a microfilament .
Microfilaments are composed of the most abundant cellular protein known as actin .
During contraction of a muscle , within each muscle cell , myosin molecular motors collectively exert forces on parallel actin filaments .
Muscle contraction starts from nerve impulses which then causes increased amounts of calcium to be released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum .
Increases in calcium in the cytosol allows muscle contraction to begin with the help of two proteins , tropomyosin and troponin .
Tropomyosin inhibits the interaction between actin and myosin , while troponin senses the increase in calcium and releases the inhibition .
This action contracts the muscle cell , and through the synchronous process in many muscle cells , the entire muscle .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1903 , Nikolai K. Koltsov proposed that the shape of cells was determined by a network of tubules that he termed the cytoskeleton .
The concept of a protein mosaic that dynamically coordinated cytoplasmic biochemistry was proposed by Rudolph Peters in 1929 while the term ( cytosquelette , in French ) was first introduced by French embryologist Paul Wintrebert in 1931 .
When the cytoskeleton was first introduced , it was thought to be an uninteresting gel - like substance that helps organelles stay in place .
Much research took place to try to understand the purpose of the cytoskeleton and its components .
With the help of Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose , they discovered that microtubules vibrate within neurons in the brain which suggest that brain waves come from deeper microtubule vibrations .
This discovery showed that the cytoskeleton is not just a gel like substance
but it actually has a purpose .
Initially , it was thought that the cytoskeleton was exclusive to eukaryotes but in 1992 , it was discovered to be present in prokaryotes as well .
This discovery came after the realization that bacteria possess proteins that are homologous to tubulin and actin ; the main components of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton .
EUKARYOTIC CYTOSKELETON Section::::Eukaryotic cytoskeleton .
Eukaryotic cells contain three main kinds of cytoskeletal filaments : microfilaments , microtubules , and intermediate filaments .
Each cytoskeletal filament type is formed by polymerization of a distinct type of protein subunit and has its own characteristic shape and intracellular distribution .
Microfilaments are polymers of the protein actin and are 7 nm in diameter .
Microtubules are composed of tubulin and are 25 nm in diameter .
Intermediate filaments are composed of various proteins , depending on the type of cell in which they are found ; they are normally 8 - 12 nm in diameter .
The cytoskeleton provides the cell with structure and shape , and by excluding macromolecules from some of the cytosol , it adds to the level of macromolecular crowding in this compartment .
Cytoskeletal elements interact extensively and intimately with cellular membranes .
Neurodegenerative disorders have recently become more understood in context to what parts of the cell they affect .
Diseases , such as Parkinson 's disease , Alzheimer 's disease , Huntington 's disease , and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) have had breakthrough research that supports the conclusion that neurodegenerative diseases affect the cytoskeleton .
Parkinson 's disease is a condition that causes the degradation of neurons , resulting in tremors , rigidity , and other non - motor symptoms .
Research has found evidence that microtubule assembly and stability in the cytoskeleton is compromised causing the neurons to degrade over time .
Alzheimer 's disease is much like Parkinson 's in that it is also a neurodegenerative disease that affects the cytoskeleton .
Tau proteins , which stabilize microtubules , malfunction in patient 's affected by Alzheimers , causing pathology with the cytoskeleton .
Huntington 's disease has also been found to affect the cytoskeleton of cells by excess glutamine in the Huntington protein , which is involved with linking vesicles to the cytoskeleton .
An error with this protein is proposed to be a factor in the development of the disease .
A fourth neurodegenerative disorder is amyotrophic lateral sclerosis , or ALS , which causes a loss of movement by the degradation of motor neurons from defects of the cytoskeleton .
A number of small - molecule cytoskeletal drugs have been discovered that interact with actin and microtubules .
These compounds have proven useful in studying the cytoskeleton and several have clinical applications .
All filaments interact with accessory proteins that regulate and link the filaments to other cell compounds and each other .
The accessory proteins are essential for controlled assembly of cytoskeletal filaments in particular locations , and they include motor proteins .
MICROFILAMENTS
( ACTIN FILAMENTS )
Section::::Microfilaments ( actin filaments ) .
Microfilaments are composed of linear polymers of G - actin proteins , and generate force when the growing ( plus ) end of the filament pushes against a barrier , such as the cell membrane .
They also act as tracks for the movement of myosin molecules that affix to the microfilament and " walk " along them .
In general , the major component or protein of microfilaments are actin .
The G - actin monomer combines to form a polymer which continues to form the microfilament ( actin filament ) .
These subunits then assemble into two chains that intertwine into what is called , F - actin chains .
Myosin motoring along F - actin filaments generates contractile forces in so - called actomyosin fibers , both in muscle as well as most non - muscle cell types .
Actin structures are controlled by the Rho family of small GTP - binding proteins such as Rho itself for contractile acto - myosin filaments ( " stress fibers " ) , Rac for lamellipodia and Cdc42 for filopodia .
Functions include : *
Muscle contraction * Cell movement
* Intracellular transport / trafficking * Maintenance of eukaryotic cell shape *
Cytokinesis * Cytoplasmic streaming INTERMEDIATE FILAMENTS Section::::Intermediate filaments .
Intermediate filaments are a part of the cytoskeleton of many eukaryotic cells .
These filaments , averaging 10 nanometers in diameter , are more stable ( strongly bound ) than actin filaments , and heterogeneous constituents of the cytoskeleton .
Like actin filaments , they function in the maintenance of cell - shape by bearing tension ( microtubules , by contrast , resist compression but can also bear tension during mitosis and during the positioning of the centrosome ) .
Intermediate filaments organize the internal tridimensional structure of the cell , anchoring organelles and serving as structural components of the nuclear lamina .
They also participate in some cell - cell and cell - matrix junctions .
Nuclear lamina exist in all animals and all tissues .
Some animals like the fruit fly do not have any cytoplasmic intermediate filaments .
In those animals that express cytoplasmic intermediate filaments , these are tissue specific .
Keratin intermediate filaments in epithelial cells provide protection for different mechanical stresses the skin may endure .
They also provide protection for organs against metabolic , oxidative , and chemical stresses .
Strengthening of epithelial cells with these intermediate filaments may prevent onset of apoptosis , or cell death , by reducing the probability of stress .
Intermediate filaments are most commonly known as the support system or " scaffolding " for the cell and nucleus while also playing a role in some cell functions .
In combination with proteins and desmosomes , the intermediate filaments form cell - cell connections and anchor the cell - matrix junctions that are used in messaging between cells as well as vital functions of the cell .
These connections allow the cell to communicate through the desmosome of multiple cells to adjust structures of the tissue based on signals from the cells environment .
Mutations in the IF proteins have been shown to cause serious medical issues such as premature aging , desmin mutations compromising organs , Alexander Disease , and muscular dystrophy .
Different intermediate filaments are : * made of vimentins .
Vimentin intermediate filaments are in general present in mesenchymal cells .
* made of keratin .
Keratin is present in general in epithelial cells .
* neurofilaments of neural cells .
* made of lamin , giving structural support to the nuclear envelope .
* made of desmin , play an important role in structural and mechanical support of muscle cells .
MICROTUBULES Section::::Microtubules .
Microtubules are hollow cylinders about 23 nm in diameter ( lumen = approximately 15 nm in diameter ) , most commonly comprising 13 protofilaments that , in turn , are polymers of alpha and beta tubulin .
They have a very dynamic behavior , binding GTP for polymerization .
They are commonly organized by the centrosome .
In nine triplet sets ( star - shaped ) , they form the centrioles , and in nine doublets oriented about two additional microtubules ( wheel - shaped ) , they form cilia and flagella .
The latter formation is commonly referred to as a " 9 + 2 " arrangement , wherein each doublet is connected to another by the protein dynein .
As both flagella and cilia are structural components of the cell , and are maintained by microtubules , they can be considered part of the cytoskeleton .
There are two types of cilia : motile and non - motile cilia .
Cilia are short and more numerous than flagella .
The motile cilia have a rhythmic waving or beating motion compared to the non - motile cilia which receive sensory information for the cell ; processing signals from the other cells or the fluids surrounding it .
Additionally , the microtubules control the beating ( movement ) of the cilia and flagella .
Also , the dynein arms attached to the microtubules function as the molecular motors .
The motion of the cilia and flagella is created by the microtubules sliding past one another , which requires ATP .
They play key roles in : * intracellular transport ( associated with dyneins and kinesins , they transport organelles like mitochondria or vesicles ) .
* the axoneme of cilia and flagella .
* the mitotic spindle .
* synthesis of the cell wall in plants .
In addition to the roles described above , Stuart Hameroff and Roger Penrose have proposed that microtubules function in consciousness .
COMPARISON Section::::Comparison . !
Cytoskeleton type ! !
Diameter ( nm ) ! !
Structure ! !
Subunit examples !
Microfilaments 6 double helix
actin !
Intermediate filaments 10 two anti - parallel helices / dimers , forming tetramers
* vimentin ( mesenchyme ) * glial fibrillary acidic protein ( glial cells ) * neurofilament proteins ( neuronal processes ) * keratins ( epithelial cells ) * nuclear lamins !
Microtubules 23 protofilaments , in turn consisting of tubulin subunits in complex with stathmin α- and β - tubulin SEPTINS Section::::Septins .
Septins are a group of the highly conserved GTP binding proteins found in eukaryotes .
Different septins form protein complexes with each other .
These can assemble to filaments and rings .
Therefore , septins can be considered part of the cytoskeleton .
The function of septins in cells include serving as a localized attachment site for other proteins , and preventing the diffusion of certain molecules from one cell compartment to another .
In yeast cells , they build scaffolding to provide structural support during cell division and compartmentalize parts of the cell .
Recent research in human cells suggests that septins build cages around bacterial pathogens , immobilizing the harmful microbes and preventing them from invading other cells .
SPECTRIN Section::::Spectrin .
Spectrin is a cytoskeletal protein that lines the intracellular side of the plasma membrane in eukaryotic cells .
Spectrin forms pentagonal or hexagonal arrangements , forming a scaffolding and playing an important role in maintenance of plasma membrane integrity and cytoskeletal structure .
YEAST CYTOSKELETON
Section::::Yeast cytoskeleton .
In budding yeast ( an important model organism ) , actin forms cortical patches , actin cables , and a cytokinetic ring and the cap .
Cortical patches are discrete actin bodies on the membrane and are vital for endocytosis , especially the recycling of glucan synthase which is important for cell wall synthesis .
Actin cables are bundles of actin filaments and are involved in the transport of vesicles towards the cap ( which contains a number of different proteins to polarize cell growth ) and in the positioning of mitochondria .
The cytokinetic ring forms and constricts around the site of cell division .
PROKARYOTIC CYTOSKELETON Section::::Prokaryotic cytoskeleton .
Prior to the work of Jones et al . , 2001 , the cell wall was believed to be the deciding factor for many bacterial cell shapes , including rods and spirals .
When studied , many misshapen bacteria were found to have mutations linked to development of a cell envelope .
The cytoskeleton was once thought to be a feature only of eukaryotic cells , but homologues to all the major proteins of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton have been found in prokaryotes .
Harold Erickson notes that before 1992 , only eukaryotes were believed to have cytoskeleton components .
However , research in the early ' 90s suggested that bacteria and archaea had homologues of actin and tubulin , and that these were the basis of eukaryotic microtubules and microfilaments .
Although the evolutionary relationships are so distant that they are not obvious from protein sequence comparisons alone , the similarity of their three - dimensional structures and similar functions in maintaining cell shape and polarity provides strong evidence that the eukaryotic and prokaryotic cytoskeletons are truly homologous .
Three laboratories independently discovered that FtsZ , a protein already known as a key player in bacterial cytokinesis , had the " tubulin signature sequence " present in all α- , β- , and γ - tubulins .
However , some structures in the bacterial cytoskeleton may not have been identified as of yet .
FTSZ Section::::FtsZ. FtsZ was the first protein of the prokaryotic cytoskeleton to be identified .
Like tubulin , FtsZ forms filaments in the presence of guanosine triphosphate ( GTP ) , but these filaments do not group into tubules .
During cell division , FtsZ is the first protein to move to the division site , and is essential for recruiting other proteins that synthesize the new cell wall between the dividing cells .
MREB AND PARM Section::::MreB and ParM.
Prokaryotic actin - like proteins , such as MreB , are involved in the maintenance of cell shape .
All non - spherical bacteria have genes encoding actin - like proteins , and these proteins form a helical network beneath the cell membrane that guides the proteins involved in cell wall biosynthesis .
Some plasmids encode a separate system that involves an actin - like protein ParM. Filaments of ParM exhibit dynamic instability , and may partition plasmid DNA into the dividing daughter cells by a mechanism analogous to that used by microtubules during eukaryotic mitosis .
CRESCENTIN
Section::::Crescentin .
The bacterium Caulobacter crescentus contains a third protein , crescentin , that is related to the intermediate filaments of eukaryotic cells .
Crescentin is also involved in maintaining cell shape , such as helical and vibrioid forms of bacteria , but the mechanism by which it does this is currently unclear .
Additionally , curvature could be described by the displacement of crescentic filaments , after the disruption of peptidoglycan synthesis .
COMMON FEATURES AND DIFFERENCES
BETWEEN PROKARYOTES AND EUKARYOTES
Section::::Common features and differences between prokaryotes and eukaryotes .
By definition , the cytoskeleton is composed of proteins that can form longitudinal arrays ( fibres ) in all organisms .
These filament forming proteins have been classified into 4 classes .
Tubulin - like , actin - like ,
Walker A cytoskeletal ATPases ( WACA - proteins ) , and intermediate filaments .
Tubulin - like proteins are tubulin in eukaryotes and FtsZ , TubZ , RepX in prokaryotes .
Actin - like proteins are actin in eukaryotes and MreB , FtsA in prokaryotes .
An example of a WACA - proteins , which are mostly found in prokaryotes , is MinD. Examples for intermediate filaments , which have almost exclusively been found in animals ( i.e. eukaryotes ) are the lamins , keratins , vimentin , neurofilaments , and desmin .
Although tubulin - like proteins share some amino acid sequence similarity , their equivalence in protein - fold and the similarity in the GTP binding site is more striking .
The same holds true for the actin - like proteins and their structure and ATP binding domain .
Cytoskeletal proteins are usually correlated with cell shape , DNA segregation and cell division in prokaryotes and eukaryotes .
Which proteins fulfill which task is very different .
For example , DNA segregation in all eukaryotes happens through use of tubulin , but in prokaryotes either WACA proteins , actin - like or tubulin - like proteins can be used .
Cell division is mediated in eukaryotes by actin , but in prokaryotes usually by tubulin - like ( often FtsZ - ring ) proteins and sometimes ( Crenarchaeota ) ESCRT - III , which in eukaryotes still has a role in the last step of division .
CYTOPLASMIC STREAMING
Section::::Cytoplasmic streaming .
Cytoplasmic streaming , also known as cylcosis , is the active movement of a cell 's contents along the components of the cytoskeleton .
While mainly seen in plants , all cell types use this process for transportation of waste , nutrients , and organelles to other parts of the cell .
Plant and algae cells are generally larger than many other cells ; so cytoplasmic streaming is important in these types of cells .
This is because the cell 's extra volume requires cytoplasmic streaming in order to move organelles throughout the entire cell .
Organelles move along microfilaments in the cytoskeleton driven by myosin motors binding and pushing along actin filament bundles .
SEE ALSO
* Cell ( biology ) * Organelle * Nuclear matrix * Microfilament * Cell cortex REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Cytoskeleton Monthly News and Blog * MBInfo - Cytoskeleton Dynamics
* Cytoskeleton , Cell Motility and Motors - The Virtual Library of Biochemistry , Molecular Biology and Cell Biology
* Cytoskeleton database , clinical trials , recent literature , lab registry ... * Animation of leukocyte adhesion ( Animation with some images of actin and microtubule assembly and dynamics . )
* http://cellix.imba.oeaw.ac.at/ Cytoskeleton and cell motility including videos
* Open access review article on the emergent complexity of the cytoskeleton ( appeared in Advances in Physics , 2013 )