LUNAR LASER RANGING EXPERIMENT
The ongoing Lunar Laser Ranging experiment measures the distance between Earth and the Moon using laser ranging .
Lasers on Earth are aimed at retroreflectors planted on the Moon during the Apollo program ( 11 , 14 , and 15 ) , the two Lunokhod missions , and the upcoming MoonLIGHT retroreflector to be deployed by the private MX-1E lander .
The time for the reflected light to return is measured , and the distance is calculated .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The first successful tests were carried out in 1962 when a team from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology succeeded in observing laser pulses reflected from the Moon 's surface using a laser with a millisecond pulse length .
Similar measurements were obtained later the same year by a Soviet team at the Crimean Astrophysical Observatory using a Q - switched ruby laser .
Greater accuracy was achieved following the installation of a retroreflector array on 21 July 1969 , by the crew of Apollo 11 , and two more retroreflector arrays left by the Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 missions have also contributed to the experiment .
Successful lunar laser range measurements to the retroreflectors were first reported by the 3.1 m telescope at Lick Observatory , Air Force Cambridge Research Laboratories Lunar Ranging Observatory in Arizona , the Pic du Midi Observatory in France , the Tokyo Astronomical Observatory , and McDonald Observatory in Texas .
The unmanned Soviet Lunokhod 1 and Lunokhod 2 rovers carried smaller arrays .
Reflected signals were initially received from Lunokhod 1 , but no return signals were detected after 1971 until a team from University of California rediscovered the array in April 2010 using images from NASA 's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter .
Lunokhod 2 array continues to return signals to Earth .
The Lunokhod arrays suffer from decreased performance in direct sunlight — a factor considered in reflector placement during the Apollo missions .
The Apollo 15 array is three times the size of the arrays left by the two earlier Apollo missions .
Its size made it the target of three - quarters of the sample measurements taken in the first 25 years of the experiment .
Improvements in technology since then have resulted in greater use of the smaller arrays , by sites such as the Côte d'Azur Observatory in Grasse , France ; and the Apache Point Observatory Lunar Laser - ranging Operation ( APOLLO ) at the Apache Point Observatory in New Mexico .
PRINCIPLE Section::::Principle .
The distance to the Moon is calculated approximately using this equation :
In actuality , the round - trip time of about 2.5 seconds is affected by the location of the Moon in the sky , the relative motion of Earth and the Moon , Earth 's rotation , lunar libration , weather , polar motion , propagation delay through Earth 's atmosphere , the motion of the observing station due to crustal motion and tides , velocity of light in various parts of air and relativistic effects .
Nonetheless , the Earth – Moon distance has been measured with increasing accuracy for more than 35 years .
The distance continually changes for a number of reasons , but averages .
At the Moon 's surface , the beam is about wide and scientists liken the task of aiming the beam to using a rifle to hit a moving dime away .
The reflected light is too weak to see with the human eye .
Out of photons aimed at the reflector , only one is received back on Earth every few seconds , even under good conditions .
They can be identified as originating from the laser because the laser is highly monochromatic .
This is one of the most precise distance measurements ever made , and is equivalent in accuracy to determining the distance between Los Angeles and New York to . , work is progressing on increasing the accuracy of the Earth –
Moon measurements to near millimeter accuracy , though the performance of the reflectors continues to degrade with age .
The upcoming MoonLIGHT reflector , that will be landed in 2019 , is designed to increase measurement accuracy 100 times over existing systems .
RESULTS Section::::Results .
Lunar laser ranging measurement data is available from the Paris Observatory Lunar Analysis Center , and the active stations .
Some of the findings of this long - term experiment are : *
The Moon is spiraling away from Earth at a rate of 3.8 cm per year .
This rate has been described as anomalously high .
*
The Moon probably has a liquid core of about 20 % of the Moon 's radius .
* The universal force of gravity is very stable .
The experiments have constrained the change in Newton 's gravitational constant G to a factor of per year .
*
The likelihood of any " Nordtvedt effect " ( a differential acceleration of the Moon and Earth towards the Sun caused by their different degrees of compactness ) has been ruled out to high precision , strongly supporting the validity of the strong equivalence principle .
* Einstein 's theory of gravity ( the general theory of relativity ) predicts the Moon 's orbit to within the accuracy of the laser ranging measurements .
* Gauge freedom plays a major role in a correct physical interpretation of the relativistic effects in the Earth - Moon system observed with LLR technique PHOTO GALLERY SEE ALSO
* Apache Point Observatory
Lunar Laser - ranging
Operation * Apollo Lunar Surface Experiments Package
* Tom Murphy ( physicist ) ( principal investigator of Apollo 's reflector experiment )
* Carroll Alley ( previous principal investigator of Apollo 's reflector experiment )
* Earth – Moon –
Earth communication
* Lidar * Lunar distance ( astronomy )
* Lunokhod programme
* Satellite laser ranging
* Space geodesy * Third - party evidence for Apollo Moon landings
* List of retroreflectors on the Moon
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Theory and Model for the New Generation of the Lunar Laser Ranging Data " by Sergei Kopeikin
* Apollo 15 Experiments - Laser Ranging Retroreflector by the Lunar and Planetary Institute * " History of Laser Ranging and MLRS " by the University of Texas at Austin , Center for Space Research * " Lunar Retroreflectors " by Tom Murphy
* Station de Télémétrie Laser - Lune in Grasse , France *
Lunar Laser Ranging from International Laser Ranging Service *
" UW researcher plans project to pin down moon 's distance from Earth " by Vince Stricherz , UW Today , 14 January 2002 *
" What Neil & Buzz Left on the Moon " by Science@NASA , 20 July 2004 *
" Apollo 11 Experiment
Still Returning Results " by Robin Lloyd , CNN , 21 July 1999