HYPOCHONDRIASIS
Hypochondriasis or hypochondria is a condition in which a person is excessively and unduly worried about having a serious illness .
An old concept , its meaning has repeatedly changed due to redefinitions in its source metaphors .
It has been claimed that this debilitating condition results from an inaccurate perception of the condition of body or mind despite the absence of an actual medical diagnosis .
An individual with hypochondriasis is known as a hypochondriac .
Hypochondriacs become unduly alarmed about any physical or psychological symptoms they detect , no matter how minor the symptom may be , and are convinced that they or others have , or are about to be diagnosed with , a serious illness .
Often , hypochondria persists even after a physician has evaluated a person and reassured them that their concerns about symptoms do not have an underlying medical basis or , if there is a medical illness , their concerns are far in excess of what is appropriate for the level of disease .
Many hypochondriacs focus on a particular symptom as the catalyst of their worrying , such as gastro - intestinal problems , palpitations , or muscle fatigue .
To qualify for the diagnosis of hypochondria the symptoms must have been experienced for at least 6 months .
The DSM - IV - TR defines this disorder , " Hypochondriasis " , as a somatoform disorder and one study has shown it to affect about 3 % of the visitors to primary care settings .
The 2013 DSM-5 replaced the diagnosis of hypochondriasis with the diagnoses of " somatic symptom disorder " and " illness anxiety disorder " .
Hypochondria is often characterized by fears that minor bodily or mental symptoms may indicate a serious illness , constant self - examination and self - diagnosis , and a preoccupation with one 's body .
Many individuals with hypochondriasis express doubt and disbelief in the doctors ' diagnosis , and report that doctors ' reassurance about an absence of a serious medical condition is unconvincing , or short - lasting .
Additionally , many hypochondriacs experience elevated blood pressure , stress , and anxiety in the presence of doctors or while occupying a medical facility , a condition known as " white coat syndrome " .
Many hypochondriacs require constant reassurance , either from doctors , family , or friends , and the disorder can become a debilitating challenge for the individual with hypochondriasis , as well as his or her family and friends .
Some hypochondriacal individuals completely avoid any reminder of illness , whereas others frequently visit medical facilities , sometimes obsessively .
Some sufferers may never speak about it .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Hypochondriasis is categorized as a somatic amplification disorder — a disorder of " perception and cognition"—that involves a hyper - vigilance of situation of the body or mind and a tendency to react to the initial perceptions in a negative manner that is further debilitating .
Hypochondriasis manifests in many ways .
Some people have numerous intrusive thoughts and physical sensations that push them to check with family , friends , and physicians .
For example , a person who has a minor cough may think that they have tuberculosis .
Or sounds produced by organs in the body , such as those made by the intestines , might be seen as a sign of a very serious illness to patients dealing with hypochondriasis .
Other people are so afraid of any reminder of illness that they will avoid medical professionals for a seemingly minor problem , sometimes to the point of becoming neglectful of their health when a serious condition may exist and go undiagnosed .
Yet others live in despair and depression , certain that they have a life - threatening disease and no physician can help them .
Some consider the disease as a punishment for past misdeeds .
Hypochondriasis is often accompanied by other psychological disorders .
Bipolar disorder , clinical depression , obsessive - compulsive disorder ( OCD ) , phobias , and somatization disorder are the most common accompanying conditions in people with hypochondriasis , as well as a generalized anxiety disorder diagnosis at some point in their life .
Many people with hypochondriasis experience a cycle of intrusive thoughts followed by compulsive checking , which is very similar to the symptoms of obsessive - compulsive disorder .
However , while people with hypochondriasis are afraid of having an illness , patients with OCD worry about getting an illness or of transmitting an illness to others .
Although some people might have both , these are distinct conditions .
Patients with hypochondriasis often are not aware that depression and anxiety produce their own physical symptoms , and mistake these symptoms for manifestations of another mental or physical disorder or disease .
For example , people with depression often experience changes in appetite and weight fluctuation , fatigue , decreased interest in sex and motivation in life overall .
Intense anxiety is associated with rapid heartbeat , palpitations , sweating , muscle tension , stomach discomfort , dizziness , and numbness or tingling in certain parts of the body ( hands , forehead , etc . ) .
In some cases , hypochondriasis responds well to antipsychotics , particularly the newer atypical antipsychotic medication .
If a person is ill with a medical disease such as diabetes or arthritis , there will often be psychological consequences , such as depression .
Some even report being suicidal .
In the same way , someone with psychological issues such as depression or anxiety will sometimes experience physical manifestations of these affective fluctuations , often in the form of medically unexplained symptoms .
Common symptoms include headaches ; abdominal , back , joint , rectal , or urinary pain ; nausea ; fever and/or night sweats ; itching ; diarrhea ; dizziness ; or balance problems .
Many people with hypochondriasis accompanied by medically unexplained symptoms feel they are not understood by their physicians , and are frustrated by their doctors ' repeated failure to provide symptom relief .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The ICD-10 defines hypochondriasis as follows : The DSM - IV defines hypochondriasis according to the following criteria : A. Preoccupation with fears of having , or the idea that one has , a serious disease based on the person 's misinterpretation of bodily symptoms .
B.
The preoccupation persists despite appropriate medical evaluation and reassurance .
C.
The belief in Criterion A is not of delusional intensity ( as in Delusional Disorder , Somatic Type ) and is not restricted to a circumscribed concern about appearance ( as in Body Dysmorphic Disorder ) .
D.
The preoccupation causes clinically significant distress or impairment in social , occupational , or other important areas of functioning .
E.
The duration of the disturbance is at least 6 months .
F. The preoccupation is not better accounted for by Generalized Anxiety Disorder , Obsessive - Compulsive Disorder , Panic Disorder , a Major Depressive Episode , Separation Anxiety , or another Somatoform Disorder .
The newly published DSM-5 replaces the diagnosis of hypochondriasis with " illness anxiety disorder " .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
Hypochondria is currently considered a psychosomatic disorder , as in a mental illness with physical symptoms .
Cyberchondria is a colloquial term for hypochondria in individuals who have researched medical conditions on the Internet .
The media and the Internet often contribute to hypochondria , as articles , TV shows and advertisements regarding serious illnesses such as cancer and multiple sclerosis often portray these diseases as being random , obscure and somewhat inevitable .
Inaccurate portrayal of risk and the identification of non - specific symptoms as signs of serious illness contribute to exacerbating the hypochondriac 's fear that they actually have that illness .
Major disease outbreaks or predicted pandemics can also contribute to hypochondria .
Statistics regarding certain illnesses , such as cancer , will give hypochondriacs the illusion that they are more likely to develop the disease .
Overly protective caregivers and an excessive focus on minor health concerns have been implicated as a potential cause of hypochondriasis development .
It is common for serious illnesses or deaths of family members or friends to trigger hypochondria in certain individuals .
Similarly , when approaching the age of a parent 's premature death from disease , many otherwise healthy , happy individuals fall prey to hypochondria .
These individuals believe they are suffering from the same disease that caused their parent 's death , sometimes causing panic attacks with corresponding symptoms .
Family studies of hypochondriasis do not show a genetic transmission of the disorder .
Among relatives of people suffering from hypochondriasis only somatization disorder and generalized anxiety disorder were more common than in average families .
Other studies have shown that the first degree relatives of patients with OCD have a higher than expected frequency of a somatoform disorder ( either hypochondriasis or body dysmorphic disorder ) .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Most research indicates that cognitive behavioral therapy ( CBT ) is an effective treatment for hypochondriasis .
Much of this research is limited by methodological issues .
A small amount of evidence suggests that selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors can also reduce symptoms , but further research is needed .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Among the regions of the abdomen , the hypochondrium is the uppermost part .
The word derives from the Greek term ὑποχόνδριος hypokhondrios , meaning " of the soft parts between the ribs and navel " from ὑπό hypo ( " under " ) and χόνδρος khondros , or cartilage ( of the sternum ) .
Hypochondria in Late Latin meant " the abdomen " .
The term hypochondriasis for a state of disease without real cause reflected the ancient belief that the viscera of the hypochondria were the seat of melancholy and sources of the vapor that caused morbid feelings .
Until the early 18th century , the term referred to a " physical disease caused by imbalances in the region that was below your rib cage " ( i.e. , of the stomach or digestive system ) .
For example , Robert Burton 's The Anatomy of Melancholy ( 1621 ) blamed it " for everything from ' too much spittle ' to ' rumbling in the guts ' " .
Immanuel Kant discussed hypochondria in his 1798 book , Anthropology like this : The disease of the hypochondriac consists in this : that certain bodily sensations do not so much indicate a really existing disease in the body as rather merely excite apprehensions of its existence : and human nature is so constituted – a trait which the animal lacks – that it is able to strengthen or make permanent local impressions simply by paying attention to them , whereas an abstraction – whether produced on purpose or by other diverting occupations – lessen these impressions , or even effaces them altogether .
* Anthropology by Immanuel Kant , 1798 Journal of Speculative Philosophy Vol .
XVI edited by William Torrey Harris p. 395 - 396 SEE ALSO * Nosophobia * Cyberchondria * Mithridatism * Munchausen syndrome * Nocebo * Psychosomatic medicine * Sickness behavior * Somatoform disorder * Somatosensory amplification
* Man flu *
Valetudinarian
* The Imaginary Invalid REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Belling , Catherine .
2012 .
"
A Condition of Doubt : The Meanings of Hypochondria . "
New York :
Oxford University Press . .
EXTERNAL LINKS