DOT PRODUCT
In mathematics , the dot product or scalar product is an algebraic operation that takes two equal - length sequences of numbers ( usually coordinate vectors ) and returns a single number .
In Euclidean geometry , the dot product of the Cartesian coordinates of two vectors is widely used and often called " the " inner product ( or rarely projection product ) of Euclidean space even though it is not the only inner product that can be defined on Euclidean space ; see also inner product space .
Algebraically , the dot product is the sum of the products of the corresponding entries of the two sequences of numbers .
Geometrically , it is the product of the Euclidean magnitudes of the two vectors and the cosine of the angle between them .
These definitions are equivalent when using Cartesian coordinates .
In modern geometry , Euclidean spaces are often defined by using vector spaces .
In this case , the dot product is used for defining lengths ( the length of a vector is the square root of the dot product of the vector by itself ) and angles ( the cosine of the angle of two vectors is the quotient of their dot product by the product of their lengths ) .
The name " dot product " is derived from the centered dot " · " that is often used to designate this operation ; the alternative name " scalar product " emphasizes that the result is a scalar , rather than a vector , as is the case for the vector product in three - dimensional space .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
The dot product may be defined algebraically or geometrically .
The geometric definition is based on the notions of angle and distance ( magnitude of vectors ) .
The equivalence of these two definitions relies on having a Cartesian coordinate system for Euclidean space .
In modern presentations of Euclidean geometry , the points of space are defined in terms of their Cartesian coordinates , and Euclidean space itself is commonly identified with the real coordinate space R.
In such a presentation , the notions of length and angles are defined by means of the dot product .
The length of a vector is defined as the square root of the dot product of the vector by itself , and the cosine of the ( non oriented ) angle of two vectors of length one is defined as their dot product .
So the equivalence of the two definitions of the dot product is a part of the equivalence of the classical and the modern formulations of Euclidean geometry .
ALGEBRAIC DEFINITION
Section::::Algebraic definition .
The dot product of two vectors and is defined as : where Σ denotes summation and n is the dimension of the vector space .
For instance , in three - dimensional space , the dot product of vectors and is : If vectors are identified with row matrices , the dot product can also be written as a matrix product where formula_4 denotes the transpose of formula_5 .
Expressing the above example in this way , a 1 × 3 matrix ( row vector ) is multiplied by a 3 × 1 matrix ( column vector ) to get a 1 × 1 matrix that is identified with its unique entry : GEOMETRIC DEFINITION Section::::Geometric definition .
In Euclidean space , a Euclidean vector is a geometric object that possesses both a magnitude and a direction .
A vector can be pictured as an arrow .
Its magnitude is its length , and its direction is the direction that the arrow points .
The magnitude of a vector a is denoted by formula_7 .
The dot product of two Euclidean vectors a and b is defined by where is the angle between a and b.
In particular , if a and b are orthogonal ( the angle between vectors is 90 ° )
then due to formula_9 At the other extreme , if they are codirectional , then the angle between them is 0 ° and
This implies that the dot product of a vector a with itself is which gives the formula for the Euclidean length of the vector .
SCALAR
PROJECTION AND FIRST PROPERTIES
Section::::Scalar projection and first properties .
The scalar projection ( or scalar component ) of a Euclidean vector a in the direction of a Euclidean vector b is given by where is the angle between a and b.
In terms of the geometric definition of the dot product , this can be rewritten where formula_16 is the unit vector in the direction of b.
The dot product is thus characterized geometrically by
The dot product , defined in this manner , is homogeneous under scaling in each variable , meaning that for any scalar α , It also satisfies a distributive law , meaning that These properties may be summarized by saying that the dot product is a bilinear form .
Moreover , this bilinear form is positive definite , which means that formula_20 is never negative and is zero if and only if formula_21 , the zero vector .
EQUIVALENCE OF THE DEFINITIONS Section::::Equivalence of the definitions .
If e , ... , e are the standard basis vectors in R , then we may write
The vectors
e are an orthonormal basis , which means that they have unit length and are at right angles to each other .
Hence since these vectors have unit length and since they form right angles with each other , if , Thus in general we can say that : Where δ is the Kronecker delta .
Also , by the geometric definition , for any vector e and a vector a , we note where a is the component of vector a in the direction of e. Now applying the distributivity of the geometric version of the dot product gives which is precisely the algebraic definition of the dot product .
So the geometric dot product equals the algebraic dot product .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
The dot product fulfills the following properties if a , b , and c are real vectors and r is a scalar .
* Commutative : * formula_28 which follows from the definition ( θ is the angle between a and b ) :
formula_29 * Distributive over vector addition : * formula_30
* Bilinear : * formula_31 * Scalar multiplication : * formula_32
* Not associative because the dot product between a scalar ( a ⋅ b ) and a vector ( c ) is not defined , which means that the expressions involved in the associative property , ( a ⋅ b ) ⋅ c or a ⋅ ( b ⋅ c ) are both ill - defined .
Note however that the previously mentioned scalar multiplication property is sometimes called the " associative law for scalar and dot product " or
one can say that " the dot product is associative with respect to scalar multiplication " because c ( a ⋅ b ) = ( c a ) ⋅ b = a ⋅ ( c b ) .
*
* Orthogonal : * Two non - zero vectors
a and b are orthogonal if and only if .
*
No cancellation : * Unlike multiplication of ordinary numbers , where if , then b always equals c unless a is zero , the dot product does not obey the cancellation law :
If and , then we can write : by the distributive law ; the result above says this just means that a is perpendicular to , which still allows , and therefore .
* Product Rule :
If a and b are functions , then the derivative ( denoted by a prime ′ ) of is .
* APPLICATION TO THE LAW OF COSINES Section::::Application to the law of cosines .
Given two vectors a and b
separated by angle θ ( see image right ) , they form a triangle with a third side .
The dot product of this with itself is : which is the law of cosines .
TRIPLE PRODUCT Section::::Triple product .
There are two ternary operations involving dot product and cross product .
The scalar triple product of three vectors is defined as
Its value is the determinant of the matrix whose columns are the Cartesian coordinates of the three vectors .
It is the signed volume of the parallelogram defined by the three vectors .
The vector triple product is defined by
This identity , also known as Lagrange 's formula may be remembered as " BAC minus CAB " , keeping in mind which vectors are dotted together .
This formula finds application in simplifying vector calculations in physics .
PHYSICS Section::::Physics .
In physics , vector magnitude is a scalar in the physical sense , i.e. a physical quantity independent of the coordinate system , expressed as the product of a numerical value and a physical unit , not just a number .
The dot product is also a scalar in this sense , given by the formula , independent of the coordinate system .
Examples include : * Mechanical work is the dot product of force and displacement vectors , * Magnetic flux is the dot product of the magnetic field and the vector area , *
Power is the dot product of force and velocity .
GENERALIZATIONS
COMPLEX VECTORS Section::::Generalizations .
Section::::Complex vectors .
For vectors with complex entries , using the given definition of the dot product would lead to quite different properties .
For instance the dot product of a vector with itself would be an arbitrary complex number , and could be zero without the vector being the zero vector ( such vectors are called isotropic ) ; this in turn would have consequences for notions like length and angle .
Properties such as the positive - definite norm can be salvaged at the cost of giving up the symmetric and bilinear properties of the scalar product , through the alternative definition where a is the complex conjugate of a.
Then the scalar product of any vector with itself is a non - negative real number , and it is nonzero except for the zero vector .
However this scalar product is thus sesquilinear rather than bilinear
: it is conjugate linear and not linear in a , and the scalar product is not symmetric , since The angle between two complex vectors is then given by
This type of scalar product is nevertheless useful , and leads to the notions of Hermitian form and of general inner product spaces .
INNER PRODUCT
Section::::Inner product .
The inner product generalizes the dot product to abstract vector spaces over a field of scalars , being either the field of real numbers formula_39 or the field of complex numbers formula_40 .
It is usually denoted using angular brackets by formula_41 .
The inner product of two vectors over the field of complex numbers is , in general , a complex number , and is sesquilinear instead of bilinear .
An inner product space is a normed vector space , and the inner product of a vector with itself is real and positive - definite .
FUNCTIONS Section::::Functions .
The dot product is defined for vectors that have a finite number of entries .
Thus these vectors can be regarded as discrete functions : a length- vector is , then , a function with domain } , and is a notation for the image of by the function / vector .
This notion can be generalized to continuous functions : just as the inner product on vectors uses a sum over corresponding components , the inner product on functions is defined as an integral over some interval ( also denoted ): Generalized further to complex functions and , by analogy with the complex inner product above , gives WEIGHT FUNCTION Section::::Weight function .
Inner products can have a weight function , i.e. a function which weights each term of the inner product with a value .
DYADICS AND MATRICES Section::::Dyadics and matrices .
Matrices have the Frobenius inner product , which is analogous to the vector inner product .
It is defined as the sum of the products of the corresponding components of two matrices A and B having the same size :
Dyadics have a dot product and " double " dot product defined on them , see Dyadics ( Product of dyadic and dyadic ) for their definitions .
TENSORS Section::::Tensors .
The inner product between a tensor of order n and a tensor of order m is a tensor of order , see tensor contraction for details .
COMPUTATION ALGORITHMS Section::::Computation .
Section::::Algorithms .
The straightforward algorithm for calculating a floating - point dot product of vectors can suffer from catastrophic cancellation .
To avoid this , approaches such as the Kahan summation algorithm are used .
LIBRARIES Section::::Libraries .
A dot product function is included in BLAS level 1 .
SEE ALSO
* Cauchy –
Schwarz inequality * Cross product
* Matrix multiplication
* Metric tensor
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Explanation of dot product including with complex vectors * " Dot Product " by Bruce Torrence , Wolfram Demonstrations Project , 2007 .