ORGAN ( ANATOMY )
Organs are collections of tissues with similar functions .
Plant and animal life relies on many organs that coexist in organ systems .
Organs are composed of main tissue , parenchyma , and " sporadic " tissues , stroma .
The main tissue is that which is unique for the specific organ , such as the myocardium , the main tissue of the heart , while sporadic tissues include the nerves , blood vessels , and connective tissues .
The main tissues that make up an organ tend to have common embryologic origins , such as arising from the same germ layer .
Functionally - related organs often cooperate to form whole organ systems .
Organs exist in all organisms .
In single - celled organisms such as bacteria , the functional analogue of an organ is known as an organelle .
In plants there are three main organs .
A hollow organ is an internal organ that forms a hollow tube , or pouch such as the stomach , intestine , or bladder .
In the study of anatomy , the term viscus is used to refer to an internal organ , and viscera is the plural form .
79 organs have been identified in the human body .
STRUCTURE
TISSUE Section::::Structure .
Section::::Tissue .
In biology , tissue is a cellular organizational level between cells and complete organs .
A tissue is an ensemble of similar cells and their extracellular matrix from the same origin that together carry out a specific function .
Organs are then formed by the functional grouping together of multiple tissues .
The study of human and animal tissues is known as histology or , in connection with disease , histopathology .
For plants , the discipline is called plant anatomy .
The classical tools for studying tissues are the paraffin block in which tissue is embedded and then sectioned , the histological stain , and the optical microscope .
In the last couple of decades , developments in electron microscopy , immunofluorescence , and the use of frozen tissue sections have enhanced the detail that can be observed in tissues .
With these tools , the classical appearances of tissues can be examined in health and disease , enabling considerable refinement of medical diagnosis and prognosis .
ORGAN SYSTEMS
Section::::Organ systems .
Two or more organs working together in the execution of a specific body function form an organ system , also called a biological system or body system .
The functions of organ systems often share significant overlap .
For instance , the nervous and endocrine system both operate via a shared organ , the hypothalamus .
For this reason , the two systems are combined and studied as the neuroendocrine system .
The same is true for the musculoskeletal system because of the relationship between the muscular and skeletal systems .
FUNCTION ANIMALS Section::::Function .
Section::::Animals .
Animals such as humans have a variety of organ systems .
These specific systems are also widely studied in human anatomy .
* Cardiovascular system : pumping and channeling blood to and from the body and lungs with heart , blood and blood vessels .
* Digestive system : digestion and processing food with salivary glands , esophagus , stomach , liver , gallbladder , pancreas , intestines , colon , rectum and anus .
* Endocrine system : communication within the body using hormones made by endocrine glands such as the hypothalamus , pituitary gland , pineal body or pineal gland , thyroid , parathyroids and adrenals , i.e. , adrenal glands .
* Excretory system : kidneys , ureters , bladder and urethra involved in fluid balance , electrolyte balance and excretion of urine .
* Lymphatic system : structures involved in the transfer of lymph between tissues and the blood stream , the lymph and the nodes and vessels that transport it including the Immune system : defending against disease - causing agents with leukocytes , tonsils , adenoids , thymus and spleen .
* Integumentary system : skin , hair and nails of mammals .
Also scales of fish , reptiles , and birds , and feathers of birds .
* Muscular system : movement with muscles .
* Nervous system : collecting , transferring and processing information with brain , spinal cord and nerves .
* Reproductive system : the sex organs , such as ovaries , fallopian tubes , uterus , vulva , vagina , testes , vas deferens , seminal vesicles , prostate and penis .
* Respiratory system : the organs used for breathing , the pharynx , larynx , trachea , bronchi , lungs and diaphragm .
* Skeletal system : structural support and protection with bones , cartilage , ligaments and tendons .
PLANTS Section::::Plants .
The study of plant organs is referred to as plant morphology , rather than anatomy , as in animal systems .
Organs of plants can be divided into vegetative and reproductive .
Vegetative plant organs are roots , stems , and leaves .
The reproductive organs are variable .
In flowering plants , they are represented by the flower , seed and fruit .
In conifers , the organ that bears the reproductive structures is called a cone .
In other divisions ( phyla ) of plants , the reproductive organs are called strobili , in Lycopodiophyta , or simply gametophores in mosses .
The vegetative organs are essential for maintaining the life of a plant .
While there can be 11 organ systems in animals , there are far fewer in plants , where some perform the vital functions , such as photosynthesis , while the reproductive organs are essential in reproduction .
However , if there is asexual vegetative reproduction , the vegetative organs are those that create the new generation of plants ( see clonal colony ) .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE Section::::Society and culture .
Many societies have a system for Organ donation , in which a living or deceased donor 's organ is transplanted into a person with a failing organ .
The transplantation of larger solid organs often requires immunosuppression to prevent organ rejection or graft vs host disease .
There is considerable interest throughout the world in creating laboratory - grown or artificial organs .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The English word " organism " is a neologism coined in the 17th century , probably formed from the verb to organize .
At first the word referred to an organization or social system .
The meaning of a living animal or plant is first recorded in 1842 .
Plant organs are made from tissue built up from different types of tissue .
When there are three or more organs it is called an organ system .
The adjective visceral , also splanchnic , is used for anything pertaining to the internal organs .
Historically , viscera of animals were examined by Roman pagan priests like the haruspices or the augurs in order to divine the future by their shape , dimensions or other factors .
This practice remains an important ritual in some remote , tribal societies .
The term " visceral " is contrasted with the term " " , meaning " of or relating to the wall of a body part , organ or cavity
" The two terms are often used in describing a membrane or piece of connective tissue , referring to the opposing sides .
ANTIQUITY
Section::::Antiquity .
Aristotle used the word frequently in his philosophy , both to describe the organs of plants or animals ( e.g. the roots of a tree , the heart or liver of an animal ) , and to describe more abstract " parts " of an interconnected whole ( e.g. his logical works , taken as a whole , are referred to as the " organon " ) .
Some alchemists ( e.g. Paracelsus ) adopted the Hermetic Qabalah assignment between the seven vital organs and the seven classical planets as follows : PlanetOrgan
SunHeart
MoonBrain
MercuryLungs
VenusKidneys MarsGall bladder
JupiterLiver SaturnSpleen MODERN TIMES Section::::Modern times .
The variations in natural language definitions of what constitutes an organ , their degree of precision , and the variations in how they map to ontologies and taxonomies in information science ( for example , to count how many organs exist in a typical human body ) are topics explored by writer Carl Engelking of Discover magazine in 2017 as he analyzed the science journalism coverage of the evolving scientific understanding of the mesentery .
He explored a challenge now faced by anatomists : as human understanding of ontology generally ( that is , how things are defined , and how the relationship of one thing to another is defined ) meets applied ontology and ontology engineering , unification of varying views is in higher demand .
However , such unification always faces epistemologic frontiers , as humans can only declare computer ontologies with certainty and finality to the extent that their own cognitive taxonomy ( that is , science 's understanding of the universe ) is certain and final .
For example , the fact that the tissues of the mesentery are continuous was something that was simply not known for sure until it was demonstrated with microscopy .
Because humans can not predict all future scientific discoveries , they can not build a unified ontology that is totally certain and will never again change .
However , one of the points made by an anatomist interviewed by Engelking is that , finality aside , much more could be done even now to represent existing human knowledge more clearly for computing purposes .
ORIGIN AND EVOLUTION Section::::Origin and evolution .
The organ level of organisation in animals can be first detected in flatworms and the more derived phyla .
The less - advanced taxa ( like Placozoa , Sponges and Radiata ) do not show consolidation of their tissues into organs .
Complex animals are composed of organs and many of these organs evolved a very long time ago .
For example , the liver evolved in the stem vertebrates more than 500 million years ago , while the gut and brain are even more ancient , arising in the ancestor of vertebrates , insects , and worms more than 600 million years ago .
Given the ancient origin of most vertebrate organs , researchers have looked for model systems , where organs have evolved more recently , and ideally have evolved multiple times independently .
An outstanding model for this kind of research is the placenta , which has evolved more than 100 times independently in vertebrates , has evolved relatively recently in some lineages , and exists in intermediate forms in extant taxa .
Studies on the evolution of the placenta have identified a variety of genetic and physiological processes that contribute to the origin and evolution of organs , these include the re - purposing of existing animal tissues , the acquisition of new functional properties by these tissues , and novel interactions of distinct tissue types .
SEE ALSO
* Organoid REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS