28 DAYS LATER
28 Days Later is a 2002 British post - apocalyptic horror film directed by Danny Boyle , written by Alex Garland , and starring Cillian Murphy , Naomie Harris , Brendan Gleeson , Megan Burns , and Christopher Eccleston .
The plot depicts the breakdown of society following the accidental release of a highly contagious virus and focuses upon the struggle of four survivors to cope with the destruction of the life they once knew .
Successful both commercially and critically , the film is credited with reinvigorating the zombie genre of horror film .
The film spawned a 2007 sequel , 28 Weeks Later , a graphic novel titled , which expands on the timeline of the outbreak , and a 2009 comic book series titled 28 Days Later .
In 2017 a poll of 150 actors , directors , writers , producers and critics for Time Out magazine ranked it the 97th best British film ever .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In Cambridge , three animal liberation activists break into a medical research laboratory .
A scientist in the lab desperately warns them against releasing the captive chimpanzees , which are infected with a highly contagious rage - inducing virus .
Ignoring his pleas , the activists release a chimp , which infects a female activist .
She then attacks and infects everyone else present .
28 days later , in London , Jim — a bicycle courier — awakens alone from a coma in St Thomas ' Hospital .
He wanders the streets of London , finding the city deserted with signs of catastrophe everywhere .
Jim eventually encounters some infected humans and is pursued , but survivors Selena and Mark rescue him .
At their shelter , the two explain to Jim that while he was in a coma , a virus had spread quickly among the populace , resulting in societal collapse .
They claim the virus had been reported in Paris and New York City as well , suggesting the infection has spread worldwide .
The next day , Selena and Mark accompany Jim to his parents ' house in Deptford , where he discovers they had committed suicide .
That night , the three fend off a pair of infected ; Mark is bitten , and Selena kills him .
She explains to Jim that the virus spreads through blood and saliva and overwhelms its victims in 10 to 20 seconds .
After leaving the house , the two see some blinking Christmas lights from Balfron Tower .
There , they discover two more survivors : cab driver Frank and his daughter Hannah , who allow them to take shelter .
The next day , Frank informs them that their supplies ( particularly water ) are dwindling ; he plays them a pre - recorded radio broadcast from a military blockade near Manchester , claiming to have " the answer to infection " and promising protection to any survivors that can reach them .
The group board Frank 's cab and head to Manchester , bonding with one another during the trip .
At the deserted blockade , Frank is infected when a drop of blood falls into his eye .
He is killed by arriving soldiers , who take the remaining survivors to a fortified mansion under the command of Major Henry West .
West reveals to Jim that his " answer to infection " entails waiting for the infected to starve to death and luring female survivors into sexual slavery to repopulate the world .
The group attempts to flee , but Jim is captured and chained next to Sergeant Farrell , a dissenting soldier .
Farrell shares with Jim his speculation that the virus has not spread beyond Great Britain and that the country is being quarantined .
The next day , the soldiers prepare the girls for gang rape , while two others lead Jim and Farrell to execution .
While his executioners argue after killing Farrell , Jim escapes .
Jim lures West and another soldier to the blockade , where Jim kills the latter and leaves West stranded for arriving infected .
He runs back to the mansion and releases Mailer , an infected soldier West kept for observation .
Mailer infects another soldier and they wreak murderous havoc throughout the mansion .
In the confusion , a soldier drags Selena upstairs , where Jim ambushes and kills him .
The two reunite with Hannah and run to Frank 's cab ; Jim is then shot by West , who has been waiting inside .
Mailer grabs West through the rear window of the cab and kills him , and the trio finally leave the mansion .
Another 28 days later , Jim is recovering at a remote cottage .
Downstairs , he finds Selena sewing large swaths of fabric when Hannah appears .
The infected are shown dying of starvation .
Hannah says she hears it and the three rush outside and unfurl a huge cloth banner , adding the final letter to the word " HELLO " laid out on the meadow .
A lone Finnish fighter jet flies over the three survivors and the pilot calls in a muffled radio transmission .
ALTERNATIVE ENDINGS Section::::Alternative endings .
The DVD extras include three alternative endings , all of which conclude with Jim dying .
Two were filmed , while the third , a more radical departure , was presented only in storyboards .
On 25 July 2003 , cinemas started showing the alternative ending after the film 's credits .
JIM DIES
AT THE HOSPITAL Section::::Jim dies at the hospital .
In this ending , after Jim is shot , Selena and Hannah still rush him to the deserted hospital , but the scene is extended .
Selena , with Hannah 's assistance , attempts to perform life - saving procedures but can not revive Jim .
Selena is heartbroken and Hannah , distraught , looks to her for guidance .
Selena tells Hannah they will go on ; they pick up their guns and walk away from Jim 's lifeless body .
Selena and Hannah , still dressed in ballgowns and fully armed , leave the hospital .
On the DVD commentary , Boyle and Garland explain that this was the original ending of the film 's first cut , which was tested with preview audiences .
It was rejected for seeming too bleak ; the final exit from the hospital was intended to imply Selena and Hannah 's survival , whereas test audiences felt the women were marching off to certain death .
Boyle and Garland express a preference for this alternative ending , calling it the " true ending " .
They comment that this ending brought Jim full circle , as he starts and finishes the story in bed in a deserted hospital .
This ending was added in the theatrical release of the film beginning on 25 July 2003 , placed after the credits and prefaced with the words , " what if ... " " HOSPITAL DREAM " Section::::"Hospital Dream " .
The " Hospital Dream " ending is an extended version of the theatrical alternative ending , wherein Jim dies at the hospital .
In the optional commentary the director states that this was the full version of the original ending .
Jim dreams while unconscious and remembers the final moments on his bicycle before the crash .
The footage cuts back and forth between the scene with Selena and Hannah trying to save his life , and the dream sequence .
As he gets hit by a car in his flashback , he simultaneously dies on the operating table .
RESCUE CODA WITHOUT JIM Section::::Rescue coda without Jim .
This ending , for which only a rough edit was completed , is an alternative version of the potential rescue sequence shown at the very end of the released film .
Here , the scenes are identical , except that this ending was intended to be placed after the first alternative ending wherein Jim dies , so he is absent .
When Selena is sewing one of the banner letters in the cottage , she is seen facetiously talking to a chicken instead of Jim .
Only Selena and Hannah are seen waving to the jet flying overhead in the final shots .
" RADICAL ALTERNATIVE ENDING " Section::::"Radical Alternative Ending " .
The " Radical Alternative Ending " , rather than a bare ending , is a radically different development of the film from the midpoint ; it was not filmed and is presented on the DVD as a series of illustrated storyboards with voiceovers by Boyle and Garland .
When Frank is infected at the military blockade near Manchester , the soldiers do not enter the story .
Instead , Jim , Selena , and Hannah are somehow able to restrain Frank , hoping they will find a cure for the virus nearby as suggested in the radio broadcast .
They soon discover that the blockade had protected a large medical research complex , the same one featured in the first scene of the film where the virus was developed .
Inside , the party is relieved to find a scientist barricaded inside a room with food and water .
He will not open the door because he fears they will take his food , although he does admit that the " answer to infection is here " .
Unfortunately , he refuses to talk further because he does not want to create an emotional attachment to people who will soon be dead .
After hours of failed attempts to break through the door or coax the man out , Jim eventually brings Hannah to the door and explains Frank 's situation .
The scientist reluctantly tells them Frank can only be cured with a complete blood transfusion and supplies them with the equipment .
After learning that he is the only match with Frank 's blood type , Jim sacrifices himself so Frank can survive with his daughter .
Just as his journey began , Jim is left alone in the abandoned medical facility , and Selena , Hannah and Frank move into the room with the scientist , as a horde of the infected breaches the complex .
The computer monitors show death and destruction come to life around a thrashing , infected Jim , who is strapped to the same table as the chimp had been in the opening scene .
Garland and Boyle explain that they conceived this ending to see what the film would be like if they did not expand the focus beyond the four survivors .
They decided against it because the idea of a total blood replacement as a cure was not credible .
Boyle said in the DVD commentary that it " did n't make much sense " , since the film had already established that one drop of blood can infect a person .
" What would we do ?
Drain him of blood and scrub his veins with bleach ? "
CAST * Cillian Murphy as Jim * Naomie Harris as Selena * Brendan Gleeson as Frank * Christopher Eccleston as Major Henry West
* Megan Burns as Hannah
* Noah Huntley as Mark
* Stuart McQuarrie as Sergeant Farrell
* Ricci Harnett as Corporal Mitchell
* Leo Bill as Private Jones
* Luke Mably as Private Clifton * Junior Laniyan as Private Bell
* Ray Panthaki as Private Bedford
* Sanjay Rambaruth as Private Davis
* Marvin Campbell as Private Mailer
* David Schneider as Scientist Section::::Cast .
On the DVD commentary , Boyle explains that , with the aim of preserving the suspension of disbelief , relatively unknown actors were cast in the film .
Cillian Murphy had starred primarily in small independent films , while Naomie Harris had acted on British television as a child , and Megan Burns had only one previous film credit .
However , Christopher Eccleston and Brendan Gleeson were well - known character actors .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
After director Danny Boyle and producer Andrew Macdonald filmed an adaptation of Alex Garland 's novel The Beach , Garland approached Macdonald about his concept for 28 Days Later .
In an interview with Creative Screenwriting , Garland explained , " I said to him that I had an idea for a movie about running zombies .
I wrote it and sent it to him and the two of us went backwards and forwards with it for a few drafts ...
At the point I was working on 28 Days
Later I had a lot of zombie movies as well as video games like Resident Evil turning round in my head . "
28 Days Later features scenes set in normally bustling parts of London such as Westminster Bridge , Piccadilly Circus , Horse Guards Parade and Oxford Street .
To depict these locations as desolate , the film crew closed off sections of street for minutes at a time , usually in early morning before sunrise on Sundays and would have typically around 45 minutes after dawn , to shoot the locations devoid of traffic and members of the public – to minimise disruption .
Portions of the film were shot on a Canon XL1 digital video camera .
DV cameras are much smaller and more manoeuvrable than traditional film cameras , which would have been impractical on such brief shoots .
The scenes of the M1 motorway devoid of traffic were also filmed within very limited time periods .
A mobile police roadblock slowed traffic sufficiently , to leave a long section of carriageway empty while the scene was filmed .
The section depicted in the film was filmed at Milton Keynes , nowhere near Manchester .
For the London scene where Jim walks by the overturned double - decker bus , the film crew placed the bus on its side and removed it when the shot was finished , all within 20 minutes .
Much of the filming took place prior to the 11 September attacks and in the audio commentary , Boyle notes the parallel between the " missing persons " flyers seen at the beginning of the film and similar flyers posted in New York City in the wake of the attacks .
Boyle adds that his crew probably would not have been granted permission to close off Whitehall for filming after the terrorist attacks in New York .
A clapperboard seen in one of the DVD extra features shows filming was still taking place on 8 October 2001 .
The mansion used in the film was Trafalgar Park near Salisbury .
Many rooms in the house , including the Cipriani - painted music room and the main hall , were filmed with minimal set decoration .
The scenes occurring upstairs were filmed downstairs , as the mansion 's owner resided upstairs .
The old ruins used as the setting for an idyllic interlude in their journey to Manchester , were those of Waverley Abbey , Surrey .
The end scenes of the film where Jim , Selena and Hannah are living in a rural cottage were filmed around Ennerdale in Cumbria .
This reflects the motorway road signage in the film which indicates the trio heading north towards the Lake District National Park .
On the DVD commentary , Boyle and Garland frequently call it a post apocalypse and horror film , commenting on scenes that were quotation of George A. Romero 's Dead trilogy .
During the initial marketing of the film Boyle did try to distance the film from such labels .
Boyle identified John Wyndham 's The Day of the Triffids as Garland 's original inspiration for the story .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
28 Days Later was a considerable success at the box office and became highly profitable on a budget of about £ 5 million .
In the UK , it took in £ 6.1 million , while in the US it became a surprise hit , taking over $ 45 million despite a limited release at fewer than 1,500 screens across the country .
The film garnered around $ 84.7 million worldwide .
Critical views of the film were very positive .
Based on 220 reviews collected by the film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , 87 % of critics gave 28 Days Later a positive review with an average score of 7.4/10 and the site 's consensus reads : " Kinetically directed by Danny Boyle , 28 Days Later is both a terrifying zombie movie and a sharp political allegory . "
On Metacritic , the film received a rating of 73 ( out of 100 ) based on 39 reviews .
Bravo awarded it the 100th spot on their list of The 100 Scariest Movie Moments with the commentators explaining that making the zombies move fast for the first time was a bright and effective idea .
In 2007 , Stylus Magazine named it the second best zombie movie of all time .
The film also ranked at number 456 in Empires 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time .
Bloody Disgusting ranked the film seventh in their list of the Top 20 Horror Films of the Decade , with the article saying " Zombie movie ?
Political allegory ?
Humanist drama ?
28 Days Later is all of those things and more – a genuine work of art by a director at the top of his game .
What 's so amazing about the film is the way it so expertly balances scenes of white - knuckled , hell - for - leather horror with moments of intimate beauty . "
ACCOLADES * Best Horror Film ( 2003 U.S. Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films — Saturn Award )
* Best British Film ( Empire Award ) * Danny Boyle ( Grand Prize of European Fantasy Film in Silver ) * Best Director — Danny Boyle ( International Fantasy Film Award ) * Best International Film — Danny Boyle ( Narcisse Award ) * Best Breakthrough Performance — Naomie Harris ( Black Reel ) *
Best Cinematographer — Anthony Dod Mantle ( European Film Award )
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film 's score was composed by John Murphy and was released in a score / song compilation in 2003 .
It also features notable tracks from Brian Eno , Grandaddy , and Blue States .
A heavily edited version of the track " East Hastings " by the post - rock band Godspeed You !
Black Emperor appears in the film , but the track is excluded from the soundtrack , because Boyle could only obtain the rights to use it in the film .
28 Days Later : The Soundtrack Album was released on 17 June 2003 .
A modified version of the soundtrack " In The House –
In A Heartbeat " was used as the character Big Daddy 's theme in the 2010 film Kick - Ass .
The same song was played in the 2012 advertisement campaign of Louis Vuitton , L'Invitation au Voyage .
LEGACY SEQUELS Section::::Legacy . Section::::Sequels .
A sequel ,
28 Weeks Later , was released on 11 May 2007 .
Danny Boyle and Alex Garland took producing roles alongside Andrew Macdonald .
The plot revolves around the arrival of American troops about seven months after the incidents in the original film , attempting to revitalise a nearly desolate Britain .
The cast for this sequel includes Robert Carlyle , Rose Byrne , Jeremy Renner , Imogen Poots , Harold Perrineau , Catherine McCormack , Mackintosh Muggleton , and Idris Elba .
In March 2007 , Danny Boyle claimed to be interested in making a third film in the series , 28 Months Later .
COMIC BOOKS Section::::Comic books .
Fox Atomic Comics , in association with HarperCollins , released a graphic novel bridging the time gap between 28 Days Later and 28 Weeks Later , titled , written by Steve Niles .
28 Days Later , a comic sequel also linking Days and Weeks and produced by Fox Atomic ( until its demise ) and Boom !
Studios , began production in 2009 .
The series focuses on Selena and answers questions about her in the film and her sequel whereabouts .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS