BATTLE OF THERMOPYLAE
The Battle of Thermopylae ( ; Greek : , Máchē tōn Thermopylōn ) was fought between an alliance of Greek city - states , led by King Leonidas of Sparta , and the Persian Empire of Xerxes I over the course of three days , during the second Persian invasion of Greece .
It took place simultaneously with the naval battle at Artemisium , in August or September 480 BC , at the narrow coastal pass of Thermopylae ( " The Hot Gates " ) .
The Persian invasion was a delayed response to the defeat of the first Persian invasion of Greece , which had been ended by the Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC .
By 480 BC Xerxes had amassed a huge army and navy , and set out to conquer all of Greece .
The Athenian politician and general Themistocles had proposed that the allied Greeks block the advance of the Persian army at the pass of Thermopylae , and simultaneously block the Persian navy at the Straits of Artemisium .
A Greek force of approximately 7,000 men marched north to block the pass in the middle of 480 BC .
The Persian army , alleged by the ancient sources to have numbered over one million , but today considered to have been much smaller ( various figures are given by scholars , ranging between about 100,000 and 150,000 ) , arrived at the pass in late August or early September .
The vastly outnumbered Greeks held off the Persians for seven days ( including three of battle ) before the rear - guard was annihilated in one of history 's most famous last stands .
During two full days of battle , the small force led by Leonidas blocked the only road by which the massive Persian army could pass .
After the second day , a local resident named Ephialtes betrayed the Greeks by revealing a small path that led behind the Greek lines .
Leonidas , aware that his force was being outflanked , dismissed the bulk of the Greek army and remained to guard their retreat with 300 Spartans and 700 Thespians , fighting to the death .
Others also reportedly remained , including up to 900 helots and 400 Thebans ; these Thebans mostly reportedly surrendered .
Themistocles was in command of the Greek Navy at Artemisium when he received news that the Persians had taken the pass at Thermopylae .
Since the Greek strategy required both Thermopylae and Artemisium to be held , given their losses , it was decided to withdraw to Salamis .
The Persians overran Boeotia and then captured the evacuated Athens .
The Greek fleet — seeking a decisive victory over the Persian armada — attacked and defeated the invaders at the Battle of Salamis in late 480 BC .
Wary of being trapped in Europe , Xerxes withdrew with much of his army to Asia ( losing most to starvation and disease ) , leaving Mardonius to attempt to complete the conquest of Greece .
However , the following year saw a Greek army decisively defeat the Persians at the Battle of Plataea , thereby ending the Persian invasion .
Both ancient and modern writers have used the Battle of Thermopylae as an example of the power of a patriotic army defending its native soil .
The performance of the defenders is also used as an example of the advantages of training , equipment , and good use of terrain as force multipliers and has become a symbol of courage against overwhelming odds .
SOURCES
Section::::Sources .
The primary source for the Greco - Persian Wars is the Greek historian Herodotus .
The Sicilian historian Diodorus Siculus , writing in the 1st century BC in his Bibliotheca historica , also provides an account of the Greco - Persian wars , partially derived from the earlier Greek historian Ephorus .
This account is fairly consistent with Herodotus ' .
The Greco - Persian wars are also described in less detail by a number of other ancient historians including Plutarch , Ctesias of Cnidus , and are referred to by other authors , as in Aeschylus in The Persians .
Archaeological evidence , such as the Serpent Column ( now in the Hippodrome of Constantinople ) , also supports some of Herodotus ' specific claims .
George B. Grundy was the first modern historian to do a thorough topographical survey of the narrow pass at Thermopylae , and to the extent that modern accounts of the battle differ from Herodotus ' they usually follow Grundy 's .
For example , the military strategist Sir Basil Henry Liddell Hart defers to Grundy .
Grundy also explored Plataea and wrote a treatise on that battle .
On the Battle of Thermopylae itself , two principal sources , Herodotus ' and Simonides ' accounts , survive .
In fact , Herodotus ' account of the battle , in Book VII of his Histories , is such an important source that Paul Cartledge wrote : " we either write a history of Thermopylae with [ Herodotus ] , or not at all " .
Also surviving is an epitome of the account of Ctesias , by the eighth - century Byzantine Photias , though this is " almost worse than useless " , missing key events in the battle such as the betrayal of Ephialtes , and the account of Diodorus Siculus in his Universal History .
Diodorus ' account seems to have been based on that of Ephorus and contains one significant deviation from Herodotus ' account : a supposed night attack against the Persian camp , of which modern scholars have tended to be sceptical .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The Greek city - states of Athens and Eretria had encouraged the unsuccessful Ionian Revolt against the Persian Empire of Darius I in 499–494 BC .
The Persian Empire was still relatively young and prone to revolts amongst its subject peoples .
Darius , moreover , was a usurper and had spent considerable time extinguishing revolts against his rule .
The Ionian revolt threatened the integrity of his empire , and Darius thus vowed to punish those involved , especially the Athenians , " since he was sure that [ the Ionians ] would not go unpunished for their rebellion " .
Darius also saw the opportunity to expand his empire into the fractious world of Ancient Greece .
A preliminary expedition under Mardonius in 492 BC , to secure the land approaches to Greece , re - conquered Thrace and forced Macedon to become a client kingdom of Persia 's .
Darius sent emissaries to all the Greek city - states in 491 BC asking for a gift of " earth and water " as tokens of their submission to him .
Having had a demonstration of his power the previous year , the majority of Greek cities duly obliged .
In Athens , however , the ambassadors were put on trial and then executed by throwing them in a pit ; in Sparta , they were simply thrown down a well .
This meant that Sparta was also effectively at war with Persia .
Darius thus put together an amphibious task force under Datis and Artaphernes in 490 BC , which attacked Naxos , before receiving the submission of the other Cycladic Islands .
The task force then moved on Eretria , which it besieged and destroyed .
Finally , it moved to attack Athens , landing at the bay of Marathon , where it was met by a heavily outnumbered Athenian army .
At the ensuing Battle of Marathon , the Athenians won a remarkable victory , which resulted in the withdrawal of the Persian army to Asia .
Darius , therefore , began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece ; however , in 486 BC , his Egyptian subjects revolted , indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition .
Darius then died whilst preparing to march on Egypt , and the throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes crushed the Egyptian revolt and very quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece .
Since this was to be a full - scale invasion , it required long - term planning , stockpiling , and conscription .
Xerxes decided that the Hellespont would be bridged to allow his army to cross to Europe , and that a canal should be dug across the isthmus of Mount Athos ( rounding which headland , a Persian fleet had been destroyed in 492 BC ) .
These were both feats of exceptional ambition , which would have been beyond any other contemporary state .
By early 480 BC , the preparations were complete , and the army which Xerxes had mustered at Sardis marched towards Europe , crossing the Hellespont on two pontoon bridges .
According to Herodotus , Xerxes ' army was so large that , upon arriving at the banks of the Echeidorus River , his soldiers proceeded to drink it dry .
In the face of such imposing numbers , many Greek cities capitulated to the Persian demand for a tribute of earth and water .
The Athenians had also been preparing for war with the Persians since the mid-480s BC , and in 482 BC the decision was taken , under the guidance of the Athenian politician Themistocles , to build a massive fleet of triremes that would be essential for the Greeks to fight the Persians .
However , the Athenians lacked the manpower to fight on both land and sea ; therefore , combating the Persians would require an alliance of Greek city - states .
In 481 BC , Xerxes sent ambassadors around Greece requesting " earth and water " but very deliberately omitting Athens and Sparta .
Support thus began to coalesce around these two leading states .
A congress of city - states met at Corinth in late autumn of 481 BC , and a confederate alliance of Greek city - states was formed .
It had the power to send envoys to request assistance and dispatch troops from the member states to defensive points , after joint consultation .
This was remarkable for the disjointed Greek world , especially since many of the city - states in attendance were still technically at war with each other .
The " congress " met again in the spring of 480 BC .
A Thessalian delegation suggested that the Greeks could muster in the narrow Vale of Tempe , on the borders of Thessaly , and thereby block Xerxes ' advance .
A force of 10,000 hoplites was dispatched to the Vale of Tempe , through which they believed the Persian army would have to pass .
However , once there , being warned by Alexander I of Macedon that the vale could be bypassed through Sarantoporo Pass and that Xerxes ' army was overwhelming , the Greeks retreated .
Shortly afterwards , they received the news that Xerxes had crossed the Hellespont .
Themistocles , therefore , suggested a second strategy to the Greeks : the route to southern Greece ( Boeotia , Attica , and the Peloponnesus ) would require Xerxes ' army to travel through the very narrow pass of Thermopylae , which could easily be blocked by the Greek hoplites , despite the overwhelming numbers of Persians .
Furthermore , to prevent the Persians from bypassing Thermopylae by sea , the Athenian and allied navies could block the straits of Artemisium .
Congress adopted this dual - pronged strategy .
However , the Peloponnesian cities made fall - back plans to defend the Isthmus of Corinth , should it come to that , whilst the women and children of Athens had been evacuated en masse to the Peloponnesian city of Troezen .
PRELUDE
Section::::Prelude .
The Persian army seems to have made slow progress through Thrace and Macedon .
News of the imminent Persian approach eventually reached Greece in August thanks to a Greek spy .
At this time of year the Spartans , de facto military leaders of the alliance , were celebrating the festival of Carneia .
During the Carneia , military activity was forbidden by Spartan law ; the Spartans had arrived too late at the Battle of Marathon because of this requirement .
It was also the time of the Olympic Games , and therefore the Olympic truce , and thus it would have been doubly sacrilegious for the whole Spartan army to march to war .
On this occasion , the ephors decided the urgency was sufficiently great to justify an advance expedition to block the pass , under one of its kings , Leonidas I. Leonidas took with him the 300 men of the royal bodyguard , the Hippeis .
This expedition was to try to gather as many other Greek soldiers along the way as possible and to await the arrival of the main Spartan army .
The legend of Thermopylae , as told by Herodotus , has it that the Spartans had consulted the Oracle at Delphi earlier in the year .
The Oracle is said to have made the following prophecy :
O ye men who dwell in the streets of broad Lacedaemon !
Honor the festival of the Carneia ! !
Otherwise , Either your glorious town shall be sacked by the children of Perseus , Or , in exchange , must all through the whole Laconian country Mourn for the loss of a king , descendant of great Heracles .
Herodotus tells us that Leonidas , in line with the prophecy , was convinced he was going to certain death since his forces were not adequate for a victory , and so he selected only Spartans with living sons .
The Spartan force was reinforced en route to Thermopylae by contingents from various cities and numbered more than 7,000 by the time it arrived at the pass .
Leonidas chose to camp at , and defend , the " middle gate " , the narrowest part of the pass of Thermopylae , where the Phocians had built a defensive wall some time before .
News also reached Leonidas , from the nearby city of Trachis , that there was a mountain track that could be used to outflank the pass of Thermopylae .
Leonidas stationed 1,000 Phocians on the heights to prevent such a manoeuvre .
Finally , in mid - August , the Persian army was sighted across the Malian Gulf approaching Thermopylae .
With the Persian army 's arrival at Thermopylae
the Greeks held a council of war .
Some Peloponnesians suggested withdrawal to the Isthmus of Corinth and blocking the passage to Peloponnesus .
The Phocians and Locrians , whose states were located nearby , became indignant and advised defending Thermopylae and sending for more help .
Leonidas calmed the panic and agreed to defend Thermopylae .
According to Plutarch , when one of the soldiers complained that , " Because of the arrows of the barbarians it is impossible to see the sun " , Leonidas replied , " Wo n't it be nice , then , if we shall have shade in which to fight them ? "
Herodotus reports a similar comment , but attributes it to Dienekes .
Xerxes sent a Persian emissary to negotiate with Leonidas .
The Greeks were offered their freedom , the title " Friends of the Persian People " , and the opportunity to re - settle on land better than that they possessed .
When Leonidas refused these terms , the ambassador carried a written message by Xerxes , asking him to " Hand over your arms " .
Leonidas ' famous response to the Persians was " Molṑn labé " ( - literally , " having come , take [ them ] " , but usually translated as " come and take them " ) .
With the Persian embassy returning empty - handed , battle became inevitable .
Xerxes delayed for four days , waiting for the Greeks to disperse , before sending troops to attack them .
OPPOSING FORCES PERSIAN ARMY Section::::Opposing forces .
Section::::Persian army .
The number of troops which Xerxes mustered for the second invasion of Greece has been the subject of endless dispute , most notably between ancient sources , which report very large numbers , and modern scholars , who surmise much smaller figures .
Herodotus claimed that there were , in total , 2.6 million military personnel , accompanied by an equivalent number of support personnel .
The poet Simonides , who was a near - contemporary , talks of four million ; Ctesias gave 800,000 as the total number of the army that was assembled by Xerxes .
Modern scholars tend to reject the figures given by Herodotus and other ancient sources as unrealistic , resulting from miscalculations or exaggerations on the part of the victors .
Modern scholarly estimates are generally in the range 120,000–300,000 .
These estimates usually come from studying the logistical capabilities of the Persians in that era , the sustainability of their respective bases of operations , and the overall manpower constraints affecting them .
Whatever the real numbers were , however , it is clear that Xerxes was anxious to ensure a successful expedition by mustering an overwhelming numerical superiority by land and by sea .
The number of Persian troops present at Thermopylae is therefore as uncertain as the number for the total invasion force .
For instance , it is unclear whether the whole Persian army marched as far as Thermopylae , or whether Xerxes left garrisons in Macedon and Thessaly .
GREEK ARMY Section::::Greek army .
According to Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus , the Greek army included the following forces : Group Number – Herodotus Numbers –
Diodorus Siculus 900 ?
700 or 1,000 300 500 500 120
1,000 400 200 80 3,100 or 4,000 4,000 or 4,300 700 1,000 400 400 1,000 1,000
" All they had " 1,000 5,200 ( or 6,100 ) plus the Opuntian Locrians 7,400 ( or 7,700 ) Notes : * The number of Peloponnesians
*
The number of Lacedemonians Pausanias ' account agrees with that of Herodotus ( whom he probably read ) except that he gives the number of Locrians , which Herodotus declined to estimate .
Residing in the direct path of the Persian advance , they gave all the fighting men they had -
according to Pausanias 6,000 men - which added to Herodotus ' 5,200 would have given a force of 11,200 .
Many modern historians , who usually consider Herodotus more reliable , add the 1,000 Lacedemonians and the 900 helots to Herodotus ' 5,200 to obtain 7,100 or about 7,000 men as a standard number , neglecting Diodorus ' Melians and Pausanias ' Locrians .
However , this is only one approach , and many other combinations are plausible .
Furthermore , the numbers changed later on in the battle when most of the army retreated and only approximately 3,000 men remained ( 300 Spartans , 700 Thespians , 400 Thebans , possibly up to 900 helots , and 1,000 Phocians stationed above the pass , less the casualties sustained in the previous days ) .
STRATEGIC AND TACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS Section::::Strategic and tactical considerations .
From a strategic point of view , by defending Thermopylae , the Greeks were making the best possible use of their forces .
As long as they could prevent a further Persian advance into Greece , they had no need to seek a decisive battle and could , thus , remain on the defensive .
Moreover , by defending two constricted passages ( Thermopylae and Artemisium ) , the Greeks ' inferior numbers became less of a factor .
Conversely , for the Persians the problem of supplying such a large army meant they could not remain in the same place for very long .
The Persians , therefore , had to retreat or advance , and advancing required forcing the pass of Thermopylae .
Tactically , the pass at Thermopylae was ideally suited to the Greek style of warfare .
A hoplite phalanx could block the narrow pass with ease , with no risk of being outflanked by cavalry .
Moreover , in the pass , the phalanx would have been very difficult to assault for the more lightly armed Persian infantry .
The major weak point for the Greeks was the mountain track which led across the highland parallel to Thermopylae , that could allow their position to be outflanked .
Although probably unsuitable for cavalry , this path could easily be traversed by the Persian infantry ( many of whom were versed in mountain warfare ) .
Leonidas was made aware of this path by local people from Trachis , and he positioned a detachment of Phocian troops there in order to block this route .
TOPOGRAPHY OF THE BATTLEFIELD Section::::Topography of the battlefield .
It is often claimed that at the time , the pass of Thermopylae consisted of a track along the shore of the Malian Gulf so narrow that only one chariot could pass through at a time .
In fact , as noted below , the pass was 100 metres wide , probably wider than the Greeks could have held against the Persian masses .
Herodotus reports that the Phocians had improved the defences of the pass by channelling the stream from the hot springs to create a marsh , and it was a causeway across this marsh which was only wide enough for a single chariot to traverse .
In a later passage , describing a Gaulish attempt to force the pass , Herodotus states " The cavalry on both sides proved useless , as the ground at the Pass is not only narrow , but also smooth because of the natural rock , while most of it is slippery owing to its being covered with streams ...
the losses of the barbarians it was impossible to discover exactly .
For the number of them that disappeared beneath the mud was great . "
It is also said that on the southern side of the track stood cliffs that overlooked the pass .
However , a glance at any photograph of the pass shows there are no cliffs , only steep slopes covered in thorny bushes and trees .
Although no obstacle to individuals , such terrain would not be passable by an army and its baggage train .
On the north side of the roadway was the Malian Gulf , into which the land shelved gently .
When at a later date , an army of Gauls led by Brennus attempted to force the pass , the shallowness of the water gave the Greek fleet great difficulty getting close enough to the fighting to bombard the Gauls with ship - borne missile weapons .
Along the path itself was a series of three constrictions , or " gates " ( pylai ) , and at the centre gate a wall that had been erected by the Phocians , in the previous century , to aid in their defence against Thessalian invasions .
The name " Hot Gates " comes from the hot springs that were located there .
The terrain of the battlefield was nothing that Xerxes and his forces were accustomed to .
Although coming from a mountainous country , the Persians were not prepared for the real nature of the country they had invaded .
The pure ruggedness of this area is caused by torrential downpours for four months of the year , combined with an intense summer season of scorching heat that cracks the ground .
Vegetation is scarce and consists of low , thorny shrubs .
The hillsides along the pass are covered in thick brush , with some plants reaching high .
With the sea on one side and steep , impassable hills on the other , King Leonidas and his men chose the perfect topographical position to battle the Persian invaders .
Today , the pass is not near the sea , but is several kilometres inland because of sedimentation in the Malian Gulf .
The old track appears at the foot of the hills around the plain , flanked by a modern road .
Recent core samples indicate that the pass was only wide , and the waters came up to the gates : "
Little do the visitors realize that the battle took place across the road from the monument .
" The pass still is a natural defensive position to modern armies , and British Commonwealth forces in World War II made a defence in 1941 against the Nazi invasion metres from the original battlefield .
* Maps of the region : * Image of the battlefield , from the east BATTLE FIRST DAY Section::::Battle .
Section::::First day .
On the fifth day after the Persian arrival at Thermopylae and the first day of the battle , Xerxes finally resolved to attack the Greeks .
First , he ordered 5,000 archers to fire a barrage of arrows , but they were ineffective ; they fired from at least 100 yards away , according to modern day scholars , and the Greeks ' bronze shields and helmets deflected the arrows .
After that , Xerxes sent a force of 10,000 Medes and Cissians to take the defenders prisoner and bring them before him .
The Persians soon launched a frontal assault , in waves of around 10,000 men , on the Greek position .
The Greeks fought in front of the Phocian wall , at the narrowest part of the pass , which enabled them to use as few soldiers as possible .
Details of the tactics are scant ; Diodorus says , " the men stood shoulder to shoulder " , and the Greeks were " superior in valour and in the great size of their shields .
" This probably describes the standard Greek phalanx , in which the men formed a wall of overlapping shields and layered spear points protruding out from the sides of the shields , which would have been highly effective as long as it spanned the width of the pass .
The weaker shields , and shorter spears and swords of the Persians prevented them from effectively engaging the Greek hoplites .
Herodotus says that the units for each city were kept together ; units were rotated in and out of the battle to prevent fatigue , which implies the Greeks had more men than necessary to block the pass .
The Greeks killed so many Medes that Xerxes is said to have stood up three times from the seat from which he was watching the battle .
According to Ctesias , the first wave was " cut to ribbons " , with only two or three Spartans killed in return .
According to Herodotus and Diodorus , the king , having taken the measure of the enemy , threw his best troops into a second assault the same day , the Immortals , an elite corps of 10,000 men .
However , the Immortals fared no better than the Medes , and failed to make any headway against the Greeks .
The Spartans apparently used a tactic of feigning retreat , and then turning and killing the enemy troops when they ran after them .
SECOND DAY Section::::Second day .
On the second day , Xerxes again sent in the infantry to attack the pass , " supposing that their enemies , being so few , were now disabled by wounds and could no longer resist . "
However , the Persians had no more success on the second day than on the first .
Xerxes at last stopped the assault and withdrew to his camp , " totally perplexed " .
Later that day , however , as the Persian king was pondering what to do next , he received a windfall ; a Trachinian named Ephialtes informed him of the mountain path around Thermopylae and offered to guide the Persian army .
Ephialtes was motivated by the desire for a reward .
For this act , the name " Ephialtes " received a lasting stigma ; it came to mean " nightmare " in the Greek language and to symbolize the archetypal traitor in Greek culture .
Herodotus reports that Xerxes sent his commander Hydarnes that evening , with the men under his command , the Immortals , to encircle the Greeks via the path .
However , he does not say who those men were .
The Immortals had been bloodied on the first day , so it is possible that Hydarnes may have been given overall command of an enhanced force including what was left of the Immortals ; according to Diodorus , Hydarnes had a force of 20,000 for the mission .
The path led from east of the Persian camp along the ridge of Mt. Anopaea behind the cliffs that flanked the pass .
It branched , with one path leading to Phocis and the other down to the Malian Gulf at Alpenus , the first town of Locris .
THIRD DAY Section::::Third day .
At daybreak on the third day , the Phocians guarding the path above Thermopylae became aware of the outflanking Persian column by the rustling of oak leaves .
Herodotus says they jumped up and were greatly amazed .
Hydarnes was perhaps just as amazed to see them hastily arming themselves as they were to see him and his forces .
He feared they were Spartans but was informed by Ephialtes that they were not .
The Phocians retreated to a nearby hill to make their stand ( assuming the Persians had come to attack them ) .
However , not wishing to be delayed , the Persians merely shot a volley of arrows at them , before bypassing them to continue with their encirclement of the main Greek force .
Learning from a runner that the Phocians had not held the path , Leonidas called a council of war at dawn .
According to Diodorus , a Persian called Tyrrhastiadas , a Cymaean by birth , warned the Greeks .
Some of the Greeks argued for withdrawal , but Leonidas resolved to stay at the pass with the Spartans .
Upon discovering that his army had been encircled , Leonidas told his allies that they could leave if they wanted to .
While many of the Greeks took him up on his offer and fled , around two thousand soldiers stayed behind to fight and die .
Knowing that the end was near , the Greeks marched into the open field and met the Persians head - on .
Many of the Greek contingents then either chose to withdraw ( without orders ) or were ordered to leave by Leonidas
( Herodotus admits that there is some doubt about which actually happened ) .
The contingent of 700 Thespians , led by their general Demophilus , refused to leave and committed themselves to the fight .
Also present were the 400 Thebans and probably the helots who had accompanied the Spartans .
Leonidas ' actions have been the subject of much discussion .
It is commonly stated that the Spartans were obeying the laws of Sparta by not retreating , but it seems it was actually the failure to retreat from Thermopylae that gave rise to the notion that Spartans never retreated .
It is also possible that , recalling the words of the Oracle , Leonidas was committed to sacrifice his life in order to save Sparta .
However , since the prophecy was specific to him , this seems a poor reason to commit 1,500 other men to a fight to the death .
The most likely theory is that Leonidas chose to form a rearguard so that the other Greek contingents could get away .
If all the troops had retreated , the open ground beyond the pass would have allowed the Persian cavalry to run the Greeks down .
If they had all remained at the pass , they would have been encircled and would eventually have all been killed .
By covering the retreat and continuing to block the pass , Leonidas could save more than 3,000 men , who would be able to fight again .
The Thebans have also been the subject of some discussion .
Herodotus suggests they were brought to the battle as hostages to ensure the good behavior of Thebes .
However , as Plutarch long ago pointed out , if they were hostages , why not send them away with the rest of the Greeks ?
The likelihood is that these were the Theban " loyalists " , who unlike the majority of their fellow citizens , objected to Persian domination .
They thus probably came to Thermopylae of their own free will and stayed to the end because they could not return to Thebes if the Persians conquered Boeotia .
The Thespians , resolved as they were not to submit to Xerxes , faced the destruction of their city if the Persians took Boeotia .
However , this alone does not explain the fact that they remained ; the remainder of Thespiae was successfully evacuated before the Persians arrived there .
It seems that the Thespians volunteered to remain as a simple act of self - sacrifice , all the more amazing since their contingent represented every single hoplite the city could muster .
This seems to have been a particularly Thespian trait – on at least two other occasions in later history , a Thespian force would commit itself to a fight to the death .
At dawn , Xerxes made libations , pausing to allow the Immortals sufficient time to descend the mountain , and then began his advance .
A Persian force of 10,000 men , comprising light infantry and cavalry , charged at the front of the Greek formation .
The Greeks this time sallied forth from the wall to meet the Persians in the wider part of the pass , in an attempt to slaughter as many Persians as they could .
They fought with spears , until every spear was shattered , and then switched to xiphē ( short swords ) .
In this struggle , Herodotus states that two of Xerxes ' brothers fell : Abrocomes and Hyperanthes .
Leonidas also died in the assault , shot down by Persian archers , and the two sides fought over his body ; the Greeks took possession .
As the Immortals approached , the Greeks withdrew and took a stand on a hill behind the wall .
The Thebans " moved away from their companions , and with hands upraised , advanced toward the barbarians ... " ( Rawlinson translation ) , but a few were slain before their surrender was accepted .
The king later had the Theban prisoners branded with the royal mark .
Of the remaining defenders , Herodotus says : " Here they defended themselves to the last , those who still had swords using them , and the others resisting with their hands and teeth . " Tearing down part of the wall , Xerxes ordered the hill surrounded , and the Persians rained down arrows until every last Greek was dead .
In 1939 , archaeologist Spyridon Marinatos , excavating at Thermopylae , found large numbers of Persian bronze arrowheads on Kolonos Hill , which changed the identification of the hill on which the Greeks were thought to have died from a smaller one nearer the wall .
The pass at Thermopylae was thus opened to the Persian army , according to Herodotus , at the cost to the Persians of up to 20,000 fatalities .
The Greek rearguard , meanwhile , was annihilated , with a probable loss of 2,000 men , including those killed on the first two days of battle .
Herodotus says , at one point 4,000 Greeks died , but assuming the Phocians guarding the track were not killed during the battle ( as Herodotus implies ) , this would be almost every Greek soldier present ( by Herodotus ' own estimates ) , and this number is probably too high .
AFTERMATH Section::::Aftermath .
When the Persians recovered Leonidas ' body , Xerxes , in a rage against Leonidas , ordered that the head be cut off and the body crucified .
Herodotus observes this was very uncommon for the Persians , as they traditionally treated " valiant warriors " with great honour ( the example of Pytheas , captured off Skiathos before the Battle of Artemisium , strengthens this suggestion ) .
However , Xerxes was known for his rage .
Legend has it that he had the very water of the Hellespont whipped because it would not obey him .
After the Persians ' departure , the Greeks collected their dead and buried them on the hill .
After the Persian invasion was repulsed , a stone lion was erected at Thermopylae to commemorate Leonidas .
A full 40 years after the battle , Leonidas ' bones were returned to Sparta , where he was buried again with full honours ; funeral games were held every year in his memory .
With Thermopylae now opened to the Persian army , the continuation of the blockade at Artemisium by the Greek fleet became irrelevant .
The simultaneous naval Battle of Artemisium had been a tactical stalemate , and the Greek navy was able to retreat in good order to the Saronic Gulf , where they helped to ferry the remaining Athenian citizens to the island of Salamis .
Following Thermopylae , the Persian army proceeded to sack and burn Plataea and Thespiae , the Boeotian cities that had not submitted , before it marched on the now evacuated city of Athens .
Meanwhile , the Greeks ( for the most part Peloponnesians ) preparing to defend the Isthmus of Corinth , demolished the single road that led through it and built a wall across it .
As at Thermopylae , making this an effective strategy required the Greek navy to stage a simultaneous blockade , barring the passage of the Persian navy across the Saronic Gulf , so that troops could not be landed directly on the Peloponnese .
However , instead of a mere blockade , Themistocles persuaded the Greeks to seek a decisive victory against the Persian fleet .
Luring the Persian navy into the Straits of Salamis , the Greek fleet was able to destroy much of the Persian fleet in the Battle of Salamis , which essentially ended the threat to the Peloponnese .
Fearing the Greeks might attack the bridges across the Hellespont and trap his army in Europe , Xerxes now retreated with much of the Persian army back to Asia , though nearly all of them died of starvation and disease on the return voyage .
He left a hand - picked force , under Mardonius , to complete the conquest the following year .
However , under pressure from the Athenians , the Peloponnesians eventually agreed to try to force Mardonius to battle , and they marched on Attica .
Mardonius retreated to Boeotia to lure the Greeks into open terrain , and the two sides eventually met near the city of Plataea .
At the Battle of Plataea , the Greek army won a decisive victory , destroying much of the Persian army and ending the invasion of Greece .
Meanwhile , at the near - simultaneous naval Battle of Mycale , they also destroyed much of the remaining Persian fleet , thereby reducing the threat of further invasions .
Thermopylae is arguably the most famous battle in European ancient history , repeatedly referenced in ancient , recent , and contemporary culture .
In Western culture at least , it is the Greeks who are lauded for their performance in battle .
However , within the context of the Persian invasion , Thermopylae was undoubtedly a defeat for the Greeks .
It seems clear that the Greek strategy was to hold off the Persians at Thermopylae and Artemisium ; whatever they may have intended , it was presumably not their desire to surrender all of Boeotia and Attica to the Persians .
The Greek position at Thermopylae , despite being massively outnumbered , was nearly impregnable .
If the position had been held for even a little longer , the Persians might have had to retreat for lack of food and water .
Thus , despite the heavy losses , forcing the pass was strategically a Persian victory , but the successful retreat of the bulk of the Greek troops was in its own sense a victory as well .
The battle itself had showed what a few free men , willing to do anything for victory against the invaders , could accomplish , and the defeat at Thermopylae had turned Leonidas and the men under his command into martyrs .
That boosted the morale of all Greek soldiers in the second Persian invasion .
It is sometimes stated that Thermopylae was a Pyrrhic victory for the Persians ( i.e. , one in which the victor is as damaged by the battle as the defeated party ) .
However , there is no suggestion by Herodotus that the effect on the Persian forces was that .
The idea ignores the fact that the Persians would , in the aftermath of Thermopylae , conquer the majority of Greece , and the fact that they were still fighting in Greece a year later .
Alternatively , the argument is sometimes advanced that the last stand at Thermopylae was a successful delaying action that gave the Greek navy time to prepare for the Battle of Salamis .
However , compared to the probable time ( about one month ) between Thermopylae and Salamis , the time bought was negligible .
Furthermore , this idea also neglects the fact that a Greek navy was fighting at Artemisium during the Battle of Thermopylae , incurring losses in the process .
George Cawkwell suggests that the gap between Thermopylae and Salamis was caused by Xerxes ' systematically reducing Greek opposition in Phocis and Boeotia , and not as a result of the Battle of Thermopylae ; thus , as a delaying action , Thermopylae was insignificant compared to Xerxes ' own procrastination .
Far from labelling Thermopylae as a Pyrrhic victory , modern academic treatises on the Greco - Persian Wars tend to emphasise the success of Xerxes in breaching the formidable Greek position and the subsequent conquest of the majority of Greece .
For instance , Cawkwell states : " he was successful on both land and sea , and the Great Invasion began with a brilliant success . ...
Xerxes had every reason to congratulate himself " , while Lazenby describes the Greek defeat as " disastrous " .
The fame of Thermopylae is thus principally derived not from its effect on the outcome of the war but for the inspirational example it set .
Thermopylae is famous because of the heroism of the doomed rearguard , who , despite facing certain death , remained at the pass .
Ever since , the events of Thermopylae have been the source of effusive praise from many sources : " ...
the fairest sister - victories which the Sun has ever seen , yet they would never dare to compare their combined glory with the glorious defeat of King Leonidas and his men .
"
A second reason is the example it set of free men , fighting for their country and their freedom :
So almost immediately , contemporary Greeks saw Thermopylae as a critical moral and culture lesson .
In universal terms , a small , free people had willingly outfought huge numbers of imperial subjects who advanced under the lash .
More specifically , the Western idea that soldiers themselves decide where , how , and against whom they will fight was contrasted against the Eastern notion of despotism and monarchy — freedom proving the stronger idea as the more courageous fighting of the Greeks at Thermopylae , and their later victories at Salamis and Plataea attested .
While this paradigm of " free men " outfighting " slaves " can be seen as a rather sweeping over - generalization ( there are many counter - examples ) , it is nevertheless true that many commentators have used Thermopylae to illustrate this point .
Militarily , although the battle was actually not decisive in the context of the Persian invasion , Thermopylae is of some significance on the basis of the first two days of fighting .
The performance of the defenders is used as an example of the advantages of training , equipment , and good use of terrain as force multipliers .
LEGACY
MONUMENTS Section::::Legacy .
Section::::Monuments .
There are several monuments around the battlefield of Thermopylae .
EPITAPH OF SIMONIDES Section::::Epitaph of Simonides .
A well - known epigram , usually attributed to Simonides , was engraved as an epitaph on a commemorative stone placed on top of the burial mound of the Spartans at Thermopylae .
It is also the hill on which the last of them died .
The original stone has not survived , but in 1955 , the epitaph was engraved on a new stone .
The text from Herodotus is : The alternative ancient reading ( peithomenoi nomίmois ) for ( rhēmasi peithomenoi ) substitutes " laws " or " orders " for " words . "
In other words , the " orders " are not personal but refer to official and binding phrases ( the Ancient Greek term can also refer to a formal speech ) .
The form of this ancient Greek poetry is an elegiac couplet , commonly used for epitaphs .
Some English renderings are given in the table below .
It is also an example of Laconian brevity , a Spartan style of verse that allows for varying interpretations of the meaning of the poem .
Ioannis Ziogas points out that the usual English translations are far from the only interpretation possible , and indicate much about the romantic tendencies of the translators .
It was well known in ancient Greece that all the Spartans who had been sent to Thermopylae had been killed there ( with the exception of Aristodemus and Pantites ) , and the epitaph exploits the conceit
that there was nobody left to bring the news of their deeds back to Sparta .
Greek epitaphs often appealed to the passing reader ( always called ' stranger ' ) for sympathy , but the epitaph for the dead Spartans at Thermopylae took this convention much further than usual , asking the reader to make a personal journey to Sparta to break the news that the Spartan expeditionary force had been wiped out .
The stranger is also asked to stress that the Spartans died ' fulfilling their orders ' . !
Translation !
Notes
Go tell the Spartans , thou who passest by , That here , obedient to their laws , we lie .
William Lisle Bowles Stranger , tell the Spartans that we behaved as they would wish us to , and are buried here .
William Golding Stranger !
To Sparta say , her faithful bandHere lie in death , remembering her command .
Francis Hodgson Stranger , report this word , we pray , to the Spartans , that lying Here in this spot we remain , faithfully keeping their laws .
George Campbell Macaulay Stranger , bear this message to the Spartans , that we lie here obedient to their laws .
William Roger Paton
Go tell the Spartans , stranger passing by , that here obedient to their laws we lie .
Steven Pressfield Go , stranger , and to Lacedaemon tellThat
here , obeying her behests , we fell .
George Rawlinson Go , way - farer , bear news to Sparta 's townthat here , their bidding done , we laid us down .
Cyril E. Robinson
Go tell the Spartans , you who read
: We took their orders , and lie here dead .
Aubrey de Sélincourt Friend , tell LacedaemonHere we lieObedient to our orders .
William Shepherd
Oh Stranger , tell the SpartansThat we lie here obedient to their word .
From the 1962 film The 300 Spartans Stranger , when you find us lying here , go tell the Spartans we obeyed their orders .
From the 1977 film
Go Tell the Spartans Stranger , go tell the SpartansThat we lie hereTrue , even to the deathTo our Spartan way of life .
J. Rufus Fears
Go tell the Spartans , passerby : That here , by Spartan law , we lie .
Frank Miller ( subsequently used in the 2007 film , 300 )
The first line of the epigram was used as the title of the short story " Stranger , Bear Word to the Spartans
We … " by German Nobel Prize laureate Heinrich Böll .
A variant of the epigram is inscribed on the Polish Cemetery at Monte Cassino .
John Ruskin expressed the importance of this ideal to Western civilization as follows : Also obedience in its highest form is not obedience to a constant and compulsory law , but a persuaded or voluntary yielded obedience to an issued command ...
His name who leads the armies of Heaven is " Faithful and True " ... and all deeds which are done in alliance with these armies ... are essentially deeds of faith , which therefore ... is at once the source and the substance of all known deed , rightly so called ...
as set forth in the last word of the noblest group of words ever , so far as I know , uttered by simple man concerning his practice , being the final testimony of the leaders of a great practical nation ...
[ the epitaph in Greek ] Cicero recorded a Latin variation in his Tusculanae Disputationes ( 1.42.101 ) : LEONIDAS MONUMENT Section::::Leonidas monument .
Additionally , there is a modern monument at the site , called the " Leonidas Monument " , in honour of the Spartan king .
It features a bronze statue of Leonidas .
A sign , under the statue , reads simply : " Μολὼν λαβέ " ( " Come and take them!"—as in answer to Xerxes ' demand that the Greeks give up their weapons ) .
The metope below depicts battle scenes .
The two marble statues on the left and the right of the monument represent , respectively , the river Eurotas and Mount Taygetos , famous landmarks of Sparta .
THESPIAN MONUMENT Section::::Thespian monument .
In 1997 , a second monument was officially unveiled by the Greek government , dedicated to the 700 Thespians who fought with the Spartans .
The monument is made of marble and features a bronze statue depicting the god Eros , to whom the ancient Thespians accorded particular religious veneration .
Under the statue , a sign reads : " In memory of the seven hundred Thespians . "
A plate below the statue explains its symbolism :
* The headless male figure symbolizes the anonymous sacrifice of the 700 Thespians to their country .
*
The outstretched chest symbolizes the struggle , the gallantry , the strength , the bravery and the courage .
*
The open wing symbolizes the victory , the glory , the soul , the spirit and the freedom .
*
The broken wing symbolizes the voluntary sacrifice and death .
*
The naked body symbolizes Eros , the most important god of the ancient Thespians , a god of creation , beauty and life .
The monument to the Thespians is placed beside the one to the Spartans .
ASSOCIATED LEGENDS
Section::::Associated legends .
Herodotus ' colorful account of the battle has provided history with many apocryphal incidents and conversations away from the main historical events .
These accounts are obviously not verifiable , but they form an integral part of the legend of the battle and often demonstrate the laconic speech ( and wit ) of the Spartans to good effect .
For instance , Plutarch recounts , in his Sayings of Spartan Women , upon his departure , Leonidas ' wife Gorgo asked what she should do if he did not return , to which Leonidas replied , " Marry a good man and have good children . "
It is reported that , upon arriving at Thermopylae , the Persians sent a mounted scout to reconnoitre .
The Greeks allowed him to come up to the camp , observe them , and depart .
Xerxes found the scout 's reports of the size of the Greek force , and that the Spartans were indulging in callisthenics and combing their long hair , laughable .
Seeking the counsel of Demaratus , an exiled Spartan king in his retinue , Xerxes was told the Spartans were preparing for battle , and it was their custom to adorn their hair when they were about to risk their lives .
Demaratus called them " the bravest men in Greece " and warned the Great King they intended to dispute the pass .
He emphasized that he had tried to warn Xerxes earlier in the campaign , but the king had refused to believe him .
He added that if Xerxes ever managed to subdue the Spartans , " there is no other nation in all the world which will venture to lift a hand in their defence . "
Herodotus also describes Leonidas ' reception of a Persian embassy .
The ambassador told Leonidas that Xerxes would offer him the kingship of all Greece if he joined with Xerxes .
Leonidas answered : " If you had any knowledge of the noble things of life , you would refrain from coveting others ' possessions ; but for me to die for Greece is better than to be the sole ruler over the people of my race . "
Then the ambassador asked him more forcefully to surrender their arms .
To this Leonidas gave his famous answer : ( pronounced ) " Come and get them . "
Such Laconic bravery doubtlessly helped to maintain morale .
Herodotus writes that when Dienekes , a Spartan soldier , was informed that Persian arrows would be so numerous as " to block out the sun " , he retorted , unconcerned : " So much the better ...
then we shall fight our battle in the shade .
"
After the battle , Xerxes was curious as to what the Greeks had been trying to do ( presumably because they had had so few men ) and had some Arcadian deserters interrogated in his presence .
The answer was : all the other men were participating in the Olympic Games .
When Xerxes asked what the prize was for the winner , the answer was : " an olive - wreath " .
Upon hearing this , Tigranes , a Persian general , said : " Good heavens , Mardonius , what kind of men are these that you have pitted against us ?
It is not for riches that they contend but for honour ! "
( Godley translation ) or otherwise , " Ye Gods , Mardonius ,
what men have you brought us to fight against ?
Men that fight not for gold , but for glory .
" IN POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In popular culture .
The Battle of Thermopylae has remained a cultural icon of western civilization ever since it was fought .
The battle is revisited in countless adages and works of popular culture , such as in films ( e.g. , The 300 Spartans ( 1962 ) and 300 ( 2007 ) , based on the events during and close to the time of the battle ) , in literature , in song , in television programs , and in video games .
The battle is also discussed in many articles and books on the theory and practice of warfare .
Prior to the battle , the Hellenes remembered the Dorians , an ethnic distinction which applied to the Spartans , as the conquerors and displacers of the Ionians in the Peloponnesus .
After the battle , Spartan culture became an inspiration and object of emulation , a phenomenon known as Laconophilia .
ANALOGUES
Section::::Analogues .
There are several analogous battles .
Similarities between the Battle of Thermopylae and the Battle of Persian Gate have been recognized by both ancient and modern authors , which describe it as a kind of reversal of the Battle of Thermopylae , calling it " the Persian Thermopylae " .
Here , on Alexander the Great 's campaign against Persia in 330 BC to exact revenge for the Persian invasion of Greece , he faced the same situation , encountering a last stand of the Persian forces ( under Ariobarzanes ) at a narrow pass near Persepolis who held the invaders for a month , until their fall as the enemy found a path to their rear .
There are even accounts that a local shepherd informed Alexander 's forces about the secret path , just as a local Greek showed the Persian forces a secret path around the pass at Thermopylae .
Curtius describes the subsequent battle fought by the surrounded , unarmed Persians as " memorable " .
Other analogous battles include : * Battle of Wizna a.k.a .
the " Polish Thermopylae " in Polish culture * Siege of the Alamo , a.k.a . "
the Texan Thermopylae " in US culture * Three Hundred Aragvians - a similar last stand by a similar number , in Georgia
* Battle of Saragarhi a.k.a .
the " Indian Thermopylae " in Indian history SEE ALSO
* Aristodemus of Sparta * Battle of Tirad Pass * Battle of Saragarhi
* Spartan Army * Gates of Fire * Battle of Traigh Ghruinneart , where a dwarf betrays the forces that rejected his service * Battle of Longewala * Battle of Neopatras
* Great Siege of Malta
* Battle of St. Jakob an der
Birs
* List of last stands
* Artapanus ( general ) * Battle of Pavan Khind REFERENCES Section::::References .
Informational notes Citations Bibliography
* Bradford , Ernle ( 1980 ) .
The Battle For The West : Thermopylae .
McGraw - Hill . .
* Archived 9/7/2007 .
* Green , Peter ; Greek History 480 - 431 B.C. , the Alternative Version , University of Texas Press , ( 2006 ) .
p. 59
* Lazenby , JF .
The Defence of Greece 490–479 BC .
Aris & Phillips Ltd. , 1993 ( )
Further reading
* Fehling , D. Herodotus and His " Sources " : Citation , Invention , and Narrative Art .
Translated by J.G. Howie .
Arca Classical and Medieval Texts , Papers , and Monographs , 21 .
Leeds : Francis Cairns , 1989
* Ιστορία του Ελληνικού Έθνους =
History of the Greek nation volume Β ' , Athens 1971 EXTERNAL
LINKS * EDSITEment Lesson Plan : 300 Spartans at the Battle of Thermopylae : Herodotus ' Real History ( from the National Endowment for the Humanities )
* The Five Great Battles of Antiquity by David L. Smith , Symposion Lectures , 30 June 2006 .
* Modern monument at siu.edu
* Spartan burial mound at coloradocollege.edu
*
Thermopylae , BBC Radio 4 discussion with Tom Holland , Simon Goldhill & Edith Hall
( In Our Time , Feb. 5 , 2004 )