AIR FORCE ONE
Air Force One is the official air traffic control call sign for a United States Air Force aircraft carrying the President of the United States .
In common parlance the term describes those Air Force aircraft designed , built , and used to transport the president .
The presidential aircraft is a prominent symbol of the American presidency and its power .
The idea of designating specific military aircraft to transport the President arose in 1943 , when officials of the United States Army Air Forces , the predecessor to the U.S. Air Force , became concerned over the reliance on commercial airlines to transport the president .
A C-87 Liberator Express was reconfigured for use as the first dedicated VIP and presidential transport aircraft and named Guess
Where II , but the Secret Service rejected it because of its safety record .
A C-54 Skymaster was then converted for presidential use ; this aircraft , dubbed the Sacred Cow , carried President Franklin D. Roosevelt to the Yalta Conference in February 1945 and was subsequently used for another two years by President Harry S. Truman .
The " Air Force One " call sign was created after a 1953 incident during which a Lockheed Constellation named Columbine II , carrying President Dwight D. Eisenhower , entered the same airspace as a commercial airline flight using the same flight number .
A number of aircraft types have been used as Air Force One since the creation of the presidential fleet , starting with two Lockheed Constellations in the late 1950s :
Columbine II and Columbine III .
It also operated two Boeing 707s , introduced in the 1960s and 1970s ;
since 1990 , the presidential fleet has been two Boeing VC-25As , which are specifically configured , highly customized Boeing 747 - 200B series aircraft .
The Air Force plans to procure the Boeing 747 - 8 for the next version of Air Force One .
HISTORY BACKGROUND Section::::History .
Section::::Background .
On 11 October 1910 , Theodore Roosevelt became the first U.S. president to fly in an aircraft , an early Wright Flyer from Kinloch Field near St. Louis , Missouri .
He was no longer in office at the time , having been succeeded by William Howard Taft .
The record - making occasion was a brief overflight of the crowd at a county fair but was nonetheless the beginning of presidential air travel .
Prior to World War II , overseas and cross - country presidential travel was rare .
The lack of wireless telecommunication and available modes of transportation made long - distance travel impractical , as it took too much time and isolated the president from events in Washington ,
D.C. Railroads were a safer and more reliable option if the president needed to travel to distant states .
By the late 1930s , with the arrival of aircraft such as the Douglas DC-3 , increasing numbers of the U.S. public saw passenger air travel as a reasonable mode of transportation .
All - metal aircraft , more reliable engines , and new radio aids to navigation had made commercial airline travel safer and more convenient .
Life insurance companies even began to offer airline pilots insurance policies , albeit at extravagant rates , and many commercial travelers and government officials began using the airlines in preference to rail travel , especially for longer trips .
FIRST PRESIDENTIAL AIRCRAFT Section::::First presidential aircraft .
Franklin D. Roosevelt was the first president to fly in an aircraft while in office .
The first aircraft obtained specifically for presidential travel was a Douglas Dolphin amphibian delivered in 1933 which was designated RD-2 by the US Navy and based at the Naval base at Anacostia D.C.
The Dolphin was modified with luxury upholstery for four passengers and a small separate sleeping compartment .
The aircraft remained in service as a presidential transport from 1933 until 1939 .
There are no reports , however , on whether the president actually flew in the aircraft .
During World War II , Roosevelt traveled on the Dixie Clipper , a Pan Am - crewed Boeing 314 flying boat to the 1943 Casablanca Conference in Morocco , a flight that covered 5,500 miles ( 8,890 km ) in three legs .
The threat from the German submarines throughout the Battle of the Atlantic made air travel the preferred method of VIP transatlantic transportation .
Concerned about relying upon commercial airlines to transport the president , USAAF leaders ordered the conversion of a military aircraft to accommodate the special needs of the Commander - in - Chief .
The first dedicated aircraft proposed for presidential use was a C-87A VIP transport aircraft .
This aircraft , number 41 - 24159 , was modified in 1943 for use as a presidential VIP transport , the Guess Where II , intended to carry President Franklin D. Roosevelt on international trips .
Had it been accepted , it would have been the first aircraft to be used in presidential service .
However , after a review of the C-87 's highly controversial safety record in service , the Secret Service flatly refused to approve the Guess Where II for presidential carriage .
As the C-87 was a derivative of the Consolidated B-24 Liberator bomber , it presented strong offensive impressions to enemy fighter aircraft as well as foreign destinations visited , an issue not present with airplanes that were used purely for transport .
The Guess Where II was used to transport senior members of the Roosevelt administration on various trips .
In March 1944 , it transported Eleanor Roosevelt on a goodwill tour of several Latin American countries .
The C-87 was scrapped in 1945 .
The Secret Service subsequently reconfigured a Douglas C-54 Skymaster for presidential transport duty .
The VC-54C aircraft , nicknamed the Sacred Cow , included a sleeping area , radio telephone , and retractable elevator to lift Roosevelt in his wheelchair .
As modified , the VC-54C was used by President Roosevelt only once before his death , on his trip to the Yalta Conference in February 1945 .
Sacred Cow is now on display at the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright - Patterson AFB , Ohio .
LATE 1940S AND 1950S
Section::::Late 1940s and 1950s .
After Roosevelt 's death in April 1945 , Vice President Harry S. Truman became president .
The legislation that created the U.S. Air Force , the National Security Act of 1947 , was signed by Truman while on board the VC-54C. He replaced the VC-54C in 1947 with a modified C-118 Liftmaster , calling it the Independence ( name of Truman 's Missouri hometown ) .
This was the first presidential aircraft that had a distinctive exterior — a bald eagle head painted on its nose .
The presidential call sign was established for security purposes during the administration of Dwight D. Eisenhower .
The change stemmed from a 1953 incident where an Eastern Airlines commercial flight ( 8610 ) had the same call sign as the flight the president was on ( Air Force 8610 ) .
The airliner accidentally entered the same airspace , and after the incident , the unique presidential aircraft call sign " Air Force One " was introduced .
The first official flight using the call sign Air Force One was in 1959 , during the Eisenhower administration .
Eisenhower introduced four propeller - driven aircraft to presidential service .
This group included two Lockheed C-121 Constellations , the aircraft Columbine II
( VC-121A 48 - 610)—the only primary presidential airplane ever sold — and Columbine III
( VC-121E 53 - 7885 ) .
They were named by First Lady Mamie Eisenhower after the columbine , the official state flower of her adopted home state of Colorado .
Two Aero Commanders were added to the fleet and earned the distinction of being the smallest aircraft ever to serve as Air Force One .
President Eisenhower also upgraded Air Force One 's technology by adding an air - to - ground telephone and an air - to - ground teletype machine .
BOEING 707S AND ENTRY TO JET AGE Section::::Boeing 707s and entry
to jet age .
Toward the end of Eisenhower 's term in 1958 , the Air Force added three Boeing 707 jets ( as VC-137s designated SAM 970 , 971 , and 972 ) , into the fleet .
Eisenhower became the first president to use the VC-137 during his " Flight to Peace " Goodwill tour , from 3 December through 22 December 1959 .
He visited 11 Asian nations , flying in 19 days , about twice as fast as he could have covered that distance via one of the Columbines .
SAM 26000 Section::::SAM 26000 .
Under John F. Kennedy , presidential air travel entered the jet age .
He had used the Eisenhower - era jets for trips to Canada , France , Austria , and the United Kingdom .
Then in October 1962 , the U.S. Air Force purchased a Boeing C-137 Stratoliner , a modified long - range Boeing 707—Special Air Mission ( SAM ) 26000 .
The Air Force had designed a special presidential livery in red and metallic gold , with the nation 's name in block letters .
Kennedy felt the aircraft appeared too regal , and , on advice from his wife , First Lady Jacqueline Kennedy , he contacted the French - born American industrial designer Raymond Loewy for help in designing a new livery and interiors for the VC-137 jet .
Loewy met with the president , and his earliest research on the project took him to the National Archives , where he looked at the first printed copy of the United States Declaration of Independence ; he saw the country 's name set widely spaced and in upper case in Caslon typeface .
He chose to expose the polished aluminum fuselage on the bottom side and used two blues – slate - blue associated with the early republic and the presidency and a more contemporary cyan to represent the present and future .
The presidential seal was added to both sides of the fuselage near the nose , a large American flag was painted on the tail , and the sides of the aircraft read " United States of America " in all capital letters .
Loewy 's work won immediate praise from the president and the press .
The VC-137 markings were adapted for the larger VC-25A when it entered service in 1990 .
SAM 26000 was in service from 1962 to 1998 , serving Presidents Kennedy to Clinton .
On 22 November 1963 , SAM 26000 carried President Kennedy to Dallas , Texas , where it served as the backdrop as the Kennedys greeted well - wishers at Dallas 's Love Field .
Later that afternoon , Kennedy was assassinated , and Vice President Lyndon Johnson assumed the office of President and took the oath of office aboard SAM 26000 .
On Johnson 's orders , the plane carried Kennedy 's body back to Washington .
A decade later , SAM 26000 took Johnson 's body home to Texas after his state funeral in Washington .
Johnson used SAM 26000 to travel extensively domestically and to visit troops in South Vietnam during the Vietnam War .
SAM 26000 served President Nixon on several groundbreaking overseas voyages , including his famous visit to the People 's Republic of China in February 1972 and trip to the Soviet Union later that year , both firsts for an American president .
Nixon dubbed the plane the " Spirit of ' 76 " in honor of the forthcoming bicentennial of the United States ; that logo was painted on both sides of the plane 's nose .
SAM 26000 is now on display at the National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright - Patterson AFB , Ohio .
SAM 27000 Section::::SAM 27000 .
SAM 26000 was replaced in December 1972 by another VC-137 , Special Air Mission 27000 , although SAM 26000 was kept as a backup until it was finally retired in 1998 .
Richard Nixon was the first president to use SAM 27000 ; the newer aircraft served every president until it was replaced by two VC-25A aircraft ( SAM 28000 and 29000 ) in 1990 .
In June 1974 , while President Nixon was on his way to a scheduled stop in Syria , Syrian fighter jets intercepted Air Force One to act as escorts .
However , the Air Force One crew was not informed in advance and , as a result , took evasive action including a dive .
After announcing his intention to resign the presidency , Nixon boarded SAM 27000 ( with call sign " Air Force One " ) to travel to California .
Colonel Ralph Albertazzie , then pilot of Air Force One , recounted that after Gerald Ford was sworn in as president , the plane had to be redesignated as SAM 27000 , indicating no president was on board the aircraft .
Over Jefferson City , Missouri , Albertazzie radioed : " ' Kansas City , this was Air Force One .
Will you change our call sign to Sierra Alpha Mike ( SAM ) 27000 ? '
Back came the reply : ' Roger , Sierra Alpha Mike 27000 .
Good luck to the President . ' " SAM 27000 's last flight as Air Force One was on 29 August 2001 when it flew President George W. Bush from San Antonio to Waco , Texas .
Following the flight , it was formally decommissioned , then flown to San Bernardino International Airport ( former Norton AFB ) in California .
It was dismantled and taken to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley , where it was reassembled and is on permanent display .
BOEING VC-25A
Section::::Boeing VC-25A.
Though Ronald Reagan 's two terms as president saw no major changes to Air Force One , the manufacture of the presidential aircraft version of the 747 began during his presidency .
The USAF issued a Request For Proposal in 1985 for two wide - body aircraft with a minimum of three engines and an unrefueled range of 6,000 miles ( 9,700 km ) .
Boeing with the 747 and McDonnell Douglas with the DC-10 submitted proposals , and the Reagan Administration ordered two identical 747s to replace the aging 707s he used .
The interior designs , drawn up by First Lady Nancy Reagan , were reminiscent of the American Southwest .
The first of two aircraft , designated VC-25A , was delivered in 1990 , during the administration of George H. W. Bush .
Delays were experienced to allow for additional work to protect the aircraft from electromagnetic pulse ( EMP ) effects .
The VC-25 is equipped with both secure and unsecure phone and computer communications systems , enabling the president to perform duties while airborne , in the event of an attack on the US .
The presidential air fleet is operated by the 89th Airlift Wing at Andrews Field , Maryland .
The Air Force usually does not have fighter aircraft escort the presidential aircraft over the United States
but it has occurred , for example during the attack on the World Trade Center .
9/11
TO PRESENT Section::::9/11 to present .
On 11 September 2001 , President George W. Bush was interrupted as he attended an event at Emma E. Booker Elementary School in Sarasota , Florida , after the attack on the World Trade Center South Tower in New York City .
He took off on a VC-25 from Sarasota - Bradenton International Airport with Colonel Mark Tillman , the senior pilot of Air Force One that day , in charge .
Air traffic controllers gave Air Force One an ominous warning that a passenger jet was close to Air Force One and was unresponsive to calls .
Tillman recalls : " As we got over Gainesville , Florida , we got the word from Jacksonville Center .
They said , ' Air Force One
you have traffic behind you and basically above you that is descending into you , we are not in contact with them – they have shut their responder off . '
And at that time it kind of led us to believe maybe someone was coming into us in Sarasota , they saw us take off , they just stayed high and are following us at this point .
We had no idea what the capabilities of the terrorists were at that point . "
In response to this reported threat , Col . Tillman said he flew Air Force One over the Gulf of Mexico to test whether the other aircraft would follow .
The other jet continued on its route , and Tillman said that it was later explained to him that an airliner had lost its transponder and that the pilots on - board neglected to switch to another radio frequency .
An aircraft transponder broadcasts an electronic identification signal .
A threat came again when Tillman received a message warning of an imminent attack on Air Force One .
" We got word from the vice president and the staff that ' Angel was next . '
Angel being the classified call sign for Air Force One .
Once we got into the Gulf [ of Mexico ] and they passed to us that ' Angel was next , ' at that point I asked for fighter support .
If an airliner was part of the attack , it would be good to have fighters on the wing to go ahead and take care of us . "
At this point , Tillman said that the plan to fly the president back to Washington , DC , was aborted and instead Tillman landed at Barksdale Air Force Base , Louisiana and Offutt Air Force Base , Nebraska , where the president made a speech .
Tillman explained that this was due to his concern that because of the reported threat , Air Force One would be attacked when he returned to Andrews Air Force Base .
After the preliminary stops , the president was returned to Washington .
The next day , officials at the White House and the Justice Department explained that President Bush did this because there was " specific and credible information that the White House and Air Force One were also intended targets . "
The White House could not confirm evidence of a threat made against Air Force One , and investigation found the original claim to be a result of miscommunication .
Presidents have invited other world leaders to travel with them on Air Force One at times , including Nixon inviting Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev to travel with him to California from Washington , D.C. in June 1973 .
In 1983 , President Reagan and Queen Elizabeth II toured the U.S. West Coast aboard Air Force One .
In March 2012 , President Obama took British Prime Minister David Cameron to a basketball game in Ohio aboard Air Force One .
On 27 April 2009 , a low - flying VC-25 circled New York City for a photo - op and training exercise and caused a scare for many in New York .
Fallout from the photo op incident led to the resignation of the director of the White House Military Office .
When President Bush came to the end of his second term in 2009 , a VC-25 was used to transport him to Texas .
For this purpose the aircraft call sign was Special Air Mission 28000 , as the aircraft did not carry the current President of the United States .
Similar arrangements were made for former Presidents Ronald Reagan , Bill Clinton , and Barack Obama .
VC-25B
Section::::VC-25B.
The VC-25As are to be replaced , as they have become less cost - effective to operate .
On 28 January 2015 , the Air Force announced that the Boeing 747 - 8 will serve as the next presidential aircraft .
On 6 December 2016 , then - President - elect Donald Trump tweeted his opposition to the Air Force One replacement due to its high cost of " more than $ 4 billion " .
The U.S. Government Accountability Office estimated the total cost at $ 3.2 billion , and the U.S. Air Force 's budget for the program is projected to be nearly $ 4 billion .
In December 2016 , Boeing was on contract for preliminary development worth $ 170 million .
On 1 August 2017 , Defense One reported that in an effort to pay less for the replacement program , the U.S. Air Force has contracted to purchase two of the bankrupt Russian airline Transaero 's undelivered 747 - 8 Intercontinentals from Boeing , which is storing them in the Mojave Desert to prevent corrosion .
These airplanes , which were flight - tested but never delivered , will be retrofitted with telecommunications and security equipment to bring them to the required security level for the presidential aircraft .
OTHER PRESIDENTIAL AIRCRAFT
Section::::Other presidential aircraft .
During the Johnson Administration , the United States Air Force acquired a Beechcraft King Air B90 which was designated VC-6A.
The aircraft was used to transport President Johnson between Bergstrom Air Force Base and his family ranch near Johnson City , Texas , and was used at least once to transport the President to Princeton , New Jersey .
It was referred to as Lady Bird 's airplane and later in its service life featured a basic color scheme similar to civilian aircraft .
When the President was aboard , the aircraft used the call sign Air Force One .
United Airlines is the only commercial airline to have operated Executive One , the call sign given to a civilian flight on which the U.S. President is aboard .
On 26 December 1973 , President Richard Nixon and his family flew as commercial passengers on a United DC-10 from Washington Dulles to Los Angeles International Airport .
His staff explained that this was done to conserve fuel by not having to fly the usual Boeing 707 Air Force aircraft .
The President regularly flies in helicopters ( call sign Marine One ) operated by the U.S. Marine Corps .
In November 1999 , President Bill Clinton flew from Ankara , Turkey , to Cengiz Topel Naval Air Station outside Izmit , Turkey , aboard a marked C-20C ( Gulfstream III ) using the call sign " Air Force One " , escorted by three F-16s .
On 8 March 2000 , President Clinton flew to Pakistan aboard an unmarked Gulfstream III while another aircraft with the call sign " Air Force One " flew on the same route a few minutes later .
This diversion was reported by several U.S. press outlets .
On 1 May 2003 , President George W. Bush flew in the co - pilot seat of a Sea Control Squadron Thirty - Five ( VS-35 ) S-3B Viking from Naval Air Station North Island , California to the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln off the California coast , where Bush delivered his " Mission Accomplished " speech .
During the flight , the aircraft used the call sign of " Navy One " for the first time .
This aircraft is now on display at the National Naval Aviation Museum at Naval Air Station Pensacola , Florida .
When required by circumstances , the President makes domestic flights using a Boeing C-32 , sometimes to allow access to smaller airports that can not support the larger VC-25 . AIR FORCE ONE AIRCRAFT ON DISPLAY Section::::Air Force One aircraft on display .
Several presidential aircraft that have formerly served as Air Force One ( Sacred Cow , Independence , Columbine III , SAM 26000 , and other smaller presidential aircraft ) are on display in the presidential hangar of the National Museum of the United States Air Force ( located at Wright - Patterson AFB near Dayton , Ohio ) and at the Museum of Flight in Seattle , Washington ( earlier VC-137B SAM 970 ) .
The Boeing VC-137C that served as Air Force One from the Nixon years through the George H. W. Bush administration ( SAM 27000 ) is on display in Simi Valley , California at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library .
The library 's Air Force One Pavilion was opened to the public on 24 October 2005 .
A VC-118A Liftmaster used by John F. Kennedy is on display at the Pima Air & Space Museum adjacent to Davis - Monthan AFB in Tucson , Arizona .
A Lockheed JetStar which was used by Lyndon Johnson during his presidency is on display at the LBJ Ranch ( now the Lyndon B. Johnson National Historical Park ) in Stonewall , Texas .
The ranch had a runway , but was too small to accommodate a large plane such as a Boeing 707 .
President Johnson would take the larger Air Force One to Bergstrom AFB in Austin , where he would transfer to the smaller JetStar for the short flight to the ranch .
A McDonnell Douglas VC-9C used by Ronald Reagan and Bill Clinton is on display at Castle Air Museum in Atwater , California , adjacent to the former Castle Air Force Base .
NOTABLE APPEARANCES IN MEDIA Section::::Notable appearances in media .
Air Force One is shown as being equipped with a one - person escape pod and parachutes for emergency use by the President of the United States in at least five films : Escape from New York , Air Force One ,
White House Down , Bermuda Tentacles , and Big Game .
However , the actual Air Force One does not have an escape pod or parachutes for emergency use .
SEE ALSO
* Air transports of heads of state and government
* List of official vehicles of the President of the United States
* Boeing E-4 " Nightwatch "
REFERENCES
NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Abbott , James A. and Elaine M. Rice .
Designing Camelot : The Kennedy White House Restoration .
New York : Van Nostrand Reinhold , 1998 . .
*
Albertazzie , Ralph and Jerald TerHorst
Flying White House
: The Story of Air Force One .
New York :
Coward , McCann & Geoghegan , 1979 . .
* Braun , David " Q&A :
U.S. Presidential Jet Air Force One .
" National Geographic News , 29 May 2003 .
* Donald , David , ed . , The Complete Encyclopedia of World Aircraft , New York : Barnes & Noble Books , 1997 , .
* Dorr , Robert F. Air Force One .
St. Paul , Minnesota : Motorbooks International , 2002 . .
* Hardesty , Von .
Air Force
One :
The Aircraft that Shaped the Modern Presidency .
Chanhassen , Minnesota : Northword Press , 2003 . .
* Harris , Tom .
"
How Air Force One Works . "
HowStuffWorks.com .
Retrieved : 10 October 2006 .
* Johnson , Lyndon Baines .
The Vantage Point : Perspectives of the Presidency , 1963–1969 .
New York :
Holt , Rinehart , & Winston , 1971 . .
* Walsh , Kenneth T. Air Force
One : A History of the Presidents and Their Planes .
New York : Hyperion , 2003 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* VC-25 – Air Force One Fact Sheet on US Air Force site
* SAM 26000 fact sheet on the National Museum of the United States Air Force site * Presidential Gallery , featuring Boeing VC-137C known as SAM ( Special Air Mission )
26000
* Air Force One page on WhiteHouse.gov
* Facts and History of 707 as Air Force One and " Where they are Now ? "
on 707sim.com *
Air Force One page on WhiteHouseMuseum.org
* Air Force One Pavilion on ReaganFoundation.org * Truman Library & Museum *
US Air Force image gallery * Boeing History of Air Force One * Technical Order 00 - 105E-9 , Segment 9 , Chapter 7 *
Air Force One page on air-force-one.fr