BOYZ
N
THE HOOD
Boyz n
the Hood is a 1991 American teen hood drama film written and directed by John Singleton in his directorial debut , and starring Cuba Gooding Jr. , Ice Cube , Morris Chestnut , Laurence Fishburne , Nia Long , Regina King and Angela Bassett .
This film was the acting debut for both Ice Cube and Morris Chestnut .
Boyz n
the Hood was filmed in ( the - then district of )
South Central Los Angeles , California from October 1 to November 28 , 1990 and was released cinematically in the United States on July 12 , 1991 .
It was nominated for both Best Director and Best Original Screenplay during the 64th Academy Awards , making Singleton the youngest person ever nominated for Best Director and the first African - American to be nominated for the award .
The film was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1991 Cannes Film Festival .
In 2002 , the United States Library of Congress deemed the film " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry .
PLOT 1984 Section::::Plot .
Section::::1984 .
Ten - year - old Tre Styles lives with his single mother , Reva in Inglewood , California .
After Tre gets into a fight at school , his teacher informs Reva that Tre is highly intelligent but has a volatile temper and lacks respect .
Worried about Tre 's future , Reva sends him to live in the Crenshaw neighborhood of Hyde Park ( which is located in South Central Los Angeles ) with his father , Jason " Furious " Styles , from whom she hopes Tre will learn valuable life lessons and to be able to mature , but assures him he will be permitted to return to her one day .
In Hyde Park , Tre reunites with his friends , Darrin " Doughboy " Baker , Doughboy 's maternal half - brother Ricky , and Chris , their mutual friend .
After chatting for a bit , Furious immediately has Tre rake the leaves off the front lawn .
That night , Furious tells Tre that he has him work to teach him how to be responsible .
That night , Tre hears his father shooting at a burglar who tries to rob the house .
Two policemen arrive an hour later , and while the white officer is civil and courteous , the black one is disrespectful towards Furious .
The next day , Tre and his friends go out with Chris to the railroad tracks behind Hyde Park Boulevard where he shows them a dead body .
While there , a group of older boys in a Rollin 60 's Neighborhood Crips gang steal Ricky 's football and Doughboy tries to retrieve it , but is defeated .
While the older boys walk away , one of them gives Ricky his ball back .
Later in the day , Furious spends father / son bonding time with Tre , taking him fishing by the seaside and tells the boy more about his life prior to having him , including his military experience in the Vietnam War , in hopes of making his son proud of him .
He concludes his story by advising Tre to never join the army , stating that a black man has no place in the army .
When returning home , they see Doughboy and Chris being arrested in Hyde Park for shoplifting ( Doughboy had said earlier on that they were going to the store , but had no money ) , while Ricky and Tre look on .
1991 Section::::1991 .
At a barbecue , Doughboy is now a Crip gang member and is celebrating his recent release from jail , along with most of his friends , including Chris , who is now paralyzed and uses a wheelchair as a result of a gun wound , and new friends Dooky and Monster , also Crip members .
Ricky , now a star running back for Crenshaw High School , lives with his single mother Brenda , girlfriend Shanice , and their infant son .
Tre has grown into a mature and responsible teenager , works at a clothes shop at the Fox Hills Mall , and aspires to attend college with his girlfriend , Brandi , but their relationship is somehow deteriorating over Tre 's desire to have sex , while Brandi , a devout Catholic , wishes to wait until after marriage .
Ricky hopes to win a scholarship from USC .
After a visit from a recruiter , a mildly embarrassing experience for Ricky due to his unkempt home and his brother 's rudeness , he is informed that he must score a 700 or higher on the SATs in order to qualify .
Ricky and Tre take the test on the same day .
Afterwards , they go to see Furious at his office to unwind .
Furious takes Tre and Ricky to Compton , California to talk about the dangers of decreasing property values in the black community .
That night , during a local street racing gathering , Ricky is provoked by Ferris , a member of the Crenshaw Mafia Gangsters .
In response , Doughboy brandishes his handgun , leading to a brief argument between the two gangs .
When the two gangs are finished arguing , Ferris fires his own gun in the air causing everyone to leave .
While Tre talks about leaving Los Angeles , he and Ricky are pulled over by the police .
The cop is exactly the same one who was disrespectful towards his father seven years earlier ; he intimidates and threatens Tre with his gun , knowing he ca n't do anything .
Distraught , Tre goes to Brandi 's house , where he finally breaks down .
After she consoles him , they have sex for the first time .
The following day , Ricky has a fight with Doughboy .
While Ricky and Tre walk to a nearby store , they see Ferris and his gang driving around the neighborhood and in an attempt to avoid them , the pair cut through back alleyways and split up .
As Tre turns back to Ricky , Ferris ' car pulls up .
Ricky turns to run but one of Ferris ' men shoots Ricky in the leg with a shotgun .
A second shot hits Ricky in the back through the chest , killing him .
Doughboy and his gang , who had sensed that Tre and Ricky were in trouble , catch up with them , but are too late .
Devastated and helpless , the boys carry Ricky 's lifeless body back home .
When Brenda and Shanice see Ricky 's corpse , they break down in tears and blame Doughboy , who unsuccessfully tries to comfort them and explain the truth .
That night , a distraught Brenda reads Ricky 's SAT results , discovering he scored a 710 , enough to qualify for the scholarship he wanted .
The remaining boys vow vengeance on Ferris and his crew .
Furious finds Tre preparing to take his .357 Magnum , but convinces Tre to abandon his plans for revenge .
However , Brandi and Furious catch Tre sneaking out of his bedroom window to join Doughboy .
That night , as the gang drives across the city , Tre asks to be let out of the car and returns home , realizing that his father was right to keep him from falling into an endless cycle of violence .
When Tre gets home , Furious is waiting for him .
They both look at each other without saying a word , and Furious retreats into his bedroom .
Meanwhile , Doughboy finds Ferris ' gang at a local fast - food outlet , and Monster opens fire on them with an AK-47 , killing one and wounding the other two .
Doughboy gets out and kills the other wounded gang member and executes Ferris .
The next day , Doughboy visits Tre , now understanding Tre 's reasons for leaving the gang .
Doughboy knows that he will soon face retaliation for Ferris ' death , and accepts the consequences of his crime - ridden lifestyle .
He plaintively questions why America does n't care about the life in the ghetto .
He sorrowfully says that he has no family left now after Ricky 's death and Brenda 's disownment of him , but is embraced by Tre , who says to Doughboy that he has a brother in him .
The epilogue reveals that Doughboy saw Ricky buried the next day and was murdered himself two weeks later .
Tre and Brandi resume their relationship , and go on to attend Morehouse and Spelman colleges in Atlanta , respectively .
CAST * Cuba Gooding Jr. as Tre Styles
* Desi Arnez Hines II as Tre age 10 * Angela Bassett as Reva Styles * Laurence Fishburne ( credited as Larry Fishburne ) as Jason " Furious " Styles Jr. * Ice Cube as Darrin " Doughboy "
Baker
* Baha Jackson as Doughboy age 10 * Morris Chestnut as Ricky Baker
* Donovan McCrary as Ricky age 10
*
Nia Long as Brandi * Nicole Brown as Brandi age 10 * Tyra Ferrell as Brenda Baker * Redge Green as Chris
* Kenneth A. Brown as Chris age 10
* Dedrick D. Gobert as Dooky
* Baldwin C. Sykes as Monster * Tracey Lewis - Sinclair as Shaniqua
* Alysia Rogers as Shanice * Regina King as Shalika
* Lexie Bigham as Mad Dog * Raymond Turner as Ferris
* Lloyd Avery II as Ferris ' Triggerman ( Knucklehead # 2 )
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Singleton wrote the film based around his life growing up and events that either happened to him , or people he knew .
When applying for film school , one of the questions on the application form was to describe " three ideas for films " .
One of the ideas Singleton wrote was a movie to be titled Summer of 84 , which would later evolve into Boyz n
the Hood .
Singleton was protective of his script , insisting that he be the one to direct the project , later explaining at a retrospective screening of the film , " I was n't going to have somebody from Idaho or Encino direct this movie . "
The role of Doughboy was specifically written for Ice Cube whom Singleton met while working as an intern at The Arsenio Hall Show .
Singleton claims that the other two leads , Cuba Gooding Jr. and Morris Chestnut , were cast simply because they were the first ones who showed up to the casting auditions .
Despite having a member of one of the best - selling rap groups , N.W.A , this , at least according to Singleton , was not a selling point to the studio who were not aware of them .
Rather , Singleton opined , the studio greenlit the film in the interest of making a film similar to the Spike Lee film Do the Right Thing .
The film was shot in sequence , with Singleton later noting that , as the film goes on , the camera work gets better as Singleton was finding his foothold as a director .
INFLUENCES Section::::Influences .
Among the influences on the film was the 1986 Rob Reiner film Stand by Me which inspired both an early scene where four young boys take a trip to see a dead body , and the closing fade - out of main character Doughboy .
RECEPTION AND LEGACY CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception and legacy .
Section::::Critical response .
Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 96 % based on 69 reviews and an average score of 8.4/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads , " Well - acted and thematically rich , Boyz N the Hood observes urban America with far more depth and compassion than many of the like - minded films its success inspired .
"
At Metacritic , the film received an average score of 73 out of 100 based on 18 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " .
CULTURAL IMPACT Section::::Cultural impact .
The film has been referenced many times in other works , including works by Lupe Fiasco , Game , and Ice Cube himself .
In 1994 , British jungle DJ duo Remarc and Lewi produced a song titled " Ricky " .
The song itself is built up of various sound bites from the movie , particularly the scene where Ricky is murdered .
Ice Cube 's song , " Check Yo Self " , also references the film .
On the July 12 , 2011 episode of her self - titled talk show , Mo'Nique celebrated the 20th anniversary of the release of Boyz n
the Hood with director John Singleton , Cuba Gooding Jr. , Yo - Yo , and Regina King .
In Vince Staple 's hit song ' Norf Norf ' ( 2016 ) , Staples references the scene where Ricky gets shot in the back , letting the listener know how much of an impact the movie had on his upbringing .
In the 2015 American comedy film Get Hard , Kevin Hart 's character is asked to talk about the reason for his fabricated incarceration years earlier .
Fumbling for a story , he describes the final scene of Boyz n
the Hood , passing it off as his own experience to Will Ferrell 's character .
AWARDS AND ACCOLADES Section::::Awards and accolades .
Academy Awards : 1992
* Nominee , Best Director , John Singleton
* Nominee , Best Original Screenplay , John Singleton BMI Film Music Award : 1992
* Winner , Stanley Clarke Image Award : 1993
* Winner , Outstanding Motion Picture ,
Boyz n
the Hood MTV Movie Award : 1992
* Nominee , Best Movie , Boyz n
the Hood * Winner , Best New Filmmaker , John Singleton National Film Preservation Board , USA : 2002
* National Film Registry , Boyz n
the Hood New York Film Critics Circle Award : 1991
* Winner , Best New Director , John Singleton Political Film Society , USA :
1992 * Winner , PFS Award , Peace * Nominee , PFS Award , Exposé * Nominee , PFS Award , Human Rights Writers Guild of America , USA :
1992 * Nominee , WGA Award ( Screen ) , Best Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen , John Singleton Young Artist Awards :
1992 * Winner , Young Artist Award , Outstanding Young Ensemble Cast in a Motion Picture
In 2007 , Boyz n the Hood was selected as one of the 50 Films To See in your lifetime by Channel 4 .
American Film Institute Lists
* AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movies ( 10th Anniversary Edition ) – Nominated SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack . !
rowspan="2"Year !
rowspan="2"Album !
colspan="2"Peak chart positions !
rowspan="2"Certifications !
width=40U.S. !
width=40U.S. R&B 1991
Boyz n
the Hood
* Released : July 9 , 1991
* Label :
Qwest / Warner Bros. Records align="center"12 align="center"1
* US :
Gold
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS