BANK HOLIDAY
A bank holiday is a public holiday in the United Kingdom , some Commonwealth countries , Hong Kong and the Republic of Ireland .
There is no automatic right to time off on these days , but banks close and the majority of the working population is granted time off work or extra pay for working on these days , depending on their contract .
The first official bank holidays were the four days named in the Bank Holidays Act 1871 , but today the term is also commonly used for Good Friday and Christmas Day , which were already public holidays under common law and therefore not official bank holidays in England , Wales , Northern Ireland and Scotland . HISTORY Section::::History .
Until 1834 , the Bank of England observed about 33 saints ' days and religious festivals as holidays , but in that year this was reduced to four : 1 May ( May Day ) ,
1 November ( All Saints ' Day ) , Good Friday and Christmas Day .
In 1871 , the first legislation relating to bank holidays was passed when Liberal politician and banker Sir John Lubbock introduced the Bank Holidays Act 1871 , which specified the days in the table below .
Under the Act , no person was compelled to make any payment or to do any act upon a bank holiday which he would not be compelled to do or make on Christmas Day or Good Friday , and the making of a payment or the doing of an act on the following day was equivalent to doing it on the holiday .
People were so grateful that some called the first Bank Holidays St Lubbock 's Days for a while .
Scotland was treated separately because of its separate traditions : for example , New Yeartime immemorial .
In 1903 , the Bank Holiday ( Ireland ) Act added 17 March , Saint Patrick 's Day , as a bank holiday for Ireland only .
New Year 's Day did not become a bank holiday in England until 1 January 1974 .
IN THE UNITED KINGDOM BANKING AND FINANCIAL DEALINGS ACT 1971 Section::::In the United Kingdom .
Section::::Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 .
Commencing in 1965 , experimentally , the August Bank Holiday weekend was observed at the end of August " to give a lead in extending British holidays over a longer summer period " .
Each year 's date was announced in Parliament on an ad - hoc basis , to the despair of the calendar and diary publishing trade .
The rule seems to have been to select the weekend of the last Saturday in August , so that in 1968 and 1969 Bank Holiday Monday actually fell in September .
A century after the 1871 Act , the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 , which currently regulates bank holidays in the UK , was passed .
The majority of the current bank holidays were specified in the 1971 Act : however New Year 's Day and May Day were not introduced throughout the whole of the UK until 1974 and 1978 respectively .
The date of the August bank holiday was changed from the first Monday in August to the last Monday in August , and the Whitsun bank holiday ( Whit Monday ) was replaced by the Late Spring Bank Holiday , fixed as the last Monday in May.
In 1978 the first Monday in May in the rest of the UK , and the final Monday of May in Scotland , were designated as bank holidays .
In January 2007 , the St Andrew 's Day Bank Holiday ( Scotland ) Act 2007 was given royal assent , making 30 November ( or the nearest Monday if a weekend )
a bank holiday in Scotland .
ROYAL PROCLAMATION
Section::::Royal proclamation .
Under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 , bank holidays are proclaimed each year by the legal device of a royal proclamation .
Royal proclamation is also used to move bank holidays that would otherwise fall on a weekend .
In this way , public holidays are not ' lost ' in years when they coincide with weekends .
These deferred bank holiday days are termed a ' bank holiday in lieu ' of the typical anniversary date .
In the legislation they are known as ' substitute days ' .
The movement of the St Andrew 's Day Scottish holiday to the nearest Monday when 30 November is a weekend day is statutory and does not require a proclamation .
IN SCOTLAND Section::::In
Scotland .
A number of differences apply in Scotland relative to the rest of the United Kingdom .
For example , Easter Monday is not a bank holiday .
Also , although they share the same name , the Summer Bank Holiday falls on the first Monday of August in Scotland , as opposed to the last Monday in England , Wales , and Northern Ireland .
Despite this , it is custom and practice to follow the rest of the UK and banks close on the last Monday and not the first .
Bank holidays do not , however , assume the same importance in Scotland as they do elsewhere .
Whereas they have effectively become public holidays elsewhere in the United Kingdom , in Scotland there remains a tradition of public holidays based on local tradition and determined by local authorities ( for example , the Glasgow Fair and the Dundee Fortnight ) .
In 1996 , Scottish banks made the business decision to harmonise their own holidays with the rest of the United Kingdom , with the result that ' bank holidays ' in Scotland are neither public holidays nor the days on which banks are closed .
CAMPAIGNS FOR EXTRA BANK HOLIDAYS Section::::Campaigns for extra bank holidays .
The number of holidays in the UK is relatively small compared to many other European countries .
However , direct comparison is inaccurate since the ' substitute day ' scheme of deferment does not apply in most European countries , where holidays that coincide with a weekend ( 29 % of fixed - date holidays ) are ' lost ' .
In fact , the average number of non - weekend holidays in such countries is only marginally higher ( and in some cases lower ) than the UK .
Worth mentioning is that public holidays in Europe which fall on Thursday or Tuesday typically become " puente " or " bridge " four - day or even six - day extended holiday weekends as people tend to use one or two days from their holiday entitlement to take off Monday and/or Friday .
There have been calls for more bank holidays .
Among the most notable dates absent from the existing list are the feast days of patron saints ; 23 April ( St George 's Day and widely regarded as the birthday of William Shakespeare ) in England and 1 March ( St David 's Day ) in Wales are not currently recognised .
17 March ( St Patrick 's Day ) is a public holiday in Northern Ireland and , since 2008 , 30 November
( St Andrew 's Day ) is a bank holiday in Scotland .
St Piran 's Day ( patron saint of Cornwall ) on 5 March is already given as an unofficial day off to many government and other workers in the county , and there are renewed calls for the government to recognise this as an official bank holiday there .
PROPOSED MOVE OF MAY DAY BANK HOLIDAY ( ENGLAND AND WALES )
Section::::Proposed move of May Day Bank Holiday ( England and Wales ) .
After the election of the Coalition Government in May 2010 , the Department of Culture , Media and Sport launched a pre - consultation in 2011 which included the suggestion of moving the May Day Bank Holiday to October , to be a " UK Day " or " Trafalgar Day " ( 21 October ) or to St David 's Day and St George 's Day .
It is suggested that a move from the May bank holiday to a St Piran 's Day bank holiday in Cornwall , on 5 March , would benefit the Cornish economy by £ 20–35 million .
1968 EMERGENCY BANK HOLIDAY Section::::1968 Emergency Bank Holiday .
During the sterling crisis of 1968 , Prime Minister Harold Wilson convened a meeting of the privy council in the early hours of 14 March to declare 15 March a non - statutory bank holiday .
This allowed the UK government to close the London gold market to stem the losses being suffered by the British pound .
It was this meeting that triggered the resignation of Foreign Secretary George Brown .
UK BANK
HOLIDAY SALES Section::::UK Bank Holiday sales .
In the UK every bank holiday retailers display large sales to entice people to shop on their bank holiday days off .
Sales can reach up to 70 % off across certain stores .
Customers will normally wait for these sales to purchase their home electronics and furniture .
The sales are on every year but the bank holiday sales dates can change from year to year .
In the UK Argos , Currys and Amazon are the largest retailers that not only have the biggest sales but also see the most revenue over these days .
BOXING DAY
Section::::Boxing Day .
Boxing Day is a holiday celebrated in Britain , Australia , New Zealand , Canada and other Commonwealth countries .
Boxing Day originated in England in the middle of the nineteenth century under Queen Victoria .
For years in which the holiday falls on a weekend , the celebration is moved to make sure workers still get a day off ( except in Canada , where it remains 26 Dec. )
In the UK it is classed as a Bank Holiday .
LIST OF CURRENT HOLIDAYS IN THE UNITED KINGDOM , IRELAND AND THE ISLE OF MAN Section::::List of current holidays in the United Kingdom , Ireland and the Isle of Man .
+ Current bank and public holidays !
Date ! !
Name ! !
England and Wales ( 8) ! !
Scotland ( 9 ) ! !
Northern Ireland(10 ) ! !
Republic of Ireland ( 9 ) ! !
Isle of Man ( 10 )
In the past , additional one - off bank holidays have included : ( i ) Wednesday 14 November 1973 , to celebrate the Wedding of Princess Anne and Captain Mark Phillips at Westminster Abbey ; ( ii ) Tuesday 7 June 1977 , to celebrate The Queen 's Silver Jubilee ; ( iii ) Wednesday 29 July 1981 , to celebrate the Wedding of Prince Charles and Lady Diana Spencer at St. Paul 's Cathedral ; Notes IN AUSTRALIA Section::::In Australia .
Public holidays are not generally known as " bank holidays " in Australia , although in the state of Victoria , all statutory holidays , their substitutes , and Saturdays are legally defined as " bank holidays " .
In two other states there are two particular public holidays , for specific occupations only , which are officially known as " Bank Holiday " : * in New South Wales
has a " Bank Holiday " on the first Monday in August – for bank employees only .
* in Tasmania , Easter Tuesday is a holiday for bank and government employees only .
IN GIBRALTAR Section::::In Gibraltar .
The public holidays in Gibraltar are a mix of " bank holidays " and " public holidays " and are often used interchangeably , although strictly and legally there is a difference .
IN HONG KONG Section::::In Hong Kong .
In Hong Kong , the term " bank holiday " is used colloquially to refer to public holidays .
IN INDIA Section::::In
India .
In India , 15 of the public holidays are bank holidays .
IN IRELAND Section::::In Ireland .
In Ireland , " bank holiday " is a colloquial term , sometimes used incorrectly for what are officially " public holidays " .
A bank holiday in Ireland are only days in which Bank employees are off , e.g. Good Friday is a Bank Holiday , but not a Public Holiday .
SEE ALSO
* List of holidays by country
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Annual leave and public holidays ( Ireland )
* Calendar of all legal Public and Bank Holidays worldwide , until 2050 * FirstCaribbean International Bank : Bank Holidays in the Caribbean region
* Bank Holidays 2016 in India
* List of Bank Holidays and other significant days for the UK * Bank Holiday dates for the UK , Scotland and Northern Ireland