MUSCULAR SYSTEM
The muscular system is an organ system consisting of skeletal , smooth and cardiac muscles .
It permits movement of the body , maintains posture and circulates blood throughout the body .
The muscular systems in vertebrates are controlled through the nervous system although some muscles ( such as the cardiac muscle ) can be completely autonomous .
Together with the skeletal system , it forms the musculoskeletal system , which is responsible for movement of the human body .
MUSCLES Section::::Muscles .
There are three distinct types of muscles : skeletal muscles , cardiac or heart muscles , and smooth ( non - striated ) muscles .
Muscles provide strength , balance , posture , movement and heat for the body to keep warm .
SKELETAL MUSCLE Section::::Skeletal muscle .
Skeletal muscles , like other striated muscles , are composed of myocytes , or muscle fibers , which are in turn composed of myofibrils , which are composed of sarcomeres , the basic building block of striated muscle tissue .
Upon stimulation by an action potential , skeletal muscles perform a coordinated contraction by shortening each sarcomere .
The best proposed model for understanding contraction is the sliding filament model of muscle contraction .
Within the sarcomere , actin and myosin fibers overlap in a contractile motion towards each other .
Myosin filaments have club - shaped heads that project toward the actin filaments .
Larger structures along the myosin filament called myosin heads are used to provide attachment points on binding sites for the actin filaments .
The myosin heads move in a coordinated style ; they swivel toward the center of the sarcomere , detach and then reattach to the nearest active site of the actin filament .
This is called a ratchet type drive system .
This process consumes large amounts of adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) , the energy source of the cell .
ATP binds to the cross bridges between myosin heads and actin filaments .
The release of energy powers the swiveling of the myosin head .
When ATP is used , it becomes adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) , and since muscles store little ATP , they must continuously replace the discharged ADP with ATP .
Muscle tissue also contains a stored supply of a fast acting recharge chemical , creatine phosphate , which when necessary can assist with the rapid regeneration of ADP into ATP .
Calcium ions are required for each cycle of the sarcomere .
Calcium is released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum into the sarcomere when a muscle is stimulated to contract .
This calcium uncovers the actin binding sites .
When the muscle no longer needs to contract , the calcium ions are pumped from the sarcomere and back into storage in the sarcoplasmic reticulum .
There are approximately 639 skeletal muscles in the human body .
CARDIAC MUSCLE Section::::Cardiac muscle .
Heart muscles are distinct from skeletal muscles because the muscle fibers are laterally connected to each other .
Furthermore , just as with smooth muscles , their movement is involuntary .
Heart muscles are controlled by the sinus node influenced by the autonomic nervous system .
SMOOTH MUSCLE
Section::::Smooth muscle .
Smooth muscles are controlled directly by the autonomic nervous system and are involuntary , meaning that they are incapable of being moved by conscious thought .
Functions such as heartbeat and lungs ( which are capable of being willingly controlled , be it to a limited extent ) are involuntary muscles but are not smooth muscles .
PHYSIOLOGY CONTRACTION Section::::Physiology .
Section::::Contraction .
Neuromuscular junctions are the focal point where a motor neuron attaches to a muscle .
Acetylcholine , ( a neurotransmitter used in skeletal muscle contraction ) is released from the axon terminal of the nerve cell when an action potential reaches the microscopic junction called a synapse .
A group of chemical messengers cross the synapse and stimulate the formation of electrical changes , which are produced in the muscle cell when the acetylcholine binds to receptors on its surface .
Calcium is released from its storage area in the cell 's sarcoplasmic reticulum .
An impulse from a nerve cell causes calcium release and brings about a single , short muscle contraction called a muscle twitch .
If there is a problem at the neuromuscular junction , a very prolonged contraction may occur , such as the muscle contractions that result from tetanus .
Also , a loss of function at the junction can produce paralysis .
Skeletal muscles are organized into hundreds of motor units , each of which involves a motor neuron , attached by a series of thin finger - like structures called axon terminals .
These attach to and control discrete bundles of muscle fibers .
A coordinated and fine tuned response to a specific circumstance will involve controlling the precise number of motor units used .
While individual muscle units contract as a unit , the entire muscle can contract on a predetermined basis due to the structure of the motor unit .
Motor unit coordination , balance , and control frequently come under the direction of the cerebellum of the brain .
This allows for complex muscular coordination with little conscious effort , such as when one drives a car without thinking about the process .
AEROBIC AND ANAEROBIC MUSCLE ACTIVITY
Section::::Aerobic and anaerobic muscle activity .
At rest , the body produces the majority of its ATP aerobically in the mitochondria without producing lactic acid or other fatiguing byproducts .
During exercise , the method of ATP production varies depending on the fitness of the individual as well as the duration and intensity of exercise .
At lower activity levels , when exercise continues for a long duration ( several minutes or longer ) , energy is produced aerobically by combining oxygen with carbohydrates and fats stored in the body .
During activity that is higher in intensity , with possible duration decreasing as intensity increases , ATP production can switch to anaerobic pathways , such as the use of the creatine phosphate and the phosphagen system or anaerobic glycolysis .
Aerobic ATP production is biochemically much slower and can only be used for long - duration , low - intensity exercise , but produces no fatiguing waste products that can not be removed immediately from the sarcomere and the body , and it results in a much greater number of ATP molecules per fat or carbohydrate molecule .
Aerobic training allows the oxygen delivery system to be more efficient , allowing aerobic metabolism to begin quicker .
Anaerobic ATP production produces ATP much faster and allows near - maximal intensity exercise , but also produces significant amounts of lactic acid which renders high - intensity exercise unsustainable for more than several minutes .
The phosphagen system is also anaerobic .
It allows for the highest levels of exercise intensity , but intramuscular stores of phosphocreatine are very limited and can only provide energy for exercises lasting up to ten seconds .
Recovery is very quick , with full creatine stores regenerated within five minutes .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
Multiple diseases can affect the muscular system .
SEE ALSO
* Major systems of the human body
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Online Muscle Tutorial * GetBody Smart Muscle system tutorials and quizzes * MedBio.info Use and formation of ATP in muscle