BIG CAT
The term " big cat " is typically used to refer to any of the five living members of the genus Panthera , namely tiger , lion , jaguar , leopard , and snow leopard .
Except the snow leopard , these species are able to roar .
A more liberal and expansive definition of the term includes species outside of Panthera including the cougar , clouded leopard , Sunda clouded leopard and cheetah , although these added species also do not roar .
Despite enormous differences in size , various cat species are quite similar in both structure and behaviour , with the exception of the cheetah , which significantly stands out from the other big and small cats .
All cats are carnivores and efficient apex predators .
Their range includes the Americas , Africa , and Asia .
ROARING Section::::Roaring .
The ability to roar comes from an elongated and specially adapted larynx and hyoid apparatus .
When air passes through the larynx on the way from the lungs , the cartilage walls of the larynx vibrate , producing sound .
The lion 's larynx is longest , giving it the most robust roar .
All five extant members of the genus Panthera contain this elongated hyoid but due to differences in the larynx the snow leopard can not roar .
THREATS Section::::Threats .
The principal threats to big cats vary by geographic location , but primarily are habitat destruction and poaching .
In Africa many big cats are hunted by pastoralists or government ' problem animal control ' officers .
Certain protected areas exist that shelter large and exceptionally visible populations of African leopards , lions and cheetahs , such as Botswana 's Chobe , Kenya 's Masai Mara , and Tanzania 's Serengeti .
Rather , it is outside these conservation areas where hunting poses the dominant threat to large carnivores .
In the United States , 19 states have banned ownership of big cats and other dangerous exotic animals as pets , and the Captive Wildlife Safety Act bans the interstate sale and transportation of these animals .
The initial Captive Wildlife Safety Act ( CWSA ) was signed into law on December 19 , 2003 .
To address problems associated with the increasing trade in certain big cat species , the CSWA regulations were strengthened by a law passed on September 17 , 2007 .
The big cat species addressed in these regulations are the lion , tiger , leopard , snow leopard , clouded leopard , cheetah , jaguar , cougar , and any hybrid of these species ( liger , tigon , etc . ) .
Private ownership is not prohibited , but the law makes it illegal to transport , sell , or purchase such animals in interstate or foreign commerce .
Although these regulations seem to provide a strong legal framework for controlling the commerce involving big cats , international organizations such as the World Wildlife Fund ( WWF ) have encouraged the U.S. to further strengthen these laws .
The WWF is concerned that weaknesses in the existing U.S. regulations could be unintentionally helping to fuel the black market for tiger parts .
CONSERVATION Section::::Conservation .
An animal sanctuary provides a refuge for animals to live out their natural lives in a protected environment .
Usually these animal sanctuaries are the organizations which provide a home to big cats whose private owners are no longer able or willing to care for their big cats .
However , use of the word sanctuary in an organization 's name is by itself no guarantee that it is a true animal sanctuary in the sense of a refuge .
To be accepted by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service ( FWS ) as a bona fide animal sanctuary and to be eligible for an exemption from the prohibition of interstate movement of big cats under the Captive Wildlife Safety Act ( CWSA ) , organizations must meet the following criteria : * Must be a non - profit entity that is tax exempt under section 501(a ) of the Internal Revenue Code * Can not engage in commercial trade in big cat species , including their offspring , parts , and products made from them * Can not breed big cats
* Can not allow direct contact between big cats and the public at their facilities * Must keep records of transactions involving covered cats * Must allow the Service to inspect their facilities , records , and animals at reasonable hours SPECIES * Family Felidae * Genus Panthera
* Tiger , Panthera tigris Asia
* Lion , Panthera leo ( Sub - Saharan Africa , Gir Forest in India ; extinct in former range of southeast Europe , Middle East , much of Asia , and North America )
* Jaguar , Panthera onca ( the Americas ; from the southern United States to northern Argentina )
* Leopard , Panthera pardus ( Asia , Africa and European Russia )
* Snow leopard , Panthera uncia ( syn .
Uncia uncia - mountains of central and south Asia )
* Genus Acinonyx
* Cheetah , Acinonyx jubatus ( Sub - Saharan Africa and Iran ; extirpated in much of its former range in Eurasia )
* Genus Puma * Cougar Puma concolor ( North and South America ) EVOLUTION Section::::Evolution .
It is estimated that the ancestors of most big cats split away from the Felinae about 6.37 million years ago .
The Felinae , on the other hand , comprises mostly small to medium - sized cats , including the domestic cats , but also some larger cats such as the cougar and cheetah .
A 2010 study published in Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution has given insight into the exact evolutionary relationships of the big cats .
The study reveals that the snow leopard and the tiger are sister species , while the lion , leopard , and jaguar are more closely related to each other .
The tiger and snow leopard diverged from the ancestral big cats approximately 3.9 Ma .
The tiger then evolved into a unique species towards the end of the Pliocene epoch , approximately 3.2 Ma .
The ancestor of the lion , leopard , and jaguar split from other big cats from 4.3–3.8 Ma .
Between 3.6–2.5 Ma the jaguar diverged from the ancestor of lions and leopards .
Lions and leopards split from one another approximately 2 Ma .
The earliest big cat fossil , Panthera blytheae , dating to 4.1−5.95 MA , was discovered in southwest Tibet .
WEIGHT RANGE
Section::::Weight range .
The range of weights exhibited by the species is large .
At the bottom , adult snow leopards usually weigh , with an exceptional specimen reaching , and cheetahs typically weigh .
Male and female lions typically weigh and respectively , and male and female tigers and respectively .
Exceptionally heavy male lions and tigers have been recorded to exceed in the wilderness , and weigh around in captivity .
The liger can grow to be much larger than its parent species , the lion and tiger .
In particular , a liger called ' Nook ' is reported to have weighed over .
GALLERY
SPECIES
HYBRIDS
SEE ALSO * Megafauna * List of largest cats REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* People Not Poaching : The Communities and IWT Learning Platform