AMAZON RIVER DOLPHIN
The Amazon river dolphin ( Inia geoffrensis ) , also known as the boto , bufeo or pink river dolphin , is a species of toothed whale classified in the family Iniidae .
Three subspecies are currently recognized : I. g. geoffrensis ( Amazon river dolphin ) , I. g. boliviensis ( Bolivian river dolphin ) and I. g. humboldtiana ( Orinoco river dolphin ) .
The three subspecies are distributed in the Amazon basin , the upper Madeira River in Bolivia , and the Orinoco basin , respectively .
The Amazon river dolphin is the largest species of river dolphin , with adult males reaching in weight , and in length .
Adults acquire a pink color , more prominent in males , giving it its nickname " pink river dolphin " .
Sexual dimorphism is very evident , with males measuring 16 % longer and weighing 55 % more than females .
Like other toothed whales , they have a melon , an organ that is used for bio sonar .
The dorsal fin , although short in height , is regarded as long , and the pectoral fins are also large .
The fin size , unfused vertebrae , and its relative size allow for improved manoeuvrability when navigating flooded forests and capturing prey .
They have one of the widest ranging diets among toothed whales , and feed on up to 53 different species of fish , such as croakers , catfish , tetras and piranhas .
They also consume other animals such as river turtles and freshwater crabs .
In 2008 , this species was ranked by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) as being data deficient , due to the uncertainty regarding its population trends and the impact of threats .
While hunting is a major threat , in recent decades greater impacts on population have been due to the loss of habitat and inadvertent entanglement in fishing lines .
It is the only species of river dolphin kept in captivity , mainly in Venezuela and Europe ; however , it is difficult to train and a high mortality is seen among captive individuals .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The species Inia geoffrensis was described by Henri Marie Ducrotay de Blainville in 1817 .
Originally , the Amazon river dolphin belonged to the superfamily Platanistoidea , which constituted all river dolphins , making them a paraphyletic group .
Today , however , the Amazon river dolphin has been reclassified into the superfamily Inioidea .
There is no consensus on when and how they penetrated the Amazon basin ; they may have done so during the Miocene from the Pacific Ocean , before the formation of the Andes , or from the Atlantic Ocean .
There is ongoing debate about the classification of species and subspecies with large international bodies being in disagreement .
The IUCN recognizes three subspecies : I. g. geoffrensis ( Amazon river dolphin ) , I. g. boliviensis ( Bolivian river dolphin ) and I. g. humboldtiana ( Orinoco river dolphin ) .
While the Committee on Taxonomy of the Society for Marine Mammalogy only recognizes the first two of these .
However , based on skull morphology in 1994 , it was proposed that I. g. boliviensis was a different species .
In 2002 , following the analysis of mitochondrial DNA specimens from the Orinoco basin , the Putumayo River ( tributary of the Amazon ) and the Tijamuchy and Ipurupuru rivers , geneticists proposed that genus Inia be divided into at least two evolutionary lineages : one restricted to the river basins of Bolivia and the other widely distributed in the Orinoco and Amazon .
A recent study , with more comprehensive sampling of the Madeira system , including above and below the Teotonio Rapids ( which were thought to obstruct gene flow ) , found that the Inia above the rapids did not possess unique mtDNA .
As such the species level distinction once held is not supported by current results .
Therefore , the Bolivian river dolphin is currently recognized as a subspecies .
In addition , a 2014 study identifies a third species in the Araguaia - Tocantins basin , but this designation is not recognized by any international organization and the Committee on Taxonomy of the Society for Marine Mammalogy
suggests this analysis is not persuasive .
SUBSPECIES Section::::Subspecies .
Inia geoffrensis geoffrensis inhabits most of the Amazon River , including rivers Tocantins , Araguaia , low Xingu and Tapajos , the Madeira to the rapids of Porto Velho , and rivers Purus , Yurua , Ica , Caqueta , Branco , and the Rio Negro through the channel of Casiquiare to San Fernando de Atabapo in the Orinoco river , including its tributary : the Guaviare .
Inia geoffrensis boliviensis has populations in the upper reaches of the Madeira River , upstream of the rapids of Teotonio , in Bolivia .
It is confined to the Mamore River and its main tributary , the Iténez .
Inia geoffrensis humboldtiana are located in the Orinoco River basin , including the Apure and Meta rivers .
This subspecies is restricted , at least during the dry season , to the waterfalls of Rio Negro rapids in the Orinoco between Samariapo and Puerto Ayacucho , and the Casiquiare canal .
This subspecies is not recognized by the Committee on Taxonomy of the Society for Marine Mammalogy , but is recognized by the IUCN .
BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY DESCRIPTION Section::::Biology and ecology .
Section::::Description .
The Amazon river dolphin is the largest river dolphin .
Adult males reach a maximum length and weight of ( average ) and ( average ) , while females reach a length and weight of ( mean ) and ( average ) .
It has very evident sexual dimorphism , with males measuring and weighing between 16 % and 55 % more than females , making it unique among cetaceans , where females are generally larger than males .
The texture of the body is robust and strong but flexible .
Unlike oceanic dolphins ; the cervical vertebrae are not fused , allowing the head to turn 90 degrees .
The flukes are broad and triangular , and the dorsal fin , which is keel - shaped , is short in height but very long , extending from the middle of the body to the caudal region .
The pectoral fins are large and paddle - shaped .
The length of its fins allows the animal to perform a circular movement , allowing for exceptional maneuverability to swim through the flooded forest but decreasing its speed .
The body color varies with age .
Newborns and the young have a dark grey tint , which in adolescence transforms into light grey , and in adults turns pink as a result of repeated abrasion of the skin surface .
Males tend to be pinker than females due to more frequent trauma from intra - species aggression .
The color of adults varies between solid and mottled pink and in some adults the dorsal surface is darker .
It is believed that the difference in color depends on the temperature , water transparency , and geographical location .
There is one albino on record , kept in an aquarium in Germany .
The skull of the species is slightly asymmetrical compared to the other toothed whales .
It has a long , thin snout , with 25 to 28 pairs of long and slender teeth to each side of both jaws .
Dentition is heterodont , meaning that the teeth differ in shape and length , with differing functions for both grabbing and crushing prey .
Anterior teeth are conical and later have ridges on the inside of the crown .
Despite small eyes , the species seems to have good eyesight in and out of the water .
It has a melon on the head , the shape of which can be modified by muscular control when used for biosonar .
Breathing takes place every 30 to 110 seconds .
LONGEVITY Section::::Longevity .
Life expectancy of the Amazon river
dolphin in the wild is unknown , but in captivity , the longevity of healthy individuals has been recorded at between ten and thirty years .
However , the average longevity in captive animals is only 33 months .
An individual named Apure at Duisburg Zoo , Germany , is estimated to have lived more than forty years , being captured from the wild at age nine .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
The Amazon river dolphin are commonly seen singly or in twos , but may also occur in pods that rarely contain more than eight individuals .
Pods as large as 37 individuals have been seen in the Amazon , but average is three .
In the Orinoco , the largest observed groups number 30 , but average is just above five .
Typically , social bonds occur between mother and child , but may also been seen in heterogeneous groups or bachelor groups .
The largest congregations are seen in areas with abundant food , and at the mouths of rivers .
There is significant segregation during the rainy season , with males occupying the river channels , while females and their offspring are located in flooded areas .
However , in the dry season , there is no such separation .
Due to the high level of prey fish , larger group - sizes are seen in large sections that are directly influenced by whitewater ( such as main rivers and lakes , especially during low water season ) than in smaller sections influenced by blackwater ( such as channels and smaller tributaries ) .
In their freshwater habitat they are apex predators and gatherings depend more on food sources and habitat availability than in oceanic dolphins where protection from larger predators is necessary .
Captive studies have shown that the Amazon river dolphin is less shy than the bottlenose dolphin , but also less sociable .
It is very curious and has a remarkable lack of fear of foreign objects .
However , dolphins in captivity may not show the same behavior that they do in their natural environment , where they have been reported to hold the oars of the fishermen , rub against the boat , pluck underwater plants , and play with sticks , logs , clay , turtles , snakes , and fish .
They are slow swimmers ; they commonly travel at speeds of but have been recorded to swim at speeds up to .
When they surface , the tips of the snout , melon and dorsal fins appear simultaneously , the tail rarely showing before diving .
They can also shake their fins , and pull their tail fin and head above the water to observe the environment .
They occasionally jump out of the water , sometimes as high as a meter ( 3.14 ft ) .
They are harder to train than most other species of dolphin .
COURTSHIP Section::::Courtship .
Adult males have been observed carrying objects in their mouths such as branches or other floating vegetation , or balls of hardened clay .
The males appear to carry these objects as a socio - sexual display which is part of their mating system .
The behavior is " triggered by an unusually large number of adult males and/or adult females in a group , or perhaps it attracts such into the group .
A plausible explanation of the results is that object - carrying is aimed at females and is stimulated by the number of females in the group , while aggression is aimed at other adult males and is stimulated by object - carrying in the group . "
Before determining that the species had an evident sexual dimorphism , it was postulated that the river dolphins were monogamous .
Later , it was shown that males were larger than females and are documented wielding an aggressive sexual behavior in the wild and in captivity .
Males often have a significant degree of damage in the dorsal , caudal , and pectoral fins , as well as the blowhole , due to bites and abrasions .
They also commonly have numerous secondary teeth - raking scars .
This suggests fierce competition for access to females , with a polygynous mating system , though polyandry and promiscuity can not be excluded .
In captivity , courtship and mating foreplay have been documented .
The male takes the initiative by nibbling the fins of the female , but reacts aggressively if the female is not receptive .
A high frequency of copulations in a couple was observed ; they used three different positions : contacting the womb at right angles , lying head to head , or head to tail .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Breeding is seasonal , and births occur between May and June .
The period of birthing coincides with the flood season , and this may provide an advantage because the females and their offspring remain in flooded areas longer than males .
As the water level begins to decrease , the density of food sources in flooded areas increases due to loss of space , providing enough energy for infants to meet the high demands required for growth .
Gestation is estimated to be around eleven months and captive births take 4 to 5 hours .
At birth , calves are long and in captivity have registered a growth of per year .
Lactation takes about a year .
The interval between births is estimated between 15 and 36 months , and the young dolphins are thought to become independent within two to three years .
The relatively long duration of breastfeeding and parenting suggests a strong mother - child bond .
Most couples observed in their natural environment consist of a female and her calf .
This suggests that long periods of parental care contribute to learning and development of the young .
DIET Section::::Diet .
The diet of the Amazon river dolphin is the most diverse of the toothed whales .
It consists of at least 53 different species of fish , grouped in 19 families .
The prey size is between , with an average of .
The most frequently consumed fish belong to the families
Sciaenidae ( croakers ) , Cichlidae , and Characidae ( tetras and piranhas ) .
The dolphin 's dentition allows it to access shells of river turtles and freshwater crabs .
The diet is more diverse during the wet season , when fish are spread in flooded areas outside riverbeds , thus becoming more difficult to catch .
The diet becomes more selective during the dry season when prey density is greater .
Usually , these dolphins are active and feeding throughout the day and night .
However , they are predominantly crepuscular .
They consume about 5.5 % of their body weight per day .
They sometimes take advantage of the disturbances made by boats to catch disoriented prey .
Sometimes , they associate with the distantly - related tucuxi ( Sotalia fluviatilis ) , and giant otters ( Pteronura brasiliensis ) to hunt in a coordinated manner , by gathering and attacking fish stocks at the same time .
Apparently , there is little competition for food between these species , as each prefers different prey .
It has also been observed that captive dolphins share food .
ECHOLOCATION
Section::::Echolocation .
Amazonian rivers are often very murky , and the Amazon river dolphin is therefore likely to depend much more on its sense of echolocation than vision when navigating and finding prey .
However , echolocation in shallow waters and flooded forests may result in many echoes to keep track of .
For each click produced a multitude of echoes are likely to return to the echolocating animal almost on top of each other which makes object discrimination difficult .
This may be why the Amazon river dolphin produces less powerful clicks compared to other similar sized toothed whales .
By sending out clicks of lower amplitude only nearby objects will cast back detectable echoes , and hence fewer echoes need to be sorted out , but the cost is a reduced biosonar range .
Toothed whales generally do not produce a new echolocation click until all relevant echoes from the previous click have been received , so if detectable echoes are only reflected back from nearby objects , the echoes will quickly return , and the Amazon river dolphin is then able to click at a high rate .
This in turn allow these animals to have a high acoustic update rate on their surroundings which may aid prey tracking when echolocating in shallow rivers and flooded forests with plenty of hiding places for the prey .
COMMUNICATION Section::::Communication .
Like other dolphins , river dolphins use whistling tones to communicate .
The issuance of these sounds is related to the time they return to the surface before diving , suggesting a link to food .
Acoustic analysis revealed that the vocalisations are different in structure from the typical whistles of other species of dolphins .
DISTRIBUTION AND POPULATION Section::::Distribution and population .
Amazon river dolphins are the most widespread river dolphins .
They are present in six countries in South America : Bolivia , Brazil , Colombia , Ecuador , Peru , and Venezuela , in an area covering about .
The boundaries are set by waterfalls , such as the Xingu and Tapajós rivers in Brazil , as well as very shallow water .
A series of rapids and waterfalls in the Madeira River have isolated one population , recognized as the subspecies I. g. boliviensis , in the southern part of the Amazon basin in Bolivia .
They are also distributed in the basin of the Orinoco River , except the Caroni River and the upper Caura River in Venezuela .
The only connection between the Orinoco and the Amazon is through the Casiquiare canal .
The distribution of dolphins in the rivers and surrounding areas depends on the time of year ; in the dry season they are located in the river beds , but in the rainy season , when the rivers overflow , they disperse to the flooded areas , both the forests and the plains .
Studies to estimate the population are difficult to analyze due to the difference in the methodology used .
In a study conducted in the stretch of the Amazon called Solimões River , with a length of between the cities of Manaus and Tabatinga , a total of 332 individuals was sighted ± 55 per inspection .
Density was estimated at 0.08-
0.33 animals per square kilometer in the main channels , and 0.49 to 0.93 animals per square kilometer in the branches .
In another study , on a stretch of at the confluence of Colombia , Brazil and Peru , 345 individuals with a density of 4.8 per square km in the tributaries around the islands .
2.7 and 2.0 were observed along the banks .
Additionally , another study was conducted in the Amazon at the height of the mouth of the Caqueta River for six days .
As a result of the studies conducted , it was found that the density is higher in the riverbanks , 3.7 per km , decreasing towards the center of the river .
In studies conducted during the rainy season , the density observed in the flood plain was 18 animals per square km , while on the banks of rivers and lakes ranged from 1.8 to 5.8 individuals per square km .
These observations suggest that the Amazon river dolphin is found in higher density than any other cetacean .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
The Amazon river dolphin is located in most of the area 's aquatic habitats , including ; river basins , major courses of rivers , canals , river tributaries , lakes , and at the ends of rapids and waterfalls .
Cyclical changes in the water levels of rivers take place throughout the year .
During the dry season , dolphins occupy the main river channels , and during the rainy season , they can move easily to smaller tributaries , to the forest , and to floodplains .
Males and females appear to have selective habitat preferences , with the males returning to the main river channels when water levels are still high , while the females and their offspring remain in the flooded areas as long as possible ; probably because it decreases the risk of aggression by males toward the young and predation by other species .
MIGRATION Section::::Migration .
In the Pacaya - Samiria National Reserve , Peru , photo - identification is used to recognize individuals based on pigmentation patterns , scars and abnormalities in the beak .
72 individuals were recognized , of which 25 were again observed between 1991 and 2000 .
The intervals between sightings ranged from one day to 7.5 years .
The maximum range of motion was , with an average of .
The longest distance in one day was , with an average of .
In a previous study conducted at the center of the Amazon River , a dolphin was observed that moved only a few dozen kilometers from the dry season and wet season .
However , three of the reviewed 160 animals were observed over from where they were first registered .
Research in 2011 concluded that photo - identification by skilled operatives using high - quality digital equipment could be a useful tool in monitoring population size , movements and social patterns .
INTERACTIONS
WITH HUMANS IN CAPTIVITY Section::::Interactions with humans .
Section::::In captivity .
The Amazon river dolphin has historically been kept in dolphinariums .
Today , only three exist in captivity : one in Acuario de Valencia in Venezuela , one in Zoologico de Guistochoca in Peru , and one in Duisburg Zoo in Germany .
Several hundred were captured between the 1950s and 1970s , and were distributed in dolphinariums throughout the US , Europe , and Japan .
Around 100 went to US dolphinariums , and of that , only 20 survived ; the last died at the Pittsburgh Zoo in 2002 .
THREATS Section::::Threats .
The region of the Amazon in Brazil has an extension of containing diverse fundamental ecosystems .
One of these ecosystems is a floodplain , or a várzea forest , and is home to a large number of fish species which are an essential resource for human consumption .
The várzea is also a major source of income through excessive local commercialized fishing .
Várzea consists of muddy river waters containing a vast number and diversity of nutrient rich species .
The abundance of distinct fish species lures the Amazon River dolphin into the várzea areas of high water occurrences during the seasonal flooding .
In addition to attracting predators such as the Amazon river dolphin , these high - water occurrences are an ideal location to draw in the local fisheries .
Human fishing activities directly compete with the dolphins for the same fish species , the tambaqui ( Colossoma macropomum ) and the pirapitinga ( Piaractus brachypomus ) , resulting in deliberate or unintentional catches of the Amazon river dolphin .
The local fishermen overfish and when the Amazon River dolphins remove the commercial catch from the nets and lines , it causes damages to the equipment and the capture , as well as generating ill will from the local fishermen .
During the process of catching the commercialized fish , the Amazon river dolphins get caught in the nets and exhaust themselves until they die , or the local fishermen deliberately kill the entangled dolphins .
The carcasses are discarded , consumed , or used as bait to attract a scavenger catfish , the piracatinga ( Calophysus macropterus ) .
The use of the Amazon river dolphin carcass as bait for the piracatinga dates back to 2000 .
Increasing demand for the piracatinga has created a market for distribution of the Amazon river dolphin carcasses to be used as bait throughout these regions .
Of the 15 dolphin carcasses found in the Japurá River in 2010–2011 surveys , 73 % of the dolphins were killed for bait , disposed of , or abandoned in entangled gillnets .
The data do not fully represent the actual overall number of deaths of the Amazon river dolphins , whether accidental or intentional , because a variety of factors make it extremely complicated to record and medically examine all the carcasses .
Scavenger species feed upon the carcasses , and the complexity of the river currents make it nearly impossible to locate all of the dead animals .
More importantly , the local fishermen do not report these deaths out of fear that a legal course of action will be taken against them , as the Amazon river dolphin and other cetaceans are protected under a Brazilian federal law prohibiting any takes , harassments , and kills of the species .
CONSERVATION Section::::Conservation .
In 2008 , the International Whaling Commission ( IWC ) expressed concern for captured botos for use as bait in the Central Amazon , which is an emerging problem that has spread on a large scale .
The species is listed in Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) , and Appendix II of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals , because it has an unfavorable conservation status or would benefit significantly from international co - operation organized by tailored agreements .
According to a previous assessment by the Scientific Committee of the International Whaling Commission in 2000 , the population of botos appears great and there is little or no evidence of population decline in numbers and range .
However , increased human intervention on their habitat is expected to , in the future , be the most likely cause of the decline of its range and population .
A series of recommendations were issued to ensure proper follow - up to the species , among which is the implementation and publication of studies on the structure of populations , making a record of the distribution of the species , information about potential threats as the magnitude of fishing operations and location of pipelines .
In September 2012 , Bolivian President Evo Morales enacted a law to protect the dolphin and declared it a national treasure .
In 2018 , the species was listed on the Red list of endangered species .
Increasing pollution and gradual destruction of the Amazon rainforest add to the vulnerability of the species .
The biggest threats are deforestation and other human activities that contribute to disrupt and alter their environment .
Another source of concern is the difficulty in keeping these animals alive in captivity , due to intra - species aggression and low longevity .
Captive breeding is not considered a conservation option for this species .
IN
MYTHOLOGY Section::::In mythology .
In traditional Amazon River folklore , at night , an Amazon river dolphin becomes a handsome young man who seduces girls , impregnates them , and then returns to the river in the morning to become a dolphin again .
Similarly , the female becomes a beautiful , well - dressed , wealthy - looking and young woman .
She goes to the house of a married man , places him under a spell to keep him quiet , and takes him to a thatched hut and visits him every year on the same night she seduced him .
On the 7th night of visiting , she changes the man into a female - baby or male , and soon transfers it into his own wife 's womb .
The mythology is said to be the cycle of a baby .
This dolphin shapeshifter is called an encantado .
The myth has been suggested to have arisen partly because dolphin genitalia bear a resemblance to those of humans .
Others believe the myth served ( and still serves ) as a way of hiding the incestuous relations which are quite common in some small , isolated communities along the river .
In the area , tales relate it is bad luck to kill a dolphin .
Legend also states that if a person makes eye contact with an Amazon river dolphin , he or she will have lifelong nightmares .
Local legends also state that the dolphin is the guardian of the Amazonian manatee , and that if one should wish to find a manatee , one must first make peace with the dolphin .
Associated with these legends is the use of various fetishes , such as dried eyeballs and genitalia .
These may or may not be accompanied by the intervention of a shaman .
A recent study has shown , despite the claim of the seller and the belief of the buyers , none of these fetishes is derived from the boto .
They are derived from Sotalia guianensis , are most likely harvested along the coast and the Amazon River delta , and then are traded up the Amazon River .
In inland cities far from the coast , many , if not most , of the fetishes are derived from domestic animals such as sheep and pigs .
GALLERY SEE
ALSO
* Unihemispheric slow - wave sleep
* Porpoise * Dolphin REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Omacha Foundation — A non - government and non - profit organization created to study , research and protect river dolphins and other fauna and aquatic ecosystems in Colombia .
Winner of the 2007 Whitley Awards ( UK ) .
* River Dolphin Research Program — Research project devoted to the study of the ecology and conservation of river dolphins in the Amazon basin , based in the Federal University of Western Pará .
The scope of this research project focuses on ecological studies , as well as the impact that human activities have on their survival .
* Convention on Migratory Species page on the Amazon Dolphin