YOU'VE GOT MAIL
You 've Got Mail is a 1998 American romantic comedy film starring Tom Hanks and Meg Ryan , directed by Nora Ephron , and co - written by Nora and Delia Ephron , inspired by the play Parfumerie by Miklós László .
The film is about two people in an online romance who are unaware that they are also business rivals .
It marks the third coupling of Hanks and Ryan , who had previously appeared together in Joe Versus the Volcano ( 1990 ) and Sleepless in Seattle ( 1993 ) .
You 've Got Mail received mildly positive reviews from critics .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Kathleen Kelly is involved with Frank Navasky , a leftist newspaper writer for The New York Observer who is always in search of an opportunity to root for the underdog .
While Frank is devoted to his typewriter , Kathleen prefers her laptop and logging into her AOL email account .
Using the screen name " Shopgirl " , she reads an email from " NY152 " , the screen name of Joe Fox , whom she first met in an " over-30s " chatroom .
As her voice narrates her reading of the email , she reveals the boundaries of the online relationship : no specifics , including no names , career or class information , or family connections .
Joe belongs to the Fox family that runs Fox Books , a chain of mega bookstores .
Kathleen runs the independent bookstore
The Shop Around The Corner that her mother ran before her .
The two are shown passing each other on their respective ways to work , revealing that they frequent the same neighborhoods in the Upper West Side of Manhattan .
Joe arrives at work , overseeing the opening of a new Fox Books in New York City with the help of his best friend , branch manager Kevin .
Kathleen and her three store assistants , George , Aunt Birdie , and Christina , open up her small shop that morning .
Following a day with his 11-year - old aunt Annabel and 4-year - old half - brother Matthew , Joe enters Kathleen 's store to let his younger relatives experience story time .
Joe and Kathleen have a conversation that reveals Kathleen 's fears about the Fox Books store opening around the corner .
He omits his last name and makes an abrupt exit with the children .
At a publishing party for New York book business people later that week , Joe and Kathleen meet again where Kathleen discovers Joe 's true identity .
She accuses him of deception and spying , while he responds by belittling her store .
The Shop Around the Corner slowly goes under .
Kathleen enters Fox Books to discover the store is friendly and relaxed , yet without the same dedication to or knowledge of children 's books as her shop .
Her employees move on :
Christina goes job hunting , George gets a job at the children 's department at the Fox Books store , and Birdie retires .
When the two finally decide to meet , Joe discovers with whom he has been corresponding .
At first he decides not to meet her , but then joins her without revealing his on - line identity , leading them to clash once more .
Joe later resumes the correspondence , apologizes , and promises to eventually tell her why he stood her up .
After both break up with their significant others , Joe realizes his feelings towards Kathleen and begins building a face - to - face relationship , still keeping his on - line identity a secret .
He arranges a meeting between his on - line persona and her , but just before she is to meet her on - line friend , Joe reveals his feelings for her .
Upon arriving at the meeting place , she hears Fox , and sees that her on - line friend is in fact Joe .
Kathleen cries tears of joy and reveals that she hoped it would be him .
CAST
* Tom Hanks as Joe Fox
* Meg Ryan as Kathleen Kelly * Parker Posey as Patricia Eden * Jean Stapleton as Birdie Conrad * Greg Kinnear as Frank Navasky * Steve Zahn as George Pappas * Heather Burns as Christina Plutzker
* Dave Chappelle as Kevin Jackson * Dabney Coleman as Nelson Fox
* John Randolph as Schuyler Fox * Deborah Rush as Veronica Grant * Hallee Hirsh as Annabel Fox
* Jeffrey Scaperrotta as Matthew Fox
* Cara Seymour as Gillian Quinn
* Sara Ramirez as Rose , Zabar 's cashier * Michael Badalucco as Charlie
PRODUCTION
INFLUENCES
Section::::Production .
Section::::Influences .
You 've Got
Mail is based on the 1937 Hungarian play Parfumerie by Miklós László and its adaptations .
Parfumerie was later remade as The Shop Around the Corner , a 1940 film by Ernst Lubitsch , which in 1949 was adapted as a movie musical , In the Good Old Summertime by Robert Z. Leonard starring Judy Garland , and finally in 1963 as a Broadway musical with She Loves Me by Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick ( composer and lyricist , respectively , of Fiddler on the Roof ) .
You 've Got Mail updates that concept with the use of e - mail , and the lead character 's workplace is named " The Shop Around the Corner " as a nod to the 1940 film .
Influences from Jane Austen 's Pride and Prejudice can also be seen in the relationship between Joe Fox and Kathleen Kelly — a reference pointed out by these characters actually discussing Mr. Darcy and Miss Bennet in the film .
The joke when Tom Hanks explains that the little girl is really his aunt is taken from Israel Zangwill 's story " A New Matrimonial Relation " in The Bachelors ' Club ( 1891 ) .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Principal photography took place primarily in New York City 's Upper West Side .
Delia Ephron , recalling the film 's bookstore setting , said , " Once we decided that she would be an independent - bookstore owner , the reason we made it a children 's bookstore is , I think , we always tried to make movies as personal as we could .
To find the thing in it that was personal .
And we grew up loving children 's books more than anything . "
Nora Ephron similarly remarked in the film 's audio commentary , " This was something that was very important to us — that there be first editions of old children 's books .
It 's part of what make this a serious bookstore .
We wanted to sell the idea that this was a place that really cared about the history of children 's literature . "
Additionally , Ephron had Ryan and Burns work in an actual bookstore for a week prior to filming in order to get them into character .
Michael Palin appeared in several scenes that were cut from the film .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A soundtrack was released on December 1 , 1998 , and featured a mixture of classics from the 1950s and 1970s , particularly the work of Harry Nilsson , as well as new original recordings and covers .
The score to the film was written by the English composer George Fenton .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
You 've Got Mail debuted No . 1 at the North American box office , earning $ 18.4 million over its opening weekend .
It ultimately grossed $ 115,821,495 from the domestic market and $ 135,000,000 from foreign markets for a worldwide total of $ 250,821,495 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
You 've Got Mail received mildly positive reviews from critics .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a " Fresh " rating of 69 % based on 83 reviews , with the critical consensus , " Great chemistry between the leads made this a warm and charming delight .
"
Metacritic gives a weighted average score of 57 out of 100 , based on 19 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film three - out - of - four stars and lauded the " immensely lovable " main characters .
Janet Maslin of The New York Times also praised the film , writing of the leads , " Ms. Ryan plays her role blithely and credibly this time , with an air of freshness , a minimum of cute fidgeting and a lot of fond chemistry with Mr. Hanks .
And he continues to amaze .
Once again , he fully inhabits a new role without any obvious actorly behavior , to the point where comparisons to James Stewart ...
really can not be avoided . "
Lael Loewenstein of Variety similarly called it a " winning romantic comedy " and praised the chemistry between Hanks and Ryan , writing , " they show why they are two of Hollywood 's most bankable and , in many ways , most traditional stars . "
James Berardinelli further remarked : Conversely , Michael O'Sullivan of The Washington Post criticized the film 's use of product placement and its overly " adorable " characters , writing , " For some reason , this film made me feel like a Christmas goose being fattened for slaughter .
Its force - fed diet of whimsy cloyed long before the eagerly anticipated romantic payoff arrived to put me out of my misery .
" Rolling Stone later included You 've Got Mail in their list of " Most Egregious Product Placements in Movie & TV History " for the film 's frequent use of AOL trademarks . REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS