CORVIDAE Corvidae is a cosmopolitan family of oscine passerine birds that contains the crows , ravens , rooks , jackdaws , jays , magpies , treepies , choughs , and nutcrackers .
In common English , they are known as the crow family , or , more technically , corvids .
Over 120 species are described .
The genus Corvus , including the jackdaws , crows , rooks , and ravens , makes up over a third of the entire family .
Corvids display remarkable intelligence for animals of their size and are among the most intelligent birds thus far studied .
Specifically , members of the family have demonstrated self - awareness in mirror tests ( European magpies ) and tool - making ability ( e.g. , crows and rooks ) ,
skills which until recently were thought to be possessed only by humans and a few other higher mammals .
Their total brain - to - body mass ratio is equal to that of non - human great apes and cetaceans , and only slightly lower than that of humans .
They are medium to large in size , with strong feet and bills , rictal bristles , and a single moult each year ( most passerines moult twice ) .
Corvids are found worldwide except for the tip of South America and the polar ice caps .
The majority of the species are found in tropical South and Central America , southern Asia and Eurasia , with fewer than 10 species each in Africa and Australasia .
The genus Corvus has re - entered Australia in relatively recent geological prehistory , with five species and one subspecies there .
Several species of raven have reached oceanic islands , and some of these species are now highly threatened with extinction or have already gone extinct .
SYSTEMATICS , TAXONOMY , AND EVOLUTION Section::::Systematics , taxonomy , and evolution .
The family Corvidae was introduced by the English zoologist William Elford Leach in a guide to the contents of the British Museum published in 1820 .
Over the years , much disagreement has arisen on the exact evolutionary relationships of the corvid family and their relatives .
What eventually seemed clear was that corvids are derived from Australasian ancestors and from there spread throughout the world .
Other lineages derived from these ancestors evolved into ecologically diverse , but often Australasian groups .
In the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s , Sibley and Ahlquist united the corvids with other taxa in the Corvida , based on DNA – DNA hybridization .
The presumed corvid relatives included currawongs , birds of paradise , whipbirds , quail - thrushes , whistlers , monarch flycatchers and drongos , shrikes , vireos , and vangas , but current research favors the theory that this grouping is partly artificial .
The corvids constitute the core group of the Corvoidea , together with their closest relatives ( the birds of paradise , Australian mud - nesters , and shrikes ) .
They are also the core group of the Corvida , which includes the related groups , such as Old World orioles and vireos .
Clarification of the interrelationships of the corvids has been achieved based on cladistic analysis of several DNA sequences .
The jays and magpies do not constitute monophyletic lineages , but rather seem to split up into an American and Old World lineage , and an Holarctic and Oriental lineage , respectively .
These are not closely related among each other .
The position of the azure - winged magpie , which has always been a major enigma , is even less clear than before .
The crested jay ( Platylophus galericulatus ) is traditionally included in the Corvidae , but might not be a true member of this family , possibly being closer to the helmetshrikes ( Malaconotidae ) or shrikes ( Laniidae ) ; it is best considered Corvidae incertae sedis for the time being .
Likewise , the Hume 's ground " jay " ( Pseudopodoces humilis ) is in fact a member of the tit family Paridae .
The following tree represents current insights in the phylogeny of the Crow family according to J. Boyd .
FOSSIL RECORD
Section::::Fossil record .
The earliest corvid fossils date to the mid - Miocene , about 17 million years ago ; Miocorvus and Miopica may be ancestral to crows and some of the magpie lineage , respectively , or similar to the living forms due to convergent evolution .
The known prehistoric corvid genera appear to be mainly of the New World and Old World
jay and Holarctic magpie lineages :
* Miocorvus ( Middle Miocene of Sansan , France ) * Miopica ( Middle Miocene of SW Ukraine ) * Miocitta ( Pawnee Creek Late Miocene of Logan County , US )
* Corvidae gen . et sp .
indet .
( Edson Early Pliocene of Sherman County , US )
*
Protocitta ( Early Pleistocene of Reddick , US )
* Corvidae gen .
et sp .
indet .
( Early / Middle Pleistocene of Sicily ) - probably belongs in an extant genus
*
Henocitta ( Arredondo Clay Middle Pleistocene of Williston , US )
In addition , there are numerous fossil species of extant genera since the Mio – Pliocene , mainly European Corvus .
MORPHOLOGY Section::::Morphology .
Corvids are large to very large passerines with a robust build , strong legs and all species except the pinyon jay have nostrils covered by bristle - like feathers .
Many corvids of temperate zones have mainly black or blue coloured plumage ; however , some are pied black and white , some have a blue - purple iridescence and many tropical species are brightly coloured .
The sexes are very similar in color and size .
Corvids have strong , stout bills and large wingspans .
The family includes the largest members of the passerine order .
The smallest corvid is the dwarf
jay ( Aphelocoma nana ) , at and .
The largest corvids are the common raven ( Corvus corax ) and the thick - billed raven ( Corvus crassirostris ) , both of which regularly exceed and .
Species can be identified based on size , shape , and geography ; however , some , especially the Australian crows , are best identified by their raucous calls .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
Corvids occur in most climatic zones .
Most are sedentary and do not migrate significantly .
However , during a shortage of food , eruptive migration can occur .
When species are migratory , they will form large flocks in the fall ( around August in the Northern Hemisphere ) and travel south .
One reason for the success of crows , compared to ravens , is their ability to overlap breeding territory .
During breeding season , crows were shown to overlap breeding territory six times as much as ravens .
This invasion of breeding ranges allowed a related increase in local population density .
Since crows and magpies have benefited and even increased in numbers due to human development , it was suggested that this might cause increased rates of nest predation of smaller bird species , leading to declines .
Several studies have shown this concern to be unfounded .
One study examined American crows , which had increased in numbers , were a suspect in nest predation of threatened marbled murrelets .
However , Steller 's jays , which are successful independently of human development , are more efficient in plundering small birds ' nests than American crows and common ravens .
Therefore , the human relationship with crows and ravens did not significantly increase nest predation , compared to other factors such as habitat destruction .
Similarly a study examining the decline of British songbirds found no link between Eurasian magpie numbers and population changes of 23 songbird species .
BEHAVIOUR
Section::::Behaviour .
Some corvids have strong organization and community groups .
Jackdaws , for example , have a strong social hierarchy , and are facultatively colonial during breeding .
Providing mutual aid has also been recorded within many of the corvid species .
Young corvids have been known to play and take part in elaborate social games .
Documented group games follow " king of the mountain " , or " follow the leader " , patterns .
Other play involves the manipulation , passing , and balancing of sticks .
Corvids also take part in other activities , such as sliding down smooth surfaces .
These games are understood to play a large role in the adaptive and survival ability of the birds .
Mate selection is quite complex and accompanied with much social play in the Corvidae .
Youngsters of social corvid species undergo a series of tests , including aerobatic feats , before being accepted as a mate by the opposite sex .
Some corvids can be aggressive .
Blue jays , for example , are well known to attack anything that threatens their nest .
Crows have been known to attack dogs , cats , ravens , and birds of prey .
Most of the time these assaults take place as a distraction long enough to allow an opportunity for stealing food .
FOOD AND FEEDING Section::::Food and feeding .
The natural diet of many corvid species is omnivorous , consisting of invertebrates , nestlings , small mammals , berries , fruits , seeds , and carrion .
However , some corvids , especially the crows , have adapted well to human conditions and have come to rely on anthropogenic foods .
In a US study of American crows , common ravens and Steller 's jays around campgrounds and human settlements , the crows appeared to have the most diverse diet of all , taking anthropogenic foods such as bread , spaghetti , fried potatoes , dog food , sandwiches , and livestock feed .
The increase in available anthropogenic food sources is contributing to population increase in some corvid species .
Some corvids are predators of other birds .
During the wintering months , corvids typically form foraging flocks .
However , some crows also eat many agricultural pests including cutworms , wireworms , grasshoppers , and harmful weeds .
Some corvids will eat carrion , and since they lack a specialized beak for tearing into flesh , they must wait until animals are opened , whether by other predators or as roadkill .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Many species of corvid are territorial , protecting territories throughout the year or simply during the breeding season .
In some cases territories may only be guarded during the day , with the pair joining off - territory roosts at night .
Some corvids are well - known communal roosters .
Some groups of roosting corvids can be very large , with a roost of 65,000 rooks counted in Scotland .
Some , including the rook and the jackdaw , are also communal nesters .
The partner bond in corvids is extremely strong and even lifelong in some species .
This monogamous lifestyle , however , can still contain extra - pair copulations .
Males and females build large nests together in trees or on ledges .
The male will also feed the female during incubation .
The nests are constructed of a mass of bulky twigs lined with grass and bark .
Corvids can lay between 3 and 10 eggs , typically ranging between 4 and 7 .
The eggs are usually greenish in colour with brown blotches .
Once hatched , the young remain in the nests for up to 6–10 weeks depending on the species .
Corvids provide biparental care .
Jackdaws can breed in buildings or in rabbit warrens .
White - throated magpie - jays are cooperatively breeding corvids where the helpers are mostly female .
Cooperative breeding takes place when additional adults help raise the nestlings .
Such helpers at the nest in most cooperatively breeding birds are males , while females join other groups .
INTELLIGENCE Section::::Intelligence .
The brain - to - body weight ratios of corvid brains are among the largest in birds , equal to that of most great apes and cetaceans , and only slightly lower than a human .
Their intelligence is boosted by the long growing period of the young .
By remaining with the parents , the young have more opportunities to learn necessary skills .
When compared to dogs and cats in an experiment testing the ability to seek out food according to three - dimensional clues , corvids out - performed the mammals .
A meta - analysis testing how often birds invented new ways to acquire food in the wild found corvids to be the most innovative birds .
A 2004 review suggests that their cognitive abilities are on par with those of great apes .
Despite structural differences , the brains of corvids and great apes both evolved the ability to make geometrical measurements .
Corvid ingenuity is represented through their feeding skills , memorization abilities , use of tools , and group behaviour .
Living in large social groups has long been connected with high cognitive ability .
To live in a large group , a member must be able to recognize individuals and track the social position and foraging of other members over time .
Members must also be able to distinguish between sex , age , reproductive status , and dominance , and to update this information constantly .
It might be that social complexity corresponds to their high cognition .
The Eurasian magpie is the only non - mammal species known to be able to recognize itself in a mirror test .
Magpies have been observed taking part in elaborate grieving rituals , which have been likened to human funerals , including laying grass wreaths .
Marc Bekoff , at the University of Colorado , argues that it shows that they are capable of feeling complex emotions , including grief .
There are also specific examples of corvid cleverness .
One carrion crow was documented to crack nuts by placing them on a crosswalk , letting the passing cars crack the shell , waiting for the light to turn red , and then safely retrieving the contents .
A group of crows in England took turns lifting garbage bin lids while their companions collected food .
Members of the corvid family have been known to watch other birds , remember where they hide their food , then return once the owner leaves .
Corvids also move their food around between hiding places to avoid thievery , but only if they have previously been thieves themselves ( that is , they remember previous relevant social contexts , use their own experience of having been a thief to predict the behavior of a pilferer , and can determine the safest course to protect their caches from being pilfered ) .
Studies to assess similar cognitive abilities in apes have been inconclusive .
The ability to hide food requires highly accurate spatial memories .
Corvids have been recorded to recall their food 's hiding place up to nine months later .
It is suggested that vertical landmarks ( like trees ) are used to remember locations .
There has also been evidence that California scrub jays , which store perishable foods , not only remember where they stored their food , but for how long .
This has been compared to episodic memory , previously thought unique to humans .
New Caledonian crows ( Corvus moneduloides ) are notable for their highly developed tool fabrication .
They make angling tools of twigs and leaves trimmed into hooks , then use the hooks to pull insect larvae from tree holes .
Tools are engineered according to task and apparently also to learned preference .
Recent studies revealed abilities to solve complicated problems , which suggests high level of innovation of a complex nature .
Other corvids that have been observed using tools include the American crow , blue jay and green jay .
Diversity in tool design among corvids suggests cultural variation .
Again , great apes are the only other animals known to use tools in such a fashion .
Clark 's nutcrackers and jackdaws were compared in a 2002 study based on geometric rule learning .
The corvids , along with a domestic pigeon , had to locate a target between two landmarks , while distances and landmarks were altered .
The nutcrackers were more accurate in their searches than the jackdaws and pigeons .
The scarecrow is an archetypal scare tactic in the agricultural business .
However , due to corvids ' quick wit , scarecrows are soon ignored and used as perches .
Despite farmers ' efforts to rid themselves of corvid pests , their attempts have only expanded corvid territories and strengthened their numbers .
Contrary to earlier teleological classifications in which they were seen as " highest " songbirds due to their intelligence , current systematics might place corvids , based on their total number of physical characteristics instead of just their brains ( which are the most developed of birds ) , in the lower middle of the passerine evolutionary tree , dependent on which subgroup is chosen as the most derived .
As per one observer : The other major group of highly intelligent birds of the order Psittaciformes ( which includes ' true ' parrots , cockatoos and New Zealand parrots ) is not closely related to corvids .
DISEASE Section::::Disease .
Corvids are reservoirs ( carriers ) for the West Nile virus in the United States .
They are infected by mosquitoes ( the vectors ) , primarily of the Culex species .
Crows and ravens are quickly killed by this disease , so their deaths are an early - warning system when West Nile virus arrives in an area ( as are horse and other bird species deaths ) .
One of the first signs that West Nile virus first arrived in the US in 1999 was the death of crows in New York .
RELATIONSHIP WITH HUMANS Section::::Relationship with humans .
Several different corvids , particularly ravens , have occasionally served as pets , although they are not able to speak as readily as parrots and do not like being caged .
ROLE IN MYTH AND CULTURE Section::::Role in myth and culture .
Folklore often represents corvids as clever , and even mystical , animals .
Some Native Americans , such as the Haida , believed that a raven created the earth and despite being a trickster spirit , ravens were popular on totems , credited with creating man , and considered responsible for placing the Sun in the sky .
Due to their carrion diet , the Celtic peoples strongly associated corvids with war , death and the battlefield – their great intelligence meant that they were often considered messengers , or manifestations of the gods such Bendigeidfran Blessed raven or the Irish Morrigan , underworld deities that may be related to the later Arthurian Fisher King .
The Welsh Dream of Rhonabwy illustrates well the association of ravens with war .
In many parts of Britain , gatherings of crows , or more often magpies , are counted using the divination rhyme : one for sorrow , two for joy , three for a girl , four for a boy , five for silver six for gold , seven for a secret never to be told .
Cornish superstition holds that when a lone magpie is encountered , it must be loudly greeted with respect .
Various Germanic peoples highly revered the raven .
The major deity Odin was so associated with ravens throughout history that he gained the kenning " raven god " and the raven banner was the flag of various Viking Age Scandinavian chieftains .
He was also attended by Hugin and Munin , two ravens who whispered news into his ears .
The Valravn sometimes appears in modern Scandinavian folklore .
The Sutton Hoo treasure features stylised corvids with scrolled beaks in the decorative enamel work on the shield and purse lid reflecting their common totemic status to the Anglo - Saxons , whose pre - Christian indigenous beliefs were of the same origin as that of the aforementioned Vikings .
The 6th century BC Greek scribe Aesop featured corvids as intelligent antagonists in many fables .
Later , in western literature , popularized by American poet
Edgar Allan Poe 's work " The Raven "
, the common raven becomes a symbol of the main character 's descent into madness .
In the book Mrs. Frisby and the Rats of NIMH and its film adaptation features a crow named Jeremy .
STATUS AND CONSERVATION Section::::Status and conservation .
Unlike many other bird families , corvid fitness and reproduction , especially with many crows , has increased due to human development .
The survival and reproductive success of certain crows and ravens is assisted by their close relationship with humans .
Human development provides additional resources by clearing land , creating shrublands rich in berries and insects .
When the cleared land naturally replenishes , jays and crows use the young dense trees for nesting sites .
Ravens typically use larger trees in denser forests .
Despite the fact that most corvids are not threatened ( many even increasing due to human activity ) a few species are in danger .
For example , the destruction of the Southeast Asian rainforests is endangering mixed - species feeding flocks with members from the family Corvidae .
Also , since its semiarid scrubland habitat is an endangered ecosystem , the Florida scrub jay has a small and declining population .
A number of island species , which are more vulnerable to introduced species and habitat loss , have been driven to extinction , such as the New Zealand raven , or are threatened , like the Mariana crow .
The American crow population of the United States has grown over the years .
It is possible that the American crow , due to humans increasing suitable habitat , will cause Northwestern crows and fish crows to decline .
SPECIES Section::::Species .
FAMILY CORVIDAE
* Choughs * Genus Pyrrhocorax
* Alpine chough , Pyrrhocorax graculus * Red - billed chough ,
Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax *
Treepies
* Genus Crypsirina * Hooded treepie , Crypsirina cucullata * Racket - tailed treepie , Crypsirina temia
* Genus Dendrocitta
* Andaman treepie , Dendrocitta bayleyi * Bornean treepie , Dendrocitta cinerascens * Grey treepie ,
Dendrocitta formosae * Collared treepie
, Dendrocitta frontalis * White - bellied treepie , Dendrocitta leucogastra * Sumatran treepie , Dendrocitta occipitalis * Rufous treepie , Dendrocitta vagabunda * Genus Platysmurus * Black magpie ,
Platysmurus leucopterus * Genus Temnurus
* Ratchet - tailed treepie , Temnurus temnurus
* Oriental magpies * Genus Cissa * Common green magpie , Cissa chinensis * Indochinese green magpie , Cissa hypoleuca * Javan green magpie , Cissa thalassina
* Bornean green magpie , Cissa jefferyi
* Genus Urocissa * Taiwan blue magpie , Urocissa caerulea * Red - billed blue magpie , Urocissa erythrorhyncha * Yellow - billed blue magpie , Urocissa flavirostris
*
Sri Lanka blue magpie , Urocissa ornata
* White - winged magpie , Urocissa whiteheadi
* Old World jays
* Genus Garrulus * Eurasian jay , Garrulus glandarius * Black - headed jay , Garrulus lanceolatus * Lidth 's jay , Garrulus lidthi * Genus Podoces – ground jays
* Biddulph 's ground jay , Podoces biddulphi * Henderson 's ground jay , Podoces hendersoni
* Pander 's ground jay ,
Podoces panderi
* Pleske 's ground jay , Podoces pleskei
* Piapiac * Genus Ptilostomus
*
Piapiac
, Ptilostomus afer
* Stresemann 's bushcrow * Genus Zavattariornis
* Stresemann 's bushcrow , Zavattariornis stresemanni * Nutcrackers
* Genus Nucifraga * Spotted nutcracker
, Nucifraga caryocatactes
* Large - spotted nutcracker , Nucifraga multipunctata * Clark 's nutcracker , Nucifraga columbiana * Holarctic magpies * Genus Pica * Black - billed magpie , Pica hudsonia * Yellow - billed magpie ,
Pica nuttalli * Eurasian magpie , Pica pica * Korean magpie ,
Pica ( pica ) sericea * Genus Cyanopica
* Azure - winged magpie
, Cyanopica cyanus * Iberian magpie , Cyanopica cooki * True crows ( crows , ravens , jackdaws and rooks ) * Genus Corvus * Australian and Melanesian species * Little crow , Corvus bennetti *
Australian raven
, Corvus coronoides * Bismarck crow , Corvus insularis * Brown - headed crow , Corvus fuscicapillus * Bougainville crow , Corvus meeki
* Little raven , Corvus mellori * New Caledonian crow , Corvus moneduloides * Torresian crow , Corvus orru * Forest raven , Corvus tasmanicus * Relict raven ,
Corvus ( tasmanicus ) boreus * Grey crow , Corvus tristis * Long - billed crow
, Corvus validus * White - billed crow , Corvus woodfordi * Pacific island species *
Alalā ( Hawaiian crow ) , Corvus hawaiiensis ( formerly Corvus tropicus )
( extinct in the wild )
* Mariana crow , Corvus kubaryi
* Tropical Asian species * Daurian jackdaw ,
Corvus dauuricus
* Slender - billed crow , Corvus enca * Flores crow
, Corvus florensis * Large - billed crow , Corvus macrorhynchos * Eastern jungle crow , Corvus levaillantii * Indian jungle crow ,
Corvus culminatus * House crow , Corvus splendens * Collared crow , Corvus torquatus
* Piping crow , Corvus typicus
* Banggai crow , Corvus unicolor *
Eurasian and North African species * Hooded crow , Corvus cornix * Mesopotamian crow , Corvus ( cornix ) capellanus * Carrion crow ( western carrion crow ) , Corvus corone * Eastern carrion crow ,
Corvus ( corone ) orientalis *
Rook , Corvus frugilegus * Western jackdaw ,
Corvus monedula
* Fan - tailed raven , Corvus rhipidurus * Brown - necked raven , Corvus ruficollis
* Holarctic species
* Common raven , Corvus corax ( see also next section )
* Pied raven , Corvus corax varius morpha leucophaeus ( an extinct color variant ) * North and Central American species * American crow , Corvus brachyrhynchos
* Northwestern crow , Corvus caurinus
* Chihuahuan raven , Corvus cryptoleucus * Tamaulipas crow , Corvus imparatus * Jamaican crow ,
Corvus jamaicensis * White - necked crow , Corvus leucognaphalus * Cuban crow , Corvus nasicus * Fish crow , Corvus ossifragus * Palm crow , Corvus palmarum * Sinaloan crow ,
Corvus sinaloae
* Western raven , Corvus ( corax ) sinuatus * Tropical African species * White - necked raven ,
Corvus albicollis
* Pied crow , Corvus albus * Cape crow , Corvus capensis
* Thick - billed raven , Corvus crassirostris * Somali crow ( dwarf raven ) , Corvus edithae
* Boreal jays * Genus Perisoreus * Gray jay , Perisoreus canadensis * Siberian jay , Perisoreus infaustus * Sichuan jay , Perisoreus internigrans * New World jays
* Genus Aphelocoma – scrub - jays
* California scrub jay , Aphelocoma californica
* Island scrub jay , Aphelocoma insularis
* Woodhouse 's scrub jay , Aphelocoma woodhouseii * Florida scrub jay ,
Aphelocoma coerulescens
* Mexican jay , Aphelocoma wollweberi * Transvolcanic jay , Aphelocoma ultramarina
* Unicolored jay , Aphelocoma unicolor
* Genus Calocitta – magpie - jays
* Black - throated magpie - jay , Calocitta colliei
* White - throated magpie - jay , Calocitta formosa
* Genus Cyanocitta
* Blue jay , Cyanocitta cristata * Steller 's jay , Cyanocitta stelleri * Genus Cyanocorax * Black - chested jay ,
Cyanocorax affinis * Purplish - backed jay , Cyanocorax beecheii * Azure jay , Cyanocorax caeruleus
* Cayenne jay , Cyanocorax cayanus *
Plush - crested jay , Cyanocorax chrysops
* Curl - crested jay , Cyanocorax cristatellus
* Purplish jay , Cyanocorax cyanomelas
* White - naped jay , Cyanocorax cyanopogon * Tufted jay ,
Cyanocorax dickeyi
* Azure - naped jay ,
Cyanocorax heilprini * Bushy - crested jay ,
Cyanocorax melanocyaneus * White - tailed jay , Cyanocorax mystacalis * San Blas jay , Cyanocorax sanblasianus
* Violaceous jay , Cyanocorax violaceus
* Green jay , Cyanocorax ynca
*
Yucatan jay ,
Cyanocorax yucatanicus
* Genus Psilorhinus
* Brown jay , Psilorhinus morio
* Genus Cyanolyca * Silvery - throated jay ,
Cyanolyca argentigula
* Black - collared jay , Cyanolyca armillata
* Azure - hooded jay , Cyanolyca cucullata
* White - throated jay , Cyanolyca mirabilis * Dwarf jay , Cyanolyca nana
* Beautiful jay , Cyanolyca pulchra * Black - throated jay , Cyanolyca pumilo * Turquoise jay ,
Cyanolyca turcosa
* White - collared jay , Cyanolyca viridicyana
* Genus Gymnorhinus
* Pinyon jay , Gymnorhinus cyanocephalus NOTES REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Sibley , Charles Gald & Ahlquist , Jon Edward ( [ 1991 ] ) : Phylogeny and Classification of Birds : A Study in Molecular Evolution .
Yale University Press , New Haven , Connecticut , EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Corvidae videos on the Internet Bird Collection * corvids.de – Corvids - Literature - Database * Corvidae sounds on xeno-canto.org * Corvid Corner A site about the
Corvidae * AvesNoir A site about corvids in art , culture , and literature .
* Discovery of species - wide tool use in the Hawaiian crow
* Rooks reveal remarkable tool use *
Clever New Caledonian crows can use three tools *
Talking Eurasian magpie
Pica pica
*
Rare crow shows a talent for tool use