MEDIA OF THE UNITED STATES Media of the United States consist of several different types of media : television , radio , cinema , newspapers , magazines , and Internet - based Web sites .
The U.S. also has a strong music industry .
Many of the media are controlled by large for - profit corporations who reap revenue from advertising , subscriptions , and sale of copyrighted material .
American media conglomerates tend to be leading global players , generating large revenues as well as large opposition in many parts of the world .
With the passage of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 , further deregulation and convergence are under way , leading to mega - mergers , further concentration of media ownership , and the emergence of multinational media conglomerates .
These mergers enable tighter control of information .
Currently , five corporations control roughly 90 % of the media .
Critics allege that localism , local news and other content at the community level , media spending and coverage of news , and diversity of ownership and views have suffered as a result of these processes of media concentration .
Theories to explain the success of such companies include reliance on certain policies of the American federal government or a tendency to natural monopolies in the industry .
See Media bias in the United States .
The organisation Reporters Without Borders compiles and publishes an annual ranking of countries based upon the organisation 's assessment of their press freedom records .
In 2013–14 United States was ranked 46th out of 180 countries , a drop of thirteen points from the preceding year .
NEWSPAPERS Section::::Newspapers .
Newspapers have declined in their influence and penetration into American households over the years .
The U.S. does not have a national paper .
The New York Times , The Wall Street Journal , and USA Today are the most circulated newspapers in the United States and are sold in most U.S. cities .
Although the Times primary audience has always been the people of New York City , the New York Times has gradually become the dominant national " newspaper of record . "
Apart from its daily nationwide distribution , the term means that back issues are archived on microfilm by every decent - sized public library in the nation , and the Times ' articles are often cited by both historians and judges as evidence that a major historical event occurred on a certain date .
The Los Angeles Times and the Wall Street Journal are also newspapers of record to a lesser extent .
Although USA Today has tried to establish itself as a national paper , it has been widely derided by the academic world as the " McPaper " and is not subscribed to ( let alone archived ) by most libraries .
Apart from the newspapers just mentioned , all major metropolitan areas have their own local newspapers .
Typically , a metropolitan area will support at most one or two major newspapers , with many smaller publications targeted towards particular audiences .
Although the cost of publishing has increased over the years , the price of newspapers has generally remained low , forcing newspapers to rely more on advertising revenue and on articles provided by a major news agency wire service , such as the Associated Press , Reuters or Bloomberg News for their national and world coverage .
With very few exceptions , all the newspapers in the U.S. are privately owned , either by large chains such as Gannett or McClatchy , which own dozens or even hundreds of newspapers ; by small chains that own a handful of papers ; or in a situation that is increasingly rare , by individuals or families .
Most general - purpose newspapers are either being printed one time a week , usually on Thursday or Friday , or are printed daily .
Weekly newspapers tend to have much smaller circulation and are more prevalent in rural communities or small towns .
Major cities often have " alternative weeklies " to complement the mainstream daily paper(s ) , for example , New York City 's Village Voice or Los Angeles ' L.A. Weekly , to name two of the best - known .
Major cities may also support a local business journal , trade papers relating to local industries , and papers for local ethnic and social groups .
Probably due to competition from other media , the number of daily newspapers in the U.S. has declined over the past half - century , according to Editor & Publisher , the trade journal of American newspapers .
In particular , the number of evening newspapers has fallen by almost one - half since 1970 , while the number of morning editions and Sunday editions has grown .
For comparison , in 1950 , there were 1,772 daily papers ( and 1,450 – or about 70 percent – of them were evening papers ) while in 2000 , there were 1,480 daily papers ( and 766—or about half — of them were evening papers . )
Daily newspaper circulation is also slowly declining in America , partly due to the near - demise of two - newspaper towns , as the weaker newspapers in most cities have folded : !
Year !
Circulation
The primary source of newspaper income is advertising – in the form of " classifieds " or inserted advertising circulars – rather than circulation income .
However , since the late 1990s , this revenue source has been directly challenged by Web sites like eBay ( for sales of secondhand items ) , Monster.com ( jobs ) , and Craigslist ( everything ) .
Additionally , as investigative journalism declined at major daily newspapers in the 2000s , many reporters formed their own non - profit investigative newsrooms .
Examples include ProPublica on the national level , Texas Tribune at the state level and Voice of OC at the local level .
The largest newspapers ( by circulation ) in the United States are USA Today , The Wall Street Journal , The New York Times and the Los Angeles Times .
MAGAZINES Section::::Magazines .
Thanks to the huge size of the English - speaking North American media market , the United States has a large magazine industry with hundreds of magazines serving almost every interest , as can be determined by glancing at any newsstand in any large American city .
Most magazines are owned by one of the large media conglomerates or by one of their smaller regional brethren .
The American Society of Magazine Editors sponsors the annual National Magazine Awards recognizing excellence .
The U.S. has three leading weekly news magazines :
Time , Newsweek and U.S. News and World Report .
Time and Newsweek are center - left while U.S. News and World Report tends to be center - right .
Time is well known for naming a " Person of the Year " each year , while U.S. News publishes annual ratings of American colleges and universities .
The U.S. also has over a dozen major political magazines , including The Atlantic and The New Yorker among others .
Finally , besides the hundreds of specialized magazines that serve the diverse interests and hobbies of the American people , there are also dozens of magazines published by professional organizations for their members , such as Communications of the ACM ( for computer science specialists ) and the ABA Journal ( for lawyers ) .
BOOKS RADIO Section::::Radio .
American radio broadcasts in two bands : FM and AM .
Some stations are only talk radio – featuring interviews and discussions – while music radio stations broadcast one particular type of music :
Top 40 , hip - hop , country , etc .
Radio broadcast companies have become increasingly consolidated in recent years .
National Public Radio is the nation 's primary public radio network , but most radio stations are commercial and profit - oriented .
Talk radio as a political medium has also exploded in popularity during the 1990s , due to the 1987 repeal of the Fairness Doctrine , which meant that stations no longer had to " balance " their day by programming alternative points of view .
The Federal Communications Commission ( FCC ) in 1970 had limited the number of radio station one person or company could own to 1 AM and 1 FM locally , and 7 AM and 7 FM stations nationally .
But due to extensive concentration of media ownership stemming from the Telecommunications Act of 1996 , radio companies could own not more than 8 local stations per area market .
Most stations are now owned by major radio companies such as iHeartMedia ( formerly Clear Channel Communications ) , Cumulus Media , Townsquare Media , and CBS Radio .
See IBOC and HD Radio .
A new form of radio that is gaining popularity is satellite radio .
The two biggest subscriptions based radio services are Sirius Satellite Radio and XM Satellite Radio , which have recently merged to form Sirius XM Radio .
Unlike terrestrial radio music channels are commercial free and other channels feature minimal commercials .
Satellite radio also is not regulated by the FCC .
During the advent of the internet in the 21st century , internet radio and digital streaming services have been emerged .
Among popular brands are Pandora and iHeartRadio .
Although , the recording industry also sees Internet radio as a threat and has attempted to impose high royalty rates for the use of recorded music to discourage independent stations from playing popular songs .
Arbitron , a consumer research company , provides ratings ( similar to the Nielsen ratings ) for national and local radio stations in the United States .
TELEVISION Section::::Television .
Ninety - nine percent of American households have at least one television and the majority of households have more than one .
The four major broadcasters in the U.S. are the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) , CBS ( formerly the Columbia Broadcasting System ) , the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) and the Fox Broadcasting Company ( Fox ) .
Several Spanish language broadcast ( as well as cable )
networks exist , which are the most common form of non - English television broadcasts .
These networks are not as widely distributed over - the - air as their English counterparts , available mostly in markets with sizeable Latino and Hispanic populations ; several of these over - the - air networks are alternatively fed directly to cable , satellite and IPTV providers in markets without either the availability or the demand for a locally based owned - and - operated or affiliate station .
The largest of these networks , Univision , launched in 1986 as a successor to the Spanish International Network .
Its major competition is Telemundo ( est . 1986 ) , a sister network of NBC ( which acquired Telemundo in 2001 ) .
Public television has a far smaller role than in most other countries .
However , a number of states , including West Virginia , Maryland , Kentucky , and South Carolina , among others , do have state - owned public broadcasting authorities which operate and fund all public television stations in their respective states .
The income received from the government is insufficient to cover expenses and stations also rely on corporate sponsorships and viewer contributions .
DirecTV and Dish Network are the major satellite television providers , with 20 and 14 million customers respectively as of February 2014 .
Meanwhile , the major cable television providers are Comcast with 22 million customers , Time Warner Cable with 11 million , and Cox Communications , Charter Communications , AT&T U - verse and Verizon FiOS
with 5–6 million each .
MOTION PICTURES Section::::Motion pictures .
In the 20th century , the motion picture industry rose to become one of the most successful and powerful industries in the U.S. Along with other intellectual property industries , its relative importance to the American economy has strengthened as the importance of manufacturing and agriculture have decreased ( due to globalization ) .
RISE OF THE HOME VIDEO MARKET ( 1980S–1990S ) Section::::Rise of the home video market ( 1980s–1990s ) .
The 1980s and 1990s saw another significant development .
The full acceptance of home video by studios opened a vast new business to exploit .
Films such as Showgirls , The Secret of NIMH , and The Shawshank Redemption , which may have performed poorly in their theatrical run , were now able to find success in the video market .
It also saw the first generation of filmmakers with access to videotapes emerge .
Directors such as Quentin Tarantino and Paul Thomas Anderson had been able to view thousands of films and produced films with vast numbers of references and connections to previous works .
Tarantino has had a number of collaborations with director Robert Rodriguez .
Rodriguez directed the 1992 action film El Mariachi , which was a commercial success after grossing $ 2 million against a budget of $ 7,000 .
In 2011 , El Mariachi was inducted into the Library of Congress to be preserved as part of its National Film Registry for being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
The film is further immortalized by Guinness World Records as the lowest - budgeted film ever to gross $ 1 million at the box office .
This , along with the explosion of independent film and ever - decreasing costs for filmmaking , changed the landscape of American movie - making once again and led a renaissance of filmmaking among Hollywood 's lower and middle - classes — those without access to studio financial resources .
With the rise of the DVD in the 21st century , DVDs have quickly become even more profitable to studios and have led to an explosion of packaging extra scenes , extended versions , and commentary tracks with the films .
INTERNET
Section::::Internet .
The Internet has provided a means for newspapers and other media organizations to deliver news and keep archives public .
Revenue is generated through advertising or subscription payments .
ONLINE
STREAMING
Section::::Online Streaming .
The days of having to tune in live or buy expensive discs in order to watch your favorite shows and movies are gone .
Online streaming makes it possible to watch everything from live news and sports to classic movies to modern TV favorites on their own time , and on any device they choose .
Some of online streaming service providers are Netflix , Hulu Plus , Amazon Video and YouTube .
Over - the - top subscription services that mirrored cable and TV
Everywhere services began emerging in the mid-2010s .
In 2015 , Dish Network and Sony respectively launched Sling TV and PlayStation Vue , cable - style online and mobile streaming services priced at lower monthly rates than packages offered by traditional pay television system operators .
REFERENCES
SEE ALSO * Communications in the United States
* Telecommunications policy of the United States * National Telecommunications and Information Administration * Federal Communications Commission * Pulitzer Prize BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS