DEWBERRY
The dewberries are a group of species in the genus Rubus , section Rubus , closely related to the blackberries .
They are small trailing ( rather than upright or high - arching ) brambles with aggregate fruits , reminiscent of the raspberry , but are usually purple to black instead of red .
Unlike many other Rubus species , dewberries are dioecious , having separate male and female plants .
Dewberries are common throughout most of the Northern Hemisphere and are thought of as a beneficial weed .
The leaves can be used to make a tisane , and the berries are edible and taste sweet .
They can be eaten raw , or used to make cobbler , jam , or pie .
Alternatively , they are sometimes referred to as ground berries .
Around March and April , the plants start to grow white flowers that develop into small green berries .
The tiny green berries grow red and then a deep purple - blue as they ripen .
When the berries are ripe , they are tender and difficult to pick in any quantity without squashing them .
The plants do not have upright canes like some other Rubus species , but have stems that trail along the ground , putting forth new roots along the length of the stem .
The stems are covered with fine spines or stickers .
The berries are sweet and , for many , less seedy than blackberries and worth the scratches and stains that come from picking them .
In the winter the leaves often remain on the stems , but may turn dark red .
The leaves are sometimes eaten by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including peach blossom moths .
The European dewberry , Rubus caesius , grows more upright like other brambles , but is frequently restricted to coastal communities , especially sand dune systems .
Its fruits are a deep , almost black , purple and are coated with a thin layer or ' dew ' of waxy droplets .
Thus , they appear sky - blue ( caesius is Latin for pale blue ) .
It is less sought after , because its fruits are small and retain a markedly tart taste even when fully ripe .
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , the town of Cameron , North Carolina was known as the " dewberry capital of the world " for large scale cultivation of this berry which was shipped out for wide spread consumption .
Local growers made extensive use of the railroads , in the area , to ship them nationally and internationally .
SPECIES
* Rubus Section Caesii , European dewberry * European dewberry , Rubus caesius
L. * Rubus Section Flagellares , American dewberries
* Rubus aboriginum Rydb .
, synonyms : * Rubus almus ( L.H. Bailey )
L.H.Bailey
* Rubus austrinus L.H.Bailey
*
Rubus bollianus L.H.Bailey
* Rubus clair - brownii ' L.H.Bailey * Rubus decor
L.H. Bailey
* Rubus flagellaris Willd .
var .
almus L.H.Bailey * Rubus foliaceus
L.H. Bailey
* Rubus ignarus
L.H. Bailey
* Rubus ricei L.H. Bailey
* Aberdeen dewberry , Rubus
depavitus L.H.Bailey
* Northern dewberry , Rubus flagellaris Willd .
* Swamp dewberry , Rubus hispidus L. * Upland dewberry , Rubus invisus ( L.H.Bailey ) Britton
* Pacific blackberry , Rubus ursinus Cham .
& Schltdl .
SEE ALSO
* Black raspberry * Boysenberry , a cross between a dewberry and a Loganberry
* Cloudberry , another dioecious Rubus species
* Youngberry REFERENCES