MOMENT OF INERTIA
The moment of inertia , otherwise known as the angular mass or rotational inertia , of a rigid body is a tensor that determines the torque needed for a desired angular acceleration about a rotational axis ; similar to how mass determines the force needed for a desired acceleration .
It depends on the body 's mass distribution and the axis chosen , with larger moments requiring more torque to change the body 's rotation rate .
It is an extensive ( additive ) property : for a point mass the moment of inertia is just the mass times the square of the perpendicular distance to the rotation axis .
The moment of inertia of a rigid composite system is the sum of the moments of inertia of its component subsystems ( all taken about the same axis ) .
Its simplest definition is the second moment of mass with respect to distance from an axis .
For bodies constrained to rotate in a plane , only their moment of inertia about an axis perpendicular to the plane , a scalar value , matters .
For bodies free to rotate in three dimensions , their moments can be described by a symmetric 3 × 3 matrix , with a set of mutually perpendicular principal axes for which this matrix is diagonal and torques around the axes act independently of each other .
INTRODUCTION Section::::Introduction .
When a body is free to rotate around an axis , torque must be applied to change its angular momentum .
The amount of torque needed to cause any given angular acceleration ( the rate of change in angular velocity ) is proportional to the moment of inertia of the body .
Moment of inertia may be expressed in units of kilogram meter squared ( kg·m ) in SI units and pound - foot - second squared ( lbf·ft·s ) in imperial or US units .
Moment of inertia plays the role in rotational kinetics that mass ( inertia ) plays in linear kinetics -
both characterize the resistance of a body to changes in its motion .
The moment of inertia depends on how mass is distributed around an axis of rotation , and will vary depending on the chosen axis .
For a point - like mass , the moment of inertia about some axis is given by formula_1 , where formula_2 is the distance of the point from the axis , and formula_3 is the mass .
For an extended rigid body , the moment of inertia is just the sum of all the small pieces of mass multiplied by the square of their distances from the axis in question .
For an extended body of a regular shape and uniform density , this summation sometimes produces a simple expression that depends on the dimensions , shape and total mass of the object .
In 1673 Christiaan Huygens introduced this parameter in his study of the oscillation of a body hanging from a pivot , known as a compound pendulum .
The term moment of inertia was introduced by Leonhard Euler in his book Theoria motus corporum solidorum seu rigidorum in 1765 , and it is incorporated into Euler 's second law .
The natural frequency of oscillation of a compound pendulum is obtained from the ratio of the torque imposed by gravity on the mass of the pendulum to the resistance to acceleration defined by the moment of inertia .
Comparison of this natural frequency to that of a simple pendulum consisting of a single point of mass provides a mathematical formulation for moment of inertia of an extended body .
Moment of inertia also appears in momentum , kinetic energy , and in Newton 's laws of motion for a rigid body as a physical parameter that combines its shape and mass .
There is an interesting difference in the way moment of inertia appears in planar and spatial movement .
Planar movement has a single scalar that defines the moment of inertia , while for spatial movement the same calculations yield a 3 × 3 matrix of moments of inertia , called the inertia matrix or inertia tensor .
The moment of inertia of a rotating flywheel is used in a machine to resist variations in applied torque to smooth its rotational output .
The moment of inertia of an airplane about its longitudinal , horizontal and vertical axis determines how steering forces on the control surfaces of its wings , elevators and tail affect the plane in roll , pitch and yaw .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
Moment of inertia
formula_4 is defined as the ratio of the net angular momentum formula_5 of a system to its angular velocity
formula_6 around a principal axis
, that is If the angular momentum of a system is constant , then as the moment of inertia gets smaller , the angular velocity must increase .
This occurs when spinning figure skaters pull in their outstretched arms or divers curl their bodies into a tuck position during a dive , to spin faster .
If the shape of the body does not change , then its moment of inertia appears in Newton 's law of motion as the ratio of an applied torque formula_8 on a body to the angular acceleration formula_9 around a principal axis , that is For a simple pendulum , this definition yields a formula for the moment of inertia
formula_4
in terms of the mass formula_3 of the pendulum and its distance
formula_2 from the pivot point as , Thus , moment of inertia depends on both the mass formula_3 of a body and its geometry , or shape , as defined by the distance
formula_2 to the axis of rotation .
This simple formula generalizes to define moment of inertia for an arbitrarily shaped body as the sum of
all the elemental point masses formula_17 each multiplied by the square of its perpendicular distance formula_2 to an axis formula_19 .
In general , given an object of mass formula_3 , an effective radius formula_19 can be defined for an axis through its center of mass , with such a value that its moment of inertia is where formula_19 is known as the radius of gyration .
EXAMPLES
SIMPLE PENDULUM Section::::Examples .
Section::::Simple pendulum .
Moment of inertia can be measured using a simple pendulum , because it is the resistance to the rotation caused by gravity .
Mathematically , the moment of inertia of the pendulum is the ratio of the torque due to gravity about the pivot of a pendulum to its angular acceleration about that pivot point .
For a simple pendulum this is found to be the product of the mass of the particle formula_3 with the square of its distance
formula_2 to the pivot
, that is
This can be shown as follows : The force of gravity on the mass of a simple pendulum generates a torque formula_27 around the axis perpendicular to the plane of the pendulum movement .
Here formula_28 is the distance vector perpendicular to and from the force to the torque axis , and formula_29 is the net force on the mass .
Associated with this torque is an angular acceleration , formula_30 , of the string and mass around this axis .
Since the mass is constrained to a circle the tangential acceleration of the mass is formula_31 .
Since formula_32 the torque equation becomes : where formula_34 is a unit vector perpendicular to the plane of the pendulum .
( The second to last step uses the vector triple product expansion with the perpendicularity of formula_30 and formula_28 . )
The quantity
formula_37 is the moment of inertia of this single mass around the pivot point .
The quantity formula_37 also appears in the angular momentum of a simple pendulum , which is calculated from the velocity formula_39 of the pendulum mass around the pivot , where formula_40 is the angular velocity of the mass about the pivot point .
This angular momentum is given by using a similar derivation to the previous equation .
Similarly , the kinetic energy of the pendulum mass is defined by the velocity of the pendulum around the pivot to yield
This shows that the quantity formula_37 is how mass combines with the shape of a body to define rotational inertia .
The moment of inertia of an arbitrarily shaped body is the sum of the values formula_1 for all of the elements of mass in the body .
COMPOUND PENDULUM
Section::::Compound pendulum .
A compound pendulum is a body formed from an assembly of particles of continuous shape that rotates rigidly around a pivot .
Its moment of inertia is the sum of the moments of inertia of each of the particles that it is composed of .
The natural frequency ( formula_45 ) of a compound pendulum depends on its moment of inertia , formula_46 , where formula_3 is the mass of the object , formula_49 is local acceleration of gravity , and formula_2 is the distance from the pivot point to the center of mass of the object .
Measuring this frequency of oscillation over small angular displacements provides an effective way of measuring moment of inertia of a body .
Thus , to determine the moment of inertia of the body , simply suspend it from a convenient pivot point
formula_51 so that it swings freely in a plane perpendicular to the direction of the desired moment of inertia , then measure its natural frequency or period of oscillation ( formula_52 ) , to obtain where formula_52 is the period ( duration ) of oscillation ( usually averaged over multiple periods ) .
The moment of inertia of the body about its center of mass , formula_55 , is then calculated using the parallel axis theorem to be where formula_3 is the mass of the body and formula_2 is the distance from the pivot point formula_51 to the center of mass formula_60 .
Moment of inertia of a body is often defined in terms of its radius of gyration , which is the radius of a ring of equal mass around the center of mass of a body that has the same moment of inertia .
The radius of gyration formula_19 is calculated from the body 's moment of inertia formula_55 and mass formula_3 as the length CENTER OF OSCILLATION Section::::Center of oscillation .
A simple pendulum that has the same natural frequency as a compound pendulum defines the length formula_5 from the pivot to a point called the center of oscillation of the compound pendulum .
This point also corresponds to the center of percussion .
The length formula_5 is determined from the formula , or The seconds pendulum , which provides the " tick " and " tock " of a grandfather clock , takes one second to swing from side - to - side .
This is a period of two seconds , or a natural frequency of formula_69 for the pendulum .
In this case , the distance to the center of oscillation , formula_5 , can be computed to be Notice that the distance to the center of oscillation of the seconds pendulum must be adjusted to accommodate different values for the local acceleration of gravity .
Kater 's pendulum is a compound pendulum that uses this property to measure the local acceleration of gravity , and is called a gravimeter .
MEASURING MOMENT OF INERTIA
Section::::Measuring moment of inertia .
The moment of inertia of a complex system such as a vehicle or airplane around its vertical axis can be measured by suspending the system from three points to form a trifilar pendulum .
A trifilar pendulum is a platform supported by three wires designed to oscillate in torsion around its vertical centroidal axis .
The period of oscillation of the trifilar pendulum yields the moment of inertia of the system .
MOTION IN A FIXED PLANE POINT MASS Section::::Motion in a fixed plane .
Section::::Point mass .
The moment of inertia about an axis of a body is calculated by summing formula_1 for every particle in the body , where formula_2 is the perpendicular distance to the specified axis .
To see how moment of inertia arises in the study of the movement of an extended body , it is convenient to consider a rigid assembly of point masses .
( This equation can be used for axes that are not principal axes provided that it is understood that this does not fully describe the moment of inertia . )
Consider the kinetic energy of an assembly of formula_74 masses formula_75 that lie at the distances formula_76 from the pivot point formula_51 , which is the nearest point on the axis of rotation .
It is the sum of the kinetic energy of the individual masses ,
This shows that the moment of inertia of the body is the sum of each of the formula_1 terms , that is Thus , moment of inertia is a physical property that combines the mass and distribution of the particles around the rotation axis .
Notice that rotation about different axes of the same body yield different moments of inertia .
The moment of inertia of a continuous body rotating about a specified axis is calculated in the same way , except with infinitely many point particles .
Thus the limits of summation are removed , and the sum is written as follows : Another expression replaces the summation with an integral , Here , the function formula_83 gives the mass density at each point
formula_84 , formula_28 is a vector perpendicular to the axis of rotation and extending from a point on the rotation axis to a point formula_84 in the solid , and the integration is evaluated over the volume formula_87 of the body formula_88 .
The moment of inertia of a flat surface is similar with the mass density being replaced by its areal mass density with the integral evaluated over its area .
Note on second moment of area : The moment of inertia of a body moving in a plane and the second moment of area of a beam 's cross - section are often confused .
The moment of inertia of a body with the shape of the cross - section is the second moment of this area about the formula_89-axis perpendicular to the cross - section , weighted by its density .
This is also called the polar moment of the area , and is the sum of the second moments about the formula_90- and formula_91-axes .
The stresses in a beam are calculated using the second moment of the cross - sectional area around either the formula_90-axis or formula_91-axis depending on the load .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
The moment of inertia of a compound pendulum constructed from a thin disc mounted at the end of a thin rod that oscillates around a pivot at the other end of the rod , begins with the calculation of the moment of inertia of the thin rod and thin disc about their respective centers of mass .
where formula_94 is the mass of the rod .
where formula_101 is its mass .
where formula_5 is the length of the pendulum .
Notice that the parallel axis theorem is used to shift the moment of inertia from the center of mass to the pivot point of the pendulum .
A list of moments of inertia formulas for standard body shapes provides a way to obtain the moment of inertia of a complex body as an assembly of simpler shaped bodies .
The parallel axis theorem is used to shift the reference point of the individual bodies to the reference point of the assembly .
As one more example , consider the moment of inertia of a solid sphere of constant density about an axis through its center of mass .
This is determined by summing the moments of inertia of the thin discs that form the sphere .
If the surface of the ball is defined by the equation then the radius formula_2 of the disc at the cross - section formula_89 along the formula_89-axis is
Therefore , the moment of inertia of the ball is the sum of the moments of inertia of the discs along the formula_89-axis , where formula_112 is the mass of the sphere .
RIGID BODY Section::::Rigid body .
If a mechanical system is constrained to move parallel to a fixed plane , then the rotation of a body in the system occurs around an axis formula_34 perpendicular to this plane .
In this case , the moment of inertia of the mass in this system is a scalar known as the polar moment of inertia .
The definition of the polar moment of inertia can be obtained by considering momentum , kinetic energy and Newton 's laws for the planar movement of a rigid system of particles .
If a system of formula_114 particles , formula_115 , are assembled into a rigid body , then the momentum of the system can be written in terms of positions relative to a reference point formula_116 , and absolute velocities formula_117 : where formula_40 is the angular velocity of the system and formula_120 is the velocity of formula_116 .
For planar movement the angular velocity vector is directed along the unit vector formula_122 which is perpendicular to the plane of movement .
Introduce the unit vectors formula_123 from the reference point formula_116 to a point formula_125 , and the unit vector formula_126 , so This defines the relative position vector and the velocity vector for the rigid system of the particles moving in a plane .
Note on the cross product : When a body moves parallel to a ground plane , the trajectories of all the points in the body lie in planes parallel to this ground plane .
This means that any rotation that the body undergoes must be around an axis perpendicular to this plane .
Planar movement is often presented as projected onto this ground plane so that the axis of rotation appears as a point .
In this case , the angular velocity and angular acceleration of the body are scalars and the fact that they are vectors along the rotation axis is ignored .
This is usually preferred for introductions to the topic .
But in the case of moment of inertia , the combination of mass and geometry benefits from the geometric properties of the cross product .
For this reason , in this section on planar movement the angular velocity and accelerations of the body are vectors perpendicular to the ground plane , and the cross product operations are the same as used for the study of spatial rigid body movement .
ANGULAR MOMENTUM Section::::Angular momentum .
The angular momentum vector for the planar movement of a rigid system of particles is given by Use the center of mass formula_129 as the reference point
so and define the moment of inertia relative to the center of mass formula_131 as then the equation for angular momentum simplifies to
The moment of inertia formula_131 about an axis perpendicular to the movement of the rigid system and through the center of mass is known as the polar moment of inertia .
Specifically , it is the second moment of mass with respect to the orthogonal distance from an axis ( or pole ) .
For a given amount of angular momentum , a decrease in the moment of inertia results in an increase in the angular velocity .
Figure skaters can change their moment of inertia by pulling in their arms .
Thus , the angular velocity achieved by a skater with outstretched arms results in a greater angular velocity when the arms are pulled in , because of the reduced moment of inertia .
A figure skater is not , however , a rigid body .
KINETIC ENERGY Section::::Kinetic energy .
The kinetic energy of a rigid system of particles moving in the plane is given by
Let the reference point be the center of mass formula_129 of the system so the second term becomes zero , and introduce the moment of inertia formula_131 so the kinetic energy is given by
The moment of inertia formula_131 is the polar moment of inertia of the body .
NEWTON 'S LAWS
Section::::Newton 's laws .
Newton 's laws for a rigid system of formula_114 particles , formula_115 , can be written in terms of a resultant force and torque at a reference point formula_116 , to yield where formula_125 denotes the trajectory of each particle .
The kinematics of a rigid body yields the formula for the acceleration of the particle formula_145 in terms of the position formula_116 and acceleration formula_147 of the reference particle as well as the angular velocity vector formula_40 and angular acceleration vector formula_30 of the rigid system of particles as ,
For systems that are constrained to planar movement , the angular velocity and angular acceleration vectors are directed along formula_34 perpendicular to the plane of movement , which simplifies this acceleration equation .
In this case , the acceleration vectors can be simplified by introducing the unit vectors formula_152 from the reference point formula_116 to a point formula_125 and the unit vectors formula_126 , so This yields the resultant torque on the system as where formula_158 , and formula_159 is the unit vector perpendicular to the plane for all of the particles formula_145 .
Use the center of mass formula_129 as the reference point and define the moment of inertia relative to the center of mass formula_131 , then the equation for the resultant torque simplifies to MOTION IN SPACE OF A RIGID BODY , AND THE INERTIA MATRIX Section::::Motion in space of a rigid body , and the inertia matrix .
The scalar moments of inertia appear as elements in a matrix when a system of particles is assembled into a rigid body that moves in three - dimensional space .
This inertia matrix appears in the calculation of the angular momentum , kinetic energy and resultant torque of the rigid system of particles .
Let the system of formula_114 particles , formula_115 be located at the coordinates formula_125 with velocities formula_117 relative to a fixed reference frame .
For a ( possibly moving ) reference point formula_116 , the relative positions are and the ( absolute ) velocities are where formula_40 is the angular velocity of the system , and formula_172 is the velocity of formula_116 .
ANGULAR MOMENTUM Section::::Angular momentum .
Note that the cross product can be equivalently written as matrix multiplication by combining the first operand and the operator into a , skew - symmetric , matrix , formula_174 , constructed from the components of formula_175 :
The inertia matrix is constructed by considering the angular momentum , with the reference point formula_116 of the body chosen to be the center of mass formula_129 : where the terms containing formula_172 ( formula_181 ) sum to zero by the definition of center of mass .
Then , the skew - symmetric matrix formula_182 obtained from the relative position vector formula_183 , can be used to define , where formula_185 defined by is the symmetric inertia matrix of the rigid system of particles measured relative to the center of mass formula_129 .
KINETIC ENERGY Section::::Kinetic energy .
The kinetic energy of a rigid system of particles can be formulated in terms of the center of mass and a matrix of mass moments of inertia of the system .
Let the system of formula_114 particles formula_115 be located at the coordinates formula_125 with velocities formula_117 , then the kinetic energy is where formula_183 is the position vector of a particle relative to the center of mass .
This equation expands to yield three terms
The second term in this equation is zero because formula_129 is the center of mass .
Introduce the skew - symmetric matrix formula_182
so the kinetic energy becomes
Thus , the kinetic energy of the rigid system of particles is given by where formula_185 is the inertia matrix relative to the center of mass and formula_200 is the total mass .
RESULTANT TORQUE Section::::Resultant torque .
The inertia matrix appears in the application of Newton 's second law to a rigid assembly of particles .
The resultant torque on this system is , where formula_202 is the acceleration of the particle formula_145 .
The kinematics of a rigid body yields the formula for the acceleration of the particle formula_145 in terms of the position formula_116 and acceleration formula_206 of the reference point , as well as the angular velocity vector formula_40 and angular acceleration vector formula_30 of the rigid system as , Use the center of mass formula_129 as the reference point , and introduce the skew - symmetric matrix formula_211 to represent the cross product formula_212 , to obtain
The calculation uses the identity obtained from the Jacobi identity for the triple cross product as shown in the proof below : !
Proof formula_215
Then , the following Jacobi identity is used on the last term :
The result of applying Jacobi identity can then be continued as follows :
The final result can then be substituted to the main proof as follows : formula_219
Notice that for any vector formula_220 , the following holds : Finally , the result is used to complete the main proof as follows :
Thus , the resultant torque on the rigid system of particles is given by where formula_185 is the inertia matrix relative to the center of mass .
PARALLEL AXIS THEOREM
Section::::Parallel axis theorem .
The inertia matrix of a body depends on the choice of the reference point .
There is a useful relationship between the inertia matrix relative to the center of mass formula_129 and the inertia matrix relative to another point formula_116 .
This relationship is called the parallel axis theorem .
Consider the inertia matrix formula_227 obtained for a rigid system of particles measured relative to a reference point formula_116 , given by
Let formula_129 be the center of mass of the rigid system , then where formula_232 is the vector from the center of mass formula_129 to the reference point formula_116 .
Use this equation to compute the inertia matrix , Distribute over the cross product to obtain The first term is the inertia matrix formula_185 relative to the center of mass .
The second and third terms are zero by definition of the center of mass formula_129 .
And the last term is the total mass of the system multiplied by the square of the skew - symmetric matrix formula_239 constructed from formula_232 .
The result is the parallel axis theorem , where formula_232 is the vector from the center of mass formula_129 to the reference point formula_116 .
Note on the minus sign :
By using the skew symmetric matrix of position vectors relative to the reference point , the inertia matrix of each particle has the form formula_245 , which is similar to the formula_1 that appears in planar movement .
However , to make this to work out correctly a minus sign is needed .
This minus sign can be absorbed into the term formula_247 , if desired , by using the skew - symmetry property of formula_248 .
SCALAR MOMENT OF INERTIA IN A PLANE
Section::::Scalar moment of inertia in a plane .
The scalar moment of inertia , formula_249 , of a body about a specified axis whose direction is specified by the unit vector
formula_34 and passes through the body at a point formula_116 is as follows : where formula_227 is the moment of inertia matrix of the system relative to the reference point formula_116 , and
formula_182 is the skew symmetric matrix obtained from the vector formula_169 .
This is derived as follows .
Let a rigid assembly of formula_114 particles , formula_115 , have coordinates formula_125 .
Choose formula_116 as a reference point and compute the moment of inertia around a line L defined by the unit vector formula_34 through the reference point formula_116 , formula_263 .
The perpendicular vector from this line to the particle formula_145 is obtained from formula_265 by removing the component that projects onto formula_34 . where formula_268 is the identity matrix , so as to avoid confusion with the inertia matrix , and formula_269 is the outer product matrix formed from the unit vector formula_34 along the line formula_5 .
To relate this scalar moment of inertia to the inertia matrix of the body , introduce the skew - symmetric matrix formula_272 such that formula_273 , then we have the identity noting that formula_34 is a unit vector .
The magnitude squared of the perpendicular vector
is
The simplification of this equation uses the triple scalar product identity where the dot and the cross products have been interchanged .
Exchanging products , and simplifying by noting that formula_265 and formula_34 are orthogonal :
Thus , the moment of inertia around the line formula_5 through formula_116 in the direction formula_34 is obtained from the calculation where formula_227 is the moment of inertia matrix of the system relative to the reference point formula_116 .
This shows that the inertia matrix can be used to calculate the moment of inertia of a body around any specified rotation axis in the body .
INERTIA TENSOR Section::::Inertia tensor .
The inertia matrix is often described as the inertia tensor , which consists of the same moments of inertia and products of inertia about the three coordinate axes .
The inertia tensor is constructed from the nine component tensors , ( the symbol formula_287 is the tensor product ) where formula_289 are the three orthogonal unit vectors defining the inertial frame in which the body moves .
Using this basis the inertia tensor is given by
This tensor is of degree two because the component tensors are each constructed from two basis vectors .
In this form the inertia tensor is also called the inertia binor .
For a rigid system of particles formula_291 each of mass formula_292 with position coordinates
formula_293 , the inertia tensor is given by where formula_268 is the identity tensor
In this case , the components of the inertia tensor are given by
The inertia tensor for a continuous body is given by where formula_28 defines the coordinates of a point in the body and formula_300 is the mass density at that point .
The integral is taken over the volume formula_87 of the body .
The inertia tensor is symmetric because formula_302 .
Alternatively it can also be written in terms of the angular momentum operator formula_303 :
The inertia tensor can be used in the same way as the inertia matrix to compute the scalar moment of inertia about an arbitrary axis in the direction formula_305 , where the dot product is taken with the corresponding elements in the component tensors .
A product of inertia term such as formula_307 is obtained by the computation and can be interpreted as the moment of inertia around the formula_90-axis when the object rotates around the formula_91-axis .
The components of tensors of degree two can be assembled into a matrix .
For the inertia tensor this matrix is given by ,
It is common in rigid body mechanics to use notation that explicitly identifies the formula_90 , formula_91 , and formula_89-axes , such as formula_315 and formula_316 , for the components of the inertia tensor .
INERTIA MATRIX IN DIFFERENT REFERENCE FRAMES Section::::Inertia matrix in different reference frames .
The use of the inertia matrix in Newton 's second law assumes its components are computed relative to axes parallel to the inertial frame and not relative to a body - fixed reference frame .
This means that as the body moves the components of the inertia matrix change with time .
In contrast , the components of the inertia matrix measured in a body - fixed frame are constant .
BODY FRAME Section::::Body frame .
Let the body frame inertia matrix relative to the center of mass be denoted formula_317 , and define the orientation of the body frame relative to the inertial frame by the rotation matrix formula_147 , such that , where vectors formula_320 in the body fixed coordinate frame have coordinates formula_321 in the inertial frame .
Then , the inertia matrix of the body measured in the inertial frame is given by Notice that formula_147 changes as the body moves , while formula_317 remains constant .
PRINCIPAL AXES Section::::Principal axes .
Measured in the body frame the inertia matrix is a constant real symmetric matrix .
A real symmetric matrix has the eigendecomposition into the product of a rotation matrix formula_325 and a diagonal matrix formula_326 , given by where The columns of the rotation matrix formula_325 define the directions of the principal axes of the body , and the constants formula_330 , formula_331 , and formula_332 are called the principal moments of inertia .
This result was first shown by J. J. Sylvester ( 1852 ) , and is a form of Sylvester 's law of inertia .
For bodies with constant density an axis of rotational symmetry is a principal axis .
ELLIPSOID
Section::::Ellipsoid .
The moment of inertia matrix in body - frame coordinates is a quadratic form that defines a surface in the body called Poinsot 's ellipsoid .
Let formula_326 be the inertia matrix relative to the center of mass aligned with the principal axes , then the surface or defines an ellipsoid in the body frame .
Write this equation in the form , to see that the semi - principal diameters of this ellipsoid are given by Let a point formula_321 on this ellipsoid be defined in terms of its magnitude and direction , formula_339 , where formula_305 is a unit vector .
Then the relationship presented above , between the inertia matrix and the scalar moment of inertia formula_341 around an axis in the direction formula_305 , yields
Thus , the magnitude of a point formula_321 in the direction formula_305 on the inertia ellipsoid is SEE ALSO
* Central moment
* List of moments of inertia
* Rotational energy
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Angular momentum and rigid - body rotation in two and three dimensions
* Lecture notes on rigid - body rotation and moments of inertia
* The moment of inertia tensor
* An introductory lesson on moment of inertia : keeping a vertical pole not falling down ( Java simulation )
* Tutorial on finding moments of inertia , with problems and solutions on various basic shapes * Notes on mechanics of manipulation : the angular inertia tensor