ALL IN THE FAMILY
All in the Family is an American sitcom TV - series that was originally broadcast on the CBS television network for nine seasons , from January 12 , 1971 to April 8 , 1979 .
The following September , it was continued with the spin - off series Archie Bunker 's Place , which picked up where All in the Family had ended and ran for four more seasons .
All in the Family was produced by Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin .
It starred Carroll O'Connor , Jean Stapleton , Sally Struthers , and Rob Reiner .
The show revolves around the life of a working - class bigot and his family .
The show broke ground in its depiction of issues previously considered unsuitable for a U.S. network television comedy , such as racism , antisemitism , infidelity , homosexuality , women 's liberation , rape , religion , miscarriages , abortion , breast cancer , the Vietnam War , menopause , and impotence .
Through depicting these controversial issues , the series became arguably one of television 's most influential comedic programs , as it injected the sitcom format with more dramatic moments and realistic , topical conflicts .
The show was an American version of an earlier British show , the BBC sitcom
Till
Death Us Do Part , with Archie Bunker modeled after his British counterpart , Alf Garnett .
All in the Family is often regarded in the United States as one of the greatest television series of all time .
Following a lackluster first season , the show soon became the most watched show in the United States during summer reruns and afterwards ranked number one in the yearly Nielsen ratings from 1971 to 1976 .
It became the first television series to reach the milestone of having topped the Nielsen ratings for five consecutive years .
The episode " Sammy 's Visit " was ranked number 13 on TV Guide 's 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time .
TV Guide 's 50 Greatest TV Shows of All Time ranked All in the Family as number four .
Bravo also named the show 's protagonist , Archie Bunker , TV 's greatest character of all time .
In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America ranked All in the Family the fourth - best written TV series ever , and TV Guide ranked it as the fourth - greatest show of all time .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
All in the Family is about a typical working - class Caucasian family living in Queens , New York .
Its patriarch is Archie Bunker ( O'Connor ) , an outspoken , narrow - minded man , seemingly prejudiced against everyone who is not like him or his idea of how people should be .
Archie 's wife Edith ( Jean Stapleton ) is sweet and understanding , though somewhat naïve and uneducated ; her husband sometimes disparagingly calls her " dingbat " .
Their one child , Gloria ( Sally Struthers ) , is generally kind and good - natured like her mother , but displays traces of her father 's stubbornness and temper ; unlike them , however , she is a feminist .
Gloria is married to college student Michael Stivic ( Reiner)referred to as " Meathead " by Archiewhose values are likewise influenced and shaped by the counterculture of the 1960s .
The two couples represent the real - life clash of values between the Greatest Generation and Baby Boomers .
For much of the series , the Stivics live in the Bunkers ' home to save money , providing abundant opportunity for them to irritate each other .
The show is set in the Astoria section of Queens , with the vast majority of scenes taking place in the Bunkers ' home at 704 Hauser Street .
Occasional scenes take place in other locations , especially during later seasons , such as Kelsey 's Bar , a neighborhood tavern where Archie spends a good deal of time and eventually purchases , and the Stivics ' home after Mike and Gloria move to the house next door .
The house seen in the opening is at 89 - 70 Cooper Avenue near the junction of the Glendale , Forest Hills , and Rego Park sections of Queens .
Supporting characters represent the demographics of the neighborhood , especially the Jeffersons , a black family , who live in the house next door in the early seasons .
CAST MAIN CHARACTERS
* Carroll O'Connor as Archie Bunker : Frequently called a " lovable bigot " , Archie was an assertively prejudiced blue - collar worker .
A World War II veteran , Archie longs for better times when people sharing his viewpoint were in charge , as evidenced by the nostalgic theme song "
Those Were the Days " ( also the show 's original title ) .
Despite his bigotry , he is portrayed as loving and decent , as well as a man who is simply struggling to adapt to the changes in the world , rather than someone motivated by hateful racism or prejudice .
His ignorance and stubbornness seem to cause his malapropism - filled arguments to self - destruct .
He often rejects uncomfortable truths by blowing a raspberry .
Former child actor Mickey Rooney was Lear 's first choice to play Archie , but Rooney declined the offer because of the strong potential for controversy , and in Rooney 's opinion , a poor chance for success .
Scott Brady , formerly of the Western series Shotgun Slade , also declined the role of Archie Bunker , but appeared four times on the series in 1976 in the role of Joe Foley .
O'Connor appears in all but seven episodes of the series ' run .
* Jean Stapleton as Edith Bunker , née Baines : Edith is Archie 's ditzy but kind - hearted wife .
Archie often tells her to " stifle " herself and calls her a " dingbat " , and although Edith generally defers to her husband 's authority and endures his insults , on the rare occasions when Edith takes a stand , she proves to have a simple but profound wisdom .
Despite their different personalities , they love each other deeply .
Stapleton developed Edith 's distinctive voice .
Stapleton remained with the show through the original series run , but decided to leave at that time .
During the first season of Archie Bunker 's Place , Edith was seen in five of the first 14 episodes in guest appearances .
After that point , Edith was written out as having suffered a stroke and died off - camera , leaving Archie to deal with the death of his beloved " dingbat " .
Stapleton appeared in all but four episodes of All in the Family .
In the series ' first episode , Edith is portrayed as being less of a dingbat and even sarcastically refers to her husband as " Mr. Religion , here ... " after they come home from church , something her character would not be expected to say later .
* Sally Struthers as Gloria Stivic , née Bunker : The Bunkers ' college - aged daughter who is married to Michael Stivic .
She has the generally kind nature of her mother , but the stubbornness of her father , which early in the series manifests as childishness , later as a more mature feminism .
Gloria frequently attempts to mediate between her father and husband , generally siding with the latter .
The roles of the Bunkers ' daughter and son - in - law ( then named " Dickie " ) initially went to Candice Azzara and Chip Oliver .
However , after seeing the show 's pilot , ABC requested a second pilot expressing dissatisfaction with both actors .
Lear later recast the roles of Gloria and Dickie with Struthers and Reiner .
Penny Marshall ( Reiner 's wife , whom he married in April 1971 , shortly after the program began ) was also considered for the role of Gloria .
During the earlier seasons of the show , Struthers was known to be discontented with how static her part was and , in 1974 , sued to get out of her contract .
But the character became more developed , satisfying her .
Struthers appeared in 157 of the 202 episodes during the first eight seasons — from January 12 , 1971 to March 19 , 1978 .
She later reprised the role in the spin - off series Gloria , which lasted for a single season in 1982–1983 .
* Rob Reiner as Michael " the Meathead " Stivic :
Gloria 's Polish - American hippie husband is part of the counterculture of the 1960s .
While good - hearted and well - meaning , he constantly spars with Archie , and is equally stubborn , although his moral views are generally presented as being more ethical and his logic somewhat sounder .
He is the most - educated person in the household , a fact which gives him a self - assured arrogance , and despite his intellectual belief in progressive social values , he tends to expect Gloria to defer to him as her husband .
As discussed in All in the Family retrospectives , Richard Dreyfuss sought the part , but Norman Lear was convinced to cast Reiner .
Harrison Ford turned down the role , citing Archie Bunker 's bigotry .
Reiner appeared in 174 of the 202 episodes of the series during the first eight seasons — from January 12 , 1971 to March 19 , 1978 .
Reiner is also credited with writing three of the series ' episodes .
* Danielle Brisebois as the cute nine - year - old daughter of one of Edith 's cousins , Stephanie Mills , who is a regular throughout the ninth season .
Despite being cute and having a sweet side , she is smart , clever , and does give her own few remarks at Archie from time to time .
The Bunkers take her in after the child 's father , Floyd Mills , abandons her on their doorstep in 1978 ( he later extorts money from them to let them keep her ) .
She remained with the show through its transition to Archie Bunker 's Place , and appeared in all four seasons of the latter show .
SUPPORTING CHARACTERS * Sherman Hemsley as George Jefferson , Isabel Sanford as his wife Louise , and Mike Evans as their son Lionel , Archie 's black neighbors : George is Archie 's combative black counterpart , while Louise is a smarter , more assertive version of Edith .
Lionel first appeared in the series ' premiere episode " Meet the Bunkers " , with Louise appearing later in the first season .
Although George had been mentioned many times , he was not seen until 1973 .
Hemsley , who was Norman Lear 's first choice to play George , was performing in the Broadway musical Purlie and did not want to break his commitment to that show .
However , Lear kept the role waiting for him until he had finished with the musical .
Plots frequently find Archie and George at odds with one another , while Edith and Louise attempt to join forces to bring about a resolution .
They later moved to an apartment in Manhattan in their own show , The Jeffersons .
* Mel Stewart , as George 's brother Henry Jefferson : The two appeared together only once , in the 1973 episode in which the Bunkers host Henry 's going - away party , marking Stewart 's final episode and Hemsley 's first .
After the Jeffersons were spun off into their own show in 1975 , Stewart 's character was rarely referred to again and was never seen .
In the closing credits of " " episode , Mel Stewart is incorrectly credited as playing George Jefferson .
Stewart was actually playing George 's brother , Henry Jefferson , who was pretending to be George for most of the episode .
( Season 1 - 4 , 8 episodes )
* Bea Arthur as Edith 's cousin Maude : Maude was white - collared and ultra - liberal , the perfect foil to Archie , and one of his main antagonists .
She appeared in only two episodes , " Cousin Maude 's Visit " , where she took care of the Bunker household when all four were sick , and " Maude " from the show 's second season , which was basically a backdoor pilot .
Her spin - off series , Maude , began in fall 1972 .
( Season 2 , 2 episodes )
* Betty Garrett and Vincent Gardenia as the liberal and Roman Catholic next - door neighbors Irene and Frank Lorenzo : Both first appeared as a married couple as Irene was trying to use the Bunker 's phone .
During an argument earlier in the episode , Archie and Mike had broken the phone wire .
Irene being a ' handyman ' of sorts with her own tools , which she carried in her purse , fixed it .
Irene fixed many things at the Bunker house during her time on the show .
She also had a sister who was a nun and appeared in one episode . "
Edith 's Christmas Story " reveals that Irene has had a mastectomy .
Archie got her a job as a forklift operator at the plant where he worked .
Irene was a strong - willed woman of Irish heritage , and Frank was a jovial Italian househusband who loved cooking and singing .
He also was a salesman , but what he sold was never said .
Gardenia , who also appeared as Jim Bowman in episode eight of season one ( as the man who sold his house to the Jeffersons ) and as Curtis Rempley in episode seven of season three ( as a swinger opposite Rue McClanahan ) , became a semi - regular along with Garrett in 1973 .
Gardenia only stayed for one season as Frank Lorenzo , but Garrett remained until her character was phased - out in late 1975 .
( Season 4 - 6 ) * Allan Melvin as Archie 's neighbor and good friend Barney Hefner :
Barney first appeared in 1972 as a recurring character .
His appearances increased during subsequent seasons until he became a regular .
He appeared as a regular in all four seasons of Archie Bunker 's Place .
He also appeared in the first season as a desk sergeant at a police precinct .
RECURRING CHARACTERS * James Cromwell as Jerome " Stretch " Cunningham ( 1973–1976 ) "
The Funniest Man in The World " , Archie 's friend and co - worker from the loading dock
( Archie claims that he is known as the " Bob Hope " of the loading platform ) : What Archie did not know was that Stretch was Jewish , evident only after Stretch died and Archie went to the funeral .
Archie 's eulogy ( or " urology " as he called it ) for his friend is often referred to as a rare occasion when he was capable of showing the humanity he tried so earnestly to hide .
In the episode titled " Archie in the Cellar " , Billy Sands is referred to as Stretch Cunningham , the voice on the tape recorder telling jokes .
Sands also appeared as other characters on the show during its run , in Kelsey 's Bar as a patron .
( Season 5 , 3 episodes )
* Liz Torres as Theresa Betancourt ( 1976–1977 ) : A Puerto Rican nursing student who meets Archie when he is admitted to the hospital for surgery .
She later rents Mike and Gloria 's former room at the Bunker house .
She called Archie " Papi " .
Torres had just completed the first season of the CBS sitcom Phyllis in the spring of 1976 before being dropped from the cast .
( She had replaced the late actress Barbara Colby in the role of Julie Erskine . )
Torres joined All in the Family in the fall of 1976 , but her character was not popular with viewers , and the role was phased out before the end of the season .
( Season 7 , 7 episodes )
* Billy Halop as Mr. Munson ( 1971–74 ) , the cab driver who lets Archie use his cab to make extra money .
( Season 1 - 3 & 5 - 6 , 10 episodes )
* Bob Hastings as Kelcy or Tommy Kelsey , who owns the bar Archie frequents and later buys : Kelcy was also played by Frank Maxwell in the episode
" Archie Gets The Business " .
The name of the establishment is Kelcy 's Bar ( as seen in the bar window in various episodes ) .
However , due to a continuity error , the end credits of episodes involving the bar owner spell the name " Kelcy " for the first two seasons and " Kelsey " thereafter , although the end credits show " Kelcy " in the " " episode .
* Jason Wingreen as Harry Snowden , a bartender at Kelcy 's Bar who continues to work there after Archie purchases it as his business partner : Harry had tried to buy the bar from Kelcy , but Archie was able to come up with the money first , by taking a mortgage out on his house , which the Bunkers owned outright .
* Gloria LeRoy as Mildred " Boom - Boom " Turner , a buxom , middle - aged secretary at the plant where Archie works : Her first appearance was when Archie is lost on his way to a convention and Mike and Gloria suspect he and she could be having an affair .
Archie gave her that moniker as she was walking by the loading dock .
He said when she walked , " Boom - Boom " .
She is not fond of Archie because he and Stretch leer at her and because of their sexist behavior , but later becomes friendly with him , occasionally working as a barmaid at Archie 's Place .
Gloria LeRoy also appeared in a third - season episode as " Bobbi Jo " Loomis , the wife of Archie 's old war buddy " Duke " .
* Barnard Hughes as Father Majeskie , a local Catholic priest who was suspected by Archie one time of trying to convert Edith : He appeared in multiple episodes .
The first time was when Edith accidentally hit Majeskie 's car near the local supermarket with a can of cling peaches in heavy syrup .
( Season 2,3 & 4 , 3 episodes )
* Eugene Roche appeared as practical jokester friend and fellow lodge member " Pinky Peterson " , one of Archie Bunker 's buddies , in three episodes , first in the episode " Beverly Rides Again " , then the memorable Christmas Day episode called " The Draft Dodger " ( episode 146 , 1976 ) , and finally the episode " Archie 's Other Wife " .
( Season 7 & 9 , 3 episodes )
*
Sorrell Booke as Lyle Sanders , personnel manager at Archie Bunker 's workplace , Prendergast Tool and Die Company : He had appeared on the series as Lyle Bennett , the manager of a local television station , in the episode " Archie and the Editorial " in season three .
*
Lori Shannon played Beverly La Salle , a transvestite entertainer , who appeared in three episodes : " Archie the Hero " , " Beverly Rides Again " , and " Edith 's Crisis of Faith " .
In that third episode , Mike and Beverly are attacked , and he dies in a hospital from injuries suffered during the fight .
* Estelle Parsons as Blanche Hefner ( 1977–1979 )
, Barney 's second wife :
Blanche and Archie are not fond of one another , though Edith likes her very much .
The character is mentioned throughout much of the series after Barney 's first wife , Mabel , had died , though she only appeared in a handful of episodes during the last few seasons .
Estelle Parsons also appeared in the season - seven episode " Archie 's Secret Passion " as Dolores Fencel .
( Season 7 & 9 )
* Bill Quinn as Mr. Edgar van Ranseleer ( Mr. van R ) , a blind patron and regular at the bar : He was almost never referred to by his first name .
In a running joke , Archie usually waves his hand in front of Mr. van R 's face when he speaks to him .
His role was later expanded on Archie Bunker 's Place , where he appeared in all four seasons .
* Burt Mustin as Justin Quigley , a feisty octogenarian / nonagenarian : Mr. Quigley first appeared in the episode :
" Edith Finds an Old Man " ( season four , episode three , Sept 23 , 1973 )
where he runs away from an old age home .
He temporarily moves in with the Bunkers but quickly leaves to share an apartment with his friend Josephine " Jo " Nelson , played by Ruth McDevitt .
He appeared in several other episodes , including " Archie 's Weighty Problem " .
Mr. Mustin previously appeared in a first - season episode as Harry Feeney , the night watchman at Archie 's workplace .
( 1 , 4 - 6 , 5 episodes )
* Nedra Volz as Aunt Iola : Edith 's aunt , she was mentioned several times in the eighth season and stayed with the Bunkers for two weeks .
Edith wanted her to move in , but Archie would not allow it , though when he thought Iola did not have any place to go , he told her privately that she could always stay with them .
* Francine Beers and Jane Connell as Sybil Gooley , who worked at Ferguson 's Market : Frequently mentioned , usually by Edith , Sybil predicted that Gloria and Mike were having a baby boy by performing a ring on a string " swing test " over Gloria 's abdomen .
Sybil also appeared in the episode " Edith 's 50th Birthday " and spilled the beans on her surprise party because she had not been invited .
Archie and she did not get along , and he referred to her as a " Big Mouth " .
* Rae Allen and Elizabeth Wilson as Cousin Amelia :
Archie detested Amelia and her husband , Russ , who were both wealthy .
Once , she sent Edith a mink and Archie wanted to send it back , until he found out how much it was worth .
In another episode , Amelia and her husband visit the Bunkers to bring them gifts from a recent trip to Hawaii , but in a private moment , Amelia shares with Edith that , despite appearances , she and Russ are considering a divorce .
The character was played by two different actresses in three episodes of the show .
* Richard Dysart and George S. Irving as Russ DeKuyper , Amelia 's husband .
He is a plumbing contractor who continued the business started by Amelia 's father and uncles .
He constantly flaunts his monetary wealth in front of Archie and looks askance at the way Archie lives , forgetting that he walked into a profitable plumbing business .
He appeared in two of the episodes that featured Amelia * Clyde Kusatsu as Reverend Chong appeared in three episodes .
He refused to baptize little Joey in season six , and then remarried Archie and Edith , and Mike and Gloria in season eight , and gave counsel to Stephanie in season nine as it was learned that she was Jewish .
( Season 6 , 8 & 9 , 3 episodes )
* Ruth McDevitt as Josephine " Jo " Nelson : She played the girlfriend of Justin Quigley , the older man Edith found walking around the supermarket .
She appeared in three episodes from seasons four through six .
Gloria and Mike adopted them as their godgrandparents .
Of most of the characters , Archie took a liking to Justin and Jo .
She died following the end of the sixth season .
( Season 4 & 5 , 3 episodes )
* William Benedict as Jimmy McNabb :
The Bunkers ' neighbor , he appeared in two episodes during the first and second seasons , and was referred to many times during the first few seasons .
* Jack Grimes as Mr. Whitehead : A member of Archie 's lodge , he was the local funeral director .
The death of Archie 's cousin Oscar in a season - two episode of All in the Family brings the very short , white - haired , and silver - tongued Whitehead with his catalog of caskets .
( Season 2 & 4 , 2 episodes ) HISTORY AND PRODUCTION Section::::History and production .
The show came about when Norman Lear read an article in Variety magazine on Till
Death Us Do Part and its success in the United Kingdom .
He immediately knew it portrayed a relationship just like the one between his father and himself .
Lear bought the rights to the show and incorporated his own family experiences with his father into the show .
Lear 's father would tell Lear 's mother to " stifle herself " and she would tell Lear 's father " you are the laziest white man I ever saw " ( two " Archieisms " that found their way onto the show ) .
The original pilot was titled Justice for All and was developed for ABC .
Tom Bosley , Jack Warden , and Jackie Gleason were all considered for the role of Archie Bunker .
In fact , CBS wanted to buy the rights to the original show and retool it specifically for Gleason , who was under contract to them , but producer Lear beat out CBS for the rights and offered the show to ABC .
In the pilot , Carroll O'Connor and Jean Stapleton played Archie and Edith Justice .
Kelly Jean Peters played Gloria and Tim McIntire played her husband , Richard .
It was taped in October 1968 in New York City .
After screening the first pilot , ABC gave the producers more money to shoot a second pilot , titled
Those Were the Days , which Lear taped in February 1969 in Hollywood .
Candice Azzara played Gloria and Chip Oliver played Richard .
D'Urville Martin played Lionel Jefferson in both pilots .
After stations ' and viewers ' complaints caused ABC to cancel Turn - On after only one episode in February 1969 , the network became uneasy about airing a show with a " foul - mouthed , bigoted lead " character , and rejected the series at about the time Richard Dreyfuss sought the role of Michael .
Rival network CBS was eager to update its image and was looking to replace much of its then popular " rural " programming ( Mayberry R.F.D. , The Beverly Hillbillies , Petticoat Junction , and Green Acres ) with more " urban " , contemporary series and was interested in Lear 's project .
CBS bought the rights from ABC and retitled the show All in the Family .
The pilot episode CBS developed had the final cast and was the series ' first episode .
Lear wanted to shoot in black and white as Till Death Us Do Part had been .
While CBS insisted on color , Lear had the set furnished in neutral tones , keeping everything relatively devoid of color .
As costume designer Rita Riggs described in her 2001 Archive of American Television interview , Lear 's idea was to create the feeling of sepia tones , in an attempt to make viewers feel as if they were looking at an old family album .
All in the Family was the first major American series to be videotaped in front of a live studio audience .
In the 1960s , most sitcoms had been filmed in the single - camera format without audiences , with a laugh track simulating an audience response .
Lear employed the multiple - camera format of shooting in front of an audience , but used tape , whereas previous multiple - camera shows like Mary Tyler Moore had used film .
Due to the success of All in the Family , videotaping sitcoms in front of an audience became a common format for the genre during the 1970s , ' 80s , and ' 90s .
The use of videotape also gave All in the Family the look and feel of early live television , including the original live broadcasts of The Honeymooners , to which All in the Family is sometimes compared .
For the show 's final season , the practice of being taped before a live audience changed to playing the already taped and edited show to an audience and recording their laughter to add to the original sound track .
Thus , the voice - over during the end credits was changed from Rob Reiner 's " All in the Family was recorded on tape before a live audience " to Carroll O'Connor 's " All in the Family was played to a studio audience for live responses " .
( Typically , the audience was gathered for a taping of One Day at a Time , and got to see All In the Family as a bonus . )
Throughout its run , Norman Lear took pride in the fact that canned laughter was never used ( mentioning this on many occasions ) ; the laughter heard in the episodes was genuine .
THEME SONG Section::::Theme song .
The series ' opening theme song "
Those Were The Days " , was written by Lee Adams ( lyrics ) and Charles Strouse ( music ) .
It was presented in a way that was unique for a 1970s series :
Carroll O'Connor and Jean Stapleton were seated at a console or spinet piano ( played by Stapleton ) and sang the tune together on - camera at the start of every episode , concluding with live - audience applause .
( The song dates back to the first Justice For All pilot , although on that occasion O'Connor and Stapleton performed the song off - camera and at a faster tempo than the series version . )
Six different performances were recorded over the run of the series , including one version that includes additional lyrics .
The song is a simple , pentatonic melody ( that can be played exclusively with black keys on a piano ) in which Archie and Edith wax nostalgic for the simpler days of yesteryear .
A longer version of the song was released as a single on Atlantic Records , reaching number 43 on the U.S.
Billboard Hot 100 and number 30 on the Billboard Adult Contemporary chart in early 1972
; the additional lyrics in this longer version lend the song a greater sense of sadness , and make poignant reference to social changes taking place in the 1960s and early 1970s .
Those Were The Days Boy , the way Glenn Miller played Songs that made the hit parade Guys like us , we had it made
Those were the days !
And you knew where you were then
Girls were girls , and men were men Mister , we could use a man like Herbert Hoover again Did n't need no welfare state
Everybody pulled his weight Gee
, our old LaSalle ran
great Those were the days !
In the original 1968 pilot episode an additional verse was sung :
Had my twelve - tube radio Loved The Eddie Cantor Show
Oh where did all that beauty go ?
Those were the days !
A few perceptible drifts can be observed when listening to each version chronologically .
In the original version , the lyric " Those Were The Days " was sung over the tonic ( root chord of the song 's key ) , and the piano strikes a dominant 7th passing chord in transition to the next part , which is absent from subsequent versions .
Jean Stapleton 's screeching high note on the line "
And you knew who you WEEERRE then " became louder , longer , and more comical , although only in the original version did the line draw a laugh from the audience .
Carroll O'Connor 's pronunciation of " welfare state " gained more of Archie 's trademark whining enunciation , and the closing lyrics ( especially " Gee , our old LaSalle ran great " ) were sung with increasingly deliberate articulation , as viewers had complained that they could not understand the words .
Also in the original version , the camera angle was shot slightly from the right side of the talent as opposed to the straight on angle of the next version .
Jean Stapleton performed the theme song without glasses beginning in season 6 .
In addition to O'Connor and Stapleton singing , footage is also shown beginning with aerial shots of Manhattan , and continuing to Queens , progressively zooming in , culminating with a still shot of a lower middle - class semidetached home , presumably representing the Bunkers ' house in Astoria .
The house shown in the opening credits , however , is actually located at 89–70 Cooper Avenue in the Glendale section of Queens , New York .
A notable difference exists , however , between the Cooper Avenue house and the All in the Family set : the Cooper Avenue house has no porch , while the Bunkers ' home featured a front porch .
The footage for the opening had been shot back in 1968 for the series ' first pilot , thus the establishing shot of the Manhattan skyline was completely devoid of the World Trade Center towers , which had not yet been built .
When the series aired two years later , the Trade Center towers , although under construction , had still not yet risen high enough to become a prominent feature on the Manhattan skyline ( this did not happen until the end of 1971 ) .
Despite this change in the Manhattan skyline , the original 1968 footage continued to be used for the series opening until the series transitioned into Archie Bunker 's Place in 1979 .
At that time , a new opening with current shots of the Manhattan skyline was used with the Trade Center towers being seen in the closing credits .
This opening format – showing actual footage of the cities and neighborhoods in which the show was set – became the standard for most of Norman Lear 's sitcoms , including Maude , Good Times , and The Jeffersons .
At the end of the opening , the camera then returns to a few final seconds of O'Connor and Stapleton , as they finish the song .
At the end of the original version , Edith smiles at Archie and Archie smiles off at a slight distance .
In the longest running version ( from season 2 to season 5 ) , Edith smiles blissfully at Archie , and Archie puts a cigar in his mouth and returns a rather cynical , sheepish look to Edith .
From season 6 through the season 8 , Edith smiles and rests her chin on Archie 's shoulder .
In the final season , Edith hugs Archie at the conclusion .
Additionally , in the first three versions of the opening , Archie is seen wearing his classic trademark white shirt .
In the last version of the opening for the series ' ninth season , Archie is seen wearing a grey sweater - jacket over his white shirt .
In all versions of the opening , the song 's conclusion is accompanied by applause from the studio audience .
In interviews , Norman Lear stated that the idea for the piano song introduction was a cost - cutting measure .
After completion of the pilot episode , the budget would not allow an elaborate scene to serve as the sequence played during the show 's opening credits .
Lear decided to have a simple scene of Archie and Edith singing at the piano .
The closing theme ( an instrumental ) was " Remembering You " played by Roger Kellaway with lyrics co - written by Carroll O'Connor .
It was played over footage of the same row of houses in Queens as in the opening ( but moving in the opposite direction down the street ) , and eventually moving back to aerial shots of Manhattan , suggesting the visit to the Bunkers ' home has concluded .
O'Connor recorded a vocal version of " Remembering You " for a record album , but though he performed it several times on TV appearances , the lyrics ( about the end of a romance ) were never heard in the actual series .
Except for some brief instances in the first season , scenes contained no background or transitional .
The opening of the animated series Family Guy is a spoof of this opening , as Peter and Lois Griffin are at the piano in their living room , singing , " It seems today that all you see is robbery and violence and sex on TV /
But where are those good old family values , on which we used to rely ? "
SETTING AND LOCATION Section::::Setting and location .
Lear and his writers set the series in the Queens neighborhood of Astoria .
The location of the Bunkers ' house at 704 Hauser Street is fictitious ( no Hauser Street exists in Queens ) .
The address is not presented the way addresses are given in Queens : most address numbers are hyphenated , containing the number of the nearest cross street .
Nevertheless , many episodes reveal that the Bunkers live near the major thoroughfare Northern Boulevard , which was the location of Kelsey 's Bar and later Archie Bunker 's Place .
The façade of the house shown at the show opening is a home located at 89 - 70 Cooper Avenue , Glendale , Queens , New York , across from St. John Cemetery ( ) .
Many real Queens institutions are mentioned throughout the series .
Carroll O'Connor , a Queens native from Forest Hills , said in an interview with the Archive of American Television that he suggested to the writers many of the locations to give the series authenticity .
For example , Archie is revealed to have attended Flushing High School , a real high school located in Flushing , Queens ( although in the " Man Of The Year " episode of Archie Bunker 's Place , Archie attended Bryant High School in nearby Long Island City , graduating in 1940 ) .
As another example , the 1976 episode " The Baby Contest " deals with Archie entering baby Joey in a cutest baby contest sponsored by the Long Island Daily Press , a then - operating local newspaper in Queens and Long Island .
The writers of All in the Family continued throughout the series to have the Bunkers and other characters use telephone exchange names when giving a telephone number ( most other series at the time , such as The Mary Tyler Moore Show , were using the standard fictitious 555 telephone exchange ) at a time when the Bell System was trying to discontinue them .
At different times throughout the series , the telephone exchanges Ravenswood and Bayside were used for the Bunkers ' telephone number .
Both exchanges were and still are applicable names for phone numbers in the neighborhoods of Astoria and Bayside .
This may have had to do with the fact that at the time many major cities in the United States , such as New York , were resisting the dropping of telephone exchange names in favor of all - number calling , and were still printing their telephone books with exchange names .
Actual residents of the Bunkers ' age continued using exchange names into the early 1980s .
This fact is referred to in the 1979 episode " The Appendectomy " , when Edith , while dialing a telephone number , uses the Parkview exchange name only to correct herself by saying that she keeps forgetting that it is all - number dialing now .
However , she comes to the conclusion that the number is exactly the same either way .
EPISODES
Section::::Episodes .
" Sammy 's Visit , " first broadcast in February 1972 , is a particularly notable episode , whose famous episode - ending scene produced the longest sustained audience laughter in the history of the show .
Guest star Sammy Davis , Jr. plays himself .
Archie is moonlighting as a cab driver and Davis visits the Bunker home to retrieve a briefcase he left in Archie 's cab earlier that day .
After hearing Archie 's bigoted remarks , Davis asks for a photograph with him .
At the moment the picture is taken , Davis suddenly kisses a stunned Archie on the cheek .
The ensuing laughter went on for so long that it had to be severely edited for network broadcast , as Carroll O'Connor still had one line ( " Well , what the hell — he said it was in his contract ! " ) to deliver after the kiss .
( The line is usually cut in syndication . )
SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
During the show 's sixth season , starting on December 1 , 1975 , CBS began airing reruns on weekdays at 3 p.m. ( EST ) , replacing long - running soap opera
The Edge of Night , which moved to ABC .
The show would later move to 3:30p.m .
and in September 1978 , 10 a.m. This lasted until September 1979 , when Viacom distributed the reruns to the off - network market where many stations picked - up the show .
In 1991 , Columbia Pictures Television began syndicating the show , and Columbia 's successor companies have continued to do so .
Since the late 1980s , All in the Family has been rerun on various cable and satellite networks including TBS ( although it held the rights locally in Atlanta , as well ) , TV Land , and Nick at Nite .
From January 3 , 2011 to December 31 , 2017 , the show aired on Antenna TV .
As of January 1 , 2018 , the show began to air on GetTV .
The cast forfeited their residual rights for a cash payout early in the production run .
RATINGS Section::::Ratings .
All in the Family is one of three television shows ( The Cosby Show and American Idol being the others ) that have been number one in the Nielsen ratings for five consecutive TV seasons .
The show remained in the top 10 for seven of its nine seasons . !
rowspan="2 "
Season !
rowspan="2
" Time !
colspan="2
" Nielsen Ratings !
Rank !
Rating
The series finale was seen by 40.2 million viewers .
SPIN - OFFS Section::::Spin - offs .
According to The Complete Directory to Prime Time Network and Cable TV Shows 1946–Present , All in the Family has the most spin - offs for a prime - time television series , spawning five other shows , three of which were very successful and two of which are spin - offs from spin - offs .
*
The first spin - off was Maude , which debuted in September 1972 .
It features Edith 's acerbic cousin Maude Findlay ( Bea Arthur ) , who first appeared on All in the Family in the December 1971 episode " Cousin Maude 's Visit " , visiting to take care of the influenza - suffering Bunkers .
In March 1972 , at the end of the series ' second season , the character was again featured in the episode " Maude " .
In this episode , a " back door pilot " for a new series , Archie and Edith visit her home in Westchester County to attend the wedding of her daughter Carol .
Bill Macy played Maude 's husband Walter and Marcia Rodd played Carol ; Rodd was replaced by Adrienne Barbeau for the series .
The show lasted for six seasons and 141 episodes , airing its final episode in April 1978 .
* Good Times is considered by some to be a spin off of Maude , as the show 's focus was Florida Evans , a character first appearing on Maude during its initial seasons as the Findlays maid .
But the character 's history and situation were changed for the new show .
According to producer Allan Manings , " It was n't really a spin - off . "
The show features no reference to Maude , changes the name of Florida 's husband from Henry to James , and sets the show in a Chicago housing project .
It ran for six seasons from February 1974 to August 1979 .
* The second and longest - lasting spin - off of All in the Family was The Jeffersons .
Debuting on CBS in January 1975 , The Jeffersons lasted 11 seasons and 253 episodes ( more than All in the Family 's nine seasons and 208 episodes ) .
The main characters were the Bunkers ' former next - door neighbors George and Louise Jefferson ( Sherman Hemsley and Isabel Sanford ) .
George was the owner of seven successful dry - cleaning stores , and the series featured their life after moving from the Bunkers ' working - class neighborhood to a luxury high - rise apartment building in Manhattan 's Upper East Side .
* Checking In was spun off from The Jeffersons , focusing on the Jeffersons ' maid Florence Johnston , working as an executive housekeeper at the St. Frederick Hotel in Manhattan .
It only lasted four weeks in April 1981 , and the character returned to her old job as the Jeffersons ' maid .
* Gloria was the third spin - off of All in the Family , focusing on now - divorced Gloria , starting a new life as an assistant trainee to a couple of veterinarians in Foxridge , New York .
It premiered in September 1982 , and ran for one season .
* Archie Bunker 's Place was technically a spin - off , but was essentially a renamed continuation of the series , beginning in September 1979 following the final season of the original .
It was primarily set in the titular neighborhood tavern which Archie Bunker purchased in the eighth - season of All in the Family .
It aired for four seasons , until April 1983 .
* 704 Hauser features the Bunkers ' house with a new family .
It was an inversion of the formula of the original , featuring a liberal African - American couple with a conservative son , who is dating a white Jewish woman .
Gloria and Mike 's son Joey Stivic , now in his twenties , makes a brief appearance in the first episode .
Five episodes aired in April and May 1994 .
SPECIALS
Section::::Specials .
At the height of the show 's popularity , Henry Fonda hosted a special one - hour retrospective of All in the Family and its impact on American television .
It included clips from the show 's most memorable episodes up to that time .
It was titled The Best of " All in the Family " , and aired on December 21 , 1974 .
On February 16 , 1991 , CBS aired a 90-minute retrospective , All in the Family 20th Anniversary Special , hosted by Norman Lear to commemorate the show 's 20th anniversary .
It featured a compilation of clips from the show 's best moments , and interviews with the four main cast members .
The special was so well received by the viewing audience
CBS aired reruns of All in the Family during its summer schedule in 1991 , garnering higher ratings than the new series scheduled next to it , Norman Lear 's sitcom Sunday Dinner .
The latter was Lear 's return to TV series producing after a seven - year absence , and was cancelled after the six - week tryout run due to being poorly received by audiences .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment ( formerly Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment ) released the first six seasons of All in the Family on DVD in Region 1 between 2002 and 2007 .
No further seasons were released , because the sales figures did not match Sony 's expectations .
On June 23 , 2010 , Shout !
Factory CULTURAL IMPACT Section::::Cultural impact .
As one of US television 's most acclaimed and groundbreaking programs , All in the Family has been referenced or parodied in countless other forms of media .
References on other sitcoms include That ' 70s Show and The Simpsons .
The animated series Family Guy pays homage to All in the Family in the opening sequence which features Peter and Lois Griffin playing the piano and singing a lament on the loss of traditional values , and also paid tribute to the show 's closing credits sequence at the end of the season 5 episode " Stewie Loves Lois " .
Popular T - shirts , buttons , and bumper stickers showing O'Connor 's image and farcically promoting " Archie Bunker for President " appeared around the time of the 1972 presidential election .
In 1998 , All in the Family was honored on a 33-cent stamp by the USPS .
Archie and Edith Bunker 's chairs are on display in the Smithsonian National Museum of American History .
The originals had been purchased by the show 's set designer for a few dollars at a local Goodwill thrift store , and were given to the Smithsonian ( for an exhibit on American television history ) in 1978 .
It cost producers thousands of dollars to create replicas to replace the originals .
Then - US President Richard Nixon can be heard discussing the show ( specifically the 1971 episodes " Writing the President " and " Judging Books by Covers " ) on one of the infamous Watergate tapes .
Rapper Redman has made references to Archie Bunker in a few of his songs , specifically his smoking of large cigars .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
All in the Family is the first of four sitcoms in which all the lead actors ( O'Connor , Stapleton , Struthers , and Reiner ) won Primetime Emmy Awards .
The other three are The Golden Girls , The Simpsons , and Will and Grace .
PRIMETIME EMMY AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS 1971 * Outstanding New Series ( Won )
* Outstanding Series - Comedy ( Won )
*
Outstanding Continued Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Comedy Series : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Continued Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Comedy Series : Jean Stapleton ( Won )
* Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Comedy : John Rich for " Gloria 's Pregnant "
( Nominated ) * Outstanding Writing Achievement in Comedy :
* Norman Lear for " Meet the Bunkers " ( Nominated ) *
Stanley Ralph Ross for "
Oh , My Aching Back " ( Nominated ) 1972 * Outstanding Series - Comedy ( Won ) * Outstanding Single Program - Drama or Comedy for " Sammy 's Visit " ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Achievement in Live or Tape
Sound Mixing : Norman Dewes for " The Elevator Story " ( Won ) *
Outstanding Continued Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Comedy Series : Carroll O'Connor ( Won ) * Outstanding Continued Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Comedy Series : Jean Stapleton ( Won ) * Outstanding Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role in a Comedy Series : Rob Reiner ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Comedy Series : Sally Struthers ( Won ) * Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Comedy : John Rich for " Sammy 's Visit " ( Won ) * Outstanding Writing Achievement in Comedy : * Burt Styler for " Edith 's Problem " ( Won ) * Alan J. Levitt and Philip Mishkin for " Mike 's Problem " ( Nominated ) * Norman Lear and Burt Styler for " The Saga of Cousin Oscar " ( Nominated ) 1973 * Outstanding Comedy Series ( Won ) *
Outstanding Continued Performance by an Actor in a Leading Role in a Comedy Series : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Continued Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Comedy Series : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated ) *
Outstanding Performance by an Actor in a Supporting Role in a Comedy Series : Rob Reiner ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Comedy Series : Sally Struthers ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Comedy : Bob LaHendro and John Rich for " The Bunkers and the Swingers " ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Writing Achievement in Comedy : Lee Kalcheim & Michael Ross & Bernie West for " The Bunkers and the Swingers " ( Won )
1974
* Outstanding Comedy Series ( Nominated ) * Best Lead Actor in a Comedy Series : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated ) * Best Lead Actress in a Comedy Series : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated ) * Best Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series : Rob Reiner ( Won )
* Best Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series : Sally Struthers ( Nominated ) 1975
* Outstanding Comedy Series ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Continuing Performance by a Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series : Rob Reiner ( Nominated ) 1976 * Outstanding Comedy Series ( Nominated ) 1977 * Outstanding Comedy Series ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series : Carroll O'Connor ( Won ) * Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series : Paul Bogart for " The Draft Dodger "
( Nominated )
* Outstanding Art Direction or Scenic Design for a Comedy Series : Don Roberts for " The Unemployment Story "
( Nominated ) 1978
* Outstanding Comedy Series ( Won )
* Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series : Carroll O'Connor ( Won )
* Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series : Jean Stapleton ( Won ) * Outstanding Continuing Performance by a Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series : Rob Reiner ( Won ) * Outstanding Continuing Performance by a Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series : Sally Struthers ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series : Paul Bogart for " Edith 's 50th Birthday " ( Won )
* Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series : * Bob Schiller and Bob Weiskopf for " Edith 's 50th Birthday "
( Nominated )
* Larry Rhine & Erik Tarloff & Mel Tolkin for " Edith 's Crisis of Faith " ( Nominated ) * Harve Brosten & Barry Harman & Bob Schiller & Bob Weiskopf for " Cousin Liz " ( Won ) 1979 * Outstanding Comedy Series ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series : Carroll O'Connor ( Won ) * Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy , Comedy - Variety , or Music Series :
Sally Struthers ( Won ) * Outstanding Directing for a Comedy , Comedy - Variety , or Music Series : Paul Bogart for " California ,
Here We Are " ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Writing for a Comedy , Comedy - Variety , or Music Series :
Milt Josefsberg & Bob Schiller & Phil Sharp & Bob Weiskopf for " California ,
Here We Are " ( Nominated ) * Outstanding Video Tape Editing for a Series : Harvey W. Berger and Hal Collins for " The 200th Episode Celebration of ' All in the Family ' "
( Nominated ) GOLDEN GLOBE AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS 1972 *
Best TV Show - Musical / Comedy ( Won ) *
Best TV Actor - Musical / Comedy :
Carroll O'Connor ( Won )
* Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated )
* Best Supporting Actor - Television :
Rob Reiner ( Nominated ) * Best Supporting Actress - Television : Sally Struthers ( Nominated ) 1973 * Best TV Show - Musical / Comedy ( Won ) * Best TV Actor - Musical / Comedy : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated ) * Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy :
Jean Stapleton ( Won )
* Best Supporting Actor - Television :
Rob Reiner ( Nominated ) * Best Supporting Actress - Television : Sally Struthers ( Nominated ) 1974 * Best TV Show - Musical / Comedy ( Won ) * Best TV Actor - Musical / Comedy : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated ) * Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy :
Jean Stapleton ( Won )
* Best Supporting Actor - Television :
Rob Reiner ( Nominated ) * Best Supporting Actress - Television : Sally Struthers ( Nominated ) 1975 * Best TV Show - Musical / Comedy ( Nominated ) * Best TV Actor - Musical / Comedy : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated ) * Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated )
* Best Supporting Actress - Television : Betty Garrett ( Won ) 1976 * Best TV Actor - Musical / Comedy : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated )
* Best Supporting Actor - Television :
Rob Reiner ( Nominated ) 1977
* Best Supporting Actor - Television :
Rob Reiner ( Nominated ) * Best Supporting Actress - Television : Sally Struthers ( Nominated ) 1978 * Best TV Series - Musical / Comedy ( Won ) * Best TV Actor - Musical / Comedy : Carroll O'Connor ( Nominated ) * Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated ) 1979 * Best TV Series - Musical / Comedy ( Nominated ) * Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated ) 1980 * Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy : Jean Stapleton ( Nominated )
TCA HERITAGE AWARD Section::::TCA Heritage Award .
In 2013 , the Television Critics Association honored All in the Family with its Heritage Award for its cultural and social impact on society .
SEE ALSO
* All in a Family
* List of American television shows based on foreign shows
* List of All in the Family writers REFERENCES FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Encyclopedia of Television entry on All in the Family
* All in the Family on emmys.com
* All in the Family on TVLand.com * All in the Family on TV.Com
*
All in the Family sit.com website