NON - COMMISSIONED
OFFICER A non - commissioned officer ( NCO ) is a military officer who has not earned a commission .
Non - commissioned officers usually obtain their position of authority by promotion through the enlisted ranks .
In contrast , commissioned officers hold higher ranks than NCOs , have more legal responsibilities , are paid more , and often have more non - military training such as a university diploma .
Commissioned officers usually earn their commissions without having risen through the enlisted ranks .
The NCO corps usually includes all grades of corporal and sergeant ; in some countries , warrant officers also carry out the duties of NCOs .
The naval equivalent includes some or all grades of petty officer .
There are different classes of non - commissioned officer , including junior non - commissioned officers ( JNCO ) and senior ( or staff ) non - commissioned officers ( SNCO ) .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The non - commissioned officer corps is often referred to as " the backbone " of the armed services , as they are the primary and most visible leaders for most military personnel .
Additionally , they are the leaders primarily responsible for executing a military organization 's mission and for training military personnel so they are prepared to execute their missions .
NCO training and education typically includes leadership and management as well as service - specific and combat training .
Senior NCOs are considered the primary link between enlisted personnel and the commissioned officers in a military organization .
Their advice and guidance are particularly important for junior officers and in many cases to officers of all senior ranks , who begin their careers in a position of authority without practical knowledge and experience .
NATIONAL USAGE AUSTRALIA Section::::National usage .
Section::::Australia .
In the Australian Army , lance corporals and corporals are classified as junior NCOs ( JNCOs ) , while sergeants and warrant officers are classified as senior NCOs ( SNCOs ) .
In the New South Wales Police Force , NCOs perform supervisory and coordination roles .
The ranks of probationary constable through to leading senior constable are referred to as " constables " .
All NCOs within the NSW Police are given a warrant of appointment under the Commissioner 's hand and seal .
All officers within the Australian Defence Force Cadets are non - commissioned .
ADFC officers are appointed by the Director - General of their respective branch .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In the Canadian Forces , the Queen 's Regulations and Orders formally defined a non - commissioned officer as " A Canadian Forces member holding the rank of Sergeant or Corporal .
"
In the 1990s , the term " non - commissioned member " ( NCM ) was introduced to indicate all ranks in the Canadian Forces from recruit to chief warrant officer .
By definition , with the unification of the CF into one service , the rank of sergeant included the naval rank of petty officer 2nd class , and corporal includes the naval rank of leading seaman ; corporal also includes the appointment of master corporal ( naval master seaman ) .
NCOs are officially divided into two categories : junior non - commissioned officers , consisting of corporals / leading seamen and master corporals / master seamen ; and senior non - commissioned officers , consisting of sergeants and petty officers 2nd class .
In the Royal Canadian Navy , however , the accepted definition of " NCO " reflects the international use of the term ( i.e. all grades of petty officer ) .
Junior non - commissioned officers mess and billet with privates and seamen ; their mess is usually referred to as the junior ranks mess .
Conversely , senior non - commissioned officers mess and billet with warrant officers ; their mess is normally referred to as the warrant officers and sergeants mess ( army and air force establishments ) or the chiefs and petty officers mess ( naval establishments ) .
As a group , NCOs rank above privates and below warrant officers .
The term " non - commissioned members " includes these ranks .
FINLAND Section::::Finland .
In the Finnish Defence Force , NCO 's ( aliupseeristo ) includes all ranks from corporal ( alikersantti , lit .
sub - sergeant ) to sergeant major ( sotilasmestari , lit .
master soldier ) .
Ranks of lance corporal ( korpraali ) and leading seaman ( ylimatruusi ) are considered not to be NCO ranks .
This ruling applies to all branches of service and also to the troops of the Border Guard .
FRANCE Section::::France .
In France , Belgium and most former French colonies , the term sous - officier ( meaning : " lower officer " or " sub - officer " ) is a class of ranks between the rank - and - file ( hommes du rang ) and commissioned officers ( officiers ) .
Corporals ( caporal and caporal - chef ) belong to the rank - and - file .
Sous - officiers include two subclasses : " subalternes " ( sergents and sergents - chefs ) and " supérieurs " ( adjudants , adjudants - chefs and majors ) .
" Sous - officiers supérieurs " can perform various functions within a regiment or battalion , including commanding a platoon or section .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
In Germany and German - speaking countries like Austria , the term Unteroffizier ( with the quite literal translation into English as " under"(unter ) " officer"(offizier ) , thus " under officer " , with both words being the progenitors of their English equivalents , and , in use , having the meaning of " lower officer " or sub - officer ) describes a class of ranks between normal enlisted personnel ( Mannschaften or in Austria Chargen ) and officers ( Offiziere ) .
In this group of ranks there are , in Germany , two other classes : Unteroffiziere mit Portepee ( with sword - knot ) and Unteroffiziere ohne Portepee ( without swordknot ) , both containing several ranks , which in Austria would be Unteroffiziere ( NCOs ) and Höhere Unteroffiziere ( senior NCOs or literally translated as " higher under officers " , with the Austrian use of the word for " higher " being equivalent to the word " grosse " , or bigger / superior / larger / greater than , in proper German ) .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
In the New Zealand Defence Force , a non - commissioned officer is defined as : NORWAY Section::::Norway .
On 1 January 2016 , the Norwegian Armed Forces reintroduced non - commissioned officers in all service branches , having had a single rank tier since 1930 , except for certain technical and maintenance units from 1945 to 1975 .
The NCOs are called specialists , and rank from sergeant to sergeant major ( NATO ranks OR5–OR9 ) .
The Specialist Corps lance corporal and corporal ranks ( OR2–OR4 ) are reserved for enlisted personnel , while the rank of private ( OR1 ) is for conscripts only .
The NCOs are in charge of military training , discipline , practical leadership , role modelling , unit standards and mentoring officers , especially juniors .
Officers commanding platoons and above are assigned a chief or master sergeant , which is the unit 's highest ranking specialist , although chief and master sergeants are functions and not ranks in themselves .
Norway took a top - down approach to establishing the Specialist Corps .
Since August 2015 , volunteer commissioned officers have converted into sergeant majors , command sergeants and first sergeants .
SINGAPORE
Section::::Singapore .
In the Singapore Armed Forces , the term " non - commissioned officer " is no longer officially used , being replaced with Specialist .
The term " NCO " however is still frequently used unofficially in the army .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
In 1983 the NCO corps , since 1972 called the Platoon Officer Corps , was disbanded and its members were given commissions as officers in ranks of second or first lieutenant in Sweden 's new one - tier military leadership system .
In 2009 a similar system as the NCO corps was re - established , called " specialist officers " .
Direct recruitment from civilian life is followed by basic and preparatory leadership training , and advanced leadership training during 1.5 year as a specialist cadet at the military academy in Halmstad , a warrant as an OR-6 , followed by specialist technical training .
Swedish specialist officers have relative ranks that match those of the commissioned officers ; an OR-7 takes precedence over a second lieutenant , for instance .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the British Armed Forces , NCOs are divided into two categories .
Lance corporals ( including lance bombardiers ) and corporals ( including lance sergeants , bombardiers , and lance corporals of horse ) are junior NCOs .
Sergeants ( including corporals of horse ) , staff sergeants ( including colour sergeants and staff corporals ) , and RAF chief technicians and flight sergeants are senior NCOs .
Warrant officers are often included in the senior NCO category , but actually form a separate class of their own , similar in many ways to NCOs but with a royal warrant .
Senior NCOs and WOs have their own messes , which are similar to officers ' messes ( and are usually known as sergeants ' messes ) , whereas junior NCOs live and eat with the unranked personnel , although they may have a separate corporals ' club to give them some separate socialising space .
The Royal Navy does not refer to its petty officers and chief petty officers as NCOs , but calls them senior ratings ( or senior rates ) .
Leading ratings and below are junior ratings .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the Army , Air Force , and Marine Corps , all ranks of sergeant are termed NCOs , as are corporals in the Army and Marine Corps .
A Marine Corps lance corporal ( E-3 ) is not an NCO , but rather junior enlisted .
The rank of corporal ( E-4 ) in the Army is a junior NCO , and is to be shown the same respect as any other NCO .
In the United States Air Force ,
E-5 ( staff sergeant ) and E-6 ( technical sergeant ) are classified under the NCO tier , while E-7 ( master sergeant ) , E-8 ( senior master sergeant ) , and E-9 ( chief master sergeant ) are considered senior non - commissioned officers ( SNCOs ) .
In the Navy and Coast Guard , all ranks of petty officer are so designated .
Junior NCOs ( E-4 through E-6 grade ) , or simply " NCOs " (
E-4 and E-5 only ) in Marine Corps usage , and function as first - tier supervisors and technical leaders .
NCOs serving in the top three enlisted grades ( E-7 , E-8 , and E-9 ) are termed senior non - commissioned officers ( chief petty officers in the Navy and Coast Guard ) .
Senior NCOs are expected to exercise leadership at a more general level .
They lead larger groups of service members , mentor junior officers , and advise senior officers on matters pertaining to their areas of responsibility .
Within the Marine Corps , senior NCOs are referred to as staff noncommissioned officers ( SNCOs ) and also include the rank of staff sergeant ( E-6 ) .
SNCOs are those career Marines serving in grades E-6 through E-9 and serve as unit leaders and supervisors , primary assistants and technical advisors to officers , and senior enlisted advisors to commanding officers , commanding generals , and other higher - level commanders .
The ranks include staff sergeant , gunnery sergeant ( E-7 ) , master sergeant / first sergeant ( E-8 ) , and master gunnery sergeant / sergeant major ( E-9 ) .
The title of superintendent is used by the Air Force as the title of the non - commissioned officer in charge ( NCOIC ) of a section , flight , squadron , group , staff agency , directorate , or similar organization .
These positions are assigned to senior non - commissioned officers ( SNCOs ) , as opposed to the titles " NCOIC " and " chief " ( which are held by junior NCOs ) .
The titles of commander and director are used for commissioned officers assigned as commanding officer of a unit or the head of a staff agency , directorate , or similar organization , respectively .
A select few senior NCOs in paygrade E-9 serve as " senior enlisted advisors " to senior commanders in each service ( e.g. , major command , fleet , force , etc . )
and in DoD ( unified commands , e.g. , United States Strategic Command , United States European Command , United States Pacific Command , etc . , and DoD agencies ,
e.g. the Defense Information Systems Agency , Defense Intelligence Agency and the National Security Agency .
One senior E-9 , selected by the service chief of staff , is the ranking NCO / PO in that service , holds the highest enlisted rank for that service , and is responsible for advising their service secretary and chief of staff .
One
E-9 holds a similar position as the SEA to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
Senior enlisted advisors , service enlisted advisors and the SEA to the Chairman advise senior officer and civilian leaders on all issues affecting operational missions and the readiness , utilization , morale , technical and professional development , and quality of life of the enlisted force .
Warrant officers in the United States Armed Forces are considered specialty officers and fall between non - commissioned and commissioned officers .
US warrant officers also have their own rank tier and paygrade .
However , when US warrant officers achieve the rank of chief warrant officer ( CWO2 ) or higher , they are commissioned and are considered commissioned US officers just like any other commissioned officer , but are still held in a different paygrade tier .
U.S. ARMY NCO CANDIDATE COURSE Section::::U.S. Army NCO Candidate Course .
Beginning in 1967 at Fort Benning , Georgia , the US Army Non - commissioned Officer Candidate Course ( NCOCC ) was a Vietnam - war era program developed to alleviate shortages of enlisted leaders at squad and platoon level assignments , training enlisted personnel to assume jobs as squad leaders in combat .
Based loosely on the Officer Candidate School ( OCS ) , NCOC was a new concept ( at the time ) where high performing trainees attending basic infantry combat training were nominated to attend a two - phased course of focused instruction on jungle warfare , and included a hands - on portion of intense training , promotion to sergeant , and then a 12-week assignment leading trainees going through advanced training .
Regular Army soldiers who had received their promotion through traditional methods ( and others ) used derisive terms for these draftees ( typically ) who were promoted quicker , such as " Instant NCOs " , " Shake ' n ' Bake " , and " Whip n ' Chills " .
The program proved to be so successful that as the war began to wind down they elected to institutionalize training non - commissioned officers and created the NCO Education System ( NCOES ) , which was based around the NCO candidate course .
The NCO candidate course generally ended in May 1971 .
U.S. NAVY
ACCELERATED
ADVANCEMENT Section::::U.S. Navy Accelerated Advancement .
Within the U.S. Navy there are a couple of different ways that a sailor can earn accelerated advancement to the rank of petty officer third class .
If a person tests high enough on their entrance exam they are able to select certain jobs that require a significant amount of training , far greater than the amount required for a basic job ( 12 months vs. 2 weeks ) .
Because these jobs are more technically advanced the schools have higher attrition rates , demand more responsibility , and require longer initial enlistments , these sailors are able to advance to petty officer third class .
Another way for a sailor to earn accelerated advancement is by graduating top 10 % of their class within their " A " school .
SEE ALSO
* Comparative military ranks *
Military ranks * Noncommissioned officer 's creed
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Center for Advanced Studies of the U.S. Army Noncommissioned Officer ( United States ) * A Short History of the NCO ( United States )
* History of noncommissioned officers ( United States ) *
Educating Noncommissioned Officers :
The history ( United States ) *
The United States Army Non - Commissioned officer 's guide Field Manual FM7 - 22.7
( United States )