DUST
Dust are fine particles of solid matter .
It generally consists of particles in the atmosphere that come from various sources such as soil , dust lifted by wind ( an aeolian process ) , volcanic eruptions , and pollution .
Dust in homes , offices , and other human environments contains small amounts of plant pollen , human and animal hairs , textile fibers , paper fibers , minerals from outdoor soil , human skin cells , burnt meteorite particles , and many other materials which may be found in the local environment .
DOMESTIC
Section::::Domestic .
House dust mites are present indoors wherever humans live .
Positive tests for dust mite allergies are extremely common among people with asthma .
Dust mites are microscopic arachnids whose primary food is dead human skin cells , but they do not live on living people .
They and their feces and other allergens which they produce are major constituents of house dust , but because they are so heavy they are not suspended for long in the air .
They are generally found on the floor and other surfaces until disturbed ( by walking , for example ) .
It could take somewhere between twenty minutes and two hours for dust mites to settle back down out of the air .
Dust mites are a nesting species that prefers a dark , warm , and humid climate .
They flourish in mattresses , bedding , upholstered furniture , and carpets .
Their feces include enzymes that are released upon contact with a moist surface , which can happen when a person inhales , and these enzymes can kill cells within the human body .
House dust mites did not become a problem until humans began to use textiles , such as western style blankets and clothing .
ATMOSPHERIC
Section::::Atmospheric .
Atmospheric or wind - borne fugitive dust , also known as aeolian dust , comes from arid and dry regions where high velocity winds are able to remove mostly silt - sized material , deflating susceptible surfaces .
This includes areas where grazing , ploughing , vehicle use , and other human activities have further destabilized the land , though not all source areas have been largely affected by anthropogenic impacts .
One - third of the global land area is covered by dust - producing surfaces , made up of hyper - arid regions like the Sahara which covers 0.9 billion hectares , and drylands which occupy 5.2 billion hectares .
Dust in the atmosphere is produced by saltation and sandblasting of sand - sized grains , and it is transported through the troposphere .
This airborne dust is considered an aerosol and once in the atmosphere , it can produce strong local radiative forcing .
Saharan dust in particular can be transported and deposited as far as the Caribbean and the Amazon basin , and may affect air temperatures , cause ocean cooling , and alter rainfall amounts .
MIDDLE EAST Section::::Middle East .
Dust in the Middle East has been a historic phenomenon .
Recently , because of climate change and the escalating process of desertification , the problem has worsened dramatically .
As a multi - factor phenomenon , there is not yet a clear consensus on the sources or potential solutions to the problem .
In Iran , the dust is already affecting more than 5 million people directly , and has emerged as a serious government issue in recent years .
In the province of Khuzestan it has led to the severe reduction of air quality .
The amount of pollutants in the air has surpassed more than 50 times the normal level several times in a year .
Recently , initiatives such as Project - Dust have been established to directly study the Middle Eastern dust .
ROADS Section::::Roads .
Dust kicked up by vehicles traveling on roads
may make up 33 % of air pollution .
Road dust consists of deposits of vehicle exhausts and industrial exhausts , particles from tire and brake wear , dust from paved roads or potholes , and dust from construction sites .
Road dust is a significant source contributing to the generation and release of particulate matter into the atmosphere .
Control of road dust is a significant challenge in urban areas , and also in other locations with high levels of vehicular traffic upon unsealed roads , such as mines and landfill dumps .
Road dust may be suppressed by mechanical methods like street sweeper vehicles equipped with vacuum cleaners , vegetable oil sprays , or with water sprayers .
Improvements in automotive engineering have reduced the amount of PM10s produced by road traffic ; the proportion representing re - suspension of existing particulates has increased as a result .
COAL Section::::Coal .
Coal dust is responsible for the lung disease known as pneumoconiosis , including black lung disease that occurs among coal miners .
The danger of coal dust resulted in environmental legislation regulating work place air quality in some jurisdictions .
In addition , if enough coal dust is dispersed within the air in a given area , in very rare circumstances , it can create an explosion hazard under certain circumstances .
These circumstances are typically within confined spaces .
CONTROL ATMOSPHERIC Section::::Control .
Section::::Atmospheric .
Most governmental EPAs , including the United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) mandate that facilities that generate fugitive dust , minimize or mitigate the production of dust in their operation .
The most frequent dust control violations occur at new residential housing developments in urban areas .
United States Federal law requires that construction sites obtain permits to conduct earth moving , clearing of areas , to include plans to control dust emissions when the work is being carried out .
Control measures include such simple practices as spraying construction and demolition sites with water , and preventing the tracking of dust onto adjacent roads .
Some of the issues include :
* Reducing dust related health risks that include allergic reactions , pneumonia and asthmatic attacks .
* Improving visibility and road safety .
* Providing cleaner air , cleaner vehicles and cleaner homes and promoting better health .
* Improving crop productivity in agriculture .
* Reducing vehicle maintenance costs by lowering the levels of dust that clog filters , bearings and machinery .
* Reducing driver fatigue , maintenance on suspension systems and improving fuel economy .
* Increasing cumulative effect - each new application builds on previous residuals reducing re - application rate * while improving performance .
US federal laws require dust control on sources such as vacant lots , unpaved parking lots , and unpaved roads .
Dust in such places may be suppressed by mechanical methods , including paving or laying down gravel , or stabilizing the surface with water , vegetable oils or other dust suppressants , or by using water misters to suppress dust that is already airborne .
DOMESTIC
Section::::Domestic .
Dust control is the suppression of solid particles with diameters less than 500 micrometers .
Dust poses a health threat to children , older people , and those with respiratory illnesses .
House dust can become airborne easily .
Care is required when removing dust to avoid causing the dust to become airborne .
A feather duster tends to agitate the dust so it lands elsewhere .
Products like Pledge and Swiffer are specifically made for removing dust by trapping it with sticky chemicals .
Certified HEPA
( tested to MIL STD 282 ) can effectively trap 99.97 % of dust at 0.3 micrometers .
Not all HEPA ( type / media )
filters can effectively stop dust ; while vacuum cleaners with HEPA ( type / media ) filters , water , or cyclones may filter more effectively than without , they may still exhaust millions of particles per cubic foot of air circulated .
Central vacuum cleaners can be effective in removing dust , especially if they are exhausted directly to the outdoors .
Air filtering appliances differ greatly in their effectiveness .
Laser particle counters are an effective way to measure filter effectiveness , medical grade instruments can test for particles as small as 0.3 micrometers .
In order to test for dust in the air , there are several options available .
Pre weighted filter and matched weight filters made from polyvinyl chloride or mixed cellulose ester are suitable for respirable dust ( less than 10 micrometers in diameter ) .
DUST RESISTANT SURFACES Section::::Dust resistant surfaces .
A dust resistant surface is a state of prevention against dust contamination or damage , by a design or treatment of materials and items in manufacturing or through a repair process .
A reduced tacticity of a synthetic layer or covering can protect surfaces and release small molecules that could have remained attached .
A panel , container or enclosure with seams may feature types of strengthened rigidity or sealant to vulnerable edges and joins .
IN OTHER CONTEXTS
OUTER SPACE Section::::In
other contexts .
Section::::Outer space .
Cosmic dust is widely present in space , where gas and dust clouds are primary precursors for planetary systems .
The zodiacal light , as seen in a dark night sky , is produced by sunlight reflected from particles of dust in orbit around the Sun .
The tails of comets are produced by emissions of dust and ionized gas from the body of the comet .
Dust also covers solid planetary bodies , and vast dust storms occur on Mars that cover almost the entire planet .
Interstellar dust is found between the stars , and high concentrations produce diffuse nebulae and reflection nebulae .
Dust is widely present in the galaxy .
Ambient radiation heats dust and re - emits radiation into the microwave band , which may distort the cosmic microwave background power spectrum .
Dust in this regime has a complicated emission spectrum , and includes both thermal dust emission and spinning dust emission .
Dust samples returned from outer space may provide information about conditions in the early solar system .
Several spacecraft have sought to gather samples of dust and other materials .
Among these craft was Stardust , which flew past Comet Wild 2 in 2004 , and returned a capsule of the comet 's remains to Earth in January 2006 .
In 2010 the Japanese Hayabusa spacecraft returned samples of dust from the surface of an asteroid .
ATMOSPHERIC GALLERY SEE ALSO
* Contamination control *
Dust bunny * Dust explosion
* Lint ( material ) * Medical geology * Mineral dust *
Nephelometer *
Occupational dust exposure *
Sawdust NOTES
REFERENCES
* Holmes , Hannah ; ( 2001)The Secret Life of Dust .
Wiley .
* Steedman , Carolyn ; ( 2002 ) Dust .
Manchester University Press .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Global map of atmospheric dust * The Bibliography of Aeolian Research