LIVE WITH KELLY AND RYAN Live with Kelly and Ryan is an American syndicated morning talk show , hosted by Kelly Ripa and Ryan Seacrest .
Executive produced by Michael Gelman , the Live with ...
show formula has aired under various hosts since 1983 locally on WABC - TV in New York City and 1988 nationwide .
As of 2016 , it is produced by WABC .
With roots in A.M. Los Angeles and A.M. New York , Live began as The Morning Show , hosted by Regis Philbin and Cyndy Garvey ; the show rose to national prominence as Live with Regis and Kathie Lee , when Philbin was joined by Kathie Lee Gifford .
That incarnation of the program ran for 12 years and continuing as Live with Regis and Kelly for another decade before Ripa , after hosting with guest co - hosts for nearly a year , was paired with former NFL star Michael Strahan .
The franchise has had longstanding success and has won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Talk Show and Outstanding Talk Show Hosts .
On January 19 , 2016 , the show was renewed through the 2019–20 season .
On February 12 , 2016 , a special episode focused on Ripa 's 15 years as part of the program .
On April 18 , 2016 , Strahan and ABC announced that he was leaving the show to join ABC 's Good Morning America full - time .
On May 1 , 2017 , it was announced that Ryan Seacrest would join Ripa as her new permanent co - host , succeeding Strahan .
PRODUCTION
CONCEPT
Section::::Production .
Section::::Concept .
Executive producer Michael Gelman said in 1993 , " The real concept of the show , in a symbolic sense , is that they are husband and wife .
They have their coffee mugs and they 're chit - chatting about what 's going on .
" That is the basis of the show 's signature " Host Chat " , an unscripted on - air conversation between the co - hosts that opens each show .
Then , a home viewer is called to answer a trivia question about the show , with the opportunity to win a vacation .
The show then continues with interviews with celebrity guests , musical performances , and other recurring segments , including regular features showcasing fashion , food , health , and lifestyle topics .
Even earlier , the husband and wife breakfast chat program was popular in old time radio , beginning with Ed and Pegeen Fitzgerald , and later Dick Kollmar and Dorothy Kilgallen and Tex McCrary and Jinx Falkenburg .
These shows were parodied by Woody Allen in his film Radio Days .
These programs were popular locally in New York and Philbin would have heard them growing up .
The format of Live !
has been emulated by other successful talk shows such as the British programmes Richard & Judy and Today with Des and Mel .
However , it has also proven to be resilient against similarly - formatted talk shows from other syndicators or networks , seeing programs such as Mike and Maty , George & Alana , , Donny & Marie , Living It Up !
With Ali & Jack , The Morning Show with Mike and Juliet , and Anderson Live all launch and end in short periods of time throughout its entire run , and fail to make any headway in the traditional 9 a.m. local time slot Live !
has been traditionally slotted in for most markets .
The show is broadcast live from New York City , on weekdays at 9 a.m. for stations in the Eastern Time Zone , and is tape - delayed for the rest of the country .
Although the program is generally associated with the ABC network and airs on all ABC owned - and - operated stations , in many markets the program is syndicated to stations affiliated with other networks .
Live did not air in a morning timeslot on all ABC - owned stations until September 2013 ,
as WLS Chicago programmed the 9 a.m. timeslot with The Oprah Winfrey Show as the originating station for the program in the 1980s , then Windy City Live after the end of Oprah , while the New York - based Live had aired on The CW affiliate WGN since 2002 ( although WLS had carried the show in an overnight timeslot earlier in its run ) .
RECURRING SEGMENTS Section::::Recurring segments .
Guinness World Record Breaker Week , New York Auto Show Week , Broadway Week , and Top Teacher Week are examples of features frequently visited on the show , highlighting a different aspect of the theme everyday that week .
Live will also invite " whiz kids " to oppose the co - hosts at spelling , athletics , mathematics , sport stacking , and technology , among other tasks .
A recurring gag with Philbin as co - host was him challenging seniors — preferably over the age of 100—at tennis , basketball , ping - pong , and bowling , for example .
Also , regular contributors to the show include toy enthusiast Chris Byrne , style maven Lawrence Zarian , animal expert Peter Gros , automotive expert Alan Taylor , pediatrician Greg Yapalater , home and gardening show host Katie Brown , technology specialist Leo Laporte , entrepreneur Carley Roney , Science Bob , veterinarian Jennifer Jellison , and nutrition expert Wendy Bazilian .
SPECIALS
Section::::Specials .
The show has hosted a number of specials over the years since it began .
Specials have included a Halloween celebration in which the co - hosts wore dozens of costumes and portrayed some of the most famous and infamous names in pop culture .
In February , Live has thrown a wedding for a couple who wrote in with reasons why they should be married on the show .
Viewer submissions have also been accepted for their " Moms Dream Come True Special , " where the co - hosts pay tribute to a select group of mothers .
The show has aired a Post - Oscar Special the day after the awards ceremony live from the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood .
ON LOCATION Section::::On location .
Live has been to eight countries and nearly 25 states , logging .
The list of remotes includes : Tampa , Hawaii , Monaco , Banff , San Antonio , Aspen , Walt Disney World , New Orleans , Disneyland , Las Vegas , San Francisco , Paris , Detroit , Chicago , The Bronx , Los Angeles , the USS Intrepid , Minneapolis – Saint Paul , Maui , Prince Edward Island , London , Scottsdale , the White House , Charlotte , Churchill Downs , Niagara Falls , Puerto Rico , Marina del Rey , Philadelphia , Branson , Mount Rushmore , The Bahamas , and the Dolby Theatre 's set for the 85th Academy Awards .
While on location , the co - hosts transplant the franchise 's own brand of entertainment - oriented talk with the beauty of the particular location providing a colorful backdrop to the show 's segments . HISTORY CO - HOST TIMELINE
1971–81 :
A.M. LOS ANGELES
Section::::1971–81 :
A.M. Los Angeles .
The show has part of its origins in A.M. Los Angeles , a local show that was broadcast on KABC - TV in Los Angeles from 1971 to 1981 that was originally created and hosted by Ralph Story , with Stephanie Edwards as co - host .
When the format went national as AM America in 1975 ( taking Edwards along with it ) , Regis Philbin assumed hosting duties of the Los Angeles version , with Sarah Purcell as his original co - host .
Purcell departed the show in 1978 and was replaced by Cyndy Garvey .
Philbin and Garvey hosted A.M. Los Angeles until 1981 .
1970–83 :
A.M. NEW YORK , THE STANLEY SIEGEL SHOW , GOOD MORNING NEW YORK
Section::::1970–83 :
A.M. New York , The Stanley Siegel Show , Good Morning New York .
Meanwhile , there were also two different morning - show predecessors on WABC - TV in New York City .
The first was A.M. New York which debuted on May 18 , 1970 as a local answer to NBC 's Today show , and was originally hosted by John Bartholomew Tucker .
After he left in 1972 , a succession of hosts came and went , until Stanley Siegel took over in late 1975 .
Under Siegel 's stint , the show went from last to first in the ratings for a brief period , and from 1977 until his departure in 1978 it was known as The Stanley Siegel Show .
Following Siegel 's departure for rival WCBS - TV , the show reverted to the A.M. New York name until its cancellation in 1980 , by which point it had been hosted by Janet Langhart and Clay Cole .
A few weeks later , WABC tried again with Good Morning New York , hosted originally by Spencer Christian and Andrea Kirby ; Kirby would eventually be replaced by Judy Licht , and Christian was followed by the likes of Dick Wolfsie and longtime Eyewitness News reporter and anchor Doug Johnson .
Like its predecessor for much of its run , Good Morning New York failed to make a dent in the ratings against Donahue on WNBC , and was cancelled in early 1983 , with The Morning Show as its replacement .
1983–88 :
THE MORNING SHOW Section::::1983–88 :
The Morning Show .
The Morning Show , co - hosted by Regis Philbin and Cyndy Garvey , premiered locally on WABC - TV in New York on April 4 , 1983 .
In 1984 , Garvey left the show and Philbin hired Ann Abernathy , whom he remembered from his time at KABC - Television for her engaging personality , to assume the co - host duties .
After Abernathy got married and decided to return to Los Angeles , Kathie Lee Johnson ( later Gifford ) joined Philbin officially on June 24 , 1985 .
Their chemistry proved to be successful as The Morning Show soon became number 1 in the market and went on to debut in national syndication on September 5 , 1988 , when the title was changed to Live with Regis and Kathie Lee .
1988–2000
: LIVE WITH REGIS AND KATHIE LEE
Section::::1988–2000 :
Live with Regis and Kathie Lee .
Early on , Live matched its local success with impressive national ratings and established itself as a dominant fixture in American television .
Entertainment Weekly described Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford as " an agreeable mismatch " and their famous banter as " playful , edgy , and amusing .
"
Gifford 's positivity throughout public scandals such as the 1996 accusation that her clothing line was being run under sweatshop conditions and her husband Frank Gifford 's 1997 affair with a flight attendant resonated with the female demographic of the show , but ultimately made her a media target prompting her emotional departure on July 28 , 2000 . " Over a third of my life has been [ at Live ] , " she said .
" This is family .
It is been an amazing journey .
"
Gifford appeared on Live !
with Regis and Kelly on three occasions , for the show 's 20th Anniversary special on September 14 , 2007 , to promote her book
Just When I Thought I 'd Dropped My Last Egg : Life and Other Calamities on April 14 , 2009 , and again as a guest to bid farewell to Philbin on his second to last show , November 17 , 2011 .
Gifford is now host of the live fourth hour of Today with Hoda Kotb ; that show mainly airs an hour after Live !
in most markets , though a few markets where both shows air at 10:00 a.m. against each other do exist .
2000–2001
: LIVE WITH REGIS Section::::2000–2001 :
Live with Regis .
When looking for Gifford 's replacement , Philbin and executive producer Michael Gelman teamed Philbin with a handful of potential co - hosts , including Joy Philbin , Kathleen Murphy , Rosie O'Donnell , Jann Carl , Whoopi Goldberg , Kathy Fountain , Gloria Estefan , Jillian Reynolds , Lisa Rinna , Caroline Rhea and Suzanne Sena .
This met with positive fan response and a 26 percent ratings increase .
Philbin won his first Daytime Emmy Award for Live during the six - month period , which he would go on to win twice with co - host Kelly Ripa .
Ripa had auditioned four months into the search , on November 1 , 2000 .
Ripa was announced as the official replacement on February 5 , 2001 .
2001–11
: LIVE !
WITH REGIS AND KELLY
Section::::2001–11
: Live !
with Regis and Kelly .
Live !
with Regis and Kelly 's young - audience demographics increased by 80 percent , with Ripa credited for bringing " a new life to the show .
" Seven months into Philbin and Ripa 's run , the September 11 attacks on New York occurred , with coverage beginning twelve minutes before that day 's episode would have started .
The show was pre - empted for a week following the attacks and returned September 18 , 2001 .
Shortly after celebrating his and Ripa 's 10th anniversary together , Philbin announced on January 18 , 2011 that he would leave Live ! .
The show then held a " Regis Farewell Celebration Season " , showcasing Philbin 's top moments from 28 years on the program .
His final show aired November 18 , 2011 .
2011–12
: LIVE !
WITH KELLY ( FIRST ERA )
Section::::2011–12 : Live !
with Kelly ( first era ) .
After Philbin 's departure , the show was renamed Live !
with Kelly .
Joining Ripa were various co - hosts from broadcasting and entertainment .
On November 21 , 2011 , Jerry Seinfeld was the first of 60 men and women to join Ripa at the co - host desk , including : Reggie Bush , Kyle MacLachlan , Russell Brand , Howie Mandel , Carl Edwards , Chris Harrison , Daniel Radcliffe , Michael Buckley , Michael Catherwood , Rob Lowe , Martin Short , Neil Patrick Harris , Peter Facinelli , Boomer Esiason , Ben Mulroney , Dan Abrams , Rob Thomas , David Duchovny , Pat Kiernan , Derek Hough , D. L. Hughley , Jesse Palmer , Carson Kressley , Carrie Ann Inaba , Mark Feuerstein , Jim Parsons , Nick Lachey , Jonah Hill , Michael Strahan , Apolo Anton Ohno , Joel McHale , Cat Deeley , Tyler Perry , Andy Cohen , Alec Baldwin , Josh Groban , Jerry O'Connell , Seth Meyers , Mike Greenberg , Kristin Chenoweth , Andy Samberg , Mark Consuelos , Lucy Liu , Taye Diggs , Randy Jackson , Mario Lopez , Matthew Broderick , Mary J. Blige , Ed Robertson , Michael Bublé , Matthew Morrison , Kevin Jonas , Tony Potts , Dana Carvey , Jimmy Kimmel , Kim Kardashian , L.A. Reid , Bryant Gumbel , Daniel Dae Kim and Sam Champion .
In April 2012 , Live !
debuted a new set described as a " contemporary downtown - style loft , spacious and yet maintaining the studio 's warmth and intimacy .
" It was the first major set re - design since the start of the show 's 10th season in national syndication ( 1997–98 ) .
In July 2012 , People magazine reported that Meyers , Groban and Strahan were the top three contenders in the running to replace Philbin .
2012–16
: LIVE WITH KELLY AND MICHAEL
Section::::2012–16
: Live with Kelly and Michael .
On the September 4 , 2012 episode , Michael Strahan made his 16th appearance on the show and was introduced as Ripa 's permanent co - host .
The former New York Giants defensive end had begun his TV career on Fox NFL Sunday , a job he said he would keep even though it shoots in Los Angeles .
The Ripa - Strahan chemistry proved to be successful .
Live With Kelly & Michael had been the No . 2 syndicated talk show averaging a 2.8 national rating over Strahan 's entire tenure while Live With Regis & Kelly averaged a 2.6 .
Live With Kelly & Michael brought in 268,000 more audience members daily , on average , than the show attracted during the end of the Regis run .
On January 19 , 2016 , the show was renewed through at least the 2019–2020 season .
On April 19 , 2016 , it was announced that Strahan would leave Live to join Good Morning America full - time .
The decision was revealed to the program 's production staff just after that day 's broadcast of Live , and officially announced on the program by Strahan the following day .
Ripa , however , was absent from that day 's episode , and ABC announced later in the day that Live would have guest co - hosts through April 25 , 2016 .
Although speculated to have been a reaction to Strahan 's abrupt exit , an ABC staff member stated to Variety that Ripa 's sudden absence was a " pre - scheduled vacation " .
Ripa returned on April 26 , 2016 , using the opening of the episode to address the reception to Strahan 's exit , and ABC 's continued commitment to Live as a series .
Strahan 's final episode on Live occurred on May 13 , 2016 and featured several flashback moments from the four years that he co - hosted the show .
2016–17
: LIVE WITH KELLY ( SECOND ERA ) Section::::2016–17 : Live with Kelly ( second era ) .
On Monday , May 16 , 2016 , Ripa began the second era of her Live career as a single co - host .
Jimmy Kimmel joined her as her first guest co - host .
2017–PRESENT
: LIVE WITH KELLY AND RYAN Section::::2017–present
: Live with Kelly and Ryan .
On May 1 , 2017 , it was announced that Ryan Seacrest would succeed Strahan as the new permanent co - host , after a year long syndicated co - host search .
Seacrest will also join as an executive producer to the show .
On September 5 , 2017 , Live with Kelly and Ryan updated the show 's look with a new , modern logo , modifications to the studio , and a brand new show opener .
On May 1 , 2018 , Ripa and Seacrest celebrated their first anniversary with a look back at the best moments of the past year .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
The New York Daily News gave the program a positive review , " … When it comes to the amount and playfulness of morning talk , nothing beats Live " .
In 2001 , 2011 , 2012 , 2015 , and 2016 the show won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Talk Show Hosts and in its 24th year , after twenty - one nominations , it won the Daytime Emmy Award for Outstanding Talk Show .
In addition , its co - hosts have received two TV Guide Award nominations for Favorite Daytime Talk Show and multiple People 's Choice nominations for Favorite Talk Show Host .
According to daytime television ratings , viewership averages 5 million per episode , ranking number 1 in all big markets , such as New York City , Pittsburgh , Los Angeles , Chicago , Philadelphia , Dallas , San Francisco , Miami , West Palm Beach , and many others .
Dominating its time periods , Live is the top - rated morning show and regularly the # 1 syndicated talk show .
INTERNATIONAL BROADCAST Section::::International broadcast . !
Country ! !
Television Network(s ) ! !
Weekly schedule ( local time ) ! !
Period
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Live with Kelly and Michael at TVGuide.com