NOCTURNAL EMISSION
A nocturnal emission , informally known as a wet dream or sex dream , is a spontaneous orgasm during sleep that includes ejaculation for a male , or vaginal wetness or an orgasm ( or both ) for a female .
Nocturnal emissions are most common during adolescence and early young adult years , but they may happen any time after puberty .
It is possible for men to wake up during a wet dream or simply to sleep through it , but for women , some researchers have added the requirement that she should also awaken during the orgasm and perceive that the orgasm happened before it counts as a wet dream .
Vaginal lubrication alone does not mean that the woman has had an orgasm .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Due to the difficulty in collecting ejaculate produced during nocturnal emissions , relatively few studies have examined its composition .
In the largest study , which included nocturnal emission samples from 10 men with idiopathic anejaculation , the semen concentration was equivalent to samples obtained from the same men by penile vibratory stimulation , although the proportions of sperm which were mobile and which were of normal morphology were higher in the nocturnal emission specimens .
FREQUENCY Section::::Frequency .
In a detailed study , men and women reported that approximately 8 % of their everyday dreams contain some form of sexual - related activity .
Four percent of sex dreams among both men and women resulted in orgasms .
IN MALES Section::::In males .
The frequency of nocturnal emissions is highly variable .
Some reported that it is due to being sexually inactive for a period of 1–2 weeks , with no engagement in either intercourse or masturbation .
Some males have experienced large numbers of nocturnal emissions as teenagers , while others have never experienced one .
In the U.S. , 83 % of men experience nocturnal emissions at some time in their life .
For males who have experienced nocturnal emissions the mean frequency ranges from 0.36 times per week ( about once every three weeks ) for single 15-year - old males to 0.18 times per week ( about once every five - and - a - half weeks ) for 40-year - old single males .
For married males the mean ranges from 0.23 times per week ( about once per month ) for 19-year - old married males to 0.15 times per week ( about once every two months ) for 50-year - old married males .
In some parts of the world nocturnal emissions are more common .
For example , in Indonesia surveys have shown that 97 % of men experience nocturnal emissions by the age of 24 .
Some males have the emissions only at a certain age , while others have them throughout their lives following puberty .
The frequency with which one has nocturnal emissions has not been conclusively linked to frequency of masturbation .
Alfred Kinsey found there may be " some correlation between the frequencies of masturbation and the frequencies of nocturnal emissions .
In general the males who have the highest frequencies of nocturnal emissions may have somewhat lower rates of masturbation . "
One factor that can affect the number of nocturnal emissions males have is whether they take testosterone - based drugs .
In a 1998 study by Finkelstein et al , the number of boys reporting nocturnal emissions drastically increased as their testosterone doses were increased , from 17 % of subjects with no treatment to 90 % of subjects at a high dose .
Thirteen percent of males experience their first ejaculation as a result of a nocturnal emission .
Kinsey found that males experiencing their first ejaculation through a nocturnal emission were older than those experiencing their first ejaculation by means of masturbation .
The study indicates that such a first ejaculation resulting from a nocturnal emission was delayed a year or more from what would have been developmentally possible for such males through physical stimulation .
IN
FEMALES Section::::In females .
The frequency of nocturnal emissions is variable , just as with males .
In 1953 , sex researcher Alfred Kinsey found that nearly 40 % of the women he interviewed have had one or more nocturnal orgasms or wet dreams .
Those who reported experiencing these said that they usually had them several times a year and that they first occurred as early as thirteen , and usually by the age of 21 .
Kinsey defined female nocturnal orgasm as sexual arousal during sleep that awakens one to perceive the experience of orgasm .
Research published by Barbara L Wells in the 1986 Journal of Sex indicates that as many as 85 % of women have experienced nocturnal orgasm by the age of 21 .
This research was based on women waking up with / during orgasm .
Studies have found that more males have more frequent spontaneous nocturnal sexual experiences than females .
Female wet dreams may be more difficult to identify with certainty than male wet dreams because ejaculation is usually associated with male orgasm while vaginal lubrication may not indicate orgasm .
LUCID DREAMING
Section::::Lucid dreaming .
Sexual activity is a commonly reported theme of lucid dreams .
LaBerge , Greenleaf , and Kedzierski ( 1983 ) undertook a pilot study to determine the extent to which subjectively experienced sexual activity during REM lucid dreaming would be reflected in physiological responses : CULTURAL VIEWS
Section::::Cultural views .
There are numerous cultural and religious views on nocturnal emissions .
Below is a limited summary of some perspectives .
ANTIQUITY
Section::::Antiquity .
In ancient Rome nocturnal emission was perceived as quite natural : JEWISH AND SAMARITAN Section::::Jewish and Samaritan .
Some examples of passages under the Mosaic law of the Hebrew Bible teach that under the law of Moses , a man who had a nocturnal emission incurred ritual defilement :
The first of these is part of a passage stating similar regulations about sexual intercourse and menstruation .
Leviticus 12 makes similar regulations about childbirth .
A third passage relates more specifically to priests , requiring any " of the offspring of Aaron who has ... a discharge " , among other causes of ritual defilement , to abstain from eating holy offerings until after a ritual immersion in a mikveh and until the subsequent night - fall .
In Judaism , the Tikkun HaKlali , also known as " The General Remedy , " is a set of ten Psalms designed in 1805 by Rebbe Nachman , whose recital is intended to serve as repentance for nocturnal emissions .
PATRISTIC CHRISTIAN Section::::Patristic Christian .
Saint Augustine held that male nocturnal emissions , unlike masturbation , did not pollute the conscience of a man , because they were not voluntary carnal acts , and were therefore not to be considered a sin .
ISLAMIC Section::::Islamic .
A wet dream is not a sin in Islam .
Moreover , whereas a person fasting ( in Ramadan or otherwise ) would normally be considered to have broken their fast by ejaculating on purpose ( during either masturbation or intercourse ) , nocturnal emission is not such a cause .
They are still required to bathe prior to undergoing some rituals in the religion .
Muslim scholars consider ejaculation something that makes one temporarily ritually impure , a condition known as junub ; meaning that a Muslim who has had an orgasm or ejaculated must have a ghusl ( consisting of ablution followed by bathing the entire body so that not a single hair remains dry on the whole body — may also requiring one to rub the body according to Maliki school of thought , dalk in Arabic — while showering ) before they can read any verse of the Qur'an or perform the formal prayers .
Informal supplications and prayers ( du'a ) do not require such a bath .
MEDIEVAL Section::::Medieval .
In European folklore , nocturnal emissions were believed to be caused by a succubus copulating with the individual at night , an event associated with sleep paralysis and possibly night terrors .
SEE ALSO * Nocturnal penile tumescence * Nocturnal clitoral tumescence * Sleep sex
* Somnophilia
* Nocturnal enuresis
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * on Wikimedia Commons * Nightfall treatment at Ayurved Research Foundation