KINGS ISLAND Kings Island is a amusement park located northeast of Cincinnati in Mason , Ohio .
Owned and operated by Cedar Fair , the park first opened in 1972 by the Taft Broadcasting Company .
It was part of a larger effort to move and expand Coney Island , a popular resort destination along the banks of the Ohio River that was prone to frequent flooding .
After more than $ 300 million in capital investments , the park features over 100 attractions including fifteen roller coasters and a water park .
Throughout its history , Kings Island has appeared in popular sitcoms and received widespread recognition for its record - breaking attractions and events .
One of the park 's most well - known attractions , The Racer , is often credited with reviving worldwide interest in roller coasters during the 1970s .
Others , such as The Beast and Banshee , have set several world records , some of which are still standing .
The park has also suffered through times of negative publicity , particularly surrounding the early demise of roller coasters The Bat and Son of Beast .
Kings Island is divided into several themed sections and operates seasonally from early spring through the fall , partially reopening for Winterfest during the holiday season .
In 2017 , Kings Island was the second - most visited seasonal amusement park in the United States behind Cedar Point , with an estimated 3.47 million visitors .
It was third overall for seasonal attendance in North America , which was led by Canada 's Wonderland .
In addition , Kings Island has won Golden Ticket Awards from Amusement Today for having the " Best Kids ' Area " in the world for seventeen consecutive years ( 2001–2017 ) as well as " Best New Ride " in 2017 for Mystic Timbers .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Kings Island was conceived as early as 1964 when Coney Island , a popular amusement park east of downtown Cincinnati on the banks of the Ohio River , suffered from a major flood that submerged the area in over of water .
Although occasional flooding was common at the successful park , the flood in 1964 was the fourth highest on record and caused considerable damage .
Faced with already - limited space for expansion and parking , the event triggered discussions within the organization about relocating the park .
Leading the way was Gary Wachs , son of Coney Island president Ralph Wachs , who with friends and family owned a majority of stock .
He decided it was time to relocate the park to stay competitive .
After years of research and traveling abroad , he presented ideas for a new theme park to the company 's board of directors .
Some board members opposed relocating , including significant stockholder Charles Sawyer .
It was n't taken seriously until 1968 , when actor Fess Parker announced plans to build a theme park in Northern Kentucky – well within Coney Island 's primary market that extended as far south as Louisville .
The announcement highlighted the need for change and gave Wachs ' proposal credibility within the organization .
Gary met with the president of Taft Broadcasting Company , a business interested in promoting its recently acquired Hanna - Barbera division , to discuss a possible merger .
In July 1969 , Taft Broadcasting Company purchased Coney Island for $ 6.5 million and soon after purchased in Warren County , Ohio , for $ 3.2 million .
Kings Island still owned of that purchase .
The site is located between I-71 and the Little Miami River in what was then a part of Deerfield Township .
Following the purchase , Fess Parker 's efforts to secure financing fell apart along with his plans to build a competing theme park .
TAFT BROADCASTING AND KECO ( 1970–1992 ) Section::::Taft Broadcasting and KECO ( 1970–1992 ) .
Construction began on June 15 , 1970 .
Later that year , a public contest was held to name the new park . "
Kings Island " emerged the most popular for its recognition of the Kings Mills area as well as its predecessor Coney Island .
Most of the former park 's rides were relocated , and much of what remained was demolished .
Coney Island 's popular Sunlite Pool attraction continued to operate , however , and the park would be partially restored years later .
Less than two years after breaking ground , Kings Island opened its gates to the public on April 29 , 1972 .
It was the first of several preview events .
The grand opening was held the following month on May 27 , 1972 .
One of the first major attractions featured at the park was The Racer , a wooden roller coaster consisting of two trains that race side - by - side on identical tracks .
Designed by legendary designer John C. Allen , who was convinced to come out of retirement , The Racer was the first of its kind in 35 years and played an integral part of the roller coaster renaissance of the 1970s .
Decades later , it would be awarded the Roller Coaster Landmark plaque from American Coaster Enthusiasts ( ACE ) for its achievement .
Other roller coasters present on opening day in 1972 were the Bavarian Beetle , a small steel coaster brought over from Coney Island , and a new junior wooden coaster in the Happy Land of Hanna - Barbera originally named Scooby - Doo .
The most expensive ride to open with the park , however , was Enchanted Voyage , a dark ride attraction that featured over 100 animatronic Hanna - Barbera characters and cost $ 2 million to construct .
Kings Island was nationally promoted in two well - known sitcoms on ABC .
Each filmed an episode on location at the park : The Partridge Family in 1972 and The Brady Bunch in 1973 .
The Brady Bunch was produced by Paramount Television , a large Taft Broadcasting shareholder .
The park also held several world - record - breaking events .
In 1974 , 69-year - old Karl Wallenda set a world record for the longest tightrope skywalk at a distance of , which was performed off the ground .
The following year , Evel Knievel successfully jumped fourteen Greyhound buses on his Harley Davidson at Kings Island , clearing a distance of – a record that was n't broken until 1999 .
The longest successful jump of his career was also his last major stunt , and the nationally - televised event was broadcast live on ABC landing 52 percent of the TV audience for that hour with an estimated 55 million viewers .
The national exposure kept the park at the forefront of the industry , and executives favored the attention and revenue being generated by newsworthy events surrounding new world records .
To keep momentum going , Kings Island spent years researching and designing a mammoth roller coaster , The Beast , which opened in 1979 as a record - smashing , wooden roller coaster .
It was designed and manufactured internally by the park .
On the heels of early success came turbulent times beginning in the 1980s .
Kings Island partnered with Arrow Development , an amusement ride company well - known for its work at Disneyland and Disney World , to develop a unique roller coaster concept .
The Bat would open to the public in 1981 as the first modern - day , suspended roller coaster featuring an overhead track with train cars that would swing freely from side to side , meant to simulate the feeling of flight .
Although it was well - received by those who rode it , it was plagued with design flaws and constant maintenance that resulted in frequent closures over its short , three - year history .
In order to appease frustrated guests , the south track of The Racer began running its trains backward in 1982 , which became so popular that the change remained until 2008 .
The park also pushed forward with its next major addition , King Cobra , which opened in 1984 as the first of its kind to be designed from inception as a stand - up roller coaster .
Kings Island also went through a series of ownership changes over the next decade .
Taft sold its theme park division in 1984 for $ 167.5 million to Kings Entertainment Company ( KECO ) , a company formed by senior executives and general managers of Taft Attractions Group .
Three parks – Kings Island , Kings Dominion and Carowinds – were involved in the sale .
Taft invested in KECO to retain one - third interest .
Three years later in 1987 , Kings Island was sold individually to American Financial Corporation , led by Carl Lindner .
The deal included a contract with KECO to continue managing park operations .
KECO , which retained ownership of the other two parks , also added Great America to its portfolio after purchasing it in 1989 from the city of Santa Clara , California .
PARAMOUNT 'S KINGS ISLAND ( 1992–2006 ) Section::::Paramount 's Kings Island ( 1992–2006 ) .
In 1992 , Paramount Communications Inc. ( formerly Gulf+Western ) purchased KECO along with Kings Island from American Financial in a deal worth $ 400 million .
Paramount formed a new division known as Paramount Parks .
They bought out the remaining 80 % stake in Canada 's Wonderland in 1993 , raising the number of parks to five .
That same year , Paramount Parks began incorporating themes from its movies into the park .
Viacom entered the picture after acquiring Paramount in 1994 , paving the way for the appearance of Nickelodeon themes .
First was Nickelodeon Splat City , followed by Nickelodeon Central and eventually Nickelodeon Universe .
In 1997 , a year after leaving Deerfield Township , the city of Mason annexed most of Kings Island .
A temporary measure allowed for some land to remain in Deerfield in an attempt to appease park officials and reduce the impact on the township .
The rest would be annexed in 1999 .
On June 14 , 2005 , Viacom announced intentions to split into two companies ( Viacom and CBS Corporation ) with CBS inheriting Paramount Parks .
Seven months later in January 2006 , CBS announced intentions to sell its theme park division .
CBS CEO Leslie Moonves said that despite the health and profitability of its Paramount Parks business , it was " one that just does n't fit our core strategy " .
CEDAR FAIR ERA ( 2006–PRESENT )
Section::::Cedar Fair era ( 2006–present ) .
After receiving interest from a variety of potential suitors , CBS announced the sale of Paramount Parks to Cedar Fair on June 30 , 2006 , for approximately $ 1.24 billion .
The acquisition of Kings Island gave Cedar Fair ownership of the last of three major amusement parks in Ohio , alongside Cedar Point and Geauga Lake – the latter was purchased from Six Flags in 2004 .
Part of the agreement allowed Kings Island to continue using Nickelodeon themes and characters for four years and other Paramount - related branding for ten years , with the option to extend the license on both .
Cedar Fair opted for a buyout option within an agreement clause to remove Paramount branding after one season .
Beginning in 2008 , Face / Off became Invertigo , The Italian Job Stunt Track became Backlot Stunt Coaster , Tomb Raider :
The Ride became The Crypt and Top Gun became Flight Deck .
Nickelodeon 's presence remained until the 2010 season , when Cedar Fair began incorporating its Peanuts theme throughout the park , primarily in the children 's area .
In late 2009 , the Mason City Council decided to put a measure on its 2010 ballot that would mandate a 3-percent ticket tax and a 5-percent parking tax at both Kings Island and The Beach waterpark .
Council member Tony Bradburn argued that it was necessary for the city to help pay for infrastructure improvements , as well as cover police and fire expenses .
This proposed tax hike was the center of debate for several months .
Kings Island actively encouraged the public to write , email and call Mason City Council representatives to express opposition .
On February 8 , 2010 , the Mason City Council voted 5–1 against the measure .
AREAS AND ATTRACTIONS ACTION ZONE Section::::Areas and attractions .
Section::::Action Zone .
Action Zone opened in 1974 as Lion Country Safari , a section of the park featuring a monorail ride that took guests on a safari - style tour through an animal preservation .
This was part of a network of other safari - style zoos also called Lion Country Safari .
It was later renamed Wild Animal Safari in 1977 .
In 1983 , the area became known as Wild Animal Habitat and included Adventure Village , a new area within the rebranded section .
Over the years , it featured rides such as Screamin ' Demon ( 1977–87 ) , the first steel looping roller coaster to run both forward and backward in the United States , and King Cobra ( 1984–2001 ) , a stand - up looping roller coaster that was the first of its kind in the world .
Early in its tenure after purchasing Kings Island , Paramount unveiled Top Gun , a suspended roller coaster from Arrow Dynamics , in 1993 .
Located next to the habitat attraction , it was titled after a film of the same name and was the first ride to be added to the park with a Paramount theme .
The following year , the entire area was renamed Adventure Village coinciding with the removal of the animal habitat and monorail ride .
In 1999 , a two - year expansion initiative began with the area 's renaming to Action Zone and the addition of two new attractions – and Face / Off .
When it debuted , Action Zone resembled a movie stunt set featuring a water tower as the centerpiece .
The water tower was originally part of a skit with stunts and special effects that imitated a live movie set with a director and stunt performers .
Son of Beast opened in 2000 , the second year of the area 's two - year expansion .
It was the tallest and fastest wooden roller coaster in the world and the first of its kind to feature a vertical loop .
As a result of a number of structural issues and two accidents , the ride closed permanently in 2009 and was eventually demolished in 2012 .
Other notable rides include Delirium , which opened in 2003 as the largest Giant Frisbee ride in the world , and Banshee , the world 's longest inverted roller coaster which opened in 2014 at the former location of Son of Beast . !
width=85px
Name !
Opened !
width=110px Manufacturer !
Model !
Description !
Thrill rating CONEY MALL Section::::Coney Mall .
When Kings Island first opened in 1972 , a section of the park was dedicated to its predecessor , Coney Island .
The area was constructed to resemble the former park 's carnival - style layout and featured many of its flat rides which were relocated , including Monster , Scrambler , and Dodgem .
One of the flagship attractions during the park 's inaugural year , The Racer , was located in this section .
In addition to rides , some of Coney Island 's famous Ginkgo trees were transplanted , lining the middle of the walkway .
Originally called Coney Island , the area was later renamed Old Coney in 1980 and again to its present name Coney Mall in 1986 .
The area also features game booths , arcades and concession stands reminiscent of state fairs and traveling carnivals from the early twentieth century .
In 1975 , Zodiac debuted in the Coney Island mall , which was billed as a " spinning , climbing double ferris wheel " .
Manufactured by Intamin , the three - minute ride featured twelve gondolas on each of the two wheels which were mounted to a long , hydraulic arm .
It closed in 1987 and reopened at Wonderland Sydney in 1989 .
In the 1980s , the area saw the additions of Skylab , Zephyr , and Vortex , a six - inversion looping roller coaster that briefly held a world record for most inversions .
Following Paramount 's acquisition of the park in 1992 , Coney Mall was further expanded in 1994 with Days of Thunder , a motion simulator ride in the new Action Theater attraction , and in 1996 with Flight of Fear , the world 's first launched roller coaster to feature a linear induction motor ( LIM ) .
In 2005 , one of the last Paramount - themed attractions to open at the park , The Italian Job : Stunt Track ( now known as Backlot Stunt Coaster ) , was unveiled .
The roller coaster replaced the antique car ride Les Taxis .
Firehawk , a flying roller coaster previously known as X - Flight at Geauga Lake , was relocated to Kings Island next to Flight of Fear in 2007 .
The area housing both roller coasters became known as X - Base , a sub - section within Coney Mall that took on its own theme .
The most recent addition to Coney Mall was WindSeeker , added in 2011 .
The , three - minute swing ride features 32 , two - person carriages that spin around a central tower up to .
Kings Island announced that Firehawk would be removed following the 2018 season and that Kings Mill Antique Autos , a new antique cars ride , would debut in 2019 . !
width=90px Name !
Opened !
Manufacturer !
Model !
Description !
Thrill rating X - BASE Section::::X - Base .
This sub - area opened in 2007 .
Flight of Fear had existed since 1996 , but with the addition of the Firehawk roller coaster in 2007 , the area took on its own theme , centered around flight and propulsion .
Although the area is designated by a sign , it 's not listed on the park map and is officially part of Coney Mall .
Plans to remove Firehawk were announced in 2018 . !
width=70px
Name !
Opened !
Manufacturer !
Model !
Description !
Thrill rating INTERNATIONAL STREET Section::::International Street .
At the heart of the amusement park , visitors are greeted by International Street which lies just beyond the main entrance .
As one of the park 's original staples when it opened in 1972 , International Street was designed by Bruce Bushman , a former Walt Disney Imagineering layout design artist .
The area 's architecture and cultural themes represent Italy , Spain , Germany and Switzerland .
To save on the cost of construction , the second story of each building was designed on a three - quarters scale , borrowing from a practice used by Disney throughout their theme parks .
The area 's main attractions include the Royal Fountain , a capable of shooting of water into the air each minute , and the signature Eiffel Tower , a one - third scale replica of the original which offers a view of the entire park to its guests .
Grand Carousel , a classic carousel built in 1926 and originally located at Coney Island , is another International Street attraction .
Also located here is the Kings Island Theater and a variety of restaurants and souvenir shops .
In 1992 , a dark ride attraction known as Phantom Theater was added to the park 's lineup .
It utilized an Omnimover system to transport riders through specially - themed rooms resembling a behind - the - scenes tour of a haunted theater .
Previously , the building housed the Enchanted Voyage ( 1972–1983 ) and Smurf 's Enchanted Voyage ( 1984–1991 ) , both Old Mill dark rides that used unaccompanied boats floating along water - filled guideways .
After a couple theme changes in 2003 and 2010 , Phantom Theater became known as Boo Blasters on Boo Hill . !
width=110px Name !
Opened !
Manufacturer !
Model !
Description !
Thrill rating OKTOBERFEST Section::::Oktoberfest .
Oktoberfest , relating to the eponymous German festival , opened with the park in 1972 .
The area resembles a German town with timber - framed , German - style architecture .
The Festhaus building is its central attraction , featuring live shows with several indoor eateries .
Nearby is an outdoor bar that serves alcoholic beverages , with a portion of its seating area located above water bordering Oktoberfest lake .
Rides within this section of the park include a mine train roller coaster called Adventure Express , which opened in 1991 , and a swinging pirate ship ride called Viking Fury , which opened in 1982 .
Sling Shot , one of two pay - per - ride attractions at Kings Island , is also located within Oktoberfest . !
width=110px Name !
Opened !
Manufacturer !
Model !
Description !
Thrill rating PLANET SNOOPY Section::::Planet Snoopy .
The area initially opened with the park in 1972 as The Happy Land of Hanna - Barbera and was later shortened to Hanna - Barbera Land .
The area 's flagship attraction was a junior wooden roller coaster named Scooby Doo ( later known as Woodstock Express ) , which like The Racer was designed by John C. Allen .
The portion of the area that borders Rivertown was revamped in 1995 with the addition of a kids ' play area , stage and water attraction , and the new sub - section was named Nickelodeon Splat City .
In 2001 , the log ride Kings Mills Log Flume was updated with a children 's theme and renamed The Wild Thornberrys River Adventure .
The Rugrats Runaway Reptar inverted roller coaster was introduced the same year .
This expansion into an area that was originally part of Rivertown became known as Nickelodeon Central .
Hanna - Barbera Land was gradually converted over the next several years and eventually renamed " Nickelodeon Universe " in 2006 .
Following Cedar Fair 's purchase of the park from Paramount in 2006 , Nickelodeon - themed elements were eventually removed and replaced with Peanuts comic strip themes in 2010 – the children 's brand marketed at other Cedar Fair parks .
Nickelodeon Universe became known as Planet Snoopy .
The area features many rides intended for smaller children , as well as three family - oriented roller coasters and a skater coaster .
Amusement Today has awarded Kings Island with the Golden Ticket Award for Best Kids ' Area in the World for seventeen consecutive years ( 2001–2017 ) .
Kings Island 's Planet Snoopy was also the largest in the Cedar Fair chain until 2013 , when Kings Dominion doubled the size of its Planet Snoopy section . !
width=145px Name !
Opened !
Manufacturer(Model ) !
Description !
Thrill rating RIVERTOWN
Section::::Rivertown .
Rivertown is an area within the park that features a western theme depicting a town with ranch - style buildings , old wooden signs , and one of the park 's most iconic attractions , the Kings Island & Miami Valley Railroad .
Originally intended to be named Frontier Land , the area was eventually named Rivertown when it debuted with the park in 1972 .
The area included attractions such as Kings Mill Log Flume and Shawnee Landing , a canoe ride in a part of Rivertown known as Kenton 's Cove .
Throughout the 1970s , Rivertown saw the addition of several attractions including Kenton 's Cove Keelboat Canal in 1973 , which was an elevated log flume ride that operated through the 2000 season , and The Beast roller coaster in 1979 .
Designed internally by Kings Island , The Beast opened as the tallest , fastest , and longest roller coaster in the world , and in addition to retaining its record length , it remains one of the most popular wooden roller coasters in the annual Golden Ticket Awards from Amusement Today .
Other rides added over the years include a river rafting ride called White Water Canyon , which opened in 1985 , and a heavily themed , indoor flat ride called Tomb Raider : The Ride ( later renamed The Crypt ) , which opened in place of Kenton 's Cove Keelboat Canal in 2002 .
The Crypt closed permanently in 2011 .
In 2009 , the park 's first roller coaster from Bolliger & Mabillard , called Diamondback , opened in Rivertown .
The hypercoaster reaches a top speed of and features a splashdown water effect finale .
In August 2016 , Kings Island revealed plans to build Mystic Timbers , a wooden roller coaster that opened in 2017 .
The new ride added of track bringing the park 's wooden coaster total to , making it the most of any amusement park in the world . !
width=75px
Name !
Opened !
Manufacturer(Model ) !
Description !
Thrill rating SOAK CITY Section::::Soak City .
Included with park admission , Soak City is a water park featuring two wave pools , several children 's areas and a variety of water slides .
It originally opened in 1989 as WaterWorks and has since been expanded several times .
It was renamed in 2004 to Crocodile Dundee 's Boomerang Bay , based on the titular character from the film " Crocodile " Dundee , played by Paul Hogan who was also hired to promote the revamped water park .
Following Cedar Fair 's acquisition of Kings Island , it was later renamed Boomerang Bay , and all references to the film character were removed .
On September 2 , 2011 , Kings Island announced a $ 10-million expansion of the water park for the 2012 season , as well as a plan to rename it Soak City .
Tropical Plunge , a seven - story water slide complex , was added for the 2016 season .
HALLOWEEN HAUNT ( SEASONAL ) Section::::Halloween Haunt ( Seasonal ) .
Halloween Haunt is a Halloween - themed event at Kings Island that operates on weekends from September through October .
It features haunted houses , mazes , live shows , and most of the park 's regular season attractions .
Special lighting and fog effects are utilized throughout the park , and actors in costume engage with guests .
The event originally debuted as Fear Fest in 2000 , and the name was later changed to Halloween Haunt in 2007 .
WINTERFEST
( SEASONAL ) Section::::Winterfest ( Seasonal ) .
Following a twelve - year absence , park officials confirmed in 2016 that Winterfest would return in 2017 .
The annual Christmas - themed holiday festival features the lighting of the park 's Eiffel Tower and ice skating on the Royal Fountain .
Several ride attractions will be open , and International Street will be transformed into a winter village filled with Christmas carolers and homemade crafts .
FAST LANE Section::::Fast Lane .
Fast Lane , introduced at Kings Island in July 2011 , is a secondary queue system that offers shorter wait times on the park 's most popular rides .
In addition to the standard admission charge , visitors can bypass the standard wait line by purchasing a wrist band that grants access to the Fast Lane queue .
A limited number of wrist bands are sold each day .
The two options available for purchase are Fast Lane and Fast Lane
Plus , the latter of which adds several additional rides to the list .. FRIGHT LANE Section::::Fright Lane .
Kings Island offers Fright Lane passes that operate the same way as Fast Lane but are for Halloween Haunt attractions only .
A feature called " Skeleton Key " was added to Fright Lane in 2014 , which unlocks additional room access within certain haunted attractions .
This feature was discontinued following the 2018 Haunt season .
SIGNIFICANT
FACTS
NOTABLE ADDITIONS * 1977
:
Screamin ' Demon debuted as one of the first forward-
and backward - looping roller coasters in the United States .
It was later sold in 1987 to Camden Park in Huntington , West Virginia , where it operated as the Thunderbolt Express until 1999 .
It was eventually dismantled in 2004 .
* 1979 : Kings Island unveiled The Beast setting records as the world 's tallest , fastest and longest roller coaster .
* 1981 : The park introduced The Bat , generally accepted as the first permanent modern - day suspended roller coaster .
However , plagued with mechanical problems and downtime , The Bat was removed just three years later in 1984 .
* 1982 : Kings Island introduced Winterfest , a Christmas - time holiday event which ran from late - November through December .
The yearly event was discontinued after the 1992 season , though it made a one - year appearance in 2005 before returning permanently in 2017 .
* 1984 : King Cobra opened as the first roller coaster to be designed from the ground - up as a stand - up coaster , even though others had been converted to stand - up designs .
King Cobra was dismantled and put up for sale in 2002 , when downtime and maintenance proved prohibitive .
* 1987 :
The Vortex was added to the park and briefly held a record with six inversions .
* 1989
: WaterWorks debuted as a family water park featuring a wave pool , water slides and other attractions .
* 1999 : Kings Island 's " Adventure Village " area began the first of a two - year expansion to re - energize the area .
Renamed Paramount Action Zone , the area was completely re - themed as a brightly colored movie studio backlot .
Two new rides , FACE / OFF and , opened with the latter setting a new record for the world 's tallest gyro drop .
* 2000 : For the second year of the Paramount Action Zone two - year expansion , Son of Beast opened setting records as the world 's tallest , fastest and only - looping wooden roller coaster .
Billed as a sequel to Kings Island 's own legendary roller coaster , The Beast , Son of Beast was also the park 's first hypercoaster .
In October 2000 , Kings Island debuted FearFest which runs annually from late September through October ( later renamed to Halloween Haunt ) .
* 2002 :
Tomb Raider :
The Ride opened at Kings Island using an unorthodox marketing approach .
The vehicle was by design concealed from view even as guests are being seated .
Opening - day riders did not know what was going to happen as the ride started .
Under the hood , the ride was based on a typical top spin model ride , except that this version was the world 's first Giant variation to hold nearly twice as many riders as prior efforts .
In addition , the ride operated indoors synchronized to a musical score , lasers , water effects , fog and theatrical lighting .
* 2005 : Kings Island opened Italian Job :
Stunt Track , a roller coaster that primarily focused on special effects to tie in with the film
The Italian Job
( sister park Canada 's Wonderland opened one the same year ) .
* 2007 : Kings Island unveiled Firehawk , a Vekoma Flying Dutchman roller coaster .
The ride originally opened in 2001 at Geauga Lake under the name X - Flight but was relocated to Kings Island after the 2006 season .
Its track colors were changed from neon green to red , while its supports were changed from dark gray to steel gray .
* 2009 :
A steel hypercoaster from Bolliger & Mabillard called Diamondback opened in place of the former Swan Lake .
* 2010 : Planet Snoopy opened in place of the Nickelodeon Universe kids area .
The Nickelodeon - themed attractions and characters from Hanna - Barbera 's Scooby - Doo were completely removed .
This change marked the first time since the park 's debut in 1972 that Scooby - Doo was not present in the park .
* 2011 :
WindSeeker , a tower swinger ride manufactured by Mondial , was added to the Coney Mall next to the Vortex .
Fast Lane .
A Pay - Per - Use attraction called Dinosaurs Alive ! debuted at Kings Island as the world 's largest animatronic dinosaur park .
It is located in Coney Mall near WindSeeker .
Dinosaurs Alive 3D was also introduced to the Action Theater presented in Dolby 3D. * 2012 :
Soak City was announced on September 2 , 2011 , as the new name for Boomerang Bay .
The Australian theme was dropped and additions included a second , larger wave pool along with sand - volleyball courts and a completely revamped lazy river with new names all around .
* 2014 : The longest inverted roller coaster in the world , Banshee , opened in the location previously occupied by Son of Beast and Thunder Alley within the park 's Action Zone .
* 2017 : Mystic Timbers , a wooden coaster manufactured by Great Coasters International is added .
It is located in the park 's Rivertown area .
Winterfest has also been confirmed to make its return after a twelve - year hiatus .
NOTABLE
EVENTS * 1972
: ABC sitcom , The Partridge Family , filmed at the park in the episode "
I Left My Heart in Cincinnati " which aired on January 26 , 1973
( Episode # 66 from Season 3 ) .
* 1973 :
Another ABC sitcom , The Brady Bunch , filmed at the park in the episode " The Cincinnati Kids " which aired later that year on November 23 .
* 1974 :
Sixty - nine - year - old Karl Wallenda broke a world skywalk distance record of .
* October 25 , 1975 :
A nationally - televised event featured Evel Knievel successfully jumping fourteen Greyhound buses at Kings Island , clearing a record - breaking distance of which stood until 1999 .
* May 24 , 2008 : Robbie Knievel , son of Evel , successfully jumped over 24 Coke Zero trucks in the Kings Island Parking Lot .
This was expected to be the last of Robbie 's big jumps .
* July 4 , 2008 :
High wire artist Rick Wallenda broke the world skywalk distance record of held by his grandfather , Karl Wallenda , by walking on a from Kings Island 's Eiffel Tower to the park 's entrance and back .
* August 31 , 2008 :
Barry Williams , Susan Olsen and Mike Lookinland returned to Kings Island for A Very Brady Reunion , a four - show special of song , dance and Brady Bunch stories .
* August 15 , 2009 :
Nik Wallenda completed a skywalk on a wire suspended above the ground that extended .
Although it did n't break any world records , it was the highest skywalk Nik had completed to date and was three times higher than the skywalk
Rick Wallenda performed a year earlier .
* May 19 , 2013 :
Former Brady Bunch stars Barry Williams , Susan Olsen and Christopher Knight returned to the park to " entertain park guests during four shows of singing , dancing and Brady Bunch anecdotes " .
NOTABLE PEOPLE Section::::Significant facts .
Section::::Notable people .
The following is a list of former employees at Kings Island that later became well known in another industry :
* Lisa Akey ( actress )
* Curtis Cregan ( actor ) – worked as a live shows performer and emcee for the Nickelodeon show at Kings Island * Carmen Electra ( singer ) – started her professional career in 1990 as a dancer at Kings Island in the show " It 's Magic " * Woody Harrelson ( actor ) – wood carver at Kings Island during high school * Justin Jeffre ( singer ) – part of quartet that performed throughout the park
* Lewis Johnson ( reporter ) – former rides supervisor on the Beast and Racer roller coasters at Kings Island ( 1981–87 )
* Susan Kay Johnson ( 1987 Miss Ohio )
* Nick Lachey ( singer ) – part of quartet that performed throughout the park * Dan Patrick ( TV / radio sports host ) – worked on park 's golf course grounds crew
* Susan Perkins ( 1978 Miss America ) – worked at the park as a live shows performer * Rob Pottorf ( film composer ) – worked as live show performer and starred in Kings Production 's TV series , Pumpkin Creek * Gigi Rice ( actress )
OTHER DOGSTREET CEMETERY Section::::Other .
Section::::Dogstreet Cemetery .
Dogstreet cemetery is located at the north end of the Kings Island parking lot and is maintained by Deerfield Township .
The historic cemetery dates back to 1803 .
The Warren County Genealogical Society documented nearly 70 grave sites in the cemetery , though , only 52 headstones remained .
On January 11 , 2012 , the amusement park and cemetery were featured on season 8 , episode 1 of Ghost Hunters entitled Roller Ghoster .
The show investigated claims of haunted occurrences inside the park and around the cemetery , particularly of a ghost reportedly known as " Missouri Jane . "
Warren County Genealogical Society records document a grave for a Missouri Jane Galeenor , who died in 1846 at age five .
KINGS ISLAND
RESORT Section::::Kings Island resort .
As part of the Kings Island resort , in 1972 Taft Broadcasting Company built a golf course , hotel and campground .
*
The Golf Center at Kings Island - Designed by Jack Nicklaus with Desmond Muirhead , the 18-hole " Grizzly " and the 9-hole " Bruin " golf courses are located just across Interstate 71 .
The " Grizzly " was used for PGA and LPGA tournaments throughout the years .
The Kings Island golf courses were formerly known as the Jack Nicklaus Golf Center , Jack Nicklaus Sports Center and The Jack Nicklaus Golden Bear Golf Courses .
* Kings Island Inn - Designed to depict a small alpine village , the 300-room inn , also known as Kings Island Resort & Conference Center was located on Kings Island Drive across the street from the park .
It featured a restaurant , indoor and outdoor pools , tennis court , sand volleyball , half - court basketball and a conference center .
The inn was also featured in the Partridge Family 's episode
" I Left My Heart in Cincinnati " and the Brady Bunch episode " The Cincinnati Kids . " .
The inn and conference center closed in 2014 and has since been demolished .
* Kings Island Campground -
The park used to offer a 45-acre campground .
It had 350 sites plus overflow , 6 cabins , pool , game room and store .
A free tram carried campers to and from the park .
The campground closed in 2004 and the land , except for the overflow area , was sold to Great Wolf Resorts .
KINGS
ISLAND GREENHOUSE Section::::Kings Island greenhouse .
The park has its own greenhouse just off of Columbia Road .
It can be seen from the top of The Bat 's lift hill .
It produces the flowers and topiary for the park .
Some of their notable work is the " Living Liberty Bell " topiary and working " Flower Clock " near the Eiffel Tower .
AWARDS AND RECOGNITION
*
Amusement Today – Golden Ticket Award for
Best Kids ' Area ( 2001–2017 ) * NAPHA – Award for best new attraction for 2009
( Diamondback ) * Themed Entertainment Association –
An attendance report that ranks Kings Island third among seasonal amusement parks in North America , with an estimated 3.47 million visitors in 2017 NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS