RONALD REAGAN WASHINGTON NATIONAL AIRPORT
Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport is an airport in Arlington , Virginia that acts as the primary airport serving Washington ,
D.C. It is the nearest commercial airport to the capital and serves the Baltimore – Washington metropolitan area .
For decades it was called Washington National Airport before being renamed to honor President Ronald Reagan in 1998 .
The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority ( MWAA ) operates the airport with close oversight by the federal government due to its proximity to the national capital .
It is located in the neighborhood of Crystal City in the county of Arlington , Virginia , south of Downtown Washington .
It covers 861 acres ( 348 ha ) of land .
Reagan National is a fortress hub for American Airlines which operates near - hourly air shuttle flights to Logan International Airport in Boston and New York LaGuardia Airport .
Delta also operates near - hourly air shuttle flights to New York LaGuardia Airport which are all operated by Delta Shuttle .
In the 12 months ending March 2015 , the airport served 21,195,775 passengers .
Other than 40 slot exemptions , flights into and out of the airport are not allowed to exceed in any direction nonstop , in an effort to send coast - to - coast and overseas traffic to the larger but more distant Washington Dulles International Airport .
Reagan National has United States immigration and customs facilities only for business jet traffic ; the only scheduled international flights allowed to land at the airport are those from airports with U.S. Customs and Border Protection preclearance facilities .
Other international passenger flights must use Washington Dulles International Airport or Baltimore – Washington International Airport .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first airport in the Washington area with a major terminal was Arlington 's Hoover Field , which opened its doors in 1926 .
Located near the present site of the Pentagon , the facility 's single runway was crossed by a street ; guards had to stop automobile traffic during takeoffs and landings .
The following year Washington Airport , another privately operated field , began service next door .
In 1930 the Depression caused the two terminals to merge to form Washington - Hoover Airport .
Bordered on the east by U.S. Route 1 , with its accompanying high - tension electrical wires , and obstructed by a high smokestack on one approach and a dump nearby , the field was inadequate .
Although the need for a better airport was acknowledged in 37 studies conducted between 1926 and 1938 , there was a statutory prohibition against federal development of airports .
When Congress lifted the prohibition in 1938 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt made a recess appropriation of $ 15 million to build National Airport by reallocating funds from other purposes .
Construction of Washington National Airport began in 1940–41 by a company led by John McShain .
Congress challenged the legality of FDR 's recess appropriation , but construction of the new airport continued .
The airport is southwest of Washington ,
D.C. The western part of the airport was once within a large Virginia plantation , a remnant of which is now inside a historic site located near the airport 's Metro - rail station ( see Abingdon ( plantation ) for history ) .
The eastern part of the airport was constructed in the District of Columbia on and near mudflats that were within the tidal Potomac River near Gravelly Point , about from the United States Capitol , using landfill dredged from the Potomac River .
The airport opened June 16 , 1941 , just before US involvement into World War II .
Public were entertained by displays of wartime equipment including a captured Japanese Zero war prize flown in with U.S. Navy colors .
In 1945 Congress passed a law that established the airport was legally within Virginia ( mainly for liquor sales taxation purposes ) but under the jurisdiction of the federal government .
On July 1 of that year , the airport 's weather station became the official point for the weather observations and records by the National Weather Service , which is located in Washington , D.C. The April 1957 Official Airline Guide shows 316 weekday departures : 95 Eastern ( plus six a week to / from South America ) , 77 American , 61 Capital , 23 National , 17 TWA , 10 United , 10 Delta , 6 Allegheny , 6 Braniff , 5 Piedmont , 3 Northeast and 3 Northwest .
Jet flights began in April 1966 ( 727 - 200s were not allowed until 1970 ) .
By 1974 , the airport 's key carriers were Eastern ( 20 destinations ) , United ( 14 destinations after subsuming Capital ) and Allegheny ( 11 destinations ) .
The grooving of runway 18 - 36 in March 1967 was a first for a civil airport in the United States .
Service to the airport 's Metro station began in 1977 .
The Washington National Airport Terminal and South Hangar Line were listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1997 .
EXPANSION AND RESTRICTIONS Section::::Expansion and restrictions .
The runway layout has changed little since the 1956 closure of the fourth east – west runway .
The terminal building was supplemented by the North Terminal in 1958 ; the two were connected in 1961 .
A United Airlines holdroom complex was built in 1965 , and a facility for American Airlines was completed in 1968 .
A commuter terminal was constructed in 1970 .
Runways 18/36 and 3/21 were renumbered as 1/19 and 4/22 , respectively , in 1999 .
The renumbering was due to a shift in the earth 's magnetic field .
In March 2012 the main 1/19 runway was lengthened 300 ft to add FAA compliant runway safety areas .
Despite the expansions , efforts have been made to restrict the growth of the airport .
The advent of jet aircraft as well as traffic growth led Congress to pass the Washington Airport Act of 1950 , which resulted in the opening of Washington Dulles International Airport in 1962 .
To reduce congestion and drive traffic to alternative airports , the FAA imposed landing slot and perimeter restrictions on National and four other high - density airports in 1969 .
Originally , the airport had no perimeter rule .
From 1954 to 1960 , airlines operated nonstop flights to California on piston - engine airliners .
Scheduled jet airliners were not allowed until April 1966 , and concerns about aviation noise led to noise restrictions even before jet service began in 1966 .
The perimeter rule first went into effect in January 1966 as a voluntary agreement by air carriers in order to get permission to use short - haul jets at National .
The purpose was to assure that Dulles continued to serve the long haul domestic and international markets , and to limit traffic and noise at National .
The FAA assumed that ground level noise would be reduced because planes would take off light on fuel and therefore be up and away quickly .
The agreement limited flights to those that were no longer than with 7 grandfathered exceptions .
The spirit of the voluntary agreement was regularly violated as flights left National to an airport within the perimeter and then immediately took off again for a destination beyond it .
Within a year there was a proposal to reduce the perimeter to 500 miles , but it was widely opposed and never implemented .
Overcrowding at National was later managed by the 1969 High Density Rule , thereby removing one of the justifications for the perimeter agreement .
Throughout the 1960s and 1970s , several attempts were made to codify the perimeter rule , but it was not until Dulles was endangered that it actually become a strict rule .
In 1970 , the FAA lifted the ban at National on the stretch version of the Boeing 727 , which resulted in a lawsuit by Virginias for Dulles who argued that the airport 's jet traffic was a nuisance .
That suit resulted in a Court of Appeals order to create an Environmental Impact Statement ( EIS ) .
In addition the court order , there were economic problems at Dulles .
Following the extension of Metrorail to National in 1977 , and airline deregulation in 1978 , traffic at Dulles began to plummet while it increased at National .
As part of a slate of efforts to protect Dulles , including removing landing fees and mobile lounge user charges , the FAA proposed regulations as part of the EIS to limit traffic at National and maintain Dulles ' role as the area 's airport serving long - haul destinations .
In 1980 , the FAA proposed codifying the perimeter rule as part of a larger rulemaking effort .
When the rule was announced , airlines reacted by challenging it in court and , in some cases , scheduling flights beyond the perimeter , to Dallas and Houston , thereby breaking the voluntary agreement .
To prevent this , the Metropolitan Washington Airports Policy of 1981 codified the perimeter rule on an interim basis " to maintain the long - haul nonstop service at Dulles and BWI which otherwise would preempt shorter haul service at National .
" At the same time , the perimeter was extended to 1000 miles to remove the unfairness of having seven grandfathered cities .
The perimeter rule was upheld by the Court of Appeals in 1982 .
In 1986 , as part of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Act which handed control of National over to the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority , the perimeter was extended to 1250 miles to enable direct flights to Houston .
Slots at the airport have been traded in several instances .
In 2011 , US Airways acquired a number of Delta 's slots at National in exchange for Delta receiving a number of US Airways slots at LaGuardia Airport in New York .
JetBlue paid $ 40 million to acquire eight slot pairs at auction during the same year .
JetBlue and Southwest acquired 12 and 27 US Airways slot pairs , respectively , in 2014 as part of a government - mandated divestiture following the merger of US Airways and American .
TRANSFER OF CONTROL AND RENAMING
Section::::Transfer of control and renaming .
In 1984 , the Secretary of Transportation Elizabeth Dole appointed a commission to study transferring National and Dulles Airports from the Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) to a local entity , which could use airport revenues to finance improvements .
The commission recommended that one multi - state agency administer both Dulles and National , over the alternative of having Virginia control Dulles and the District of Columbia control National .
In 1987 Congress , through legislation , transferred control of the airport from the FAA to the new Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority with the Authority 's decisions being subject to a Congressional review panel .
The constitutionality of the review panel was later challenged in the Supreme Court and the Court has twice declared the oversight panel unconstitutional .
Even after this decision , however , Congress has continued to intervene in the management of the airports .
On February 6 , 1998 , President Bill Clinton signed legislation changing the airport 's name from Washington National Airport to Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport , to honor the former president on his 87th birthday .
The legislation , passed by Congress in 1998 , was drafted against the wishes of MWAA officials and political leaders in Northern Virginia and Washington ,
D.C. Opponents of the renaming argued that a large federal office building had already been named for Reagan ( the Ronald Reagan Building and International Trade Center ) and that the airport was already named for a United States President ( George Washington ) .
The bill expressly stated that it did not require the expenditure of any funds to accomplish the name change ; however , state , regional , and federal authorities were later required to change highway and transit signs at their own additional expense as new signs were made .
CONSTRUCTION OF CURRENT TERMINAL BUILDINGS Section::::Construction of current terminal buildings .
With the addition of more flights and limited space in the aging main terminal , the airport began an extensive renovation and expansion in the 1990s .
Hangar 11 on the northern end of the airport was converted into The USAir Interim Terminal , designed by Joseph C. Giuliani , FAIA .
Soon after an addition for Delta Air Lines was added in 1989 and was later converted to Authority offices .
These projects allowed for the relocation of several gates in the main terminal until the new $ 450 million terminal complex became operational .
On July 27 , 1997 , the new terminal complex , consisting of terminals B and C and two parking garages , opened .
Argentine architect César Pelli designed the new terminals of the airport .
The Interim Terminal closed immediately after its opening and was converted back into a hangar .
One pier of the main terminal ( now widely known as Terminal A ) , which mainly housed American Airlines and Pan Am , was demolished ; the other pier , originally designed by Giuliani Associates Architects for Northwest / TWA remains operational today as gates 1–9 .
OPERATIONS APPROACH
PATTERNS Section::::Operations .
Section::::Approach patterns .
Reagan National Airport has some of the strictest noise restrictions in the country .
In addition , due to security concerns , the areas surrounding the National Mall and U.S. Naval Observatory in central Washington are prohibited airspace up to .
Due to these restrictions , pilots approaching from the north are generally required to follow the path of the Potomac River and turn just before landing .
This approach is known as the River Visual .
Similarly , flights taking off to the north are required to climb quickly and turn left .
The " River Visual " is only possible with a ceiling of at least and visibility of or more .
There are lights on the Key Bridge , Theodore Roosevelt Bridge , Arlington Memorial Bridge , and the George Mason Memorial Bridge to aid pilots following the river .
Aircraft using the approach can be observed from various parks on the river 's west bank .
Passengers on the left side of an airplane can see the Capitol , the Washington Monument , the Lincoln Memorial , the Jefferson Memorial , the World War II Memorial , Georgetown University , the National Mall , and the White House .
Passengers on the right side can see CIA headquarters , Arlington National Cemetery , the Pentagon , and the United States Air Force Memorial .
When the River Visual is not available due to visibility or winds , aircraft may fly an offset localizer or GPS approach to Runway 19 along a similar course ( flying a direct approach course on instruments as far as Rosslyn , and then turning to align with the runway visually moments before touchdown ) .
Most airliners are also capable of performing a VOR or GPS approach to the shorter Runway 15/33 .
Northbound visual and ILS approaches to Runway 1 are also sometimes used ; these approaches follow the Potomac River from the south and overfly the Woodrow Wilson Bridge .
SPECIAL SECURITY MEASURES Section::::Special security measures .
Reagan National Airport is in between two overlapping No Fly Zone so pilots have to watch out for the Pentagon and CIA headquarters .
And on takeoff , pilots must ascend quickly and sharply turn left so they do n't fly over the White House .
After the attacks of September 11 , security forces strongly enforce these rules .
Reagan National has extra security precautions required by the Washington Air Defense Identification Zone that have been in place since the airport began operations .
After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , the airport was closed for several weeks , and security was tightened when it reopened .
Increased security measures included : *
A ban on aircraft with more than 156 seats ( lifted in April 2002 )
* A ban on the " River Visual " approach ( lifted in April 2002 )
* A requirement that , 30 minutes prior to landing or following takeoff , passengers were required to remain seated ; if anyone stood up , the aircraft was to be diverted to Washington Dulles International Airport under military escort and the person standing would be detained and questioned by federal law enforcement officials ( lifted in July 2005 )
* A ban on general aviation ( lifted in October 2005 , subject to the restrictions below )
On October 18 , 2005 , Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport was reopened to general aviation on a limited basis ( 48 operations per day ) and under restrictions : passenger and crew manifests must be submitted to the Transportation Security Administration 24 hours in advance , and all planes must pass through one of 27 " gateway airports " where re - inspections of aircraft , passengers , and baggage take place .
An armed security officer must be on board before departing a gateway airport .
On March 23 , 2011 , the air traffic control supervisor on duty reportedly fell asleep during the night shift .
Two aircraft on approach to the airport were unable to contact anyone in the control tower and landed unassisted .
PERIMETER RESTRICTIONS Section::::Perimeter restrictions .
Reagan National Airport is subject to a federally mandated perimeter limitation and may not accommodate nonstop flights to or from cities beyond , with limited exceptions .
The U.S. Department of Transportation has issued " beyond - perimeter slot exemptions " which allow specified carriers to operate 20 daily round - trip flights to cities outside the perimeter .
The current exemptions are : In 1999 , Senator John McCain of Arizona introduced legislation to remove the restriction .
In the end the restriction was not lifted , but in 2000 the FAA was permitted to add 24 exemptions , which went not to America West but to competitor Alaska Airlines .
America West later gained additional exemptions for non - stop flights to Phoenix in 2004 .
In May 2012 , the DOT granted new exemptions for Alaska to serve Portland , JetBlue to serve San Juan , Southwest to serve Austin , and Virgin America to serve San Francisco .
American , Delta , United and US Airways were also each allowed to exchange a pair of in - perimeter slots for an equal number of beyond - perimeter slots .
TERMINALS
TERMINAL A Section::::Terminals .
Section::::Terminal A.
Designed by architect Charles M. Goodman , terminal A opened in 1941 and was expanded in 1955 to accommodate more passengers and airlines .
The exterior of this terminal has had its original architecture restored , with the airside facade restored in 2004 and the landside facade restored in 2008 .
The terminal underwent a $ 37 million renovation that modernized the airport 's look by bringing in brighter lighting , more windows and new flooring .
The project was completed in 2014 along with a new expanded TSA security checkpoint .
In 2014 , additional renovations were announced including new upgraded concessions and further structural improvements , the project was completed in 2015 .
Terminal A contains gates 1–9 and houses operations from Air Canada Express , Frontier and Southwest .
TERMINALS B AND C
Section::::Terminals B and C. Terminals B and C are the airport 's newest and largest terminals ; the terminals opened in 1997 and replaced a collection of airline - specific terminals built during the 1960s .
The new terminals were designed by architect Cesar Pelli and house 35 gates .
Both terminals share the same structure and are directly connected to the WMATA airport station via indoor pedestrian bridges .
Terminal B and C have three concourses .
Terminal B ( gates 10–22 ) houses Alaska Airlines , Delta and United .
Terminal B / C ( gates 23–34 ) houses American and JetBlue .
Terminal C ( gates 35–45 ) is exclusive to American .
The corridor / hall connecting the three concourses of Terminal B and C is known as National Hall .
Terminal B houses a Delta Sky Club and United Club , and there are American Admirals Clubs in both Terminal B / C and Terminal C. TERMINAL D Section::::Terminal D. MWAA has begun construction of a new concourse north of Terminal C to accommodate 14 new regional jet gates with jetways .
This will replace " Gate 35X , " a bus gate currently used to bring passengers to and from American Eagle flights that use parking spots on the ramp .
In addition , the individual security checkpoints for the three concourses in Terminals B and C will be replaced with higher - capacity security checkpoints in a new building to the west of National Hall and above the existing arrivals roadway , placing all of National Hall within the secured area of the airport and allowing passengers to walk between concourses without re - clearing security .
Construction commenced in February 2018 and is expected to be complete by 2021 .
AIRLINES AND DESTINATIONS PASSENGER Section::::Airlines and destinations .
Section::::Passenger . !
Domestic Destinations map STATISTICS Section::::Statistics .
In 2013 , Reagan National Airport handled 20,415,085 passengers , which was a new record .
From April 2014 to March 2015 , the airport handled 21,195,775 passengers , which is slightly higher than the aforementioned record .
American Airlines , following its merger with US Airways , has the largest share of traffic at the airport , accounting for 50.0 % of the market share .
Southwest , the second largest , accounts for 15.0 % , with Delta Air Lines in third with 14.4 % .
TOP DESTINATIONS Section::::Top destinations .
+
Busiest domestic routes from DCA(October 2017 – September 2018 ) !
Rank !
Airport !
Passengers !
Carriers AIRLINE MARKET SHARE Section::::Airline market share .
+ Largest Airlines at DCA ( October 2017 - September 2018 ) !
Rank !
Airline !
Passengers !
Market Share 1 5,672,000 25.28 % 2 3,391,000 15.11 % 3 2,467,000 10.99 % 4 JetBlue Airways 1,780,000 7.93 % 5 United Airlines 1,141,000 5.09 %
ANNUAL TRAFFIC
PASSENGERS
Section::::Annual traffic .
Section::::Passengers .
+ Annual passenger traffic ( enplaned + deplaned ) at DCA , 1941 through 2017 !
Year !
Passengers !
Year !
Passengers !
Year !
Passengers !
Year !
Passengers !
Year !
Passengers !
Year !
Passengers !
Year !
Passengers !
Year !
Passengers OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
+ Annual aircraft operations at DCA , 1941 through 2017 !
Year !
Operations !
Year !
Operations !
Year !
Operations !
Year !
Operations !
Year !
Operations !
Year !
Operations !
Year !
Operations !
Year !
Operations CARGO Section::::Cargo .
+ Annual cargo in pounds at DCA , 1953 through 2014 !
Year !
Pounds !
Year !
Pounds !
Year !
Pounds !
Year !
Pounds !
Year !
Pounds !
Year !
Pounds !
Year !
Pounds GROUND
TRANSPORTATION RAIL Section::::Ground transportation .
Section::::Rail .
The Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport station on the Washington Metro , serving the Yellow and Blue lines , is located on an elevated outdoor platform station adjacent to Terminals B and C. Two elevated pedestrian walkways connect the station directly to the concourse levels of Terminals B and C. An underground pedestrian walkway and shuttle services provide access to Terminal A. BUS Section::::Bus .
Metrobus provides service on weekend mornings before the Metro station opens or during any disruptions to regular Metro service .
TAXI Section::::Taxi .
Taxicab services are available at the Ground Transportation area of all terminal buildings .
Taxicabs that serve the airport are required to be licensed and are regulated by either Washington , D.C. , or Virginia local governments .
TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES Section::::Transportation network companies .
Lyft and Uber are approved to pick up and drop off passengers .
AIRPORT SHUTTLE Section::::Airport shuttle .
Shared - ride shuttle services are available from several providers including SuperShuttle , Limos 4 Less and Supreme Shuttle .
ROADS Section::::Roads .
Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport is located on the George Washington Memorial Parkway , and connected to U.S. Route 1 by the Airport Viaduct ( State Route 233 ) .
Interstate 395 is just north of the airport , and is also accessible by the G.W. Parkway and U.S. Route 1 .
Airport - operated parking garage facilities as well as economy lots are available adjacent to or near the various airport terminals .
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE Section::::Pedestrian and bicycle .
The airport is accessible by bicycle and foot from the Mt. Vernon Trail , as well as the sidewalk along the Airport Viaduct ( State Route 233 ) , which connects the airport grounds to U.S. Route 1 .
A total of 48 bike parking spots are available across six separate bike racks .
The Airport is planning to have a Capital Bikeshare station installed sometime in 2016 .
ABINGDON PLANTATION HISTORICAL SITE Section::::Abingdon plantation historical site .
A part of the airport is located on the former site of the 18th and 19th century Abingdon plantation , which was associated with the prominent Alexander , Custis , Stuart , and Hunter families .
In 1998 , MWAA opened a historical display around the restored remnants of two Abingdon buildings and placed artifacts collected from the site in an exhibit hall in Terminal A.
The Abingdon site is located on a knoll between parking Garage A and Garage B / C , near the south end of the Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport Metrorail station .
ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS EASTERN AIR LINES FLIGHT 537 Section::::Accidents and incidents .
Section::::Eastern Air Lines Flight 537 .
On November 1 , 1949 , a mid - air collision between an Eastern Air Lines passenger aircraft and a P-38 Lightning military plane took the lives of 55 passengers .
The sole survivor was the Bolivian ace pilot of the fighter plane , Erick Rios Bridoux .
Bridoux 's plane had taken off from National just 10 minutes earlier and was in contact with the tower during a brief test flight .
The Eastern Air Lines DC-4 was on approach from the south when the nimble and much faster P-38 banked and plunged right into the passenger plane .
Both aircraft dropped into the Potomac River .
CAPITAL AIRLINES FLIGHT 500 Section::::Capital Airlines Flight 500 .
On December 12 , 1949 , Capital Airlines Flight 500 , a Douglas DC-3 , stalled and crashed into the Potomac River while on approach to Reagan National .
Six of the 23 passengers and crew on board were killed .
AIR FLORIDA FLIGHT 90 Section::::Air Florida Flight 90 .
On the afternoon of January 13 , 1982 , following a period of exceptionally cold weather and a morning of blizzard conditions , Air Florida Flight 90 crashed after waiting forty - nine minutes on a taxiway and taking off with ice and snow on the wings .
The Boeing 737 aircraft failed to gain altitude .
Less than from the end of the runway , the airplane struck the 14th Street Bridge complex , shearing the tops off vehicles stuck in traffic before plunging through the ice covering the Potomac River .
Rescue responses were greatly hampered by the weather and traffic .
Due to action on the part of motorists , a United States Park Service police helicopter crew , and one of the plane 's passengers who later perished , five occupants of the downed plane survived .
The other 74 people who were aboard died , as well as four occupants of vehicles on the bridge .
President Reagan cited motorist Lenny Skutnik in his State of the Union Address a few weeks later .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website *
Airport Map Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority .
June 2011