ATP SYNTHASE ATP synthase is an enzyme that creates the energy storage molecule adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) .
ATP is the most commonly used " energy currency " of cells for all organisms .
It is formed from adenosine diphosphate ( ADP ) and inorganic phosphate ( P ) .
The overall reaction catalyzed by ATP synthase is : * ADP + P + H ATP + HO + H
The formation of ATP from ADP and P is energetically unfavorable and would normally proceed in the reverse direction .
In order to drive this reaction forward , ATP synthase couples ATP synthesis during cellular respiration to an electrochemical gradient created by the difference in proton ( H ) concentration across the mitochondrial membrane in eukaryotes or the plasma membrane in bacteria .
During photosynthesis in plants , ATP is synthesized by ATP synthase using a proton gradient created in the thylakoid lumen through the thylakoid membrane and into the chloroplast stroma .
ATP synthase consists of two main subunits , F and F , which has a rotational motor mechanism allowing for ATP production .
Because of its rotating subunit , ATP synthase is a molecular machine .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
The F fraction derives its name from the term " Fraction 1 " and F ( written as a subscript letter " o " , not " zero " ) derives its name from being the binding fraction for oligomycin , a type of naturally - derived antibiotic that is able to inhibit the F unit of ATP synthase .
These functional regions consist of different protein subunits — refer to tables .
This enzyme is used in synthesis of ATP through aerobic respiration .
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION Section::::Structure and function .
Located within the thylakoid membrane and the inner mitochondrial membrane , ATP synthase consists of
two regions F and F. F causes rotation of F and is made of c - ring and subunits a , b , d , F6 .
F is made of formula_1 subunits .
F has a water - soluble part that can hydrolyze ATP .
F on the other hand has mainly hydrophobic regions .
F F creates a pathway for protons movement across the membrane .
F REGION Section::::F region .
The F portion of ATP synthase is hydrophilic and responsible for hydrolyzing ATP .
This portion is located through the intermembrane space between the inter membrane space of the mitochondria .
Subunits formula_2 and formula_3 make a hexamer with 6 binding sites .
Three of them are catalytically inactive and they bind ADP .
Other three subunits catalyze the ATP synthesis .
The other F subunits formula_4 are a part of a rotational motor mechanism .
formula_5 subunit allows formula_3 to go through conformational changes , i.e. closed , half open and open states allows for ATP to be bound and released once synthesized .
The F particle is large and can be seen in the transmission electron microscope by negative staining .
These are particles of 9 nm diameter that pepper the inner mitochondrial membrane .
+ F – Subunits !
Subunit ! !
Human Gene F REGION Section::::F region .
F is a water insoluble protein with eight subunits and a transmembrane ring .
The ring has a tetramer shape with a helix loop helix protein that goes though conformational changes when protonated and deprotonated , pushing neighboring subunits to rotate , causing the spinning of F which then also affects conformation of F , resulting in switching of states of alpha and beta subunits .
The F region of ATP synthase is a proton pore that is embedded in the mitochondrial membrane .
It consists of three main subunits , a , b , and c , and ( in humans ) six additional subunits , d , e , f , g , F6 , and 8 ( or A6L ) .
An atomic model for the dimeric yeast F region was determined by cryo - EM at an overall resolution of 3.6 Å.
This part of the enzyme is located in the mitochondrial inner membrane and couples proton translocation to the rotation the causes ATP synthesis in the F region .
+
F - Main subunits !
Subunit ! !
Human Gene
BINDING MODEL
Section::::Binding model .
In the 1960s through the 1970s , Paul Boyer , a UCLA Professor , developed the binding change , or flip - flop , mechanism theory , which postulated that ATP synthesis is dependent on a conformational change in ATP synthase generated by rotation of the gamma subunit .
The research group of John E. Walker , then at the MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology in Cambridge , crystallized the F catalytic - domain of ATP synthase .
The structure , at the time the largest asymmetric protein structure known , indicated that Boyer 's rotary - catalysis model was , in essence , correct .
For elucidating this , Boyer and Walker shared half of the 1997 Nobel Prize in Chemistry .
The crystal structure of the F showed alternating alpha and beta subunits ( 3 of each ) , arranged like segments of an orange around a rotating asymmetrical gamma subunit .
According to the current model of ATP synthesis ( known as the alternating catalytic model ) , the transmembrane potential created by ( H+ ) proton cations supplied by the electron transport chain , drives the ( H+ ) proton cations from the intermembrane space through the membrane via the F region of ATP synthase .
A portion of the F ( the ring of c - subunits ) rotates as the protons pass through the membrane .
The c - ring is tightly attached to the asymmetric central stalk ( consisting primarily of the gamma subunit ) , causing it to rotate within the alphabeta of F causing the 3 catalytic nucleotide binding sites to go through a series of conformational changes that lead to ATP synthesis .
The major F subunits are prevented from rotating in sympathy with the central stalk rotor by a peripheral stalk that joins the alphabeta to the non - rotating portion of F. The structure of the intact ATP synthase is currently known at low - resolution from electron cryo - microscopy ( cryo - EM ) studies of the complex .
The cryo - EM model of ATP synthase suggests that the peripheral stalk is a flexible structure that wraps around the complex as it joins F to F. Under the right conditions , the enzyme reaction can also be carried out in reverse , with ATP hydrolysis driving proton pumping across the membrane .
The binding change mechanism involves the active site of a β subunit 's cycling between three states .
In the " loose " state , ADP and phosphate enter the active site ; in the adjacent diagram , this is shown in pink .
The enzyme then undergoes a change in shape and forces these molecules together , with the active site in the resulting " tight " state ( shown in red ) binding the newly produced ATP molecule with very high affinity .
Finally , the active site cycles back to the open state ( orange ) , releasing ATP and binding more ADP and phosphate , ready for the next cycle of ATP production .
PHYSIOLOGICAL ROLE
Section::::Physiological role .
Like other enzymes , the activity of FF ATP synthase is reversible .
Large - enough quantities of ATP cause it to create a transmembrane proton gradient , this is used by fermenting bacteria that do not have an electron transport chain , but rather hydrolyze ATP to make a proton gradient , which they use to drive flagella and the transport of nutrients into the cell .
In respiring bacteria under physiological conditions , ATP synthase , in general , runs in the opposite direction , creating ATP while using the proton motive force created by the electron transport chain as a source of energy .
The overall process of creating energy in this fashion is termed oxidative phosphorylation .
The same process takes place in the mitochondria , where ATP synthase is located in the inner mitochondrial membrane and the F - part projects into mitochondrial matrix .
The consumption of ATP by ATP - synthase pumps proton cations into the matrix .
EVOLUTION Section::::Evolution .
The evolution of ATP synthase is thought to have been modular whereby two functionally independent subunits became associated and gained new functionality .
This association appears to have occurred early in evolutionary history , because essentially the same structure and activity of ATP synthase enzymes are present in all kingdoms of life .
The F - ATP synthase displays high functional and mechanistic similarity to the V - ATPase .
However , whereas the F - ATP synthase generates ATP by utilising a proton gradient , the V - ATPase generates a proton gradient at the expense of ATP , generating pH values of as low as 1 .
The F region also shows significant similarity to hexameric DNA helicases , and the F region shows some similarity to -powered flagellar motor complexes .
The αβ hexamer of the F region shows significant structural similarity to hexameric DNA helicases ; both form a ring with 3-fold rotational symmetry with a central pore .
Both have roles dependent on the relative rotation of a macromolecule within the pore ; the DNA helicases use the helical shape of DNA to drive their motion along the DNA molecule and to detect supercoiling , whereas the αβ hexamer uses the conformational changes through the rotation of the γ subunit to drive an enzymatic reaction .
The motor of the F particle shows great functional similarity to the motors that drive flagella .
Both feature a ring of many small alpha - helical proteins that rotate relative to nearby stationary proteins , using a potential gradient as an energy source .
This link is tenuous , however , as the overall structure of flagellar motors is far more complex than that of the F particle and the ring with about 30 rotating proteins is far larger than the 10 , 11 , or 14 helical proteins in the F complex .
The modular evolution theory for the origin of ATP synthase suggests that two subunits with independent function , a DNA helicase with ATPase activity and a motor , were able to bind , and the rotation of the motor drove the ATPase activity of the helicase in reverse .
This complex then evolved greater efficiency and eventually developed into today 's intricate ATP synthases .
Alternatively , the DNA helicase/ motor complex may have had pump activity with the ATPase activity of the helicase driving the motor in reverse .
This may have evolved to carry out the reverse reaction and act as an ATP synthase .
IN DIFFERENT SPECIES E. COLI Section::::In different species .
Section::::E. coli .
E. coli
ATP synthase is the simplest known form of ATP synthase , with 8 different subunit types .
YEAST Section::::Yeast .
Yeast ATP synthase is one of the best - studied eukaryotic ATP synthases ; and five F , eight F subunits , and seven associated proteins have been identified .
Most of these proteins have homologues in other eukaryotes .
PLANT Section::::Plant .
In plants , ATP synthase is also present in chloroplasts ( CFF - ATP synthase ) .
The enzyme is integrated into thylakoid membrane ; the CF - part sticks into stroma , where dark reactions of photosynthesis ( also called the light - independent reactions or the Calvin cycle ) and ATP synthesis take place .
The overall structure and the catalytic mechanism of the chloroplast ATP synthase are almost the same as those of the bacterial enzyme .
However , in chloroplasts , the proton motive force is generated not by respiratory electron transport chain but by primary photosynthetic proteins .
BOVINE Section::::Bovine .
The ATP synthase isolated from bovine ( Bos taurus )
heart mitochondria is , in terms of biochemistry and structure , the best - characterized ATP synthase .
Beef heart is used as a source for the enzyme because of the high concentration of mitochondria in cardiac muscle .
HUMAN Section::::Human .
The following is a list of humans genes that encode components of ATP synthases :
* ATP5A1 * ATP5B * ATP5C1 , ATP5D , ATP5E , ATP5F1 , ATP5G1 , ATP5G2 , ATP5G3 , ATP5H , ATP5I , ATP5J , ATP5J2 , ATP5L , ATP5O
*
MT - ATP6 , MT - ATP8 SEE ALSO * ATP10 protein required for the assembly of the F sector of the mitochondrial ATPase complex .
* Chloroplast * Electron transfer chain *
Flavoprotein *
Mitochondrion * Oxidative phosphorylation * P - ATPase
* Proton pump * Rotating locomotion in living systems * Transmembrane ATPase
* V - ATPase
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Nick Lane :
The Vital Question : Energy , Evolution , and the Origins of Complex Life , Ww Norton , 2015 - 07 - 20 , ( Link points to Figure 10 showing model of ATP synthase ) EXTERNAL LINKS
* Boris A. Feniouk : " ATP synthase — a splendid molecular machine " *
Well illustrated ATP synthase lecture by Antony Crofts of the University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign .
*
Proton and Sodium translocating F - type , V - type and A - type ATPases in OPM database * The Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1997 to Paul D. Boyer and John E. Walker for the enzymatic mechanism of synthesis of ATP ; and to Jens C. Skou , for discovery of an ion - transporting enzyme , , -ATPase .
* Harvard Multimedia Production Site — Videos – ATP synthesis animation
* David Goodsell : " ATP Synthase- Molecule of the Month "