COLORADO RIVER ( TEXAS )
The Colorado River is an long river in the U.S. state of Texas .
It is the 18th longest river in the United States and the longest river with both its source and its mouth within Texas .
Its drainage basin and some of its usually dry tributaries extend into New Mexico .
It flows generally southeast from Dawson County through Ballinger , Marble Falls , Austin , Bastrop , Smithville , La Grange , Columbus , Wharton , and Bay City before emptying into the Gulf of Mexico at Matagorda Bay .
COURSE
Section::::Course .
The Colorado River originates south of Lubbock , on the Llano Estacado , near Lamesa .
It flows generally southeast , out of the Llano Estacado and through the Texas Hill Country , through several reservoirs including Lake J.B. Thomas , E.V. Spence Reservoir , and Lake O.H. Ivie .
The river flows through several more reservoirs before reaching Austin , including Lake Buchanan , Inks Lake , Lake Lyndon B. Johnson , commonly referred to as Lake LBJ and Lake Travis .
The Llano River joins the Colorado at Lake LBJ near Kingsland .
The Pedernales River joins the Colorado at Lake Travis near Briarcliff .
After passing through Austin , the Colorado River continues flowing southeast until emptying into Matagorda Bay on the Gulf of Mexico , near Matagorda .
The Texas waterway is not connected to , nor part of , the longer and more well - known Colorado River .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Colorado River , which means " red " or " reddish " river in Spanish , was frequently confused by Spanish explorers with the Brazos River to the north .
The European discoverer of these two neighboring rivers called the present Colorado River the Brazos de Dios , and called the present Brazos the Colorado River , and later the names were reversed .
The upper Colorado River was controlled by Comanches from the early 18th century to the late 19th century .
In 1757 , Spanish Texas attempted to establish an outlying Catholic mission on the San Saba River , near its confluence with the Colorado River .
Nearly defenseless and viewed by the Comanche tribe as a territorial invasion , the mission was sacked in 1758 by about 2,000 Comanches and their allies .
The Comanche were not effectively challenged on the upper Colorado River for nearly a century .
RIVER MODIFICATIONS Section::::River modifications .
The river is an important source of water for farming , cities , and electrical power production .
Major man - made reservoirs on the river include Lake Buchanan , Inks Lake , Lake LBJ , Lake Marble Falls , Lake Travis , Lake Austin , and Lady Bird Lake in Austin .
Collectively , these lakes are known as the Highland Lakes .
In addition to power plants operating on each of the major lakes , waters of the Colorado are used for cooling the South Texas Nuclear Project , near Bay City .
The Colorado River Municipal Water District owns and operates three reservoirs upstream of the Highland Lakes , Lake J. B. Thomas near Snyder , E.V. Spence Reservoir near Robert Lee , and O. H. Ivie Reservoir near Ballinger .
Flood control and use of the Colorado River is managed by two agencies established by the Texas Legislature , the Upper Colorado River Authority , and the Lower Colorado River Authority .
There are 11 major reservoirs along the Colorado River .
MAJOR TRIBUTARIES Section::::Major tributaries .
The Colorado River is joined by five significant tributaries : Concho River , Pecan Bayou , Llano River , San Saba River and Pedernales River .
Beals Creek is also a tributary fed by arroyos such as Sulphur Springs Draw , McKenzie , Seminole , Monument , Mustang , Midland , and Johnson Draws .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * List of crossings of the Colorado River
* List of tributaries of the Colorado River ( Texas ) * Matagorda Bay — river 's mouth
* Texas Hill Country
* List of rivers of Texas NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS * Upper Colorado River Authority
* Lower Colorado River Authority