THE GREAT ESCAPE ( FILM )
The Great Escape is a 1963 American World War II epic film that depicts an escape by British Commonwealth prisoners of war from a German POW camp .
The film stars Steve McQueen , James Garner , and Richard Attenborough and features James Donald , Charles Bronson , Donald Pleasence , James Coburn , and Hannes Messemer .
It was filmed in Panavision .
The film is based on Paul Brickhill 's 1950 book of the same name , a non - fiction first - hand account of the mass escape from Stalag Luft III in Sagan ( now Żagań , Poland ) , in the province of Lower Silesia , Nazi Germany .
A heavily fictionalised version of the escape is depicted in the film .
The film was based on the real events but with numerous compromises for its commercial appeal , such as including Americans among the escapees ( none of whom were actually American ) .
The characters are based on real men , and in some cases are composites of several men .
However , many details of the actual escape attempt were changed for the film , and the role of American personnel in both the planning and the escape was largely fabricated .
The Great Escape was made by The Mirisch Company , released by United Artists , and produced and directed by John Sturges .
The film had its Royal World Premiere at the Odeon Leicester Square in London 's West End on 20 June 1963 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1943 , after having recaptured escaped Allied POWs , the Germans move those still - determined - to - escape - again POWs ( under their senior British officer , Group Captain Ramsey ) to a new , high - security prisoner of war camp under the supervision of Luftwaffe Colonel von Luger .
Meanwhile , Gestapo agents Kuhn and Preissen and SS Lieutenant Dietrich bring RAF Squadron Leader Roger Bartlett to the camp .
Known as " Big X " , Bartlett is introduced as the principal escape organiser .
As Kuhn leaves , he warns Bartlett that if he escapes again , he will be shot .
Bartlett remains defiant and immediately plans the greatest escape ever attempted , with tunnels to break out 250 prisoners .
The POWs organise into teams .
Flight Lieutenant Robert Hendley is " the scrounger " who finds needed materials , from a camera to clothes and identity cards .
Australian Flying Officer Louis Sedgwick , " the manufacturer " , makes tools like picks for digging and bellows for pumping air into the tunnels .
Flight Lieutenants Danny Velinski and William " Willie " Dickes are " the tunnel kings " in charge of the digging .
Flight Lieutenant Andrew MacDonald acts as intelligence provider and Bartlett 's second - in - command .
Lieutenant Commander Eric Ashley - Pitt of the Royal Navy devises a method of spreading soil from the tunnels over the camp , under the guards ' noses .
Flight Lieutenant Griffith acts as " the tailor " , creating civilian outfits from scavenged cloth .
Forgery is handled by Flight Lieutenant Colin Blythe .
The prisoners work on three tunnels simultaneously , calling them " Tom " , " Dick " , and " Harry " .
USAAF Captain Virgil Hilts , the " Cooler King " , irritates guards with frequent escape attempts and irreverence .
Hilts and his Scottish friend , RAF Flying Officer Archibald " Archie " Ives , conceive an escape attempt through a short tunnel at a blind spot near the edge of the camp , a proposal which is accepted by Bartlett on the grounds that vetoing every independent escape attempt would raise suspicion of the planned collective escape attempt .
Hilts and Ives are caught and returned to the " cooler " .
Upon release from the cooler , Bartlett requests that Hilts use his next escape attempt as an opportunity to reconnoiter the area immediately surrounding the camp ; Hilts turns down Bartlett 's request but does assist the prisoners as a scrounger .
Meanwhile , Hendley forms a friendship with German guard Werner , which he exploits to smuggle documents and other items of importance to the prisoners .
Soon , Bartlett orders " Dick " and " Harry " to be sealed off , as " Tom " is closest to completion .
While the POWs enjoy a 4th of July celebration arranged by the three Americans in the camp , the guards discover " Tom " .
The mood drops to despair , and Ives frantically climbs the barbed wire surrounding the camp , to be shot dead .
The prisoners switch their efforts to " Harry " , and Hilts agrees to reconnoiter outside the camp and allow himself to be recaptured .
The information he brings back is used to create maps to guide the escapees .
Blythe becomes nearly blind due to progressive myopia caused by intricate work by candlelight ; Hendley takes it upon himself to be Blythe 's guide in the escape .
The last part of the tunnel is completed on the scheduled night , but it proves to be twenty feet short of the woods .
Knowing there are no other options , Bartlett orders the escape to go ahead , and Hilts improvises a rope signal system to allow them to exit the tunnel between sweeps of the guards on patrol .
Seventy - six prisoners escape , aided by an air - raid blackout : once back on the rope , however , Griffith impatiently exits the tunnel in view of the guards , and the escape is discovered .
After attempts to reach neutral Switzerland , Sweden , or Spain , almost all the POWs are recaptured or killed .
Hendley and Blythe steal a small plane to fly over the Swiss border , but the engine fails , and they crash - land .
Soldiers approach them , and Blythe , his eyesight damaged , stands and is shot .
As he dies , he thanks Hendley for getting him out .
When Bartlett is recognized in a railway station by Kuhn , Ashley - Pitt rushes Kuhn and shoots him , but is killed while attempting to flee .
The resulting confusion allows Bartlett and MacDonald to slip away , but they are later caught as well .
Hilts stretches a wire across a country road and downs a lone German soldier riding a motorcycle .
He takes the German 's uniform and motorcycle , and heads toward Switzerland , but arouses suspicion at a checkpoint and is pursued by German soldiers .
He jumps a first - line barbed wire fence at the German - Swiss border ; but before he 's able to jump the second - line fence , the motorcycle is shot , causing him to become entangled in the bigger , second line of the fence and be captured .
Three truckloads of recaptured POWs are driven down a country road and split off in three directions .
The trucks stop in a field , and the POWs , which include Bartlett , MacDonald , Cavendish and Haynes , are told to get out to " stretch their legs " .
The prisoners are shot dead under the pretense that they were trying to escape .
In all , 50 escapees are murdered ; Hendley and 10 others are returned to the camp .
In reality , the 50 were shot individually in smaller groups by a single bullet to the head .
Only three POWs make it to safety : Danny and Willie steal a rowboat and proceed downriver to the Baltic coast , where they board a Swedish merchant ship .
Sedgwick makes it to France , where he is guided by the Resistance to Spain .
Hilts is returned to the camp and taken back to the cooler , just as Von Luger is relieved of command of the camp by SS Lieutenant Steinach , with the indication that he will be executed for having failed to prevent the breakout .
CAST
* Steve McQueen as Hilts
" The Cooler King " * James Garner as Hendley " The Scrounger " * Richard Attenborough as Bartlett " Big X " * James Donald as Ramsey " The SBO " * Charles Bronson as Danny " Tunnel King " * Donald Pleasence as Blythe " The Forger " * James Coburn as Sedgwick " Manufacturer " * Hannes Messemer as Von Luger "
The Kommandant " * David McCallum as Ashley - Pitt " Dispersal " * Gordon Jackson as MacDonald " Intelligence "
* John Leyton as Willie " Tunnel King " * Angus Lennie as Ives " The Mole " * Nigel Stock as Cavendish " The Surveyor " * Robert Graf as Werner " The Ferret " * Jud Taylor as 2nd
Lt .
Goff * Hans Reiser as Kuhn ( Gestapo ) * Harry Riebauer as Stabsfeldwebel Strachwitz
* William Russell as Sorren
* Robert Freitag as Hauptmann Posen * Ulrich Beiger as Preissen * George Mikell as SS Obersturmführer Dietrich *
Lawrence Montaigne as Haynes " Diversions " * Robert Desmond as Griffith " Tailor " * Til Kiwe as Frick * Heinz Weiss as Kramer
* Tom Adams as Dai Nimmo " Diversions " * Karl - Otto Alberty as SS Untersturmführer Steinach
PRODUCTION
ADAPTATION
Section::::Production .
Section::::Adaptation .
The story was adapted by James Clavell , W. R. Burnett , and Walter Newman from Paul Brickhill 's book The Great Escape .
Brickhill had been a prisoner at Stalag Luft III during World War II .
In the book , Brickhill noted he had been a very minor member of the X Organization , one of the " stooges " who monitored German movements in the POW compound .
The film was to a significant extent fictional , based on real events but with numerous changes made to increase its drama and appeal , and as a vehicle for its box - office stars .
While some of its characters were fictitious , most were amalgams of several real characters and others based on real people .
In reality there were no escapes by aircraft or motorcycle : the motorcycle sequence was asked for by McQueen , a keen motorcyclist , who did the stunt riding himself ( except for the final jump , done by Bud Ekins ) .
Nor were the recaptured prisoners executed in one place at the same time .
The screenwriters significantly increased the involvement of American POWs ; the real escape was by largely British and other Allied personnel .
A few American officers in the camp initially helped dig the tunnels , and worked on the early plans ; however , they were moved away seven months before the escape , ending their involvement .
In addition , the film suggests the three prisoners who escaped to freedom were British , Polish , and Australian ; in reality , they were Norwegian ( Jens Müller and Per Bergsland ) and Dutch ( Bram van der Stok ) .
The film omits to mention the crucial role Canadians played in building the tunnels and in the escape itself .
Of the 1,800 or so POWs , 600 were involved in preparations out of which 150 were Canadian .
Wally Floody , an RCAF pilot and mining engineer who was the real - life " tunnel king , " was engaged as a technical advisor for the film .
Ex - POWs asked film - makers to exclude details about the help they received from their home countries , such as maps , papers , and tools hidden in gift packages , lest it jeopardise future POW escapes .
The film - makers complied .
The film omits to mention that many Germans willingly helped in the escape itself .
The film suggests that the forgers were able to make near - exact replicas of just about any pass that was used in Nazi Germany .
In reality , the forgers received a great deal of assistance from Germans who lived many hundreds of miles away on the other side of the country .
Several German guards , who were openly anti - Nazi , also willingly gave the prisoners items , and assistance in any way to aid their escape .
The need for such accuracy produced much eyestrain , but unlike in the film , there were no cases of blindness .
Some , such as Frank Knight , gave up forging because of the strain , but he certainly did not suffer the same ocular fate as the character of Colin Blythe in the film .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Steve McQueen , in a role based on at least three pilots , David M. Jones , John Dortch Lewis , and William Ash , has been credited with the most significant performance .
Critic Leonard Maltin wrote that " the large , international cast is superb , but the standout is McQueen ; it 's easy to see why this cemented his status as a superstar . "
Richard Attenborough was cast as Sqn Ldr Roger Bartlett RAF ( " Big X " ) , a character based on Roger Bushell , the South African - born British POW who was the mastermind of the real Great Escape .
This was the film that first brought Attenborough to common notice in the United States .
During the Second World War , Attenborough served in the Royal Air Force .
He volunteered to fly with the Film Unit and after further training , where he sustained permanent ear damage , qualified as a sergeant , flying on several missions over Europe filming from the rear gunner 's position to record the outcome of Bomber Command sorties .
( Richard Harris was originally announced for the role . )
Group Captain Ramsey RAF ( the " SBO " ) was based on Group Captain Herbert Massey , a WWI veteran who had volunteered in WWII .
He is played by James Donald .
Massey walked with a limp , and so did Ramsey in the movie who walked with a cane .
Massey had suffered severe wounds to the same leg in both wars .
There would be no escape for him but as Senior British Officer , he had to know what was going on .
Group Captain Massey had been a veteran escaper himself and had been in trouble with the Gestapo .
His experience allowed him to offer sound advice to the X - Organisation .
Another officer that had most likely inspired the character of Ramsey was Wing Commander Harry Day .
There was an uncanny resemblance between " Wings " Day and James Donald as Group Captain Ramsey in this .
Flt Lt Colin Blythe RAF ( " The Forger " ) was based on Tim Walenn and played by Donald Pleasence .
Pleasence himself had served in the Royal Air Force during World War II .
He was shot down and spent a year in German prisoner - of - war camp
Stalag Luft I. Charles Bronson had been a gunner in the USAAF and was wounded , but had not been shot down .
Like his character , Danny Valinski , he was a coal miner and suffered from claustrophobia .
James Garner had been a soldier in the Korean War and was twice wounded .
He was a scrounger during that time , as is his character Flt Lt Hendley .
Hannes Messemer was cast as the Kommandant of Stalag Luft III , " Colonel von Luger , " a character based on Oberst Friedrich Wilhelm von Lindeiner - Wildau .
He had been a POW in Russia during World War II and had escaped by walking hundreds of miles to the German border .
Angus Lennie 's Flying Officer Archibald Ives , " The Mole " , was based on Jimmy Kiddel , who was shot dead while trying to scale the fence .
The film is accurate in showing that only three escapees made home runs , although the people who made them differed from those in the film .
The escape of Danny and Willie in the film is based on two Norwegians who escaped by boat to Sweden , Per Bergsland and Jens Müller .
The successful escape of James Coburn 's Australian character Sedgwick ( the manufacturer ) via Spain was based on Dutchman Bram van der Stok .
Coburn , an American , was cast in the role of Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF )
Flying Officer Louis Sedgwick who was an amalgamation of Flt Lt Albert Hake , an Australian serving in the RAF and the camps compass maker , and Johnny Travis , the real manufacturer .
Tilman ' Til Kiwe ' Kiver played the German guard " Frick " .
He is the one who fires his pistol at Steve McQueen 's character during the escape .
Kiwe had been a German paratrooper officer who was captured and held prisoner at a POW camp in Colorado .
He made several escape attempts , dyeing his uniform and carrying forged papers .
He was captured in the St. Louis train station during one escape attempt .
He won the Knight 's Cross before his capture and was the cast member who had actually done many of the exploits shown in the film .
LOCATION AND SET
DESIGN Section::::Location and set design .
The film was made at the Bavaria Film Studio in the Munich suburb of Geiselgasteig in rural Bavaria , where sets for the barrack interiors and tunnels were constructed .
The camp was built in a clearing of the Perlacher forest near the studio .
The German town near the real camp was Sagan ( now Żagań , Poland ) ; it was renamed Neustadt in the film .
Many scenes were filmed in and around the town of Füssen in Bavaria , including its railway station .
The nearby district of Pfronten with its distinctive St. Nikolaus Church and scenic background also features often in the film .
Many scenes involving the railway were filmed near Deisenhofen station and on the Großhesselohe - Holzkirchen line .
The castle Hendley and Blythe fly by while attempting to escape
is Neuschwanstein Castle .
The film depicts the tunnel codenamed Tom as having its entrance under a stove and Harry 's as in a drain sump in a washroom .
In reality , Dick 's entrance was the drain sump , Harry 's was under the stove , and Tom 's was in a darkened corner next to a stove chimney .
The motorcycle chase scenes with the barbed wire fences were shot on meadows outside Füssen , and the " barbed wire " that Hilts crashes into before being recaptured was simulated by strips of rubber tied around barbless wire , constructed by the cast and crew in their spare time .
The final jump scene was performed by stuntman Bud Ekins in place of Steve McQueen .
Other parts of the chase were done by McQueen , playing both Hilts and the soldiers chasing him , because of his ability on a motorcycle .
The motorcycle was a Triumph TR6 Trophy which was painted to look like a German machine .
The restored machine is currently on display at Triumph 's factory at Hinckley , UK .
MUSIC
INTRADA
RECORDS ALBUM DISC ONE
DISC
TWO DISC THREE RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Great Escape grossed $ 11.7 million at the box office , after a budget of $ 4 million .
It became one of the highest - grossing films of 1963 , despite heavy competition .
In the years since its release , its audience has broadened , cementing its status as a cinema classic .
It was entered into the 3rd Moscow International Film Festival where McQueen won the Silver Prize for Best Actor .
Critical and public response has mostly been enthusiastic , with a 93 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
In 1963 The New York Times critic Bosley Crowther wrote : " But for much longer than is artful or essential , The Great Escape grinds out its tormenting story without a peek beneath the surface of any man , without a real sense of human involvement .
It 's a strictly mechanical adventure with make - believe men . "
British film critic Leslie Halliwell described it as " pretty good but overlong POW adventure with a tragic ending " .
The Time magazine reviewer in 1963 wrote : " The use of color photography is unnecessary and jarring , but little else is wrong with this film .
With accurate casting , a swift screenplay , and authentic German settings , Producer - Director John Sturges has created classic cinema of action .
There is no sermonizing , no soul probing , no sex .
The Great Escape is simply great escapism " .
In a 2006 poll in the United Kingdom , regarding the family film that television viewers would most want to see on Christmas Day , The Great Escape came in third , and was first among the choices of male viewers .
In 2009 , seven POWs returned to Stalag Luft III for the 65th anniversary of the escape and watched the film .
According to the veterans , many details of the first half depicting life in the camp were authentic , e.g. the machine - gunning of Ives , who snaps and tries to scale the fence , and the actual digging of the tunnels .
In 2014 , the 70th anniversary of the escape , the RAF staged a commemoration of the escape attempt , with 50 serving personnel carrying a photograph of one of the men shot .
In 2019 , the RAF are planning another event for the 75th anniversary of the escape .
There will be a screening of the film The Great Escape at London 's Eventim Apollo Hammersmith hosted by Dan Snow .
The film has resulted in the story and the memory of the fifty executed airmen remaining widely known , if in a distorted form .
AWARDS AND HONORS
* Nominated Academy Award for Film Editing ( Ferris Webster )
* Nominated Golden Globe Award for Best Picture
* Winner Moscow International Film Festival
Best Actor ( Steve McQueen )
* Nominated Moscow International Film Festival Grand Prix ( John Sturges )
* Selected National Board of Review Top Ten Films of Year
* Nominated Writers Guild of America Best Written American Drama ( James Clavell , W. R. Burnett ) ( Screenplay Adaptation )
IN POPULAR CULTURE FILM
* The films Chicken Run , Reservoir Dogs , the 1998 remake of The Parent Trap , Top Secret ! , and Charlie 's Angels all contain references or homages to the film .
TELEVISION
* Monty Python 's Flying Circus , The Simpsons , Hogan 's Heroes , Nash Bridges , Seinfeld , Get Smart , and Red Dwarf have all parodied or paid homage to the film .
*
In " Escape From Stalag Luft 112B , " an episode of Ripping Yarns , Maj .
Errol Phipps ( played by Michael Palin ) is depicted as being the only prisoner of war never to escape from the camp of the title .
VIDEO GAMES
* The 1986 video game The Great Escape for the Commodore 64 , ZX Spectrum and DOS platforms , shares a title and similar plot to the movie .
The game follows an unnamed prisoner of war who has been interned in a P.O.W. camp somewhere in northern Germany in 1942 .
* The 2003 video game The Great Escape for Xbox and PlayStation 2 , is based on the film .
The plot - line follows that of the film of the same name , except there are also levels featuring some of the characters first captures and early escape attempts , as well as a changed ending .
SPORT
* Bernstein 's Great Escape theme tune has been taken up by the Pukka Pies England Band , a small brass band who have played in the crowd at England football team matches since 1996 .
They released an arrangement of the theme as a single for the 1998 FIFA World Cup and a newer version for UEFA Euro 2000 .
SEQUEL
Section::::Sequel .
A fictional , made - for - television sequel , , was released in 1988 , with different actors , directed by Jud Taylor ( in the 1963 original Taylor had played 2nd Lt . Goff ) .
The film is not a true sequel , as it dramatizes the escape itself just as the original film does , although mostly using the real names of the individuals involved ( whereas the original film fictionalized them and used composite characters ) .
It depicts the search for the culprits responsible for the murder of the 50 Allied officers .
Pleasence appeared in a supporting role as a member of the SS .
SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1963
* composite character
REFERENCES
NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Details the manhunt by the Royal Air Force 's special investigations unit after the war to find and bring to trial the perpetrators of the " Sagan murders " .
* Memoir by the surviving Norwegian escapee .
* Story of Wing Commander Harry " Wings " Day .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* James Garner Interview on the Charlie Rose Show
( See 30:23–34:47 of video . )
* New publication with private photos of the shooting & documents of 2nd unit cameraman Walter Riml
* Photos of the filming *
The Great Escape locations