BOOK OF TOBIT
The Book of Tobit ( ) is a book of scripture that is part of the Catholic and Orthodox biblical canons .
It was pronounced canonical by the Council of Hippo ( in 393 ) , the Councils of Carthage of 397 and 417 , and the Council of Florence ( in 1442 ) , and confirmed in the Counter - Reformation by the Council of Trent ( 1546 ) .
It is not found in Protestant or Jewish biblical canons .
CANONICAL STATUS
IN CHRISTIANITY Section::::Canonical status .
Section::::In
Christianity .
The Book of Tobit is listed as a canonical book by the Council of Rome ( 382 AD ) , the Council of Hippo ( 393 AD ) , the Council of Carthage ( 397 ) and ( 419 AD ) , the Council of Florence ( 1442 ) and finally the Council of Trent ( 1546 ) , and is part of the canon of both the Roman Catholic Church and Eastern Orthodox Churches .
Roman Catholics often refer to it as deuterocanonical .
Augustine ( c. 397 AD ) and Pope Innocent
I ( 405 AD ) affirmed that Tobit is a part of the Old Testament Canon .
Athanasius ( 367 AD ) mentioned that certain other books , including the book of Tobit , while not being part of the Canon , " were appointed by the Fathers to be read " .
According to the monk Rufinus of Aquileia ( c. 400 AD ) the book of Tobit and other deuterocanonical books were not called Canonical but Ecclesiastical books .
Article VI of the Thirty - Nine Articles of the Church of England lists it as a book of the " Apocrypha " .
Protestants regard Tobit as apocryphal because it was not included in the Tanakh nor considered canonical by Judaism .
IN JUDAISM Section::::In Judaism .
Before the 1952 discovery of Aramaic and Hebrew fragments of Tobit among the Dead Sea Scrolls in a cave at Qumran , scholars believed Tobit was not included in the Jewish canon because of late authorship , estimated to 100 AD .
Qumran fragments of the text , which were copied between 100 BC to 25 AD , evidence a much earlier origin than previously thought .
These fragments evidence authorship no later than the 2nd century BC and , likely , contemporary with the date ascribed , by modern scholars , to the final compilation of the Book of Daniel , which did attain canonical status .
Other scholars have postulated that Tobit was excluded from the Jewish Scriptures for a halakhic reason because Raguel , the bride 's father , wrote the marriage document discussed in 7:16 , instead of the bridegroom , as required by Jewish rabbinical law .
However , it could be hypothesized that some ancient Jewish rabbinic scholars considered Tobit to be historical .
Midrash Bereishit Rabbah , an aggadic commentary on the Book of Genesis compiled circa 400–600 AD , includes a truncated Aramaic version of Tobit .
Tobit was also considered part of the Septuagint ( the Greek translation / interpretation of the Hebrew Bible ) .
In more contemporary times , a number of Jews in Israel have sought to reclaim Tobit as part of the canon .
SUMMARY Section::::Summary .
This book tells the story of Tobit , a righteous Israelite of the tribe of Naphtali , living in Nineveh after Sargon II had deported the northern tribes of Israel to Assyria in 721 BC .
In the two Greek versions , the first two and a half chapters are written in the first person ; in the Vulgate version , they are written in the third person .
Tobit , raised by his paternal grandmother , Deborah , remains loyal to the worship of God at the temple in Jerusalem , refusing the cult of the golden calves that Jeroboam , king of Northern Israel , set up at Dan .
He is particularly noted for his diligence in attempting to provide proper burials for fallen Israelites whom Sargon 's successor , Sennacherib , has slain .
For this behavior the king seizes his property and exiles him .
After Sennacherib 's death , Tobit is allowed to return to Nineveh , where he buries a man who has been murdered on the street .
That night , he sleeps in the open and is blinded by bird droppings which fall into his eyes .
The blindness caused by this injury strains his marriage and , ultimately , he prays for death .
Meanwhile , in faraway Media , a young woman named Sarah has prayed for death in despair .
The demon of lust , Asmodeus ( " the worst of demons " ) , abducts and kills every man Sarah marries on their wedding night before the marriage can be consummated .
God sends the angel Raphael , disguised as a human , to heal Tobit and free Sarah from the demon .
The main narrative is dedicated to Tobit 's son , Tobiah or Tobiyah
( Greek : Tobias ) , who is sent by his father to collect money that the elder has deposited in distant Media .
Raphael presents himself as Tobit 's kinsman , Azariah , and offers to aid and protect Tobias .
Under Raphael 's guidance , Tobias journeys to Media with his dog .
Along the way , while washing his feet in the river Tigris , a fish tries to swallow his foot .
By the angel 's order , he captures it and removes its heart , liver and gall bladder .
Upon arriving in Media , Raphael tells Tobias of the beautiful Sarah , whom Tobias has the right to marry because he is her cousin and closest relative .
The angel instructs the young man to burn the fish 's liver and heart to drive away the demon when he attacks on the wedding night .
The two marry , and the fumes of the burning organs drive the demon to Upper Egypt , where Raphael follows and binds him .
Sarah 's father had been digging a grave to secretly bury Tobias under the assumption that he would be killed .
Surprised to find his son - in - law alive and well , he orders a double - length wedding feast and has the grave secretly filled .
Since the feast prevents him from leaving , Tobias sends Raphael to recover his father 's money .
After the feast , Tobias and Sarah return to Nineveh .
There , Raphael tells the youth to use the fish 's gall to cure his father 's blindness .
Raphael then reveals his identity and returns to heaven , and Tobit sings a hymn of praise .
Tobit tells his son to leave Nineveh before God destroys it according to prophecy ( compare the Book of Nahum ) .
After the prayer , Tobit dies at an advanced age .
After burying his father and mother , Tobias returns to Media with his family .
LITURGICAL AND RELIGIOUS SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Liturgical and religious significance .
Readings from the book are used in the Latin Rite .
Because of the book 's praise for the purity of marriage , it is often read during weddings in many rites .
Doctrinally , the book is cited for its teaching on the intercession of angels , filial piety , and reverence for the dead .
COMPOSITION
DATING Section::::Composition .
Section::::Dating .
The story in the Book of Tobit is set in the 8th century BC .
However , a number of historical errors ( according to Miller , though some may dispute this ) rule out contemporaneous authorship , and most scholars now date the book 's composition between 225 and 175 BC .
The direct quote in Tobit 2:6 from the Book of Amos ( " Your feasts shall be turned into mourning , and all your mirth into lamentation " ) indicates that the prophetic books had become not only fixed but authoritative , signalling a post - exilic date .
Moreover , reference to the " Book of Moses " ( 6:13 , 7:11–13 ) and the " Law of Moses " ( 7:13 ) echo identical phrasing in the Book of Chronicles , which some believe was composed after the 4th century BC .
Contextually , dating Tobit 's authorship to after 175 BC is problematic , as the author expresses no awareness of Seleucid attempts to Hellenize Judea ( from 175 BC ) or of the Maccabean Revolt against the Seleucids ( 165 BC ) , nor does it espouse apocalyptic or messianic expectations upon which later writings focused .
Nevertheless , some scholars espouse a later date of composition of at least portions of Tobit .
LOCATION AND LANGUAGE Section::::Location and language .
No scholarly consensus exists on the place of composition , and " almost every region of the ancient world seems to be a candidate . "
A Mesopotamian origin seems logical given that the story takes place in Assyria and Persia , as does the invocation of the Persian demon " aeshma daeva " , rendered " Asmodeus " by Tobit .
But significant errors in geographical detail ( such as the distance from Ecbatana to Rhages and their topography ) render this origin questionable .
Arguments against and in favor of Judean or Egyptian composition also exist .
The original language of composition remains unclear .
Tobit may have been originally composed either in Aramaic or Hebrew , since fragments of Tobit in both languages have been discovered at Qumran .
GENRE
Section::::Genre .
The book is closely related to Jewish wisdom literature .
This is especially clear in Tobit 's instructions to Tobias before his departure for Media in Chapter 4 , which particularly praise the value of prayer , fasting , and almsgiving .
MANUSCRIPTS Section::::Manuscripts .
As stated , fragments of Tobit in both Aramaic and Hebrew have been discovered at Qumran .
Jerome described his version for the Vulgate as being made from an Aramaic text available to him .
Surviving Greek translations are found in two versions .
The shorter , which Robert Hanhart called Greek I in his edition of the Septuagint , is found in Codex Vaticanus , Alexandrinus , Venetus , and most cursive manuscripts .
The Greek II version , 1700 words longer , is found in Codex Sinaiticus and closely aligns with the Hebrew and Aramaic fragments found at Qumran .
Apparently the Old Latin ( La ) manuscripts are also translated from the longer Greek II version .
Most English translations since 1966 have relied on the Greek II version .
SEE ALSO
* Mary Untier of Knots ( painting with Tobias and the Angel )
* Tobias and the Angel ( Verrocchio )
* Philosopher in Meditation ( " Tobit and Anna in an Interior " by Rembrandt ) NOTES REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY * Fitzmyer , Joseph A. , " Tobit " , ( de Gruyter , 2003 ) , Commentaries on early Jewish literature , * Miller , Geoffrey David , Marriage in the Book of Tobit , pp .
10–15 ( Walter de Gruyter 2011 ) ,
EXTERNAL LINKS
* ( KJV Apocrypha )
* The Book of Tobit Full text from St - Takla.org ( also available in Arabic )
* World Wide Study Bible : Tobit * 2012 Critical Translation with Dramatized Audio Version ( Tobi )
* Various versions