BAKED BEANS Baked beans is a dish containing beans , sometimes baked but , despite the name , usually stewed , in a sauce .
Most commercially canned baked beans are made from haricot beans , also known as navy beans ( a variety of Phaseolus vulgaris ) in a sauce .
In Ireland and the United Kingdom , a tomato sauce is most commonly used , and they are commonly eaten on toast or as part of a full English , Scottish , or Irish breakfast .
American Boston baked beans use a sauce prepared with molasses and salt pork , the popularity of which has led to the city 's being nicknamed " Beantown " .
Beans in a tomato and brown sugar , sugar , or corn syrup sauce are widely available throughout the US .
Canada 's Quebec - style beans often use maple syrup .
This style is also popular in states bordering Canada 's eastern provinces .
Canned baked beans are used as a convenience food .
They may be eaten hot or cold , straight from the can , as they are already fully cooked .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The beans presently used to make baked beans are all native to South America and were introduced to Europe around 1528 .
The dish is commonly described as having a savory - sweet flavor and a brownish- or reddish - tinted white bean once baked , stewed , canned or otherwise cooked .
According to alternative traditions , sailors brought cassoulet from the south of France or northern France , and the Channel Islands , where bean stews were popular .
Most probably , a number of regional bean recipes coalesced and cross - fertilised in North America and ultimately gave rise to the baked bean culinary tradition familiar today .
While many recipes today are stewed , traditionally beans were slow - baked in a ceramic or cast - iron beanpot .
A tradition in Maine of " bean hole " cooking may have originated with the native Penobscot people and was later practiced in logging camps .
A fire would be made in a stone - lined pit and allowed to burn down to hot coals , and then a pot with 11 pounds of seasoned beans would be placed in the ashes , covered over with dirt , and left to cook overnight or longer .
These beans were a staple of Maine 's logging camps , served at every meal .
Canned beans , often containing pork , were among the first convenience foods , and it is in this form that they became exported and popularised by U.S. companies operating in the UK in the early 20th century .
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration stated in 1996 , " It has for years been recognized by consumers generally that the designation ' beans with pork , ' or ' pork and beans ' is the common or usual name for an article of commerce that contains very little pork . "
The included pork is typically a piece of salt pork that adds fat to the dish .
Canned baked beans with small pork sausages are still available , as are variants with other added ingredients such as chili .
UNITED KINGDOM AND IRELAND Section::::United Kingdom and Ireland .
In the UK , Ireland , Australia , New Zealand , Hong Kong , Brunei , Malaysia , and Singapore , the term baked beans usually refers to tinned beans in a tomato sauce .
They were originally imported from American companies , first sold in the UK in 1886 in the upmarket Fortnum & Mason store in London as an expensive foreign delicacy .
Today , baked beans are a staple convenience food in the UK , often eaten as part of the modern full English breakfast and particularly on toast ( called simply " beans on toast " ) .
Baked beans freshly cooked from raw ingredients , much closer to their original unprocessed , unindustrialised form , are offered by a few upmarket brunch establishments .
The best - selling brand in the UK is Heinz Baked Beans .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , Bush 's ( Bush Brothers and Company ) , Van Camp 's , B&M ( Burnham & Morrill Inc. ) , Allens , Inc. , the H. J. Heinz Company , and the Campbell 's Soup Company are well - known producers or brands of packaged baked beans .
B&M specializes in Boston - style baked beans often sold in beanpot - shaped jars , and canned brown bread , a traditional regional accompaniment to baked beans , whereas Bush and Van Camp produce multiple flavor varieties of canned beans , some styles using cured bacon to flavor the products .
In the New England region , baked beans are flavored either with maple syrup ( Northern New England ) , or with molasses ( Boston ) , and are traditionally cooked with salt pork in a beanpot in a brick oven for six to eight hours .
In the absence of a brick oven , the beans were cooked in a beanpot nestled in a bed of embers placed near the outer edges of a hearth , about a foot away from the fire .
Today , baked beans can be made in a slow cooker or in a modern oven using a traditional beanpot , Dutch oven , or casserole dish .
In southern states and along the eastern seaboard of the U.S. , the beans become tangier usually due to the addition of yellow mustard .
For example , the baked beans of Tennessee - based Bush 's include mustard in most of their varieties of beans .
Ground beef may also become common alongside bacon in the home versions some of these bean styles .
They may take on a flavor similar to Cowboy Beans , a home - mixed stew , somewhat similar to a chili but made instead with sweet baked beans .
Baked beans are a staple side dish for various types of barbecue .
This is due in part to the ease of handling , as they can be served hot or cold , directly from the can , making them handy for outdoor eating .
The tomato - based sweet sauce also complements many types of barbecue .
The already - cooked beans may also be baked in a casserole dish topped with slices of raw bacon , which is baked until the bacon is cooked .
Additional seasonings are sometimes used , such as additional brown sugar or mustard to make the sauce more tangy .
Heinz baked beans became very successful as an export to the UK , where canned baked beans are now a staple food .
In America , the H. J. Heinz Co. continue to sell baked beans , although they are not always as widely distributed as competing American brands .
Despite their international fame , there are currently substantial differences between the Heinz baked beans produced for the UK market ( descended from the original American recipe ) and the nearest currently equivalent American product ( Heinz Premium Vegetarian Beans ) .
The American product contains brown sugar where the British beans do not , and the U.S. product contains 14 g of sugar per 16 oz tin compared to 7 g for the British version ( equating to 140 versus 90 calories ) .
The U.S. beans have a mushier texture and are darker in color than their UK counterpart .
This has resulted in a situation where the product is now imported back to the brand 's home country .
For several years , UK Heinz Baked Beans have been available in the U.S. , either in different - sized cans from those sold in the UK or in a 385-gram can ( the same can as the 415-gram can in the UK ) with an " export " label with American English spelling and the word " baked " dropped from the title on the label .
These are sold in many U.S. specialty stores , attesting to the popularity of baked beans and their appeal to expats .
Bush , Van Camp , B&M , and Heinz all produce pork - free baked beans labeled as vegetarian beans , making this American dish available to people who abstain from pork for religious , dietary , or ethical reasons .
AROUND
THE WORLD
Section::::Around the world .
Traditional cuisines of many regions claim such recipes as typical specialities , for example : *
In Poland , with the addition of bacon and/or sausage these are known as Breton Beans ( fasolka po bretońsku ) .
*
In France these are known as à la bretonne .
* Jersey bean crock * Boston baked beans * Pork and beans , which despite the name often contain very little pork * Guernsey Bean Jar * Spanish Cocido Montañés * Cassoulet ( South - western France ) * Feijoada * Fasolada * Frijoles charros , pinto beans cooked with bacon and sometimes tomatoes , are popular in Mexico and the American border states .
* Greek Fasolia Gigandes Gigandes plaki
*
In the Italian cuisine beans ( of various size and various types ) are widely used for several recipes also mixed with other ingredients : " fagiolata " generally stands for baked beans but there are also regional variations like " fagioli all'uccelletto " in Florence ; " minestra di fagioli " ( beans soup normally cooked with vegetables ) " pasta e fagioli " ( meaning " pasta and beans " ) .
* New England baked beans * Quebec - style baked beans are often prepared with maple syrup .
* Bean - hole beans , traditionally from Northern New England and Quebec , cooked in a covered fire pit in the ground for up to two days * British cuisine claims beans on toast as a teatime favourite , the combination of cereal and legume forming an inexpensive complete protein ; compare rice and beans .
Variations of " beans on toast deluxe " can include extras as such as egg , grated cheese , marmite , tuna etc . , and baked beans sometimes form part of a full English breakfast .
* Beans cooked in barbecue sauce ( or a similarly flavoured sauce ) are a traditional side dish in an American barbecue .
*
" Franks & beans " , a recipe wherein hot dogs are cut up and cooked in the same sauce as the baked beans .
In Canada , this recipe is more commonly called " beans and wieners " .
*
In the north of the Netherlands brown beans are often stewed and served with lardons baked until crisp , pickled silverskin onions and gherkins , and sugar syrup or apple syrup .
In the province of Drenthe , this dish has a cultural significance due to the regional nostalgic novel and TV series Bartje .
*
In Mexico and Latin America baked beans are also popular : black beans ( frijoles negros ) and frijoles pintos ( pinto beans ) are the most common .
* Chilean porotos con riendas
*
In the Balkans , they are known as prebranac .
*
The traditional Jewish Shabbat dish cholent ( also known as hamin ) is made with meat , potatoes , beans and barley .
* Turkish Fasolia ( fasulye ) , usually served with
rice * Iranian Loobia Chiti is made from pinto beans , usually served with olive oil and lemon juice .
Many unusual dishes are made with baked beans including the baked bean sandwich .
These are slices of bread topped with beans and other additions , such as melted cheese .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
In 2002 , the British Dietetic Association allowed manufacturers of canned baked beans to advertise the product as contributing to the recommended daily consumption of five to six vegetables per person .
This concession was criticised by heart specialists , who pointed to the high levels of sugar and salt in the product .
However , it has been proven that consumption of baked beans does indeed lower total cholesterol levels and low - density lipoprotein cholesterol , even in normo - cholesterolaemic individuals .
Some manufacturers produce a " healthy " version of the product with reduced levels of sugar and salt .
FLATULENCE
Section::::Flatulence .
Baked beans are known on occasion to cause a considerable increase in flatulence following consumption ; this is due to the fermentation of polysaccharides ( specifically oligosaccharides ) by gut flora , specifically Methanobrevibacter smithii .
The oligosaccharides pass through the small intestine largely unchanged ; when they reach the large intestine , bacteria feast on them , producing copious amounts of flatus .
This condition is referenced in multiple works of popular culture .
Some prominent examples include : * The campfire scene in Mel Brooks 's film Blazing Saddles , in which the cowboys ' banter is punctuated by fusillades of flatulence
*
The UK children 's song , " Beans , Beans , Good for the Heart " * The U.S. children 's song " Beans , Beans , the Musical Fruit " SEE ALSO
* Cassoulet
* List of legume dishes * List of toast dishes * Pork and beans * Refried beans
* Tavče gravče , a traditional Macedonian dish REFERENCES