HAND , FOOT , AND MOUTH DISEASE Hand , foot , and mouth disease ( HFMD ) is a common infection caused by a group of viruses .
It typically begins with a fever and feeling generally unwell .
This is followed a day or two later by flat discolored spots or bumps that may blister , on the hands , feet , and mouth , and occasionally buttocks and groin .
Signs and symptoms normally appear 3–6 days after exposure to the virus .
The rash generally resolves on its own in about a week .
Fingernail and toenail loss may occur a few weeks later , but they will regrow with time .
The viruses that cause HFMD are spread through close personal contact , through the air from coughing , and the feces of an infected person .
Contaminated objects can also spread the disease .
Coxsackievirus A16 is the most common cause and Enterovirus 71 is the second - most common cause .
Other strains of coxsackievirus and enterovirus can also be responsible .
Some people may carry and pass on the virus despite having no symptoms of disease .
Other animals are not involved .
Diagnosis can often be made based on symptoms .
Occasionally a throat or stool sample may be tested for the virus .
Handwashing may prevent spread and those infected should not go to work , daycare , or school .
No antiviral medication or vaccine is available , but development efforts are underway .
Most cases require no specific treatment .
Simple pain medication such as ibuprofen or numbing mouth gel may be used .
Occasionally intravenous fluids are given to children who are unable to drink enough .
Rarely viral meningitis or encephalitis may complicate the disease .
HFMD occurs in all areas of the world .
It often occurs in small outbreaks in nursery schools or kindergartens .
Large outbreaks have been occurring in Asia since 1997 .
It usually occurs during the spring , summer , and fall months .
Typically it occurs in children less than five years old , but can occasionally occur in adults .
HFMD should not be confused with foot - and - mouth disease ( also known as hoof - and - mouth disease ) which mostly affects livestock .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Common constitutional signs and symptoms of the HFMD include fever , nausea , vomiting , feeling tired , generalized discomfort , loss of appetite , and irritability in infants and toddlers .
Skin lesions frequently develop in the form of a rash of flat discolored spots and bumps which may be followed by vesicular sores with blisters on palms of the hands , soles of the feet , buttocks , and sometimes on the lips .
The rash is rarely itchy for children , but can be extremely itchy for adults .
Painful facial ulcers , blisters , or lesions may also develop in or around the nose or mouth .
HFMD usually resolves on its own after 7–10 days .
Most cases of the disease are relatively harmless , but complications including encephalitis , meningitis , and paralysis that mimics the neurological symptoms of polio can occur .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
The viruses that cause the disease are of the Picornaviridae family .
Coxsackievirus A16 is the most common cause of HFMD .
Enterovirus 71 ( EV-71 ) is the second - most common cause .
Many other strains of coxsackievirus and enterovirus can also be responsible .
TRANSMISSION Section::::Transmission .
HFMD is highly contagious and is transmitted by nasopharyngeal secretions such as saliva or nasal mucus , by direct contact , or by fecal - oral transmission .
Child care settings are the most common places for HMFD to be contracted because of the bathroom training , diaper changes , and that children often put their hands into their mouths .
Children who do not attend a preschool or kindergarten were found to be more susceptible to the disease .
HFMD is contracted through nose and throat secretions such as saliva , sputum , nasal mucus and as well as fluid in blisters , and stool .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
A diagnosis usually can be made by the presenting signs and symptoms alone .
If the diagnosis is unclear , a throat swab or stool specimen may be taken to identify the virus by culture .
The common incubation period ( the time between infection and onset of symptoms ) ranges from three to six days .
Early detection of HFMD is important in preventing an outbreak in the pediatric population .
PREVENTION Section::::Prevention .
Preventive measures include avoiding direct contact with infected individuals ( including keeping infected children home from school ) , proper cleaning of shared utensils , disinfecting contaminated surfaces , and proper hand hygiene .
These measures have been shown to be effective in decreasing the transmission of the viruses responsible for HFMD .
Protective habits include hand washing and disinfecting surfaces in play areas .
Breast - feeding has also shown to decrease rates of severe HFMD , though does not reduce the risk for the infection of the disease .
VACCINE
Section::::Vaccine .
A vaccine known as the EV71 vaccine is available to prevent HFMD in China .
No vaccine is currently available in the United States .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Medications are usually not needed as hand , foot , and mouth disease is a viral disease that typically resolves on its own .
Currently , there is no specific curative treatment for hand , foot and mouth disease .
Disease management typically focuses on achieving symptomatic relief .
Pain from the sores may be eased with the use of analgesic medications .
Infection in older children , adolescents , and adults is typically mild and lasts approximately 1 week , but may occasionally run a longer course .
Fever reducers and lukewarm baths can help decrease body temperature .
A minority of individuals with hand , foot and mouth disease may require hospital admission due to complications such as inflammation of the brain , inflammation of the meninges , or acute flaccid paralysis .
Non - neurologic complications such as inflammation of the heart , fluid in the lungs , or bleeding into the lungs may also occur .
COMPLICATIONS Section::::Complications .
Complications from the viral infections that cause HFMD are rare , but require immediate medical treatment if present .
HFMD infections caused by Enterovirus 71 tend to be more severe and are more likely to have neurologic or cardiac complications including death than infections caused by Coxsackievirus A16 .
Viral or aseptic meningitis can occur with HFMD in rare cases and is characterized by fever , headache , stiff neck , or back pain .
The condition is usually mild and clears without treatment ; however , hospitalization for a short time may be needed .
Other serious complications of HFMD include encephalitis ( swelling of the brain ) , or flaccid paralysis in rare circumstances .
Fingernail and toenail loss have been reported in children 4–8 weeks after having HFMD .
The relationship between HFMD and the reported nail loss is unclear ; however , it is temporary and nail growth resumes without treatment .
Minor complications due to symptoms can occur such as dehydration , due to mouth sores causing discomfort with intake of foods and fluid .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Hand , foot and mouth disease most commonly occurs in children under the age of 10 .
It tends to occur in outbreaks during the spring , summer , and autumn seasons .
This is believed to be due to heat and humidity improving spread .
HFMD is more common in rural areas than urban areas ; however , socioeconomic status and hygiene levels need to considered .
Poor hygiene is a risk factor for HFMD .
Outbreaks have occurred in China , Japan , Hong Kong , the Republic of Korea , Malaysia , Singapore , Thailand , Taiwan , and Vietnam .
HFMD most commonly affects young children under the age of 10 and more often under the age of 5 , but can also affect adults with varying symptoms .
Since 1997 there have been 71 large enterovirus outbreaks reported , mostly in East and South East Asia , primarily affecting children .
From the years 2008 to 2014 , more than 1 million HFMD cases have been reported in China each year .
OUTBREAKS
*
In 1998 , there was an outbreak in Taiwan , affecting mainly children .
There were 405 severe complications , and 78 children died .
The total number of cases in that epidemic is estimated to have been 1.5 million .
*
In 2008 an outbreak in China , beginning in March in Fuyang , Anhui , led to 25,000 infections , and 42 deaths , by May 13 .
Similar outbreaks were reported in Singapore ( more than 2,600 cases as of April 20 , 2008 ) , Vietnam ( 2,300 cases , 11 deaths ) , Mongolia ( 1,600 cases ) , and Brunei ( 1053 cases from June – August 2008 )
*
In 2009 17 children died in an outbreak during March and April 2009 in China 's eastern Shandong Province , and 18 children died in the neighboring Henan Province .
Out of 115,000 reported cases in China from January to April , 773 were severe and 50 were fatal .
*
In 2010 in China , an outbreak occurred in southern China 's Guangxi Autonomous Region as well as Guangdong , Henan , Hebei and Shandong provinces .
Until March 70,756 children were infected and 40 died from the disease .
By June , the peak season for the disease , 537 had died .
* The World Health Organization reporting between January to October 2011 ( 1,340,259 ) states the number of cases in China had dropped by approx 300,000 from 2010 ( 1,654,866 ) cases , with new cases peaking in June .
There were 437 deaths , down from 2010 ( 537 deaths ) .
*
In December 2011 , the California Department of Public Health identified a strong form of the virus , coxsackievirus A6 ( CVA6 ) , where nail loss in children is common .
*
In 2012 in Alabama , United States there was an outbreak of an unusual type of the disease .
It occurred in a season when it is not usually seen and affected teenagers and older adults .
There were some hospitalizations due to the disease but no reported deaths .
*
In 2012 in Cambodia , 52 of 59 reviewed cases of children reportedly dead ( ) due to a mysterious disease were diagnosed to be caused by a virulent form of HFMD .
Although a significant degree of uncertainty exists with reference to the diagnosis , the WHO report states , " Based on the latest laboratory results , a significant proportion of the samples tested positive for enterovirus 71 ( EV-71 ) , which causes hand foot and mouth disease ( HFMD ) .
The EV-71 virus has been known to generally cause severe complications amongst some patients . "
* HFMD infected 1,520,274 people with up to 431 deaths reported at the end of July in 2012 in China .
HISTORY Section::::History .
HFMD cases were first described clinically in Canada and New Zealand in 1957 .
The disease was termed " Hand Foot and Mouth Disease " , by Thomas Henry Flewett , after a similar outbreak in 1960 .
RESEARCH Section::::Research .
Novel antiviral agents to prevent and treat infection with the viruses responsible for HFMD are currently under development .
Preliminary studies have shown inhibitors of the EV-71 viral capsid to have potent antiviral activity .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS