.38 SPECIAL
The .38 Smith & Wesson Special ( commonly .38
Special , .38
Spl , or .38 Spc , pronounced " thirty - eight special " ) is a rimmed , centerfire cartridge designed by Smith & Wesson .
It is most commonly used in revolvers , although some semi - automatic pistols and carbines also use this round .
The .38 Special was the standard service cartridge of most police departments in the United States from the 1920s to the 1990s , and was also a common sidearm cartridge used by soldiers in World War I.
In other parts of the world , it is known by its metric designation of 9×29.5mmR or 9.1×29mmR. Known for its accuracy and manageable recoil , the .38 Special remains one of the most popular revolver cartridges in the world more than a century after its introduction .
It is used for target shooting , formal target competition , personal defense , and for hunting small game .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
The .38 Special was introduced in 1898 as an improvement over the .38 Long Colt which , as a military service cartridge , was found to have inadequate stopping power against the charges of Filipino Muslim warriors during the Philippine – American War .
Upon its introduction , the .38 Special was originally loaded with black powder , but the cartridge 's popularity caused manufacturers to offer smokeless powder loadings within a year of its introduction .
Despite its name , the caliber of the .38 Special cartridge is actually .357 inches ( 36 caliber/9.07 mm ) , with the " .38 " referring to the approximate diameter of the loaded brass case .
This came about because the original .38-caliber cartridge , the .38 Short Colt , was designed for use in converted .36-caliber cap - and - ball Navy revolvers , which had cylindrical firing chambers of approximately diameter , requiring heeled bullets , the exposed portion of which was the same diameter as the cartridge case .
Except for case length , the .38 Special is identical to the .38 Short Colt , .38
Long Colt , and .357 Magnum .
This allows the .38 Special round to be safely fired in revolvers chambered for the .357 Magnum , and the .38 Long Colt in revolvers chambered for .38 Special , increasing the versatility of this cartridge .
However , the longer and more powerful .357
Magnum cartridge will usually not chamber and fire in weapons rated specifically for .38 Special ( e.g. all versions of the Smith & Wesson Model 10 ) , which are not designed for the greatly increased pressure of the magnum rounds .
Both .38
Special and .357 Magnum will chamber in Colt New Army revolvers in .38 Long Colt , due to the straight walled chambers , but this should not be done under any circumstances , due to dangerous pressure levels , up to three times what the New Army is designed to withstand .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The .38 Special was designed in 1898 to be a higher velocity round , with better penetration properties than the .38 Long Colt that was in Government Service in the Philippines during the Spanish – American War .
The .38
Long Colt revolver round would n't penetrate the insurgent Philippine Morro warrior shields , and the Government contracted the new revolver round to Smith & Wesson .
The .38 Special held a minimum of 21 grains of black powder , which was 3 grains more than the current .38 Long Colt , and it was 100 to 150 feet per second faster with a 158 grain bullet .
During the late 1920s , and in response to demands for a more effective law enforcement version of the cartridge , a new standard - velocity loading for the .38 Special was developed by Western Cartridge Company .
This .38
Special variant incorporated a round - nosed lead ' Lubaloy ' bullet , the .38 Super Police .
Remington - Peters also introduced a similar loading .
Testing revealed that the longer , heavier .357-calibre bullet fired at low velocity tended to ' keyhole ' or tumble upon impact , providing more shock effect against unprotected personnel .
At the same time , authorities in Great Britain , who had decided to adopt the .38 caliber revolver as a replacement for their existing .455 service cartridge , also tested the same bullet in the smaller .38 S&W cartridge .
This cartridge was called the .38 S&W Super Police or the .38/200 .
Britain would later adopt the .38/200 as its standard military handgun cartridge .
In 1930 , Smith & Wesson introduced a large frame .38
Special revolver with a 5-inch barrel and fixed sights intended for police use , the Smith & Wesson .38/44
Heavy Duty .
The following year , a new high - power loading called the .38 Special Hi - Speed with a metal - tip bullet was developed for these revolvers in response to requests from law enforcement agencies for a handgun bullet that could penetrate auto bodies and body armor .
That same year , Colt Firearms announced that their Colt Official Police would also handle ' high - speed ' .38
Special loadings .
The .38/44 high - speed cartridge came in three bullet weights : , , with either coated lead or steel jacket , metal - piercing bullets .
The media attention gathered by the .38/44
and its ammunition eventually led Smith & Wesson to develop a completely new cartridge with a longer case length in 1934—this
was the .357 Magnum .
During World War II , some U.S. aircrew ( primarily Navy and Marine Corps ) were issued .38 Special S&W Victory revolvers as sidearms in the event of a forced landing .
In May 1943 , a new .38 Special cartridge with a , full - steel - jacketed , copper flash - coated bullet meeting the requirements of the rules of land warfare was developed at Springfield Armory and adopted for the Smith & Wesson revolvers .
The new military .38 Special loading propelled its bullet at a standard from a revolver barrel .
During the war , many U.S. naval and marine aircrew were also issued red - tipped .38 Special tracer rounds using either a bullet for emergency signaling purposes .
In 1956 , the U.S. Air Force adopted the Cartridge , Caliber .38 , Ball M41 , a military variant of the .38 Special cartridge designed to conform to the rules of land warfare .
The original .38 M41 ball cartridge used a 130-grain full - metal - jacketed bullet , and was loaded to an average pressure of only , giving a muzzle velocity of approximately from a barrel .
This ammunition was intended to prolong the life of S&W M12 and Colt Aircrewman revolvers equipped with aluminum cylinders and frames , which were prone to stress fractures when fired with standard .38 ammunition .
By 1961 , a slightly revised M41 .38
cartridge specification known as the Cartridge , Caliber .38 Ball , Special , M41 had been adopted for U.S. armed forces using .38 Special caliber handguns .
The new M41 Special cartridge used a 130-grain FMJ bullet loaded to a maximum allowable pressure of for a velocity of approximately in a solid test barrel , and about from a revolver barrel .
The M41 ball cartridge was first used in .38 revolvers carried by USAF aircrew and Strategic Air Command security police , and by 1961 was in use by the U.S. Army for security police , dog handlers , and other personnel equipped with .38 Special caliber revolvers .
A variant of the standard M41 cartridge with a semi - pointed , unjacketed lead bullet was later adopted for CONUS ( Continental United States ) police and security personnel .
At the same time , .38 tracer cartridges were reintroduced by the US Navy , Marines , and Air Force to provide a means of emergency signaling by downed aircrew .
Tracer cartridges in .38 Special caliber of different colors were issued , generally as part of a standard aircrew survival vest kit .
A request for more powerful .38
Special ammunition for use by Air Police and security personnel resulted in the Caliber .38
Special , Ball , PGU-12 /
B High Velocity cartridge .
Issued only by the U.S. Air Force , the PGU-12 / B had a greatly increased maximum allowable pressure rating of 20,000 psi , sufficient to propel a 130-grain FMJ bullet at from a solid test barrel , and about 950–980 ft / s from a revolver barrel .
The PGU-12 / B High Velocity cartridge differs from M41 Special ammunition in two important respects — the PGU-12 / B is a much higher - pressure cartridge , with a bullet deeply set and crimped into the cartridge case .
In response to continued complaints over ineffectiveness of the standard .38 Special 158-grain cartridge in stopping assailants in numerous armed confrontations during the 1950s and 1960s , ammunition manufacturers began to experiment with higher - pressure ( 18,500 CUP ) loadings of the .38 Special cartridge , known as .38
Special
+ P.
In 1972 , the Federal Bureau of Investigation introduced a new .38 + P loading that became known as the " FBI Load " .
The FBI Load combined a more powerful powder charge with a 158-grain unjacketed soft lead semi - wadcutter hollow - point bullet designed to readily expand at typical .38
Special velocities obtained in revolvers commonly used by law enforcement .
The FBI Load proved very satisfactory in effectively stopping adversaries in numerous documented shootings using 2- to 4-inch barreled revolvers .
The FBI Load was later adopted by the Chicago Police Department and numerous other law enforcement agencies .
Demand for a .38 cartridge with even greater performance for law enforcement led to the introduction of the
+ P+ .38
Special cartridge , first introduced by Federal and Winchester .
Originally labeled " For Law Enforcement Only " ,
+ P+ ammunition is intended for heavier - duty .38
Special and .357 Magnum revolvers , as the increased pressure levels can result in accelerated wear and significant damage to firearms rated for lower - pressure .38
Special loadings ( as with all .38 Special loadings , the .38 Special
+ P+ can also be fired safely in .357 Magnum revolvers ) .
PERFORMANCE Section::::Performance .
Due to its black powder heritage , the .38 Special is a low pressure cartridge , one of the lowest in common use today at 17,000 PSI .
By modern standards , the .38 Special fires a medium - sized bullet at rather low speeds .
In the case of target loads , a bullet is propelled to only .
The closest comparisons are the .380 ACP , which fires much lighter bullets slightly faster than most .38 Special loads ; the 9×19 mm Parabellum , which fires a somewhat lighter bullet significantly faster ; and the .38 Colt Super , which fires a comparable bullet significantly faster .
All three of these are usually found in semi - automatic pistols .
The higher - pressure
.38
+
P loads at
20,000 PSI offer about 20 % more muzzle energy than standard - pressure loads and places between the .380 ACP and the 9 mm Parabellum ; similar to that of the 9×18 mm Makarov .
A few specialty manufacturers ' + P loads for this cartridge can attain even higher energies that , especially when fired from longer barrels , produce energies in the range of the 9 mm Parabellum .
These loads are generally not recommend for older revolvers or ones not specifically " + P " rated .
+ .38
Comparisons !
Cartridge ! !
Bullet weight ! !
Muzzle velocity ! !
Muzzle energy ! !
Max pressure
All of the above specifications for .38 loadings , and the .357 Magnum , are applicable when fired from a barreled revolver .
The velocity is reduced when using the more standard barreled guns .
Power ( muzzle energy ) will , of course , decrease accordingly .
Although only a few US police departments now issue or authorize use of the .38 Special revolver as a standard duty weapon , the caliber remains popular with some police officers for use in short - barreled revolvers carried when off - duty or for undercover police investigations .
It is also widely used in revolvers purchased for civilian home defense or for concealed carry by individuals with a CCW permit .
TERMINAL PERFORMANCE AND EXPANSION
Section::::Terminal performance and expansion .
There are many companies that manufacture .38 Special ammunition .
It can range from light target loads to more powerful defensive ammunition .
Because of the relatively low pressure that the .38 Special cartridge and even its more powerful + P version can be loaded to , most 38 Special bullets do not expand reliably , even when using hollow - point designs , especially if fired from a short - barreled or ' snub - nose ' revolver .
In 2004 , Speer Bullets introduced the Gold Dot jacketed hollow - point .38
Special cartridge in an attempt to solve this very problem .
Another solution is to use an unjacketed soft lead hollow - point bullet as found in the FBI Load .
The latter 's 158-grain soft lead hollow point is loaded to + P pressures and velocity , which ensures more reliable expansion in unprotected flesh , even when fired in a 2-inch short - barreled revolver .
Various YouTube videos seem to indicate that hollow point 38 Special projectiles ( and 380ACP ) that have a plastic filler in the concavity achieve more consistent expansion .
Some brands call that a ' ballistic tip ' .
HANDLOADING
Section::::Handloading .
The .38 Special is particularly popular among handloaders .
The cartridge 's straight walls , headspacing on the rim , ready availability of previously - fired cases , and ability to be fired in .357 Magnum firearms , all contribute to this popularity .
Additionally , the .38 Special 's heritage as a black powder cartridge gives it a case size capable of accommodating many types of powders , from slower - burning ( e.g. Hodgdon H-110 or Hercules 2400 ) to fast - burning ( e.g. Alliant Bullseye , the traditional smokeless powder for this cartridge ) .
This flexibility in powders translates directly to versatility in muzzle energy that a handloader can achieve .
Thus , with proper care , a suitably - strong revolver , and adherence to safe handloading practices , the .38 Special can accommodate ammunition ranging from light - recoiling target loads to + P+ self - defense rounds .
The .38 Special , handloaded with premium to regular lead bullets can be loaded safely to equal the now popular 9x19 mm Luger round , and equal the power of the .45 ACP round .
The round is still as viable today as a self - defense round as it was back in 1898 .
SEE ALSO
* .357 Magnum
* List of handgun cartridges
* Table of handgun and rifle cartridges
* Smith & Wesson Bodyguard
* Smith & Wesson Model 52 REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Snubnose Files * Ballistics By The Inch
.38 special results .