WOOD GAS Wood gas is a syngas fuel which can be used as a fuel for furnaces , stoves and vehicles in place of gasoline , diesel or other fuels .
During the production process biomass or other carbon - containing materials are gasified within the oxygen - limited environment of a wood gas generator to produce hydrogen and carbon monoxide .
These gases can then be burnt as a fuel within an oxygen rich environment to produce carbon dioxide , water and heat .
In some gasifiers this process is preceded by pyrolysis , where the biomass or coal is first converted to char , releasing methane and tar rich in polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first wood gasifier was apparently built by Gustav Bischof in 1839 .
The first vehicle powered by wood gas was built by Thomas Hugh Parker in 1901 .
Around 1900 , many cities delivered syngas ( centrally produced , typically from coal ) to residences .
Natural gas began to be used only in 1930 .
Wood gas vehicles were used during World War II as a consequence of the rationing of fossil fuels .
In Germany alone , around 500,000 " producer gas " vehicles were in use at the end of the war .
Trucks , buses , tractors , motorcycles , ships and trains were equipped with a wood gasification unit .
In 1942 , when wood gas had not yet reached the height of its popularity , there were about 73,000 wood gas vehicles in Sweden , 65,000 in France , 10,000 in Denmark , and almost 8,000 in Switzerland .
In 1944 , Finland had 43,000 " woodmobiles " , of which 30,000 were buses and trucks , 7,000 private vehicles , 4,000 tractors and 600 boats .
Wood gasifiers are still manufactured in China and Russia for automobiles and as power generators for industrial applications .
Trucks retrofitted with wood gasifiers are used in North Korea in rural areas , particularly on the roads of the east coast .
USAGE INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE
Section::::Usage .
Section::::Internal combustion engine .
Wood gasifiers can power either spark ignition engines , where all of the normal fuel can be replaced with little change to the carburation , or in a Diesel engine , feeding the gas into the air inlet that is modified to have a throttle valve , if it did n't have it already .
On Diesel engines the Diesel fuel is still needed to ignite the gas mixture , so a mechanically regulated Diesel engine 's " stop " linkage and probably " throttle " linkage must be modified to always give the engine a little bit of injected fuel , often under the standard idle per - injection volume .
Wood can be used to power cars with ordinary internal combustion engines if a wood gasifier is attached .
This was quite popular during World War II in several European , African and Asian countries , because the war prevented easy and cost - effective access to oil .
In more recent times , wood gas has been suggested as a clean and efficient method to heat and cook in developing countries , or even to produce electricity when combined with an internal combustion engine .
Compared to World War II technology , gasifiers have become less dependent on constant attention due to the use of sophisticated electronic control systems , but it remains difficult to get clean gas from them .
Purification of the gas and feeding it into natural gas pipelines is one variant to link it to the existing refueling infrastructure .
Liquefaction by the Fischer – Tropsch process is another possibility .
Efficiency of the gasifier system is relatively high .
The gasification stage converts about 75 % of fuel energy content into a combustible gas that can be used as a fuel for internal combustion engines .
Based on long - term practical experiments and over driven with a wood gas - powered car , the energy consumption has been 1.54 times higher compared to the energy demand of the same car on petrol , excluding the energy needed to extract , transport and refine the oil from which petrol is derived , and excluding the energy to harvest , process , and transport the wood to feed the gasifier .
This means that of wood combustible matter has been found to be equivalent to of petrol during real transportation in similar driving conditions and with the same , otherwise unmodified , vehicle .
This can be considered to be a good result , because no other refining of the fuel is required .
This study also considers all possible losses of the wood gas system , like preheating of the system and carrying of the extra weight of the gas - generating system .
In power generation , reported demand of fuel is wood combustible matter per kilowatt - hour of electricity .
Gasifiers have been built for remote Asian communities using rice hulls , which in many cases have no other use .
One installation in Burma uses an 80 kW modified Diesel - powered electric generator for about 500 people who are otherwise without power .
The ash can be used as biochar fertilizer , so this can be considered a renewable fuel .
Exhaust gas emission from an internal combustion engine is significantly lower on wood gas than on petrol .
Especially the hydrocarbon emissions are low on wood gas .
A normal catalytic converter works well with wood gas , but even without it , emission levels less than 20 ppm HC and 0.2 % CO can be easily achieved by most automobile engines .
Combustion of wood gas generates no particulates , and the gas renders thus
very little carbon black amongst motor oil .
STOVES , COOKING AND FURNACES Section::::Stoves , cooking and furnaces .
Certain stove designs are , in effect , gasifiers working on the updraft principle : The air passes up through the fuel , which can be a column of rice hulls , and is combusted , then reduced to carbon monoxide by the residual char on the surface .
The resulting gas is then burnt by heated secondary air coming up a concentric tube .
Such a device behaves very much like a gas stove .
This arrangement is also known as a Chinese burner .
An alternative stove based on the down - draft principle and typically built with nested cylinders also provides high efficiency .
Combustion from the top creates a gasification zone , with the gas escaping downwards through ports located at the base of the burner chamber .
The gas mixes with additional incoming air to provide a secondary burn .
Most of the CO produced by gasification is oxidized to in the secondary combustion cycle ; therefore , gasification stoves carry lower health risks than conventional cooking fires .
Another application is the use of producer gas to displace light density fuel oil ( LDO ) in industrial furnaces .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
A wood gasifier takes wood chips , sawdust , charcoal , coal , rubber or similar materials as fuel and burns these incompletely in a fire box , producing wood gas , solid ash and soot , the latter of which have to be removed periodically from the gasifier .
The wood gas can then be filtered for tars and soot / ash particles , cooled and directed to an engine or fuel cell .
Most of these engines have strict purity requirements of the wood gas , so the gas often has to pass through extensive gas cleaning in order to remove or convert , i.e. , " crack " , tars and particles .
The removal of tar is often accomplished by using a water scrubber .
Running wood gas in an unmodified gasoline - burning internal combustion engine may lead to problematic accumulation of unburned compounds .
The quality of the gas from different gasifiers varies a great deal .
Staged gasifiers , where pyrolysis and gasification occur separately , instead of in the same reaction zone as was the case in , e.g. , the World War II gasifiers , can be engineered to produce essentially tar - free gas ( less than 1 mg / m³ ) , while single - reactor fluid - bed gasifiers may exceed 50,000 mg / m³ tar .
The fluid bed reactors have the advantage of being much more compact , with more capacity per unit volume and price .
Depending on the intended use of the gas , tar can be beneficial , as well by increasing the heating value of the gas .
The heat of combustion of " producer gas " — a term used in the United States meaning wood gas produced for use in a combustion engine — is rather low compared to other fuels .
Taylor reports that producer gas has a lower heat of combustion of 5.7 MJ / kg versus 55.9 MJ / kg for natural gas and 44.1 MJ / kg for gasoline .
The heat of combustion of wood is typically 15 - 18 MJ / kg .
Presumably , these values can vary somewhat from sample to sample .
The same source reports the following chemical composition by volume which most likely is also variable : During the production of charcoal for blackpowder , the volatile wood gas is vented .
Extremely - high - surface - area carbon results , suitable for use as a fuel in black powder .
* Nitrogen N : 50.9 % *
Carbon monoxide CO : 27.0 % * Hydrogen H : 14.0 % * Carbon dioxide CO : 4.5 % * Methane CH : 3.0 % * Oxygen O : 0.6 % .
It is pointed out that the gas composition is strongly dependent on the gasification process , the gasification medium ( air , oxygen or steam ) and the fuel moisture .
Steam - gasification processes typically yield high hydrogen contents , downdraft fixed bed gasifiers yield high nitrogen concentrations and low tar loads , while updraft fixed bed gasifiers yield high tar loads .
SEE ALSO
* Biogas * Gasification * Producer gas * Rocket stove
* Water gas * Gasification Outdoor Wood Boilers
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations :
Wood Gas as Engine Fuel , 1986