VIRGO SUPERCLUSTER
The Virgo Supercluster ( Virgo SC ) or the Local Supercluster ( LSC or LS ) is a mass concentration of galaxies containing the Virgo Cluster and Local Group , which in turn contains the Milky Way and Andromeda galaxies .
At least 100 galaxy groups and clusters are located within its diameter of 33 megaparsecs ( 110 million light - years ) .
The Virgo SC is one of about 10 million superclusters in the observable universe and is in the Pisces – Cetus Supercluster Complex , a galaxy filament .
A 2014 study indicates that the Virgo Supercluster is only a lobe of an even greater supercluster , Laniakea , a larger , competing referent of Local Supercluster centered on the Great Attractor .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Beginning with the first large sample of nebulae published by William and John Herschel in 1863 , it was known that there is a marked excess of nebular fields in the constellation Virgo ( near the north galactic pole ) .
In the 1950s , French – American astronomer Gérard Henri de Vaucouleurs was the first to argue that this excess represented a large - scale galaxy - like structure , coining the term " Local Supergalaxy " in 1953 , which he changed to " Local Supercluster " ( LSC ) in 1958 .
( Harlow Shapley , in his 1959 book Of Stars and Men , suggested the term Metagalaxy . )
Debate went on during the 1960s and 1970s as to whether the Local Supercluster ( LS ) was actually a structure or a chance alignment of galaxies .
The issue was resolved with the large redshift surveys of the late 1970s and early 1980s , which convincingly showed the flattened concentration of galaxies along the supergalactic plane .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
In a comprehensive 1982 paper , R. Brent Tully presented the conclusions of his research concerning the basic structure of the LS .
It consists of two components : an appreciably flattened disk containing two - thirds of the supercluster 's luminous galaxies , and a roughly spherical halo containing the remaining one - third .
The disk itself is a thin ( ~1 Mpc ) ellipsoid with a long axis / short axis ratio of at least 6 to 1 , and possibly as high as 9 to 1 .
Data released in June 2003 from the 5-year Two - degree - Field Galaxy Redshift Survey ( 2dF ) has allowed astronomers to compare the LS to other superclusters .
The LS represents a typical poor ( that is , lacking a high density core ) supercluster of rather small size .
It has one rich galaxy cluster in the center , surrounded by filaments of galaxies and poor groups .
The Local Group is located on the outskirts of the LS in a small filament extending from the Fornax Cluster to the Virgo Cluster .
The Virgo Supercluster 's volume is very approximately 7000 times that of the Local Group or 100 billion times that of the Milky Way .
See volumes of similar orders of magnitude .
GALAXY DISTRIBUTION
Section::::Galaxy distribution .
The number density of galaxies in the LS falls off with the square of the distance from its center near the Virgo Cluster , suggesting that this cluster is not randomly located .
Overall , the vast majority of the luminous galaxies ( less than absolute magnitude −13 ) are concentrated in a small number of clouds ( groups of galaxy clusters ) .
Ninety - eight percent can be found in the following 11 clouds ( given in decreasing order of number of luminous galaxies ) : Canes Venatici , Virgo Cluster , Virgo II ( southern extension ) , Leo II , Virgo III , Crater ( NGC 3672 ) , Leo I , Leo Minor ( NGC 2841 ) , Draco ( NGC 5907 ) , Antlia ( NGC 2997 ) and NGC 5643 .
Of the luminous galaxies located in the disk , one third are in the Virgo Cluster , while the remainder are found in the Canes Venatici Cloud and Virgo II Cloud , plus the somewhat insignificant NGC 5643 Group .
The luminous galaxies in the halo are also concentrated in a small number of clouds ( 94 % in 7 clouds ) .
This distribution indicates that " most of the volume of the supergalactic plane is a great void . "
A helpful analogy that matches the observed distribution is that of soap bubbles .
Flattish clusters and superclusters are found at the intersection of bubbles , which are large , roughly spherical ( on the order of 20–60 Mpc in diameter ) voids in space .
Long filamentary structures seem to predominate .
An example of this is the Hydra - Centaurus Supercluster , the nearest supercluster to the LS , which starts at a distance of roughly 30 Mpc and extends to 60 Mpc .
COSMOLOGY LARGE - SCALE
DYNAMICS Section::::Cosmology .
Section::::Large - scale dynamics .
Since the late 1980s it has been apparent that not only the Local Group , but all matter out to a distance of at least 50 Mpc is experiencing a bulk flow on the order of 600 km / s in the direction of the Norma Cluster (
Abell 3627 ) .
Lynden - Bell et al .
( 1988 )
dubbed the cause of this the " Great Attractor " .
The Great Attractor is now understood to be the center of mass of an even larger structure of galaxy clusters , dubbed " Laniakea " , which includes the Virgo Supercluster ( including the Local Group ) as well as the Hydra - Centaurus Supercluster , the Pavo - Indus Supercluster , and the Fornax Group .
DARK MATTER Section::::Dark matter .
The LS has a total mass M ≈ 10 and a total optical luminosity L ≈ 3 .
This yields a mass - to - light ratio of about 300 times that of the solar ratio ( / = 1 ) , a figure that is consistent with results obtained for other superclusters .
By comparison , the mass - to - light ratio for the Milky Way is 63.8 assuming a solar absolute magnitude of 4.83 , a Milky Way absolute magnitude of −20.9 , and a Milky Way mass of .
These ratios are one of the main arguments in favor of the presence of large amounts of dark matter in the universe ; if dark matter did not exist , a much smaller mass - to - light ratios would be expected .
MAPS
DIAGRAMS SEE ALSO * Abell catalogue * Large - scale structure of the universe * List of Abell clusters
* Supercluster REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Atlas of the Universe , a website created by astrophysicist Richard Powell that shows maps of our local universe on a number of different scales ( similar to above maps ) .