RHOMBUS
In plane Euclidean geometry , a rhombus ( plural rhombi or rhombuses ) is a simple ( non - self - intersecting ) quadrilateral whose four sides all have the same length .
Another name is equilateral quadrilateral , since equilateral means that all of its sides are equal in length .
The rhombus is often called a diamond , after the diamonds suit in playing cards which resembles the projection of an octahedral diamond , or a lozenge , though the former sometimes refers specifically to a rhombus with a 60 ° angle ( see Polyiamond ) , and the latter sometimes refers specifically to a rhombus with a 45 ° angle .
Every rhombus is a parallelogram and a kite .
A rhombus with right angles is a square .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word " rhombus " comes from Greek ( rhombos ) , meaning something that spins , which derives from the verb ῥέμβω ( rhembō ) , meaning " to turn round and round .
" The word was used both by Euclid and Archimedes , who used the term " solid rhombus " for two right circular cones sharing a common base .
The surface we refer to as rhombus today is a cross section of this solid rhombus through the apex of each of the two cones .
CHARACTERIZATIONS Section::::Characterizations .
A simple ( non - self - intersecting ) quadrilateral is a rhombus if and only if it is any one of the following :
* a parallelogram in which a diagonal bisects an interior angle * a parallelogram in which at least two consecutive sides are equal in length * a parallelogram in which the diagonals are perpendicular ( an orthodiagonal parallelogram ) * a quadrilateral with four sides of equal length ( by definition ) * a quadrilateral in which the diagonals are perpendicular and bisect each other * a quadrilateral in which each diagonal bisects two opposite interior angles
* a quadrilateral ABCD possessing a point P in its plane such that the four triangles ABP , BCP , CDP , and DAP are all congruent * a quadrilateral ABCD in which the incircles in triangles ABC , BCD , CDA and DAB have a common point BASIC PROPERTIES
Section::::Basic properties .
Every rhombus has two diagonals connecting pairs of opposite vertices , and two pairs of parallel sides .
Using congruent triangles , one can prove that the rhombus is symmetric across each of these diagonals .
It follows that any rhombus has the following properties : * Opposite angles of a rhombus have equal measure .
* The two diagonals of a rhombus are perpendicular ; that is , a rhombus is an orthodiagonal quadrilateral .
*
Its diagonals bisect opposite angles .
The first property implies that every rhombus is a parallelogram .
A rhombus therefore has all of the properties of a parallelogram : for example , opposite sides are parallel ; adjacent angles are supplementary ; the two diagonals bisect one another ; any line through the midpoint bisects the area ; and the sum of the squares of the sides equals the sum of the squares of the diagonals ( the parallelogram law ) .
Thus denoting the common side as a and the diagonals as p and q , in every rhombus Not every parallelogram is a rhombus , though any parallelogram with perpendicular diagonals ( the second property ) is a rhombus .
In general , any quadrilateral with perpendicular diagonals , one of which is a line of symmetry , is a kite .
Every rhombus is a kite , and any quadrilateral that is both a kite and parallelogram is a rhombus .
A rhombus is a tangential quadrilateral .
That is , it has an inscribed circle that is tangent to all four sides .
AREA Section::::Area .
As for all parallelograms , the area K of a rhombus is the product of its base and its height ( h ) .
The base is simply any side length a :
The area can also be expressed as the base squared times the sine of any angle : or in terms of the height and a vertex angle : or as half the product of the diagonals p , q : or as the semiperimeter times the radius of the circle inscribed in the rhombus ( inradius ) : Another way , in common with parallelograms , is to consider two adjacent sides as vectors , forming a bivector , so the area is the magnitude of the bivector ( the magnitude of the vector product of the two vectors ) , which is the determinant of the two vectors ' Cartesian coordinates :
K = xy – xy .
DIAGONALS Section::::Diagonals .
The length of the diagonals p = AC and q
= BD can be expressed in terms of the rhombus side a and one vertex angle α as and
These formulas are a direct consequence of the law of cosines .
INRADIUS Section::::Inradius .
The inradius ( the radius of a circle inscribed in the rhombus ) , denoted by , can be expressed in terms of the diagonals and as : DUAL PROPERTIES Section::::Dual properties .
The dual polygon of a rhombus is a rectangle : * A rhombus has all sides equal , while a rectangle has all angles equal .
* A rhombus has opposite angles equal , while a rectangle has opposite sides equal .
* A rhombus has an inscribed circle , while a rectangle has a circumcircle .
* A rhombus has an axis of symmetry through each pair of opposite vertex angles , while a rectangle has an axis of symmetry through each pair of opposite sides .
*
The diagonals of a rhombus intersect at equal angles , while the diagonals of a rectangle are equal in length .
*
The figure formed by joining the midpoints of the sides of a rhombus is a rectangle and vice versa .
EQUATION Section::::Equation .
The sides of a rhombus centered at the origin , with diagonals each falling on an axis , consist of all points ( x , y ) satisfying
The vertices are at formula_11 and formula_12
This is a special case of the superellipse , with exponent 1 .
OTHER PROPERTIES
* One of the five 2D lattice types is the rhombic lattice , also called centered rectangular lattice .
* Identical rhombi can tile the 2D plane in three different ways , including , for the 60 ° rhombus , the rhombille tiling .
{ class = wikitable Section::::Other properties .
!
colspan=2As
topological square tilings !
As 30 - 60 degree rhombille tiling * Three - dimensional analogues of a rhombus include the bipyramid and the bicone .
* Several polyhedra have rhombic faces , such as the rhombic dodecahedron and the trapezo - rhombic dodecahedron .
{ class = wikitable +
Some polyhedra with all rhombic faces !
colspan=3Identical rhombi ! colspan=2Two types of rhombi !
Rhombohedron !
Rhombic dodecahedron !
Rhombic triacontahedron !
Rhombic icosahedron !
Rhombic enneacontahedron
AS THE FACES OF A POLYHEDRON Section::::As
the faces of a polyhedron .
A rhombohedron is a three - dimensional figure like a cube , except that its six faces are rhombi instead of squares .
The rhombic dodecahedron is a convex polyhedron with 12 congruent rhombi as its faces .
The rhombic triacontahedron is a convex polyhedron with 30 golden rhombi ( rhombi whose diagonals are in the golden ratio ) as its faces .
The great rhombic triacontahedron is a nonconvex isohedral , isotoxal polyhedron with 30 intersecting rhombic faces .
The rhombic hexecontahedron is a stellation of the rhombic triacontahedron .
It is nonconvex with 60 golden rhombic faces with icosahedral symmetry .
The rhombic enneacontahedron is a polyhedron composed of 90 rhombic faces , with three , five , or six rhombi meeting at each vertex .
It has 60 broad rhombi and 30 slim ones .
The trapezo - rhombic dodecahedron is a convex polyhedron with 6 rhombic and 6 trapezoidal faces .
The rhombic icosahedron is a polyhedron composed of 20 rhombic faces , of which three , four , or five meet at each vertex .
It has 10 faces on the polar axis with 10 faces following the equator .
SEE ALSO
* Merkel - Raute * Rhombus of Michaelis , in human anatomy
* Rhomboid , either a parallelepiped or a parallelogram that is neither a rhombus nor a rectangle
* Rhombic antenna * Rhombic Chess
* Flag of the Department of North Santander of Colombia , containing four stars in the shape of a rhombus
* Superellipse ( includes a rhombus with rounded corners )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Parallelogram and Rhombus - Animated course ( Construction , Circumference , Area )
* Rhombus definition , Math Open Reference with interactive applet .
* Rhombus area , Math Open Reference - shows three different ways to compute the area of a rhombus , with interactive applet