SOLENOID
A solenoid ( /ˈsolə.nɔɪd/ )
( from the French solénoïde , derived in turn from the Greek solen ( " pipe , channel " ) and eidos ( " form , shape " ) ) is a coil wound into a tightly packed helix .
The term was invented by French physicist André - Marie Ampère to designate a helical coil .
In physics , the term refers to a coil whose length is substantially greater than its diameter , often wrapped around a metallic core , which produces a uniform magnetic field in a volume of space ( where some experiment might be carried out ) when an electric current is passed through it .
A solenoid is a type of electromagnet whose purpose is to generate a controlled magnetic field .
If the purpose of the solenoid is instead to impede changes in the electric current , a solenoid can be more specifically classified as an inductor rather than an electromagnet .
Not all electromagnets and inductors are solenoids ; for example , the first electromagnet , invented in 1824 , had a horseshoe rather than a cylindrical solenoid shape .
In engineering , the term may also refer to a variety of transducer devices that convert energy into linear motion .
The term is also often used to refer to a solenoid valve , which is an integrated device containing an electromechanical solenoid which actuates either a pneumatic or hydraulic valve , or a solenoid switch , which is a specific type of relay that internally uses an electromechanical solenoid to operate an electrical switch ; for example , an automobile starter solenoid , or a linear solenoid , which is an electromechanical solenoid .
Solenoid bolts , a type of electronic - mechanical locking mechanism , also exist .
INFINITE CONTINUOUS
SOLENOID
Section::::Infinite continuous solenoid .
An infinite solenoid is a solenoid with infinite length but finite diameter .
Continuous means that the solenoid is not formed by discrete finite - width coils but by infinitely many infinitely - thin coils with no space between them ; in this abstraction , the solenoid is often viewed as a cylindrical sheet of conductive material .
INSIDE Section::::Inside .
The magnetic field inside an infinitely long solenoid is homogeneous and its strength neither depends on the distance from the axis , nor on the solenoid 's cross - sectional area .
This is a derivation of the magnetic flux density around a solenoid that is long enough so that fringe effects can be ignored .
In Figure 1 , we immediately know that the flux density vector points in the positive z direction inside the solenoid , and in the negative z direction outside the solenoid .
We confirm this by applying the right hand grip rule for the field around a wire .
If we wrap our right hand around a wire with the thumb pointing in the direction of the current , the curl of the fingers shows how the field behaves .
Since we are dealing with a long solenoid , all of the components of the magnetic field not pointing upwards cancel out by symmetry .
Outside , a similar cancellation occurs , and the field is only pointing downwards .
Now consider the imaginary loop c that is located inside the solenoid .
By Ampère 's law , we know that the line integral of B ( the magnetic flux density vector ) around this loop is zero , since it encloses no electrical currents ( it can be also assumed that the circuital electric field passing through the loop is constant under such conditions : a constant or constantly changing current through the solenoid ) .
We have shown above that the field is pointing upwards inside the solenoid , so the horizontal portions of loop c do not contribute anything to the integral .
Thus the integral of the up side 1 is equal to the integral of the down side 2 .
Since we can arbitrarily change the dimensions of the loop and get the same result , the only physical explanation is that the integrands are actually equal , that is , the magnetic field inside the solenoid is radially uniform .
Note , though , that nothing prohibits it from varying longitudinally , which in fact it does .
OUTSIDE Section::::Outside .
A similar argument can be applied to the loop a to conclude that the field outside the solenoid is radially uniform or constant .
This last result , which holds strictly true only near the centre of the solenoid where the field lines are parallel to its length , is important as it shows that the flux density outside is practically zero since the radii of the field outside the solenoid will tend to infinity .
An intuitive argument can also be used to show that the flux density outside the solenoid is actually zero .
Magnetic field lines only exist as loops , they can not diverge from or converge to a point like electric field lines can ( see Gauss 's law for magnetism ) .
The magnetic field lines follow the longitudinal path of the solenoid inside , so they must go in the opposite direction outside of the solenoid so that the lines can form a loop .
However , the volume outside the solenoid is much greater than the volume inside , so the density of magnetic field lines outside is greatly reduced .
Now recall that the field outside is constant .
In order for the total number of field lines to be conserved , the field outside must go to zero as the solenoid gets longer .
Of course , if the solenoid is constructed as a wire spiral ( as often done in practice ) , then it emanates an outside field the same way as a single wire , due to the current flowing overall down the length of the solenoid .
QUANTITATIVE DESCRIPTION
Section::::Quantitative description .
Applying Ampère 's Law to the solenoid ( see the right figure )
gives us where formula_2 is the magnetic constant , formula_3 the number of turns , and formula_4 the current .
From this we get
This equation is valid for a solenoid in free space , which means the permeability of the magnetic path is the same as permeability of free space , μ .
If the solenoid is immersed in a material with relative permeability μ , then the field is increased by that amount :
In most solenoids , the solenoid is not immersed in a higher permeability material , but rather some portion of the space around the solenoid has the higher permeability material and some is just air ( which behaves much like free space ) .
In that scenario , the full effect of the high permeability material is not seen , but there will be an effective ( or apparent ) permeability μ such that 1 ≤ μ ≤ μ .
The inclusion of a ferromagnetic core , such as iron , increases the magnitude of the magnetic flux density in the solenoid and raises the effective permeability of the magnetic path .
This is expressed by the formula where μ is the effective or apparent permeability of the core .
The effective permeability is a function of the geometric properties of the core and its relative permeability .
The terms relative permeability ( a property of just the material ) and effective permeability ( a property of the whole structure ) are often confused ; they can differ by many orders of magnitude .
For an open magnetic structure , the relationship between the effective permeability and relative permeability is given as follows : where k is the demagnetization factor of the core .
FINITE CONTINUOUS
SOLENOID Section::::Finite continuous solenoid .
A finite solenoid is a solenoid with finite length .
Continuous means that the solenoid is not formed by discrete coils but by a sheet of conductive material .
We assume the current is uniformly distributed on the surface of the solenoid , with a surface current density K ; in cylindrical coordinates : The magnetic field can be found using the vector potential , which for a finite solenoid with radius a and length L in cylindrical coordinates formula_10 is where Here , formula_18 , formula_19 , and formula_20 are complete elliptic integrals of the first , second , and third kind .
Using the magnetic flux density is obtained as FINITE NON - CONTINUOUS SOLENOID ESTIMATE Section::::Finite non - continuous solenoid estimate .
For non - continuous solenoids in which the coil radius ( r ) is significantly smaller than the length ( L ) of the solenoid ( L / r > 100 )
the estimate given for the infinite continuous solenoid of a constant magnetic flux density is highly accurate , however , many solenoids exist that do not have this property ( often L < r for large electromagnet ) .
For the case in which the radius is larger than length of the solenoid , the magnetic flux density through the centre of the solenoid ( in the x direction , parallel to the solenoids length , where the x position of the first coil / wire turning is 0 ) can be estimated as : formula_24 For cases in which L and r are of a similar magnitude or L / r < 100 , this estimate can be further refined by summating it over N number of wire
turnings / coils :
formula_25
This example fits all ratios of L , r and N. INDUCTANCE Section::::Inductance .
As shown above , the magnetic flux density
formula_26 within the coil is practically constant and given by where μ is the magnetic constant ,
formula_3 the number of turns , formula_29 the current and formula_30 the length of the coil .
Ignoring end effects , the total magnetic flux through the coil is obtained by multiplying the flux density formula_26 by the cross - section area
formula_32 :
Combining this with the definition of inductance the inductance of a solenoid follows as A table of inductance for short solenoids of various diameter to length ratios has been calculated by Dellinger , Whittmore , and Ould .
This , and the inductance of more complicated shapes , can be derived from Maxwell 's equations .
For rigid air - core coils , inductance is a function of coil geometry and number of turns , and is independent of current .
Similar analysis applies to a solenoid with a magnetic core , but only if the length of the coil is much greater than the product of the relative permeability of the magnetic core and the diameter .
That limits the simple analysis to low - permeability cores , or extremely long thin solenoids .
The presence of a core can be taken into account in the above equations by replacing the magnetic constant μ with μ or μμ , where μ represents permeability and μ relative permeability .
Note that since the permeability of ferromagnetic materials changes with applied magnetic flux , the inductance of a coil with a ferromagnetic core will generally vary with current .
APPLICATIONS
ELECTROMECHANICAL
SOLENOID
Section::::Applications .
Section::::Electromechanical solenoid .
Electromechanical solenoids consist of an electromagnetically inductive coil , wound around a movable steel or iron slug ( termed the armature ) .
The coil is shaped such that the armature can be moved in and out of the center , altering the coil 's inductance and thereby becoming an electromagnet .
The armature is used to provide a mechanical force to some mechanism ( such as controlling a pneumatic valve ) .
Although typically weak over anything but very short distances , solenoids may be controlled directly by a controller circuit , and thus have very quick reaction times .
The force applied to the armature is proportional to the change in inductance of the coil with respect to the change in position of the armature , and the current flowing through the coil ( see Faraday 's law of induction ) .
The force applied to the armature will always move the armature in a direction that increases the coil 's inductance .
Electromechanical solenoids are commonly seen in electronic paintball markers , pinball machines , dot matrix printers and fuel injectors .
Some residential doorbells use electromechanical solenoids to hit metal chime bars .
Proportional Solenoid - Included in this category of solenoids are the uniquely designed magnetic circuits that effect analog positioning of the solenoid plunger or armature as a function of coil current .
These solenoids , whether axial or rotary , employ a flux carrying geometry that both produces a high starting force ( torque ) , and has a section that quickly begins to saturate magnetically .
The resulting force ( torque ) profile as the solenoid progresses through its operational stroke is nearly flat or descends from a high to a lower value .
The solenoid can be useful for positioning , stopping mid - stroke , or for low velocity actuation ; especially in a closed loop control system .
A uni - directional solenoid would actuate against an opposing force or a dual solenoid system would be self cycling .
The proportional concept is more fully described in SAE publication 860759 ( 1986 ) .
Proportional Solenoid Principles - Focusing of the magnetic field and its attendant flux metering , as illustrated in the SAE paper , is required to produce a high starting force at the start of the solenoid stroke and to maintain a level or declining force as the solenoid moves thru its displacement range .
This is quite contrary to that experienced with normal diminishing air gap types of solenoids .
The focusing of the magnetic field to the working air gap initially produces a high mmf ( ampere turns ) and relatively low flux level across the air gap .
This high product of mmf x flux ( read energy ) produces a high starting force .
As the plunger is incremented ( ds ) the energy of motion , F∙ds , is extracted from the air gap energy .
Inherent with the plunger increment of motion , the air gap permeance increases slightly , the magnetic flux increases , the mmf across the air gap decreases slightly ; all of which results in maintaining a high product of mmf x flux .
Because of the increased flux level a rise in ampere - turns drops elsewhere in the ferrous circuit ( predominately in the pole geometry ) causes the reduction of air gap ampere - turns and , therefore , the reduced potential energy of the field at the air gap .
Further incrementing of the plunger causes a continuing decrease of the solenoid force thus creating an ideal condition for motion control as controlled by the current to the solenoid coil .
The aforementioned pole geometry , having a linearly changing path area , produces a nearly linear change in force .
An opposing spring force or a dual ended solenoid ( two coils ) allows over and back motion control .
Closed loop control improves the linearity and stiffness of the system .
ROTARY SOLENOID
Section::::Rotary solenoid .
The rotary solenoid is an electromechanical device used to rotate a ratcheting mechanism when power is applied .
These were used in the 1950s for rotary snap - switch automation in electromechanical controls .
Repeated actuation of the rotary solenoid advances the snap - switch forward one position .
Two rotary actuators on opposite ends of the rotary snap - switch shaft , can advance or reverse the switch position .
The rotary solenoid has a similar appearance to a linear solenoid , except that the core is mounted in the center of a large flat disk , with two or three inclined grooves cut into the underside of the disk .
These grooves align with slots on the solenoid body , with ball bearings in the grooves .
When the solenoid is activated , the core is drawn into the coil , and the disk rotates on the ball bearings in the grooves as it moves towards the coil body .
When power is removed , a spring on the disk rotates it back to its starting position , also pulling the core out of the coil .
The rotary solenoid was invented in 1944 by George H. Leland , of Dayton , Ohio , to provide a more reliable and shock / vibration tolerant release mechanism for air - dropped bombs .
Previously used linear ( axial ) solenoids were prone to inadvertent releases .
U.S. Patent number 2,496,880 describes the electromagnet and inclined raceways that are the basis of the invention .
Leland 's engineer , Earl W. Kerman , was instrumental in developing a compatible bomb release shackle that incorporated the rotary solenoid .
Bomb shackles of this type are found in a B-29 aircraft fuselage on display at the National Museum of the USAF in Dayton , Ohio .
Solenoids of this variety continue to be used in countless modern applications , and are still manufactured under Leland 's original brand " Ledex " , now owned by Johnson Electric .
ROTARY VOICE COIL Section::::Rotary voice coil .
A rotary voice coil is a rotational version of a solenoid .
Typically the fixed magnet is on the outside , and the coil part moves in an arc controlled by the current flow through the coils .
Rotary voice coils are widely employed in devices such as disk drives .
The working part of a moving coil meter is also a type of rotary voice coil that pivots around the pointer axis , a hairspring is usually used to provide a weak nearly linear restoring force .
PNEUMATIC
SOLENOID
VALVE
Section::::Pneumatic solenoid valve .
A pneumatic solenoid valve is a switch for routing air to any pneumatic device , usually an actuator , allowing a relatively small signal to control a large device .
It is also the interface between electronic controllers and pneumatic systems .
HYDRAULIC SOLENOID
VALVE
Section::::Hydraulic solenoid valve .
Hydraulic solenoid valves are in general similar to pneumatic solenoid valves except that they control the flow of hydraulic fluid ( oil ) , often at around 3000 psi ( 210 bar , 21 MPa , 21 MN / m² ) .
Hydraulic machinery uses solenoids to control the flow of oil to rams or actuators .
Solenoid - controlled valves are often used in irrigation systems , where a relatively weak solenoid opens and closes a small pilot valve , which in turn activates the main valve by applying fluid pressure to a piston or diaphragm that is mechanically coupled to the main valve .
Solenoids are also in everyday household items such as washing machines to control the flow and amount of water into the drum .
Transmission solenoids control fluid flow through an automatic transmission and are typically installed in the transmission valve body .
AUTOMOBILE STARTER SOLENOID Section::::Automobile starter solenoid .
In a car or truck , the starter solenoid is part of an automobile starting system .
The starter solenoid receives a large electric current from the car battery and a small electric current from the ignition switch .
When the ignition switch is turned on ( i.e. when the key is turned to start the car ) , the small electric current forces the starter solenoid to close a pair of heavy contacts , thus relaying the large electric current to the starter motor .
Starter solenoids can also be built into the starter itself , often visible on the outside of the starter .
If a starter solenoid receives insufficient power from the battery , it will fail to start the motor , and may produce a rapid ' clicking ' or ' clacking ' sound .
This can be caused by a low or dead battery , by corroded or loose connections in the cable , or by a broken or damaged positive ( red ) cable from the battery .
Any of these will result in some power to the solenoid , but not enough to hold the heavy contacts closed , so the starter motor itself never spins , and the engine does n't start .
SEE ALSO * Coilgun * Electromagnet
* Helmholtz coil
* Inductor
* Variable force solenoid * Linear actuator
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Interactive Java Tutorial : Magnetic Field of a Solenoid , National High Magnetic Field Laboratory * Discussion of Solenoids at Hyperphysics * Solenoid Basics for Robotics * Basics of Rotary Voice Coils
* What Is a Solenoid
* How a DC Solenoid Works