MELROSE PLACE Melrose Place is an American primetime soap opera that aired on Fox from July 8 , 1992 to May 24 , 1999 , for seven seasons .
The show follows the lives of a group of young adults living in an apartment complex called Melrose Place , in West Hollywood , California .
The show was created by Darren Star for Fox and executive produced by Aaron Spelling for his company , Spelling Television .
It was the second series in the Beverly Hills , 90210 franchise .
Season one and season two were broadcast on Wednesday at 9 p.m. , after Beverly Hills , 90210 .
In 1994 , for its third - season premiere , the show moved to Monday at 8 p.m.
The show had many cast changes during the run .
Thomas Calabro was the only original cast member to remain on the series throughout its entire run .
The show earned several Golden Globe nominations and placed # 51 on Entertainment Weekly " New TV Classics " list .
SETTING AND ORIGINAL PREMISE Section::::Setting and original premise .
The show is set in a small apartment courtyard complex located at 4616 Melrose Place in the city of West Hollywood , California .
Several young individuals reside in the apartments , each with their own dreams and drives .
The original format for the show was to have self - contained stories that conclude in every episode , but when that formula proved unpopular , the producers and writers started developing long - term storylines to evolve during the season .
By the second season , the show had adopted a full - on soap opera format .
CAST AND CHARACTERS Section::::Cast and characters .
Melrose Place premiere season featured eight main characters : Dr. Michael Mancini ( Thomas Calabro ) , a physician who works at Wilshire Memorial Hospital and changes from a kind , devoted husband in Season 1 to a mean , adulterous villain from Season 2 on ; Jane Mancini ( Josie Bissett ) , his budding fashion designer wife ; Billy Campbell ( Andrew Shue ) , a struggling writer adapting to life out of his parents ' control ; Alison Parker ( Courtney Thorne - Smith ) , a receptionist at D&D Advertising ; Jake Hanson ( Grant Show ) , a struggling manual laborer and motorcycle enthusiast ; Matt Fielding ( Doug Savant ) , a gay social worker ; Rhonda Blair ( Vanessa A. Williams ) , an aerobics instructor ; and Sandy Harling ( Amy Locane ) , a Southern belle and struggling actress who moonlights as a waitress at a local bar called Shooters , the group 's main hangout .
Locane was written off after 13 episodes and replaced by Daphne Zuniga as Jo Reynolds , a photographer running away from her abusive husband .
Williams was not brought back for the second season , her character having become engaged to a wealthy restaurant entrepreneur .
Actress Heather Locklear , who in season one
had guest starred as Alison 's ambitious and merciless boss Amanda Woodward , was promoted to series regular status in the second season after her character bought and moved into the Melrose Place apartment building .
Although she was always billed as a " special guest star " , Locklear remained with the show for the rest of its run .
Guest Laura Leighton , recurring as Jane 's trouble - making younger sister Sydney Andrews in the first two seasons , was upgraded to series regular for season three .
Marcia Cross , recurring as Dr. Kimberly Shaw in season 1 , became a series regular by the end of the second season ( though she was not credited in the opening until the start of season four ) .
Janet Carroll appeared in several episodes as Marion Shaw , Kimberly 's domineering mother .
Beata Pozniak was featured in Season two in 7 episodes as Dr. Katya Petrova Fielding , a doctor with a daughter from a previous marriage who befriends and ultimately marries Matt ( for a green card ) , who becomes an endearing father figure for her child .
Season four saw two new regular characters : Peter Burns ( Jack Wagner ) , the ruthless hospital Chief of Staff introduced in season three ; and Brooke Armstrong ( Kristin Davis ) , a young , conniving intern at D&D Advertising also recurring the previous season .
Davis 's character was subsequently killed off in the middle of the fourth season , while Zuniga left the series at the end of the season .
Patrick Muldoon also arrived in the third season as the villainous Richard Hart .
Although Muldoon was not billed with the main cast ( though he appeared in numerous promotional photos with them ) , he appeared in most of the fourth season 's episodes and is also Melrose Places longest recurring character ( i.e. not in the opening credits ) in terms of number of episodes .
The fifth season saw the addition of Rob Estes as restaurateur Kyle McBride , Lisa Rinna as his opportunistic wife Taylor , and Brooke Langton as Samantha Reilly , an artist and a new tenant in the apartment complex .
Bissett and Cross left the series towards the end of the fifth season ; Kelly Rutherford was brought in as Megan Lewis , a prostitute hired by Kimberly Shaw to have an affair with Michael Mancini , and David Charvet played Craig Field , Amanda 's new co - worker and later Sydney 's boyfriend .
The season finale featured the exits of series regulars Thorne - Smith , Show , and Leighton .
The season premiere of season six featured the departure of original cast member Doug Savant while Alyssa Milano ( recurring as Michael 's sister Jennifer Mancini since season five ) was bumped to series regular , with Linden Ashby joining the cast as Dr. Brett Cooper and Jamie Luner as his seductive and rich ex - wife , Lexi Sterling .
Charvet was written out in the middle of season 6 , and the beginning of season seven saw the departure of Shue , Rinna , Langton , Milano , and Ashby .
The show 's seventh season introduced John Haymes Newton as Ryan McBride , Kyle 's younger brother , and Rena Sofer as Eve Cleary , a woman from Amanda 's past who marries Peter .
Sofer was not billed with the main cast .
Bissett reprised her role as Jane for the seventh season .
MAIN CAST Section::::Main cast .
Category : List of Melrose Place charactersThis table includes only main cast characters , those who are listed in the intro title sequence . !
rowspan=2Actor !
rowspan=2Character !
colspan=8Seasons 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 ( pt . 1 ) 7 ( pt . 2 )
Notes
*
In season five , Josie Bissett departs the show after episode 15 .
*
* Josie Bissett is added to the cast from episode 4 onwards .
*
*
Amy Locane only appears in the first thirteen episodes .
*
*
In season six , Doug Savant departs the show after the first episode .
* * Andrew Shue , Brooke Langton , Lisa Rinna , Alyssa Milano and Linden Ashby only appear in first seven episodes of the seventh season .
*
*
In season one , Daphne Zuniga is added to the cast from episode 15 onwards .
* * Heather Locklear , though technically a main cast member from the second season onwards , is credited as a " special guest star " for the remainder of the series .
*
*
In season five , Marcia Cross departs the show after episode 27 .
*
*
In season four , Kristin Davis departs the show after episode 22 .
*
*
Although initially recurring in season five , Kelly Rutherford is added to the opening credits from episode 16 onwards .
*
*
Although initially recurring in season five , David Charvet is added to the opening credits from episode 28 onwards .
*
*
In season six , David Charvet departs the show after episode 17 of the sixth season .
*
*
In season six , Jamie Luner is added to the cast from episode 4 onwards .
*
* John Haymes Newton is added to the cast from episode 8 onwards .
* SEASONS AND EPISODES FILMING Section::::Filming .
Filming for the series took place at a studio in Santa Clarita , California .
NIELSEN RATINGS Section::::Nielsen ratings . !
Season !
Rank !
Rating !
US viewers ( in millions )
Melrose Place debuted on July 8 , 1992 at # 19 on the Nielsen ratings with a 10.3/19 share and 16 million viewers .
In December 1993 , Meredith Berkman of Entertainment Weekly called the show " arguably the hottest one - hour drama on television . "
Though ratings dropped slightly over the first season , the addition of Heather Locklear as Amanda is credited for improving ratings and bringing the show from # 94 to # 60 in season two .
The series finale was watched by 10.38 million viewers .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
Melrose Place received mixed reviews from critics .
As of September 2014 , season 1 has a critics ' rating of 4.7/10 at Metacritic ( this rating is only for the first season , not for the show as a whole ) .
One of the critics , Time 's Richard Zoglin , who gave the season a 2.0/10 score , wrote that the soap is " tapping into nothing more than worn plot lines from The Young and the Restless " .
Conversely , Ken Tucker of Entertainment Weekly , gave the first season a B- rating , writing : " Hey , I make fun of Melrose Place — but I 'm hypnotized by it .
As warm - weather escapism , it takes all the issues facing this country , from unemployment to sexual harassment , and turns them into crises that can be solved in an hour .
"
In 1997 , Mark Harris , who gave the soap 's sixth season a D rating , stated : " Although the ever - game , deserves - better Heather Locklear still spits out even the worst lines with snappish authority , and the diabolical - doctor duo of Jack Wagner and Thomas Calabro at least try to look interested , they ca n't sustain a show that has lost its best asset — a twisted joy in its own trashiness . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The series won the People 's Choice Award in 1993 for ' Favorite New TV Dramatic Series ' .
Heather Locklear was nominated for four Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress in a Television Series – Drama for her role as Amanda Woodward on Melrose Place , in 1993 , 1994 , 1995 , and 1996 .
Laura Leighton was nominated in 1995 for Best Performance by an Actress in a Supporting Role in a Series for her role as Sydney Andrews .
In May 1994 , at the height of the show 's popularity , the female stars , Heather Locklear , Laura Leighton , Courtney Thorne - Smith , Daphne Zuniga and Josie Bissett , were featured on the cover of Rolling Stone .
Read the article and see the cover .
TV Guide ranked Amanda Woodward at # 2 in the short list of " The Biggest TV Bitches " , only behind Joan Collins ' iconic Alexis Carrington Colby , with whom Locklear co - starred on Dynasty .
In Entertainment Weekly , Heather Locklear said about playing her : " Not trying to be a bitch .
Just trying to be strong and do what you are supposed to do " .
In 2012 , Entertainment Weekly reunited Melrose favorites Heather Locklear , Marcia Cross , Laura Leighton , Courtney Thorne - Smith , Josie Bissett , Daphne Zuniga , Andrew Shue , Grant Show and Doug Savant , and they appeared on the cover .
SPIN - OFFS Section::::Spin - offs .
The original series produced a spin - off series , Models Inc. , which ran for one season in 1994–95 .
That series focused on a Los Angeles modeling agency run by Hillary Michaels ( played by Linda Gray ) , the mother of Melroses Amanda Woodward ; the show was cancelled after a single season due to low ratings .
A continuation of the series , also called Melrose Place , premiered on September 8 , 2009 on The CW Television Network .
The new series featured primarily a new cast , although five actors from the original series made appearances including Thomas Calabro , Laura Leighton , Josie Bissett , Daphne Zuniga and Heather Locklear .
The revival series suffered from low ratings and negative reviews and was cancelled in 2010 after one season .
LAWSUIT
Section::::Lawsuit .
In 1996 , actress Hunter Tylo was cast in Melrose Place and opted to leave daytime soap opera The Bold and the Beautiful to take the role .
However , she was fired by Melrose Place producer Aaron Spelling prior to filming any episodes for the series , when she announced she was pregnant .
The character she was to play , Taylor McBride , was recast , Lisa Rinna taking the role .
Tylo quickly returned to The Bold and the Beautiful .
Tylo sued Spelling on grounds of discrimination for being pregnant and won $ 4.8 million from a Los Angeles jury .
Spelling argued that Tylo 's pregnancy rendered her unable to play the character , who was supposed to be a sexy seductress .
During the trial , Tylo published pictures of herself while pregnant which showed that she retained a slim figure .
Prior to trial , during the discovery phase of the litigation , Tylo 's lawyers won a partial victory in an interlocutory appeal challenging a lower court 's order compelling her to answer a broad range of personal questions .
The Court of Appeal established Tylo 's right to refuse to answer questions in her deposition about marital problems and psychological treatment , although the Court sustained the portion of the order which compelled her to answer questions about her efforts to become pregnant , her husband 's ability or inability to impregnate her , and communications with her agent with respect to her efforts and ability to become pregnant .
The case is widely recognized as an important one in establishing the right of privacy in deposition and the right of female actors to continue to work while pregnant .
UNAUTHORIZED STORY Section::::Unauthorized story .
On October 10 , 2015 , a television movie called The Unauthorized Melrose Place Story was released .
It told the behind - the - scenes making - of story of the show , finishing with the filming of the season three finale .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
CBS Home Entertainment ( distributed by Paramount ) have released all seasons of Melrose Place on DVD in Region 1 .
The series has also been released on DVD in Region 2 and 4 by Paramount Home Entertainment .
Due to music licensing issues , most of the original music has been replaced on these DVD releases .
Starting with Season 1 , some episodes are edited from their original broadcast versions .
The series is rated in Australia and in New Zealand for its sex scenes and offensive language . !
rowspan=2DVD Name !
rowspan=2 ofepisodes !
colspan=4Release dates !
rowspan=2Special features !
Region 1 !
Region 2
( Scandinavia ) !
Region 2 ( UK ) !
Region 4
On April 1 , 2011 , all seven seasons of the show were made available to view on Netflix 's subscription internet streaming service .
The show was removed from Netflix in July 2015 GALA COMMITTEE Section::::GALA Committee .
A group of artists and Melrose Place producers formed the GALA Committee , headed by artist Mel Chin , in order to bring artworks out of galleries and into primetime television .
GALA artists designed artworks that were used as props by Melrose Place characters in the fourth and fifth seasons , often with hidden political messages :
* When Alison is pregnant , her quilt is decorated with the molecular structure of RU-486 .
* A bag of Chinese take - out food is emblazoned with two opposing ideograms translated from Chinese as " Human Rights " and " Turmoil " ; both terms were used by the Chinese government to justify a restriction on student protesters of June 4 , 1989 .
* Bottles behind the counter at Shooters bar are decorated with ads and documents chronicling the history of alcohol .
* As Alison quits D&D Advertising , a framed ad in the background features a bombed - out building .
The damage to the structure is in the shape of a liquor bottle , and the words " Total Proof " appear on the poster .
Chin compared the works to viruses , symbiotic and invisible .
The project was called " In the Name of the Place " , as part of the " Uncommon Sense " art show at the Geffen Contemporary at MOCA , Los Angeles , California in 1997 .
A portion of the Fifth Season was filmed at the Geffen Contemporary where the project was displayed .
The artwork was also shown at the 1997 Kwangju Biennale in Kwangju , Korea and at Grand Arts in Kansas City , Missouri in 1998 .
Sotheby 's Auction house auctioned almost fifty of these artworks for charity .
RELATED SERIES
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS