CAPE FEAR ( 1991 FILM )
Cape Fear is a 1991 American psychological thriller film directed by Martin Scorsese and a remake of the 1962 film of the same name .
It stars Robert De Niro , Nick Nolte , Jessica Lange , Joe Don Baker , Juliette Lewis , Robert Mitchum , and Gregory Peck in his final film role .
In addition to Mitchum and Peck , Martin Balsam cameos in the remake ; all three starred in the original film .
The film tells the story of a convicted rapist , who , using mostly his newfound knowledge of the law and its numerous loopholes , seeks vengeance against a former public defender whom he blames for his 14-year imprisonment due to purposefully faulty defense tactics used during his trial .
Cape Fear marks the seventh collaboration between Scorsese and De Niro .
The film received positive reviews and received Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations for Best Actor ( De Niro ) and Best Supporting Actress ( Juliette Lewis ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Sam Bowden is a lawyer in the town of New Essex , North Carolina .
Max Cady is a former client whom Bowden defended 14 years earlier when he was working as a public defender in Atlanta .
Cady was tried for the violent rape and battery of a young woman .
Bowden , appalled by Cady 's crime , buried evidence that might have lightened Cady 's sentence or even secured his acquittal .
After his release from prison , Cady tracks down Bowden .
He studied law in prison and assumed his own defense , unsuccessfully appealing his conviction several times .
Cady hints he has learned about Bowden burying the report .
Several incidents involving Cady impact the Bowden family , which consists of Bowden 's wife Leigh and their teenage daughter Danielle .
The family dog is poisoned .
Cady lurks near their property .
Bowden attempts to have Cady arrested , but police lieutenant Elgart says there is no evidence of a crime .
At a bar , Cady meets Bowden 's colleague Lori Davis .
At her house , Cady cuffs her hands , breaks her arm , chews skin off of her face and rapes her .
Lori refuses to press charges , ashamed of what happened .
Bowden hires private investigator Claude Kersek to follow Cady .
Cady approaches Danielle at her school by impersonating her new drama teacher and kisses her .
Bowden warns him to leave his family and him alone or suffer the consequences .
Cady secretly tapes the conversation with a hidden recorder .
Kersek persuades Bowden to hire three men to beat Cady , but as Bowden watches from a hiding place , Cady turns the tide on his attackers and viciously beats them .
Cady uses the recording of Bowden 's threat and an exaggerated display of his own injuries to file for a restraining order against Bowden .
Cady 's new lawyer , Lee Heller , files a complaint with the North Carolina State Bar , vowing to have Bowden disbarred .
Kersek reasons that Cady may try to enter the Bowden house during Bowden 's appearance at a bar hearing out of town .
They fake Bowden 's departure and hide in the house , hoping that Cady will break in so that he can be shot in self - defense .
Cady kills the Bowden 's housekeeper Graciella and impersonates her to ambush Kersek , strangling him with piano wire and shooting him with his own gun .
Bowden , Leigh , and Danielle discover the bodies .
Horrified , they flee to their houseboat , which is docked upstate along Cape Fear .
Cady follows them by tying himself to the chassis of their car .
He attacks the family on the boat , beating and tying up Bowden , and prepares to rape Leigh and Danielle while making Bowden watch .
Danielle sprays Cady with lighter fluid while he lights a cigar , engulfing him in flames and causing him to jump off the boat .
However , Cady clings to a rope and pulls himself back on board .
As the boat is rocked by a violent thunderstorm , a badly burned Cady confronts Bowden .
The storm knocks him off his feet , allowing Bowden to gain the upper hand once the women make it to shore .
Bowden uses Cady 's handcuffs to shackle Cady to the boat .
When the boat hits a rock and is destroyed , the fight continues on shore .
A raging tide carries Cady away , and he drowns .
Bowden washes the blood from his hands before rejoining Leigh and Danielle .
CAST
* Robert De Niro as Max Cady * Nick Nolte as Sam Bowden
* Jessica Lange as Leigh Bowden
* Juliette Lewis as Danielle Bowden
* Joe Don Baker as Claude Kersek * Robert Mitchum as Lt .
Elgart * Gregory Peck as Lee Heller
* Illeana Douglas as Lori Davis * Fred Dalton Thompson as Tom Broadbent * Martin Balsam as Judge
* Zully Montero as Graciella PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film was adapted by Wesley Strick from the original screenplay by James R. Webb , which was an adaptation from the novel The Executioners by John D. MacDonald .
It was originally developed by Steven Spielberg , who eventually decided it was too violent and traded it to Scorsese to get back Schindler 's List , which Scorsese had decided not to make .
Spielberg stayed on as a producer , through his Amblin Entertainment , but chose not to be credited personally on the finished film .
Despite having worked with Nolte in New York Stories ( 1989 ) , Scorsese did not have him in mind to portray Sam Bowden and wanted Harrison Ford to play the part instead .
Ford , however , agreed to do the film only if he was going to portray Max Cady .
Nolte , who was interested in portraying Bowden , managed to convince Scorsese to cast him for the part .
In addition , Drew Barrymore and Reese Witherspoon both auditioned for the part of Danielle Bowden and Spielberg reportedly wanted Bill Murray to portray Cady .
Nick Nolte is taller than Robert De Niro , but for the movie , Nolte lost weight and De Niro developed muscles until De Niro appeared to be the stronger man .
De Niro reportedly took his body fat down to 4 % .
De Niro also paid a doctor $ 5,000 to grind down his teeth for the role to give the character a more menacing look , later paying $ 20,000 to have his teeth restored after the film production was over .
The work of Alfred Hitchcock was also influential on the style of Cape Fear .
As with the 1962 film version , where director J. Lee Thompson specifically acknowledged Hitchcock 's influence , strove to use Hitchcock 's style , and had Bernard Hermann write the score , Scorsese made his version in the Hitchcock manner , especially through the use of unusual camera angles , lighting , and editing techniques .
Additionally , Scorsese 's version has opening credits designed by regular Hitchcock collaborator Saul Bass , and the link to Hitchcock is cemented by the reuse of the original score by Herrmann , albeit reworked by Elmer Bernstein .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film was a box office success , making $ 182,291,969 worldwide on a $ 35 million budget .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film received generally positive reviews by critics , with praise garnered towards its performances , direction , cinematography and editing .
It received a 75 % " Certified Fresh " rating on the film aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes based on 48 reviews , with an average score of 7.1/10 .
The consensus reads , " Smart and stylish , Cape Fear is a gleefully mainstream shocker from Martin Scorsese , with a terrifying Robert De Niro performance .
"
On Metacritic , the film holds a score of 73 out of 100 based on 9 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews .
"
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale .
Roger Ebert gave the film three stars , commenting : " Cape Fear is impressive moviemaking , showing Scorsese as a master of a traditional Hollywood genre who is able to mold it to his own themes and obsessions .
But as I look at this $ 35 million movie with big stars , special effects and production values , I wonder whether it represents a good omen from the finest director now at work . "
AWARDS AND HONORS Section::::Awards and honors . !
Award !
Category !
Subject !
Result
rowspan=2Academy Awards
Best Actor Robert De Niro
Best Supporting Actress Juliette Lewis rowspan=2Golden
Globe Awards
Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama
Robert De Niro
Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture Juliette Lewis
rowspan=2BAFTA Awards
Best Cinematography Freddie Francis Best Editing Thelma Schoonmaker Berlin International Film Festival
Golden Berlin Bear
Martin Scorsese Broadcast Music ,
Inc. BMI Film Music Award Elmer Bernstein rowspan=3CFCA Awards
Best Director Martin Scorsese
Best Supporting Actress
rowspan=2Juliette Lewis
Most Promising Actress
David di Donatello Award
Best Foreign Actor rowspan=2Robert De Niro Jupiter Award Best
International Actor Kansas City Film Critics Circle Award
Best Supporting Actress rowspan=2Juliette Lewis rowspan=4MTV Movie Awards rowspan=2Best
Kiss rowspan=3Robert De Niro Best Male Performance Best Villain National Society of Film Critics Award
Best Supporting Actress rowspan=2Juliette Lewis rowspan=2New York Film Critics Circle Awards
Best Supporting Actress Best Cinematographer
Freddie Francis IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The film was parodied in the 1993 Simpsons episode " Cape Feare " , with Sideshow Bob in the role of Cady .
They also pay homage to another Robert Mitchum film
The Night of the Hunter in which Sideshow Bob 's knuckles ( scaled down for a cartoon character with one fewer finger on each hand ) say " Luv " ( Love ) and " Hāt " ( Hate , with the diacritical mark providing the long vowel ) .
In 1995 , professional wrestler Waylon Mercy made his WWE ( then WWF ) debut , with his gimmick based on De Niro 's portrayal of Max Cady .
However , he only lasted a few months with the company due to a buildup of previous injuries , and the character was abandoned .
In 2013 , WWE debuted Bray Wyatt , another character partly based on De Niro 's portrayal .
In the Seinfeld episode " The Red Dot " , as Elaine 's boyfriend rampages through her office to get revenge on Jerry for making him lose his job , Elaine makes a reference to the film .
Also in the " Seinfeld " episode " The Bookstore " , in a dream after Jerry rats on Uncle Leo for shoplifting in a bookstore , Jerry has a nightmare where Uncle Leo is doing chin ups , working out in prison to get his revenge on Jerry once he finally received his release .
A close up , sharing the same scary score of the movie , Uncle Leo is seen with " Jerry " & " Hello " tattooed on each hand .
It 's a clear reference to Robert De Niro 's character in Cape Fear .
In the Rick and Morty episode " Ricksy Business " , Lucy ( the deranged maid who tries to rape Jerry ) is shown clinging to the underside chassis of their car as they drive home , maniacally shouting " Ha , I 'm doing like in Cape Fear ! "
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring home invasions
* List of 1991 box office number - one films in the United States * Night and the City , another remake also starring De Niro and Lange REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Machura , Stefan and Robson , Peter , eds .
Law and Film : Representing Law in Movies ( Cambridge :
Blackwell Publishing , 2001 ) .
Thain , Gerald J. , " Cape Fear , Two Versions and Two Visions Separated by Thirty Years .
" , . 176 pages .
EXTERNAL LINKS