TO SIR , WITH LOVE To Sir , with Love is a 1967 British drama film that deals with social and racial issues in an inner city school .
It stars Sidney Poitier and features Christian Roberts , Judy Geeson , Suzy Kendall and singer Lulu making her film debut .
James Clavell ( who had written The Children 's Story three years prior ) directed from his own screenplay , which was based on E. R. Braithwaite 's 1959 autobiographical novel of the same name .
The film 's title song " To Sir with Love " , sung by Lulu , reached number one on the U.S. pop charts for five weeks in the autumn of 1967 and ultimately was Billboard magazine 's No . 1 pop single for that year .
The movie ranked number 27 on Entertainment Weeklys list of the 50 Best High School Movies .
A made - for - television sequel , To Sir , with Love II ( 1996 ) , was released nearly three decades later , with Poitier reprising his starring role .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Mark Thackeray ( Sidney Poitier ) , an immigrant to Britain from British Guiana via California , applies for an engineering job , but learns that it will be a long time before a decision is made .
He also applies for and is offered a teaching post at North Quay Secondary School in the tough East End of London , which he accepts as an interim position .
Thackeray learns from the staff of North Quay that most of the pupils have been rejected from other schools , and their antics drove their last teacher to resign .
The pupils live up to their reputation .
Led by Bert Denham ( Christian Roberts ) and Pamela Dare ( Judy Geeson ) , their antics progress from disruptive behaviour ( banging desk lids to break Thackeray 's train of thought ) to distasteful pranks .
One pupil , Williams , persistently wears sunglasses in the classroom ; Thackeray , as a running gag , keeps removing them for him .
Thackeray retains his calm manner but a turning point comes one morning when he enters the classroom and discovers something being burned in the classroom stove .
( It is implied that one of the girls is burning a used sanitary napkin , but this is never confirmed . )
Despite himself , Thackeray loses his temper ; he orders the boys out of the classroom and then reprimands , not only the unknown girl who caused the fire , but also the other girls for knowingly and wilfully allowing her to do so .
Thackeray is more angry with himself than with his pupils , as he has allowed them to get the better of him .
Changing his approach , he informs the students that he will treat them as adults , and allow them to discuss issues of their own choosing for the remainder of the term .
Future classes discuss what the pupils can expect when they leave school , including advice on how to apply for jobs .
Thackeray wins the class over , except for Denham , who continues to bait him .
Thackeray suggests a class outing to a museum , which turns out to be a success .
He loses some of this new - found support when he defuses a potentially violent situation between Potter ( Chris Chittell ) and a gym teacher , Mr Bell .
In class , he demands that Potter apologize directly to Bell for the incident even if he believes Bell was wrong .
The group refuses to invite Thackeray to the class dance , and when Seales ' ( Anthony Villaroel )
mother dies , the class takes up a collection for a wreath but refuses to accept Thackeray 's donation .
At this point , the headmaster advises him that he feels " the adult approach " has failed ; future class outings are cancelled , and Thackeray is to take over the boys ' gym classes until the headmaster can find a replacement .
Meanwhile , Thackeray receives the engineer job offer in the post .
During gym class , Denham smugly challenges Thackeray to a boxing match , which comes to an abrupt end after Thackeray delivers just one punch to Denham 's mid - section .
However , he compliments Denham 's ability and suggests Denham teach boxing to the younger pupils next year .
Denham expresses his admiration for Thackeray to his fellow pupils ; Thackeray wins back their respect and is invited to the class dance .
Later , when Thackeray attends the funeral of Seales ' mother , he is touched to find that his lectures on personal choices and responsibility have been taken to heart , and his entire class has also come despite the stigma they would receive for entering the home of a colored person .
At the dance , Barbara Pegg ( Lulu ) announces a " ladies choice " dance and Pamela chooses Thackeray as her dance partner .
While Barbara sings the film theme song , the class presents Thackeray with a gift .
He is too moved for words and retires to his classroom .
Two youths rush into the classroom , and upon seeing Thackeray
they begin mocking his gift , a silver tankard and card " To sir , with love " , with the students ' signatures , and joke that they will be in his class next year .
After they leave , Thackeray tears up the job offer letter .
He then takes a flower from the vase on his desk , places it on his lapel and returns to the dance .
CAST
* Sidney Poitier as Mark Thackeray * Christian Roberts as Bert Denham
* Judy Geeson as Pamela Dare * Suzy Kendall as Gillian Blanchard * Lulu as
Barbara " Babs " Pegg * Ann Bell as Mrs Dare * Geoffrey Bayldon as Theo Weston * Faith Brook as Grace Evans
* Patricia Routledge as Clinty Clintridge * Chris Chittell as Potter * Adrienne Posta as Moira Joseph * Edward Burnham as Florian * Rita Webb as Mrs Joseph
* Fred Griffiths as Market Stallholder * Anthony Villaroel as Seales
* Michael Des Barres as Williams * Gareth Robinson as Tich Jackson
* Lynne Sue Moon as Miss Wong
* Marianne Stone as Gert
* The Mindbenders PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Sidney Poitier and James Clavell wanted to do the film , but Columbia was reluctant .
They agreed to make the film for small fees , provided Poitier got 10 % of the gross and Clavell 30 % of the profits .
" When we were ready to shoot , Columbia wanted either a rape or a big fight put in , " said Martin Baum .
We held out , saying this was a gentle story , and we won . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Upon its U.S. release , Bosley Crowther began his review by contrasting the film with Poitier 's role and performance in the 1955 film Blackboard Jungle ; unlike that earlier film , Crowther says " a nice air of gentility suffuses this pretty color film , and Mr. Poitier gives a quaint example of being proper and turning the other cheek .
Although he controls himself with difficulty in some of his confrontations with his class , and even flares up on one occasion , he never acts like a boor , the way one of his fellow teachers ( played by Geoffrey Bayldon ) does .
Except for a few barbed comments by the latter , there is little intrusion of or discussion about the issue of race : It is as discreetly played down as are many other probable tensions in this school .
To Sir , with Love comes off as a cozy , good - humored and unbelievable little tale . "
Halliwell 's Film and Video Guide describes it as " sentimental non - realism " and quotes a Monthly Film Bulletin review ( possibly contemporary with its British release ) , which claims that " the sententious script sounds as if it has been written by a zealous Sunday school teacher after a particularly exhilarating boycott of South African oranges " .
The Time Out
Film Guide says that it " bears no resemblance to school life as we know it " and the " hoodlums ' miraculous reformation a week before the end of term ( thanks to teacher Poitier ) is laughable " .
Although agreeing with the claims about the film 's sentimentality , and giving it a mediocre rating , the Virgin Film Guide asserts : " What makes [ this ] such as enjoyable film is the mythic nature of Poitier 's character .
He manages to come across as a real person , while simultaneously embodying everything there is to know about morality , respect and integrity . "
The film premiered and became a hit one month before another film about troubled schools , Up the Down Staircase , appeared .
To Sir , with Love holds a 92 % " Fresh " rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes .
The film grossed $ 42,432,803 at the box office in the United States , yielding $ 19,100,000 in rentals , on a $ 640,000 budget , making it the eighth highest grossing picture of 1967 in the US .
Poitier especially benefited from that film 's success considering he agreed on a mere $ 30,000 fee in exchange for 10 % of the gross box office and thus arranged one of the most impressive payoffs in film history .
In fact , although Columbia insisted on an annual cap to Poitier of $ 25,000 to fulfill that percentage term , the studio was forced to revise the deal with Poitier when they calculated they would be committed to 80 years of those payments .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack album features music by Lulu , The Mindbenders , and incidental music by Ron Grainer .
The original album was released on Fontana Records .
It was re - released onto CD in 1995 .
AllMusic rated it three stars out of five .
The title song was a Cash Box Top 100 number - one single for three weeks .
*
To Sir With Love ( Lyric : Don Black / Music : Marc London ) –
Lulu * * School Break Dancing " Stealing My Love from Me " (
Lyric & Music : Marc London ) –
Lulu *
* Thackeray meets Faculty ,
Then Alone * * Music from Lunch Break " Off and Running "
( Lyric :
Toni Wine / Music : Carole Bayer ) – The Mindbenders *
* Thackeray Loses Temper , Gets an Idea * * Museum Outings Montage " To Sir , with Love " -
Lulu *
* A Classical Lesson *
* Perhaps I Could Tidy Your Desk *
* Potter 's loss of temper in gym
* * Thackeray reads letter about job *
* Thackeray and Denham box in gym
*
* The funeral * * End of Term Dance
" It 's Getting Harder all the Time "
( Lyric : Ben Raleigh / Music : Charles Abertine )
–
The Mindbenders * * To Sir With Love – Lulu * AWARDS AND HONORS AWARDS Section::::Awards and honors .
Section::::Awards .
Laurel Awards
* Sleeper of the Year : 1968 * Female New Face – 2nd place : Judy Geeson – 1968 NOMINATIONS Section::::Nominations .
Directors Guild of America
* Outstanding Directorial Achievement in Motion Pictures : James Clavell – 1967
Laurel Awards
* Male New Face : Christian Roberts – 1968 10th Annual Grammy Awards
* Best Original Score from a Motion Picture or Television Show : 1968 OTHER HONORS
Section::::Other honors .
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists :
* 2004 : AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs : *
" To Sir With Love " –
Nominated SEE ALSO
* The Hindi film Imtihan ( 1974 ) starring Vinod Khanna as the teacher , and Tanuja as his love interest , was inspired by the film * Dangerous Minds * The Egyptian comedy Madrast Al - Mushaghebeen , was inspired by the film .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Christian Roberts and Judy Geeson discuss making To Sir , with Love on its 50th anniversary , The Spectrum , Accessed June 7 , 2017 .