SLING BLADE ( FILM )
Sling Blade is a 1996 American drama film written and directed by Billy Bob Thornton , who also stars in the lead role .
Set in rural Arkansas , the film tells the story of a man named Karl Childers who has an intellectual disability and is released from a psychiatric hospital , where he has lived since killing his mother and her lover when he was 12 years old , and the friendship he develops with a young boy and his mother .
In addition to Thornton , it stars Dwight Yoakam , J. T. Walsh , John Ritter , Lucas Black , Natalie Canerday , James Hampton , and Robert Duvall .
The film was adapted by Thornton from his previous screenplay for the short film
Some Folks Call It a Sling Blade , directed by George Hickenlooper .
Sling Blade proved to be a sleeper hit , launching Thornton into stardom .
It won the Academy Award for Best Writing , Adapted Screenplay , and Thornton was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role .
The music for the soundtrack was provided by French Canadian artist / producer Daniel Lanois .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Karl Childers is an intellectually disabled Arkansas man , who has been in the custody of the state mental hospital since the age of 12 , for having killed his mother and her lover .
Although he had been thoroughly institutionalized , Karl is deemed fit to be released into the outside world .
Prior to his release , he is interviewed by a local college newspaper reporter , and he recounts committing the murders with a Kaiser blade , saying , " Some folks call it a sling blade .
I call it a kaiser blade . "
Karl explains that he attended school with his father 's boss ' teenage son Jesse Dixon , who was a mean - spirited bully and pervert ; he thought that Jesse was raping his mother , and decapitated him .
When he discovered that his mother was a willing participant in the affair , he killed her also .
Thanks to the doctor in charge of his institutionalization , Karl , who is highly skilled at repairing small engines , lands a job at a repair shop in the small town where he was born and raised .
He befriends 12-year - old Frank Wheatley , and shares some of the details of his past , including the killings .
Frank reveals that his father was killed when he was hit by a train , leaving him and his mother on their own .
He later admits that he lied , and that his father committed suicide .
Frank introduces Karl to his mother , Linda , and her gay friend , Vaughan Cunningham .
Vaughan is the manager of the dollar store where Linda works .
Despite Vaughan 's concerns about Karl 's history in the mental hospital , Linda allows him to move into her garage , which angers Linda 's abusive alcoholic boyfriend , Doyle Hargraves .
Karl bonds with Linda , who makes him biscuits to eat .
Vaughan invites Karl to lunch where he explains that a gay man and a mentally challenged man face similar obstacles of intolerance , and ridicule , in small - town America , before warning Karl about Doyle 's violent demeanor , as well as his fears that Doyle might hurt or kill Linda and Frank .
Karl quickly becomes a father figure to Frank , who misses his father , and despises Doyle , who becomes increasingly abusive towards everybody including his own friends .
Eventually , Doyle , who is also the frontman of his own band , has a drunken outburst towards his fellow band members and kicks them out , and attempts to do the same with Karl and Vaughan .
Linda tries kicking Doyle out of the house , despite his threats to kill her if she ever left him , and this leads to a physical confrontation with Linda and Frank , angering the boy , who throws things at Doyle until he finally leaves .
Things begin to look up for Karl , as he becomes more and more successful at his job , and is even set up on a date with Melinda , a coworker of Linda and Vaughan 's , at a dinner party at Vaughan 's house in which Linda , Frank , and Vaughan 's partner Albert also attend .
Despite this , however , Karl is haunted by an incident that happened when he was 6 or 8 years old .
His parents performed an abortion of his unwanted baby brother , causing the baby to " come out too soon , " and Karl was given a bloody towel wrapped around the baby , which survived the abortion .
Karl was instructed to " get rid of it , " but when Karl detected movement inside the towel , he inspected it , discovering " a little ol' boy " that " was n't no bigger than a squirrel .
" While recounting this story to Frank , Frank asks why Karl did not just keep the baby , to which Karl replies that he had no way to care for a baby .
He placed the baby , still in the bloody towel , inside a shoe box and buried the baby alive , saying he felt it was better to just " return him to the good Lord right off the bat , " because of the abuse and neglect he received at the hands of his own parents .
A few days later , Linda and Doyle reconcile , who announces his plan to move into the house permanently , and to one day " pop the question " to Linda , much to Frank 's anger .
After a lot of thinking , Karl visits his father , who has become a mentally unbalanced hermit , living in the dilapidated home where Karl grew up .
He tells his father that killing his baby brother was wrong , and that he had wanted to kill his father for making him do it , but eventually decided that he was not worth the effort .
Knowing that he has the upper hand again , Doyle confronts Karl and Frank shortly after Karl 's baptism , and announces " big changes " including Karl 's removal from the house ; Doyle attempts to attack Frank when he retorts him , which Karl stops and threatens Doyle if he ever touches Frank again , to no avail .
Karl begins to realize that , eventually , either Frank is going to kill Doyle and end up just like him , or that Doyle 's abuse will end up killing Frank and Linda .
In order to prevent this , Karl makes Frank promise to spend the night at Vaughan 's house .
Karl then goes to Vaughan 's house and asks to pick up Linda from her place , and have her stay over also ; he then tells Vaughan that , even though homosexuality is a sin according to the Bible , that he does n't think the Lord would ever send someone as nice as him to Hell , and that he does n't have to " go with women " to be a good father to Frank .
Karl returns to Linda 's house , but seems undecided about whether to enter .
When confronted , a drunk Doyle asks what Karl is doing with the lawnmower blade he had sharpened and fashioned into a weapon .
Karl replies , " I aim to kill you with it , " but not before asking how to reach the police by telephone .
Not taking Karl seriously , Doyle says he should dial 911 and request " an ambulance , or a hearse . "
Karl kills Doyle with two chopping blows of the lawnmower blade to the head .
Karl then phones the police to turn himself in , and requests a hearse be sent for Doyle .
He eats biscuits and mustard while waiting for the police .
Returned to the state hospital , he seems to be a different person than he was during his previous institutionalization .
He silences a sexual predator who had previously forced him to listen to tales of his horrible deeds , before standing to look out of the window towards a field , having learned the value of sacrificing one 's self to save others .
CAST * Billy Bob Thornton as Karl Childers * Dwight Yoakam as Doyle Hargraves
* J. T. Walsh as Charles Bushman * John Ritter as Vaughan Cunningham * Lucas Black as Frank Wheatley
*
Natalie Canerday as Linda Wheatley * James Hampton as Jerry Woolridge
* Robert Duvall as Karl 's father
* Jim Jarmusch as Deke ,
the Frostee Cream employee
* Vic Chesnutt as Terence * Brent Briscoe as Scooter Hodges * Mickey Jones as Johnson RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film garnered both critical and commercial success .
It grossed $ 24,444,121 on a $ 1 million budget .
The film received a 96 % " Certified Fresh " rating by Rotten Tomatoes with an average rating of 8.3 out of 10 , with 49 critics giving generally favorable reviews and only two negative reviews ; the site 's consensus states " You will see what 's coming , but the masterful performances , especially Thornton 's , will leave you riveted . "
The Washington Post called it a " masterpiece of Southern storytelling . "
Kevin Thomas wrote in the Los Angeles Times that the film is " a mesmerizing parable of good and evil and a splendid example of Southern storytelling at its most poetic and imaginative " .
The New York Times critic Janet Maslin praised the performances but said that " it drifts gradually toward climactic events that seem convenient and contrived " .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
* Academy Awards
* Won for Best Adapted Screenplay ( Thornton ) *
Nominated for Best Actor
( Thornton ) * Chicago Film Critics Awards
* Won for Best Actor ( Thornton )
* Edgar Awards
* Won for Best Motion Picture Screenplay ( Thornton )
* Independent Spirit
Awards
* Won for Best First Feature
* Kansas City Film Critics Awards
* Won for Best Actor ( Thornton ) * National Board of Review Awards
* Won for Special Achievement in Filmmaking ( Thornton )
* Satellite Awards
* Nominated for Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama ( Thornton )
* Nominated for Best Original Screenplay ( Thornton ) * Screen Actors Guild Awards
* Nominated for Outstanding Performance by a Cast * Nominated for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Leading Role ( Thornton ) * Writers Guild of America Awards
* Won for Best Adapted Screenplay ( Thornton ) * Young Artist Award
* Won for Best Leading Young Actor in a Feature Film ( Black )
* YoungStar Award
* Won for Best Young Actor in a Drama Film ( Black ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL
LINKS * Sling Blade – Actual locations of Movie Landmarks