JUDGMENT NOTWITHSTANDING VERDICT Judgment notwithstanding the verdict , also called judgment non obstante veredicto , or JNOV , is a type of judgment as a matter of law ( JMOL ) that is sometimes rendered at the conclusion of a jury trial .
In U.S. federal civil court cases , the term has been replaced by the renewed judgment as a matter of law , which emphasizes its relationship to the judgment as a matter of law ( formerly called a directed verdict ) .
In U.S. federal criminal cases , the term is " judgment of acquittal " .
JNOV is the practice in American courts whereby the presiding judge in a civil jury trial may overrule the decision of a jury and reverse or amend their verdict .
In literal terms , the judge enters a judgment notwithstanding the jury verdict .
This intervention , often requested but rarely granted , permits the judge to exercise discretion to avoid extreme and unreasonable jury decisions .
A judge is not allowed to enter a JNOV of " guilty " following a jury acquittal in United States criminal cases ; such an action would violate a defendant 's Fifth Amendment right not to be placed in double jeopardy and Sixth Amendment right to a trial by jury .
If the judge grants a motion to set aside judgment after the jury convicts , however , this action may be reversed on appeal by the prosecution .
A JNOV is appropriate only if the judge determines that no reasonable jury could have reached the given verdict .
For example , if a party enters no evidence on an essential element of their case , and the jury still finds in their favor , the court may rule that no reasonable jury would have disregarded the lack of evidence on that key point and reform the judgment .
Reversal of a jury 's verdict by a judge occurs when the judge believes that there were insufficient facts on which to base the jury 's verdict , or that the verdict did not correctly apply the law .
This procedure is similar to a situation in which a judge orders a jury to arrive at a particular verdict , called a directed verdict .
A judgment notwithstanding the verdict is occasionally made when a jury refuses to follow a judge 's instruction to arrive at a certain verdict .
REFERENCES