CORNUS FLORIDA Cornus florida , the flowering dogwood , is a species of flowering plant in the family Cornaceae native to eastern North America and northern Mexico .
An endemic population once spanned from southernmost coastal Maine south to northern Florida and west to the Mississippi River .
The tree is commonly planted as an ornamental in residential and public areas because of its showy bracts and interesting bark structure .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
The flowering dogwood is usually included in the dogwood genus Cornus as Cornus florida L. , although it is sometimes treated in a separate genus as Benthamidia florida ( L. ) Spach .
Two subspecies are generally recognized : * Cornus florida subsp .
florida – eastern + south - central United States .
* Cornus florida subsp .
urbiniana
( Rose ) Rickett – northeastern Mexico
( Nuevo León , Veracruz ) .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Flowering dogwood is a small deciduous tree growing to high , often wider than it is tall when mature , with a trunk diameter of up to .
A 10-year - old tree will stand about tall .
The leaves are opposite , simple , ovate , long and broad , with an apparently entire margin ( actually very finely toothed , under a lens ) ; they turn a rich red - brown in fall .
The flowers are individually small and inconspicuous , with four greenish - yellow bracts long .
Around 20 flowers are produced in a dense , rounded , umbel - shaped inflorescence , or flower - head , in diameter .
The flower - head is surrounded by four conspicuous large white , pink or red " petals " ( actually bracts ) , each bract long and broad , rounded , and often with a distinct notch at the apex .
The flowers are hermaphroditic ( " perfect flowers " ) .
When in the wild they can typically be found at the forest edge and frequently on dry ridges .
While most of the wild trees have white bracts , some selected cultivars of this tree also have pink bracts , some even almost a true red .
They typically flower in early April in the southern part of their range , to late April or early May in northern and high altitude areas .
The similar Kousa dogwood ( Cornus kousa ) , native to Asia , flowers about a month later .
The fruit is a cluster of two to ten separate drupes , ( fused in Cornus kousa ) , each long and about wide , which ripen in the late summer and the early fall to a bright red , or occasionally yellow with a rosy blush .
They are an important food source for dozens of species of birds , which then distribute the seeds .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Flowering dogwood does best horticulturally in moist , acidic soil in a site with some afternoon shade , but good morning sun .
It does not do well when exposed to intense heat sources such as adjacent parking lots or air conditioning compressors .
It also has a low salinity tolerance .
The hardiness zone is 5–9 and the preferred pH is between 6.0–7.0 .
In urban and suburban settings , care should be taken not to inflict mower damage on the trunk or roots , as this increases the tree 's susceptibility to disease and pest pressure .
The common flowering dogwood has been placed on the endangered species list in Ontario .
In regions where dogwood anthracnose is a problem , homeowners and public land managers are encouraged to know the symptoms and inspect trees frequently .
The selection of healthy , disease - free planting stock is essential and transplanting trees from the forest should be avoided .
Sites should be selected for reasonably well - drained , fertile soils ; full sun is recommended in high - hazard areas ( such as stream or pond banks ) .
New plantings should be mulched to a depth of , avoiding the stem .
Dead wood and leaves should be pruned and completely removed and destroyed yearly .
Plants should be watered weekly during droughts , with watering done in the morning , avoiding wetting the foliage .
Registered fungicides can be applied when necessary , according to manufacturers instructions and advice of local Extension Service .
Flowering dogwood is grown widely throughout the temperate world .
Selected cultivars
* ' Amerika Touch - O - Pink ' – large bracts , tinged pink ; large leaves ; good disease resistance .
* ' Appalachian Spring ' – large white bracts ; red fall foliage ; resistant to dogwood anthracnose .
* ' Autumn Gold ' – white bracts ; yellow fall color .
* ' Barton ' – large white bracts ; blooms at early age ; resistant to stem canker and powdery mildew .
* ' Bay Beauty ' – double white bracts ; resists heat and drought ; good for Deep South .
* ' Cherokee Daybreak ' – white bract ; vigorous grower with variegated leaves .
* ' Cherokee Chief ' – red bracts ; red new growth .
* ' Cherokee Brave ' –
Even redder than ' Cherokee Chief ' , smaller bracts but dark red color ; consistently resistant to powdery mildew .
* ' Cherokee Princess ' – vigorous white bracts , industry standard for white flowers .
* ' Cherokee Sunset ' – purplish - red bracts ; variegated foliage .
* ' Gulf Coast Pink ' – best pink flowering dogwood in Florida – northern part only .
* ' Hohman 's Gold ' – white bracts ; variegated foliage .
* ' Jean 's Appalachian Snow ' –
large , overlapping white bracts w/ green flowers ; very resistant to powdery mildew .
* ' Karen 's Appalachian Blush ' – delicate white bracts edged in pink ; some powdery mildew resistance .
* ' Kay 's Appalachian Mist ' – stiff , creamy white bracts ; red fall foliage ; good resistance to powdery mildew .
* ' Plena ' – double white bracts ; spot anthracnose - resistant .
* ' Purple Glory ' – red bracts ; purple foliage ; spot anthracnose - resistant but susceptible to stem canker .
* ' Weaver White ' – large white blooms ; large leaves ; candelabra shape ; good in north - central Florida .
PROPAGATION Section::::Propagation .
Cornus florida is easily propagated by seeds , which are sown in the fall into prepared rows of sawdust or sand , and emerge in the spring .
Germination rates for good clean seed should be near 100 % if seed dormancy is first overcome by cold stratification treatments for 90 to 120 days at .
Flowering dogwood demonstrates gametophytic self - incompatibility , meaning that the plants ca n't self - fertilize .
This is important for breeding programs as it means that it is not necessary to emasculate ( remove the anthers from )
C. florida flowers before making controlled cross - pollinations .
These pollinations should be repeated every other day , as the flowers must be cross - pollinated within one or two days of opening for pollinations to be effective .
Softwood cuttings taken in late spring or early summer from new growth can be rooted under mist if treated with 8,000 to 10,000 ppm indole-3-butyric acid ( IBA ) .
In cold climates , potted cuttings must be kept in heated cold frames or polyhouses the following winter to maintain temperatures between .
Although rooting success can be as high as 50–85 % , this technique is not commonly used by commercial growers .
Rather , selected cultivars are generally propagated by T - budding in late summer or by whip grafting in the greenhouse in winter onto seedling rootstock .
Micropropagation of flowering dogwood is now used in breeding programs aiming to incorporate resistance to dogwood anthracnose and powdery mildew into horticulturally and economically important cultivars .
Nodal ( axillary bud ) sections are established in a culture of Woody Plant Medium ( WPM ) amended with 4.4 µmol / L 6-Benzyladenine ( BA ) to promote shoot growth .
Rooting of up to 83 % can be obtained when 5–7 week - old microshoots are then transferred to WPM amended with 4.9 µmol / L IBA .
HISTORICAL USES Section::::Historical uses .
Other old names now rarely used include American dogwood , Florida dogwood , Indian arrowwood , Cornelian tree , white cornel , white dogwood , false box , and false boxwood .
This species has in the past been used in the production of inks , scarlet dyes , and as a quinine substitute .
The hard , dense wood has been used for products such as golf club heads , mallets , wooden rake teeth , tool handles , jeweler 's boxes and butcher 's blocks .
Cornus florida is the state tree and flower of Virginia , the state tree of Missouri , and state flower of North Carolina .
It was used to treat dogs with mange , which may be how it got its name .
The red berries are edible , but do not taste good .
In 1915 , forty dogwood saplings were donated by U.S. to Japan in the 1912 - 15 exchange of flowers between Tokyo and Washington ,
D.C. While the cherry trees survived the ensuing sour relations of these two countries and are the main feature of the National Cherry Blossom Festival , all dogwood trees in Tokyo died except the one that had been planted in an agriculture high school .
In 2012 , the United States sent 3,000 dogwood saplings to Japan to commemorate the 100 year anniversary of the Washington D.C. cherry trees given as a gift to the U.S. by Japan in 1912 .
REFERENCES
* Dogwood placed on Endangered List EXTERNAL LINKS
* Missouriplants : Cornus florida
* Bioimages : Cornus florida
* Floridata : Cornus florida
* University of Connecticut Plant Database :
Cornus florida
* United States Department of Agriculture , National Forest Service :
Cornus florida
* University of California @ Davis , Integrated Pest Management
Online :
Dogwood pest management * Cornell University , Integrated Pest Management , Dogwood Borer * United States Department of Agriculture , National Forest Service , St. Paul Field Office ,
How to Identify and Control Dogwood Anthracnose
* Virginia State University Cooperative Extension , Foliar Diseases of Dogwood
* flowering dogwood - Interactive Native Range Distribution Map of Cornus florida