KNOTT
'S BERRY FARM Knott 's Berry Farm is a theme park located in Buena Park , California , and owned by Cedar Fair .
In 2017 , it was the tenth - most - visited theme park in North America .
Knott 's Berry Farm is also the most - visited theme park in the Cedar Fair chain .
The park features 40 rides including roller coasters , family rides , dark rides and water rides , and it employs approximately 10,000 people ..
Unlike the rest of the Cedar Fair parks which are amusement parks , Knott 's Berry Farm is the only theme park in the Cedar Fair chain .
The origin of the theme park dates back to the mid 1920 's , when Walter Knott and his family began selling berry products at a roadside stand along State Route 39 in California .
By the 1940s , a restaurant , several shops , and other attractions had been constructed on the property to entertain a growing number of visitors , including a replica ghost town .
The site continued its transformation into a modern amusement park over the next two decades , and an admission charge was added in 1968 .
The park was sold to Cedar Fair in the late 1990s , and the family 's food business was eventually acquired by The J. M. Smucker Company .
HISTORY
ORIGIN Section::::History .
Section::::Origin .
The theme park sits on the site of a former berry farm established by Walter Knott and his family .
Beginning in the mid 1920 's , the Knott family sold berries , berry preserves , and pies from a roadside stand along State Route 39 .
In 1934 , the Knotts began selling fried chicken dinners in a tea room on the property , later called " Mrs. Knott 's Chicken Dinner Restaurant " .
The dinners soon became a major tourist draw , and the Knotts built several shops and other attractions to entertain visitors while waiting for a seat in the restaurant .
In 1940 , Walter Knott began constructing a replica Ghost Town on the property , the beginning of the present - day theme park .
The idea of an amusement park really picked up in the 1950s when Walter Knott opened a " summer - long county fair " .
In 1968 , for the first time , an admission price was required to get into the park , originally set at 25 cents .
The Calico log ride was added in 1969 .
The park became a popular destination for conservative college students in the 1960s , especially as conservative organizations like the California Free Enterprise Association , the Libres Foundation , and the Americanism Educational League were based there .
According to Assistant Professor Caroline Rolland - Diamond of the Paris West University Nanterre La Défense : On April 12 , 1974 , Cordelia Knott died .
Walter turned his attention toward political causes , Roaring Twenties re - themed Gypsy Camp in the 1970s with the addition of a nostalgic traditional amusement area , Wheeler Dealer Bumper Cars , Knott 's Bear - y Tales .
Then with the northward expansion of a 1920s - era Knott 's Airfield themed area featuring the Cloud 9 Dance Hall , Sky Cabin / Parachute Sky Jump and Motorcycle Chase steeplechase roller coaster above the electric guided rail Gasoline Alley car ride .
Sky Tower with the illuminated " K " in logo script at the top was built to support two attractions , the Parachute Sky Jump ( now closed ) and the Sky Cabin .
Parachute Sky Jump boarded one or two standing riders anticipating the thrill of the drop into baskets beneath a faux parachute canopy .
From the top , eight arms supported the vertical cable tracks of wire rope which lifted the baskets .
The Sky Cabin ringed the support pole with a single floor of seats that are enclosed behind windows .
The Sky Cabin ring revolves slowly as it rises to the top and back offering a pleasantly changing vista .
Sky Cabin is very sensitive to weather and passenger motion , such as walking , which is prohibited during the trip .
During winds 25 + mph or rain it is closed .
When built , Sky Tower was the tallest structure in Orange County ( a distinction briefly held by WindSeeker before its relocation to Worlds of Fun in 2012 . )
Motorcycle Chase , modernized steeplechase rollercoaster built in 1976 by Arrow Development , featured single motorbike themed vehicles racing side - by - side , each on one of four parallel tracks , launched together .
One or two riders straddled each " Indian motorcycle " attraction vehicle .
The tubular steel monorail track closely followed dips and bumps in " the road " and tilted to lean riders about the curves .
Gasoline Alley , an electric steel - guiderail car ride below , was built together and intimately intertwined , which enhanced ride - to - ride interaction thrill value .
Rider safety concerns of the high center of gravity coupled with the method of rider restraints caused it to be re - themed Wacky Soap Box Racers with vehicles themed to look like soap box racers , each seating two riders , strapped in low ( nearly straddling the track ) , surrounded by the close fitting car sides , and the dips and bumps of the track were straightened flat in 1980 .
Motorcycle Chase / Wacky Soap Box Racers was removed 1996 for a dueling loop coaster Windjammer Surf Racers and now Xcelerator , a vertical launch coaster , takes its place .
On December 3 , 1981 , Walter Knott died , survived by his children who would continue to operate Knott 's as a family business for another fourteen years .
In the 1980s , Knott 's built the Calico Barn Dance featured Bobbi & Clyde as the house band .
It was during the height of the " Urban Cowboy " era .
The " Calico Barn Dance " was featured in Knott 's TV Commercials .
During the 1980s , Knott 's met the competition in Southern California theme parks by theming a new land and building two massive attractions :
* Kingdom of the Dinosaurs ( 1987 )
( primeval re - theme of Knott 's Bear - y Tales )
* Bigfoot Rapids ( 1988 ) , a whitewater river rafting ride as the centerpiece of the new themed area Wild Water Wilderness .
The Boomerang roller coaster replaced the Corkscrew in 1990 with a lift shuttle train passing to and fro through a cobra roll and a vertical loop for six inversions each trip .
Mystery Lodge ( 1994 ) , inspired by General Motors " Spirit Lodge " pavilion , was a live show augmented with Pepper 's ghost and other special effects , which was among the most popular exhibits at Expo 86 in Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada , which was produced by Bob Rogers of BRC Imagination Arts and created with the assistance of the Kwagulth Native reserve in the village of Alert Bay , British Columbia .
Mystery Lodge recreates a quiet summer night in Alert Bay , then guests " move inside " the longhouse and listen to the storyteller weave a tale of the importance of family from the smoke of the bonfire .
The Jaguar !
was opened June 17 , 1995 , to add another roller coaster to the mix of Fiesta Village alongside Montezooma 's Revenge .
NEW OWNERS Section::::New owners .
In the 1990s , after Walter and Cordelia died , their children decided to sell off their businesses :
In the late 1990s Cedar Fair acquired the Buena Park Hotel at the corner of Grand Ave .
and Crescent .
It was then brought up to Radisson standards and branded Radisson Resort Hotel as a franchise .
In 2004 , the park renamed the Radisson Resort Hotel the Knott 's Berry Farm Resort Hotel .
In 1995 , the Knott family sold the food specialty business to ConAgra Foods , which later re - sold the brand to The J.M. Smucker Company in 2008 .
In 1997 , the Knott family sold the amusement park operations to Cedar Fair Entertainment Company .
Initially , the Knotts were given an opportunity to sell the park to The Walt Disney Company .
The park would have been amalgamated into the Disneyland Resort and converted into Disney 's America , which had previously failed to be built near Washington ,
D.C. The Knotts refused to sell the park to Disney out of fear most of what Walter Knott had built would be eliminated .
CEDAR FAIR ERA TO PRESENT Section::::Cedar Fair era to present .
Since being acquired by Cedar Fair , the park has seen an aggressive shift towards thrill rides , with the construction of a number of large roller coasters and the addition of a high - performance Shoot - the - Chutes ride Perilous Plunge .
Perilous Plunge had the record of being the tallest and steepest water ride in the world until September 2012 when it was closed and removed .
Also , in 2013 , Knott 's Berry Farm announced that the most popular ride at the park , the Timber Mountain Log Ride , would be closed for a major five - month refurbishment , led by Garner Holt Productions ,
Inc. On May 25 , 2013 , Knott 's Berry Farm added three new family rides on the site of former Perilous Plunge .
They include : Coast Rider ( wild mouse roller coaster ) , Pacific Scrambler ( Scrambler ride ) and Surfside Gliders .
All three of the rides added to the Boardwalk theme .
The old bridge which connected the exit of Perlious Plunge and the boardwalk is now used as the entrance to Surfside Gliders and Pacific Scrambler .
The Boomerang roller coaster was also repainted a lime - green color as part of the Boardwalk expansion .
On September 2 , 2013 , Knott 's Berry Farm announced that Windseeker would be removed from the park .
The ride was removed and sent to Worlds of Fun for the 2014 season .
On November 22 , 2013 , Knott 's Berry Farm made a major announcement for the 2014 operating season ; the famous and historical Calico Mine Ride would be closed for a major six - month refurbishment beginning in January 2014 .
TIMELINE * 1920 :
Ten acres of berry farm land leased by Walter and Cordelia Knott * 1927 :
Ten leased acres of berry farm purchased , named Knott 's Berry Place * 1929 : Ten more acres purchased
* 1932 :
Rudolf Boysen gives Walter his last six crossbreed berry plants , as yet unnamed * 1934 : Tea room opens and Cordelia serves the first chicken dinner * 1940
: Living Ghost Town tribute started with free entertainment .
* 1941
: 100 more acres of land are added , totals 120 .
* 1946 :
Steakhouse * 1947 :
Name change from Knott 's Berry Place to Knott 's Berry Farm .
* 1948 : Bottle House and Music Hall * 1949 : Stagecoach * 1951 : Calico Saloon * 1952 : Ghost Town & Calico Railroad * 1954 : Haunted Shack ,
Bird Cage Theater * 1955
: Dentzel Carousel , Merry - Go - Round Auto Ride ( later the Tijuana Taxi ) , Hunter 's Paradise Shootin ' Gallery , Model ' T ' Children 's Ride , Cable Cars * 1958 : Mott 's Miniatures * 1960 : Calico Mine Ride . * 1966 : Independence Hall * 1968 : Fence surrounds the park , and admission is charged .
* 1969
: Timber Mountain Log Ride ; Fiesta Village themed area ; Tijuana Taxi ( re - themed from Auto Ride ) ; Mexican Whip ; Fiesta Wheel ; Happy Sombrero .
* 1971 :
John Wayne Theater ( later the Good Time Theater , then the Charles M. Shulz Theater ) * 1973 :
Inaugural Knott 's Scary Farm Halloween event * 1974 :
Wild West Stunt Show replaces Wagon Camp shows .
* 1975 :
Corkscrew ; Bear - y Tales .
* 1976 :
Motorcycle Chase ; Sky Jump ; Sky Cabin ; Propeller Spin ; Loop Trainer Flying Machine ; Whirlpool ; Gasoline Alley ; Whirlwind .
* 1978 :
Montezooma 's Revenge , Old MacDonald 's Farm removed , Cable Cars removed * 1980 : Dragon Swing , Wacky Soap Box Racers * 1983 :
Barn Dance featured Bobbi & Clyde Country Western Dancing ; Camp Snoopy themed area built , forcing removal of Knott 's Lagoon and its attractions around a lake which had been built north of Independence Hall , so that a parking area could be relocated .
* 1984 : Studio K debuts .
The most successful teen dance facility in the nation .
Opened with a Dick Clark Special , " Rock Rolls On " .
* 1986 :
Bear - y Tales removed ; Tijuana Taxi removed ; Fiesta Wheel removed ; Mexican Whip removed .
* 1987 : Kingdom of the Dinosaurs ; Tampico Tumbler ; Gran Slammer ; Slingshot ; Happy Sombrero renamed Mexican Hat Dance .
* 1988 :
Bigfoot Rapids ; Bear - y Tales Funhouse .
* 1989 : XK-1
; Greased Lighting moved into enclosed building and renamed Whirlwind .
Corkscrew removed/ refurbished and moved to Idaho ; Propeller Spin removed ; Loop Trainer Flying Machine removed .
* 1990 : Boomerang built on former site of Corkscrew ;
* 1991 : Studio K closed .
* 1992 :
Indian Trails themed area .
* 1994 : Mystery Lodge .
® * 1995 : Jaguar !
added * 1996
: The Boardwalk themed area ( retheme of Roaring 20 's ) ; HammerHead ; Greased Lightning renamed HeadAche ; Whirlpool renamed Headspin ; Wacky Soap Box Racers with Gasoline Alley removed .
* 1997 :
Windjammer Surf Racers ; Cedar Fair Acquires Knott 's ;
Bear - y Tales Funhouse removed .
* 1998 :
GhostRider ;
XK-1 removed ; Supreme Scream ; Woodstock 's Airmail ;
Slingshot renamed Wave Swinger ; Mexican Hat Dance renamed Hat Dance .
* 1999 :
Wipeout ; Coasters restaurant ; Charlie Brown Speedway ;
Sky Jump removed ; HeadAche removed and renamed The Blue Thunder at Miracle Strip Amusement Park ; Pacific Pavilion removed ; Radisson Resort Knott 's Berry Farm .
* 2000 : Windjammer Surf Racers closes ; Perilous Plunge ; Knott 's Soak City U.S.A. water park ; Haunted Shack removed .
* 2001
: VertiGo ;
Windjammer Surf Racers removed ; Wipeout relocated ; Headspin relocated and renamed Wilderness Scrambler .
* 2002 : Xcelerator added ; VertiGo removed * 2003 :
Tampico Tumbler removed ; Gran Slammer removed ; La Revolución ; Joe Cool 's Gr8 Sk8 ; HammerHead removed .
* 2004 :
Silver Bullet ; Lucy 's Tugboat ; Rip Tide and Screamin ' Swing opened ; Kingdom of the Dinosaurs closed ; Church of Reflections relocated to outside of park ; Radisson Resort Knott 's Berry Farm renamed Knott 's Berry Farm Resort Hotel .
Grand Sierra Railroad shortened to accommodate Silver Bullet .
* 2005 :
T.G.I. Fridays restaurant ( California Marketplace ) .
* 2006 :
Pacific Spin ( Soak City U.S.A. ) ; Johnny Rockets restaurant ; New Perilous Plunge boats put into operation ; Walter K Steamboat removed ; Woodstock 's Airmail relocated .
* 2007 :
Sierra Sidewinder ; Wilderness Scrambler removed .
* 2008 :
Pony Express , Peanut 's Playhouse removed .
* 2009 :
Pink 's , Remodel and rebrand of Viva La Coasters in the California Marketplace .
* 2010 : Snoopy 's Starlight Spectacular added / Snoopy 's Christmas Spectacular .
* 2011 :
WindSeeker added * 2012 : Park improvements – replacing area theme music , removing boardwalks and pouring concrete replacements , rebuilding rotted wood structures , keeping open until park closing attractions , restaurants & shops which had previously closed early .
More aggressive youth marketing & advertising ; Fast Lane
, Perilous Plunge closes
* 2013 : Boardwalk expansion :
Coast Rider ; Surfside Gliders ; Pacific Scrambler ( all replaced Perilous Plunge ) ;
WindSeeker removed * 2014 : Charlie Brown 's Kite Flyer ; Linus Launcher ; Pig Pen 's Mud Buggies ; Grand Sierra Scenic Railroad , Lucy 's Tugboat and Rocky Road Trucking Company rethemed as Grand Sierra Railroad , Rapid River Run and Rocky Mountain Trucking Company ; Charlie Brown 's Speedway , Joe Cool 's GR8 SK8 , Kingdom of the Dinosaurs , Log Peeler and Snoopy Bounce removed .
La Tiendita removed .
* 2015 :
Voyage to the Iron Reef , Screamin ' Swing closed in preparation for removal , GhostRider closed for major refurbishment .
* 2016 : Ghost Town is renovated to celebrate its 75th birthday ; Rip Tide officially closed and demolished due to technical issues ; Starbucks replaces Dreyer 's in the California Marketplace ; Mrs. Knott 's Chicken Dinner Restaurant undergoes major renovations ; GhostRider reopens from its major refurbishment on June 10 , 2016 . ; Removed Wipeout .
* 2017 : Soak City gets an expansion added Sol Spin ; new Boardwalk Barbecue restaurant .
Brought back Ghost Town Alive ; Extended Boysenberry Festival ; Added VRCADE .
Montezooma 's Revenge Receives new color scheme .
Boomerang closes .
* 2018 :
HangTime opens ; Sky Cabin reopened on February 10 , 2018 ; Wipeout relocated ; Big Foot Rapids closes in September in order to undergo major renovation and new themeing as Calico River Rapids opening in Summer 2019 ANNUAL PARK
EVENTS Section::::Annual park events .
The park 's annual Knott 's Scary Farm has drawn crowds since 1973 .
The idea for this event was presented at one of the regularly scheduled round table meetings for managers by Patricia Pawson .
The actual event was created by Bill Hollingshead , Gary Salisbury , Martha Boyd and Gene Witham , along with other members of the Knott 's Berry Farm Entertainment Department as documented in the DVD Season of Screams .
Initially fake corpses and other static figures were rented from Hollywood prop house , but Bud Hurlbut , the creator / concessionaire of the Mine Ride , Log Ride and other rides at Knott 's , decided that this was n't enough .
He dressed up in a gorilla suit , and started scaring guests on the Mine Ride .
Halloween Haunt was an instant hit , and by the next year , the event sold out nightly .
During this special ticketed event , the entire park ( or major portions of it ) re - themes itself into a " haunted house " style attraction in the form of mazes and " scare zones " in the evening .
Over a thousand specially employed monsters are also scattered — often hidden out of view — throughout the park at this time .
Some of the characters have become well - known , such as the green witch , which has been portrayed by Charlene Parker since 1983 , the longest of any performer .
Several attractions are decorated for the event including the Timber Mountain Log Ride and Calico Mine Train
and there are 13 mazes of various themes .
Elvira ( actress Cassandra Peterson ) was introduced into the Halloween Event in 1982 and was prominently featured in many Halloween Haunt events until 2001 .
According to postings on her My Space page , Cassandra was released from her contract by the park 's new owners due to their wanting a more family friendly appeal , although she returned for one night in 2012 for the 40th anniversary of the event and has returned as a regular performer throughout the run of the event for the last several years .
During the month of October , Knott 's Scary Farm generates half the revenue for Knott 's Berry Farm 's fiscal year .
Season of Screams is a DVD produced by an independent company which traces the beginnings of Halloween Haunt and the story behind how it all got started back in 1973 .
Season of Screams also highlights recent Halloween Haunts .
Winter Coaster Solace is an event that takes place in the first or second weekend of March every year when roller coaster enthusiasts can come before the park opens and stay after the park closes to ride the rides and eat at the Chicken Dinner Restaurant .
It is intended to provide " solace " to visitors from other parts of the country where theme parks and roller coasters are seasonal , not year - round operations like the Southern California parks .
Knott 's Berry Farm also used to give attendees behind the scenes tours of the rides .
Every year since 1991 , Knott 's has offered free admission to veterans and their families during the month of November .
Though this was originally started as a tribute to returning Gulf War veterans , they subsequently expanded it to include all veterans and have run it every year since .
A Christmas event known as " Knott 's Merry Farm " also happens annually .
Previous Merry Farm events have included manufactured snow , handcrafts exhibits , and a visit with Santa Claus .
This event was originally created by Gary Salisbury in the Fall of 1985 .
Praise ( festival ) has been a Christian themed celebration presented many years as a mix - in special event of music and comedy on New Year 's Eve .
CURRENT AREAS AND ATTRACTIONS Section::::Current areas and attractions .
The park consists of four themed areas : * Ghost Town
* Fiesta Village * The Boardwalk * Camp Snoopy GHOST TOWN
Section::::Ghost Town .
Craftsmen in Ghost Town demonstrate the arts of the blacksmith , woodcarver , glass - blower , sign cutter , and spinner .
Demonstrations of narrow gauge railroading and farm equipment hobbyists accompany additional merchant stalls of cottage - craft fairs seasonally at discounted admission which is restricted to Ghost Town only .
Western Trails Museum , relocated between the candy store and the General Store to accommodate Bigfoot Rapids , still features historical western artifacts large and small , from a hand powered horse - drawn fire engine to miniature replica of a borax hauling " Twenty Mule Team " and utensils necessary to survive the prairie and wilderness .
The Ghost Town area has a few other notable attractions .
The Bird Cage Theatre only hosts two seasonal entertainments — during " Knott 's Merry Farm , " two small productions of " The Gift of the Magi " and " A Christmas Carol , " and a Halloween Haunt thrill show .
The Calico Stage , a large open - air stage in Calico Square , hosts a variety of shows and acts , big and small , from those of elementary school students , Gallagher , a local band , and the summer - spectacular All Wheels Extreme stunt show featuring youthful performers demonstrating aerial tricks with acrobatics , trampolines , and riding ramps with skates , scooters , skateboards , and freestyle bikes to popular music .
Calico Saloon recreates the revelry of music , singing and dancing , with Cameo Kate hosting a variety of acts .
Jersey Lily , Judge Roy Bean 's combination courthouse / saloon , offers certified comical " genuine illegal hitchin ' " alongside pickles , candy , and sports / soft drinks .
Many parts of Ghost Town are forever lost to progress .
The conversion of the Silver Dollar Saloon to a shooting gallery , Hunters Paradise shooting gallery to Panda Express and the original Berry Stand , moved several times with its last location now occupied by the Silver Bullet station .
What is left of Ghost Town today was based on Calico ghost town and other real ghost towns in the Western United States such as Prescott , Arizona .
Walter Knott inherited his uncle 's silver mill and land , then bought more of the actual Calico ghost town in 1951 and developed it .
In 1966 , he donated that property to the corporate - municipal County of San Bernardino which then made the town of Calico , California into a public historic park , for which it charged an entrance / parking fee .
See ' History –
Ghost Town – Calico ' section above . !
Thrill level !
Ride !
Picture !
Opened !
Manufacturer !
Description !
Thrill level
ButterfieldBud HurlbutCustom Coasters InternationalBolliger & MabillardBud Hurlbut & Arrow Development WILD
WATER
WILDERNESS
Section::::Wild Water Wilderness .
Formerly known as Wild Water Wilderness , now part of Ghost Town , that features two major rides : the Bigfoot Rapids river rafting adventure , and Pony Express , a horse themed family roller coaster installed in 2008 .
Nearby Bigfoot Rapids is Rapids Trader , a small merchandise stand .
It is also home to Mystery Lodge , a multimedia show based on an Expo 86IntaminZamperla FIESTA VILLAGE Chance - MorganZiererChance - MorganDentzel CarouselAnton
SchwarzkopfMondialZierer THE BOARDWALK Section::::The Boardwalk .
Boardwalk Games include physical challenges such as a rock wall , soccer , basketball and a rope ladder crawl .
A variety of traditional pitch three balls and win a prize type games , such as squirt gun into clowns mouth , knock off milk bottles , pitch a quarter onto a plate are pitched by hawkers along the Boardwalk Games midway .
In September 2012 , Perilous Plunge closed for an expansion of the Boardwalk .
Perilous Plunge was noticeably known as one of Knott 's major thrill rides .
The boardwalk reopened after a year transformation with two flat rides and a new family roller coaster taking the spot of Perilous Plunge .
The Boomerang roller coaster also got repainted with a new vibrant green and yellow color scheme .
The world 's largest Johnny RocketsMack RidesGerstlauerEli Bridge Company Originally " Whirlpool " from 1989 to 1996 , Pacific Scrambler is a classic scrambler amusement ride .
When the area opened in 1996 , this was a ride called Whirlpool , it was housed inside a building which featured ' undersea ' murals on the walls , musical soundtrack effects , and concert - style lighting effects .
In 2000 , it was replaced with a Shoot the Chutes ride called Perilous PlungeIntaminS&S WorldwideLarson InternationalTriotech A 4-D interactive dark rideIntaminChance
Rides CAMP SNOOPY Section::::Camp Snoopy .
Camp Snoopy is home to the park 's family and children 's rides , with many of the rides and attractions being built specifically for children and guests who can not ride the park 's more aggressive attractions .
Its theme is Charles M. Schulz ' " Peanuts " comic strip characters .
Snoopy has been the mascot of Knott 's Berry Farm since 1983 , and the characters can now be seen at all of Cedar Fair 's parks , except Gilroy Gardens , which is managed by Cedar Fair and owned by the city of Gilroy .
The 14 rides include a mini roller coaster called the Timberline Twister , a Zamperla Rockin '
Tug called Rapid River Run , and a steel spinning roller coaster called Sierra Sidewinder .
For guests who can not ride the park 's more aggressive and thrilled rides , Camp Snoopy contains a good number of rides for guests of all ages including infants , children , and seniors .
With the exception of Sierra Sidewinder and Timberline Twister , the rides are relativity tame and not aggressive .
Knott 's Berry Farm also built the Mall of America 's indoor theme park , which itself was originally called Camp Snoopy .
( In fact , Charles M. Schulz hailed from St. Paul . )
However , today the park is no longer affiliated with Knott 's or Cedar Fair , and is now called Nickelodeon Universe .
On November 22 , 2013 , Knott 's Berry Farm announced major improvements in the area of Camp Snoopy .
Camp Snoopy will receive a makeover as the section is approaching its 30th anniversary .
In summer 2014 , Knott 's Berry Farm will open up new rides in Camp Snoopy .
The narrow gaugeZamperlaLarson InternationalZamperlaZamperlaSierra SidewinderMack Rides Timberline TwisterBradley and Kaye INDIAN TRAILS Section::::Indian Trails .
Located next to the Bottle House in Ghost Town , Indian Trails is a small area sandwiched between Camp Snoopy , Ghost Town , and Fiesta Village , showcasing Native American art , crafts , and dance .
PUBLIC AREA Section::::Public area .
Many of the original attractions are outside the gates of the current - day theme park along Grand Ave .
at the California Marketplace , mostly things which would no longer be considered interesting to today 's audience , or things which were merely there for decoration .
Near the restrooms behind Berry Place are the waterfall overshooting the water wheel and historic gristmill grindstone , a replica of George Washington 's Mount Vernon estate fireplace hearth , and what remains of the visible beehive .
Some attractions still exist , but have been incorporated into backstage areas , such as the Rock Garden , now an employee smoking area .
Other attractions have been removed , such as the historic volcano , and the cross - section of giant sequoia with age rings denoting historic events such as Christopher Columbus visiting America .
EAST PROPERTY Section::::East property .
The east side of the property , divided by Beach Blvd . , features the main parking lot , Knott 's Soak City a seasonal water park that requires separate admission , the picnic grounds rental areas , complementary admission to Independence Hall and gift shop , and the Church of Reflections which was moved outside the theme park in 2004 and held non - denominational Sunday services until 2010 .
A tunnel and pedestrian underpass beneath Beach Blvd .
connects the main parking lot to the shops , restaurants and theme park .
FORMER ATTRACTIONS
FEARVR :
5150 CONTROVERSY Section::::Former attractions .
Section::::FearVR : 5150 controversy .
For Halloween Haunt in 2016 , Knott 's Berry Farm introduced FearVR : 5150 , a virtual reality attraction that was met with controversy from the mental health community regarding the negative portrayal of mental illness .
The ten - minute - long attraction immersed guests inside of a chaotic mental hospital haunted by a supernatural central character named Katie and zombie - like patients .
The initial controversy came from the attraction 's name , with 5150 referring to the California law that allows a law enforcement officer or clinician to involuntarily commit a person suspected of having a mental illness and determined " a danger to themselves or others " .
The backlash was focused on Cedar Fair 's use of painful experiences suffered by those dealing with mental illness and to have it " transmogrified into spooky entertainment " .
In response , Cedar Fair removed " 5150 " from the name , and after continued opposition , permanently closed the attraction on September 28 , 2016 , only six days after its debut .
A petition was signed by more than 2,000 people hoping Cedar Fair would bring it back , with the petition 's organizer stating that Cedar Fair should n't be " forced to shut down an attraction based on the words of people who had not even experienced the attraction " .
KNOTT 'S
SOAK
CITY Section::::Knott 's Soak City .
Knott 's Soak City is a water park .
It opened in 1999 as Soak City U.S.A.
It requires separate admission from Knott 's Berry Farm .
In addition to the water park across the street from the main theme park , Cedar Fair also formerly owned two satellite Knott 's Soak City Parks , in Palm Springs and Chula Vista .
KNOTT 'S PRIVATE POLICE FORCE Section::::Knott 's Private Police Force .
For most of the park 's history , Knott 's Berry Farm had a unique arrangement with the Orange County Sheriff Department where the park 's security officers were sworn special deputies vested with full police powers .
The Security Department , however , did not answer to the county sheriff , but rather to the park 's Chief of Security ( who for many years was Steve Knott , the grandson of Walter Knott ) .
Knott 's Berry Farm maintained a completely private police force , vested with full police powers , and overseen by park management .
Before the City of Buena Park was incorporated , Knott 's Berry Farm 's Security Department even provided police services to the nearby unincorporated area that would eventually become known as Buena Park , including writing traffic tickets .
Then , in the early days of the incorporated City of Buena Park , Knott 's Berry Farm Security provided vital mutual aid assistance to the Buena Park Police Department ( formerly Buena Park Public Safety ) during emergencies since Knott 's Berry Farm 's 34 sworn Special Deputies outnumbered , and were better equipped than the city 's four - man Department of Public Safety .
The Orange County Sheriff Department discontinued this arrangement in the late 1980s but Knott 's still maintains its own private ( albeit un - sworn ) security force , and its " Station - K " public safety radio designation .
FAST LANE QUEUING Section::::Fast Lane queuing .
Fast Lane is Knott 's Berry Farm 's virtual queue system .
For an extra fee , visitors get a wrist band that enables them to get to the front of the line on some of the most popular attractions without queuing .
FOOD PRODUCTS Section::::Food products .
The J.M. Smucker Company continues to sell the jam and preserves made famous by the Knott family ; however , other products such as the syrups have been discontinued due to low demand .
In November 2013 , Knott 's Berry Farm began selling their " Berry Market " brand of preserves at the park .
The Berry Market brand is all - natural .
They are unable to use " Knott 's " on the label , since Smucker 's owns the rights to the name .
PUBLIC
TRANSPORTATION
Section::::Public Transportation .
Knott 's Berry Farm can easily be accessed by public transportation .
Service is available by both Los Angeles Metro and the Orange County Transportation Authority .
Bus routes serving the park include Metro Express Line 460 which provides direct express service between Downtown Los Angeles and Disneyland and OCTA bus routes 29 and 38 .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
* Summer School starring Mark Harmon and Kirstie Alley .
Mr. Shoop ( Harmon ) takes his band of under - achieving students on a field trip to Knott 's Berry Farm ( among other places ) instead of teaching them .
* BrainRush ( first aired June 20 , 2009 ) , a Cartoon Network TV quiz show was filmed as contestants compete while riding aboard Knott 's Berry Farm roller coasters .
*
Future entertainers : Christian author Stormie Omartian , comedian Steve Martin , the creator of Las Vegas
" Legends In Concert " and the worldwide impersonation empire ; John Stuart , and Kathy Westmoreland ( back - up singer for Elvis Presley ) all worked at the Birdcage Theater .
ATTENDANCE Section::::Attendance .
! 2008
2009 2010 2011 2012
2013 2014 2015 2016
Worldwide rank SEE
ALSO
* Disneyland * Six Flags * Walt Disney World NOTES REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website