MURDER , SHE WROTE
Murder , She Wrote is an American crime drama television series starring Angela Lansbury as mystery writer and amateur detective Jessica Fletcher .
The series aired for 12 seasons with 264 episodes from 1984 to 1996 on the CBS network .
It was followed by four TV films .
Among the most successful and longest - running television shows in history , it averaged more than 30 million viewers per week in its prime ( sometimes hitting above 40 million viewers ) , and was a staple of the CBS Sunday night lineup for a decade .
In syndication , the series is still highly successful throughout the world .
Lansbury was nominated for ten Golden Globes and 12 Emmy Awards for her work on Murder , She Wrote .
She holds the record for the most Golden Globe nominations and wins for Best Actress in a television drama series and the most Emmy nominations for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series for Murder , She Wrote , with those nominations netting her four Golden Globe awards .
The series received three nominations in the Outstanding Drama Series category at the Emmys .
It was nominated for a Golden Globe in the same category six times and won twice .
After the series finished in 1996 , four TV movies were released between 1997 and 2003 .
In 2009 , a point - and - click video game was released for the PC platform , followed in 2012 by a sequel .
A spin - off book series continues publication at present .
HISTORY
ORIGIN Section::::History .
Section::::Origin .
Series producers Peter S. Fischer , Richard Levinson and William Link thought Lansbury would be perfect for the part of Jessica Fletcher but did not think that she would be interested in a television series .
Earlier , she had acted in two film adaptations of Agatha Christie 's mystery novels : as Salome Otterbourne in Death on the Nile and as the famous sleuth Miss Marple in The Mirror Crack'd ( 1980 ) .
When the latter film did poorly — despite an all star cast including Rock Hudson , Elizabeth Taylor , Kim Novak , and Tony Curtis — the offer for Lansbury to reprise Miss Marple in three more films never materialized .
When she made it known she would be available if the right project came along , the trio of creators sent her the script and almost immediately , Lansbury felt she could do something with the role of Jessica Fletcher .
With Murder , She Wrote debuting on Sunday , September 30 , 1984 , the producers were able to parlay their " mystery writer / amateur detective " premise into a 12-year hit for CBS .
It also made Lansbury , known previously for her motion picture and Broadway stage work , a household name for millions of television viewers .
The title comes from Murder , She Said , which was the title of a 1961 film adaptation of Agatha Christie 's Miss Marple novel .
PREMISE Section::::Premise .
The show revolves around the day - to - day life of Jessica Fletcher , a childless , widowed , retired English teacher who becomes a successful mystery writer .
Despite fame and fortune , Jessica remains a resident of Cabot Cove , a small coastal community in Maine , and maintains her links with all of her old friends , never letting her success go to her head .
Exterior shots of Cabot Cove were filmed in Mendocino , California .
The fictional " Cabot Cove " name for the series ' coastal town was derived from the name of an actual bay harbor inlet in Kennebunkport , Maine , located near the town 's center , on the road where motels and lobster shack dives are located .
The show mostly starts with a preview of the episode 's events , with Jessica stating : "
Tonight on Murder , She Wrote ... " Jessica invariably proves more perceptive than the official investigators of a case , who are almost always willing to arrest the most likely suspect .
By carefully piecing the clues together and asking astute questions , she always manages to trap the real murderer .
Murder occurred with such regularity in her vicinity that the term " Cabot Cove syndrome " was coined to describe the constant appearance of dead bodies in remote locations .
Indeed , if Cabot Cove existed in real life , it would top the FBI 's national crime statistics in numerous categories , with some analysis suggesting that the homicide rate in Cabot Cove exceeds even that of the real - life murder capital of the world .
Jessica 's relationship with law enforcement officials varies from place to place .
Both sheriffs of Cabot Cove resign themselves to having her meddle in their cases .
However , most detectives and police officers do not want her anywhere near their crime scenes , until her accurate deductions convince them to listen to her .
Some are happy to have her assistance from the start , often because they are fans of her books .
With time , she makes friends in many police departments across the U.S. , as well as with a British police officer attached to Scotland Yard .
At the start of season eight , more of the stories were set in New York City with Jessica moving into an apartment there part - time in order to teach criminology .
Some programmes appeared to allegorise contemporaneous events .
For example , the Season 5
( 1988–89 ) Episode ( No . 102 )
" From Russia With Blood " could represent the Soviet Union 's beginnings on introducing Glasnost and Perestroika .
ENDING Section::::Ending .
By August 1988 , when Lansbury expressed weariness of her commitment , the series was expected to end in May 1989 .
Nevertheless , she continued in the role , with a few changes made .
For the next two seasons , Lansbury reduced her appearances in several episodes , only appearing at the beginning and the end , to introduce stories starring several friends of Jessica , like PI Harry McGraw , reformed thief Dennis Stanton or MI5 agent Michael Hagarty .
The " experiment " ended in 1991 .
By the end of the 1994–95 season , Murder , She Wrote 's 11th season , CBS moved the network 's then - longest - running weekly series to Thursday nights at 8 p.m.
This put the series in direct competition with the first hour of NBC 's
Must See TV lineup , which had been drawing the highest ratings of the week for any network for years .
Despite protests of many of the show 's fans ( who believed CBS was intentionally setting the show up to fail in its new timeslot ) , CBS refused to budge on the new timeslot .
Murder , She Wrote plummeted from eighth to 58th in the yearly ratings ; the series lost nearly 6 million viewers as the audience was not willing to follow it to Thursday , which left CBS with little choice but to end Murder
, She Wrote after 12 seasons in August 1996 .
To soften the blow , the network agreed to air the final four episodes in its original Sunday night timeslot , as well as commission four Murder , She Wrote movies over the next few years :
the first was South by Southwest ( 1997 ) , with three more following as A Story to Die For ( 2000 ) ,
The Last Free Man ( 2001 ) , and The Celtic Riddle ( 2003 ) .
Lansbury stated in May 2011 that she would like to make a comeback appearance as Jessica Fletcher .
However , in a 2015 interview , Lansbury quashed the idea of reprising the much beloved character stating , " I think it would be a downer .
In some way , we 'd have to show her as a much older woman , and I think it 's better to maintain that picture we have in our mind 's eye of her as a vigorous person .
I 'm still pretty vigorous , especially in the garden … but if I wanted to transform myself back into the woman I looked like then , it would be ridiculous .
And I ca n't do that .
" She then expressed interest in revisiting the character again in 2017 .
CAST REGULAR CAST
* Angela Lansbury as Jessica Fletcher ( 1984–1996 ; 264 episodes ) , a retired English teacher who , after being widowed in her early 50s , becomes a very successful mystery writer .
* William Windom as Dr. Seth Hazlitt ( 1985–1996 ; 49 episodes ) , the local doctor of Cabot Cove and one of Jessica 's best friends and most intrepid supporters .
There is a hint that Dr. Hazlitt may want to be more than a platonic friend but this possibility was never explored .
In the season one finale , Windom portrayed Sam Breen , a lawyer who jointly murdered the victim in that episode .
* Tom Bosley as Sheriff Amos Tupper ( 1984–1988 ; 19 episodes ) , Cabot Cove 's sheriff at the start of the series .
Tupper later retires and goes to live with his sister .
* Ron Masak as Sheriff Mort Metzger ( 1988–1996 ; 38 episodes ) , a former NYPD officer who takes Tupper 's place as sheriff in the mistaken belief that he would be living in a more peaceful place .
His unseen wife , Adele , a former Marine capable of prodigious acts of strength , teaches self - defense classes .
In an earlier episode , Masak portrayed a different character , a store owner in trouble with the IRS , trying to get out of trouble by selling his business .
He also portrayed a police officer investigating the murder of an author in another season one episode .
* Louis Herthum as Deputy Andy Broom ( 1991–1996 , 25 episodes ) RECURRING
CAST
* Michael Horton as Grady Fletcher ( 1984–1995 ; 12 episodes ) ,
Jessica 's not - so - lucky favorite nephew , who ( through no fault of his own ) always seems to get in trouble with the law .
After many romantic disasters , he gets married later in the series .
In real life , Horton is married to actress Debbie Zipp , who played Grady 's eventual wife Donna Mayberry in several episodes .
( The two were married before working together on Murder , She Wrote . )
* Madlyn Rhue as Jean O'Neil ( 1993–1996 ; 4 episodes ) , the local disabled librarian in Cabot Cove .
* Jerry Orbach as Harry McGraw ( 1985–1991 ; 6 episodes ) , an old - school private investigator who becomes friends with Jessica .
Orbach was popular enough to garner his own , short - lived spin - off series in 1987 , The Law & Harry McGraw .
* Len Cariou as Michael Hagarty ( 1985–1992 ; 7 episodes ) , a British MI5 agent who would appear when Jessica least expected him to drag her into a dangerous case .
Cariou had previously starred with Lansbury on Broadway in Sweeney Todd : The Demon Barber of Fleet Street as the titular character .
* Richard Paul as Sam Booth ( 1986–1991 ; 7 episodes ) , the genial , ineffectual mayor of Cabot Cove whose main campaign promise is that he will do nothing , and that 's exactly why the people of Cabot Cove vote for him .
* Julie Adams as Eve Simpson ( 1987–1993 ; 10 episodes ) , the Cabot Cove realtor with a great love for men , both single and married , and for gossiping .
* Ruth Roman as Loretta Speigel ( 1987–1989 ; 3 episodes ) , Cabot Cove 's lovelorn hairdresser , also an inveterate gossip .
* Keith Michell as Dennis Stanton ( 1988–1993 ; 9 episodes ) , a suave English former jewel thief turned insurance claims investigator , who always solves his cases using unusual methods , and often sends a copy of the story to Jessica afterwards .
Stanton 's assistant , Rhoda , who appeared in most or all of the Stanton - related episodes , was played by Hallie Todd .
Many of the episodes starring Dennis do not involve Jessica , and usually begin with her introducing the story to the audience invoking the fourth wall .
* Wayne Rogers as Charlie Garrett ( 1993–1995 ; 5 episodes ) , a disreputable private investigator who usually gets into trouble and needs Jessica 's help .
* Claude Akins as Ethan Cragg ( 1984 ; 4 episodes ) , Jessica 's fisherman friend .
* Herb Edelman as Artie Gelber ( 1984–1995 , 10 episodes ) , a NYPD Lieutenant and Jessica 's friend .
GUEST STARS
EPISODES
CROSSOVER WITH MAGNUM ,
P.I. Section::::Episodes .
Section::::Crossover with Magnum , P.I ..
The Third Season episode of Murder , She Wrote entitled " Magnum on Ice " concludes a crossover that began on the Seventh Season Magnum , P.I. episode " Novel Connection " .
In the episode 's plot , Jessica comes to Hawaii to investigate an attempt to murder Robin Masters ' guests , and then tries to clear Magnum when he 's accused of killing the hitman .
The Magnum , P.I. episode originally aired on 11/19/86 with the concluding Murder , She Wrote episode following four days later on 11/23/86 .
The Magnum , P.I. episode of the crossover is included on the Murder , She Wrote Season 3 DVD set , as well as the Complete Series Set .
The Magnum , P.I. Season 7 DVD set , as well as its Complete Series set , includes the Murder , She Wrote episode .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
Over its twelve - year run Murder , She Wrote received numerous award nominations .
Lansbury herself holds the record for the most Emmy nominations for outstanding lead actress in a drama series with twelve , one for each season .
She never won , which is also a record .
Mary Dodson , the art director for 102 of the series ' 264 episodes , received three Emmy nominations for her work on Murder , She Wrote . !
Group !
Award !
Years !
Result US TELEVISION RATINGS Section::::US television ratings .
Murder
, She Wrote maintained extremely high ratings finishing in the top 15 of shows for eleven of its 12 seasons ( eight of which it was in the top 10 ) , even well into its late seasons .
By its 11th season , Murder , She Wrote was still averaging 25 million viewers per week .
At its very peak , the show even hit above 40 million US viewers .
However , at the beginning of its 12th season in 1995 , CBS moved the show from its extremely popular Sunday night time slot to Thursday night forcing it to compete with NBC 's
Must See TV line up , and as a result the ratings plummeted .
The show rated as the following : + Television ratings ! scope= " col " colspan="2 " Season !
scope=
" col " Episodes !
scope= " col " Time slot ( ET ) ! scope= " col " Season premiere ! scope=
" col " Season finale ! scope= " col " Rank ! scope= " col " Rating ! scope= " row " 1 ! scope= " row " 2 ! scope= " row " 3 ! scope= " row " 4 ! scope= " row " 5 ! scope= " row " 6 ! scope= " row " 7 ! scope= " row " 8 ! scope= " row " 9 ! scope= " row " 10 ! scope= " row " 11 ! scope= " row " 12 ABANDONED REBOOT Section::::Abandoned reboot .
Deadline Hollywood reported in October 2013 that NBC was planning a reboot of the series , starring Oscar - winning actress Octavia Spencer as a " hospital administrator and amateur sleuth who self - publishes her first mystery novel . "
Lansbury commented that she was not a fan of using the title , saying " I think it 's a mistake to call it '
Murder , She Wrote , ' because ' Murder , She Wrote ' will always be about Cabot Cove and this wonderful little group of people who told those lovely stories and enjoyed a piece of that place , and also enjoyed Jessica Fletcher , who is a rare and very individual kind of person .
" Early on it was decided by producers that Spencer 's character would not be named Jessica Fletcher , for only Lansbury could play Jessica Fletcher .
It was announced on January 21 , 2014 , that the reboot would not be going forward .
INTERNATIONAL SYNDICATION
Section::::International syndication .
Since its original run on CBS , Murder , She Wrote has been syndicated in many countries around the world . !
Country ! !
Channels ! !
Title ! !
Literal translation ! !
Language Vision TV MERCHANDISE Section::::Merchandise .
In 1985 , Warren Company released a Murder , She Wrote board game .
In the game , one player takes the hidden role of a killer and the other players try to determine which player is the killer through deduction .
The killer is successful if he or she can kill five of the characters on the game - board and escape , while the detective players win by correctly deducing the identity of the killer .
In December 2009 , casual game developer and publisher Legacy Interactive , under license with Universal Pictures Digital Platforms Group ( UPDPG ) , announced the release a PC and Macintosh video game based on the television series .
In the game , players help Jessica Fletcher to solve five unusual murders .
A sequel , Murder She Wrote 2 , was launched by Legacy Interactive in November 2012 .
MULTIMEDIA
* List of novels
* Home video releases
* Mystery Theatre
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS