EPICENTER
The epicenter , epicentre or epicentrum in seismology is the point on the Earth 's surface directly above a hypocenter or focus , the point where an earthquake or an underground explosion originates .
SURFACE DAMAGE
Section::::Surface damage .
In most earthquakes , the epicenter is the point where the greatest damage takes place , but the length of the subsurface fault rupture may indeed be a long one , and damage can be spread on the surface across the entire rupture zone .
As an example , in the magnitude 7.9 2002 Denali earthquake in Alaska , the epicenter was at the western end of the rupture , but the greatest damage was about 330 km away at the eastern end .
Focal depths of earthquakes occurring in continental crust mostly range from 2 to 20 km .
Continental earthquakes below 20 km are rare whereas in subduction zones earthquakes can originate at depths deeper than 600 km .
EPICENTRAL DISTANCE
Section::::Epicentral distance .
During an earthquake , seismic waves propagate in all directions from the hypocenter .
Seismic shadowing occurs on the opposite side of the Earth from the earthquake epicenter because the planet 's liquid outer core refracts the longitudinal or compressional ( P - waves ) while it absorbs the transverse or shear waves ( S - waves ) .
Outside the seismic shadow zone , both types of wave can be detected but , because of their different velocities and paths through the Earth , they arrive at different times .
By measuring the time difference on any seismograph and the distance on a travel - time graph on which the P - wave and S - wave have the same separation , geologists can calculate the distance to the quake 's epicenter .
This distance is called the epicentral distance , commonly measured in ° ( degrees ) and denoted as Δ ( delta ) in seismology .
Once distances from the epicenter have been calculated from at least three seismographic measuring stations , the point can be located , using trilateration .
Epicentral distance is also used in calculating seismic magnitudes as developed by Richter and Gutenberg .
FAULT RUPTURE Section::::Fault rupture .
The point at which fault slipping begins is the referred to as the focus of the earthquake .
The fault rupture begins at the focus and then expands along the fault surface .
The rupture stops where the stresses become insufficient to continue breaking the fault ( because the rocks are stronger ) or where the rupture enters ductile material .
The magnitude of an earthquake is related to the total area of its fault rupture .
Most earthquakes are small , with rupture dimensions less than the depth of the focus so the rupture does n't break the surface , but in high magnitude , destructive earthquakes , surface breaks are common .
Fault ruptures in large earthquakes can extend for more than 100 km .
When a fault ruptures unilaterally ( with the epicenter at or near the end of the fault break )
the waves are stronger in one direction along the fault .
DERIVATION AND USAGE Section::::Derivation and usage .
The word is derived from the New Latin noun epicentrum , the latinisation of the ancient Greek adjective ἐπίκεντρος ( epikentros ) , " occupying a cardinal point , situated on a centre " , from ἐπί ( epi ) " on , upon , at " and κέντρον ( kentron )
" centre " .
The term was coined by the Irish seismologist Robert Mallet .
It is also used to mean center .
For example , " Travel is restricted in the Chinese province thought to be the epicentre of the SARS outbreak . "
Garner 's Modern American Usage gives several examples of such use .
Garner also refers to a William Safire article in which Safire quotes a geophysicist as attributing the use of the term to " spurious erudition on the part of writers combined with scientific illiteracy on the part of copy editors " .
Nevertheless , Garner has noted that these usages may describe " focal points of unstable and potentially destructive environments . " REFERENCES