BULL RIDING Bull riding is a rodeo sport that involves a rider getting on a bucking bull and attempting to stay mounted while the animal tries to buck off the rider .
American bull riding has been called " the most dangerous eight seconds in sports .
" To receive a score , the rider must stay atop the bull for eight seconds with the use of one hand on a rope tied behind the bull 's forelegs ; touching the bull or themselves with the free hand , or failing to reach the eight - second mark , results in a no - score ride .
In most bull riding circuits , four judges mark scores for the rider and the bull .
Two judges score the rider based on their ability up to 25 points each for up to a total of 50 points .
The other two judges score the bull on his bucking performance for up to 25 points each for a total of up to 50 points .
Thus , the ride is scored up to 100 points .
Most professional riders score between the mid-70s and high 80s .
Outside of the United States , bull riding traditions with varying rules and histories also exist in Canada , Mexico , Belize , Guatemala , El Salvador , Honduras , Nicaragua , Costa Rica , Panama , Cuba , the Dominican Republic , Colombia , Venezuela , Guyana , Ecuador , Peru , Bolivia , Brazil , Paraguay , Chile , Argentina , Uruguay , Australia and New Zealand with the majority of them following similar rules , especially with the Professional Bull Riders organization .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The taming of bulls has ancient roots in contests dating as far back as Minoan culture .
Bull riding itself has its direct roots in Mexican contests of equestrian and ranching skills now collectively known as charreada .
During the 16th century , a hacienda contest called jaripeo developed .
Originally considered a variant of bull fighting , in which riders literally rode a bull to death , the competition evolved into a form where the bull was simply ridden until it stopped bucking .
By the mid-19th century , charreada competition was popular on Texas and California cattle ranches where Anglo and Hispanic ranch hands often worked together .
Many early Texas rangers , who had to be expert horse riders and later went on to become ranchers , learned and adapted Hispanic techniques and traditions to ranches in the United States .
Many also enjoyed traditional Mexican celebrations , and H. L. Kinney , a rancher , promoter and former Texas Ranger staged what is thought to be the first Anglo - American organized bullfight in the southwest in 1852 .
This event also included a jaripeo competition and was the subject of newspaper reports from as far away as the New Orleans Daily Delta .
However , popular sentiment shifted away from various blood sports and both bullfighting and prize fighting were banned by the Texas legislature in 1891 .
In the same time period , however , Wild West Shows began to add steer riding to their exhibitions , choosing to use castrated animals because steers were easier to handle and transport than bulls .
Additionally , informal rodeos began as competitions between neighboring ranches in the American Old West .
The location of the first formal rodeo is debated .
Deer Trail , Colorado claims the first rodeo was in 1869 , but so does Cheyenne , Wyoming in 1872 .
Although steer riding contests existed into the 1920s , the sport did not gain popularity until bulls were returned to the arena and replaced steers as the mount of choice .
The first - known rodeo to use brahma bulls was in Columbia , Mississippi , produced in 1935 by Canadian brothers Earl and Weldon Bascom with Jake Lybbert and Waldo Ross .
This rodeo was the first to feature a bull riding event at a night rodeo held outdoors under electric lights .
A pivotal moment for modern bull riding , and rodeo in general , came with the founding of the Rodeo Cowboy Association ( RCA ) in 1936 , which later became the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association ( PRCA ) .
Through this organization , many hundreds of rodeos are held each year .
Since that time , the popularity of all aspects of the rodeo has risen .
In addition to the PRCA , which has PRCA ProRodeo with bull riding and the Xtreme Bulls events for bull riding only , there is the Professional Bull Riders ( PBR ) , which stages a large number of events in the United States , Canada , Mexico , Brazil , and Australia .
For many years the annual PBR World Finals were held at the Thomas and Mack Center in Las Vegas , Nevada .
However , starting in 2016 , the Finals are now held at the T - Mobile Arena in Las Vegas .
The PBR 's major league tour , currently titled the Unleash the Beast Series , is broadcast on CBS Sports Network , with the primary broadcast network televising selected bonus rounds ( known as 15/15 bucking battles ) .
The previous tour name , which ran from 2003 until 2017 , was titled the Built Ford Tough Series .
From these roots , bull riding as a competitive sport has spread to a number of other nations worldwide .
RULES AND REGULATIONS Section::::Rules and regulations .
Each bull has a unique name and number used to help identify it .
A sufficient number of bulls , each judged to be of good strength , health , agility , and age , are selected to perform .
The rider and bull are matched randomly before the competition , although starting in 2008 , some ranked riders are allowed to choose their own bulls from a bull draft for selected rounds in PBR events .
A rider mounts a bull and grips a flat braided rope .
After they secure a good grip on the rope , the rider nods to signal they are ready .
The bucking chute ( a small enclosure which opens from the side ) is opened and the bull storms out into the arena .
The rider must attempt to stay on the bull for at least eight seconds , while only touching the bull with their riding hand .
The other hand must remain free for the duration of the ride .
Originally , the rules required a 10-second ride , but that was changed to the current eight seconds .
The bull bucks , rears , kicks , spins , and twists in an effort to throw the rider off .
This continues for a number of seconds until the rider is bucked off of the bull or dismounts after completing the ride .
A loud buzzer or whistle announces the completion of an eight - second ride .
Throughout the ride , bullfighters , also popularly known as rodeo clowns , stay near the bull to aid the rider if necessary .
When the ride ends , either intentionally or not , the bullfighters distract the bull to protect the rider from harm .
Many competitions have a format that involves multiple rounds , sometimes called " go - rounds " .
Generally , events span two to three nights .
The rider is given a chance to ride one bull per night .
The total points scored by the end of the event are recorded , and after the first or first two go - rounds , the top 20 riders are given a chance to ride one more bull .
This final round is called the " short go " .
After the end of the short go , the rider with the most total points wins the event .
POINTS AND SCORING Section::::Points and scoring .
The ride is scored from 0–100 points .
Both the rider and the bull are awarded points .
There are usually two judges , each judge scoring the bull from 0–25 points , and the rider from 0–25 points .
The combined point totals from both judges make up the final score for the ride .
This system was spearheaded by former PRCA president Dale Smith .
Scores of zero are quite common , as many riders lose control of the animal almost immediately after the bull leaves the bucking chute .
Many experienced professionals are able to earn scores of 75 or more .
Scores above 80 are considered excellent , and a score in the 90s exceptional .
Judges award points based on several key aspects of the ride .
Judges look for constant control and rhythm in the rider in matching their movements with the bull .
Points are usually deducted if a rider is constantly off balance .
For points actually to be awarded , the rider must stay mounted for a minimum of 8 seconds , and they are scored only for actions during those 8 seconds .
The ability to control the bull
well allows riders to gain extra style points .
These are often gained by spurring the animal .
A rider is disqualified for touching the bull , the rope , or themself with their free arm .
Bulls have more raw power and a different style of movement from bucking horses .
One move particular to bulls is a belly roll ( " sunfishing " ) , in which the bull is completely off the ground and kicks either his hind feet or all four feet to the side in a twisting , rolling motion .
Bulls also are more likely than horses to spin in tight , quick circles , and are less likely to run or to jump extremely high ( " break in two " ) .
For the bull , judges look at the animal 's overall agility , power and speed ; his back legs kick , and his front end drops .
In general , if a bull gives a rider a very hard time , more points will be awarded .
If a rider fails to stay mounted for at least 8 seconds , the bull is still awarded a score .
The PBR and PRCA record bulls ' past scores so that the best bulls can be brought to the finals , ensuring that riders will be given a chance to score highly .
Both organizations also award one bull
the " Bucking Bull of the Year " award , decided by scores and the number of riders it has bucked off .
The award brings prestige to the ranch at which the bull was raised .
If a rider scores sufficiently low due to poor bull performance , the judges may offer the rider the option of a re - ride .
By taking the option , the rider gives up the score received , waits until all other riders have ridden , and rides again .
This can be risky because the rider loses their score and risks being bucked off and receiving no score .
A re - ride may also be given if a bull stumbles or runs into the fence or gate .
EQUIPMENT RIDER EQUIPMENT Section::::Equipment .
Section::::Rider equipment .
Bull riders use many pieces of equipment both functionally and to ensure maximum safety , both to themselves and to the animals involved .
The primary piece of equipment used is the bull rope .
The bull rope is a braided rope made of polypropylene , grass , or some combination .
A handle is braided into the center of the rope and is usually stiffened with leather .
One side of the rope is tied in an adjustable knot that can be changed for the size of bull .
The other side of the rope ( the tail ) is a flat braid and is usually coated with rosin to keep it from sliding through the rider 's hand .
A metallic bell is strapped to the knot and hangs directly under the bull throughout the ride .
In addition to the sound the bell produces , it also gives the rope some weight , allowing it to fall off the bull once a rider has dismounted .
Chaps are probably the most noticeable piece of bull rider clothing , as their distinctive coloring and patterns add flair to the sport .
Usually made of leather , chaps also provide protection for the rider 's legs and thighs .
Bull riders are required to wear a protective vest , most usually wear one made of high impact foam that allows the shock to disperse over a wide area , thereby reducing pain and injury .
To prevent a rope burn , riders must wear a protective glove , usually of leather .
This glove must be fastened to the rider 's hand since the force the animal is able to exert could tear the glove away .
The rider often applies rosin to the glove , which allows for additional grip .
Cowboy boots are also worn .
The dull and loosely locked spurs help keep the rider balanced and is crucial piece of equipment to the sport as a whole .
The bulls are unharmed by the rowels , as their hide is roughly seven times thicker than a human being 's skin .
Truly skilled riders will often spur the bull in the hope of achieving extra style points from the judges .
Cowboy hats remain the primary headwear used .
While the professional organizations permit protective helmets and masks , some riders continue to believe that this equipment can detrimentally affect balance , and many professionals still avoid wearing them .
However , the trend is changing , as more champion riders begin to wear helmets for added safety .
Public health researchers found evidence suggesting that bull riding helmets are protective , when riders wearing one particular type of helmet suffered approximately 50 % fewer head and facial injuries .
In 2004 , at the 1st International Rodeo Research and Clinical Care Conference in Calgary , Alberta , Canada , a group of top rodeo medicine researchers and clinical care providers came to a consensus on the use of helmets declaring that all youth rodeo participants should wear helmets , and that helmets should be recommended for adult bull riders .
For competitors under the age of 18 , protective headgear incorporating a helmet and ice hockey style face mask are worn .
While optional at the upper levels of the sport , it has become mandatory at younger levels , and riders who use helmets and face masks as youths tend to continue to wearing them as they reach adulthood and turn professional .
BULL EQUIPMENT Section::::Bull equipment .
The flank strap is a rope made of a soft cotton rope at least 5/8 " in diameter is acceptable as a flank strap and does not require extra padding with sheepskin or neoprene .
It is tied around the bull 's flank .
Contrary to popular belief , the flank strap is not tied around the bull 's testicles .
This rope is to encourage the bull to use his hind legs more in a bucking motion , as this is a true test of a rider 's skill in maintaining the ride .
If it is applied improperly a rider may request to ride again , as the bull will not buck well if the flank strap is too tight .
The flank strap is applied by the stock contractor or his designate .
THE ARENA Section::::The arena .
The arenas used in professional bull riding vary .
Some are rodeo arenas that are used only for bull riding and other rodeo events .
Others are event centers that play host to many different sports .
Common to all arenas is a large , open area that gives the bulls , bull riders , and bull fighters plenty of room to maneuver .
The area is fenced , usually 6 to 7 feet high , to protect the audience from escaped bulls .
There are generally exits on each corner of the arena for riders to get out of the way quickly .
Riders can also hop onto the fence to avoid danger .
One end of the arena contains the bucking chutes from which the bulls are released .
There is also an exit chute where the bulls can exit the arena .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
In the United States and Canada , most professional bull riders start out riding in high school rodeo or other junior associations .
From there , riders may go on the college rodeo circuit or to one of several national or regional semi - pro associations including the Southern Extreme Bull Riding Association ( SEBRA ) , the Southern States Bull Riders Association ( SSBR ) , the International Bull Riders Association ( IBR ) , the Professional Championship Bull Riders Tour ( PCB ) , Bull Riders Canada ( BRC ) , the American Bull Riders Tour ( ABT ) , the International Professional Rodeo Association ( IPRA ) , the Cowboys Professional Rodeo Association ( CPRA ) , the United Professional Rodeo Association ( UPRA ) , the Southern Rodeo Association ( SRA ) , the Professional Western Rodeo Association ( PWRA ) , the Canadian Cowboys Association ( CCA ) , among others .
Bull riders compete in these organizations as they are climbing the ladder to the professional ranks and to supplement their income .
In Mexico , there are several American - style bull riding organizations .
The main ones include PBR Mexico , Cuernos Chuecos ( Crooked Horns ) , Jinete Supremo ( Supreme Bull Rider ) , Danger Bull Riding Company and Bull Masters Championship .
La Federacion Mexicana de Rodeo ( Mexican Rodeo Federation ) is Mexico 's top organization that includes all of American Rodeo 's standard events , including bull riding .
There are also a number of regional associations .
The top bull riders in the world compete on the Professional Bull Riders ( PBR ) and Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association ( PRCA ) circuits .
Bull riders can win in excess of $ 100,000 a year while competing in either of these organizations , and it is not uncommon for riders to compete in both of them .
Other bull riding organizations that top bull riders competed in are Bull Riders Only ( BRO ) which lasted from 1991 to 1998 , and Championship Bull Riding ( CBR ) which put on events from 2002 to 2018 .
AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND Section::::Australia and New Zealand .
There are approximately 200 rodeos and bushmen 's carnivals held annually across Australia .
At most of these events bull riding is one of the featured competitions .
Initially bullocks and steers were used for roughriding events and these were owned by local graziers that lent them for these events .
Nowadays bulls are used for the open events and stock contractors supply the various roughriding associations .
Contract stock has produced a more uniform range of bucking stock which is also quieter to handle .
The competitions are run and scored in a similar style to that used in the United States .
In May 1992 the National Rodeo Council of Australia ( NRCA ) was formed to promote and further the sport of rodeo and has represented the following associations , which also control bull riding : * Australian Bushmen 's Campdraft & Rodeo Association ( ABCRA )
* Australian Professional Bull Riders Association ( APBA )
* Central Rodeo Cowboys Association ( CRCA ) * Indigenous Rodeo Riders Australia ( IRRA )
* National Student Rodeo Association ( NSRA )
* National Rodeo Association ( NRA ) * Northern Cowboys Association ( NCA ) * Queensland Rodeo Association ( QRA ) * Rodeo Services Association ( RSA ) * West Coast Rodeo Circuit ( WCRC )
There are strict standards for the selection , care and treatment of rodeo livestock , arenas , plus equipment requirements and specifications .
Chainsaw was one of Australia 's most famous bucking bulls .
Only nine contestants scored on him and he won the Australian national title of Bull of the Year a world record eight times during 1987 to 1994 .
Some of Australia 's best bull riders travel and compete internationally in Canada , New Zealand and the United States .
Some of Australia 's leading bull riders conduct bull riding clinics to assist learners and novice riders .
A World Challenge of Professional Bull Riders ( PBR ) was held on 29 May 2010 at the Brisbane Entertainment Centre ( BEC ) .
The 2010 PBR Finals were held over two nights at the Australian Equine and Livestock Events Centre ( AELEC ) , with five top - ranked professional bull riders from the United States and 25 of Australia 's best bull riders contesting the event .
Rodeo is also popular in country regions of New Zealand where approximately 32 rodeos , which include bull riding contests , are held each summer .
ANIMAL WELFARE
Section::::Animal welfare .
There is debate between animal rights / welfare organizations and bull riding enthusiasts over many aspects of the sport .
One source of controversy is the flank strap .
The flank strap is placed around a bull 's flank , just in front of the hind legs , to encourage bucking .
Critics say that the flank strap encircles or otherwise binds the genitals of the bull .
However , the flank strap is anatomically impossible to place over the testicles .
Many point out that the bull 's genes are valuable and that there is a strong economic incentive to keep the animal in good reproductive health .
Further , particularly in the case of bulls , an animal that is sick and in pain usually will not want to move at all , will not buck as well , and may even lie down in the chute or ring rather than buck .
Critics also claim that electric cattle prods ( " hot shots " ) are used to injure and torture bulls , while supporters of bull riding claim that the cattle prod simply gets the bull out of the chute quickly and is only a moderate irritation due to the thickness of the animal 's hide .
Cattle prods have not been used in the Professional Bull Riders ( PBR ) tour for several years .
However , in smaller associations , a cattle prod is still sometimes used to ensure that the animal leaves the chute as soon as the rider nods their head .
Cattle prods are not allowed by any major association .
Spurs are also a source of controversy , though modern rodeo rules place strict regulations on the type and use of spurs and participants point out that they are a tool commonly used in other non - rodeo equestrian disciplines .
Spurs used in bull riding do not have a fixed rowel , nor can they be sharpened .
The PBR currently allows only two types of rowels to ensure the safety of the animals .
Bull riding has the highest rate of injury to humans of any rodeo sport .
It accounts for approximately 50 % of all traumatic injuries to rodeo contestants , and the bullfighters have the highest injury rate of any non - contestant group .
SEE ALSO
*
Steer riding
* Miniature
bull riding
* Bucking bull
* Mutton busting * Mechanical bull * Jaripeo * Jineteada gaucha
* Bronc riding REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association * International Professional Rodeo Association
* Professional Bull Riders
* Professional Bull Riders :
Canada * Professional Bull Riders : Mexico * Professional Bull Riders : Brazil * Professional Bull Riders : Australia * Cuernos Chuecos * Bull Riders Canada
* Tuff Hedeman Bull Riding Tour