DEADPOOL
Deadpool ( Wade Winston Wilson ) is a fictional character appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics .
Created by writer Fabian Nicieza and artist / writer Rob Liefeld , the character first appeared in The New Mutants # 98 ( cover - dated February 1991 ) .
Initially Deadpool was depicted as a supervillain when he made his first appearance in The New Mutants and later in issues of X - Force , but later evolved into his more recognizable antiheroic persona .
Deadpool , whose real name is Wade Wilson , is a disfigured mercenary with the superhuman ability of an accelerated healing factor and physical prowess .
The character is known as the " Merc with a Mouth " because of his tendency to talk and joke constantly , including breaking the fourth wall for humorous effect and running gags .
The character 's popularity has seen him featured in numerous forms of other media .
In the 2004 series Cable & Deadpool , he refers to his own scarred appearance as " Ryan Reynolds crossed with a Shar - Pei " .
Reynolds himself would eventually portray the character in the X - Men film series , appearing in ( 2009 ) , Deadpool ( 2016 ) , and its sequel Deadpool 2 ( 2018 ) .
PUBLICATION HISTORY 1990S Section::::Publication history .
Section::::1990s .
Created by artist / writer Rob Liefeld and writer Fabian Nicieza , Deadpool made his first appearance in the pages of The New Mutants # 98 cover dated February 1991 .
According to Nicieza , Liefeld came up with the character 's visual design and name , and Nicieza himself came up with the character 's speech mannerisms .
Liefeld , a fan of the Teen Titans comics , showed his new character to then - writer Fabian Nicieza .
Upon seeing the costume and noting his characteristics ( killer with super agility ) , Nicieza contacted Liefeld , saying " this is Deathstroke from Teen Titans " .
Nicieza gave Deadpool the real name of " Wade Wilson " as an inside - joke to being " related " to " Slade Wilson " , Deathstroke .
Other inspirations were Spider - Man and Wolverine .
Liefeld states : " Wolverine and Spider - Man were the two properties I was competing with at all times .
I did n't have those , I did n't have access to those .
I had to make my own Spider - Man and Wolverine .
That 's what Cable and Deadpool were meant to be , my own Spider - Man and my own Wolverine .
"
Both Deadpool and Cable were also meant to be tied into Wolverine 's history already from the start , as Liefeld describes : " Wolverine was my guy .
If I could tie anything into Wolverine , I was winning .
" Liefeld 's favorite comic title before X - Men was Avengers , which featured weapons like Captain America 's shield , Thor 's hammer and Hawkeye 's bow and arrow , he decided to give weapons to his new characters as well .
In his first appearance , Deadpool is hired by Tolliver to attack Cable and the New Mutants .
After subsequently appearing in X - Force as a recurring character , Deadpool began making guest appearances in a number of different Marvel Comics titles such as The Avengers , Daredevil , and Heroes for Hire .
In 1993 , the character received his own miniseries , titled The Circle Chase , written by Fabian Nicieza and pencilled by Joe Madureira .
It was a relative success and Deadpool starred in a second , self - titled miniseries written in 1994 by Mark Waid , pencilled by Ian Churchill , and inked by Jason Temujin Minor and Bud LaRosa .
Waid later commented , " Frankly , if I 'd known Deadpool was such a creep when I agreed to write the mini - series , I would n't have done it .
Someone who has n't paid for their crimes presents a problem for me . "
In 1997 , Deadpool was given his own ongoing title , initially written by Joe Kelly , with then - newcomer Ed McGuinness as an artist .
Deadpool became an action comedy parody of the cosmic drama , antihero - heavy comics of the time .
The series firmly established his supporting cast , including his prisoner / den mother Blind Al and his best friend Weasel .
The ongoing series gained cult popularity for its unorthodox main character and its balance of angst and pop culture slapstick and the character became less of a villain , though the element of his moral ambiguity remained .
The writer Joe Kelly noted , " With Deadpool , we could do anything we wanted because everybody just expected the book to be cancelled every five seconds , so nobody was paying attention .
And we could get away with it . "
Reportedly Kelly introduced the fourth wall breaking gimmick .
The series was taken over by Christopher Priest who noted that he found Kelly 's issues to be " complex and a little hostile to new readers like me " and that by issue 37 , he realized that " it was okay to make Deadpool look stupid .
" Kelly may have introduced Deadpool to breaking the fourth wall , but Priest " could be credited for establishing it as an essential part of the character 's personality and worldview . "
Priest left the series after only one year at issue # 45 . 2000S Section::::2000s .
For a time , writers who followed generally ignored the fourth wall entirely , until Gail Simone took over with issue # 65 .
Her version is remembered for the frequent use of the " little yellow boxes .
" Deadpool lasted until issue # 69 , at which point it was relaunched as a new title with a similar character called Agent X in 2002 .
This occurred during a line - wide revamp of X - Men related comics , with Cable becoming Soldier X and X - Force becoming X - Statix .
Simone notes that " When I took the Deadpool job , the revamp had n't been planned , so it was a complete surprise .
Thankfully , we heard about it in time to make adjustments to the early scripts .
" It appeared that Deadpool was killed in an explosion fighting the supervillain Black Swan .
Deadpool 's manager , Sandi Brandenberg later founded Agency X with a mysterious man called Alex Hayden , who took the name dubbed Agent X. Deadpool later returned to the series .
Simone left the title after seven issues due to creative differences with the series editor , but then returned to conclude with issues 13–15 .
Deadpool 's next starring appearance came in 2004 with the launch of Cable & Deadpool written by Fabian Nicieza , where Deadpool became partnered with his former enemy , Cable , teaming up in various adventures .
This title was canceled with issue # 50 and replaced by a new Cable series in March 2008 .
Deadpool then appeared briefly in the title by writer Daniel Way before Way and Paco Medina launched another Deadpool title in September 2008 .
Medina was the main series artist , with Carlo Barberi filling in on the first issue after the " Secret Invasion " tie - in .
A new Deadpool ongoing series written by Daniel Way with artist Paco Medina began as a Secret Invasion tie - in .
In the first arc , the character is seen working with Nick Fury to steal data on how to kill the Skrull queen Veranke .
Norman Osborn steals the information that Deadpool had stolen from the Skrulls , and subsequent stories deal with the fallout from that .
Writer Daniel Way explained , " the first thing Osborn does to try and take care of the situation is to bring in a hired gun to take Deadpool down , which would be Tiger - Shark .
That would be the standard thing to do , but of course everything about Deadpool is non - standard .
So it goes completely awry and Norman has to get more serious about things .
"
The story also sees the return of Bob , Agent of HYDRA ; " I do n't want the book to become ' Deadpool and Friends ' so characters will drift in and out , but Bob was someone I definitely wanted to bring in .
It just had to be at the perfect moment
and when I was putting this storyline together that moment presented itself .
" This all led directly to a confrontation with the new Thunderbolts in " Magnum Opus " which crossed over between Deadpool vol . 2 # 8–9 and Thunderbolts # 130–131 .
Thunderbolts writer Andy Diggle said , " it 's a natural progression for Deadpool to go after Norman , and for Norman to send his personal hit - squad after Deadpool . "
In Deadpool # 15 , Deadpool decides to become a hero resulting in conflicts with proper heroes like Spider - Man ( who he had recently encountered in The Amazing Spider - Man # 611 as part of " The Gauntlet " ) and leading to a 3-issue arc where he takes on Hit - Monkey , a character who debuted in the same month in a digital , then print , one - shot .
Another ongoing Deadpool series ,
Deadpool : Merc with a Mouth launched in July 2009 , written by Victor Gischler , with art by Bong Dazo .
In it Deadpool teams with Headpool from Marvel Zombies 3 and 4 .
A special anniversary issue titled Deadpool # 900 was released in October 2009 .
It features stories written by several authors , with the main feature written by the original Deadpool series writer Joe Kelly and drawn by Deadpool 's creator Rob Liefeld .
A third Deadpool ongoing series , Deadpool Team - Up , launched in November 2009 ( with issue numbers counting in reverse starting with issue # 899 ) , written by Fred Van Lente , with art by Dalibor Talajic .
This series features Deadpool teaming up with different heroes from the Marvel Universe in each issue , such as Hercules .
Deadpool also joined the cast of the new Uncanny X - Force team .
2010S Section::::2010s .
Another Deadpool series by Gischler titled Deadpool Corps was released in April 2010 .
Besides Deadpool himself , this series featured alternate versions of Deadpool , including Lady Deadpool ( who debuted in Deadpool : Merc with a Mouth # 7 ) , Headpool ( the Marvel Zombies universe incarnation , now reduced to a severed head ) , and two new characters ; Kidpool , a child , and Dogpool , a dog .
The series lasted twelve issues .
Marvel also published Deadpool titles through the Marvel Knights and MAX imprints :
Deadpool :
Wade Wilson 's War , by Duane Swierczynski and Jason Pearson , and Deadpool MAX by David Lapham and Kyle Baker .
Deadpool ( vol . 2 ) was written by Daniel Way and drawn by Alé Garza .
In the story arc " DEAD " , Wade is " cured " of his healing ability and becomes mortal .
As a side effect , he also has his old , unscarred face once again .
Although he spent the majority of the story arc looking forward to dying , he suppresses his desires in order to protect his friend and sidekick Hydra Bob .
After he loses his healing factor , Wilson claims he felt " more alive than ever . "
However , after a harsh beating from Intelligencia , Wade realized that he had let his ability to heal compensate for skill
so he decided to ask for help from Taskmaster in training .
Taskmaster asked Wilson to help him steal Pym Particles from S.H.I.E.L.D. , but actually , he allowed Black Box to study Wade in order to prepare his vengeance against Wilson , even letting him know
Deadpool lost his healing factor .
Wade managed to defeat Black Box , Black Tom and Black Swan , but in the process , his face was burned and disfigured again .
Former FBI agent Allison Kemp wanted to get revenge on Deadpool because of his involvement in an accident which left her in a wheelchair , and she called other enemies of Deadpool such as T - Ray and Slayback and trained them to kill Deadpool .
Deadpool infiltrated their base and managed to get T - Ray and Slayback killed when Kemp was about to kill herself in an explosion which would kill Wade in the process , he convinced her not to attack him .
In that moment , he was surprised by the returned Evil Deadpool , who informed Wade that the serum they took was not permanent , reasons why Wade 's face did n't heal or a finger he lost grew back , so Wade would return after Evil Deadpool shot him .
Daniel Way 's Deadpool series concluded with issue 63 .
As part of Marvel 's Marvel NOW !
initiative
a new Deadpool ongoing series was launched , written by Brian Posehn and Gerry Duggan and illustrated by Tony Moore .
He is also a member of the Thunderbolts .
In the 27th issue of his new series , as part of " All - New Marvel NOW ! " , Deadpool was married for the third time .
Initially a secret , his bride was revealed in the webcomic Deadpool :
The Gauntlet to be Shiklah , Queen of the Undead .
Deadpool also discovers that he has a daughter by the name of Eleanor from a former flame of Deadpool named Carmelita .
During the events of " Original Sin " , it was revealed that Deadpool was tricked into killing his parents by a scientist known as Butler ( who abducted Eleanor and gave her to his brother ) , however Deadpool does not know about it .
Much later , he clashed with Carnage , believing the universe was telling to defeat him .
After several fights and getting torn to pieces , Deadpool bonds with four symbiotes : Riot , Phage , Lasher and Agony .
Playing mind games , Deadpool tricked Shriek by using his shapeshifting abilities to make her disorient and having her flee .
After the symbiotic Deadpool and Carnage fought again , Deadpool captures Shriek and forces her to impersonate himself , making it trick Carnage into almost killing her in the process .
Feeling broken after a mental breakdown , Carnage allowed himself to be arrested and was placed in an unlocked cell .
While sitting in the cell until he was his own self , Carnage swore vengeance on Deadpool .
Deadpool , after defeating Carnage , gives the four symbiotes to a war dog who helped Deadpool fight Carnage to deliver to them to the government .
During the " AXIS " storyline , Deadpool appears as a member of Magneto 's unnamed supervillain group during the fight against Red Skull 's Red Onslaught form .
The group of villains becomes inverted to heroes , after a spell cast by Scarlet Witch and Doctor Doom .
This group was later named the Astonishing Avengers .
This Deadpool , referred to as " Zenpool " was pivotal in turning Apocalypse to fighting the Inverted Avengers .
Deadpool 's death occurs in Deadpool # 250 , involving story ideas that cowriters Gerry Duggan and Brian Posehn
have had in mind since the beginning of the NOW series .
Issue # 250 was technically issue # 45 , but was so named as it was the cumulative 250th issue of the character 's solo series .
Deadpool faces off in a final showdown with ULTIMATUM and Flag - Smasher , killing all of them , and gives up the " Deadpool " identity , wishing to have a better life .
He , along with his family and friends , ( and presumably everyone on Earth ) are all killed when the Earth collides with an alternate universe 's Earth .
Deadpool laments that the Secret Wars should have stayed an Avengers event , but then dies at peace , content that everybody else is dying with him .
ALL NEW , ALL DIFFERENT MARVEL Section::::All New , All Different Marvel .
Eight months after the events of Secret Wars and the restoration of Earth , Deadpool is seen working for Steve Rogers .
After stealing some potentially life - saving chemicals needed by an ailing Rogue , he is offered membership in the Avengers Unity Squad .
In the course of the following months , Deadpool 's popularity skyrocketed after the mercenary Solo impersonated him to piggyback on Deadpool 's reputation and take jobs at a higher pay rate .
One of Solo 's jobs in Washington , D.C. had Deadpool 's public opinion drastically change for the better when he saved an ambassador from his telepathically - manipulated agents .
After learning of Solo 's impersonation , Deadpool came up with the idea to form a group of mercenaries called the Mercs for Money to extend his reach across the globe .
However , Deadpool 's newfound popularity forced him to leave his family behind , fearing his enemies could endanger them .
Deadpool additionally joined the Avengers Unity Division and used his popularity as a means of funding the team , with the profit from merchandise .
Madcap additionally returned to Deadpool 's life , though Wade was unaware his experience inside his mind left Madcap emotionally damaged and vengeful .
Madcap initially posed as an ally , joining the Mercs for Money , but eventually showed his true intentions after he was discovered impersonating Deadpool to defame and threaten his loved onces .
Seeing as he had had enough fun , Madcap used an alien weapon to molecularly disintegrate himself .
For his second coming , the villain had Deadpool unwittingly become the carrier of a deadly airborne virus with which he infected his family .
Wade found a cure , though had to resort to Cable 's evil clone Stryfe to find it .
Around this time , tensions between Shiklah 's domain and the surface word sparked an invasion of Manhattan from Monster Metropolis , which in turn led to Shiklah divorcing Deadpool , opting to return to Dracula instead .
Not long after Wade joined the Avengers Unity Division , the real Steve Rogers was secretly supplanted by an evil fascist counterpart from another timeline that operated as a Hydra sleeper agent within the superhero community .
When Phil Coulson became suspicious of Steve , Rogers convinced Deadpool to kill him , claiming that Coulson had gone rogue .
A short time afterwards , Captain America 's machinations resulted in Hydra rising to power , taking over the United States of America .
When Hydra 's conquest had barely begun , Preston found out about Coulson 's death , and confronted Deadpool about it .
The fight ended in Preston 's death .
As Hydra 's empire grew stronger , Wade joined its own version of the Avengers out of blind loyalty for Captain America .
Plagued by guilt , Wade held back when tasked with hunting down the rebel alliance known as the Underground , and eventually helped , behind the scenes , to lay part of the foundation of Hydra 's eventual defeat .
With his mistakes costing the lives of two of his friends , the love of his daughter , and any respect the world had for him , Deadpool turned his back on what little remained of the life he had built .
MARVEL LEGACY AND FRESH
START Section::::Marvel Legacy and Fresh Start .
As many heroes and villains alike are now hunting for Deadpool 's head , Deadpool must accomplish his atonement he can still recover , such as humiliating Hydra Supreme Rogers in his prison , and asking the now returned real Captain America to revive Preston .
Once his atonements were done , Deadpool began to erase every good memory that he unintentionally made worse , restarted his new life and had his criminal records aligned with Hydra made clear .
Although Deadpool erased his memories , the real Captain America managed to recover the photo of him , Deadpool and Wolverine from Deadpool 's pocket , the only good piece left which Deadpool will be able to remember .
FICTIONAL
CHARACTER
BIOGRAPHY
Section::::Fictional character biography .
The character 's back - story has been presented as vague and subject to change , and within the narrative he is unable to remember his personal history due to a mental condition .
Whether or not his name was even Wade Wilson is subject to speculation since one of his nemeses , T - Ray , claims in Deadpool # 33 that he is the real Wade Wilson and that Deadpool is a vicious murderer who stole his identity .
There have been other dubious stories about his history — at one point the supervillain Loki claimed to be his father .
Frequently , revelations are later retconned or ignored altogether , and in one issue , Deadpool himself joked that whether or not he is actually Wade Wilson depends on which writer the reader prefers .
He has professed to be Canadian .
The original story had him joining the Weapon X program after being kicked out of the U.S. Army Special Forces and given an artificial healing factor based on Wolverine 's thanks to Dr. Emrys Killebrew , one of the head scientists .
CHARACTERIZATION PERSONALITY Section::::Characterization .
Section::::Personality .
Deadpool is aware that he is a fictional comic book character .
He commonly breaks the fourth wall , which is done by few other characters in the Marvel Universe , and this is used to humorous effect .
He often has conversations with his two internal monologues , which are shown as caption boxes in his panels ; in Deadpool Annual # 1 ( 2014 )
it is revealed that Madcap , a foe of Captain America , is the psychotic voice appearing in white captions with a typewriter serif ; the other voice is unidentified and often mistakenly attributed to Dr. Bong , Deadpool 's former psychiatrist .
Deadpool is depicted as having a regenerative healing factor , which not only prevents him from being permanently injured through enhanced cell regeneration throughout his body , but also causes psychosis and mental instability , as his neurons are also affected by the accelerated regeneration .
It is thought that while his psychosis is a handicap , it is also one of his assets as they make him an extremely unpredictable opponent .
Taskmaster , who has photo - reflexive memory which allows him to copy anyone 's fighting skills by observation , was unable to defeat Deadpool due to his chaotic and improvised fighting style .
Taskmaster has also stated that Deadpool is an expert at distracting his opponents .
The character , known for his talkative nature , has been nicknamed the " Merc with a Mouth " .
Deadpool has sometimes been portrayed to have a strong sense of core morality .
In Uncanny X - Force , he storms out after Wolverine tries to rationalize Fantomex killing Apocalypse , who was at the time in a child form .
After Wolverine argues that Deadpool is motivated solely by money , Archangel reveals that Deadpool never cashed any of his checks .
SEXUAL ORIENTATION
Section::::Sexual orientation .
In December 2013 , Deadpool was confirmed as being pansexual by Deadpool writer Gerry Duggan via Twitter .
When asked about Deadpool 's sexuality , co - creator Fabian Nicieza stated , " Deadpool is whatever sexual inclination his brain tells him he is in THAT moment .
And then the moment passes .
" Nicieza has also stated , Not trying to be dismissive , but readers always want to ' make a character their own ' and often that is to the exclusion of what the character might mean to other fans .
I 've been dogged with the DP sexuality questions for YEARS .
It is a bit tiring .
He is NO sex and ALL sexes .
He is yours and everyone else 's .
So not dismissive , but rather the epitome of inclusive .
POWERS AND ABILITIES Section::::Powers and abilities .
Deadpool 's primary power is an accelerated healing factor , depicted by various writers at differing levels of efficiency .
The speed of his healing factor depends on the severity of the wound and Deadpool 's mental state .
It works most efficiently when he is awake , alert , and in good spirits .
Deadpool 's accelerated healing factor is strong enough that he has survived complete incineration and decapitation more than once .
Although his head normally has to be reunited with his body to heal a decapitation wound , he was able to regrow his head after having it pulverized by the Hulk in the graphic novel Deadpool Kills the Marvel Universe .
Deadpool 's brain cells are similarly affected , with dying neurons being rejuvenated at a super accelerated rate .
This allows Deadpool to recover from any head wounds , and it renders him nearly invulnerable to psychic and telepathic powers , although this ability is inconsistent .
It has been revealed that at the time his healing ability was given to him , Deadpool suffered from some form of cancer ; after the healing factor was given to him , it made his normal cells as well as his cancerous cells unable to die , giving him a heavily scarred appearance beneath his suit .
Deadpool 's body is highly resistant to most drugs and toxins , due to his accelerated healing factor .
For example , it is extremely difficult for him to become intoxicated .
He can be affected by certain drugs , such as tranquilizers if he is exposed to a large enough dosage .
Unlike Wolverine , whose wounds sometimes cause excruciating pain as they heal depending on the severity , Deadpool has some degree of pain insensitivity .
Deadpool is effectively immortal , although he has died several times .
He is still alive 800 years in the future when the new X - Force encounters him .
In addition , Thanos once declared that Deadpool should " consider yourself cursed ... with life ! "
out of jealousy over Deadpool 's status as Death 's love interest .
His enemy T - Ray later resurrected him , under Thanos ' instruction , using an artifact he had given him .
Later , Deadpool was informed that Thanos had placed a curse on him , and tracked Thanos down .
He revealed that the only thing keeping Wade alive was his " spell of darkest necromancy " .
Although Thanos removed this curse in order to kill Deadpool , he felt forced to immediately bring him back using " a fusion of necromancy and science " in order to request his aid in tracking down Mistress Death , who had gone missing .
Deadpool is a highly trained assassin and mercenary , adept in multiple forms of martial arts , an extraordinary athlete , and an expert swordsman and marksman .
His accelerated healing factor may contribute to his abilities , allowing him to perform intense exercise for extended periods of time with minimal aches and fatigue .
Although in earlier years he was originally portrayed as having superhuman strength , he is no longer depicted as having this ability .
Over the years , Deadpool has owned a number of personal teleportation devices .
Also , during Deadpool 's first ongoing comic , he possesses a device which projected holographic disguises , allowing him to go undercover or conceal his appearance .
Deadpool is multilingual , with the ability to speak fluently in German , Spanish , ASL , and Japanese , in addition to his native English .
Since Deadpool is aware that he is a fictional character , he uses this knowledge to his advantage to deal with opponents or gain knowledge to which he should not normally have access , such as reading past issues of his and others ' comics .
For example , Deadpool knows he has a Wikipedia article and hopes his fans keep his page updated .
OTHER VERSIONS
Section::::Other versions .
As a fictional character , Deadpool has appeared in various adaptations , from comic books to films and television series .
Each version of the work typically establishes its own continuity , and sometimes introduces parallel universes , to the point where distinct differences in the portrayal of the character can be identified .
This article details various versions of Deadpool depicted in works including Marvel Comics ' Ultimate universe and What If issues .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Deadpool was ranked 182nd on Wizard magazine 's list of the Top 200 Comic Book Characters of All Time , ranked 45th on Empire magazine 's list of The 50 Greatest Comic Book Characters , and placed 31st on IGN 's list of the Top 100 Comic Book Heroes .
DC Rebirth has given Harley Quinn a stalker / friend named Wayne Wilkins AKA " Red Tool " , who is a direct parody of Deadpool .
IN OTHER MEDIA
TELEVISION
* Deadpool had made several non - voiced cameo appearances in the X - Men animated series .
A flashback alongside Wolverine in one of Sabretooth 's mental sessions with Professor Xavier in the episode " Deadly Reunions " , Morph shape - shifts into Deadpool 's form in the episode
" Whatever It Takes " , and Xavier 's dark side projects the character 's image to attack Wolverine in the episode
" The Phoenix Saga : Part 2 : The Dark Shroud " .
*
Deadpool has a brief cameo appearance in Marvel Anime : X - Men .
He is seen in the episode " Destiny " .
* Deadpool appears in the Ultimate Spider - Man cartoon series , voiced by Will Friedle .
This version was a former S.H.I.E.L.D. trainee before dropping out to be a mercenary .
Deadpool personally appears in the episode " Ultimate Deadpool " .
Despite ( and because of ) Spider - Man 's growing dislike for Deadpool 's antics , attitude and willingness to kill ( or as Deadpool puts it , " un - alive"/"K - word " ) , they both end up fighting Taskmaster and each other for critical S.H.I.E.L.D. data about the secret identities of America 's superheroes .
He is shown capable of negating Taskmaster 's ability to copy someone 's fighting style , utilizing an unpredictable fighting style that parodies various dance moves , rendering Taskmaster 's ability to predict attacks useless .
After giving a few false origin stories ( as well as mocking Wolverine ) , Deadpool finally reveals that he had been a street kid taken in by Nick Fury to be a hero , though he later decided being a mercenary was easier than carrying morals and a conscience .
Ultimately , Spider - Man acknowledges that the web - slinger himself could have turned out like Deadpool had circumstances in his own life been different .
*
Deadpool appeared in , voiced by Takehito Koyasu .
He appears in the episodes " The Forbidden Hero Appears ? " and " Chris and the Moment of Truth ! " .
*
In May 2017 , FXX placed a series order for an animated series based on Deadpool , to be co - produced by Marvel Television , FX Productions and ABC Signature Studios .
Donald Glover and his brother Stephen Glover were announced as showrunners , executive producers and writers for the series .
In late March 2018 , it was announced that FXX would not move forward with the series due to creative differences .
Stephen Glover later admitted that the " creative difference " in question involved an episode revolving around Taylor Swift which FXX stated was the " last straw " and that they wanted to give Rick and Morty " a run for its money " .
* Deadpool appears in Marvel Future Avengers , with Takehito Koyasu reprising his role as Deadpool .
FILM
ANIMATION Section::::In other media .
Section::::Film .
Section::::Animation .
Deadpool appears in the animated film Hulk Vs Wolverine , voiced by Nolan North .
Deadpool acts as one of Professor Thorton 's military strike team Team X
( Lady Deathstrike , Omega Red , and Sabretooth ) in the Weapon X program , seeking to capture Wolverine and the Hulk in order to brainwash them and convert them into the ultimate weapons .
He frequently annoys his teammates with his wisecracks .
LIVE ACTION
* Wade Wilson / Deadpool makes his first feature film appearance in , portrayed by Ryan Reynolds .
He is a highly skilled , wisecracking , and amoral mercenary who wields a pair of katanas with superhuman athleticism and skill sufficient to deflect fully automatic weapons fire .
He is supposedly killed by Victor Creed , but is later revealed to have been transformed by Colonel William Stryker into mutant killer " Weapon XI "
( stunts performed by Scott Adkins ) who possesses other mutants ' powers , including Scott Summers ' optic blasts , John Wraith 's teleportation , Wolverine 's healing factor , and a pair of extendable blades resembling the character 's prized swords ; Stryker is able to completely control him thanks to Chris Bradley 's technopathy .
He is referred to by Stryker as " the Deadpool " because the compatible powers of the other mutants have been ' pooled ' together into one being .
Wolverine and Victor fight Deadpool in the film 's climax and manage to defeat him by decapitating him and sending him falling into a cooling tower of a nuclear power plant , although a post - credits scene appearing in DVD releases and some theatrical presentations of the film implies Deadpool is still alive , as his hand is shown reaching out for his still - living head amid the rubble of the destroyed tower .
* Following the events of , which reset the X - Men film series timeline , Ryan Reynolds reprised his role in Deadpool , which premiered in February 2016 .
This version depicted Wade as a mercenary who after being diagnosed with late stage cancer turns to Ajax who has offered a cure .
Ajax tortures Wade in order to catalyse the treatment , which eventually results in regressive mutant genes activating , causing his disfigurement and healing factor .
Wade goes on a vendetta to force Ajax to fix his disfigurement , and eventually kills him on Ajax 's admission that this was impossible .
This film also introduces to Reynolds 's incarnation his most famous weakness from the comics : his Truman Syndrome that adds to the comedic effect by giving him the ability to reference not just X - Men movies and casts , but also Ryan Reynolds and his filmography .
*
Before screenings of the film Logan in U.S. territories a pre - film sequence , that was later titled and released online , was shown serving as a teaser of sorts for Deadpool 2 .
Rhett Reese , the writer , confirmed that the film was a short and " not a teaser or a trailer " .
The plot of the short revolves around Deadpool attempting to change into his costume in a phone booth fast enough to stop a nearby mugging .
The man is shot before Deadpool can finish putting on his costume .
Deadpool apologizes as he could have just called the police since he was already inside a phone booth .
He then lies down and initiates a one - sided conversation with the dead man .
* Deadpool 2 , announced to be in development shortly after the first film 's release , is directed by David Leitch and premiered in 2018 .
After the death of his girlfriend Vanessa , Deadpool ended up in the series of events to protect an angst boy named Russell Collins ( Julian Dennison ) from Nathan Summers / Cable ( Josh Brolin ) .
Reynolds also plays himself and reprises the Weapon XI version of Wade from X - Men Origins , both killed by Deadpool in the mid - credits .
*
In December 2013 , Rob Liefeld confirmed that Cable and Deadpool would be appearing in an X - Force spin - off to the X - Men film series , with Ryan Reynolds returning as the latter .
After the release of Deadpool , Reynolds felt that Deadpool would soon be in an X - Force film .
In February 2017 , Joe Carnahan had signed on as director , as well as co - writer with Ryan Reynolds .
By September of the same year the studio parted ways with Carnahan , while Drew Goddard replaced him on as writer / director after previously working as a co - writer on the script for the Deadpool sequel .
The following month , Josh Brolin stated that production will begin some time during 2018 .
VIDEO GAMES
*
Deadpool appears in , voiced by John Kassir .
* Deadpool appears as playable character in , with John Kassir reprising his speaking role .
* Wade Wilson appears in the video game adaptation of , voiced by Steven Blum .
His Deadpool / Weapon XI transformation is the final boss .
* Deadpool appears as a playable character in , again voiced by John Kassir .
He first appears in the Washington D.C. level , having arrived for the cherry blossom festival only to get caught up in a terrorist attack on the capital .
He attacks the heroes out of frustration over his vacation being ruined , but after he 's beaten he decides to help them fight off the terrorists , becoming playable after rescuing some senators .
Also during the credits , Deadpool confronts one of the writers with a complaint about the game not starring him .
In the Wii , PSP and PS2 versions , he is playable from the start and appears during the credit sequence and load screens watching television while sitting in a recliner .
* The Ultimate version of Deadpool appears as a villain in , with Nolan North reprising his speaking role .
He hosts the survival show Pain Factor , and challenges Spider - Man to compete for a fragment of the Tablet .
* Deadpool appears as a playable fighter in voiced again by Nolan North .
He is frequently featured opposite of Capcom 's Dante from the Devil May Cry series .
*
Deadpool is a playable character in Marvel Super Hero Squad Online , voiced by Tom Kenny .
* Deadpool appears as an unlockable character in .
*
Deadpool 's costume is available as downloadable content for the game LittleBigPlanet , as part of " Marvel Costume Kit 6 " .
*
Deadpool is a playable character in the MMORPG Marvel Heroes , again voiced by Nolan North .
* Deadpool , an action game based on the character , was developed by High Moon Studios and published by Activision in 2013 , with Nolan North reprising his voice role once again .
Deadpool , keeping with his fourth wall - breaking , constantly has to call the creators of the game to fix problems with the graphics .
*
Deadpool is a playable character in Lego Marvel Super Heroes , once again voiced by Nolan North .
*
Deadpool has his own table in Marvel Pinball .
Nolan North reprised his role as the voice actor .
*
Deadpool is featured in Marvel Puzzle Quest on a limited storyline where he attacks all the heroes and villains in a quest for Iso-8 and chimichangas .
*
Deadpool is a character featured in Marvel Powers United VR , voiced by Jason Spisak .
*
Deadpool is a playable character in .
*
Deadpool is a playable character in Marvel Strike Force .
WEB ANIMATION
* Deadpool appears in several episodes of the stop - motion animated web series .
Including self - titled episodes such as " DEADPOOL -
For Your Consideration " , " Mean Deadpool Big Game Ad " , " Holiday Special with Iron Man & Deadpool " and " Deadpool Vs .
The Punisher " .
LIVE ACTION
*
Reynolds filmed footage of himself seated in the Deadpool costume as a trailer for the Deadpool movie trailer and at the end of an extended trailer for the 2015 film Fantastic Four .
*
Reynolds reprised his role as Deadpool in short film released on his YouTube channel for Halloween 2015 , titled " How Deadpool Spent Halloween " .
* Reynolds appeared as Deadpool in three episodes of Screen Junkies ' " Honest Trailers " series for the " Deadpool " , " Logan " and " Deadpool 2 " episodes .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Deadpool at Marvel.com * Deadpool on IMDb