TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD TUBE STATION
Tottenham Court Road is a London Underground and future Elizabeth line station in St Giles , West End of London .
It is served by the Central line and the branch of the Northern line .
The station will also be served by the Elizabeth Line when the core section opens in autumn 2019 .
On the Central line it is between and , and on the Northern line it is between and .
The station is located at St Giles Circus , the junction of Tottenham Court Road , Oxford Street , New Oxford Street and Charing Cross Road and is in Travelcard Zone 1 .
HISTORY
CENTRAL LONDON RAILWAY Section::::History .
Section::::Central London Railway .
The station opened as part of the Central London Railway ( CLR ) on 30 July 1900 .
From that date until 24 September 1933 , the next station eastbound on the Central line was the now - defunct ; the next stop in that direction is now .
The platforms are under Oxford Street west of St Giles ' Circus , and were originally connected to the ticket hall via lifts at the east end of the platforms .
The original station building is in Oxford Street and was designed in common with other CLR stations by Harry Bell Measures .
Much modified , it now forms part of the station entrance , and some elements of the original facade survive above the canopy .
Apart from those very limited original features of the entrance , the station building otherwise together with a whole row of other elegant old buildings were demolished in 2009 .
CHARING CROSS , EUSTON & HAMPSTEAD RAILWAY Section::::Charing Cross , Euston & Hampstead Railway .
The Charing Cross , Euston & Hampstead Railway ( CCE&HR , now part of the Northern line ) arrived here on 22 June 1907 but used the name Oxford Street until an interchange ( linking the eastbound Central line with the southbound Northern line via the ends of the platform ) was opened on 3 September 1908 from when the present name was used for both lines .
The next station north on the Northern line was originally called Tottenham Court Road , but was renamed to at this time .
The original ticket office was on the south east corner of the junction of Oxford Street and Charing Cross Road , and its original lift shafts and emergency stairs are still extant .
A set of emergency stairs can used as access down to the ends of the Northern line platform .
The lift shafts are used for offices and station facilities .
The original CCE&HR station buildings were destroyed when the Centre Point tower block was built .
EARLY IMPROVEMENTS Section::::Early Improvements .
Like a number of other central area stations , Tottenham Court Road underwent improvements during the 1920s to replace the original sets of lifts with escalators .
Works commenced in 1923 ; a new subsurface ticket hall , under St Giles Circus , was constructed and the escalators came into service on 28 September 1926 ( upper set ) and 1 February 1926 ( lower set ) .
A shaft for three escalators was driven from the ticket hall under the junction down to the east end of the Central line platforms ending at an intermediate circulation space .
A further pair of escalators descend from this level to the north end of the Northern line platforms .
The lifts were removed and the redundant shafts were used as ventilation ducts .
In 1938 a chiller plant began operating at the station .
This was decommissioned in 1949 .
Passenger congestion entering and leaving the Northern line platforms was partially eased by the addition of a short single escalator at the centre of the platform leading up to a passageway linking to the intermediate circulation area .
However , this was in itself a cause of congestion , as traffic trying to leave the station from the Northern line found itself in the path of traffic entering and travelling to the Central line .
In 1984 the entire station was redecorated , losing the distinctive Leslie Green - designed platform tiling pattern of the Yerkes tube lines ( which included the CCE&HR ) , and the plain white platform tiles of the CLR .
The 1980s design includes panels of tessellated mural mosaic by Eduardo Paolozzi ( whose signature appears at several places within the station ) , and is a distinct and noticeable feature of the station .
The mosaic 's frenetic design is intended to reflect the station 's position adjacent to Tottenham Court Road 's large concentration of hi - fi and electronics shops .
Some of this mosaic has now been removed in the expansion of the station for Crossrail .
These parts are due to be reconstructed and installed in the University of Edinburgh .
CONGESTION RELIEF Section::::Congestion relief .
The station had four entrances to the sub - surface ticket hall from the north - east , south - west and north - west corners of the junction and from a subway beneath the Centre Point building which starts on Andrew Borde Street .
The entrances were frequently congested leading to occasions during peak periods of the day when they were briefly closed to prevent overcrowding in the station .
In the aftermath of the King 's Cross fire in 1987 , London Underground was recommended to investigate " passenger flow and congestion in stations and take remedial action " .
Although a Parliamentary bill was tabled in 1991 to permit London Underground to improve and expand the frequently congested station , the station was drastically reconstructed and upgraded in the mid 2010s as part of the Crossrail project .
The £ 500 m station upgrade took 8 years , and involved building a much larger ticket hall under the forecourt of Centre Point , new sets of escalators to reach the central section of the Northern line platforms from the ticket hall , step - free access to the platforms , as well as escalators down to the eastern end of the future Crossrail station .
The subway to Andrew Borde Street was replaced as part of this development .
To enable this expansion to occur , both the Astoria theatres and the original Central line entrance were demolished .
As part of the expansion of the ticket hall , Art on the Underground commissioned an artwork by Daniel Buren , a French conceptual artist .
This piece , ' Diamonds and Circles ' permanent works ' in situ ' , was Buren 's first permanent public commission in the UK .
The artwork comprises colourful diamond and circle shapes , which contrast with Buren 's trademark stripes in black and white , fixed to internal glass walls throughout the ticket hall .
The piece was completed in 2017 .
From 2 April until 28 November 2011 , the Northern line platforms were closed for structural upgrade works and Northern line trains ran non - stop through the station .
From 5 January until 7 December 2015 , the Central line platforms were closed , meaning Central line trains did not stop at the station .
On 12 January 2015 , the first part of the new ticket hall opened for the first time .
The station which previously required commuters going through the Central line level concourse to get to the Northern line , via a one - way system , now has escalators directly to Northern line level followed by stairs to the platforms .
The escalators are among the longest in the tube , and take a minute top to bottom if you stand on them .
CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS
CROSSRAIL Section::::Current developments .
Section::::Crossrail .
In addition to the eastern ticket hall expansion , a new western entrance and ticket hall is being built under Dean Street as part of the Crossrail project , leading to both the Crossrail platforms and to the parallel Central line platforms .
The Crossrail station ' box ' was constructed as part of the Underground ticket hall works , and completed in an un - fitted form by 12 January 2015 .
Similar to the situation with Thameslink platforms at St Pancras , the line developers are responsible for the fitting - out works which create the actual station infrastructure .
CONSTRUCTION GALLERY FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS CROSSRAIL 2 Section::::Future developments .
Section::::Crossrail 2 .
The proposed Chelsea - Hackney line , now known as Crossrail 2 , if built , will have a station at Tottenham Court Road , and the development plans include facilities to take account of this .
This would be the only planned interchange between Crossrail 1 and Crossrail 2 .
A massive boost in capacity to the existing station will be needed to host both lines .
The station was safeguarded as part of the route in 1991 and 2007 .
Redevelopment of the station will include space for platforms on the line .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
*
The station was used for a sequence in the 1981 film An American Werewolf in London .
* A scene in the musical We Will Rock You is set in the station ; the musical played across the street at the Dominion Theatre from 2002 to 2014 .
GALLERY CONNECTIONS Section::::Connections .
London Buses routes 1 , 7 , 8 , 14 , 19 , 24 , 29 , 38 , 55 , 73 , 98 , 134 , 176 and night routes N1 , N20 , N5 , N7 , N8 , N19 , N20 , N29 , N35 , N38 , N41 , N55 , N68 , N73 , N98 , N171 , N207 , N253 and N279 serve the station .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Central line station building in 1914
* City of Westminster , Draft Planning Brief – Crossrail : Tottenham Court Road Station ( Eastern Ticket Hall ) , May 2005 , Retrieved 31 January 2008
* Photos of Paolozzi 's mosaics in the station
* Conservation of the TCR Station
Mosaics
* Images from An American Werewolf in London prior to installation of Paolozzi mosaics * Rebuilding work and schedule ( Transport for London )