WATERCOLOR PAINTING
Watercolor ( American English ) or watercolour ( British English ; see spelling differences ) , also aquarelle ( French , diminutive of Latin aqua " water " ) , is a painting method in which the paints are made of pigments suspended in a water - based solution .
Watercolor refers to both the medium and the resulting artwork .
Aquarelles painted with water - soluble colored ink instead of modern water colors are called " aquarellum atramento " ( Latin for " aquarelle made with ink " ) by experts .
However , this term has been more and more passing out of use .
The traditional and most common support — material to which the paint is applied — for watercolor paintings is paper .
Other supports include papyrus , bark papers , plastics , vellum , leather , fabric , wood and canvas .
Watercolor paper is often made entirely or partially with cotton .
This gives the surface the appropriate texture and minimizes distortion when wet .
Watercolors are usually translucent , and appear luminous because the pigments are laid down in a pure form with few fillers obscuring the pigment colors .
Watercolors can also be made opaque by adding Chinese white .
In East Asia , watercolor painting with inks is referred to as brush painting or scroll painting .
In Chinese , Korean and Japanese painting it has been the dominant medium , often in monochrome black or browns .
India , Ethiopia and other countries have long watercolor painting traditions as well .
American artists in the early 19th century seemed to regard watercolor primarily as a sketching tool in preparation for the " finished " work in oil or engraving .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Watercolor painting is extremely old , dating perhaps to the cave paintings of paleolithic Europe , and has been used for manuscript illustration since at least Egyptian times but especially in the European Middle Ages .
However , its continuous history as an art medium begins with the Renaissance .
The German Northern Renaissance artist Albrecht Dürer ( 1471–1528 ) , who painted several fine botanical , wildlife , and landscape watercolors , is generally considered among the earliest exponents of watercolor .
An important school of watercolor painting in Germany was led by Hans Bol ( 1534–1593 ) as part of the Dürer Renaissance .
Despite this early start , watercolors were generally used by Baroque easel painters only for sketches , copies or cartoons ( full - scale design drawings ) .
Notable early practitioners of watercolor painting were Van Dyck ( during his stay in England ) , Claude Lorrain , Giovanni Benedetto Castiglione , and many Dutch and Flemish artists .
However , botanical illustration and wildlife illustration perhaps form the oldest and most important traditions in watercolor painting .
Botanical illustrations became popular during the Renaissance , both as hand - tinted woodblock illustrations in books or broadsheets and as tinted ink drawings on vellum or paper .
Botanical artists have traditionally been some of the most exacting and accomplished watercolor painters , and even today , watercolors — with their unique ability to summarize , clarify , and idealize in full color — are used to illustrate scientific and museum publications .
Wildlife illustration reached its peak in the 19th century with artists such as John James Audubon , and today many naturalist field guides are still illustrated with watercolor paintings .
ENGLISH SCHOOL Section::::English school .
Several factors contributed to the spread of watercolor painting during the 18th century , particularly in England .
Among the elite and aristocratic classes , watercolor painting was one of the incidental adornments of a good education ; mapmakers , military officers , and engineers used it for its usefulness in depicting properties , terrain , fortifications , field geology , and for illustrating public works or commissioned projects .
Watercolor artists were commonly brought with the geological or archaeological expeditions , funded by the Society of Dilettanti ( founded in 1733 ) , to document discoveries in the Mediterranean , Asia , and the New World .
These expeditions stimulated the demand for topographical painters , who churned out memento paintings of famous sites ( and sights ) along the Grand Tour to Italy that was undertaken by every fashionable young man of the time .
In the late 18th century , the English cleric William Gilpin wrote a series of hugely popular books describing his picturesque journeys throughout rural England , and illustrated them with self - made sentimentalized monochrome watercolors of river valleys , ancient castles , and abandoned churches .
This example popularized watercolors as a form of personal tourist journal .
The confluence of these cultural , engineering , scientific , tourist , and amateur interests culminated in the celebration and promotion of watercolor as a distinctly English " national art " .
William Blake published several books of hand - tinted engraved poetry , provided illustrations to Dante 's Inferno , and he also experimented with large monotype works in watercolor .
Among the many other significant watercolorists of this period were Thomas Gainsborough , John Robert Cozens , Francis Towne , Michael Angelo Rooker , William Pars , Thomas Hearne , and John Warwick Smith .
From the late 18th century through the 19th century , the market for printed books and domestic art contributed substantially to the growth of the medium .
Watercolors were used as the basic document from which collectible landscape or tourist engravings were developed , and hand - painted watercolor originals or copies of famous paintings contributed to many upper class art portfolios .
Satirical broadsides by Thomas Rowlandson , many published by Rudolph Ackermann , were also extremely popular .
The three English artists credited with establishing watercolor as an independent , mature painting medium are Paul Sandby ( 1730–1809 ) , often called the " father of the English watercolor " ; Thomas Girtin ( 1775–1802 ) , who pioneered its use for large format , romantic or picturesque landscape painting ; and Joseph Mallord William Turner ( 1775–1851 ) , who brought watercolor painting to the highest pitch of power and refinement , and created hundreds of superb historical , topographical , architectural , and mythological watercolor paintings .
His method of developing the watercolor painting in stages , starting with large , vague color areas established on wet paper , then refining the image through a sequence of washes and glazes , permitted him to produce large numbers of paintings with " workshop efficiency " and made him a multimillionaire , partly by sales from his personal art gallery , the first of its kind .
Among the important and highly talented contemporaries of Turner and Girtin were John Varley , John Sell Cotman , Anthony Copley Fielding , Samuel Palmer , William Havell , and Samuel Prout .
The Swiss painter Abraham - Louis - Rodolphe Ducros was also widely known for his large format , romantic paintings in watercolor .
The confluence of amateur activity , publishing markets , middle class art collecting , and 19th - century technique led to the formation of English watercolor painting societies : the Society of Painters in Water Colours ( 1804 , now known as the Royal Watercolour Society ) and the New Water Colour Society ( 1832 , now known as the Royal Institute of Painters in Water Colours ) .
( A Scottish Society of Painters in Water Colour was founded in 1878 , now known as the Royal Scottish Society of Painters in Watercolour . )
These societies provided annual exhibitions and buyer referrals for many artists .
They also engaged in petty status rivalries and aesthetic debates , particularly between advocates of traditional ( " transparent " ) watercolor and the early adopters of the denser color possible with body color or gouache ( " opaque " watercolor ) .
The late Georgian and Victorian periods produced the zenith of the British watercolor , among the most impressive 19th - century works on paper , due to artists Turner , Varley , Cotman , David Cox , Peter de Wint , William Henry Hunt , John Frederick Lewis , Myles Birket Foster , Frederick Walker , Thomas Collier , Arthur Melville and many others .
In particular , the graceful , lapidary , and atmospheric watercolors ( " genre paintings " ) by Richard Parkes Bonington created an international fad for watercolor painting , especially in England and France in the 1820s .
The popularity of watercolors stimulated many innovations , including heavier and more sized wove papers , and brushes ( called " pencils " ) manufactured expressly for watercolor .
Watercolor tutorials were first published in this period by Varley , Cox , and others , establishing the step - by - step painting instructions that still characterize the genre today ; The Elements of Drawing , a watercolor tutorial by English art critic John Ruskin , has been out of print only once since it was first published in 1857 .
Commercial brands of watercolor were marketed and paints were packaged in metal tubes or as dry cakes that could be " rubbed out " ( dissolved ) in studio porcelain or used in portable metal paint boxes in the field .
Breakthroughs in chemistry made many new pigments available , including synthetic ultramarine blue , cobalt blue , viridian , cobalt violet , cadmium yellow , aureolin ( potassium cobaltinitrite ) , zinc white , and a wide range of carmine and madder lakes .
These pigments , in turn , stimulated a greater use of color with all painting media , but in English watercolors , particularly by the Pre - Raphaelite Brotherhood .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Watercolor painting also became popular in the United States during the 19th century ; outstanding early practitioners included John James Audubon , as well as early Hudson River School painters such as William H. Bartlett and George Harvey .
By mid - century , the influence of John Ruskin led to increasing interest in watercolors , particularly the use of a detailed " Ruskinian " style by such artists as John W. Hill Henry , William Trost Richards , Roderick Newman , and Fidelia Bridges .
The American Society of Painters in Watercolor ( now the American Watercolor Society ) was founded in 1866 .
Late-19th - century American exponents of the medium included Thomas Moran , Thomas Eakins , John LaFarge , John Singer Sargent , Childe Hassam , and , preeminently , Winslow Homer .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Watercolor was less popular in Continental Europe .
In the 18th century , gouache was an important medium for the Italian artists Marco Ricci and Francesco Zuccarelli , whose landscape paintings were widely collected .
Gouache was used by a number of artists in France as well .
In the 19th century , the influence of the English school helped popularize " transparent " watercolor in France , and it became an important medium for Eugène Delacroix , François Marius Granet , Henri - Joseph Harpignies , and the satirist Honoré Daumier .
Other European painters who worked frequently in watercolor were Adolph Menzel in Germany and Stanisław Masłowski in Poland .
Unfortunately , the careless and excessive adoption of brightly colored , petroleum - derived aniline dyes ( and pigments compounded from them ) , which all fade rapidly on exposure to light , and the efforts to properly conserve the twenty thousand J. M. W. Turner paintings inherited by the British Museum in 1857 , led to an examination and negative reevaluation of the permanence of pigments in watercolor .
This caused a sharp decline in their status and market value .
Nevertheless , isolated practitioners continued to prefer and develop the medium into the 20th century .
Gorgeous landscape and maritime watercolors were done by Paul Signac , and Paul Cézanne developed a watercolor painting style consisting entirely of overlapping small glazes of pure color .
20TH AND 21ST CENTURIES Section::::20th and 21st centuries .
Among the many 20th - century artists who produced important works in watercolor , Wassily Kandinsky , Emil Nolde , Paul Klee , Egon Schiele , and Raoul Dufy must be mentioned .
In America , the major exponents included Charles Burchfield , Edward Hopper , Georgia O'Keeffe , Charles Demuth , and John Marin ( 80 % of his total work is watercolor ) .
In this period , American watercolor painting often imitated European Impressionism and Post - Impressionism , but significant individualism flourished in " regional " styles of watercolor painting from the 1920s to 1940s .
In particular , the " Cleveland School " or " Ohio School " of painters centered around the Cleveland Museum of Art , and the California Scene painters were often associated with Hollywood animation studios or the Chouinard Art Institute ( now California Institute of the Arts ) .
The California painters exploited their state 's varied geography , Mediterranean climate , and " automobility " to reinvigorate the outdoor or " plein air " tradition .
The most influential among them were Phil Dike , Millard Sheets , Rex Brandt , Dong Kingman , and Milford Zornes .
The California Water Color Society , founded in 1921 and later renamed the National Watercolor Society , sponsored important exhibitions of their work .
The largest watercolor in the world at the moment is Building 6 Portrait : Interior .
Produced by American artist Barbara Ernst Prey on commission for MASS MoCA , the work can be seen at MASS MoCA 's Robert W. Wilson Building .
Although the rise of abstract expressionism , and the trivializing influence of amateur painters and advertising- or workshop - influenced painting styles , led to a temporary decline in the popularity of watercolor painting after c. 1950 , watercolors continue to be utilized by artists like Martha Burchfield , Joseph Raffael , Andrew Wyeth , Philip Pearlstein , Eric Fischl , Gerhard Richter , Anselm Kiefer , and Francesco Clemente .
In Spain , Ceferí Olivé created an innovative style followed by his students , such as Rafael Alonso López - Montero and Francesc Torné Gavaldà .
In Mexico , the major exponents are Ignacio Barrios , Edgardo Coghlan , Ángel Mauro , Vicente Mendiola , and Pastor Velázquez .
In the Canary Islands , where this pictorial technique has many followers , there are stand - out artists such as Francisco Bonnín Guerín , José Comas Quesada , and Alberto Manrique .
WATERCOLOR PAINT Section::::Watercolor paint .
Watercolor paint consists of four principal ingredients : a pigment ; gum arabic as a binder to hold the pigment in suspension ; additives like glycerin , ox gall , honey , and preservatives to alter the viscosity , hiding , durability or color of the pigment and vehicle mixture ; and evaporating water , as a solvent used to thin or dilute the paint for application .
The more general term watermedia refers to any painting medium that uses water as a solvent and that can be applied with a brush , pen , or sprayer .
This includes most inks , watercolors , temperas , caseins , gouaches , and modern acrylic paints .
The term " watercolor " refers to paints that use water - soluble , complex carbohydrates as a binder .
Originally ( in the 16th to 18th centuries ) , watercolor binders were sugars and/or hide glues , but since the 19th century , the preferred binder is natural gum arabic , with glycerin and/or honey as additives to improve plasticity and solubility of the binder , and with other chemicals added to improve product shelf life .
The term " bodycolor " refers to paint that is opaque rather than transparent .
It usually refers to opaque watercolor , known as gouache .
Modern acrylic paints use a acrylic resin dispersion as a binder .
COMMERCIAL WATERCOLORS Section::::Commercial watercolors .
Watercolor painters before the turn of the 18th century had to make paints themselves using pigments purchased from an apothecary or specialized " colorman " , and mixing them with gum arabic or some other binder .
The earliest commercial paints were small , resinous blocks that had to be wetted and laboriously " rubbed out " in water to obtain a usable color intensity .
William Reeves started his business as a colorman around 1766 .
In 1781 , he and his brother , Thomas Reeves , were awarded the Silver Palette of the Society of Arts , for the invention of the moist watercolor paint - cake , a time - saving convenience , introduced in the " golden age " of English watercolor painting .
The " cake " was immediately soluble when touched by a wet brush .
Modern commercial watercolor paints are available in two forms : tubes or pans .
The majority of paints sold today are in collapsible small metal tubes in standard sizes and formulated to a consistency similar to toothpaste by being already mixed with a certain water component .
For use , this paste has to be further diluted with water .
Pan paints ( actually small dried cakes or bars of paint in an open plastic container ) are usually sold in two sizes , full pans and half pans .
Owing to modern industrial organic chemistry , the variety , saturation , and permanence of artists ' colors available today has been vastly improved .
Correct and non - toxic primary colors are now present through the introduction of hansa yellow , phthalo blue and quinacridone ( PV 122 ) .
From such a set of three colors , in principle all others can be mixed , as in a classical technique no white is used .
The modern development of pigments was not driven by artistic demand .
The art materials industry is too small to exert any market leverage on global dye or pigment manufacture .
With rare exceptions such as aureolin , all modern watercolor paints utilize pigments that have a wider industrial use .
Paint manufacturers buy , by industrial standards very small , supplies of these pigments , mill them with the vehicle , solvent , and additives , and package them .
The milling process with inorganic pigments , in more expensive brands , reduces the particle size to improve the color flow when the paint is applied with water .
TRANSPARENCY Section::::Transparency .
In the partisan debates of the 19th - century English art world , gouache was emphatically contrasted to traditional watercolors and denigrated for its high hiding power or lack of " transparency " ; " transparent " watercolors were exalted .
The aversion against opaque paint had its origin in the fact that well into the nineteenth century lead white was used to increase the covering quality , which pigment tended to soon discolor into black under the influence of sulphurous air pollution , totally ruining the artwork .
The traditional claim that " transparent " watercolors gain " luminosity " because they function like a pane of stained glass laid on paper — the color intensified because the light passes through the pigment , reflects from the paper , and passes a second time through the pigment on its way to the viewer — is false : watercolor paints typically do not form a cohesive paint layer , as do acrylic or oil paints , but simply scatter pigment particles randomly across the paper surface ; the transparency consists in the paper being directly visible between the particles .
Watercolors appear more vivid than acrylics or oils because the pigments are laid down in a more pure form with no or fewer fillers ( such as kaolin ) obscuring the pigment colors .
Furthermore , typically most or all of the gum binder will be absorbed by the paper , preventing it from changing the visibility of the pigment .
The gum being absorbed does not decrease but increase the adhesion of the pigment to the paper , as its particles will then more easily penetrate the fibres .
In fact , an important function of the gum is to facilitate the " lifting " ( removal ) of the color , should the artist want to create a lighter spot in a painted area .
Furthermore , the gum prevents a flocculation of the pigment particles .
SEE ALSO
* Acrylic paint
* Acrylic painting techniques
* History of painting * Gouache
* Oil paint
NOTES
REFERENCES HISTORY * Andrew Wilton & Anne Lyles .
The Great Age of British Watercolours ( 1750–1880 ) .
Prestel , 1993 .
* Anne Lyles & Robin Hamlyn .
British watercolours from the Oppé Collection .
Tate Gallery Publishing , 1997 .
* Christopher Finch .
American Watercolors .
Abbeville Press , 1991 .
ASIN B000IBDWGK * Christopher Finch .
Nineteenth - Century Watercolors .
Abbeville Press , 1991 .
* Christopher Finch .
Twentieth - Century Watercolors .
Abbeville Press , 1988 .
* Eric Shanes .
Turner : The Great Watercolours .
Royal Academy of Arts , 2001 .
* Martin Hardie .
Water - Colour Painting in Britain ( 3 volumes :
I. The Eighteenth Century ; II .
The Romantic Period ; III .
The Victorian Period . ) .
Batsford , 1966–1968 .
* Michael Clarke .
The Tempting Prospect : A Social History of English Watercolours .
British Museum Publications , 1981 .
ASIN
B000UCV0XO * Moore , Sean .
Ultimate Visual Dictionary .
Dorling Kindersley , 1994 .
TUTORIALS AND TECHNIQUE
* Rex Brandt .
The Winning Ways of Watercolor : Basic Techniques and Methods of Transparent Watercolor in Twenty Lessons .
Van Nostrand Reinhold , 1973 .
* David Dewey .
The Watercolor Book : Materials and Techniques for Today 's Artist .
Watson - Guptill , 1995 .
* Donna Seldin Janis .
Sargent Abroad : Figures and Landscapes .
Abbeville Press ; 1st edition ( October 1997 ) . .
* Charles LeClair .
The Art of Watercolor ( Revised and Expanded Edition ) .
Watson - Guptill , 1999 .
* Royal Watercolour Society .
The Watercolour Expert .
Cassell Illustrated , 2004 .
* John Ruskin .
The Elements of Drawing [ 1857 ] .
Watson - Guptill , 1991 .
( Reprints from other publishers are also available . )
* Pip Seymour .
Watercolour Painting : A Handbook for Artists .
Lee Press , 1997 .
* Stan Smith .
Watercolor :
The Complete Course .
Reader 's Digest , 1995 .
* Curtis Tappenden .
Foundation Course : Watercolour .
Cassell Illustrated , 2003 .
* Edgar A. Whitney .
Complete Guide to Watercolor Painting .
Watson - Guptill , 1974 .
[ Dover Edition ] MATERIALS
* Ian Sideway .
The Watercolor Artist 's Paper Directory .
North Light , 2000 .
* Jacques Turner .
Brushes : A Handbook for Artists and Artisans .
Design Press , 1992 .
* Sylvie Turner .
The Book of Fine Paper .
Thames & Hudson , 1998 .
* Michael Wilcox .
The Wilcox Guide To The Best Watercolor Paints .
School of Colour Publications , 2000 .
EXTERNAL LINKS * American Watercolor Society * National Watercolor Society ( USA ) * Belgian Watercolour Institute *
http://watercolor.net/history-overview/ * http://www.handprint.com/HP/WCL/water.html
* http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Watercolor_painting