WHALE RIDER Whale Rider is a 2002 New Zealand - German family drama film directed by Niki Caro , based on the novel of the same name by Witi Ihimaera .
The film stars Keisha Castle - Hughes as Kahu Paikea Apirana , a twelve - year - old Māori girl whose ambition is to become the chief of the tribe .
Her grandfather Koro Apirana believes that this is a role reserved for males only .
The film was a coproduction between New Zealand and Germany .
It was shot on location in Whangara , the setting of the novel .
The world premiere was on 9 September 2002 , at the Toronto International Film Festival .
The film received critical acclaim upon its release .
At age 13 , Keisha Castle - Hughes became the youngest nominee for the Academy Award for Best Actress before she was surpassed by Quvenzhané Wallis , at age 9 , for Beasts of the Southern Wild less than a decade later .
The film earned $ 41.4 million on a NZ$9,235,000 budget .
In 2005 the film was named to the BFI list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film 's plot follows the story of Paikea Apirana ( " Pai " ) .
The leader should be the first - born grandson – a direct patrilineal descendant of Paikea , the Whale Rider – he who rode on top of a whale ( Tohora ) from Hawaiki .
Pai is originally born a twin , but her twin brother , as well as her mother , dies in childbirth .
However , Pai is female and technically can not inherit the leadership .
While her grandfather , Koro , later forms an affectionate bond with his granddaughter , carrying her to school every day on his bicycle , he also condemns her and blames her for conflicts happening within the tribe .
At one point Paikea decides to live with her father because her grandfather is mistreating her .
She finds that she can not bear to leave the sea as the whale seems to be calling her back .
Pai tells her father to turn the car back and returns home .
After the death of his wife and overwhelming pressure from Koro , Pai 's father refuses to assume traditional leadership ; instead he moves to Germany to pursue a career as an artist .
Pai herself is interested in the leadership , learning traditional songs and dances , but is given little encouragement by her grandfather .
Pai feels that she can become the leader ( although there 's no precedent for a woman to do so ) , and is determined to succeed .
Koro leads a cultural school for the village boys , hoping to find a new leader .
He teaches the boys to use a taiaha ( fighting stick ) .
This is traditionally reserved for males .
However , Nanny tells Pai that her second son , Pai 's uncle , had won a taiaha tournament in his youth while he was still slim , so Pai secretly learns from him .
She also secretly follows Koro 's lessons .
One of the students , Hemi , is also sympathetic towards her .
Koro is enraged when he finds out , particularly when she wins her taiaha fight against Hemi .
Koro 's relationship with Pai erodes further when none of the boys succeed at the traditional task of recovering the rei puta ( whale tooth ) that he threw into the ocean – this mission would prove one of them worthy of becoming leader .
With the loss of the rei puta , Koro in despair calls out the Ancient ones , the whales .
In an attempt to help , Pai also calls out to them and they hear her call .
One day Pai finds the rei puta while swimming , signifying that she is the rightful leader .
Pai , in an attempt to bridge the rift that has formed , invites Koro to be her guest of honour at a concert of Māori chants that her school is putting on .
Unknown to all , she had won an inter - school speech contest with a touching dedication to Koro and the traditions of the village .
However , Koro was late , and as he was walking to the school , he notices that numerous southern right whales are beached near Pai 's home .
The entire village attempts to coax and drag them back into the water , but all efforts prove unsuccessful ; even a tractor does not help .
Koro sees it as a sign of his failure and despairs further .
He admonishes Pai against touching the largest whale because " she has done enough damage " with her presumption .
Also , the largest whale traditionally belongs to the legendary Paikea .
When Koro walks away , Pai climbs onto the back of the largest whale at the location and coaxes it to re - enter the ocean .
The whale leads the entire pod back into the sea ; Pai submerges completely underwater , and the spectators wonder if she has drowned , but are relieved when she comes back above sea level .
When she goes out to sea , Nanny shows Koro the whale tooth which Pai had previously recovered .
When Pai is found and brought to the hospital , Koro declares her the leader and asks her forgiveness .
The film ends with Pai 's father , grandparents , and uncle coming together to celebrate her status as the new leader , as the finished waka is hauled into the sea for its maiden voyage .
In voiceover , Pai declares , " My name is Paikea Apirana , and I come from a long line of chiefs stretching all the way back to the Whale Rider .
I 'm not a prophet , but I know that our people will keep going forward , all together , with all of our strength . "
CAST
* Keisha Castle - Hughes as Paikea Apirana * Rawiri Paratene as Koro * Vicky Haughton as Nanny Flowers * Cliff Curtis as Porourangi
* Grant Roa as Uncle Rawiri * Mana Taumaunu as Hemi * Rachel House as Shilo * Taungaroa Emile as Willie
* Tammy Davis as Dog * Mabel Wharekawa as Maka ( as Mabel Wharekawa - Burt )
* Rawinia Clarke as Miro
* Tahei Simpson as Miss Parata
* Roi Taimana as Hemi 's Dad ( as Roimata Taimana )
* Elizabeth Skeen as Rehua * Tyronne White as Jake ( as Tyrone White )
* Taupua Whakataka - Brightwell as Ropata * Tenia McClutchie - Mita as Wiremu * Peter Patuwai as Bubba * Rutene Spooner as Parekura *
Riccardo Davis as Maui
*
Apiata Whangaparita - Apanui as Henare
* John Sumner as Obstetrician * Sam Woods as Young Rawiri * Pura Tangira as Ace
* Jane O'Kane as Anne * Aumuri Parata - Haua as Baby Paikea PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film had budget of NZ$9,235,000 .
It received $ 2.5 million from the New Zealand Film Production Fund .
Additional financing came from ApolloMedia , Filmstiftung NRW , the New Zealand Film Commission and NZ On Air .
Casting director Diana Rowan visited numerous schools to find an actress to play Pai .
10,000 children were auditioned before narrowing it down to 12 .
Castle - Hughes impressed Caro in the resulting workshop and was cast as Pai .
The film was shot in Whangara on the East Coast of New Zealand 's North Island and in Auckland .
Producer John Barnett said " This novel was set in Whangara and it would almost have been heresy to shoot anywhere else .
There are very physical things that are described in the book – the sweep of the bay , the island that looks like a whale , the meeting houses , the number of houses that are present and of course , the people whose legend we were telling .
[ ... ] If we 'd gone somewhere else and tried to manufacture the surroundings and the ambience , then I think it would have been noticeable in the picture .
" The whale beaching was depicted using full - scale models created by Auckland , New Zealand based Glasshammer visual effects .
The 60-foot waka seen at the end of the film was made in two halves in Auckland before being transported to Whangara .
The waka was given to the Whangara community after filming concluded .
RELEASE THEATRICAL RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Theatrical release .
Whale Rider was theatrically released on 2003 in New Zealand and Germany .
PREMIERE
Section::::Premiere .
Whale Rider was premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival in 2002 .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Whale Rider was released on DVD and VHS on 28 October 2003 by Columbia TriStar Home Entertainment .
Shout Factory released a 15th anniversary blu - ray of Whale Rider on their Shout Select imprint on 22 August 2017 .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film received critical acclaim and Castle - Hughes 's performance won rave reviews .
Based on 144 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an overall approval rating from critics of 90 % , with an average score of 7.7 as of June 2010 .
By comparison , Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics , calculated an average score of 79 , based on 31 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Margaret Pomeranz and David Stratton of The Movie Show both gave the film four out of five stars .
Pomeranz said " Niki Caro has directed this uplifting story with great sensitivity , eliciting affecting performances from a sterling cast , and a wonderful one from newcomer Keisha Castle - Hughes . "
Roger Ebert gave the film four out of four stars and said , " The genius of the movie is the way it sidesteps all of the obvious cliches of the underlying story and makes itself fresh , observant , tough and genuinely moving . "
He said of Castle - Hughes : " This is a movie star .
" Ebert later went on to name it as one of the best ten films of 2003 .
The Los Angeles Timess Kenneth Turan praised Caro for her " willingness to let this story tell itself in its own time and the ability to create emotion that is intense without being cloying or dishonest . "
Claudia Puig of USA Today gave the film three - and - a - half out of four stars and praised Castle - Hughes ' acting , saying " so effectively does she convey her pained confusion through subtle vocal cues , tentative stance and expressive dark eyes . "
The film has also been discussed , and praised , widely within academia .
Anthropologist , A. Asbjørn Jøn , discussed a range of Maori tribal traditions that resonate within the film , while noting links between the release of Whale Rider and increases in both New Zealand 's whale watching tourism industry and conservation efforts .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Whale Rider grossed 6,400,000
[ Currency ? ]
in New Zealand and Germany .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The film won a number of international film - festival awards , including : * the Toronto International Film Festival 's AGF Peoples Choice award in September 2002 * the World Cinema Audience award at the January 2003 Sundance Film Festival in the United States
* the Canal Plus Award at the January 2003 Rotterdam Film Festival .
At the age of 13 , Keisha Castle - Hughes was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her performance , becoming the youngest actress ever nominated for the award at that time .
She held the record until 2012 when Quvenzhané Wallis ( at the age of 9 ) was nominated for that category for the film Beasts of the Southern Wild .
Academy Awards :
* Best Actress ( Keisha Castle - Hughes , lost to Charlize Theron for Monster )
Chicago Film Critics Association : * Best Actress ( Keisha Castle - Hughes , lost to Charlize Theron for Monster ) * Most Promising Filmmaker ( Niki Caro , lost to Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini for American Splendor )
*
Most Promising Performer ( Keisha Castle - Hughes , winner ) Image Awards : * Best Actress ( Keisha Castle - Hughes , lost to Queen Latifah for Bringing Down the House )
* Best Film ( lost to The Fighting Temptations ) Independent Spirit Awards : * Best Foreign Film ( winner ) New Zealand Film Awards : * Best Film * Best Director ( Niki Caro ) * Best Actress ( Keisha Castle - Hughes ) * Best Supporting Actor ( Cliff Curtis ) * Best Supporting Actress ( Vicky Haughton ) * Best Juvenile Performer ( Mana Taumanu ) * Best Screenplay ( Niki Caro ) * Best Original Score ( Lisa Gerrard ) * Best Costume Design ( Kirsty Cameron ) Satellite Awards
* Best Art Direction ( lost to )
* Best Director ( Niki Caro , lost to Jim Sheridan for In America )
* Best Film – Drama ( lost to In America )
* Best Screenplay – Adapted ( Niki Caro , lost to Brian Helgeland for Mystic River )
Screen Actors Guild : * Best Supporting Actress ( Keisha Castle - Hughes , lost to Renée Zellweger for Cold Mountain ) Washington D.C. Area Film Critics Association : * Best Actress ( Keisha Castle - Hughes , lost to Naomi Watts for 21 Grams )
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film contains music by Lisa Gerrard , released on the album Whalerider on 7 July 2003 .
* Bar One ( International Observer )
Loaded Sounds - International Observer
* Kaikoura Dub - Pitch Black
* U Want Beef - Deceptikonz * Voice / Percussion Loop - Hirini Melbourne and Richard Nunns from
Te Ku Te Whe * Jast Passing Through - Nick Theobald REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS