FEDERAL RESERVE BANK
A Federal Reserve Bank is a regional bank of the Federal Reserve System , the central banking system of the United States .
There are twelve in total , one for each of the twelve Federal Reserve Districts that were created by the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 .
The banks are jointly responsible for implementing the monetary policy set forth by the Federal Open Market Committee , and are divided as follows : Some banks also possess branches , with the whole system being headquartered at the Eccles Building in Washington , D.C. HISTORY Section::::History .
Alexander Hamilton , the first Secretary of Treasury , started a movement in 1780 advocating for the creation of a central bank .
The Bank Bill created by Hamilton was a proposal to institute a national bank in order to improve the economic stability of the nation after its independence from Britain .
Although the national bank was to be used as a tool for the government , it was to be privately owned .
Hamilton wrote several articles providing information regarding his national bank idea where he expressed the validity and " would be " success of the national bank based upon : incentives for the rich to invest , ownerships of bonds and shares , being rooted in fiscal management , and stable monetary system .
In response to this , the First Bank of the United States was established in 1791 , its charter signed by George Washington .
The First Bank of the United States was headquartered in Philadelphia , but had branches in other major cities .
The Bank performed the basic banking functions of accepting deposits , issuing bank notes , making loans and purchasing securities .
When its charter expired 20 years later , the United States was without a central bank for a few years , during which it suffered an unusual inflation .
In 1816 , James Madison signed the Second Bank of the United States into existence .
Then , in 1833 , before that bank 's charter expired , President Jackson removed the government funds as part of the Bank War , and the United States went without a central bank for 40 years .
A financial crisis known as the Panic of 1907 was headed off by a private conglomerate ( led by J. P. Morgan ) , who set themselves up as " lenders of last resort " to banks in trouble .
This effort succeeded in stopping the panic , and led to calls for a Federal agency to do the same thing .
In response to this , the Federal Reserve System was created by the Federal Reserve Act of December 23 , 1913 , establishing a new central bank intended to serve as a formal " lender of last resort " to banks in times of liquidity crisis — panics where depositors tried to withdraw their money faster than a normal fractional - reserve - based bank could pay it out .
The Federal Reserve Act presented by Congressman Carter Glass and Senator Robert L. Owen incorporated modifications by Woodrow Wilson and allowed for a regional Federal Reserve System , operating under a supervisory board in Washington ,
D.C. Congress approved the Act , and President Wilson signed it into law on December 23 , 1913 .
The Act , " Provided for the establishment of Federal Reserve Banks , to furnish an elastic currency , to afford means of rediscounting commercial paper , to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States , and for other purposes .
The Act provided for a Reserve Bank Organization Committee that would designate no less than eight but no more than twelve cities to be Federal Reserve cities , and would then divide the nation into districts , each district to contain one Federal Reserve City .
The legislation provided for a system that included a number of regional Federal Reserve Banks and a seven - member governing board .
All national banks were required to join the system and other banks could join .
On April 2 , 1914 , the Reserve Bank Organization Committee announced its decision , and twelve Federal Reserve banks were established to cover various districts throughout the country .
Those opposed to the establishment of an overwhelmingly powerful New York Fed prevailed in their desire that its scope and influence should be limited .
Initially , this bank 's influence was restricted to New York State .
Nonetheless , with over $ 20,000,000 in capital stock , the New York Bank had nearly four times the capitalization of the smallest banks in the system , such as Atlanta and Minneapolis .
As a result , it was impossible to prevent the New York Fed from being the largest and most dominant bank in the system .
The Federal Reserve Banks opened for business in November 1914 .
The New York Fed opened for business under the leadership of Benjamin Strong , Jr. , previously president of the Bankers Trust Company , on November 16 , 1914 .
The initial staff consisted of seven officers and 85 clerks , many on loan from local banks .
Mr. Strong recalled the starting days at the Bank in a speech : " It may be said that the Bank 's equipment consisted of little more than a copy of the Federal Reserve Act .
" During its first day of operation , the Bank took in $ 100 million from 211 member banks ; made two rediscounts ; and received its first shipment of Federal Reserve Notes .
Congress created Federal Reserve notes to provide the nation with a flexible supply of currency .
The notes were to be issued to Federal Reserve Banks for subsequent transmittal to banking institutions in accordance with the needs of the public .
The Bank 's staff grew rapidly during the early years , necessitating the need for a new home .
Land was bought on a city block encompassing Liberty Street , Maiden Lane , William Street and Nassau Street .
A public competition was held and the architectural firm of York & Sawyer submitted the winning design reminiscent of the palaces in Florence , Italy .
The Bank 's vaults , located 86 feet below street level , were built on Manhattan 's bedrock .
In 1924 , the Fed moved into its new home .
By 1927 , the vault contained ten percent of the world 's entire store of monetary gold .
The Federal Reserve System is considered to be an independent agency that exists outside of the cabinet of the executive and its powers are derived directly from Congress .
Over the past century , the Fed 's power has expanded from its original roles such as a private response to problems in banking systems and to establishing a more effective supervisory role of banking systems in the United States , to its now current position of being a lender of last resort to banking institutions that require additional credit to stay afloat .
LEGAL STATUS Section::::Legal status .
The twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks were established as the operating arms of the nation 's central banking system .
They are organized much like private corporations — possibly leading to some confusion about ownership .
The Federal Reserve Banks have an intermediate legal status , with some features of private corporations and some features of public federal agencies .
In United States Shipping Board Emergency Fleet Corporation v. Western Union Telegraph Co. , the U.S. Supreme Court stated , " Instrumentalities like the national banks or the federal reserve banks , in which there are private interests , are not departments of the government .
They are private corporations in which the government has an interest . "
The United States has an interest in the Federal Reserve Banks as tax - exempt federally created instrumentalities whose profits belong to the federal government , but this interest is not proprietary .
In Lewis v. United States , the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit stated that : " The Reserve Banks are not federal instrumentalities for purposes of the FTCA [ the Federal Tort Claims Act ] , but are independent , privately owned and locally controlled corporations .
" The opinion went on to say , however , that : " The Reserve Banks have properly been held to be federal instrumentalities for some purposes . " Another relevant decision is Scott v. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City , in which the distinction is made between Federal Reserve Banks , which are federally created instrumentalities , and the Board of Governors , which is a federal agency .
Regarding the structural relationship between the twelve Federal Reserve banks and the various commercial ( member ) banks , political science professor Michael D. Reagan has written that :
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The Federal Reserve System provides the government with a ready source of loans and serves as the safe depository for federal money .
The Federal Reserve is also a low - cost mechanism for transferring funds and is an inexpensive agent for meeting payments on the national debt and government salaries .
The Federal Reserve Banks were created as instrumentalities to carry out the policies of the Federal Reserve System .
The Federal Reserve Banks issue shares of stock to member banks .
However , owning Federal Reserve Bank stock is quite different from owning stock in a private company .
The Federal Reserve Banks are not operated for profit , and ownership of a certain amount of stock is , by law , a condition of membership in the system .
The stock may not be sold or traded or pledged as security for a loan ; dividends are , by law , limited to 6 % per year .
The dividends paid to member banks are considered partial compensation for the lack of interest paid on member banks ' required reserves held at the Federal Reserve .
By law , banks in the United States must maintain fractional reserves , most of which are kept on account at the Federal Reserve .
Historically , the Federal Reserve did not pay interest on these funds .
The Federal Reserve now has authority , granted by Congress in the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act ( EESA ) of 2008 , to pay interest on these funds .
A major responsibility of The Federal Reserve is to oversee their banking and financial systems .
Overseeing the banking and financial systems of a bank is crucial in a society .
FINANCES Section::::Finances .
Each Federal Reserve Bank funds its own operations , primarily from interest on its loans and on the securities it holds .
Expenses and dividends paid are typically a small fraction of a Federal Reserve Bank 's revenue each year .
The banks may retain part of their earnings in their own surplus funds that are limited to $ 7.5 billion , system - wide .
The rest must be transferred to the Board of Governors , which then deposits it to the Treasury .
The Federal Reserve Banks conduct ongoing internal audits of their operations to ensure that their accounts are accurate and comply with the Federal Reserve System 's accounting principles .
The banks are also subject to two types of external auditing .
Since 1978 the Government Accountability Office ( GAO ) has conducted regular audits of the banks ' operations .
The GAO audits are reported to the public , but they may not review a bank 's monetary policy decisions or disclose them to the public .
Since 1999 each bank has also been required to submit to an annual audit by an external accounting firm , which produces a confidential report to the bank and a summary statement for the bank 's annual report .
Some members of Congress continue to advocate a more public and intrusive GAO audit of the Federal Reserve System , but Federal Reserve representatives support the existing restrictions to prevent political influence over long - range economic decisions .
BANKS
Section::::Banks .
The Federal Reserve officially identifies Districts by number and Reserve Bank city .
* 1st District ( A ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Boston * 2nd District ( B ) - Federal Reserve Bank of New York
* 3rd District ( C ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
* 4th District ( D ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland , with branches in Cincinnati , Ohio and Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania
* 5th District ( E ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond , with branches in Baltimore , Maryland and Charlotte , North Carolina
* 6th District ( F ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta , with branches in Birmingham , Alabama ; Jacksonville , Florida ; Miami , Florida ; Nashville , Tennessee ; and New Orleans , Louisiana * 7th District ( G ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago , with branches in Detroit , Michigan and West Des Moines , Iowa * 8th District ( H ) - Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis , with branches in Little Rock , Arkansas ; Louisville , Kentucky ; and Memphis , Tennessee * 9th District ( I ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis , with a branch in Helena , Montana * 10th District ( J ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City , with branches in Denver , Colorado ; Oklahoma City , Oklahoma ; and Omaha , Nebraska * 11th District ( K ) - Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas , with branches in El Paso , Texas ; Houston , Texas ; and San Antonio , Texas * 12th District ( L ) - Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco , with branches in Los Angeles , California ; Portland , Oregon ; Salt Lake City , Utah ; and Seattle , Washington The New York Federal Reserve district is the largest by asset value .
San Francisco , followed by Kansas City and Minneapolis , represent the largest geographical districts .
Missouri is the only state to have two Federal Reserve Banks ( Kansas City and St. Louis ) .
California , Florida , Missouri , Ohio , Pennsylvania , Tennessee , and Texas are the only states which have two or more Federal Reserve Bank branches seated within their states , with Missouri , Pennsylvania , and Tennessee having branches of two different districts within the same state .
In the 12th District , the Seattle Branch serves Alaska , and the San Francisco Bank serves Hawaii .
New York , Richmond , and San Francisco are the only banks that oversee non - U.S. state territories .
The System serves these territories as follows : the New York Bank serves the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands ; the Richmond Bank serves the District of Columbia ; the San Francisco Bank serves American Samoa , Guam , and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands .
The Board of Governors last revised the branch boundaries of the System in February 1996 .
ASSETS Section::::Assets . !
Federal Reserve Bank ! !
Total assets in billions
USD New York City $ 2,428 San Francisco $ 583 Richmond $ 261 Atlanta $ 265 Chicago $ 233 Dallas $ 187 Cleveland $ 129 Philadelphia $ 114 Boston $ 85 Kansas City $ 72 St. Louis $ 60 Minneapolis $ 38 !
All banks ! !
$ 4,453 SEE ALSO
* Criticism of the Federal Reserve * Federal Reserve Act
* List of regions of the United States#Federal Reserve banks
* Federal Reserve Branches * Federal Reserve System
NOTES
REFERENCES
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Twelve Federal Reserve Districts * Federal Reserve Board Annual Reports