RED RIVER OF THE SOUTH
The Red River , or sometimes the Red River of the South , is a major river in the southern United States of America .
It was named for the red - bed country of its watershed .
It is one of several rivers with that name .
Although it was once a tributary of the Mississippi River , the Red River is now a tributary of the Atchafalaya River , a distributary of the Mississippi that flows separately into the Gulf of Mexico .
It is connected to the Mississippi River by the Old River Control Structure .
The south bank of the Red River formed part of the US – Mexico border from the Adams – Onís Treaty ( in force 1821 ) until the Texas Annexation and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo .
The Red River is the second - largest river basin in the southern Great Plains .
It rises in two branches in the Texas Panhandle and flows east , where it acts as the border between the states of Texas and Oklahoma .
It forms a short border between Texas and Arkansas before entering Arkansas , turning south near Fulton , Arkansas , and flowing into Louisiana , where it flows into the Atchafalaya River .
The total length of the river is , with a mean flow of over at the mouth .
GEOGRAPHY COURSE Section::::Geography .
Section::::Course .
The Red River rises near the edge of the northwestern dip slope of the Llano Estacado mesa in two forks in northern Texas and southwestern Oklahoma .
The North Fork Red River meets the southern and largest fork near the Texas – Oklahoma border .
The southern fork , which is about long , is generally called the Prairie Dog Town Fork .
It is formed in Randall County , Texas , near the county seat of Canyon , by the confluence of intermittent Palo Duro Creek and Tierra Blanca Creek .
The Red River turns and flows southeast through Palo Duro Canyon in Palo Duro Canyon State Park at an elevation of , then past Newlin , Texas , to meet the Oklahoma state line .
Past that point , it is generally considered the main stem of the Red River .
Near Elmer , Oklahoma , the North Fork finally joins , and the river proceeds to follow a winding course east through one of the most arid parts of the Great Plains , receiving the Wichita River as it passes the city of Wichita Falls .
Near Denison , the river exits the eastern end of Lake Texoma , a reservoir formed by the Denison Dam .
The lake is also fed by the Washita River from the north .
After the river flows out of the southeastern end of the lake , it runs generally east towards Arkansas and receives Muddy Boggy Creek before turning southward near Texarkana .
Soon after , the river crosses south into Louisiana .
The sister cities of Shreveport and Bossier City were developed on either bank of the river , as were the downriver cities of Alexandria and Pineville .
Where it is joined by the Ouachita River , its largest tributary , the river later broadens into a complex network of marshlands surrounding the Mississippi and Atchafalaya rivers .
Its waters eventually discharge into the Atchafalaya River and flow eastward or southward into the Gulf of Mexico .
In 1946 , the Red River flood spilled over into Pineville because of insufficient levee height and strength .
However , the taller and stronger levee held in Alexandria .
Willie E. Kees Jr. , the newly elected mayor of Pineville , worked to gain support for the Corps of Engineers to increase the height of the levee on the eastern side of the river to equal that in Alexandria .
TRIBUTARIES Section::::Tributaries .
Tributaries include the Little Red River , Prairie Dog Town Fork Red River , Salt Fork Red River , North Fork Red River , Pease River , Washita River , Kiamichi River , Little Wichita River , Little River , Sulphur River , Loggy Bayou ( through Lake Bistineau and Dorcheat Bayou ) as well as the Ouachita River ( also known as the Black River at that point ) not far ( at Acme , Louisiana ) from the mouth .
WATERSHED Section::::Watershed .
The Red River 's watershed covers and is the southernmost major river system in the Great Plains .
Its drainage basin is mostly in the states of Texas and Oklahoma , but also covers parts of Arkansas and Louisiana .
Its basin is characterized by flat , fertile agricultural land , with only a few major cities .
The drainage basin of the Red River is very arid and receives little precipitation .
As a result , much of the river above the Texas – Oklahoma border is intermittent , and until the river is past its great bend south in Arkansas , the flow varies widely .
Most of the agriculture in the basin is sustained by groundwater , which is recharged with rainfall and riverflow .
The lower course of the river flows through a series of marshes and swamps , where its flow is dramatically moderated .
HISTORY NATIVE
AMERICANS Section::::History .
Section::::Native Americans .
Native American cultures along the river were diverse , developing specialized adaptations to the many different environments .
By the time of European contact , the eastern Piney Woods were dominated by the numerous historic tribes of the Caddoan Confederacy .
They found plentiful game and fish , and also had good land for cultivating staple crops .
The middle part of the Red River was dominated by Wichita and Tonkawa .
This area was prairie , where Native Americans constructed portable and temporary tepees for housing .
They practiced limited farming and followed game in seasonal , nomadic hunting cycles .
The Plains division of the Lipan Apache dominated the western Red River area until the 18th century , when they were displaced by invading Comanche from the north .
EUROPEAN - AMERICAN EXPLORATION AND SETTLEMENT Section::::European - American exploration and settlement .
In 1806 , President Thomas Jefferson commissioned the Red River Expedition to explore parts of the new lands of the Louisiana Purchase by traveling up the Red River .
He said it was " in truth , next to the Missouri , the most interesting water of the Mississippi " , in a letter to William Dunbar .
Having threaded the maze of bayous at the river 's confluence , and the " Great Raft " of lodged driftwood , the expedition was stopped by the Spanish near what is now New Boston , Texas .
In 1806 , Lieutenant Zebulon Pike , under orders to ascertain the source of the Red River , ascended the Arkansas River , made his way downstream on what turned out to be the Rio Grande , and was sent home by the Spanish authorities .
A more successful exploration of the river 's upper reaches to both its sources was the 1852 expedition under Capt .
Randolph Barnes Marcy , assisted by Brevet Capt .
George B. McClellan .
The latter was important as a general in the American Civil War .
In April 1815 , Captain Henry Miller Shreve was the first person to bring a steamboat , the Enterprise , up the Red River .
Fulton and Livingston , who claimed the exclusive right to navigate Louisiana waters by steamboat , sued Shreve in the District Court of New Orleans .
The judge ruled that the monopoly claimed by the plaintiffs was illegal .
That decision , along with a similar outcome in Gibbons v. Ogden freed navigation on every river , lake or harbor in the United States from interference by monopolies .
When John Quincy Adams became Secretary of State in 1817 , one of his highest priorities was to negotiate the boundaries of the Louisiana Purchase with Spain .
He negotiated with the Spanish Minister to the United States , Luis de Onis , and finally concluded Adams – Onis Treaty , also known as the Treaty of 1819 .
The treaty defined the south bank of the river as the boundary between the United States and Spain .
That boundary continued to be recognized when Mexico gained its independence from Spain , then again when Texas became independent from Mexico .
It remained so until the United States Congress consented to the Red River Boundary Compact adopted by the states of Oklahoma and Texas , which set the jurisdictional boundary between Texas and Oklahoma at the vegetation line on the south bank , but left title of adjacent property owners at the south bank .
The Red River Campaign ( March – May 1864 ) was fought along the Red River Valley in Louisiana during the American Civil War .
It was a failed attempt by the Union to occupy eastern Texas .
Confederate commander Richard Taylor was able to repel an army under Nathaniel Banks three times bigger than his own .
In Louisiana , the area of present - day Natchitoches Parish was settled by French Creole and mixed - race Louisiana Creole people , starting before 1800 .
The Cane River National Heritage Area marks this area of influence , with plantations and churches founded by Louisiana Creoles .
Some of the sites are designated as destinations on the Louisiana African American Heritage Trail , designed in the 21st century .
For nearly 100 years after the American Civil War , some of the plantations were the center of a large African American and Creole community life , whose people lived and worked in this area for generations .
The area along the lower Red River of Grant Parish , Louisiana , and neighboring parishes were a mixture of hill country and cotton plantations , with white planters and subsistence farmers , and numerous African American slaves working the plantations in the ante bellum years .
It was an area of heated social tensions and insurgency during and after the Reconstruction era .
Grant was a new parish created by the Reconstruction legislature , which was trying to increase Republican Party representation .
In 1873 , Grant Parish was the site of the Colfax massacre , caused by the political tension and violence arising from the disputed 1872 gubernatorial election and efforts by local whites to keep white supremacy .
White militias , organized from nearby parishes , killed more than 100 freedmen , some of whom had surrendered as prisoners .
In 1874 , such militias organized as the White League in Grant Parish , and other chapters were soon founded across the state .
The Coushatta Massacre was attributed to the White League , which attacked Republican officeholders to run them out of office .
The paramilitary groups intimidated and terrorized freedmen to keep them from the polls , and by the late 1870s , conservative Democrats had retaken political control of the state .
GREAT RAFT
Section::::Great Raft .
In the early 19th century , settlers found that much of the river 's length in Louisiana was unnavigable because of a collection of fallen trees that formed a " Great Raft " over long .
Captain Henry Miller Shreve began clearing the log jam in 1839 .
The log jam was not completely cleared until the 1870s , when dynamite became available .
The river was thereafter navigable , but north of Natchitoches it was restricted to small craft .
Removal of the raft further connected the Red and Atchafalaya rivers , accelerating the development of the Atchafalaya River channel .
In the 20th century , the interest group known as the Red River Valley Association was formed to lobby the United States Congress to make the river fully navigable between Alexandria and Shreveport , Louisiana .
Leading supporters of the longstanding project were Louisiana Democratic senators Allen J. Ellender , J. Bennett Johnston and Russell B. Long , the Fourth District Congressman Joe Waggonner , and the late Shreveport Mayor Calhoun Allen .
With the completion of the project , a lock system constructed by the US Army Corps of Engineers allowed navigation of barge traffic as far north as Shreveport .
GREER COUNTY
DEBATE Section::::Greer County debate .
Specialists debate whether the North Fork or the Prairie Dog Town Fork is the true stem .
Because of a cartographic error , the land between the north and south forks was claimed by both the state of Texas and the United States federal government .
Randolph B. Marcy 's expedition followed the Prairie Dog Town Fork in 1852 .
Originally called Greer County , Texas , the US Supreme Court ruled that it belonged to the United States , which at the time oversaw the Oklahoma Territory .
That territory was later incorporated into the state of Oklahoma , whose southern border now follows the south fork .
Today , the southern Prairie Dog Town Fork is considered the main fork , though the North Fork is as long and normally has a greater water flow .
2015 RED RIVER FLOOD Section::::2015 Red River flood .
In June 2015 , the Red River flooded parts of northeast Texas , southwest Arkansas , southeast Oklahoma and Louisiana , from Denison Dam , to just south of Alexandria , Louisiana . RECREATION Section::::Recreation .
In 1943 , Denison Dam was built on the Red River to form Lake Texoma , a large reservoir of , some north of Dallas .
Other reservoirs on the river 's tributaries serve as flood control .
SEE ALSO
* List of Arkansas rivers
* List of longest main - stem rivers in the United States * List of Louisiana rivers
* List of Oklahoma rivers
* List of Texas rivers
* Great Raft * North Fork Red River
* Prairie Dog
Town Fork Red River * Red River Bridge War * Red River Campaign , 1864 , during the American Civil War , 1861–1865 * Adams – Onís Treaty * Red River Shootout , the annual college football game between the University of Texas Longhorns and the University of Oklahoma Sooners .
*
Little Red River ( Texas ) REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Randolph Marcy , Exploration of the Red River , 1852 , hosted by the Portal to Texas History * Oklahoma Digital Maps : Digital Collections of Oklahoma and Indian Territory * Red River Compact Commission .
* " U.S. Supreme Court Ruling Leaves Texas High And Dry . "
Geology * Red River Valley - Engineering Geology Mapping Program PDF files of publications about and maps of the geology of the Red River Valley
* Autin , W. J. , and C. E. Pearson , 1993 , Quaternary Geology and Geoarchaeology of the Lower Red River Valley : Friends of the Pleistocene South Central Cell 11 th Annual Field Conference Alexandria , Louisiana March 26 - 28 , 1993 .
Friends of the Pleistocene South Central Cell and Louisiana Geological Survey , Baton Rouge , Louisiana .
183 p.