SNIPE
A snipe is any of about 26 wading bird species in three genera in the family Scolopacidae .
They are characterized by a very long , slender bill and crypsis , or camouflage , plumage .
The Gallinago snipes have a nearly worldwide distribution , the Lymnocryptes snipe is restricted to Asia and Europe and the Coenocorypha snipes are found only in the outlying islands of New Zealand .
The four species of painted snipe are not closely related to the typical snipes , and are placed in their own family , the Rostratulidae .
BEHAVIOUR
Section::::Behaviour .
Snipes search for invertebrates in the mud with a " sewing - machine " action of their long bills .
The sensitivity of the bill is caused by filaments belonging to the fifth pair of nerves , which run almost to the tip and open immediately under the soft cuticle in a series of cells .
A similar adaptation is found in sandpipers .
They give this portion of the surface of the premaxillaries a honeycomb - like appearance .
Through these filaments the bird can sense its food in the mud without seeing it .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Snipes feed mainly on insect larva .
Other invertebrate prey include snails , crustacea , and worms .
The snipe 's bill allows the very tip to remain closed while the snipe slurps up invertebrates .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
Snipes can be found in various types of wet marshy settings including bogs and swamps , wet meadows , and along rivers and ponds .
Snipes avoid settling in areas with dense vegetation , but rather seek marshy areas with patchy cover to hide from predators .
HUNTING
Section::::Hunting .
Camouflage may enable snipe to remain undetected by hunters in marshland .
If the snipe flies , hunters have difficulty wing - shooting due to the bird 's erratic flight pattern .
The difficulties involved in hunting snipes gave rise to the term sniper , meaning a hunter highly skilled in marksmanship and camouflaging , which later evolved to mean a sharpshooter or someone who shoots from a concealed location .
" Going on a snipe hunt " is a phrase suggesting a fool 's errand , or an impossible task .
As an American rite of passage , it is often associated with summer camps and groups such as the Boy Scouts .
SEE ALSO
* Snipe
eel * Snipe ( mammal ) FOOTNOTES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Snipe videos on the Internet Bird Collection * http://www.fssbirding.org.uk/snipesonogram.htm