MISS AMERICA Miss America is an annual competition that is open to women from the United States between the ages of 17 and 25 .
Originating in 1921 as a " bathing beauty revue " , the contest is now judged on competitors ' talent performances and interviews .
As of 2018 , there is no longer a swimsuit portion to the contest , or consideration of physical appearance .
Miss America travels about 20,000 miles a month , changing her location every 24 to 48 hours , touring the nation and promoting her particular platform of interest .
The winner is crowned by the previous year 's titleholder .
The current titleholder , Miss America 2019 , is Miss New York 2018 , Nia Franklin , who was crowned on September 9 , 2018 , by her predecessor Cara Mund ( Miss America 2018 ) .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
On February 1 , 1919 , there was a beauty pageant held in the Chu Chin Chow Ball at the Hotel des Artistes in New York City .
The winner , Edith Hyde Robbins Macartney , was called " Miss America . "
Neither the title nor this pageant were related to the current " Miss American Pageant " which would develop a year later in Atlantic City , New Jersey .
Rather , the origins of the " Miss America Pageant " lie in an event entitled The Fall Frolic which was held on September 25 , 1920 , in Atlantic City .
This event was designed to bring business to the Boardwalk : " three hundred and fifty gaily decorated rolling wicker chairs were pushed along the parade route .
Three hundred and fifty men pushed the chairs .
However , the main attractions were the young ' maidens ' who sat in the rolling chairs , headed by a Miss Ernestine Cremona , who was dressed in a flowing white robe and represented ' Peace . ' "
The event was so successful that The Businessmen 's League planned to repeat it the following year as a beauty pageant or a " bather 's revue " ( to capitalize on the popularity of newspaper - based beauty contests that used photo submissions ) .
The event was scheduled to take place the week - end following Labor Day , to encourage summer visitors to stay in Atlantic City .
Thus , " newspapers as far west as Pittsburgh and as far south as Washington , D.C. , were asked to sponsor local beauty contests .
The winners would participate in the Atlantic City contest .
If the local newspaper would pay for the winner 's wardrobe , the Atlantic City Businessmen 's League would pay for the contestant 's travel to compete in the Inter - City Beauty Contest . "
Herb Test , a " newspaperman " , coined the term for the winner : " Miss America . "
On September 8 , 1921 , 100,000 people gathered at the Boardwalk to watch the contestants from Washington , D.C. , Pittsburgh , Harrisburg , Ocean City , Camden , Newark , New York , and Philadelphia .
The 16-year - old winner from Washington , D.C. , Margaret Gorman , was crowned the " Golden Mermaid " and won $ 100 .
The pageant continued consistently over the next eight decades except for the years 1928–1932 , when it was temporarily shut down due to financial problems associated with the Great Depression and suggestions that it promoted " loose morals . "
With its revival in 1933 , 15-year - old Marian Bergeron won , prompting future contestants to be between the ages of 18 and 26 .
In 1935 , Lenora Slaughter was hired to " re - invent " the pageant and served for 32 years as its Director .
By 1938 , a talent section was added to the competition , and contestants were required to have a chaperone .
In 1940 , the title officially became " The Miss America Pageant " and the pageant was held in Atlantic City 's Convention Hall .
In 1944 , compensation for " Miss America " switched from " furs and movie contracts " to college scholarships , an idea generally credited to Jean Bartel , Miss America 1943 .
During the early years of the pageant , under the directorship of Lenora Slaughter , it became segregated via rule number seven that stated : " contestants must be of good health and of the white race . "
Rule number seven was abolished in 1950 .
Miss New York 1945 , Bess Myerson , the only Jewish American winner to date , became Miss America 1945 and faced antisemitism during her time as Miss America , leading to a cutback in her official duties .
Although there were Native American , Latina , and Asian - American contestants , there were no African - American contestants for fifty years ( African - Americans appeared in musical numbers as far back as 1923 , however , when they were cast as slaves ) .
In 1970 , however , Cheryl Browne , Miss Iowa 1970 , competed as the first African - American contestant in the Miss America 1971 pageant .
She also participated in one of the last USO - Miss America tours in Vietnam .
A decade later in 1983 , Miss New York ( and Miss Syracuse )
1983
, Vanessa Williams ( the first African - American woman to win the competition as Miss America 1984 ) , faced discrimination in response to her win and later resigned under pressure due to a scandal involving nude photographs .
Three decades after these events , Miss New York ( and Miss Syracuse )
2013 , Nina Davuluri , the first Indian - American woman to win the crown as Miss America 2014 , faced xenophobic and racist comments in social media when she won .
Two years later at the Miss America 2016 pageant , former Miss America CEO Sam Haskell apologized to Vanessa Williams ( who was serving as head judge ) for what was said to her during the events of 1984 .
In 2018 , the pageant adopted a new format , referred to as " Miss America 2.0 " , as part of an effort under new chairwoman Gretchen Carlson to " [ evolve Miss America ] in this cultural revolution .
" Under the new format , competitors are no longer judged on their physical appearance ( resulting in the highly - publicized announcement that the event would no longer include a swimsuit competition ) , and there is a larger focus on the competitors ' " talent , passion , and ambition " .
HISTORY 1921–1967 Section::::History .
Section::::1921–1967 .
Margaret Gorman , Miss District of Columbia , was declared " The Most Beautiful Bathing Girl in America " in 1921 at the age of 16 and was recognized as the first " Miss America " when she returned to compete the next year .
The contest that year was won by Mary Katherine Campbell ( Miss Ohio ) , who won again in 1923 .
She returned to compete a third time in 1924 but placed as first runner - up that year , and pageant rules were then amended to prevent anyone from winning more than once .
Beginning in 1940 , Bob Russell served as the first official host of the pageant .
In 1941 , Mifauny Shunatona , Miss Oklahoma , became the first Native American contestant .
In 1945 , Bess Myerson became the first Jewish - American and the first Miss New York ( competing as Miss New York City , a competition organized by a local radio station ) to win the Miss America pageant as Miss America 1945 .
As the only Jewish contestant , Myerson was encouraged by the pageant directors to change her name to " Bess Meredith " or " Beth Merrick " , but she refused .
After winning the title ( and as a Jewish Miss America ) , Myerson received few endorsements and later recalled that " I could n't even stay in certain hotels [ … ] there would be signs that read no coloreds , no Jews , no dogs .
I felt so rejected .
Here I was chosen to represent American womanhood
and then America treated me like this .
"
She thus cut short her Miss America tour and instead traveled with the Anti - Defamation League .
In this capacity , she spoke against discrimination in a talk entitled , " You Ca n't Be Beautiful and Hate . "
In 1948 , Irma Nydia Vasquez , the first Miss Puerto Rico , became the first Latina contestant .
In addition , in 1948 , Yun Tau Chee , the first Miss Hawaii , was also the first Asian - American contestant .
Miss America 1949 , Jacque Mercer , was married and divorced during her reign ; after this , a rule was enacted requiring Miss America contestants to sign a certification that they have never been married or pregnant .
Starting in 1950 , although the pageant continued to be in September , the Miss America title changed to " post - dated " , thus that year 's pageant winner became Miss America 1951 , and there was no Miss America 1950 .
The pageant was first televised nationally in 1954 , hosted by Bob Russell .
Future television star Lee Meriwether was crowned Miss America 1955 .
It would also be the last time Russell served as host .
He recommended , and was replaced by , Bert Parks , who served as the host for the second televised pageant in 1955 and stayed as host until 1979 .
Television viewership peaked during the early 1960s , when it was the highest - rated program on American television .
1968–2016
Section::::1968–2016 .
With the rise of second - wave feminism and the civil rights movement during the 1960s , the Miss America pageant became the subject of a series of protests that attacked it as sexist , racist , and part of U.S. militarism .
The first demonstration took place during the Miss America 1969 pageant held on September 7 , 1968 ( won by Miss Illinois 1968 , Judith Ford ) , when about 200 members of the group New York Radical Women demonstrated as part of the Miss America protest .
In addition , a pamphlet distributed at the protest by Robin Morgan , No More Miss America ! , became a source for feminist scholarship .
The protest was co - sponsored by Florynce Kennedy 's Media Workshop , an activist group she founded in 1966 to protest the media 's representation of African Americans , along with the feminist Jeanette Rankin Brigade and the ACLU .
Morgan later stated that the Miss America pageant " was chosen as a target for a number of reasons : it has always been a lily - white , racist contest ; the winner tours Vietnam , entertaining the troops as a ' Murder Mascot ' ; the whole gimmick is one commercial shillgame to sell the sponsor 's products .
Where else could one find such a perfect combination of American values — racism , militarism , sexism — all packaged in one ' ideal symbol , ' a woman .
"
The protesters compared the pageant to a county fair where livestock are judged .
They thus crowned a sheep as Miss America and symbolically destroyed a number of feminine products , including false eyelashes , high - heeled shoes , curlers , hairspray , makeup , girdles , corsets , and bras .
Burning the contents of a trash can was suggested , but a permit was unobtainable ; news media seized on the similarity between draft resisters burning draft cards and women burning their bras .
In fact , there was no bra burning , nor did anyone remove her bra .
The Women 's Liberation Front later demonstrated at the Miss America 1971 pageant .
Miss Iowa 1970 , Cheryl Browne , became the first African American contestant in the competition 's history during the Miss America 1971 pageant ( September 12 , 1970 ) .
She drew attention from reporters and from security personnel in Atlantic City who maintained a visible presence during pageant rehearsals .
Browne was not a finalist , however , losing to future media personality , Miss Texas 1970 , Phyllis George .
In August 1971 , Browne traveled to Vietnam with George , Miss Nevada 1970 , Vicky Jo Todd , Miss New Jersey 1970 , Hela Yungst , Miss Arizona 1970 , Karen Shields , Miss Arkansas 1970 , Donna Connelly , and Miss Texas 1970
( George 's replacement ) , Belinda Myrick .
They participated in a 22-day United Service Organizations tour for American troops that began in Saigon .
Browne later commented that she thought " it was one of the last Miss America groups to go to Vietnam . "
Miss Arkansas 1980 , Lencola Sullivan , finished the Miss America 1981 pageant ( September 6 , 1980 ) as fourth runner - up , making her the first African American contestant to place in the top five .
A few years later , Vanessa Williams ( Miss New York 1983 ) won the title of Miss America 1984 on September 17 , 1983 , making her the first African American woman to wear the crown .
Williams later commented that she was one of five minority contestants that year , noting that ballet dancer Deneen Graham " had already had a cross burned on her front yard because she was the first black Miss North Carolina [ 1983 ] .
" She also pointed out that " Suzette Charles was the first runner - up , and she was biracial .
But when the press started , when I would go out on the – on the tour and do my appearances , and people would come up and say they never thought they 'd see the day that it would happen ; when people would want to shake my hand , and you 'd see tears in their eyes , and they 'd say , I never thought I 'd see it in my lifetime
– that 's when , you know , it was definitely a very special honor .
" Williams ' reign as Miss America was not without its challenges and controversies , however .
For the first time in pageant history , a reigning Miss America was the target of death threats and hate mail .
Williams was forced to resign seven weeks prior to the end of her time as Miss America , however , after the unauthorized publication of nude photos in Penthouse .
First runner - up , Miss New Jersey 1983 , Suzette Charles replaced her for the final weeks of Williams ' reign .
Thirty - two years after she resigned however , Vanessa Williams returned to the Miss America stage on September 13 , 2015 , for the Miss America 2016 pageant as head judge ( where Miss Georgia 2015 , Betty Cantrell , won the crown ) .
The pageant began with former Miss America CEO Sam Haskell issuing an apology to Williams , telling her that although " none of us currently in the organization were involved then , on behalf of today 's organization , I want to apologize to you and to your mother , Miss Helen Williams .
I want to apologize for anything that was said or done that made you feel any less
the Miss America you are and the Miss America you always will be . "
Suzette Charles ( Williams ' replacement ) said in an interview with Inside Edition that she was perplexed over the apology and suggested that it was given for the purpose of ratings .
In 1985 , Miss Utah 1984 , Sharlene Wells Hawkes , became the first foreign - born , bilingual Miss America , as she was born in Asunción , Paraguay .
Miss Alabama 1994 , Heather Whitestone , won the 1995 pageant becoming the first deaf Miss America ( she lost most of her hearing at the age of 18 months ) .
At the Miss America 1999 pageant held on September 19 , 1998 , Nicole Johnson ( Miss Virginia 1998 ) became the first Miss America with diabetes and the first contestant to publicize an insulin pump .
Around the same time , Miss America officials announced they had lifted the ban on contestants who were divorced or had had an abortion .
This rule change , however , was rescinded and Miss America CEO Robert L. Beck , who had suggested it , was fired .
Angela Perez Baraquio , Miss Hawaii 2000 , was crowned Miss America 2001 , thereby becoming the first Asian - American , the first Filipino - American , as well as the first teacher ever to win the pageant .
A few years later , the Miss America 2005 pageant held on September 18 , 2004 , would be the last one televised live on ABC ( which dropped the pageant after this broadcast , as it " drew a record - low 9.8 million viewers " ) and the last one held in Atlantic City for ten years .
Miss Alabama 2004 , Deidre Downs , reigned as Miss America four months longer than usual as the Miss America 2006 pageant was moved to a January broadcast at the Las Vegas Strip 's Theatre for the Performing Arts ( Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino ) .
It was also broadcast live on MTV Networks ' Country Music Television .
After two years , the pageant moved to TLC ( the former Learning Channel ) .
The Miss America 2011 pageant held on January 15 , 2011 , showcased Miss New York 2010 , Claire Buffie , ( the first Miss America contestant to advocate a gay - rights platform ) and Miss Delaware 2010 , Kayla Martell , ( the first bald contestant ) .
ABC also resumed broadcasting the pageant with the 2011 competition .
The Miss America 2013 pageant , held on January 12 , 2013 , was the last one to take place in Las Vegas .
Miss New York 2012 , Mallory Hagan , won the competition but only served for eight months as the pageant moved back to its former broadcast slot in September 2013 Miss Montana 2012 , Alexis Wineman , ( " America 's Choice " winner ) was the pageant 's first autistic contestant .
With the Miss America 2014 pageant , held on September 15 , 2013 , the competition returned to Boardwalk Hall , Atlantic City , New Jersey .
Miss New York
( Nina Davuluri ) won the title of Miss America .
Davuluri was also the first Indian - American and second Asian - American to win the crown .
Shortly after her win , however , Davuluri became the target of xenophobic and racist comments in social media relating the proximity of the event date to the 9/11 anniversary and to anti - Indian sentiment .
News agencies cited tweets that misidentified her as Muslim or Arab , associated her with groups such as Al - Qaeda , and questioned why she was chosen over Miss Kansas 2013 , Theresa Vail , ( a soldier who won the " America 's Choice " award and was the first contestant to display tattoos during the swimsuit competition ) .
Davuluri said that she was prepared for this backlash because " as Miss New York , I was called a terrorist and very similar remarks " , and Vail denounced the social media backlash , offering her support to Davuluri .
In addition , a torn ACL and MCL forced Miss Florida 2013 , Myrrhanda Jones , to perform her baton routine with a decorated leg brace , while Nicole Kelly ( Miss Iowa 2013 ) was the first contestant without a forearm to compete in the pageant .
Amanda Longacre , who was crowned Miss Delaware 2014 and was preparing to compete in Miss America 2015 , was stripped of the title and the crown because she was deemed to be too old .
Longacre filed a $ 3 million lawsuit , and Miss America officials later blamed the error on state pageant officials whom , they said , " missed the age discrepancy in Longacre 's submitted paperwork . "
Miss New York 2014
( Kira Kazantsev ) eventually won the title of Miss America 2015 , making New York the first state to produce a winner for three consecutive years .
In September 2014 , comedian John Oliver ran a segment on his show , Last Week Tonight , that investigated the Miss America Organization 's claim that it is " the world 's largest provider of scholarships for women .
"
Oliver 's team , which included four researchers with journalism backgrounds , collected and analyzed the organization 's state and federal tax forms to find that the organization 's scholarship program only distributes a small fraction of its claimed " $ 45 million made available annually " .
Oliver said that at the national level , the Miss America Organization and Miss America Foundation together spent only $ 482,000 in cash scholarships in 2012 .
Oliver found that at the state level , the Miss Alabama pageant claimed that it had provided $ 2,592,000 in scholarships to Troy University despite not actually distributing any such scholarships .
The pageant appeared to multiply the value of a single available scholarship by the number of contestants theoretically eligible for it , while using the term " provided " in a way that did not mean " distributed . "
The Miss America Organization responded by stating that Oliver affirmed that it provides the most scholarships to women and that the $ 45 million figure was based on all scholarships made available whether or not they are accepted .
In February 2015 , Sharon Pearce announced that she was stepping down from her role as President of the Miss America Organization .
At that time , former CEO Sam Haskell was named Executive Chairman of the Miss America Organization , retained the title of CEO , and assumed all of Pearce 's responsibilities .
In addition , Miss America 2014 , Nina Davuluri , was appointed one of the new trustees to the Miss America Foundation .
In September 2015 , Miss America officials announced that the organization grants $ 5.5 million in scholarships , a number which still includes adding together offers of in - kind tuition waivers from multiple schools when a contestant could accept one at most .
On March 24 , 2016 , the Miss America Organization announced a contract renewal with ABC to continue carrying the pageant for the next three years to the 2019 edition .
In June 2016 , Erin O'Flaherty was crowned Miss Missouri , becoming the first openly lesbian Miss America contestant .
2017–PRESENT
Section::::2017–present .
In late December 2017 , HuffPost published an article exposing derogatory emails sent and received by CEO Sam Haskell , board members Tammy Haddad and Lynn Weidner , and lead writer Lewis Friedman .
The emails , sent between 2014 and 2017 , featured instances of expletive name - calling and unprofessional comments .
The comments were often sexual or violent in nature and targeted former Miss America winners , notably Mallory Hagan and Katherine Shindle , both of whom joined 47 other former Miss Americas ( including all Miss Americas from 1988 to 2017 ) in signing a joint open letter calling for the firing or resignation of all involved .
On December 22 , the Miss America Organization released statements to USA Today , saying that it was made aware of concerns several months prior .
They stated that the organization does not " condone the use of inappropriate language " and reported that its investigation had determined that Haskell was under " unreasonable distress resulting from intense attacks on his family from disgruntled stakeholders " .
The organization also reported that its relationship with Friedman had been terminated .
Haskell explained that attacks on his character impaired his judgment when responding to the emails .
Miss America 's board of directors also suspended Haskell , who released a statement labeling the HuffPost article " unkind and untrue " .
Hagan and Shindle criticized the decision to suspend Haskell , rather than fire him , as inadequate .
The following day , the President of Miss America , Josh Randle ; executive chairwoman Lynn Weidner ; and Haskell all resigned .
The scandal prompted the pageant 's producer , Dick Clark Productions , to cut ties , and the Casino Reinvestment Development Authority ( CRDA ) announced that it was reconsidering its contract with Miss America , with its executive director Chris Howard describing the scandal as " troubling " , and both Frank Gilliam , incoming mayor of Atlantic City , and State Senator Colin Bell called for CRDA to end its relationship with Miss America .
On December 24 , Haddad also resigned .
In January 2018 , Gretchen Carlson , who won the Miss America in 1989 , was elected as the new chairwoman of the organization , becoming the first former Miss America to serve as its leader .
Katherine Shindle , Miss America 1998 , was also appointed to the board alongside fellow Miss America winners , Heather French Henry ( 2000 ) and Laura Kaeppeler ( 2012 ) .
This move led to a number of changes .
In June 2018 , there was an announcement that Miss America contestants would no longer be judged based on their physical appearance .
Thus , the national Miss America event would be considered a competition , rather than a beauty pageant , and the titleholders would now be candidates , rather than contestants .
The swimsuit competition was replaced with state titleholders participating in a live interactive session with the judges .
For the evening gown competition , the contestants chose clothing , " that makes them feel confident , expresses their personal style , and shows how they hope to advance the role of Miss America . "
In interviews , Carlson emphasized the organization 's desire to be more welcoming , " open , transparent , [ and ] inclusive to women , " and to prioritize displaying the talent and scholarship in the contestants .
The talent portion was worth 50 % of the contestants ' preliminary score .
Additionally , the new board of directors increased the maximum age of titleholders to 25 years old , from 24 .
Therefore , contestants can not be older than 25 years old on December 31 in the calendar year of her state competition .
In August 2018 , Miss America 2018 Cara Mund gave an interview to The Press of Atlantic City in which she stated that it has " been a tough year .
" She then wrote an open letter to former Miss Americas a few weeks later , in order to explain her comments .
In the letter she states that the current leadership had " silenced me , reduced me , marginalized me , and essentially erased me in my role as Miss America . "
She also stated that her " voice is not heard nor wanted by our current leadership … nor do they have any interest in knowing who I am and how my experiences relate to positioning the organization for the future .
" Carlson has denied Mund 's claims .
However , at the time the Miss America 2019 competition began , 46 of 51 state organizations ( as well as 23 former Miss America winners ) had signed a petition calling for the resignation of Carlson and CEO , Regina Hopper , from the Miss America Organization .
The states who had not signed were Arkansas , Kentucky , Minnesota , Nevada , and Vermont .
On September 5 , 2018 , Fox Rothschild LLP , a law firm based in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , filed a breach - of - contract suit against the Miss America Organization for failing to pay nearly $ 100,000 for legal services .
In the fall of 2018 , the Miss America Organization terminated licenses from Florida , Georgia , New Jersey , New York , Pennsylvania , Tennessee , and West Virginia .
The leadership of the Miss Colorado organization quit in protest .
With license termination the state organization can not " claim to be affiliated with the Miss America Organization and must ... turn over bank accounts with scholarship money to the national organization . "
WINNERS RECENT TITLEHOLDERS Section::::Winners .
Section::::Recent titleholders . !
Title year !
Name !
State represented HOSTS PRESENT
* Ross Mathews : 2019—present
* Carrie Ann Inaba : 2019—present PAST
* Chris Harrison : 2004–2005 ,
2011–2018 * Sage Steele : 2017–2018 * Brooke Burke : 2011–2013 , 2016
* Lara Spencer : 2014–2015
* Mario Lopez : 2007 , 2009–2010 * Mark Steines : 2008 * James Denton : 2006
* Tom Bergeron : 2003
* Wayne Brady : 2002
* Tony Danza : 2001
* Donny and Marie Osmond : 1999–2000 ( known collectively as " Donny & Marie " )
* Boomer Esiason and Meredith Vieira :
1998
* Eva LaRue and John Callahan : 1997
*
Regis Philbin : 1996
* Regis Philbin and Kathie Lee Gifford : 1991–1995 ( known collectively as " ")
* Phyllis George : 1989–1990
* Gary Collins : 1982–1990
* Ron Ely : 1980–1981
* Bert Parks : 1955–1979 * Bob Russell : 1940–1954 SEE ALSO * Miss America award winners
* Miss America 's Outstanding Teen FURTHER READING AND VIEWING ARCHIVES AND COLLECTIONS
* Finding Aid to Beauty Pageant Collection at Browne Popular Culture Library , University Libraries , Bowling Green State University , Bowling Green , Ohio .
*
What Beauty Pageant Queens Looked Like the Year You Were Born .
Cosmopolitan , May 31 , 2016 .
*
It Happened Here in New Jersey :
Miss America – Photographs of various Miss America pageants .
*
It Happened Here in New Jersey-
Here She is : Miss America and the Protest of 1968 BOOKS * Banet - Weiser , Sarah .
The Most Beautiful Girl in the World :
Beauty Pageants and National Identity .
Berkeley : University of California Press , 1999 .
* Carlson , Gretchen ( Miss America 1989 ) .
Getting Real .
New York :
Viking Press , 2015 .
* Riverol , A.R. Live from Atlantic City : A History of the Miss America Pageant .
Bowling Green , OH : Bowling Green State University Popular Press , 1992 .
* Shindle , Kate ( Miss America 1998 ) .
Being Miss America : Behind the Rhinestone Curtain .
University of Texas Press , 2014 .
* Wiliams , Vanessa ( Miss America 1984 ) and Helen Williams .
You Have No Idea : A Famous Daughter , Her No - nonsense Mother , and How They Survived Pageants , Hollywood , Love , Loss ( and Each Other ) .
New York : Gotham / Penguin Group , 2012 .
DOCUMENTARIES
* The American Experience : Miss America – American Experience , PBS ( 2001 , 90 min )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Miss America Foundation