CLARITHROMYCIN Clarithromycin , sold under the brand name Biaxin among others , is an antibiotic used to treat various bacterial infections .
This includes strep throat , pneumonia , skin infections , H. pylori infection , and Lyme disease , among others .
Clarithromycin can be taken by mouth as a pill or liquid .
Common side effects include nausea , vomiting , headaches , and diarrhea .
Severe allergic reactions are rare .
Liver problems have been reported .
It may cause harm if taken during pregnancy .
It is in the macrolide class and works by decreasing protein production of some bacteria .
Clarithromycin was developed in 1980 .
It is on the World Health Organization 's List of Essential Medicines , the most effective and safe medicines needed in a health system .
Clarithromycin is available as a generic medication .
The wholesale cost in the developing world is between US$ 0.13 and $ 0.79 per dose .
In the United States it is moderately expensive at $ 50–100 for a course of treatment .
It is made from erythromycin and is chemically known as 6-O - methylerythromycin .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Clarithromycin is primarily used to treat a number of bacterial infections including pneumonia , Helicobacter pylori , and as an alternative to penicillin in strep throat .
Other uses include cat scratch disease and other infections due to bartonella , cryptosporidiosis , as a second line agent in Lyme disease and toxoplasmosis .
It may also be used to prevent bacterial endocarditis in those who can not take penicillin .
It is effective against upper and lower respiratory tract infections , skin and soft tissue infections and helicobacter pylori infections associated with duodenal ulcers .
SPECTRUM OF BACTERIAL
SUSCEPTIBILITY Section::::Spectrum of bacterial susceptibility .
Aerobic Gram - positive
bacteria * Staphylococcus aureus *
Streptococcus pneumoniae * Streptococcus pyogenes Aerobic Gram - negative bacteria * Haemophilus parainfluenzae * Haemophilus influenzae
* Moraxella catarrhalis
Helicobacter
* Helicobacter pylori Mycobacteria Mycobacterium avium complex consisting of : * Mycobacterium avium avium * Mycobacterium intracellulare Other bacteria * Chlamydia pneumoniae * Mycoplasma pneumoniae Safety and effectiveness of clarithromycin in treating clinical infections due to the following bacteria have not been established in adequate and well - controlled clinical trials :
Aerobic Gram - positive bacteria
*
Streptococcus agalactiae
*
Streptococcus ( Groups C , F , G )
* Viridans group streptococci Aerobic Gram - negative bacteria * Bordetella pertussis
* Legionella pneumophila
* Pasteurella multocida Anaerobic Gram - positive bacteria
* Clostridium perfringens *
Peptococcus Niger * Propionibacterium acnes
Anaerobic Gram - negative bacteria
* Prevotella melaninogenica ( formerly Bacteroides melaninogenicus ) CONTRAINDICATIONS
* Clarithromycin should not be taken by people who are allergic to other macrolides or inactive ingredients in the tablets , including microcrystalline cellulose , croscarmelose sodium , magnesium stearate , and povidone * Clarithromycin should not be used by people with a history of cholestatic jaundice and/or liver dysfunction associated with prior clarithromycin use .
* Clarithromycin should not be used in the setting of hypokalaemia ( low blood potassium )
* Use of clarithromycin with the following medications : cisapride , pimozide , astemizole , terfenadine , ergotamine , ticagrelor , ranolazine or dihydroergotamine is not recommended .
*
It should not be used with colchicine in people with kidney or liver impairment .
* Concomitant use with cholesterol medications such as lovastatin or simvastatin .
* Hypersensitivity to clarithromycin or any component of the product , erythromycin , or any macrolide antibiotics .
* QT prolongation or ventricular cardiac arrhythmias , including torsade de pointes .
SIDE EFFECTS Section::::Side effects .
The most common side effects are gastrointestinal : diarrhea ( 3 % ) , nausea ( 3 % ) , abdominal pain ( 3 % ) , and vomiting ( 6 % ) .
It also can cause headaches , insomnia , and abnormal liver function tests .
Allergic reactions include rashes and anaphylaxis .
Less common side effects ( < 1 % ) include extreme irritability , hallucinations ( auditory and visual ) , dizziness / motion sickness , and alteration in senses of smell and taste , including a metallic taste .
Dry mouth , panic attacks , and nightmares have also been reported , albeit less frequently .
CARDIAC Section::::Cardiac .
In February 2018 , the FDA issued a Safety Communication warning with respect to an increased risk for heart problems or death with the use of clarithromycin , and has recommended that alternative antibiotics be considered in those with heart disease .
Clarithromycin can lead to a prolonged QT interval .
In patients with long QT syndrome , cardiac disease , or patients taking other QT - prolonging medications , this can increase risk for life - threatening arrhythmias .
In one trial , the use of short - term clarithromycin treatment was correlated with an increased incidence of deaths classified as sudden cardiac deaths in stable coronary heart disease patients not using statins .
Some case reports suspect it of causing liver disease .
LIVER AND KIDNEY Section::::Liver and kidney .
Clarithromycin has been known to cause jaundice , cirrhosis , and kidney problems , including renal failure .
CENTRAL
NERVOUS SYSTEM Section::::Central nervous system .
Common adverse effects of clarithromycin in the central nervous system include dizziness , headaches .
Rarely , it can cause ototoxicity , delirium and mania .
INFECTION
Section::::Infection .
A risk of oral candidiasis and vaginal candidiasis , due to the elimination of the yeast 's natural bacterial competitors by the antibiotic , has also been noted .
PREGNANCY AND BREASTFEEDING Section::::Pregnancy and breastfeeding .
Clarithromycin should not be used in pregnant women except in situations where no alternative therapy is appropriate .
Clarithromycin can cause potential hazard to the fetus hence should be used during pregnancy only if the potential benefit justifies the potential risk to the fetus .
For lactating mothers it is not known whether clarithromycin is excreted in human milk .
INTERACTIONS
Section::::Interactions .
Clarithromycin inhibits a liver enzyme , CYP3A4 , involved in the metabolism of many other commonly prescribed drugs .
Taking clarithromycin with other medications that are metabolized by CYP3A4 may lead to unexpected increases or decreases in drug levels .
A few of the common interactions are listed below .
COLCHICINE Section::::Colchicine .
Clarithromycin has been observed to have a dangerous interaction with colchicine as the result of inhibition of CYP3A4 metabolism and P - glycoprotein transport .
Combining these two drugs may lead to fatal colchicine toxicity , particularly in patients with renal insufficiency .
STATINS Section::::Statins .
Taking clarithromycin concurrently with certain statins ( a class of drugs used to reduce blood serum cholesterol levels ) increases the risk of side effects , such as muscle aches and muscle break down ( rhabdomyolysis ) .
CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS Section::::Calcium channel blockers .
Concurrent therapy with calcium channel blocker may increase risk of low blood pressure , kidney failure , and death , compared to pairing calcium channel blockers with azithromycin , a drug similar to clarithromycin but without CYP3A4 inhibition .
Administration of clarithromycin in combination with verapamil have been observed to cause low blood pressure , low heart rate , and lactic acidosis .
CARBAMAZEPINE Section::::Carbamazepine .
Clarithromycin may double the level of carbamazepine in the body by reducing its clearance , which may lead to toxic symptoms of carbamazepine , such as double vision , loss of voluntary body movement , nausea , as well as hyponatremia .
HIV MEDICATIONS Section::::HIV medications .
Depending on the combination of medications , clarithromycin therapy could be contraindicated , require changing doses of some medications , or be acceptable without dose adjustments .
For example , clarithromycin may lead to decreased zidovudine concentrations .
MECHANISM OF ACTION Section::::Mechanism of action .
Clarithromycin prevents bacteria from multiplying by acting as a protein synthesis inhibitor .
It binds to 23S rRNA , a component of the 50S subunit of the bacterial ribosome , thus inhibiting the translation of peptides .
PHARMACOKINETICS Section::::Pharmacokinetics .
Unlike erythromycin , clarithromycin is acid - stable , so can be taken orally without having to be protected from gastric acids .
It is readily absorbed , and diffuses into most tissues and phagocytes .
Due to the high concentration in phagocytes , clarithromycin is actively transported to the site of infection .
During active phagocytosis , large concentrations of clarithromycin are released ; its concentration in the tissues can be over 10 times higher than in plasma .
Highest concentrations are found in liver , lung tissue , and stool .
METABOLISM Section::::Metabolism .
Clarithromycin has a fairly rapid first - pass metabolism in the liver .
Its major metabolites include an inactive metabolite , N - desmethylclarithromycin , and an active metabolite , 14-(R)-hydroxyclarithromycin .
Compared to clarithromycin , 14-(R)-hydroxyclarithromycin is less potent against mycobacterial tuberculosis and the Mycobacterium avium complex .
Clarithromycin ( 20%-40 % ) and its active metabolite ( 10%-15 % ) are excreted in urine .
Of all the drugs in its class , clarithromycin has the best bioavailability at 50 % , which makes it amenable to oral administration .
Its elimination half - life is about 3 to 4 hours with 250 mg administered every 12 h , but increased to 5 to 7 h with 500 mg administered every 8 to 12 h. With any of these dosing regimens , the steady - state concentration of this metabolite is generally attained within 3 to 4 days .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Clarithromycin was invented by researchers at the Japanese drug company Taisho Pharmaceutical in 1980 .
The product emerged through efforts to develop a version of the antibiotic erythromycin that did not experience acid instability in the digestive tract , causing side effects , such as nausea and stomachache .
Taisho filed for patent protection for the drug around 1980 and subsequently introduced a branded version of its drug , called Clarith , to the Japanese market in 1991 .
In 1985 , Taisho partnered with the American company Abbott Laboratories for the international rights , and Abbott also gained FDA approval for Biaxin in October 1991 .
The drug went generic in Europe in 2004 and in the US in mid-2005 .
SOCIETY AND CULTURE COST Section::::Society and culture .
Section::::Cost .
Clarithromycin is available as a generic medication .
The wholesale cost is between US$ 0.13 and $ 0.79 per dose .
In the United States it is moderately expensive at $ 50–100 for a course of treatment .
AVAILABLE FORMS Section::::Available forms .
In the United States , clarithromycin is available as immediate release tablets , extended release tablets , and granules for oral suspension .
BRAND NAMES Section::::Brand names .
Clarithromycin is available under several brand names in many different countries , for example Biaxin , Bioclar , Crixan , Claritron , Clarihexal , Clacid , Claritt , Clacee , Clarac , Clariwin , Claripen , Clarem , Claridar , Cloff , Fromilid , Infex , Kalixocin , Karicin , Klaricid , Klaridex , Klacid , Klaram , Klabax , MegaKlar , Monoclar , Resclar , Rithmo , Truclar , Vikrol and Zeclar .
MANUFACTURERS Section::::Manufacturers .
In the UK the drug product is manufactured in generic form by a number of manufacturers including Somex Pharma , Ranbaxy , Aptil and Sandoz .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * FDA Drug Safety Communication , " FDA review finds additional data supports the potential for increased long - term risks with antibiotic clarithromycin ( Biaxin ) in patients with heart disease . "