ANTISOCIAL PERSONALITY DISORDER Antisocial personality disorder is defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders ( DSM ) .
Dissocial personality disorder ( DPD ) , a similar or equivalent concept , is defined in the International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems ( ICD ) , which includes antisocial personality disorder in the diagnosis .
Both manuals provide similar criteria for diagnosing the disorder .
Both have also stated that their diagnoses have been referred to , or include what is referred to , as psychopathy or sociopathy , but distinctions have been made between the conceptualizations of antisocial personality disorder and psychopathy , with many researchers arguing that psychopathy is a disorder that overlaps with , but is distinguishable from , ASPD .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Antisocial personality disorder is defined by a pervasive and persistent disregard for morals , social norms , and the rights and feelings of others .
Individuals with this personality disorder will typically have no compunction in exploiting others in harmful ways for their own gain or pleasure and frequently manipulate and deceive other people , achieving this through wit and a façade of superficial charm or through intimidation and violence .
They may display arrogance , think lowly and negatively of others , and lack remorse for their harmful actions and have a callous attitude to those they have harmed .
Irresponsibility is a core characteristic of this disorder : they can have significant difficulties in maintaining stable employment as well as fulfilling their social and financial obligations , and people with this disorder often lead exploitative , unlawful , or parasitic lifestyles .
Those with antisocial personality disorder are often impulsive and reckless , failing to consider or disregarding the consequences of their actions .
They may repeatedly disregard and jeopardize their own safety and the safety of others and place themselves and others in danger .
They are often aggressive and hostile and display a disregulated temper and can lash out violently with provocation or frustration .
Individuals are prone to substance abuse and addiction , and the abuse of various psychoactive substances is common in this population .
These behaviors lead such individuals into frequent conflict with the law , and many people with ASPD have extensive histories of antisocial behavior and criminal infractions stemming back before adulthood .
Serious problems with interpersonal relationships are often seen in those with the disorder .
Attachments and emotional bonds are weak , and interpersonal relationships often revolve around the manipulation , exploitation , and abuse of others .
While they generally have no problems in establishing relationships , they may have difficulties in sustaining and maintaining them .
Relationships with family members and relatives are often strained due to their behavior and the frequent problems that these individuals may get into .
CONDUCT DISORDER Section::::Conduct disorder .
While antisocial personality disorder is a mental disorder diagnosed in adulthood , it has its precedent in childhood .
The DSM-5 's criteria for ASPD require that the individual have conduct problems evident by the age of 15 .
Persistent antisocial behavior as well as a lack of regard for others in childhood and adolescence is known as conduct disorder and is the precursor of ASPD .
About 25 - 40 % of youths with conduct disorder will be diagnosed with ASPD in adulthood .
Conduct disorder ( CD ) is a disorder diagnosed in childhood that parallels the characteristics found in ASPD and is characterized by a repetitive and persistent pattern of behavior in which the basic rights of others or major age - appropriate norms are violated .
Children with the disorder often display impulsive and aggressive behavior , may be callous and deceitful , and may repeatedly engage in petty crime such as stealing or vandalism or get into fights with other children and adults .
This behavior is typically persistent and may be difficult to deter with threat or punishment .
Attention deficit hyperactivity disorder ( ADHD ) is common in this population , and children with the disorder may also engage in substance abuse .
" CD is differentiated from oppositional defiant disorder ( ODD ) in that children with ODD do not commit aggressive or antisocial acts against other people , animals , and property , though many children diagnosed with ODD are subsequently rediagnosed with CD .
Two developmental courses for CD have been identified based on the age at which the symptoms become present .
The first is known as the " childhood - onset type " and occurs when conduct disorder symptoms are present before the age of 10 years .
This course is often linked to a more persistent life course and more pervasive behaviors , and children in this group express greater levels of ADHD symptoms , neuropsychological deficits , more academic problems , increased family dysfunction , and higher likelihood of aggression and violence .
The second is known as the " adolescent - onset type " and occurs when conduct disorder develops after the age of 10 years .
Compared to the childhood - onset type , less impairment in various cognitive and emotional functions are present , and the adolescent - onset variety may remit by adulthood .
In addition to this differentiation , the DSM-5 provides a specifier for a callous and unemotional interpersonal style , which reflects characteristics seen in psychopathy and are believed to be a childhood precursor to this disorder .
Compared to the adolescent - onset subtype , the childhood onset subtype , especially if callous and unemotional traits are present , tends to have a worse treatment outcome .
CAUSES AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Section::::Causes and pathophysiology .
Personality disorders are seen to be caused by a combination and interaction of genetic and environmental influences .
Genetically , it is the intrinsic temperamental tendencies as determined by their genetically influenced physiology , and environmentally , it is the social and cultural experiences of a person in childhood and adolescence encompassing their family dynamics , peer influences , and social values .
People with an antisocial or alcoholic parent are considered to be at higher risk .
Fire - setting and cruelty to animals during childhood are as well linked to the development of antisocial personality .
The condition is more common in males than in females , and among people who are in prison .
GENETIC
Section::::Genetic .
Research into genetic associations in antisocial personality disorder is suggestive that ASPD has some or even a strong genetic basis .
Prevalence of ASPD is higher in people related to someone afflicted by the disorder .
Twin studies , which are designed to discern between genetic and environmental effects , have reported significant genetic influences on antisocial behavior and conduct disorder .
In the specific genes that may be involved , one gene that has seen particular interest in its correlation with antisocial behavior is the gene that encodes for Monoamine oxidase
A ( MAO - A ) , an enzyme that breaks down monoamine neurotransmitters such as serotonin and norephinephrine .
Various studies examining the gene 's relationship to behavior have suggested that variants of the gene that results in less MAO - A being produced , such as the 2R and 3R alleles of the promoter region , have associations with aggressive behavior in men .
The association is also influenced by negative experience in early life , with children possessing a low - activity variant ( MAOA - L ) who experience such maltreatment being more likely to develop antisocial behavior than those with the high - activity variants ( MAOA - H ) .
Even when environmental interactions ( e.g. emotional abuse ) are controlled for , a small association between MAOA - L and aggressive and antisocial behavior remains .
The gene that encodes for the serotonin transporter ( SCL6A4 ) , a gene that is heavily researched for its associations with other mental disorders , is another gene of interest in antisocial behavior and personality traits .
Genetic associations studies have suggested that the short " S " allele is associated with impulsive antisocial behavior and ASPD in the inmate population .
However , research into psychopathy find that the long " L " allele is associated with the Factor 1 traits of psychopathy , which describes its core affective ( e.g. lack of empathy , fearlessness ) and interpersonal ( e.g. grandiosity , manipulativeness ) personality disturbances .
This is suggestive of two different forms , one associated more with impulsive behavior and emotional dysregulation , and the other with predatory aggression and affective disturbance , of the disorder .
Various other gene candidates for ASPD have been identified by a genome - wide association study published in 2016 .
Several of these gene candidates are shared with attention - deficit hyperactivity disorder , with which ASPD is comorbid .
PHYSIOLOGICAL HORMONES AND NEUROTRANSMITTERS Section::::Physiological .
Section::::Hormones and neurotransmitters .
Traumatic events can lead to a disruption of the standard development of the central nervous system , which can generate a release of hormones that can change normal patterns of development .
Aggressiveness and impulsivity are among the possible symptoms of ASPD .
Testosterone is a hormone that plays an important role in aggressiveness in the brain .
For instance , criminals who have committed violent crimes tend to have higher levels of testosterone than the average person .
The effect of testosterone is counteracted by cortisol which facilitates the cognitive control of impulsive tendencies .
One of the neurotransmitters that have been discussed in individuals with ASPD is serotonin , also known as 5HT .
A meta - analysis of 20 studies found significantly lower 5-HIAA levels ( indicating lower serotonin levels ) , especially in those who are younger than 30 years of age .
While it has been shown that lower levels of serotonin may be associated with ASPD , there has also been evidence that decreased serotonin function is highly correlated with impulsiveness and aggression across a number of different experimental paradigms .
Impulsivity is not only linked with irregularities in 5HT metabolism , but may be the most essential psychopathological aspect linked with such dysfunction .
Correspondingly , the DSM classifies " impulsivity or failure to plan ahead " and " irritability and aggressiveness " as two of seven sub - criteria in category A of the diagnostic criteria of ASPD .
Some studies have found a relationship between monoamine oxidase A and antisocial behavior , including conduct disorder and symptoms of adult ASPD , in maltreated children .
NEUROLOGICAL
Section::::Neurological .
Antisocial behavior may be related to head trauma .
Antisocial behavior is associated with decreased grey matter in the right lentiform nucleus , left insula , and frontopolar cortex .
Increased volumes have been observed in the right fusiform gyrus , inferior parietal cortex , right cingulate gyrus , and post central cortex .
People that exhibit antisocial behavior demonstrate decreased activity in the prefrontal cortex .
The association is more apparent in functional neuroimaging as opposed to structural neuroimaging .
The prefrontal cortex is involved in many executive functions , including behavior inhibitions , planning ahead , determining consequences of action , and differentiating between right and wrong .
Cavum septi pellucidi ( CSP ) is a marker for limbic neural maldevelopment , and its presence has been loosely associated with certain mental disorders , such as schizophrenia and post - traumatic stress disorder .
One study found that those with CSP had significantly higher levels of antisocial personality , psychopathy , arrests and convictions compared with controls .
ENVIRONMENTAL FAMILY ENVIRONMENT
Section::::Environmental .
Section::::Family environment .
Some studies suggest that the social and home environment has contributed to the development of antisocial behavior .
The parents of these children have been shown to display antisocial behavior , which could be adopted by their children .
CULTURAL INFLUENCES Section::::Cultural influences .
The socio - cultural perspective of clinical psychology views disorders as influenced by cultural aspects ; since cultural norms differ significantly , mental disorders such as ASPD are viewed differently .
Robert D. Hare has suggested that the rise in ASPD that has been reported in the United States may be linked to changes in cultural mores , the latter serving to validate the behavioral tendencies of many individuals with ASPD .
While the rise reported may be in part merely a byproduct of the widening use ( and abuse ) of diagnostic techniques , given Eric Berne 's division between individuals with active and latent ASPD – the latter keeping themselves in check by attachment to an external source of control like the law , traditional standards , or religion – it has been suggested that the erosion of collective standards may indeed serve to release the individual with latent ASPD from their previously prosocial behavior .
There is also a continuous debate as to the extent to which the legal system should be involved in the identification and admittance of patients with preliminary symptoms of ASPD .
Controversial clinical psychiatrist Pierre - Édouard Carbonneau suggested that the problem with legal forced admittance is the rate of failure when diagnosing ASPD .
He states that the possibility of diagnosing and coercing a patient into prescribing medication to someone without ASPD , but is diagnosed with it could be potentially disastrous , but the possibility of not diagnosing it and seeing a patient go untreated because of a lack of sufficient evidence of cultural or environmental influences is something a psychiatrists must ignore , and in his words , " play it safe " .
DIAGNOSIS DSM IV - TR
Section::::Diagnosis .
Section::::DSM IV - TR .
The APA 's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , fourth edition , text revision ( DSM IV - TR ) defines antisocial personality disorder as : DSM-5 Section::::DSM-5 .
The essential features of a personality disorder are impairments in personality ( self and interpersonal ) functioning and the presence of pathological personality traits .
To diagnose antisocial personality disorder , the following criteria must be met : A. Significant impairments in personality functioning manifest by : AND B. Pathological personality traits in the following domains : C.
The impairments in personality functioning and the individual 's personality trait expression are relatively stable across time and consistent across situations .
D.
The impairments in personality functioning and the individual 's personality trait expression are not better understood as normative for the individual 's developmental stage or sociocultural environment .
E.
The impairments in personality functioning and the individual 's personality trait expression are not solely due to the direct physiological effects of a substance ( e.g. , a drug of abuse , medication ) or a general medical condition ( e.g. , severe head trauma ) .
F.
The individual is at least age 18 years .
Antisocial personality disorder falls under the dramatic / erratic cluster of personality disorders , " Cluster B. " ICD-10 Section::::ICD-10 .
The WHO 's International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems , tenth edition ( ICD-10 ) , has a diagnosis called dissocial personality disorder ( ): The ICD states that this diagnosis includes " amoral , antisocial , asocial , psychopathic , and sociopathic personality " .
Although the disorder is not synonymous with conduct disorder , presence of conduct disorder during childhood or adolescence may further support the diagnosis of dissocial personality disorder .
There may also be persistent irritability as an associated feature .
It is a requirement of the ICD-10 that a diagnosis of any specific personality disorder also satisfies a set of general personality disorder criteria .
PSYCHOPATHY
Section::::Psychopathy .
Psychopathy is commonly defined as a personality disorder characterized partly by antisocial behavior , a diminished capacity for empathy and remorse , and poor behavioral controls .
Psychopathic traits are assessed using various measurement tools , including Canadian researcher Robert D. Hare 's Psychopathy Checklist , Revised ( PCL - R ) .
" Psychopathy " is not the official title of any diagnosis in the DSM or ICD ; nor is it an official title used by other major psychiatric organizations .
The DSM and ICD , however , state that their antisocial diagnoses are at times referred to ( or include what is referred to ) as psychopathy or sociopathy .
American psychiatrist Hervey Cleckley 's work on psychopathy formed the basis of the diagnostic criteria for ASPD , and the DSM states ASPD is often referred to as psychopathy .
However , critics argue ASPD is not synonymous with psychopathy as the diagnostic criteria are not the same , since criteria relating to personality traits are emphasized relatively less in the former .
These differences exist in part because it was believed such traits were difficult to measure reliably and it was " easier to agree on the behaviors that typify a disorder than on the reasons why they occur " .
Although the diagnosis of ASPD covers two to three times as many prisoners than the diagnosis of psychopathy , Robert Hare believes the PCL - R is better able to predict future criminality , violence , and recidivism than a diagnosis of ASPD .
He suggests there are differences between PCL - R - diagnosed psychopaths and non - psychopaths on " processing and use of linguistic and emotional information " , while such differences are potentially smaller between those diagnosed with ASPD and without .
Additionally , Hare argued confusion regarding how to diagnose ASPD , confusion regarding the difference between ASPD and psychopathy , as well as the differing future prognoses regarding recidivism and treatability , may have serious consequences in settings such as court cases where psychopathy is often seen as aggravating the crime .
Nonetheless , psychopathy has been proposed as a specifier under an alternative model for ASPD .
In the DSM-5 , under " Alternative DSM-5 Model for Personality Disorders " , ASPD with psychopathic features is described as characterized by " a lack of anxiety or fear and by a bold interpersonal style that may mask maladaptive behaviors ( e.g. , fraudulence ) .
" Low levels of withdrawal and high levels of attention - seeking combined with low anxiety are associated with " social potency " and " stress immunity " in psychopathy .
Under the specifier , affective and interpersonal characteristics are comparatively emphasized over behavioral components .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Theodore Millon suggested 5 subtypes of ASPD .
However , these constructs are not recognized in the DSM and ICD . !
Subtype !
Features Elsewhere , Millon differentiates ten subtypes ( partially overlapping with the above ) – covetous , risk - taking , malevolent , tyrannical , malignant , disingenuous , explosive , and abrasive – but specifically stresses that " the number 10 is by no means
special ...
Taxonomies may be put forward at levels that are more coarse or more fine - grained . "
COMORBIDITY Section::::Comorbidity .
ASPD commonly coexists with the following conditions :
When combined with alcoholism , people may show frontal function deficits on neuropsychological tests greater than those associated with each condition .
The rates of antisocial personality disorder tends to be around 40 - 50 % in male alcohol and opiate addicts .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
ASPD is considered to be among the most difficult personality disorders to treat .
Rendering an effective treatment for ASPD is further complicated due to the inability to look at comparative studies between psychopathy and ASPD due to differing diagnostic criteria , differences in defining and measuring outcomes and a focus on treating incarcerated patients rather than those in the community .
Because of their very low or absent capacity for remorse , individuals with ASPD often lack sufficient motivation and fail to see the costs associated with antisocial acts .
They may only simulate remorse rather than truly commit to change : they can be seductively charming and dishonest , and may manipulate staff and fellow patients during treatment .
Studies have shown that outpatient therapy is not likely to be successful , but the extent to which persons with ASPD are entirely unresponsive to treatment may have been exaggerated .
Most treatment done is for those in the criminal justice system are given the treatment regimes as part of their imprisonment .
Those with ASPD may stay in treatment only as required by an external source , such as parole conditions .
Residential programs that provide a carefully controlled environment of structure and supervision along with peer confrontation have been recommended .
There has been some research on the treatment of ASPD that indicated positive results for therapeutic interventions .
Psychotherapy also known as talk therapy is found to help treat patients with ASPD.Schema therapy is also being investigated as a treatment for ASPD .
A review by Charles M. Borduin features the strong influence of Multisystemic therapy ( MST ) that could potentially improve this imperative issue .
However , this treatment requires complete cooperation and participation of all family members .
Some studies have found that the presence of ASPD does not significantly interfere with treatment for other disorders , such as substance abuse , although others have reported contradictory findings .
Therapists working with individuals with ASPD may have considerable negative feelings toward patients with extensive histories of aggressive , exploitative , and abusive behaviors .
Rather than attempt to develop a sense of conscience in these individuals , which is extremely difficult considering the nature of the disorder , therapeutic techniques are focused on rational and utilitarian arguments against repeating past mistakes .
These approaches would focus on the tangible , material value of prosocial behavior and abstaining from antisocial behavior .
However , the impulsive and aggressive nature of those with this disorder may limit the effectiveness of even this form of therapy .
The use of medications in treating antisocial personality disorder is still poorly explored , and no medications have been approved by the FDA to specifically treat ASPD .
A 2010 Cochrane review of studies that explored the use of pharmaceuticals in ASPD patients , of which 8 studies met the selection criteria for review , concluded that the current body of evidence was inconclusive for recommendations concerning the use of pharmaceuticals in treating the various issues of ASPD .
Nonetheless psychiatric medications such as antipsychotics , antidepressants , and mood stabilizers can be used to control symptoms such as aggression and impulsivity , as well as treat disorders that may co - occur with ASPD for which medications are indicated .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
According to Professor Emily Simonoff of the Institute of Psychiatry , Psychology and Neuroscience , " childhood hyperactivity and conduct disorder showed equally strong prediction of antisocial personality disorder ( ASPD ) and criminality in early and mid - adult life .
Lower IQ and reading problems were most prominent in their relationships with childhood and adolescent antisocial behaviour . "
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
ASPD is seen in 3 % to 30 % of psychiatric outpatients .
The prevalence of the disorder is even higher in selected populations , like prisons , where there is a preponderance of violent offenders .
A 2002 literature review of studies on mental disorders in prisoners stated that 47 % of male prisoners and 21 % of female prisoners had ASPD .
Similarly , the prevalence of ASPD is higher among patients in alcohol or other drug ( AOD ) abuse treatment programs than in the general population , suggesting a link between ASPD and AOD abuse and dependence .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first version of the DSM in 1952 listed sociopathic personality disturbance .
Individuals to be placed in this category were said to be " ...
ill primarily in terms of society and of conformity with the prevailing milieu , and not only in terms of personal discomfort and relations with other individuals " .
There were four subtypes , referred to as " reactions " ; antisocial , dyssocial , sexual , and addiction .
The antisocial reaction was said to include people who were " always in trouble " and not learning from it , maintaining " no loyalties " , frequently callous and lacking responsibility , with an ability to " rationalize " their behavior .
The category was described as more specific and limited than the existing concepts of " constitutional psychopathic state " or " psychopathic personality " which had had a very broad meaning ; the narrower definition was in line with criteria advanced by Hervey M. Cleckley from 1941 , while the term sociopathic had been advanced by George Partridge in 1928 when studying the early environmental influence on psychopaths .
Partridge discovered the correlation between antisocial psychopathic disorder and parental rejection experienced in early childhood .
The DSM - II in 1968 rearranged the categories and " antisocial personality " was now listed as one of ten personality disorders but still described similarly , to be applied to individuals who are : " basically unsocialized " , in repeated conflicts with society , incapable of significant loyalty , selfish , irresponsible , unable to feel guilt or learn from prior experiences , and who tend to blame others and rationalize .
The manual preface contains " special instructions " including " Antisocial personality should always be specified as mild , moderate , or severe . "
The DSM - II warned that a history of legal or social offenses was not by itself enough to justify the diagnosis , and that a " group delinquent reaction " of childhood or adolescence or " social maladjustment without manifest psychiatric disorder " should be ruled out first .
The dyssocial personality type was relegated in the DSM - II to " dyssocial behavior " for individuals who are predatory and follow more or less criminal pursuits , such as racketeers , dishonest gamblers , prostitutes , and dope peddlers .
( DSM - I classified this condition as sociopathic personality disorder , dyssocial type ) .
It would later resurface as the name of a diagnosis in the ICD manual produced by the WHO , later spelled dissocial personality disorder and considered approximately equivalent to the ASPD diagnosis .
The DSM - III in 1980 included the full term antisocial personality disorder and , as with other disorders , there was now a full checklist of symptoms focused on observable behaviors to enhance consistency in diagnosis between different psychiatrists ( ' inter - rater reliability ' ) .
The ASPD symptom list was based on the Research Diagnostic Criteria developed from the so - called Feighner Criteria from 1972 , and in turn largely credited to influential research by sociologist Lee Robins published in 1966 as " Deviant Children Grown Up " .
However , Robins has previously clarified that while the new criteria of prior childhood conduct problems came from her work , she and co - researcher psychiatrist Patricia O'Neal got the diagnostic criteria they used from Lee 's husband the psychiatrist Eli Robins , one of the authors of the Feighner criteria who had been using them as part of diagnostic interviews .
The DSM - IV maintained the trend for behavioral antisocial symptoms while noting " This pattern has also been referred to as psychopathy , sociopathy , or dyssocial personality disorder " and re - including in the ' Associated Features ' text summary some of the underlying personality traits from the older diagnoses .
The DSM-5 has the same diagnosis of antisocial personality disorder .
The Pocket Guide to the DSM-5 Diagnostic Exam suggests that a person with ASPD may present " with psychopathic features " if he or she exhibits " a lack of anxiety or fear and a bold , efficacious interpersonal style " .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS * DSM - IV - TR Criteria for Antisocial personality disorder
* Psychopathy and Antisocial Personality Disorder : A Case of Diagnostic Confusion