BLUE - RINGED OCTOPUS Blue - ringed octopuses , comprising the genus Hapalochlaena , are four highly venomous species of octopus that are found in tide pools and coral reefs in the Pacific and Indian oceans , from Japan to Australia .
They can be identified by their yellowish skin and characteristic blue and black rings that change color dramatically when the animal is threatened .
They eat small animals , including crabs , hermit crabs , shrimp , and other crustaceans .
They are recognized as one of the world 's most venomous marine animals .
Despite their small size —— and relatively docile nature , they are dangerous to humans if provoked and handled because of their venom , which contains the powerful neurotoxin tetrodotoxin .
The species tend to have a lifespan of approximately two years .
This can vary depending on factors such as nutrition , temperature and the intensity of light in its habitat .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
The genus was described by British zoologist Guy Coburn Robson in 1929 .
There are four confirmed species of Hapalochlaena , and six possible species still being researched : * Greater blue - ringed octopus ( Hapalochlaena lunulata ) * Southern blue - ringed octopus or lesser blue - ringed octopus ( Hapalochlaena maculosa )
* Blue - lined octopus ( Hapalochlaena fasciata )
* Hapalochlaena nierstraszi was described in 1938 from a single specimen from the Bay of Bengal , with a second specimen caught and described in 2013 .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
Blue - ringed octopuses spend much of their time hiding in crevices while displaying effective camouflage patterns with their dermal chromatophore cells .
Like all octopuses , they can change shape easily , which helps them to squeeze into crevices much smaller than themselves .
This , along with piling up rocks outside the entrance to its lair , helps safeguard the octopus from predators .
If they are provoked , they quickly change color , becoming bright yellow with each of the 50 - 60 rings flashing bright iridescent blue within a third of a second as an aposematic warning display .
In the greater blue - ringed octopus ( Hapalochlaena lunulata ) , the rings contain multi - layer light reflectors called iridophores .
These are arranged to reflect blue – green light in a wide viewing direction .
Beneath and around each ring there are dark pigmented chromatophores which can be expanded within 1 second to enhance the contrast of the rings .
There are no chromatophores above the ring , which is unusual for cephalopods as they typically use chromatophores to cover or spectrally modify iridescence .
The fast flashes of the blue rings are achieved using muscles which are under neural control .
Under normal circumstances , each ring is hidden by contraction of muscles above the iridophores .
When these relax and muscles outside the ring contract , the iridescence is exposed thereby revealing the blue color .
In common with other Octopoda , the blue - ringed octopus swims by expelling water from a funnel in a form of jet propulsion .
FEEDING
Section::::Feeding .
The blue - ringed octopus diet typically consists of small crabs and shrimp .
They also tend to take advantage of small injured fish if they can catch them .
The blue - ringed octopus pounces on its prey , seizing it with its arms and pulling it towards its mouth .
It uses its horny beak to pierce through the tough crab or shrimp exoskeleton , releasing its venom .
The venom paralyses the muscles required for movement , which effectively kills the prey .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
The mating ritual for the blue - ringed octopus begins when a male approaches a female and begins to caress her with his modified arm , the hectocotylus .
A male mates with a female by grabbing her , which sometimes completely obscures the female 's vision , then transferring sperm packets by inserting his hectocotylus into her mantle cavity repeatedly .
Mating continues until the female has had enough , and in at least one species the female has to remove the over - enthusiastic male by force .
Males will attempt copulation with members of their own species regardless of sex or size , but interactions between males are most often shorter in duration and end with the mounting octopus withdrawing the hectocotylus without packet insertion or struggle .
Blue - ringed octopus females lay only one clutch of about 50 eggs in their lifetimes towards the end of autumn .
Eggs are laid then incubated underneath the female 's arms for about six months , and during this process she does not eat .
After the eggs hatch , the female dies , and the new offspring will reach maturity and be able to mate by the next year .
TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
The blue - ringed octopus , despite its small size , carries enough venom to kill twenty - six adult humans within minutes .
Their bites are tiny and often painless , with many victims not realizing they have been envenomated until respiratory depression and paralysis start to set in .
No blue - ringed octopus antivenom is available .
VENOM Section::::Venom .
The octopus produces venom containing tetrodotoxin , histamine , tryptamine , octopamine , taurine , acetylcholine and dopamine .
The venom can result in nausea , respiratory arrest , heart failure , severe and sometimes total paralysis , blindness , and can lead to death within minutes if not treated .
Death , if it occurs , is usually from suffocation due to paralysis of the diaphragm .
The major neurotoxin component of the blue - ringed octopus is a compound that was originally known as maculotoxin but was later found to be identical to tetrodotoxin , a neurotoxin also found in pufferfish , and in some poison dart frogs .
Tetrodotoxin is 1,200 times more toxic than cyanide .
Tetrodotoxin blocks sodium channels , causing motor paralysis , and respiratory arrest within minutes of exposure .
The tetrodotoxin is produced by bacteria in the salivary glands of the octopus .
Direct contact is necessary to be envenomated .
Faced with danger , the octopus 's first instinct is to flee .
If the threat persists , the octopus will go into a defensive stance , and show its blue rings .
If the octopus is cornered , and touched , the person would be in danger of being bitten and envenomated .
EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
Tetrodotoxin causes severe and often total body paralysis .
Tetrodotoxin envenomation can result in victims being fully aware of their surroundings but unable to move .
Because of the paralysis that occurs , they have no way of signaling for help or any way of indicating distress .
The victim remains conscious and alert in a manner similar to curare or pancuronium bromide .
This effect , however , is temporary and will fade over a period of hours as the tetrodotoxin is metabolized and excreted by the body .
The symptoms vary in severity , with children being the most at risk because of their small body size .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
First aid treatment is pressure on the wound and artificial respiration once the paralysis has disabled the victim 's respiratory muscles , which often occurs within minutes of being bitten .
Because the venom primarily kills through paralysis , victims are frequently saved if artificial respiration is started and maintained before marked cyanosis and hypotension develop .
Efforts should be continued even if the victim appears not to be responding .
Respiratory support until medical assistance arrives ensures the victims will generally recover .
It is essential that rescue breathing be continued without pause until the paralysis subsides and the victim regains the ability to breathe on their own .
This is a daunting physical prospect for a single individual , but use of a bag valve mask respirator reduces fatigue to sustainable levels until help can arrive .
Definitive hospital treatment involves placing the patient on a medical ventilator until the toxin is removed by the body .
Victims who survive the first twenty - four hours usually recover completely .
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::Popular culture .
The blue - ringed octopus is the prominent symbol of the secret order of female bandits and smugglers in the James Bond film Octopussy , appearing in an aquarium tank , on silk robes , and as a tattoo on women in the order .
The animal was also featured in the book State of Fear by Michael Crichton , where a terrorist organization utilized the animal 's venom as a favored murder weapon .
The Adventure Zone featured a blue - ringed octopus in its " Petals To The Metal " series .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Blue Ring Octopuses ( Hapalochlaena spec . )
* Life In The Fast Lane – Toxicology Conundrum # 011
* PBS Nature