JACOBIAN MATRIX AND DETERMINANT
In vector calculus , the Jacobian matrix ( , ) is the matrix of all first - order partial derivatives of a vector - valued function .
When the matrix is a square matrix , both the matrix and its determinant are referred to as the Jacobian in literature .
Suppose is a function which takes as input the vector and produces as output the vector .
Then the Jacobian matrix of is an matrix , usually defined and arranged as follows : or , component - wise :
This matrix , whose entries are functions of , is also denoted by , , and .
( Note that some literature defines the Jacobian as the transpose of the matrix given above . )
The Jacobian matrix is important because if the function is differentiable at a point ( this is a slightly stronger condition than merely requiring that all partial derivatives exist at ) , then the Jacobian matrix defines a linear map , which is the best ( pointwise ) linear approximation of the function near the point .
This linear map is thus the generalization of the usual notion of derivative , and is called the derivative or the differential of at .
If = , the Jacobian matrix is a square matrix , and its determinant , a function of , is the Jacobian determinant of .
It carries important information about the local behavior of .
In particular , the function has locally in the neighborhood of a point an inverse function that is differentiable if and only if the Jacobian determinant is nonzero at ( see Jacobian conjecture ) .
The Jacobian determinant also appears when changing the variables in multiple integrals ( see substitution rule for multiple variables ) .
If = 1 , is a scalar field and the Jacobian matrix is reduced to a row vector of partial derivatives of — i.e. the transpose of the gradient of , when denoted as column vector with respect to the ordered basis formula_3 .
These concepts are named after the mathematician Carl Gustav Jacob Jacobi ( 1804–1851 ) .
JACOBIAN MATRIX Section::::Jacobian matrix .
The Jacobian generalizes the gradient of a scalar - valued function of multiple variables , which itself generalizes the derivative of a scalar - valued function of a single variable .
In other words , the Jacobian for a scalar - valued multivariate function is the gradient and that of a scalar - valued function of single variable is simply its derivative .
The Jacobian can also be thought of as describing the amount of " stretching " , " rotating " or " transforming " that a transformation imposes locally .
For example , if is used to transform an image , the Jacobian , describes how the image in the neighborhood of is transformed .
If a function is differentiable at a point , its derivative is given in coordinates by the Jacobian , but a function does not need to be differentiable for the Jacobian to be defined , since only the partial derivatives are required to exist .
If is a point in and is differentiable at , then its derivative is given by .
In this case , the linear map described by is the best linear approximation of near the point , in the sense that for close to and where is the little o - notation ( for ) and is the distance between and .
( See Total derivative#The total derivative as a linear map . )
Compare this to a Taylor series for a scalar function of a scalar argument , truncated to first order :
In a sense , both the gradient and Jacobian are " first derivatives"—the former the first derivative of a scalar function of several variables , the latter the first derivative of a vector function of several variables .
The Jacobian of the gradient of a scalar function of several variables has a special name : the Hessian matrix , which in a sense is the " second derivative " of the function in question .
JACOBIAN DETERMINANT Section::::Jacobian determinant .
If , then is a function from to itself and the Jacobian matrix is a square matrix .
We can then form its determinant , known as the Jacobian determinant .
The Jacobian determinant is sometimes referred to as " the Jacobian " .
The Jacobian determinant at a given point gives important information about the behavior of near that point .
For instance , the continuously differentiable function is invertible near a point if the Jacobian determinant at is non - zero .
This is the inverse function theorem .
Furthermore , if the Jacobian determinant at is positive , then preserves orientation near ; if it is negative , reverses orientation .
The absolute value of the Jacobian determinant at gives us the factor by which the function expands or shrinks volumes near ; this is why it occurs in the general substitution rule .
The Jacobian determinant is used when making a change of variables when evaluating a multiple integral of a function over a region within its domain .
To accommodate for the change of coordinates the magnitude of the Jacobian determinant arises as a multiplicative factor within the integral .
This is because the -dimensional element is in general a parallelepiped in the new coordinate system , and the -volume of a parallelepiped is the determinant of its edge vectors .
The Jacobian can also be used to solve systems of differential equations at an equilibrium point or approximate solutions near an equilibrium point .
INVERSE Section::::Inverse .
According to the inverse function theorem , the matrix inverse of the Jacobian matrix of an invertible function is the Jacobian matrix of the inverse function .
That is , if the Jacobian of the function is continuous and nonsingular at the point in , then is invertible when restricted to some neighborhood of and Conversely , if the Jacobian determinant is not zero at a point , then the function is locally invertible near this point , that is , there is a neighbourhood of this point in which the function is invertible .
The ( unproved ) Jacobian conjecture is related to global invertibility in the case of a polynomial function , that is a function defined by n polynomials in n variables .
It asserts that , if the Jacobian determinant is a non - zero constant ( or , equivalently , that it does not have any complex zero ) , then the function is invertible and its inverse is a polynomial function .
CRITICAL POINTS
Section::::Critical points .
If is a differentiable function , a critical point of is a point where the rank of the Jacobian matrix is not maximal .
This means that the rank at the critical point is lower than the rank at some neighbour point .
In other words , let be the maximal dimension of the open balls contained in the image of ; then a point is critical if all minors of rank of are zero .
In the case where , a point is critical if the Jacobian determinant is zero .
EXAMPLES EXAMPLE 1 Section::::Examples .
Section::::Example 1 . Consider the function with given by
Then we have and and the Jacobian matrix of is and the Jacobian determinant is EXAMPLE 2 :
POLAR - CARTESIAN TRANSFORMATION
Section::::Example 2 : polar - Cartesian transformation .
The transformation from polar coordinates to Cartesian coordinates ( x , y ) , is given by the function with components :
The Jacobian determinant is equal to .
This can be used to transform integrals between the two coordinate systems :
EXAMPLE 3 : SPHERICAL - CARTESIAN
TRANSFORMATION
Section::::Example 3 : spherical - Cartesian transformation .
The transformation from spherical coordinates to Cartesian coordinates ( x , y , z ) , is given by the function with components :
The Jacobian matrix for this coordinate change is The determinant is .
As an example , since this determinant implies that the differential volume element .
Unlike for a change of Cartesian coordinates , this determinant is not a constant , and varies with coordinates ( and ) .
EXAMPLE 4 Section::::Example 4 .
The Jacobian matrix of the function with components is This example shows that the Jacobian need not be a square matrix .
EXAMPLE 5 Section::::Example 5 .
The Jacobian determinant of the function with components is From this
we see that reverses orientation near those points where and have the same sign ; the function is locally invertible everywhere except near points where or .
Intuitively , if one starts with a tiny object around the point and apply to that object , one will get a resulting object with approximately times the volume of the original one , with orientation reversed .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
The Jacobian serves as a linearized design matrix in statistical regression and curve fitting ; see non - linear least squares .
DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS Section::::Dynamical systems .
Consider a dynamical system of the form formula_21 , where formula_22 is the ( component - wise ) derivative of formula_23 with respect to the evolution parameter formula_24 ( time ) , and formula_25 is differentiable .
If formula_26 , then formula_27 is a stationary point ( also called a steady state ) .
By the Hartman – Grobman theorem , the behavior of the system near a stationary point is related to the eigenvalues of formula_28 , the Jacobian of formula_29 at the stationary point .
Specifically , if the eigenvalues all have real parts that are negative , then the system is stable near the stationary point , if any eigenvalue has a real part that is positive , then the point is unstable .
If the largest real part of the eigenvalues is zero , the Jacobian matrix does not allow for an evaluation of the stability .
NEWTON 'S METHOD
Section::::Newton 's method .
A square system of coupled nonlinear equations can be solved iteratively by Newton 's method .
This method uses the Jacobian matrix of the system of equations .
SURFACE ANALYSIS
Section::::Surface analysis .
Let
n = 2
so the Jacobian is a 2 × 2 real matrix .
Suppose a surface diffeomorphism f :
U → V in the neighborhood of p in U is written
formula_30 The matrix formula_31 can be interpreted as a complex number : ordinary , split , or dual .
Furthermore , since formula_31 is invertible , the complex number has a polar decomposition or an alternative planar decomposition .
And again , each such complex number represents a group action on the tangent plane at p.
The action is dilation by the norm of the complex number , and rotation respecting angle , hyperbolic angle , or slope , according to the case of formula_33 Such action corresponds to a conformal mapping .
SEE ALSO
* Center manifold * Hessian matrix * Pushforward ( differential ) REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS
* Mathworld A more technical explanation of Jacobians