TRAPEZOID
In Euclidean geometry , a convex quadrilateral with at least one pair of parallel sides is referred to as a trapezoid ( ) in American and Canadian English but as a trapezium ( ) in English outside North America .
The parallel sides are called the bases of the trapezoid and the other two sides are called the legs or the lateral sides ( if they are not parallel ; otherwise there are two pairs of bases ) .
A scalene trapezoid is a trapezoid with no sides of equal measure , in contrast to the special cases below .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term trapezium has been in use in English since 1570 , from Late Latin trapezium , from Greek τραπέζιον ( trapézion ) , literally " a little table " , a diminutive of τράπεζα ( trápeza ) , " a table " , itself from τετράς ( tetrás ) , " four " + πέζα ( péza ) , " a foot ; end , border , edge " .
The first recorded use of the Greek word translated trapezoid ( τραπεζοειδή , trapezoeidé , " table - like " ) was by Marinus Proclus ( 412 to 485 AD ) in his Commentary on the first book of Euclid 's Elements .
This article uses the term trapezoid in the sense that is current in the United States and Canada .
In many other languages using a word derived from the Greek for this figure , the form closest to trapezium ( e.g. Portuguese trapézio , French trapèze , Italian trapezio , Spanish trapecio , German Trapez , Russian " трапеция " ) is used .
INCLUSIVE VS EXCLUSIVE DEFINITION Section::::Inclusive vs exclusive definition .
There is some disagreement whether parallelograms , which have two pairs of parallel sides , should be regarded as trapezoids .
Some define a trapezoid as a quadrilateral having only one pair of parallel sides ( the exclusive definition ) , thereby excluding parallelograms .
Others define a trapezoid as a quadrilateral with at least one pair of parallel sides ( the inclusive definition ) , making the parallelogram a special type of trapezoid .
The latter definition is consistent with its uses in higher mathematics such as calculus .
The former definition would make such concepts as the trapezoidal approximation to a definite integral ill - defined .
This article uses the inclusive definition and considers parallelograms as special cases of a trapezoid .
This is also advocated in the taxonomy of quadrilaterals .
Under the inclusive definition , all parallelograms ( including rhombuses , rectangles and squares ) are trapezoids .
Rectangles have mirror symmetry on mid - edges ; rhombuses have mirror symmetry on vertices , while squares have mirror symmetry on both mid - edges and vertices .
SPECIAL CASES Section::::Special cases .
A right trapezoid ( also called right - angled trapezoid ) has two adjacent right angles .
Right trapezoids are used in the trapezoidal rule for estimating areas under a curve .
An acute trapezoid has two adjacent acute angles on its longer base edge , while an obtuse trapezoid has one acute and one obtuse angle on each base .
An isosceles trapezoid is a trapezoid where the sides ( legs ) have the same length , and the base angles have the same measure .
It has reflection symmetry .
This is possible for acute or right trapezoids .
A parallelogram is a trapezoid with two pairs of parallel sides .
A parallelogram has central 2-fold rotational symmetry ( or point reflection symmetry ) .
It is possible for obtuse or right trapezoids .
A tangential trapezoid is a trapezoid that has an incircle .
A Saccheri quadrilateral is similar to a trapezoid in the hyperbolic plane , with two adjacent right angles , while it is a rectangle in the Euclidean plane .
A Lambert quadrilateral in the hyperbolic plane has 3 right angles .
CONDITION OF EXISTENCE Section::::Condition of existence .
Four lengths a , c , b , d can constitute the consecutive sides of a non - parallelogram trapezoid with a and b parallel only when The quadrilateral is a parallelogram when formula_2 , but it is an ex - tangential quadrilateral ( which is not a trapezoid ) when formula_3 . CHARACTERIZATIONS Section::::Characterizations .
Given a convex quadrilateral , the following properties are equivalent , and each implies that the quadrilateral is a trapezoid :
*
It has two adjacent angles that are supplementary , that is , they add up to 180 degrees .
*
The angle between a side and a diagonal is equal to the angle between the opposite side and the same diagonal .
*
The diagonals cut each other in mutually the same ratio ( this ratio is the same as that between the lengths of the parallel sides ) .
*
The diagonals cut the quadrilateral into four triangles of which one opposite pair are similar .
*
The diagonals cut the quadrilateral into four triangles of which one opposite pair have equal areas .
*
The product of the areas of the two triangles formed by one diagonal equals the product of the areas of the two triangles formed by the other diagonal .
* The areas S and T of some two opposite triangles of the four triangles formed by the diagonals satisfy the equation
*
The midpoints of two opposite sides and the intersection of the diagonals are collinear .
*
The angles in the quadrilateral ABCD satisfy
formula_5
*
The cosines of two adjacent angles sum to 0 , as do the cosines of the other two angles .
*
The cotangents of two adjacent angles sum to 0 , as do the cotangents of the other two adjacent angles .
*
One bimedian divides the quadrilateral into two quadrilaterals of equal areas .
*
Twice the length of the bimedian connecting the midpoints of two opposite sides equals the sum of the lengths of the other sides .
Additionally , the following properties are equivalent , and each implies that opposite sides a and b are parallel :
* The consecutive sides a , c , b , d and the diagonals p , q satisfy the equation
*
The distance v between the midpoints of the diagonals satisfies the equation MIDSEGMENT AND HEIGHT Section::::Midsegment and height .
The midsegment ( also called the median or midline ) of a trapezoid is the segment that joins the midpoints of the legs .
It is parallel to the bases .
Its length m is equal to the average of the lengths of the bases a and b of the trapezoid , The midsegment of a trapezoid is one of the two bimedians ( the other bimedian divides the trapezoid into equal areas ) .
The height ( or altitude ) is the perpendicular distance between the bases .
In the case that the two bases have different lengths ( a ≠ b ) , the height of a trapezoid h can be determined by the length of its four sides using the formula where c and d are the lengths of the legs .
AREA Section::::Area .
The area K of a trapezoid is given by where a and b are the lengths of the parallel sides
, h is the height ( the perpendicular distance between these sides ) , and m is the arithmetic mean of the lengths of the two parallel sides .
In 499 AD Aryabhata , a great mathematician - astronomer from the classical age of Indian mathematics and Indian astronomy , used this method in the Aryabhatiya ( section 2.8 ) .
This yields as a special case the well - known formula for the area of a triangle , by considering a triangle as a degenerate trapezoid in which one of the parallel sides has shrunk to a point .
The 7th - century Indian mathematician Bhāskara I derived the following formula for the area of a trapezoid with consecutive sides
a , c , b , d : where a and b are parallel and b > a.
This formula can be factored into a more symmetric version When one of the parallel sides has shrunk to a point ( say a = 0 ) , this formula reduces to Heron 's formula for the area of a triangle .
Another equivalent formula for the area , which more closely resembles Heron 's formula , is where formula_14 is the semiperimeter of the trapezoid .
( This formula is similar to Brahmagupta 's formula , but it differs from it , in that a trapezoid might not be cyclic ( inscribed in a circle ) .
The formula is also a special case of Bretschneider 's formula for a general quadrilateral ) .
From Bretschneider 's formula , it follows that The line that joins the midpoints of the parallel sides , bisects the area .
DIAGONALS Section::::Diagonals .
The lengths of the diagonals are where a is the short base , b is the long base , and c and d are the trapezoid legs .
If the trapezoid is divided into four triangles by its diagonals AC and BD ( as shown on the right ) , intersecting at O , then the area of is equal to that of , and the product of the areas of and is equal to that of and .
The ratio of the areas of each pair of adjacent triangles is the same as that between the lengths of the parallel sides .
Let the trapezoid have vertices A , B , C , and D in sequence and have parallel sides AB and DC .
Let E be the intersection of the diagonals , and let F be on side DA and G be on side BC such that FEG is parallel to AB and CD .
Then FG is the harmonic mean of AB and DC :
The line that goes through both the intersection point of the extended nonparallel sides and the intersection point of the diagonals , bisects each base .
OTHER PROPERTIES
Section::::Other properties .
The center of area ( center of mass for a uniform lamina ) lies along the line segment joining the midpoints of the parallel sides , at a perpendicular distance x from the longer side b given by
The center of area divides this segment in the ratio ( when taken from the short to the long side )
If the angle bisectors to angles A and B intersect at P , and the angle bisectors to angles C and D intersect at Q , then MORE ON TERMINOLOGY Section::::More on terminology .
The term trapezoid was once defined as a quadrilateral without any parallel sides in Britain and elsewhere .
( The Oxford English Dictionary says " Often called by English writers in the 19th century " . )
According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the sense of a figure with no sides parallel is the meaning for which Proclus introduced the term " trapezoid " .
This is retained in the French trapézoïde ( ) , German Trapezoid , and in other languages .
However , this particular sense is considered obsolete .
A trapezium in Proclus ' sense is a quadrilateral having one pair of its opposite sides parallel .
This was the specific sense in England in 17th and 18th centuries , and again the prevalent one in recent use outside North America .
A trapezium as any quadrilateral more general than a parallelogram is the sense of the term in Euclid .
Confusingly , the word trapezium was sometimes used in England from c. 1800 to c. 1875 , to denote an irregular quadrilateral having no sides parallel .
This is now obsolete in England , but continues in North America .
However this shape is more usually ( and less confusingly ) just called an irregular quadrilateral .
APPLICATIONS
ARCHITECTURE
Section::::Applications .
Section::::Architecture .
In architecture the word is used to refer to symmetrical doors , windows , and buildings built wider at the base , tapering toward the top , in Egyptian style .
If these have straight sides and sharp angular corners , their shapes are usually isosceles trapezoids .
This was the standard style for the doors and windows of the Inca .
GEOMETRY Section::::Geometry .
The crossed ladders problem is the problem of finding the distance between the parallel sides of a right trapezoid , given the diagonal lengths and the distance from the perpendicular leg to the diagonal intersection .
BIOLOGY Section::::Biology .
In morphology , taxonomy and other descriptive disciplines in which a term for such shapes is necessary , terms such as trapezoidal or trapeziform commonly are useful in descriptions of particular organs or forms .
SEE ALSO
* Polite number , also known as a trapezoidal number
*
Trapezoidal rule , also known as trapezium rule
* Wedge , a polyhedron defined by two triangles and three trapezoid faces .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* D. Fraivert , A. Sigler and M. Stupel : Common properties of trapezoids and convex quadrilaterals
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Trapezium at Encyclopedia of Mathematics .
* Trapezoid definition Area of a trapezoid Median of a trapezoid With interactive animations
* Trapezoid ( North America ) at elsy.at : Animated course ( construction , circumference , area ) * Trapezoidal Rule on Numerical Methods for Stem Undergraduate * Autar Kaw and E. Eric Kalu , Numerical Methods with Applications , ( 2008 )