VEGETABLE OIL Vegetable oils , or vegetable fats , are fats extracted from seeds , or less often , from other parts of fruits .
Like animal fats , vegetable fats are mixtures of triglycerides .
Soybean oil , rapeseed oil , and cocoa butter are examples of fats from seeds .
Olive oil , palm oil , and rice bran oil are example of fats from other parts of fruits .
In common usage , vegetable oil may refer exclusively to vegetable fats which are liquid at room temperature .
USES OF TRIGLYCERIDE VEGETABLE OIL Section::::Uses of triglyceride vegetable oil .
Oils extracted from plants have been used since ancient times and in many cultures .
As an example , in a 4,000-year - old kitchen unearthed in Indiana 's Charlestown State Park , archaeologist Bob McCullough of Indiana University - Purdue University Fort Wayne found evidence that large slabs of rock were used to crush hickory nuts and the oil was then extracted with boiling water .
Archaeological evidence shows that olives were turned into olive oil by 6000 BC and 4500 BC in present - day Israel and Palestine .
CULINARY USES Section::::Culinary uses .
Many vegetable oils are consumed directly , or indirectly as ingredients in food – a role that they share with some animal fats , including butter , ghee , lard , and schmaltz .
The oils serve a number of purposes in this role : * Shortening – to give pastry a crumbly texture .
* Texture – oils can serve to make other ingredients stick together less .
* Flavor – while less flavorful oils command premium prices , some oils , such as olive , sesame , or almond oil , may be chosen specifically for the flavor they impart .
* Flavor base – oils can also " carry " flavors of other ingredients , since many flavors are due to chemicals that are soluble in oil .
Secondly , oils can be heated and used to cook other foods .
Oils suitable for this objective must have a high flash point .
Such oils include the major cooking oils – soybean , rapeseed , canola , sunflower , safflower , peanut , cottonseed , etc .
Tropical oils , such as coconut , palm , and rice bran oils , are particularly valued in Asian cultures for high - temperature cooking , because of their unusually high flash points .
HYDROGENATED OILS Section::::Hydrogenated oils .
Unsaturated vegetable oils can be transformed through partial or complete " hydrogenation " into oils of higher melting point .
The hydrogenation process involves " sparging " the oil at high temperature and pressure with hydrogen in the presence of a catalyst , typically a powdered nickel compound .
As each carbon – carbon double - bond is chemically reduced to a single bond , two hydrogen atoms each form single bonds with the two carbon atoms .
The elimination of double bonds by adding hydrogen atoms is called saturation ; as the degree of saturation increases , the oil progresses toward being fully hydrogenated .
An oil may be hydrogenated to increase resistance to rancidity ( oxidation ) or to change its physical characteristics .
As the degree of saturation increases , the oil 's viscosity and melting point increase .
The use of hydrogenated oils in foods has never been completely satisfactory .
Because the center arm of the triglyceride is shielded somewhat by the end fatty acids , most of the hydrogenation occurs on the end fatty acids , thus making the resulting fat more brittle .
A margarine made from naturally more saturated oils will be more plastic ( more " spreadable " ) than a margarine made from hydrogenated soy oil .
While full hydrogenation produces largely saturated fatty acids , partial hydrogenation results in the transformation of unsaturated cis fatty acids to unsaturated trans fatty acids in the oil mixture due to the heat used in hydrogenation .
Partially hydrogenated oils and their trans fats have been linked to an increased risk of mortality from coronary heart disease , among other increased health risks .
In the US , the Standard of Identity for a product labeled as " vegetable oil margarine " specifies only canola , safflower , sunflower , corn , soybean , or peanut oil may be used .
Products not labeled " vegetable oil margarine " do not have that restriction .
INDUSTRIAL USES Section::::Industrial uses .
Vegetable oils are used as an ingredient or component in many manufactured products .
Many vegetable oils are used to make soaps , skin products , candles , perfumes and other personal care and cosmetic products .
Some oils are particularly suitable as drying oils , and are used in making paints and other wood treatment products .
Dammar oil ( a mixture of linseed oil and dammar resin ) , for example , is used almost exclusively in treating the hulls of wooden boats .
Vegetable oils are increasingly being used in the electrical industry as insulators as vegetable oils are not toxic to the environment , biodegradable if spilled and have high flash and fire points .
However , vegetable oils are less stable chemically , so they are generally used in systems where they are not exposed to oxygen , and they are more expensive than crude oil distillate .
Synthetic tetraesters , which are similar to vegetable oils
but with four fatty acid chains compared to the normal three found in a natural ester , are manufactured by Fischer esterification .
Tetraesters generally have high stability to oxidation and have found use as engine lubricants .
Vegetable oil is being used to produce biodegradable hydraulic fluid and lubricant .
One limiting factor in industrial uses of vegetable oils is that all such oils are susceptible to becoming rancid .
Oils that are more stable , such as ben oil or mineral oil , are thus preferred for industrial uses .
Castor oil has numerous industrial uses , owing to the presence of hydroxyl group on the fatty acid .
Castor oil is a precursor to Nylon 11 .
PET FOOD ADDITIVE Section::::Pet food additive .
Vegetable oil is used in production of some pet foods .
AAFCO defines vegetable oil , in this context , as the product of vegetable origin obtained by extracting the oil from seeds or fruits which are processed for edible purposes .
FUEL Section::::Fuel .
Vegetable oils are also used to make biodiesel , which can be used like conventional diesel .
Some vegetable oil blends are used in unmodified vehicles but straight vegetable oil , also known as pure plant oil , needs specially prepared vehicles which have a method of heating the oil to reduce its viscosity .
The use of vegetable oils as alternative energy is growing and the availability of biodiesel around the world is increasing .
The NNFCC estimate that the total net greenhouse gas savings when using vegetable oils in place of fossil fuel - based alternatives for fuel production , range from 18 to 100 % .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The production process of vegetable oil involves the removal of oil from plant components , typically seeds .
This can be done via mechanical extraction using an oil mill or chemical extraction using a solvent .
The extracted oil can then be purified and , if required , refined or chemically altered .
MECHANICAL EXTRACTION Section::::Mechanical extraction .
Oils can be removed via mechanical extraction , termed " crushing " or " pressing . "
This method is typically used to produce the more traditional oils ( e.g. , olive , coconut etc . ) , and it is preferred by most " health - food " customers in the United States and in Europe .
There are several different types of mechanical extraction .
Expeller - pressing extraction is common , though the screw press , ram press , and ghani ( powered mortar and pestle ) are also used .
Oilseed presses are commonly used in developing countries , among people for whom other extraction methods would be prohibitively expensive ; the ghani is primarily used in India .
The amount of oil extracted using these methods varies widely , as shown in the following table for extracting mowrah butter in India : SOLVENT EXTRACTION
Section::::Solvent extraction .
The processing of vegetable oil in commercial applications is commonly done by chemical extraction , using solvent extracts , which produces higher yields and is quicker and less expensive .
The most common solvent is petroleum - derived hexane .
This technique is used for most of the " newer " industrial oils such as soybean and corn oils .
Supercritical carbon dioxide can be used as a non - toxic alternative to other solvents .
HYDROGENATION Section::::Hydrogenation .
Oils may be partially hydrogenated to produce various ingredient oils .
Lightly hydrogenated oils have very similar physical characteristics to regular soy oil , but are more resistant to becoming rancid .
Margarine oils need to be mostly solid at 32 ° C ( 90 ° F ) so that the margarine does not melt in warm rooms , yet it needs to be completely liquid at 37 ° C ( 98 ° F ) , so that it does n't leave a " lardy " taste in the mouth .
Hardening vegetable oil is done by raising a blend of vegetable oil and a catalyst in near - vacuum to very high temperatures , and introducing hydrogen .
This causes the carbon atoms of the oil to break double - bonds with other carbons , each carbon forming a new single - bond with a hydrogen atom .
Adding these hydrogen atoms to the oil makes it more solid , raises the smoke point , and makes the oil more stable .
Hydrogenated vegetable oils differ in two major ways from other oils which are equally saturated .
During hydrogenation , it is easier for hydrogen to come into contact with the fatty acids on the end of the triglyceride , and less easy for them to come into contact with the center fatty acid .
This makes the resulting fat more brittle than a tropical oil ; soy margarines are less " spreadable " .
The other difference is that trans fatty acids ( often called trans fat ) are formed in the hydrogenation reactor , and may amount to as much as 40 percent by weight of a partially hydrogenated oil .
Hydrogenated oils , especially partially hydrogenated oils with their higher amounts of trans fatty acids are increasingly thought to be unhealthy .
DEODORIZATION Section::::Deodorization .
In the processing of edible oils , the oil is heated under vacuum to near the smoke point , and water is introduced at the bottom of the oil .
The water immediately is converted to steam , which bubbles through the oil , carrying with it any chemicals which are water - soluble .
The steam sparging removes impurities that can impart unwanted flavors and odors to the oil .
Deodorization is key to the manufacture of vegetable oils .
Nearly all soybean , corn , and canola oils found on supermarket shelves go through a deodorization stage that removes trace amounts of odors and flavors , and lightens the color of the oil .
OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE Section::::Occupational exposure .
People can breathe in vegetable oil mist in the workplace .
The U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has set the legal limit ( permissible exposure limit ) for vegetable oil mist exposure in the workplace as 15 mg / m total exposure and 5 mg / m respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday .
The U.S. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set a recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 10 mg / m total exposure and 5 mg / m respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday .
YIELD Section::::Yield .
+ Some typical yields ! width="110 " Crop !
width="60 "
Yield ( MT / ha )
Palm oil align =
right 4.0
Coconut oil align =
right 1.4
Canola oil align =
right 1.4 Soybean oil align =
right 0.6 Sunflower oil align =
right 0.6 PARTICULAR OILS
Section::::Particular oils .
The following triglyceride vegetable oils account for almost all worldwide production , by volume .
All are used as both cooking oils and as SVO or to make biodiesel .
According to the USDA , the total world consumption of major vegetable oils in 2007/08 was : !
Oil source !
World consumption(million metric tons ) !
Notes Coconut align="center " 3.48 Used in cooking , cosmetics and soaps Note that these figures include industrial and animal feed use .
The majority of European rapeseed oil production is used to produce biodiesel , or used directly as fuel in diesel cars which may require modification to heat the oil to reduce its higher viscosity .
The suitability of the fuel should come as little surprise , as Rudolf Diesel originally designed his engine to run on peanut oil .
Other significant triglyceride oils include : * Corn oil , one of the most common cooking oils .
As of 2006 the US produced about 1.09 million metric tons of corn oil , which is used for cooking oil , salad dressing , margarine , mayonnaise , prepared goods like spaghetti sauce and baking mixes , and to fry prepared foods like potato chips and French fries .
* Grape seed oil , used in cooking and cosmetics *
Hazelnut oil and other nut oils
* Linseed oil , from flax seeds
* Rice bran oil , from rice grains
* Safflower oil , a flavorless and colorless cooking oil * Sesame oil , used as a cooking oil , and as a massage oil , particularly in India * Açaí palm oil , used in culinary and cosmetics * Jambú oil , is extracted from the flowers , leaves and stem from jambu ( Acmella oleracea ) , contains spilanthol * Graviola oil , derived from Annona muricata * Tucumã oil , from Astrocaryum aculeatum is used to manufacture soap .
* Brazil nut oil , culinary and cosmetics use
* Carapa oil , pharmaceutical use and anti - mosquito candle * Buriti oil , from Mauritia flexuosa , used in cosmetics ( skin and hair care )
* Passion fruit oil , derived from Passiflora edulis , has varied applications in cosmetics manufacturing and for uses as a human or animal food .
* Pracaxi oil , obtained from Pentaclethra macroloba , cosmetics use * Solarium oil , derived from chloroplasts , various applications in cooking COMPOSITION OF FATS HISTORY Section::::History .
Such oils have been part of human culture for millennia .
Poppy seed , rapeseed , linseed , almond oil , sesame seed , safflower , and cotton seed were used since at least the bronze age throughout the Middle East and Central Asia .
In 1780 , Carl Wilhelm Scheele demonstrated that fats were derived from glycerol .
Thirty years later Michel Eugène Chevreul deduced that these fats were esters of fatty acids and glycerol .
In modern times , cottonseed oil was marketed by Procter & Gamble as a creamed shortening in 1911 .
Ginning mills were happy to have someone haul away the cotton seeds .
The extracted oil was refined and partially hydrogenated to give a solid at room temperature and thus mimic natural lard , and can it under nitrogen gas .
Compared to the rendered lard Procter & Gamble was already selling to consumers , Crisco was cheaper , easier to stir into a recipe , and could be stored at room temperature for two years without turning rancid .
Soybeans were an exciting new crop from China in the 1930s .
Soy was protein - rich , and the medium viscosity oil was high in polyunsaturates .
Henry Ford established a soybean research laboratory , developed soybean plastics and a soy - based synthetic wool , and built a car " almost entirely " out of soybeans .
Roger Drackett had a successful new product with Windex , but he invested heavily in soybean research , seeing it as a smart investment .
By the 1950s and 1960s , soybean oil had become the most popular vegetable oil in the US .
In the mid-1970s , Canadian researchers developed a low - erucic - acid rapeseed cultivar .
Because the word " rape " was not considered optimal for marketing , they coined the name " canola " ( from " Canada Oil low acid " ) .
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration approved use of the canola name in January 1985 , and U.S. farmers started planting large areas that spring .
Canola oil is lower in saturated fats , and higher in monounsaturates and is a better source of omega-3 fats than other popular oils .
Canola is very thin ( unlike corn oil ) and flavorless ( unlike olive oil ) , so it largely succeeds by displacing soy oil , just as soy oil largely succeeded by displacing cottonseed oil .
USED OIL Section::::Used oil .
A large quantity of used vegetable oil is produced and recycled , mainly from industrial deep fryers in potato processing plants , snack food factories and fast food restaurants .
Recycled oil has numerous uses , including use as a direct fuel , as well as in the production of biodiesel , soap , animal feed , pet food , detergent , and cosmetics .
It is traded as the commodity , yellow grease .
Since 2002 , an increasing number of European Union countries have prohibited the inclusion of recycled vegetable oil from catering in animal feed .
Used cooking oils from food manufacturing , however , as well as fresh or unused cooking oil , continue to be used in animal feed .
SHELF LIFE
Section::::Shelf life .
Due to their susceptibility to oxidation from the exposure to oxygen , heat and light , resulting in the formation of oxidation products , such as peroxides and hydroperoxides , plant oils rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids have a limited shelf - life .
PRODUCT LABELING
Section::::Product labeling .
In Canada , palm oil is one of five vegetable oils , along with palm kernel oil , coconut oil , peanut oil and cocoa butter , which must be specifically named in the list of ingredients for a food product .
Also , oils in Canadian food products which have been modified or hydrogenated must contain the word " modified " or " hydrogenated " when listed as an ingredient .
A mix of oils other than the aforementioned exceptions may simply be listed as " vegetable oil " in Canada ; however , if the food product is a cooking oil , salad oil or table oil , the type of oil must be specified and listing " vegetable oil " as an ingredient is not acceptable .
From December 2014 , all food products produced in the European Union were legally required to indicate the specific vegetable oil used in their manufacture , following the introduction of the Food Information to Consumers Regulation .
SEE ALSO
* Algae culture * Cholesterol * Decorticator * Deodoriser * Essential oils
* Fatty acid * Food extrusion * Fragrance
oil
* Lipid * List of macerated oils * List of vegetable oils
*
Neem * Non - food crops
* Oleochemistry * Vernonia oil * Vegetable oil recycling NOTES AND REFERENCES FURTHER READING