RED KITE
The red kite ( Milvus milvus ) is a medium - large bird of prey in the family Accipitridae , which also includes many other diurnal raptors such as eagles , buzzards , and harriers .
The species currently breeds in the Western Palearctic region of Europe and northwest Africa , though it formerly also occurred in northern Iran .
It is resident in the milder parts of its range in western Europe and northwest Africa , but birds from northeastern and central Europe winter further south and west , reaching south to Turkey .
Vagrants have reached north to Finland and south to Israel , Libya and Gambia .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The red kite was described by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the 10th edition of his Systema Naturae under the binomial name Falco milvus .
The word milvus was the Latin name for the bird .
In 1799 the French naturalist Bernard Germain de Lacépède moved the species to the genus Milvus creating the tautonym .
Two subspecies are recognised : * M. m. milvus ( Linnaeus , 1758 ) – Europe and northwest Africa to the Middle East
* M. m. fasciicauda Hartert , 1914 – Cape Verde Islands
The subspecies M. m. fasciicauda is almost certainly extinct .
The genus Milvus contains two other species : the black kite ( M. migrans ) and the yellow - billed kite ( M. aegyptius ) .
The red kite has been known to successfully hybridize with the black kite in captivity where both species were kept together , and in the wild on the Cape Verde Islands and infrequently in other places .
The red kites on the Cape Verde Islands are ( or rather were ) quite distinct in morphology , being somewhat intermediate with black kites .
The question whether the Cape Verde kite should be considered a distinct species ( Milvus fasciicauda ) or a red kite subspecies has not been settled .
A mitochondrial DNA study on museum specimens suggested that Cape Verde birds did not form a monophyletic lineage among or next to red kites .
This interpretation is problematic : mtDNA analysis is susceptible to hybridization events , the evolutionary history of the Cape Verde population is not known , and the genetic relationship of red kites is confusing , with geographical proximity being no indicator of genetic relatedness and the overall genetic similarity high , perhaps indicating a relict species .
Given the morphological distinctness of the Cape Verde birds and that the Cape Verde population was isolated from other populations of red kites , it can not be conclusively resolved as to whether the Cape Verde population was not a distinct subspecies ( as M. migrans fasciicauda ) or even species that frequently absorbed stragglers from the migrating European populations into its gene pool .
The Cape Verde population became effectively extinct since 2000 , all surviving birds being hybrids with black kites .
The English word " kite " is from the Old English cyta which is of unknown origin .
A kite is mentioned by Geoffrey Chaucer 's in his Knight 's Tale .
The early fifteenth century Hengwrt manuscript contains the lines : " Ther cam a kyte , whil þt
they were so wrothe That bar awey the boon bitwix hem bothe .
" The first recorded use of the word " kite " for a toy that is attached to a length of string and flown in the air dates from the seventeenth century . DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Red kites are long with a wingspan ; males weigh , and females .
It is an elegant bird , soaring on long wings held at a dihedral , and long forked tail , twisting as it changes direction .
The body , upper tail and wing coverts are rufous .
The white primary flight feathers contrast with the black wing tips and dark secondaries .
Apart from the weight difference , the sexes are similar , but juveniles have a buff breast and belly .
Its call is a thin piping sound , similar to but less mewling than the common buzzard .
There is a rare white leucistic form accounting for approximately 1 % of hatchlings in the Welsh population but is at a disadvantage in the survival stakes .
DIFFERENCES BETWEEN ADULTS AND JUVENILES Section::::Differences between adults and juveniles .
Adults differ from juveniles in a number of characteristics :
* Adults are overall more deeply rufous , compared with the more washed out colour of juveniles ; * Adults have black breast - streaks whereas on juveniles these are pale ; * Juveniles have a less deeply forked tail , with a dark subterminal band ; * Juveniles have pale tips to all of the greater - coverts ( secondary and primary ) on both the upper- and under - wings , forming a long narrow pale line ; adults have pale fringes to upperwing secondary - coverts only .
These differences hold throughout most of the first year of a bird 's life .
BEHAVIOUR BREEDING
Section::::Behaviour .
Section::::Breeding .
Usually red kites first breed when they are two years old , although exceptionally they can successfully breed when they are only one year old .
They are monogamous and the pair - bond in populations is probably maintained during the winter , particularly when the pair remain on their breeding territory .
For migrant populations the fidelity to a particular nesting site means that the pair - bond is likely to be renewed each breeding season .
The nest is normally placed in a fork of a large hardwood tree at a height of between above the ground .
A pair will sometimes use a nest from the previous year and can occasionally occupy an old nest of the common buzzard .
The nest is built by both sexes .
The male brings dead twigs in length which are placed by the female .
The nest is lined with grass and sometimes also with sheep 's wool .
Unlike the black kite , no greenery is added to the nest .
Both sexes continue to add material to the nest during the incubation and nestling periods .
Nests vary greatly in size and can become large when the same nest is occupied for several seasons .
The eggs are laid at three - day intervals .
The clutch is usually between one and three eggs but
4 and even 5 eggs have occasionally been recorded .
The eggs are non - glossy with a white ground and red - brown spots .
The average size is with a calculated weight of .
In Britain and in central Europe laying begins at the end of March but in the Mediterranean area laying begins in early March .
The eggs are mainly incubated by the female , but the male will relieve her for short periods while she feeds .
The male will also bring food for the female .
Incubation starts as soon as the first egg is laid .
Each egg hatches after 31 to 32 days but as they hatch asynchronously a clutch of three eggs requires 38 days of incubation .
The chicks are cared for by both parents .
The female them for the first 14 days while the male brings food to the nest which the female feeds to the chicks .
Later both parents bring items of food which are placed in the nest to allow the chicks to feed themselves .
The nestlings begin climbing onto branches around their nest from 45 days but they rarely before 48 - 50 days and sometimes not until they are 60 - 70 days of age .
The young spend a further 15 - 20 days in the neighbourhood of the nest being fed by their parents .
Only a single brood is raised each year but if the eggs are lost the female will relay .
The maximum age recorded is 25 years and 8 months for a ringed bird in Germany .
The longevity record for Britain and Ireland is 23 years and 10 months for a bird found dead in Wales in 2012 .
FOOD AND FEEDING Section::::Food and feeding .
The red kite 's diet consists mainly of small mammals such as mice , voles , shrews , young hares and rabbits .
It feeds on a wide variety of carrion including sheep carcasses and dead game birds .
Live birds are also taken and occasionally reptiles and amphibians .
Earthworms form an important part of the diet , especially in spring .
In some parts of the United Kingdom , red kites are also deliberately fed in domestic gardens , explaining the presence of red kites in urban areas .
Here , up to 5 % of householders have provided supplementary food for red kites , with chicken the predominant meat provided .
As scavengers , red kites are particularly susceptible to poisoning .
Illegal poison baits set for foxes or crows are indiscriminate and kill protected birds and other animals .
There have also been a number of incidents of red kites and other raptors being targeted by wildlife criminals .
In the United Kingdom , there have been several unusual instances of red kites stealing food from people in a similar manner to gulls .
One such occurrence took place in Marlow , Buckinghamshire ( a town near a major reintroduction site for the species in the UK in the nearby village of Stokenchurch ) , in which Red Kites swooped down to steal sandwiches from people in one of the town 's parks .
DISTRIBUTION AND STATUS Section::::Distribution and status .
Red kites inhabit broadleaf woodlands , valleys and wetland edges , to .
They are native to the western Palearctic , with the European population of 19,000–25,000 pairs encompassing 95 % of its global breeding range .
It breeds from Spain and Portugal east into central Europe and Ukraine , north to southern Sweden , Latvia and the UK , and south to southern Italy .
There is a population in northern Morocco .
Northern birds move south in winter , mostly staying in the west of the breeding range , but also to eastern Turkey , northern Tunisia and Algeria .
The three largest populations ( in Germany , France and Spain , which together hold more than 75 % of the global population ) declined between 1990 and 2000 , and overall the species declined by almost 20 % over the ten years .
The main threats to red kites are poisoning , through illegal direct poisoning and indirect poisoning from pesticides , particularly in the wintering ranges in France and Spain , and changes in agricultural practices causing a reduction in food resources .
Other threats include electrocution , hunting and trapping , deforestation , egg - collection ( on a local scale ) and possibly competition with the generally more successful black kite M. migrans .
CONTINENTAL EUROPE Section::::Continental Europe .
German populations declined by 25%–30 % between 1991 and 1997 , but have remained stable since .
The populations of the northern foothills of the Harz Mountains ( the most densely populated part of its range ) suffered an estimated 50 % decline from 1991 to 2001 .
In Spain , the species showed an overall decline in breeding population of up to 43 % for the period 1994 to 2001–02 , and surveys of wintering birds in 2003–04 suggest a similarly large decline in core wintering areas .
The Balearic Islands population has declined from 41–47 breeding pairs in 1993 to just 10 in 2003 .
In France , breeding populations have decreased in the northeast , but seem to be stable in southwest and central France and Corsica .
Populations elsewhere are stable or undergoing increases .
In Sweden , the species has increased from 30–50 pairs in the 1970s to 1,200 breeding pairs in 2003 .
In Switzerland , populations increased during the 1990s , and have stabilised .
According to a report by the Welsh Kite Trust , the UK is the only country in which the red kite population is increasing .
Red kites are decreasing in their strongholds of Spain , France and Germany .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , red kites were ubiquitous scavengers that lived on carrion and rubbish .
Shakespeare 's King Lear describes his daughter Goneril as a detested kite , and he wrote " when the kite builds , look to your lesser linen " in reference to them stealing washing hung out to dry in the nesting season .
In the mid-15th century , King James II of Scotland decreed that they should be " killed wherever possible " , but they remained protected in England and Wales for the next 100 years as they kept the streets free of carrion and rotting food .
Under Tudor " vermin laws " many creatures were seen as competitors for the produce of the countryside and bounties were paid by the parish for their carcasses .
By the 20th century , the breeding population was restricted to a handful of pairs in South Wales , but recently the Welsh population has been supplemented by re - introductions in England and Scotland .
In 2004 , from 375 occupied territories identified , at least 216 pairs were thought to have hatched eggs and 200 pairs reared at least 286 young .
In 1989 , six Swedish birds were released at a site in north Scotland and four Swedish and a Welsh bird in Buckinghamshire .
Altogether , 93 birds of Swedish and Spanish origin were released at each of the sites .
In the second stage of reintroduction in 1995 and 1996 , further birds were brought from Germany to populate areas of Dumfries and Galloway .
Ninety - four birds were brought from the Chilterns and introduced into the Derwent Valley in North East England between 2004 and 2006 .
In Northern Ireland , 80 birds from wild stock in Wales were released over three years between 2008 and 2010 , and in 2010 the first successful breeding was recorded .
The reintroductions in the Chilterns have been a success .
Between 1989 and 1993 , 90 birds were released in the Chilterns Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty and by 2002 , 139 pairs were breeding there .
They can commonly be seen taking advantage of thermals from the M40 motorway .
Another successful reintroduction has been in Northamptonshire , which has become a stronghold for the red kite .
Thirty Spanish birds were introduced into Rockingham Forest near Corby in 2000 , and by 2010 , the RSPB estimated that over 200 chicks had been reared from the initial release .
So successful has the reintroduction been that 30 chicks have been transported from Rockingham Forest , for release in Cumbria .
A sighting of the first red kite in London for 150 years was reported in The Independent newspaper in January 2006 and in June of that year , the UK - based Northern Kites Project reported that kites had bred in the Derwent Valley in and around Rowlands Gill , Tyne and Wear for the first time since the re - introduction .
In 1999 , the red kite was named ' Bird of the Century ' by the British Trust for Ornithology .
According to the Welsh Kite Trust , it has been voted " Wales 's favourite bird " .
In June 2010 , the Forestry Commission North West England announced a three - year project to release 90 red kites in Grizedale Forest , Cumbria under a special licence issued by Natural England .
The Grizedale programme will be the ninth reintroduction of red kites into different regions of the UK , and the final re - introduction phase in England .
The stated aims of the Grizedale project are : *
To establish a viable population of red kites in Grizedale , South Cumbria by 2015 .
* To increase the rate of red kite expansion into North West England and link up with existing populations in Wales , Yorkshire , North East England and South West Scotland and so increase the chances of a continuous geographical range .
* To develop community involvement and create educational opportunities arising from the project .
As of July 2011 , non - breeding birds are regularly seen in all parts of Britain , and the number of breeding pairs is too large for the RSPB to continue to survey them on an annual basis .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
Red kites were extinct in Ireland by the middle nineteenth century , due to persecution , poisoning and woodland clearance .
In May 2007 , Minister for the Environment , Heritage and Local Government Dick Roche announced an agreement to bring at least 100 birds from Wales to restock the population as part of a 5-year programme in the Wicklow Mountains , similar to the earlier golden eagle reintroduction programme .
On 19 July 2007 , the first thirty red kites were released in County Wicklow .
On 22 May 2010 , 2 newly hatched red kite chicks were discovered in the Wicklow mountains , bringing the number of chicks hatched since reintroduction to 7 .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
Sweden is one location where the red kite seems to be increasing , with around 2000 pairs in 2009 , some of which are overwintering and some flying south to the Mediterranean for the winter .
They return around March – April .
The red kite is the landscape bird of Scania , and the coat of arms of the municipality of Tomelilla .
The kite is often seen along the roadsides and roaming the open colourful patchwork quilt of wheat and rapeseed fields of Scania .
POPULATIONS AND TRENDS
BY COUNTRY
Section::::Populations and trends by country .
The following figures ( mostly estimates ) have been collated from various sources .
They cover most of the countries in which red kites are believed to have bred . !
Country !
Year !
Pairs !
Trend !
Notes OBSERVATION Section::::Observation .
One of the best places to see the red kite in Scandinavia is Scania in southern Sweden .
It may be observed in one of its breeding locations such as the Kullaberg Nature Preserve near Mölle .
In Switzerland , they are a common sight in all rural areas , excluding the Alps and its foothills .
Some of the best places to see them in the United Kingdom are Gigrin Farm near Rhayader , mid Wales , where hundreds are fed by the local farmer as a tourist attraction , a Red Kite Feeding Station at Llanddeusant in the Brecon Beacons , visited daily by over 50 birds , and the Bwlch Nant yr Arian forest visitor centre in Ceredigion where the rare leucistic variant can be seen .
In the UK , the Oxfordshire part of the Chilterns has many red kites , especially near Henley - on - Thames and Watlington , where they were introduced on John Paul Getty 's estate .
Red Kites are also becoming common in Buckinghamshire , often being seen near Stokenchurch , where a population was released in the 1990s , and Flackwell Heath near High Wycombe .
They can also be seen around Harewood near Leeds where they were re - introduced in 1999 .
In Ireland they can be best observed at Redcross , near Avoca , County Wicklow .
SEE
ALSO * Shite - hawk REFERENCES
SOURCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Friends of Red Kites - Details about the reintroduced kites in the Derwent Valley , Gateshead * BBC Wales Nature - Red Kite footage * BBC Report about this bird 's redemption in UK culture from a hated shithawk to a beloved bird *
The Welsh Kite Trust - includes UK breeding reports
* About Red Kites - includes latest figures available in UK
* Details Red Kites in the Chilterns - about the reintroduced kites in the Chilterns * Red Kites in Yorkshire
* Red Kites in Berkshire ( Berkshire Ornithological Club )
- 2006/2007
Survey * Adult and juvenile Red Kite wing identification images ( PDF ; 5.6 MB ) by Javier Blasco - Zumeta & Gerd - Michael Heinze