PERFECT GAME
A perfect game is defined by Major League Baseball as a game in which a pitcher ( or combination of pitchers ) pitches a victory that lasts a minimum of nine innings in which no opposing player reaches base .
Thus , the pitcher ( or pitchers ) can not allow any hits , walks , hit batsmen , or any opposing player to reach base safely for any other reason and the fielders can not make an error that allows an opposing player to reach a base ; in short , " 27 up , 27 down " .
The feat has been achieved 23 times in MLB history – 21 times since the modern era began in 1900 , most recently by Félix Hernández of the Seattle Mariners on August 15 , 2012 .
A perfect game is also a no - hitter and a shutout .
A fielding error that does not allow a batter to reach base , such as a misplayed foul ball , does not spoil a perfect game .
Weather - shortened contests in which a team has no baserunners and games in which a team reaches first base only in extra innings do not qualify as perfect games under the present definition .
The first confirmed use of the term " perfect game " was in ; the term 's current definition was formalized in .
Although it is possible for several pitchers to combine for a perfect game ( as has happened 11 times at the major league level for a no - hitter ) , to date , every major league perfect game has been thrown by a single pitcher .
In Eastern Asian leagues such as Nippon Professional Baseball , KBO League , or Chinese Professional Baseball League , only Complete Perfect Games were recorded as official .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first known use in print of the term perfect game occurred in 1908 .
I. E. Sanborn 's report for the Chicago Tribune about Addie Joss 's performance against the White Sox calls it " an absolutely perfect game , without run , without hit , and without letting an opponent reach first base by hook or crook , on hit , walk , or error , in nine innings " .
Several sources have claimed ( erroneously ) that the first recorded usage of the term " perfect game " was by Ernest J. Lanigan in his Baseball Cyclopedia , made in reference to Charlie Robertson 's 1922 perfect game .
The Chicago Tribune came close to the term in describing Richmond 's game in 1880 : " Richmond was most effectively supported , every position on the home nine being played to perfection . "
Similarly , in writing up John Montgomery Ward 's 1880 perfect game , the New York Clipper described the " perfect play " of Providence 's defense .
As of 2014 , the current Major League Baseball definition of a perfect game is largely a side effect of the decision made by the major leagues ' Committee for Statistical Accuracy on September 4 , 1991 , to redefine a no - hitter as a game in which the pitcher or pitchers on one team throw a complete game of nine innings or more without surrendering a hit .
That decision removed a number of games that had long appeared in the record books : those lasting fewer than nine innings , and those in which a team went hitless in regulation but then got a hit in extra innings .
The definition of perfect game was made to parallel this new definition of the no - hitter , in effect substituting " baserunner " for " hit " .
As a result of the 1991 redefinition , for instance , Harvey Haddix receives credit for neither a perfect game nor a no - hitter for his performance on May 26 , 1959 , when he threw 12 perfect innings against the Milwaukee Braves before allowing a baserunner in the 13th .
There has been one perfect game in the World Series , thrown by Don Larsen for the New York Yankees against the Brooklyn Dodgers on October 8 , 1956 .
By coincidence , the second Yankee pitcher to throw a perfect game , David Wells in 1998 , graduated from the same high school as Larsen - Point Loma High School in San Diego , California .
In a further coincidence , Larsen was in attendance when the third Yankee pitcher to throw a perfect game , David Cone in 1999 , performed the feat on the same day that Larsen and Yogi Berra ( the catcher in the 1956 perfect game ) were invited to do the ceremonial first pitch .
Ron Hassey is the only catcher in MLB history to have caught more than one perfect game ( his first was with pitcher Len Barker in 1981 and his second was with pitcher Dennis Martínez in 1991 ) .
The most recent perfect game pitched in Major League Baseball was thrown by Félix Hernández of the Seattle Mariners against the Tampa Bay Rays on August 15 , 2012 ) .
He struck out the side twice and struck out twelve total batters in the 1 - 0 victory over Tampa Bay .
Since the beginning of the 2009 MLB season , it was the third time that the Tampa Bay Rays were on the losing end of a perfect game .
The only perfect game thrown in a Little League World Series championship was by Angel Macias of the Monterrey , Mexico , team in 1957 .
SEE ALSO
* Armando Galarraga 's near - perfect game *
Golden set in tennis
* Maximum break in snooker * Nine - dart finish in darts
* Perfect game in bowling *
Eight - ender in curling * The Perfect Game , a 2009 movie * For Love of the Game , a 1991 novel by Pulitzer Prize - winning author Michael Shaara NOTES SOURCES
* Alvarez , Mark , ed .
( 1993 ) .
The Perfect Game : A Classic Collection of Facts , Figures , Stories and Characters from the Society for American Baseball Research ( Taylor ) .
* Anderson , David W. ( 2000 ) .
More Than Merkle : A History of the Best and Most Exciting Baseball Season in Human History ( Lincoln and London : University of Nebraska Press ) .
* Browning , Reed ( 2003 ) .
Cy Young :
A Baseball Life ( Amherst : University of Massachusetts Press ) .
* Buckley , Jr. , James ( 2002 ) .
Perfect :
The Inside Story of Baseball 's Seventeen Perfect Games ( Triumph Books ) .
* Chen , Albert ( 2009 ) .
" The Greatest Game Ever Pitched " , Sports Illustrated ( June 1 ; available online ) .
* Coffey , Michael ( 2004 ) .
27 Men Out : Baseball 's Perfect Games ( New York : Atria Books ) .
* Cook , William A. ( 2004 ) .
Waite Hoyt : A Biography of the Yankees ' Schoolboy Wonder ( Jefferson , N.C. : McFarland ) .
* Deutsch , Jordan A. et al .
( 1975 ) .
The Scrapbook History of Baseball ( New York : Bobbs - Merrill ) .
* Deveaux , Tom ( 2001 ) .
The Washington Senators , 1901–1971
( Jefferson , N.C. : McFarland ) .
* Dewey , Donald , and Nicholas Acocella ( 1995 ) .
The Biographical History of Baseball ( New York : Carroll & Graf ) .
* Dickson , Paul ( 2009 ) .
The Dickson Baseball Dictionary , 3d ed .
( New York : W. W. Norton ) .
* Egan , James M. ( 2008 ) .
Base Ball on the Western Reserve :
The Early Game in Cleveland and Northeast Ohio , Year by Year and Town by Town , 1865–1900
( Jefferson , N.C. : McFarland ) .
*
Elston , Gene ( 2006 ) .
A Stitch in Time :
A Baseball Chronology , 3d ed .
( Houston , Tex . :
Halcyon Press ) .
* Fleitz , David L. ( 2004 ) .
Ghosts in the Gallery at Cooperstown : Sixteen Little - Known Members of the Hall of Fame ( Jefferson , N.C. : McFarland ) .
* Forker , Dom , Robert Obojski , and Wayne Stewart ( 2004 ) .
The Big Book of Baseball Brainteasers ( Sterling ) .
* Gallagher , Mark ( 2003 ) .
The Yankee Encyclopedia , 6th ed .
( Champaign , Ill. : Sports Publishing LLC ) .
*
Hanlon , John ( 1968 ) .
" First Perfect Game In the Major Leagues " , Sports Illustrated ( August 26 ; available online ) .
*
Holtzman , Jerome ( 2003 ) .
" Pitching Perfection Is in the Eye of the Beholder " , Baseball Digest ( June ; available online ) .
* James , Bill .
The New Bill James Historical Baseball Abstract , rev . ed .
( Simon and Schuster , 2003 ) .
* Kennedy , Kostya ( 1996 ) .
"
His Memory Is Perfect " , Sports Illustrated ( October 14 ; available online ) * Lewis , Allen ( 2002 ) .
"
Tainted No - hitters " , Baseball Digest ( February ; available online ) .
* Lupica , Mike ( 1999 ) .
Summer of ' 98 : When Homers Flew , Records Fell , and Baseball Reclaimed America ( New York :
G.P. Putnam 's Sons ) .
* McNeil , William F. ( 2003 ) .
The Dodgers Encyclopedia , 2d ed .
( Champaign , Ill. : Sports Publishing LLC ) .
* Nemec , David ( 2006 [ 1994 ] ) .
The Official Rules of Baseball Illustrated ( Guilford , Conn. : Globe Pequot ) .
* Newman , Bruce ( 1981 ) .
"
Perfect in Every Way " , Sports Illustrated ( May 25 ; available online ) .
* Nowlin , Bill ( 2005 ) . "
Rick Wise " , in ' 75 :
The Red Sox Team That Saved Baseball , ed .
Bill Nowlin and Cecilia Tan ( Cambridge ,
Massachusetts : Rounder ) .
* Okrent , Daniel , and Steve Wulf ( 1989 ) .
Baseball Anecdotes ( New York and Oxford : Oxford University Press ) .
* Reisler , Jim ( 2007 ) .
The Best Game Ever : Pirates vs. Yankees , October 13 , 1960 ( New York : Carroll & Graf ) .
* Robbins , Mike ( 2004 ) .
Ninety Feet from Fame : Close Calls with Baseball Immortality ( New York : Carroll & Graf ) .
*
Schneider , Russell ( 2005 ) .
The Cleveland Indians Encyclopedia , 3d ed .
( Champaign , Ill. : Sports Publishing LLC ) .
* Schott , Tom , and Nick Peters ( 2003 ) .
The Giants Encyclopedia ( Champaign , Ill. : Sports Publishing LLC ) .
* Simon , Thomas P. , ed .
( 2004 ) .
Deadball Stars of the National League ( Brassey 's ) .
* Sullivan , Dean , ed .
( 2002 ) .
Late Innings : A Documentary History of Baseball , 1945–1972 ( Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press ) .
* Thielman , Jim ( 2005 ) .
Cool of the Evening : The 1965 Minnesota Twins ( Minneapolis , Minn. :
Kirk House Publishers ) .
* Vass , George ( 1998 ) .
" Here Are the 13 Most Fascinating No - Hitters " , Baseball Digest ( June ) .
* Vass , George ( 2002 ) . "
Seven Most Improbable No - Hitters " , Baseball Digest ( August ; available online ) .
* Vass , George ( 2007 ) .
"
One Out Away from Fame : The Final Out of Hitless Games Has Often Proved to Be a Pitcher 's Toughest Conquest " , Baseball Digest ( June ; available online ) .
*
Westcott , Rich ( 2005 ) .
Veterans Stadium : Field of Memories ( Philadelphia : Temple University Press ) .
* Young , Mark C. ( 1997 ) .
The Guinness Book of Sports Records ( Guinness Media ) .
* Zingg , Paul J. , and Mark D. Medeiros ( 1994 ) .
Runs , Hits , and an Era : the Pacific Coast League , 1903–58
( Champaign : University of Illinois Press ) .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Perfect Games Baseball Almanac links to boxscores of both official and unofficial games * Pitchers who retired 27 consecutive batters or more over a span of two or more games Baseball Prospectus article by Keith Woolner on " hidden " perfect games ( also see the follow - up )
* Rare Feats :
Perfect Games MLB.com links to historical video and audio extracts