HUGHES H-4 HERCULES
The Hughes H-4 Hercules ( also known as the Spruce Goose ; registration NX37602 ) is a prototype strategic airlift flying boat designed and built by the Hughes Aircraft Company .
Intended as a transatlantic flight transport for use during World War II , it was not completed in time to be used in the war .
The aircraft made only one brief flight on November 2 , 1947 , and the project never advanced beyond the single example produced .
Built from wood because of wartime restrictions on the use of aluminum and concerns about weight , it was nicknamed by critics the Spruce Goose , although it was made almost entirely of birch .
The Hercules is the largest flying boat ever built , and it has the largest wingspan of any aircraft that has ever flown .
The aircraft remains in good condition .
After being displayed to the public for almost 11 years in Long Beach , California from 1980 to 1991 , it is now displayed at the Evergreen Aviation & Space Museum in McMinnville , Oregon , United States .
DESIGN AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::Design and development .
In 1942 , the U.S. War Department needed to transport war materiel and personnel to Britain .
Allied shipping in the Atlantic Ocean was suffering heavy losses to German U - boats , so a requirement was issued for an aircraft that could cross the Atlantic with a large payload .
Wartime priorities meant the aircraft could not be made of strategic materials ( e.g. , aluminum ) .
The aircraft was the brainchild of Henry J. Kaiser , a leading Liberty ship builder and manufacturer .
Kaiser teamed with aircraft designer Howard Hughes to create what would become the largest aircraft ever built at that time .
The aircraft was designed to carry 150,000 pounds , 750 fully equipped troops or two 30-ton M4 Sherman tanks .
The original designation " HK-1 " reflected the Hughes and Kaiser collaboration .
The HK-1 aircraft contract was issued in 1942 as a development contract and called for three aircraft to be constructed in two years for the war effort .
Seven configurations were considered , including twin - hull and single - hull designs with combinations of four , six , and eight wing - mounted engines .
The final design chosen was a behemoth , eclipsing any large transport then built .
It would be built mostly of wood to conserve metal ( its elevators and rudder were fabric - covered ) , and was nicknamed the Spruce Goose ( a name Hughes disliked ) or the Flying Lumberyard .
While Kaiser had originated the " flying cargo ship " concept , he did not have an aeronautical background and deferred to Hughes and his designer , Glenn Odekirk .
Development dragged on , which frustrated Kaiser , who blamed delays partly on restrictions placed for the acquisition of strategic materials such as aluminum , and partly on Hughes ' insistence on " perfection " .
Construction of the first HK-1 took place 16 months after the receipt of the development contract .
Kaiser then withdrew from the project .
Hughes continued the program on his own under the designation H-4 Hercules , signing a new government contract that now limited production to one example .
Work proceeded slowly , and the H-4 was not completed until well after the war was over .
The plane was built by the Hughes Aircraft Company at Hughes Airport , location of present - day Playa Vista , Los Angeles , California , employing the plywood - and - resin " Duramold " process – a form of composite technology – for the laminated wood construction , which was considered a technological tour de force .
The specialized wood veneer was made by Roddis Manufacturing in Marshfield , Wisconsin .
Hamilton Roddis had teams of young women ironing the ( unusually thin ) strong birch wood veneer before shipping to California .
A house moving company transported the airplane on streets to Pier E in Long Beach , California .
They moved it in three large sections : the fuselage , each wing — and a fourth , smaller shipment with tail assembly parts and other smaller assemblies .
After Hughes Aircraft completed final assembly , they erected a hangar around the flying boat , with a ramp to launch the H-4 into the harbor .
Howard Hughes was called to testify before the Senate War Investigating Committee in 1947 over the use of government funds for the aircraft .
During a Senate hearing on August 6 , 1947 ( the first of a series of appearances ) , Hughes said : The Hercules was a monumental undertaking .
It is the largest aircraft ever built .
It is over five stories tall with a wingspan longer than a football field .
That 's more than a city block .
Now , I put the sweat of my life into this thing .
I have my reputation all rolled up in it
and I have stated several times that if it 's a failure , I 'll probably leave this country and never come back .
And I mean it .
In all , development cost for the plane reached $ 23 million ( equivalent to more than $ 283 million in 2016 ) .
OPERATIONAL HISTORY Section::::Operational history .
Hughes returned to California during a break in the Senate hearings to run taxi tests on the H-4 .
On November 2 , 1947 , the taxi tests began with Hughes at the controls .
His crew included Dave Grant as copilot , two flight engineers , Don Smith and Joe Petrali , 16 mechanics , and two other flight crew .
The H-4 also carried seven invited guests from the press corps and an additional seven industry representatives .
Thirty - six were on board .
Four reporters left to file stories after the first two taxi runs while the remaining press stayed for the final test run of the day .
After picking up speed on the channel facing Cabrillo Beach
the Hercules lifted off , remaining airborne for 26 seconds at off the water at a speed of for about one mile ( 1.6 km ) .
At this altitude the aircraft still experienced ground effect .
The brief flight proved to detractors that Hughes ' ( now unneeded ) masterpiece was flight - worthy — thus vindicating the use of government funds .
The Spruce Goose , however , never flew again .
Its lifting capacity and ceiling were never tested .
A full - time crew of 300 workers , all sworn to secrecy , maintained the aircraft in flying condition in a climate - controlled hangar .
The company reduced the crew to 50 workers in 1962 and then disbanded it after Hughes ' death in 1976 .
DISPLAY Section::::Display .
Ownership of the H-4 was disputed by the U.S. government , which had contracted for its construction .
In the mid-1970s , an agreement was reached whereby the Smithsonian Institution 's National Air and Space Museum would receive the Hughes H-1 Racer and section of the H-4 's wing , the Summa Corporation would pay $ 700,000 and receive ownership of the H-4 , the U.S. government would cede any rights , and the aircraft would be protected " from commercial exploitation . "
In 1980 , the Hercules aircraft was acquired by the Aero Club of Southern California , which later put the aircraft on display in a very large geodesic dome next to the Queen Mary ship exhibit in Long Beach , California .
The large dome facility became known as the Spruce Goose Dome .
The very large enclosed indoor dome area around the Spruce Goose consisted of meeting and special event space , elaborate audio visual displays about Howard Hughes and the Spruce Goose aircraft , and dining areas for tourists .
Many convention groups held large dinners , sales meetings , and even concerts under the wings of the aircraft at night when the Spruce Goose Dome was closed to tourists .
In 1988 , The Walt Disney Company acquired both Long Beach attractions and the associated Long Beach real estate by Pier J.
In 1991 , Disney informed the Aero Club of Southern California that it no longer wished to display the Hercules aircraft after its highly ambitious Port Disney plan was scrapped .
After a long search for a suitable host , the Aero Club of Southern California arranged for the Hughes Hercules flying boat to be given to Evergreen Aviation Museum in exchange for payments and a percentage of the museum 's profits .
The aircraft was transported by barge , train , and truck to its current home in McMinnville , Oregon ( about 40 miles ( 60 km ) southwest of Portland ) , where it was reassembled by Contractors Cargo Company and is currently on display .
The aircraft arrived in McMinnville on February 27 , 1993 , after a 138-day , trip from Long Beach .
The Spruce Goose geodesic dome is now used by Carnival Cruise Lines as its Long Beach terminal .
By the mid-1990s , the former Hughes Aircraft hangars at Hughes Airport , including the one that held the Hercules , were converted into sound stages .
Scenes from movies such as Titanic , What Women Want and End of Days have been filmed in the 315,000-square - foot ( 29,000 m ) aircraft hangar where Howard Hughes created the flying boat .
The hangar will be preserved as a structure eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Buildings in what is today the large light industry and housing development in the Playa Vista neighborhood of Los Angeles .
The Western Museum of Flight in Torrance , California has a large collection of construction photographs and blueprints of the Hercules .
SPECIFICATIONS ( H-4 )
Section::::Specifications ( H-4 ) .
Performance specifications are projected .
NOTABLE APPEARANCES IN MEDIA SEE
ALSO
REFERENCES
NOTES CITATIONS BIBLIOGRAPHY * Francillon , René J. McDonnell Douglas Aircraft since 1920 : Volume II .
Annapolis , Maryland : Naval Institute Press , 1990 . .
* McDonald , John J. Howard Hughes and the Spruce Goose .
Blue Ridge Summit , Pennsylvania : Tab Books Inc. , 1981 . .
*
Odekirk , Glenn E. Spruce Goose ( Title inside cover : HK-1
Hercules : A Pictorial History of the Fantastic Hughes Flying Boat ) .
Long Beach , California : Glenn E. Odekirk and Frank Alcantr , Inc. , 1982 .
No ISBN .
* Parker , Dana T. Building Victory : Aircraft Manufacturing in the Los Angeles Area in World War II , Cypress , CA , 2013 . .
* Winchester , Jim . "
Hughes
H-4 ' Spruce Goose ' . "
Concept Aircraft : Prototypes , X - Planes and Experimental Aircraft .
Kent , UK : Grange Books plc . , 2005 . .
FURTHER READING
* David , Peter .
The Rocketeer : The Official Movie Adaptation .
Burbank , California : W D Publications Inc. , 1991 . .
* Schwartz , Milton L.The Spruce Goose Commemorative Pictorial .
Oakland , California :
The Wrather Corporation by Mike Roberts Color Productions , 1983 .
* Yenne , Bill .
Seaplanes & Flying Boats : A Timeless Collection from Aviation 's Golden Age .
New York : BCL Press , 2003 . .
* " Look Inside The World 's Largest Plane " - Popular Science , September 1945 * " World 's Largest Airplane Takes To The Road " - Popular Science , August 1946 *
" 200 tons and it flies ! "
- Popular Mechanics , January 1948 EXTERNAL LINKS * Evergreen Aviation Museum , home of the Spruce Goose * Vintage photos of Spruce Gooses construction