SATELLITE DISH
A satellite dish is a dish - shaped type of parabolic antenna designed to receive or transmit information by radio waves to or from a communication satellite .
The term most commonly means a dish used by consumers to receive direct - broadcast satellite television from a direct broadcast satellite in geostationary orbit .
PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION Section::::Principle of operation .
The parabolic shape of a dish reflects the signal to the dish 's focal point .
Mounted on brackets at the dish 's focal point is a device called a feedhorn .
This feedhorn is essentially the front - end of a waveguide that gathers the signals at or near the focal point and ' conducts ' them to a low - noise block downconverter or LNB .
The LNB converts the signals from electromagnetic or radio waves to electrical signals and shifts the signals from the downlinked C - band and/or K - band to the L - band range .
Direct broadcast satellite dishes use an LNBF , which integrates the feedhorn with the LNB .
( A new form of omnidirectional satellite antenna , which does not use a directed parabolic dish and can be used on a mobile platform such as a vehicle was announced by the University of Waterloo in 2004 .
The theoretical gain ( directive gain ) of a dish increases as the frequency increases .
The actual gain depends on many factors including surface finish , accuracy of shape , feedhorn matching .
A typical value for a consumer type 60 cm satellite dish at 11.75 GHz is 37.50 dB. With lower frequencies , C - band for example , dish designers have a wider choice of materials .
The large size of dish required for lower frequencies led to the dishes being constructed from metal mesh on a metal framework .
At higher frequencies , mesh type designs are rarer though some designs have used a solid dish with perforations .
A common misconception is that the LNBF ( low - noise block / feedhorn ) , the device at the front of the dish , receives the signal directly from the atmosphere .
For instance , one BBC News downlink shows a " red signal " being received by the LNBF directly instead of being beamed to the dish , which because of its parabolic shape will collect the signal into a smaller area and deliver it to the LNBF .
Modern dishes intended for home television use are generally 43 cm ( 18 in ) to 80 cm ( 31 in ) in diameter , and are fixed in one position , for Ku - band reception from one orbital position .
Prior to the existence of direct broadcast satellite services , home users would generally have a motorised C - band dish of up to 3 m in diameter for reception of channels from different satellites .
Overly small dishes can still cause problems , however , including rain fade and interference from adjacent satellites .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
In Europe , the frequencies used by DBS services are 10.7–12.75 GHz on two polarisations H ( Horizontal ) and V ( Vertical ) .
This range is divided into a " low band " with 10.7–11.7 GHz , and a " high band " with 11.7–12.75 GHz .
This results in two frequency bands , each with a bandwidth of about 1 GHz , each with two possible polarizations .
In the LNB they become down converted to 950–2150 MHz , which is the frequency range allocated for the satellite service on the coaxial cable between LNBF and receiver .
Lower frequencies are allocated to cable and terrestrial TV , FM radio , etc .
Only one of these frequency bands fits on the coaxial cable , so each of these bands needs a separate cable from the LNBF to a switching matrix or the receiver needs to select one of the 4 possibilities at a time .
SYSTEMS DESIGN
Section::::Systems design .
In a single receiver residential installation there is a single coaxial cable running from the receiver set - top box in the building to the LNB on the dish .
The DC electric power for the LNB is provided through the same coaxial cable conductors that carry the signal to the receiver .
In addition , control signals are also transmitted from the receiver to the LNB through the cable .
The receiver uses different power supply voltages ( 13 / 18 V ) to select antenna polarization , and pilot tones ( 22 kHz ) to instruct the LNB to select one of the two frequency bands .
In larger installations each band and polarization is given its own cable , so there are 4 cables from the LNB to a switching matrix , which allows the connection of multiple receivers in a star topology using the same signalling method as in a single receiver installation .
A satellite finder may aid in aiming .
TYPES MOTOR - DRIVEN DISH Section::::Types .
Section::::Motor - driven dish .
A dish that is mounted on a pole and driven by a stepper motor or a servo can be controlled and rotated to face any satellite position in the sky .
Motor - driven dishes are popular with enthusiasts .
There are three competing standards : DiSEqC , USALS , and 36 V positioners .
Many receivers support all of these standards .
MULTI - SATELLITE Section::::Multi - satellite .
Some designs enable simultaneous reception from multiple different satellite positions without re - positioning the dish .
The vertical axis operates as an off - axis concave parabolic concave hyperbolic Cassegrain reflector , while the horizontal axis operates as a concave convex Cassegrain .
The spot from the main dish wanders across the secondary , which corrects astigmatism by its varying curvature .
The elliptic aperture of the primary is designed to fit the deformed illumination by the horns .
Due to double spill - over , this makes more sense for a large dish .
VSAT
Section::::VSAT .
A common type of dish is the very small aperture terminal ( VSAT ) .
This provides two way satellite internet communications for both consumers and private networks for organizations .
Today most VSATs operate in ; C band is restricted to less populated regions of the world .
There is a move which started in 2005 towards new satellites operating at higher frequencies , offering greater performance at lower cost .
These antennas vary from in most applications though C - band VSATs may be as large as .
OTHERS
*
Individual dishes serving one dwelling :
Direct to Home ( DTH ) .
* Collective dishes , shared by several dwellings : satellite master antenna television ( SMATV ) or communal antenna broadcast distribution ( CABD ) .
*
Automatic Tracking Satellite Dish
HOMEMADE
DISHES
Section::::Homemade dishes .
Any metal surface which concentrates a significant fraction of the reflected microwaves at a focus can be used as a dish antenna , at a lower gain .
This has led to trash can lids , woks , and other items being used as " dishes " .
Only modern low noise LNBs and the higher transmission power of DTH satellites allows a usable signal to be received from such inefficient DIY antennas .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Parabolic antennas referred to as " dish " antennas had been in use long before satellite television .
The term " satellite dish " was coined in 1978 during the beginning of the satellite television industry , and came to refer to dish antennas that send and/or receive signals from communications satellites .
Taylor Howard of San Andreas , California adapted an ex - military dish in 1976 and became the first person to receive satellite television signals using it .
The first satellite television dishes were built to receive signals on the C - band analog , and were very large .
The front cover of the 1979 Neiman - Marcus Christmas catalog featured the first home satellite TV stations on sale .
The dishes were nearly in diameter .
The satellite dishes of the early 1980s were in diameter and made of fiberglass with an embedded layer of wire mesh or aluminum foil , or solid aluminum or steel .
Satellite dishes made of wire mesh first came out in the early 1980s , and were at first in diameter .
As the front - end technology improved and the noise figure of the LNBs fell , the size shrank to a few years later , and continued to get smaller reducing to feet by the late 1980s and by the early 1990s .
Larger dishes continued to be used , however .
In December 1988 Luxembourg 's Astra 1A satellite began transmitting analog television signals on the K band for the European market .
This allowed small dishes ( 90 cm ) to be used reliably for the first time .
In the early 1990s , four large American cable companies founded PrimeStar , a direct broadcasting company using medium power satellites .
The relatively strong K band transmissions allowed the use of dishes as small as 90 cm for the first time .
On 4 March 1996 EchoStar introduced Digital Sky Highway ( Dish Network ) .
This was the first widely used direct - broadcast satellite television system and allowed dishes as small as 20 inches to be used .
This great decrease of dish size also allowed satellite dishes to be installed on vehicles .
Dishes this size are still in use today .
Television stations , however , still prefer to transmit their signals on the C - band analog with large dishes due to the fact that C - band signals are less prone to rain fade than K band signals .
SEE ALSO * DiSEqC
* Satellite television
* Set - top box
* Parabolic reflector
* Low - noise block converter
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * European Commission : The right to use a satellite dish .
* DishPointer – Satellite dish alignment with Google Maps .
* Guide explaining how to self install freesat * Online Satellite Finder Based on Google Maps