CHICAGO ( 1927 FILM )
Chicago is a 1927 American comedy - drama silent film produced by Cecil B. DeMille and directed by Frank Urson .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The plot of the film is drawn from the play Chicago by Maurine Dallas Watkins which was in turn based on the true story of Beulah Annan , fictionalized as Roxie Hart ( Phyllis Haver ) , and her spectacular murder of her boyfriend .
The silent film adds considerably to the material in Watkins ' play , some additions based on the original murder , and some for Hollywood considerations .
The murder , which occurs in a very brief vignette before the play begins , is fleshed out considerably .
Also , Roxie 's husband Amos Hart ( played by Victor Varconi ) has a much more sympathetic and active role in the film than he does either in the play or in the subsequent musical .
The ending is crueler to Roxie , in keeping with Hollywood values of not allowing criminals to profit too much from their crimes ( although she does get away with murder ) .
CAST
* Phyllis Haver as Roxie Hart * Victor Varconi as Amos Hart * Virginia Bradford as Katie * Robert Edeson as Billy Flynn * Eugene Pallette as Fred Casely
* Warner Richmond as Asst .
District Attorney * T. Roy Barnes as Reporter * Clarence Burton as Police sergeant * Julia Faye as Velma Kelly * May Robson as Matron Mama Morton * Viola Louie as Two Gun Rosie PRESERVATION STATUS Section::::Preservation status .
The film was long difficult to see , but a recent print was made available from the UCLA Film and Television Archive , enabling the film to play at festivals and historic theaters around the country .
This has greatly improved the reputation of the film .
A print of Chicago also survives at Gosfilmofond Russian State Archives .
SEE ALSO
* Roxie Hart ( 1942 )
* Chicago ( musical ) * Chicago ( 2002 ) REFERENCES FURTHER READING * Zsófia Anna Tóth . "
The Merry Murderers " : The Farcical ( Re)Figuration of the Femme Fatale in Maurine Dallas Watkins ' Chicago ( 1927 ) and its various adaptations .
Ph.D. dissertation , University of Szeged , 2010 .
*
" The Representation of Aggressive Women in Various Adaptations of Maurine Dallas Watkins 's Chicago , " Americana : Ejournal of American Studies in Hungary , 4 ( 1 ) , Spring 2008 .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Stills at moviessilently.com