THE LEGEND OF ZELDA :
THE WIND WAKER
The Legend of Zelda :
The Wind Waker is an action - adventure game developed and published by Nintendo for the GameCube home video game console .
The tenth installment in The Legend of Zelda series , it was released in Japan in December 2002 , in North America in March 2003 , and in Europe in May 2003 .
The game is set on a group of islands in a vast sea , a departure for the series .
The player controls series protagonist Link as he attempts to save his sister from the sorcerer Ganon and becomes embroiled in a struggle for the Triforce , a sacred wish - granting relic .
Aided by allies including pirate captain Tetra – an incarnation of Princess Zelda – and a talking boat named the King of Red Lions , Link sails the ocean , explores islands , and traverses dungeons to acquire the power necessary to defeat Ganon .
Wind , which facilitates sailing , plays a prominent role and can be controlled with a magic conductor 's baton called the Wind Waker .
The Wind Waker was directed by Eiji Aonuma and produced by Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka .
It retains the basic 3D gameplay of its predecessors , and , but with a distinctive cartoon - like art style created through cel shading .
The game received widespread critical acclaim , but the art style proved divisive among players , which contributed to comparatively weak sales .
As a result , Nintendo changed directions with the next Zelda installment , the more realistically - styled .
However , The Wind Wakers reputation improved over time , and it is now widely considered one of the greatest video games ever made .
The Wind Waker originated the " Toon Link " variant of the main character , and received two direct sequels for the Nintendo DS , ( 2007 ) and ( 2009 ) .
A high - definition remaster , , was released for the Wii U in 2013 , to critical acclaim .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
The Legend of Zelda :
The Wind Waker is an open world action - adventure game with role - playing elements .
The control scheme is comparable to its predecessors : the player moves the protagonist Link in three dimensions from a third - person perspective .
Link fights with a sword and shield , and can use a variety of other items and weapons .
He interacts with non - player characters and objects via the action button .
Like the previous games , The Wind Waker features a targeting system allowing Link to " lock on " and constantly face an enemy or target .
A new feature is the ability to move the camera system around Link .
Onscreen meters track Link 's health and magic ; Link can expand his health meter by finding " heart containers " and container pieces in the game .
The game world comprises 49 gridded sections of the " Great Sea " , each containing an island or island chain .
Some must be explored to continue the story , while others are optional .
Like all Zelda games , The Wind Waker features several dungeons — large , enclosed areas where Link fights enemies , finds items , and solves puzzles to continue .
Each dungeon quest concludes with a battle against a boss , a singularly powerful enemy .
In addition to the main story , the game includes many sidequests , minor objectives the player can optionally complete to attain rewards .
For example , Link can use the " Picto Box " – an in - game camera – to take pictures to fulfill quests .
Throughout the game , Link acquires items and weapons that provide new abilities .
Items are often needed to reach certain areas , defeat bosses and other enemies , and advance the story .
For example , the grappling hook is necessary to pass obstacles and defeat the boss in the Dragon Roost Cavern dungeon ; it can then be used to enter previously inaccessible areas elsewhere .
The " Tingle Tuner " is a special item allowing a second player to control the character Tingle if the system is connected to a Game Boy Advance by a link cable .
WIND AND SAILING Section::::Wind and sailing .
A significant portion of the game is spent sailing between islands on Link 's boat , the King of Red Lions .
The boat 's sail is driven by wind that blows across the game world in one of eight directions ; a tailwind behind the boat will give it top speed , while sailing against the wind is difficult .
The Great Sea features different enemies and obstacles than the land .
Some items serve new purposes on the King of Red Lions ; for instance , the grappling hook serves as a crane for recovering sunken treasure .
Link explores the sea with the help of a sea chart , which can be updated with information on each square and island .
Through the game , Link acquires additional charts pointing the way to treasure chests and significant locations .
On land , dungeons feature similar maps .
Early in the game , Link receives the Wind Waker , a baton that allows him to control the wind and gain other powers by " conducting " specific melodies .
The player controls the Wind Waker by moving the joypads to change pitch and time signature .
The first melody , the " Wind 's Requiem " , enables Link to change the wind 's direction , allowing him to sail anywhere .
Link can learn five other tunes for the Wind Waker , which provide abilities such as warping to other regions and turning night to day .
SYNOPSIS BACKGROUND AND SETTING
Section::::Synopsis . Section::::Background and setting .
According to , Nintendo 's official Legend of Zelda chronology , The Wind Waker takes place in the " New World " timeline , one of several parallel timelines in which Zelda games are set following the events of Ocarina of Time .
The game follows the " Adult Link " timeline , after Link , the " Hero of Time " , defeats Ganon and time - travels back to his childhood .
A crisis emerges when Ganon returns , but Link does not .
Centuries later , the people live on islands in the Great Sea .
They preserve Link 's story as a legend , but his kingdom 's fate is unknown .
The main character , a young boy also named Link , lives on Outset Island , where boys dress in green like the Hero of Time when they come of age .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
While Link is celebrating his coming of age , a gigantic bird drops pirate captain Tetra into Outset Island 's forest .
Link rescues Tetra from monsters , but the bird carries off Link 's sister Aryll .
Tetra agrees to help Link find his sister , and they sail to the Forsaken Fortress , where the bird , the Helmaroc King , has been taking girls with long ears .
Link finds Aryll and other kidnapped girls , but the Helmaroc King captures him and takes him to a man in black , who orders Link thrown into the sea .
Link is rescued at Windfall Island by a talking boat , the King of Red Lions , who explains that the bird 's master is a returned Ganon .
To defeat him , Link must find the Hero of Time 's power , which requires the three Pearls of the Goddesses .
Link finds Din 's Pearl on Dragon Roost Island , home of the avian Rito and the dragon Valoo ; Farore 's Pearl in Forest Haven , home of the Great Deku Tree and the plant - like Koroks ; and Nayru 's Pearl with the water spirit Jabun on Outset Island .
The King of Red Lions then takes Link to the Tower of the Gods , where he faces trials before descending beneath the ocean to a castle suspended in time .
Here Link finds the Hero of Time 's weapon , the Master Sword .
Link returns to the Forsaken Fortress .
Tetra 's crew arrive and rescue the girls , but Ganon easily overpowers Link and Tetra : the Master Sword has lost its power .
Ganon recognizes Tetra 's Triforce necklace , and realizes she is the incarnation of Princess Zelda he is seeking .
Link 's Rito allies and Valoo save Link and Tetra from Ganon .
The King of Red Lions brings the two back to the underwater realm , explaining it is the legendary kingdom of Hyrule , which the goddesses submerged long ago to contain Ganon while the people fled to the mountaintops .
The King of Red Lions reveals himself to be Daphnes Nohansen Hyrule , the last King of Hyrule , and Tetra is his heir , Zelda , keeper of the Triforce of Wisdom .
Tetra remains in the castle while Link and the King journey to the two sages who provided the Master Sword 's power .
They discover Ganon 's forces murdered them both , so Link must awaken new sages : the Rito Medli and the Korok Makar .
The sages restore the Master Sword , but the King learns that Ganon has abandoned the Forsaken Fortress , and fears an attack .
They then track down the eight shards of the missing Triforce of Courage , once kept by the Hero of Time , and the gods recognize Link as the Hero of Winds .
Link and the King return to Hyrule to discover that Ganon has captured Tetra .
Link follows them to Ganon 's tower , defeating Ganon 's minions before Ganon overcomes him .
Ganon joins Link 's and Tetra 's Triforce pieces with his own Triforce of Power , forming the complete Triforce , which will grant his wish to rule the world .
Before he can act , the King of Hyrule appears and wishes that the Goddesses wash Ganon and Hyrule away , and grant Link and Tetra hope for their own future .
Link and Tetra battle Ganon with the Master Sword and magical arrows as water pours around them ; with the final blow , the Master Sword turns Ganon to stone .
Link and Tetra rise to the surface as the King and Hyrule are submerged .
They are reunited with their friends ; a post - credits scene shows the heroes sailing off to find a new land .
DEVELOPMENT GAME DESIGN
Section::::Development .
Section::::Game design .
Nintendo 's Zelda team initiated plans for a new game early in the development of the GameCube system , before Majora 's Mask was completed for the Nintendo 64 in 2000 .
Eiji Aonuma , director of Majora 's Mask , returned to helm the project , while Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka served as producers .
Early concepts generally followed Ocarina of Times designs , with graphics enhanced for the new system 's capabilities .
The team hastily created a brief clip of Link fighting Ganondorf for a demonstration at the 2000 Space World exposition , where Nintendo announced the GameCube .
The clip resonated with fans and commentators who hoped it previewed the next Zelda game .
The Zelda team , however , had exhausted its ideas for this style and format .
Aonuma hated the demo , finding it derivative of past Zelda games .
The team explored other directions until designer Yoshiki Haruhana created a cartoonish drawing of a young Link that caught their eye .
Design manager Satoru Takizawa drew up an enemy Moblin in a similar style , and the team seized on the new gameplay and combat possibilities afforded by the stylized cartoon aesthetic .
To achieve this look , they used cel shading on 3D models , giving the look of an interactive cartoon .
The developers built the game with Alias / Wavefront 's Maya 3D tool and a custom game engine .
With this decision , development proceeded swiftly .
The team quickly decided the setting would be islands in an ocean , determining it would provide interesting visuals and mechanics in the cel - shaded style .
This in turn inspired the central sailing feature .
Some features drew skepticism ; for instance producers Miyamoto and Tezuka requested an explanation for the characters ' exaggeratedly large eyes .
The team jokingly suggested having Link shoot beams from his eyes before deciding to have him focus his gaze on significant objects nearby , giving hints to observant players about what to do next .
Nintendo presented a demo clip of the new game at the 2001 Space World , August 23–26 .
Response to the cel - shaded design was divided .
While some attendees enjoyed the new look , there was backlash from disappointed fans who had hoped for a more realistic Zelda along the lines of the 2000 demo .
Critics derisively dubbed the game " Celda " .
Miyamoto was surprised at the response , and decided to limit revealing further information about the game until the team finished a playable demonstration , hoping to shift focus from the graphics to the gameplay .
Miyamoto introduced a playable demo at the next year 's Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) on May 22–24 , 2002 , alongside another upcoming GameCube Zelda , .
Miyamoto encountered glitches while he attempted to demonstrate Link 's new ability to use enemies ' dropped weapons .
Despite this setback , reception was more positive than that for the Space World demo .
The game received the 2002 Game Critics Awards for Best Console Game at E3 .
IGN editor Fran Mirabella said the cartoon look " works very nicely " and that " it feels very much like Zelda " .
The whimsical style was compared to and promotional artwork from previous Zelda games .
The E3 demo also introduced new features , such as the ability to connect to the Game Boy Advance and receive help from Tingle .
However , the art direction continued to divide audiences Development continued through late 2002 , with targeted release dates of December in Japan and early 2003 in North America .
During the final stages , two dungeons that fell behind schedule were cut and replaced with a quest to recover Triforce pieces around the Great Sea .
Elements of these dungeons were recycled for later Zelda games .
On October 15 , 2002 , Nintendo revealed the game 's Japanese subtitle , Kaze no Takuto ( Wind Baton ) , to emphasize the role of wind in the game .
The company announced the English title , The Wind Waker , on December 2 , 2002 .
In the gap between the Japanese and North American releases , the designers reworked some segments , notably shortening the lengthy Triforce quest .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The music in The Wind Waker was composed by Kenta Nagata , Hajime Wakai , Toru Minegishi , and Koji Kondo .
The sound team was significantly larger than for other contemporary projects to accommodate Nintendo 's desire for a high caliber of work in the rushed development schedule .
Koji Kondo , the primary composer for The Legend of Zelda series , contributed to the score but did not serve as sound director .
However , the score incorporated some of his pieces from older Zelda games , modifying them to emphasize the time passed between the stories .
The soundtrack is primarily environmental ; it modulates between various tracks depending on location , time and other conditions .
Much of the score is inspired by traditional Irish music , and is overall lighter and more upbeat than previous scores in the series .
The advancement of MIDI technology allowed the soundtrack to more closely approximate the sounds of real instruments than was possible in previous installments .
The score features strings , winds , brass , and percussion , and for the first time in the Zelda series , wordless vocals .
The vocals are especially prominent in the tunes Link conducts with the Wind Waker , singing in D major .
Shigeru Miyamoto reportedly played the mandolin featured in the " Title Theme " .
Scitron Digital Content released a two - disc , 133-track soundtrack album , The Legend of Zelda : The Wind Waker Original Sound Tracks , on March 19 , 2003 .
The Wind Waker was released on December 13 , 2002 in Japan , on March 24 , 2003 in North America , and on May 2 , 2003 in Europe .
To promote the release , Nintendo offered a bonus disc as a pre - order incentive which included a GameCube port of Ocarina of Time as well as its previously unreleased expansion , Ura Zelda .
Ura Zelda , largely an adaptation of Ocarina of Time with some changes , including new dungeon challenges , had been developed for the Nintendo 64 's 64DD peripheral , but was shelved when that system failed .
Ura Zelda was named Ocarina of Time Master Quest in North America and Europe .
Ocarina of Time / Master Quest discs became popular items in their own right in North America , with some customers making and then cancelling preorders to get them .
To avoid this issue in Europe , Nintendo released the item only in two - disc packages with The Wind Waker .
In May 2003 , Nintendo bundled The Wind Waker with limited edition GameCubes in North America and Europe .
On November 17 that year , Nintendo launched another promotion via a compilation disc , The Legend of Zelda Collector 's Edition .
The disc includes ports of the original Legend of Zelda , , Ocarina of Time , and Majora 's Mask , as well as a Wind Waker demo and two featurettes .
Collector 's Edition was included in another GameCube bundle , and was made available to existing GameCube owners who registered their system or subscribed to Nintendo Power .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical reception .
The Wind Waker received widespread critical acclaim .
Review aggregator website Metacritic calculated a score of 96/100 based on 80 reviews , indicating " universal acclaim " .
It was the fourth game to receive a perfect score from the Japanese magazine Famitsu , and additionally earned perfect scores from Computer and Video Games , Game Informer , Game Pro , Nintendo Power , and Planet GameCube .
It received high marks from many other reviewers as well , although it did not reach the levels of critical acclaim that had greeted Ocarina of Time .
While often noting fans ' ambivalence about the cel shading , critics praised the game 's visuals .
Reviewers likened the game to a playable cartoon , with several positively comparing the animation to the films of Disney and Hayao Miyazaki .
In particular , critics appreciated the characters ' unique expressiveness , and found that the fine details and environments added richness to the game world .
Famitsus reviewers wrote that the rich design brings all the game 's elements together into a cohesive whole .
Electronic Gaming Monthlys reviewers found the animation quality unparalleled in games and wrote that " The Wind Wakers new look is as effective as it is unique " .
Matt Casamassina of IGN said that despite some fans ' distaste for the graphics , Nintendo 's execution represented the pinnacle of the GameCube 's capabilities and of cel shading technology .
Jeff Gerstmann of GameSpot said that skepticism about the visuals was " unfounded " , and wrote that the character design " adds emotional weight " to the storyline .
One Nintendo Power reviewer wrote that despite his initial skepticism , the visuals worked " brilliantly , framing the most enjoyable game play experience I 've had since Ocarina of Time " .
Critics also lauded the gameplay , in particular the responsive control system , fluid combat , and puzzles .
Several reviews noted the gameplay 's similarity to Ocarina of Time despite the cel - shaded graphics , though they praised enhancements such as the ability to move the camera , counterattacks , and use enemy items .
IGN reassured players that beyond visual differences between The Wind Waker and Ocarina , " these two games are very much alike " .
Game Informer wrote that the gameplay expanded upon that in its predecessors to become " far greater , deeper , and more complex " , while Electronic Gaming Monthly said that " Wind Wakers core gameplay is the best the series has ever had " .
On the other hand , Edge said that while the game would awe new players , its similarity to previous Zelda games meant that veteran players may find it " ' merely ' brilliant . "
Famitsu wrote that the game 's user friendliness would appeal even to novice players .
IGN praised the intuitive controls , the especially interactive environment , and the variety of game actions , which " can be executed with a precision that few other games could offer " .
GameSpot appreciated the breadth of items that can be used .
Electronic Gaming Monthly said that the high variety of options for progressing through fights and puzzles kept the game from ever getting boring .
GamePros Star Dingo enjoyed the variety of combo attacks and puzzles , and called the game " a combination of vivid artistry and timeless gameplay " .
Other elements that commonly received praise include the expansive game world and level design , especially in the dungeons .
The storyline also received praise ; Nintendo Power called the game " a masterpiece of style and storytelling " .
Several critics lauded the score and soundtrack , though some noted the lack of voice acting as a drawback .
The game 's most common criticism is the heavy emphasis on sailing , especially later in the game when Link must trek around the ocean to collect Triforce pieces .
GameSpot wrote that while the main quest " starts out in a very brisk manner " , by the last third of the game , the " focus on sailing ... is pretty tedious " .
Edge wrote that the sailing was " convincingly organic " , but even with the warp feature , " there remains an awful lot of relatively dull seafaring activity " .
Others complained about having to use the Wind Waker so frequently to change wind direction .
IGN wrote that using the device became " a tedious nuisance " , and that the inability to skip the accompanying animation was " more bothersome still " .
Some reviewers enjoyed the sailing ; two Electronic Gaming Monthly reviewers appreciated the combat , exploration , and side quests available at sea .
Another common criticism was the game 's comparatively low level of difficulty .
IGN wrote that once the player added enough hearts to Link 's health meter , " he becomes nearly invincible , which is a true shortcoming as far as we concerned " .
Several publications named The Wind Waker Game of the Year , including GameSpot , Nintendo Power , GameFAQs , Planet GameCube , and Games magazine .
IGN gave it the Readers ' Choice award for 2003 and named it Best Adventure Game for the GameCube .
It received the Excellence in Visual Arts award at the 2004 Game Developers Choice Awards and was a finalist for the GDCA Game of the Year award .
It also won the Outstanding Achievement in Art Direction award at the 2004 Interactive Achievement Awards and received seven other nominations , including Console Game of the Year .
AUDIENCE RESPONSE AND SALES Section::::Audience response and sales .
Player response to the game remained divided over the cel - shaded design .
Reception was comparatively warm in Japan , where various media commonly borrow an anime aesthetic , but was much more divided in North America .
Some players appreciated the design and Miyamoto 's vision , but others found it childish and too far removed from the more realistic designs of previous games .
According to Stephen Totilo of Kotaku , much of the backlash came from anxiety that Nintendo was losing its edge by focusing on games for children , as opposed to the more mature , realistic fare developed by competitors .
The Wind Waker generated the most successful pre - order campaign in Nintendo history at the time .
However , sales did not live up to expectations ; director Aonuma noted that purchases were disappointing in both Japan and North America .
Japanese sales suffered from a general decline in the video game market caused by consumers shifting away from games , a phenomenon known as " gamer drift " .
The overall market remained strong in North America , but The Wind Wakers sales were slow there , and had declined markedly by the time they reached one million .
The Wind Waker sold 4.6 million copies , far below the 7.6 million record set by Ocarina of Time .
Nintendo of America attributed the game 's comparatively weak North American sales in large part to the cel - shaded graphics , which turned off many players , particularly older teenagers who made up The Legend of Zeldas traditional audience .
Miyamoto further blamed a failure to introduce major innovations to excite established players or attract new ones .
LEGACY SEQUELS AND OTHER MEDIA
Section::::Legacy . Section::::Sequels and other media .
Nintendo initially planned a direct sequel for the GameCube , developed by Aonuma 's Zelda team under the working title Wind Waker 2 .
However , Wind Wakers underwhelming reception in North America , combined with the downturn in the Japanese video game market , convinced Aonuma that the only avenue to success would be a more realistic Zelda game that would appeal to the stronger North American market .
He persuaded Miyamoto , who authorized development of a realistically styled game using the Wind Waker engine , .
Twilight Princess proved a major success for the GameCube and the newly released Wii .
The Wind Waker originated the variant of the Link character named " Toon Link " , who appeared in several later Nintendo games .
The Wind Waker received two direct sequels for the Nintendo DS handheld system .
Wanting to continue The Wind Waker 's story and art style , Aonuma produced in 2007 , which follows Link and Tetra as they explore new reaches of the Great Sea .
( 2009 ) is set later , with a new Link and Zelda traversing a New Hyrule with a magic train .
Toon Link also returned in indirectly related Legend of Zelda games such as Four Swords Adventures ( 2004 ) , ( 2005 ) , and ( 2015 ) .
He also features as a playable character in Nintendo 's Super Smash Bros. crossover fighting game series and , along with other Wind Waker characters , in the 2016 Legend of Zelda pastiche Hyrule Warriors Legends .
Conductors of the concert tour have used custom - made Wind Waker batons .
The Wind Waker also influenced 2017 's , which features a similarly stylized art design , but with more realistic proportions .
Breath of the Wild also includes species from The Wind Waker and other references , leading some fans to speculate that it follows The Wind Wakers timeline .
LATER REPUTATION Section::::Later reputation .
The Wind Waker has continued to be acclaimed by critics .
It has appeared in various lists of the best video games , including those compiled by Electronic Gaming Monthly , Nintendo Power , and IGN .
Nintendo Power named The Wind Waker the fourth best game to ever appear on a Nintendo console , while Official Nintendo Magazine placed it 12th .
Nintendo Power listed its ending as one of the greatest in Nintendo history , due to the final battle 's climax .
UGO listed The Wind Waker on their list of the " Top 50 Games That Belong On the 3DS " .
In a retrospective on the GameCube , IGN named The Wind Waker the fourth best game ever released for the system .
Nintendo Power named The Wind Waker the second best GameCube game of all time , behind only Resident Evil 4 .
Later pieces have noted that The Wind Waker 's divisive reputation among fans improved over time , and that it has come to be seen as a classic .
Several writers have said that the game and its stylized aesthetic aged well , whereas contemporary games with more realistic graphics often became dated .
The graphics that initially divided opinion have become a favorite feature ; some former skeptics have written about revising their initial opinions .
Nintendo representatives describe this turnaround as a particularly dramatic example of the " Zelda cycle " , in which fans ' negative responses to Zelda games improve over time .
In 2013 , Keza MacDonald of IGN wrote that The Wind Waker had outlived its initial reception and was " popularly considered among the very best Zeldas " .
WII U VERSION Section::::Wii U version .
In 2013 , Nintendo developed a high definition re - release of The Wind Waker , , for the Wii
U. The inspiration came when staff converted elements from various games to explore the system 's capabilities in planning a new Legend of Zelda installment .
The developers experimented with several Zelda games , but were especially struck by how well The Wind Waker translated into high definition .
When the team determined it would take less than a year to remaster the entire game , Aonuma approached Miyamoto about developing it .
He faced considerable reluctance from management due to players ' mixed response in 2003 , but by this time Nintendo staff were discussing the " Zelda cycle " and the fact that opinions of the game had warmed over the years , and Miyamoto greenlit development .
Aonuma served as producer , while Daiki Iwamoto served as director .
The Wind Waker HD converted all graphics into high definition , and improved the lighting .
The developers made some changes to the gameplay as well : they introduced a new item , the " Swift Sail " , allowing for faster sailing on the Great Sea .
They also streamlined the Triforce quest , improved the Picto Box , and replaced the Tingle Tuner , which had required connectivity with a Game Boy Advance , with a Tingle Bottle item that connected to the Miiverse prior to its shutdown on November 8 , 2017 .
The Wind Waker HD was critically acclaimed ; review aggregators Metacritic calculated a score of 90/100 based on 70 reviews .
According to Keza MacDonald , the rerelease was " near - universally hailed as a masterpiece " .
REFERENCES Notes Citations
Bibliography
* EXTERNAL LINKS