ALLSPICE Allspice , also called pimenta , Jamaica pimenta , or myrtle pepper , is the dried unripe fruit ( berries , used as a spice ) of Pimenta dioica , a midcanopy tree native to the Greater Antilles , southern Mexico , and Central America , now cultivated in many warm parts of the world .
The name " allspice " was coined as early as 1621 by the English , who thought it combined the flavour of cinnamon , nutmeg and cloves .
Several unrelated fragrant shrubs are called " Carolina allspice " ( Calycanthus floridus ) , " Japanese allspice " ( Chimonanthus praecox ) , or " wild allspice " ( Lindera benzoin ) .
" Allspice " is also sometimes used to refer to the herb costmary ( Tanacetum balsamita ) .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Allspice is the dried fruit of the Pimenta dioica plant .
The fruits are picked when green and unripe and are traditionally dried in the sun .
When dry they are brown and resemble large , smooth peppercorns .
Fresh leaves are similar in texture to bay leaves and similarly used in cooking .
Leaves and wood are often used for smoking meats where allspice is a local crop .
Care must be taken during drying to ensure that volatile oil , such as eugenol , remains in the end products .
Allspice can also be found in essential oil form .
USES Section::::Uses .
Allspice is one of the most important ingredients of Caribbean cuisine .
It is used in Jamaican jerk seasoning ( the wood is used to smoke jerk in Jamaica , although the spice is a good substitute ) , in moles , and in pickling ; it is also an ingredient in commercial sausage preparations and curry powders .
Allspice is also indispensable in Middle Eastern cuisine , particularly in the Levant , where it is used to flavour a variety of stews and meat dishes .
In Arab cuisine , for example , many main dishes call for allspice as the sole spice added for flavouring .
In the West Indies , an allspice liqueur is produced under the name " pimento dram " due to conflation of pimenta and pimento .
In the United States , it is used mostly in desserts , but it is also responsible for giving Cincinnati - style chili its distinctive aroma and flavor .
Allspice is commonly used in Great Britain , and appears in many dishes , including cakes and also in beauty products .
In Poland , allspice is used in a variety of dishes , including savory foods like deli meats , soups , marinades and pickles , and to a lesser extent in desserts and fruit drinks .
Even in many countries where allspice is not very popular in the household , as in Germany , it is used in large amounts by commercial sausage makers .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
The allspice tree , classified as an evergreen shrub , can reach in height .
Allspice can be a small , scrubby tree , quite similar to the bay laurel in size and form .
It can also be a tall , canopy tree , sometimes grown to provide shade for coffee trees planted underneath it .
It can be grown outdoors in the tropics and subtropics with normal garden soil and watering .
Smaller plants can be killed by frost , although larger plants are more tolerant .
It adapts well to container culture and can be kept as a houseplant or in a greenhouse .
To protect the pimenta trade , the plant was guarded against export from Jamaica .
Many attempts at growing the pimenta from seeds were reported , but all failed .
At one time , the plant was thought to grow nowhere except in Jamaica , where the plant was readily spread by birds .
Experiments were then performed using the constituents of bird droppings ; however , these were also totally unsuccessful .
Eventually , passage through the avian gut , whether due to the acidity or the elevated temperature , was found to be essential for germinating the seeds .
Today , pimenta is spread by birds in Tonga and Hawaii , where it has become naturalized on Kauai and Maui .
WESTERN HISTORY Section::::Western history .
Allspice ( P. dioica ) was encountered by Christopher Columbus on the island of Jamaica during his second voyage to the New World , and named by Diego Álvarez Chanca .
It was introduced into European and Mediterranean cuisines in the 16th century .
It continued to be grown primarily in Jamaica , though a few other Central American countries produced allspice in comparatively small quantities .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS