PENNSYLVANIA STATION ( NEW YORK CITY ) Pennsylvania Station , also known as New York Penn Station or Penn Station , is the main intercity railroad station in New York City and the busiest in the Western Hemisphere , serving more than 630,000 passengers per weekday .
Penn Station is in Midtown Manhattan , close to Herald Square , the Empire State Building , Koreatown , and Macy 's Herald Square .
Entirely underground , it sits beneath Madison Square Garden , between Seventh and Eighth Avenues and between 31st and 33rd Streets , with additional exits to nearby streets .
Penn Station has 21 tracks fed by seven tunnels ( the two North River Tunnels , the four East River Tunnels , and the single Empire Connection tunnel ) .
It is at the center of the Northeast Corridor , a passenger rail line that connects New York City with Boston , Philadelphia , Washington , D.C. , and intermediate points .
Intercity trains are operated by Amtrak , which owns the station , while commuter rail services are operated by the Long Island Rail Road ( LIRR ) and New Jersey Transit .
Connections are available within the complex to the New York City Subway , and buses .
The old " Hilton Corridor " formerly provided indoor connection with the 34th Street
– Herald Square subway station and 33rd Street PATH station .
Penn Station is named for the Pennsylvania Railroad ( PRR ) , its builder and original tenant , and shares its name with several stations in other cities .
The current facility is the remodeled underground remnant of the original Pennsylvania Station , a more ornate station building designed by McKim , Mead , and White and completed in 1910 .
Considered a masterpiece of the Beaux - Arts style , its headhouse was torn down in 1963 , galvanizing the modern historic preservation movement .
The rest of the station was rebuilt in the following six years .
Future plans for Penn Station include adding railway platforms at the station 's south end to accommodate two proposed Gateway Project tunnels .
Plans also call for adding entrances and concourses to the adjacent James A. Farley Building , a former post office building that had been built along with the 1910 station .
Moynihan Station , a project to add new concourses for the LIRR and Amtrak within the Farley Post Office building , is being built in phases .
HISTORY PLANNING AND CONSTRUCTION
( 1901–1910 ) Section::::History .
Section::::Planning and construction ( 1901–1910 ) .
Until the early 20th century , the PRR 's rail network terminated on the western side of the Hudson River ( once known locally as the North River ) at Exchange Place in Jersey City , New Jersey .
Manhattan - bound passengers boarded ferries to cross the Hudson River for the final stretch of their journey .
The rival New York Central Railroad 's line ran down Manhattan from the north under Park Avenue and terminated at Grand Central Depot ( later Grand Central Station , now Terminal ) at 42nd Street .
An early proposal for a bridge was considered but rejected .
The alternative was to tunnel under the river , but this was infeasible for steam locomotive use .
The development of the electric locomotive at the turn of the 20th century made a tunnel feasible .
In 1901 , PRR president Alexander Cassatt announced the railroad 's plan to enter New York City by tunneling under the Hudson and building a grand station on the West Side of Manhattan south of 34th Street .
The station would sit in Manhattan 's Tenderloin district , a historical red - light district known for its corruption and prostitution .
Beginning in June 1903 , the two single - track North River Tunnels were bored from the west under the Hudson River .
A second set of four single - track tunnels , the East River Tunnels , were bored from the east under the East River , linking the new station to Queens and the PRR - owned Long Island Rail Road .
and Sunnyside Yard in Queens , where trains would be maintained and assembled .
Construction was completed on the Hudson River tunnels on October 9 , 1906 , and on the East River tunnels on March 18 , 1908 .
ORIGINAL STRUCTURE Section::::Original structure .
A small portion of Penn Station was opened on September 8 , 1910 , in conjunction with the opening of the East River Tunnels .
As a result , LIRR riders gained direct railroad service to Manhattan .
On November 27 , 1910 , Penn Station was fully opened to the public .
During half a century of operation by the Pennsylvania Railroad ( 1910–1963 ) , scores of intercity passenger trains arrived and departed daily to Chicago and St. Louis on " Pennsy " rails and beyond on connecting railroads to Miami and the west .
Along with Long Island Rail Road trains , Penn Station saw trains of the New Haven and the Lehigh Valley Railroads .
A side effect of the tunneling project was to open the city up to the suburbs , and within 10 years of opening , two - thirds of the daily passengers coming through Penn Station were commuters .
The station put the Pennsylvania Railroad at comparative advantage to its competitors offering direct service from Manhattan to the west and south .
Other railroads began their routes at terminals in Weehawken , Hoboken , Pavonia and Communipaw which required passengers from New York City to use ferries or the interstate Hudson Tubes to traverse the Hudson River before boarding their trains .
By 1945 , at its peak , more than 100 million passengers a year traveled through Penn Station .
By the late 1950s , intercity rail passenger volumes had declined dramatically with the coming of the Jet Age and the Interstate Highway System .
A renovation around this time covered some of the grand columns with plastic and blocked off the spacious central hallway with a new ticket office .
The Pennsylvania Railroad optioned the air rights of Penn Station in the 1950s .
The option called for the demolition of the head house and train shed , to be replaced by an office complex and a new sports complex , while the tracks of the station would remain untouched .
Plans for the new Penn Plaza and Madison Square Garden were announced in 1962 .
In exchange for the air rights to Penn Station , a new , smaller underground station would be built at no cost , and the Pennsylvania Railroad would receive a 25 percent stake in the new Madison Square Garden Complex .
Modern architects rushed to save the ornate building , but to no avail .
Demolition of the above - ground station house began in October 1963 .
As most of the rail infrastructure was below street level , including the waiting room , concourses , and boarding platforms , rail service was maintained throughout demolition with only minor disruptions .
The demolition of the head house was controversial and caused outrage internationally .
" One entered the city like a God , " the architectural historian Vincent Scully famously wrote of the original station . "
One scuttles in now like a rat .
"
The controversy over the demolition of such a well - known landmark , and its deplored replacement , is often cited as a catalyst for the architectural preservation movement in the United States .
New laws were passed to restrict such demolition .
Within the decade , Grand Central Terminal was protected under the city 's new landmarks preservation act , a protection upheld by the courts in 1978 after a challenge by Grand Central 's owner , Penn Central .
CURRENT STRUCTURE ( 1968–PRESENT )
Section::::Current structure ( 1968–present ) .
The current Penn Station is completely underground , and sits below Madison Square Garden , 33rd Street , and Two Penn Plaza .
The station has three underground levels : concourses on the upper two levels and train platforms on the lowest .
The two levels of concourses , while original to the 1910 station , were extensively renovated during the construction of Madison Square Garden , and expanded in subsequent decades .
The tracks and platforms are also largely original , except for some work connecting the station to the West Side Rail Yard and the Amtrak Empire Corridor serving Albany and Buffalo , New York .
In the 1990s , the current Pennsylvania Station was renovated by Amtrak , the Metropolitan Transportation Authority , and New Jersey Transit , to improve the appearance of the waiting and concession areas , sharpen the station information systems ( audio and visual ) and remove much of the grime .
Recalling the erstwhile grandeur of the bygone Penn Station , an old four - sided clock from the original depot was installed at the 34th Street Long Island Rail Road entrance .
The walkway from that entrance 's escalator also has a mural depicting elements of the old Penn Station 's architecture .
There is an abandoned underground passageway from Penn Station to the nearby 34th Street – Herald Square subway station , which was known as " Gimbels Passageway . "
After decades of safety concerns , it was closed in the 1990s .
After the September 11 attacks in 2001 , security was increased and passenger flow through the Penn Station complex was curtailed .
In 2002 , work began on a $ 100 million improvement to add security features inside Penn Station , such as lighting , security cameras , and barricades .
The taxiway under Madison Square Garden , which ran from 31st Street north to 33rd Street halfway between 7th and 8th Avenues , was closed off with concrete Jersey barriers .
A covered walkway from the taxiway was constructed to guide arriving passengers to a new taxi - stand on 31st Street .
In addition , the direct connection escalators from Penn Station to the lobby of Madison Square Garden were closed and later removed .
Despite the improvements , Penn Station continues to be criticized as a low - ceilinged " catacomb " lacking charm , especially when compared to New York 's much larger and ornate Grand Central Terminal .
The New York Times , in a November 2007 editorial supporting development of an enlarged railroad terminal , said that " Amtrak 's beleaguered customers ...
now scurry through underground rooms bereft of light or character .
"
Times transit reporter Michael M. Grynbaum later called Penn Station " the ugly stepchild of the city 's two great rail terminals .
"
SERVICES Section::::Services .
The station is served by 1,300 arrivals and departures per day , twice the number during the 1970s .
There are more than 600,000 commuter rail and Amtrak passengers who use the station on an average weekday , or up to one thousand every ninety seconds .
It is the busiest passenger transportation facility in the United States and in North America .
INTERCITY RAIL
AMTRAK Section::::Intercity rail .
Section::::Amtrak .
Amtrak owns the station and uses it for the following services :
* Acela Express to Boston ( northern terminus ) and Washington D.C. ( southern terminus )
* Adirondack to Montréal * Cardinal to Chicago * Carolinian to Charlotte
* Crescent to New Orleans * Empire Service to Niagara Falls , NY * Ethan Allen Express to Rutland * Keystone Service to Harrisburg
* Lake Shore Limited to Chicago * Maple Leaf to Toronto
* Pennsylvanian to Pittsburgh * Northeast Regional to Boston or Springfield ( northern termini ) and Roanoke , Newport News , or Norfolk ( southern termini )
* Palmetto to Savannah
* Silver Meteor to Miami
* Silver Star to Miami
* Vermonter to Washington D.C. ( southern terminus ) and St. Albans ( northern terminus ) Despite its status as the busiest train station for Amtrak , Pennsylvania Station does not have adequate clearance for its Superliner railcars .
Amtrak normally uses tracks 1–16 alongside New Jersey Transit , as well as the LIRR for 13–16 .
COMMUTER RAIL
LONG ISLAND RAIL ROAD
Section::::Commuter rail .
Section::::Long Island Rail Road .
The following Long Island Rail Road ( LIRR ) services terminate at Penn Station :
* Babylon Branch to Babylon with connecting service to Montauk
* Belmont Park Branch seasonal service to Belmont Park * City Terminal Zone with connecting service at Jamaica station * Far Rockaway Branch to Far Rockaway , Queens in New York City * Hempstead Branch to Hempstead
* Long Beach Branch to Long Beach * Montauk Branch to Babylon and
Montauk
* Oyster Bay Branch to Oyster Bay * Port Jefferson Branch to Huntington and Port Jefferson
* Port Washington Branch to Great Neck and Port Washington
* Ronkonkoma Branch to Ronkonkoma and Long Island MacArthur Airport with connecting service to Greenport * West Hempstead Branch to Hempstead All branches connect at Jamaica station except the Port Washington Branch .
Normally , the LIRR uses tracks 17–21 exclusively and shares 13–16 with Amtrak and NJT .
The LIRR uses Tracks 11 - 12 on rare occasions .
NEW JERSEY TRANSIT
Section::::New Jersey Transit .
The following NJ Transit Rail Operations ( NJT ) branches terminate at Penn Station : * Montclair - Boonton Line to Montclair , and points west to Hackettstown * Morris and Essex Lines to Summit and Dover and points west to Hackettstown or the Gladstone branch .
* Northeast Corridor Line to Trenton
* North Jersey Coast Line to Long Branch , with connecting service to Bay Head * Raritan Valley Line to Raritan and High Bridge NJT normally has the exclusive use of tracks 1–4 , and shares tracks 5–16 with Amtrak and tracks 13–16 with the LIRR as well .
The NJT uses track 17 on rare occasions .
RAPID
TRANSIT
NEW YORK
CITY SUBWAY Section::::Rapid transit .
Section::::New York City Subway .
Connections are available to the following New York City Subway stations :
* From Penn Station :
* at 34th Street – Penn Station station , under Eighth Avenue * at 34th Street – Penn Station station , under Seventh Avenue * From Herald Square , one block east at Sixth Avenue :
* at 34th Street – Herald Square station , under Broadway & Sixth Avenue PATH Section::::PATH . Connections are also available to the PATH system at Herald Square , one block east at Sixth Avenue .
The JSQ-33 , HOB-33 , and JSQ-33 ( via HOB ) trains stop at 33rd Street station , under Sixth Avenue .
BUS AND COACH Section::::Bus and coach .
NYC Airporter provides bus transportation to and from John F. Kennedy International Airport and LaGuardia Airport , and is authorized by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey and the New York City Department of Transportation .
NEW YORK
CITY BUS Section::::New York City Bus .
The following MTA Regional Bus Operations buses stop near Penn Station :
* M7 ( Lenox , Columbus , Amsterdam , Sixth and Seventh Avenues ) : southbound to Greenwich Village , via Seventh Avenue ; or northbound to Harlem via Sixth , Amsterdam , and Lenox Avenues
* M20 ( Seventh and Eighth Avenues / Varick and Hudson Streets ) : northbound to Lincoln Center via Eighth Avenue ; or southbound to South Ferry via Seventh Avenue * M34 Select Bus Service ( 34th Street Crosstown ) :
westbound to Javits Center ; or eastbound to FDR Drive * M34A Select Bus Service ( 34th Street Crosstown ) :
westbound to Port Authority Bus Terminal ; or eastbound to Waterside Plaza and Kips Bay
* Q32 ( Fifth and Madison Avenues ) : northbound only , to Jackson Heights , Queens INTERCITY COACH BOLTBUS Section::::Intercity coach .
Section::::BoltBus .
BoltBus is a discount bus company owned and operated under a 50/50 partnership between Greyhound and Peter Pan bus lines .
They operate intercity bus service from two stops at Penn Station : Penn Station Bus Stop # 1
( West 33rd Street and 7th Avenue )
* Service to Penn Station , Baltimore , Maryland ; Greenbelt Metrorail Intermodal Station , Greenbelt , Maryland ; Union Station , Washington , D.C. ; 10th Street and H Street NW , Washington , D.C.
Penn Station Bus Stop # 2 ( West 34th Street and 8th Avenue )
* Service to South Station ( Gate # 9 ) , Boston , Massachusetts * Service to Cherry Hill Mall , Cherry Hill , New Jersey ; 30th Street Station , 30th Street between Market & Chestnut Streets , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania VAMOOSE BUS Section::::Vamoose Bus .
Vamoose Bus is a private company that runs buses from a stop near Penn Station ( West 30th Street and 7th Avenue ) to Bethesda Station , Bethesda , Maryland ; Rosslyn Station , Arlington , Virginia ; Lorton VRE Station , Lorton , Virginia .
TRIPPER BUS Section::::Tripper Bus .
Tripper Bus is a private company that runs buses from a stop near Penn Station ( 31st Street between 8th & 9th Avenue ) to Bethesda Station , Bethesda , Maryland ; and Rosslyn Station , Arlington , Virginia .
GO BUSES Section::::Go
Buses .
Go Buses is a private company that runs buses from a stop near Penn Station ( 31st Street between 8th & 9th Avenue ) to Riverside Station , Newton , Massachusetts , and Alewife Station , Cambridge , Massachusetts .
AIRLINE TICKETING Section::::Airline ticketing .
Penn Station includes a United Airlines ticketing office , located at the ticket lobby .
This was previously a Continental Airlines ticketing office .
PROPOSED METRO - NORTH SERVICE Section::::Proposed Metro - North service .
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has proposed to bring Metro - North Railroad commuter trains to Penn Station as part of its Penn Station Access project .
The first phase of the project would bring New Haven Line trains to Penn Station via Amtrak 's Hell Gate Bridge and the East River Tunnels .
The second phase would bring Hudson Line service to the station via the Empire Connection .
STATION LAYOUT Section::::Station layout .
Penn Station does not have a unified design or floor plan but rather is divided into
separate Amtrak , Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit concourses with each concourse maintained and styled differently by its respective operator .
Amtrak and NJ Transit concourses are located on the first level below the street - level while the Long Island Rail Road concourse is two levels below street - level .
The NJ Transit concourse near Seventh Avenue is the newest and opened in 2002 out of existing retail and Amtrak office space .
A new entrance to this concourse from West 31st Street opened in September 2009 .
Previously , NJ Transit shared space with the Amtrak concourse .
The main LIRR concourse runs below West 33rd Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues .
Significant renovations were made to this concourse over a three - year period ending in 1994 , including the addition of a new entry pavilion on 34th Street .
The LIRR 's West End Concourse , west of Eighth Avenue , opened in 1986 .
The station is so complex that in December 2017 , Amtrak and Zyter released a mobile appMadison Square Garden / Two Penn Plaza34th Street – Penn Station ( IND Eighth Avenue Line)34th Street – Penn Station ( IND Eighth Avenue Line)34th Street –
Penn Station ( IRT Broadway – Seventh Avenue Line )
station , connection to West End , LIRR , Central , and Exit concourses , to One Penn Plaza and 34th Street TRACKS AND SURROUNDING INFRASTRUCTURE Section::::Tracks and surrounding infrastructure .
Normally , Amtrak and NJT share tracks 1–12
, the LIRR uses tracks 17–21 exclusively , and all three railroads share tracks 13–16 .
Tracks 1–4 end at bumper blocks at the eastern end of the platform and have no access to the East River Tunnels .
From the east , the East River Tunnels ' lines 1 and 2 ( the more southerly tubes ) can only access tracks 5–17 and are used by most Amtrak and NJ Transit trains , while the East River Tunnels ' lines 3 and 4 ( the more northerly tubes ) can only access tracks 14–21 and are mostly used by LIRR .
From the west , the North River Tunnels can access tracks 1–19 , while the Empire Connection can only access tracks 1–9 and the LIRR 's West Side Yard can only access tracks 10–21 .
All station tracks are powered by 12 kV overhead wire .
Tracks 5–21 also have 750 V DC third rail .
Due to the lack of proper ventilation in the tunnels and station , only electric locomotives and dual - mode locomotives are scheduled to enter Penn Station .
Diesel - only NJT trains terminate at Hoboken Terminal or Newark Penn Station , and diesel - only LIRR trains terminate at or prior to Long Island City .
Trains on track 18 open their doors only on the north side ( platform 10 ) .
2017–2018 SERVICE DISRUPTIONS AND TRACK IMPROVEMENTS Section::::2017–2018 service disruptions and track improvements .
Since the early 2010s , Amtrak had planned to fix the deteriorating rails and infrastructure around Penn Station , but due to the prioritization of other projects , applied only minimal fixes .
In early 2017 , this culminated in numerous power outages , derailments , and delays due to track maintenance delays .
There were frequent service disruptions to train schedules caused by the deterioration of its tracks and their supporting infrastructure , as well as in those of the East River and North River tunnels that respectively connect the station to Long Island and New Jersey .
A string of early 2017 service disruptions started on March 23 , 2017 , when an Acela train derailed , causing delays for the day .
On April 3 , a NJ Transit train derailed at a known problem site , where repairs had been deferred .
This caused four days of reduced service along the Northeast Corridor for both Amtrak and NJ Transit , because the incident damaged the switch that connects Tracks 1–8 to the North River tunnels .
This closure caused a cascading failure , delaying Amtrak and Long Island Railroad trains on the unaffected tracks .
Had the Gateway Program been built by then , the disruptions would have been lessened .
On April 14 , a New Jersey Transit train became stuck in the North River tunnels , causing the station to grow crowded with waiting passengers .
After an Amtrak police officer used a Taser on a man who was acting disruptively , rumors of gunshots sparked a stampede that injured 16 people .
Following the stampede , U.S. Senator Chuck Schumer called on Amtrak to centralize law enforcement response .
As a result of these incidents , the Long Island Rail Road had proposed taking over Penn Station from Amtrak to improve maintenance , and New Jersey has suggested withholding state payments to Amtrak .
Amtrak has discussed accelerating major maintenance work , even at the cost of further disruptions , to more quickly stabilize infrastructure and decrease more future incidents that could potentially cause even greater disruption .
On April 28 , Amtrak announced that it would perform some track maintenance during the summer over a period of one and a half months .
Five tracks were closed for repairs as part of the reconstruction work , severely reducing track capacity in a situation media outlets deemed " the summer of hell " .
Many affected NJ Transit passengers were diverted to take the PATH instead .
Some Amtrak trains from the Empire Corridor were routed to Grand Central instead of Penn Station .
Regular service resumed on September 5 , 2017 .
Amtrak made further improvements to Penn Station 's trackage in summer 2018 .
As a result , some Empire Corridor trains were rerouted again to Grand Central .
The Lake Shore Limited and Cardinal to Chicago were truncated or rerouted because of this work .
PLATFORM ACCESS Section::::Platform access .
Although most Amtrak passengers board via the escalators in the main Amtrak boarding area , multiple entrances exist for each platform .
CLUBACELA LOUNGE Section::::ClubAcela lounge .
ClubAcela is a private lounge located on the Amtrak concourse ( 8th Avenue side of the station ) .
Prior to December 2000 it was known as the Metropolitan Lounge .
Guests are provided with comfortable seating , complimentary non - alcoholic beverages , newspapers , television sets and a conference room .
Access to ClubAcela is restricted to the following passenger types :
* Amtrak Guest Rewards members with a valid Select Plus or Select Executive member card .
* Amtrak passengers with a same - day ticket ( departing ) or ticket receipt ( arriving ) in First class or sleeping car accommodations .
* ClubAcela Single - Day Pass holders .
Same day business class passengers may purchase these for $ 25 .
* United Airlines United Club Members with a valid card or passengers with a same - day travel ticket on United Polaris First Class or United Polaris .
* Private rail car owners / lessees .
The PNR number must be given to a Club representative upon entry .
ENCLOSED WAITING AREA Section::::Enclosed waiting area .
Amtrak also offers an enclosed waiting area for ticketed passengers with seats , outlets and WiFi .
PLANNING AND REDEVELOPMENT GATEWAY
PROJECT Section::::Planning and redevelopment .
Section::::Gateway Project .
The Gateway Project is a proposed high - speed rail corridor to alleviate the bottleneck along the Northeast Corridor at the North River Tunnels , which runs under the Hudson River .
If constructed , the project would add 25 cross - Hudson train slots during rush hours , convert parts of the James Farley Post Office into a rail station , and add a 7-track , 4-platform terminal annex to Penn Station .
Some previously planned improvements already underway have also been incorporated into the Gateway plan .
The Gateway Project was unveiled in 2011 , one year after the cancellation of the somewhat similar Access to the Region 's Core ( ARC ) project , and was originally projected to cost $ 14.5 billion and take 14 years to build .
Construction of a " tunnel box " that would preserve the right - of - way on Manhattan 's West Side began in September 2013 , using $ 185 million in recovery and resilience funding awarded after Hurricane Sandy in 2012 .
In 2015 , Amtrak said that damage done to the existing trans - Hudson tunnels by Hurricane Sandy had made their replacement urgent .
That year , Amtrak reported that environmental and design work was underway , estimated the project 's total cost at $ 20 billion , and said construction would start in 2019 or 2020 and last four to five years .
A draft environmental impact statement was released in July 2017 .
Funding for the Gateway Project had been unclear for several years due to a lack of funding commitments from New Jersey officials and the federal government .
In March 2018 , up to $ 541 million for the project was provided in the Consolidated Appropriations Act .
MAIN SITE PLANS Section::::Main site plans .
Resurgence of train ridership in the 21st century has pushed the current Pennsylvania Station structure to capacity , leading to several proposals to renovate or rebuild the station .
In May 2013 , four architecture firms — SHoP Architects , SOM , H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture , and Diller Scofidio + Renfro — submitted proposals for a new Penn Station .
SHoP Architects recommended moving Madison Square Garden to the Morgan Postal Facility a few blocks southwest , as well as removing 2 Penn Plaza and redeveloping other towers , and an extension of the High Line to Penn Station .
Meanwhile , SOM proposed moving Madison Square Garden to the area just south of the James Farley Post Office , and redeveloping the area above Penn Station as a mixed - use development with commercial , residential , and recreational space .
H3 Hardy Collaboration Architecture wanted to move the arena to a new pier west of Jacob K. Javits Convention Center , four blocks west of the current station / arena .
Then , according to H3 's plan , four skyscrapers at each of the four corners of the new Penn Station superblock , with a roof garden on top of the station ; the Farley Post Office would become an education center .
Finally , Diller Scofidio + Renfro proposed a mixed - use development on the site , with spas , theaters , a cascading park , a pool , and restaurants ; Madison Square Garden would be moved two blocks west , next to the post office .
DS+F also proposed high - tech features in the station , such as train arrival and departure boards on the floor , and applications that can help waiting passengers use their time until they board their trains .
Madison Square Garden rejected the allegations that it would be relocated , and called the plans " pie - in - the - sky " .
In 2013 , the Regional Plan Association and Municipal Art Society formed the Alliance for a New Penn Station .
Citing overcrowding and the limited capacity of the current station under Madison Square Garden , the Alliance began to advocate for limiting the extension of Madison Square Garden 's operating permit to 10 years .
In June 2013 , the New York City Council Committee on Land Use voted unanimously to give the Garden a ten - year permit , at the end of which period the owners will either have to relocate , or go back through the permission process .
On July 24 , 2013 , the New York City Council voted to give the Garden a ten - year operating permit by a vote of 47 to 1 .
" This is the first step in finding a new home for Madison Square Garden and building a new Penn Station that is as great as New York and suitable for the 21st century , " said City Council speaker Christine Quinn .
" This is an opportunity to reimagine and redevelop Penn Station as a world - class transportation destination . "
In October 2014 , the Morgan facility was selected as the ideal area to which to move Madison Square Garden , following the 2014 MAS Summit in New York City .
More plans for the station were discussed .
In January 2016 , Governor Andrew Cuomo announced that requests for proposals would be solicited for the redevelopment of the station , which would be a public private partnership .
Investors would be granted commercial rights to the station in exchange for paying building costs .
MOYNIHAN STATION Section::::Moynihan Station .
In the early 1990s , U.S. Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan began to champion a plan to rebuild a replica of the historic Penn Station , in which he had shined shoes during the Great Depression .
He proposed building it in the Farley Post Office building , which occupies the block across Eighth Avenue from the current Penn Station and was designed by McKim , Mead & White , the same architectural firm that designed the original station .
In 1999 Senator Charles Schumer sponsored and passed legislation formally naming the yet - to - be - constructed facility " Daniel Patrick Moynihan Station " in his honor .
Initial design proposals were laid out by David Childs of Skidmore , Owings & Merrill in 2001 .
Designs saw several iterations by multiple architectural firms , and Amtrak withdrew from the plan until 2012 .
Support also grew for " Plan B , " an expansion of the project 's scope , under which Madison Square Garden would have been moved to the west flank of the Farley Building , allowing Vornado Realty to construct an office complex on the current Garden site .
By 2009 , the Garden 's owner Cablevision had decided not to move Madison Square Garden , but to renovate its current location instead , and Amtrak had returned as a potential tenant .
In 2010 , the fully designed elements of the plan were broken off into a $ 267 million Phase 1 .
Funded by $ 83.4 million of federal stimulus money that became available in February , plus other funds , the phase adds two entrances to the existing Penn Station platforms through the Farley Building on Eighth Avenue .
Ground was broken on October 18 , 2010 , and the extended West End Concourse opened in the eastern part of the former post office in June 2017 .
Phase 2 will consist of the new train hall in the fully renovated Farley Building .
At the time it was first proposed , it was expected to cost up to $ 1.5 billion .
A proposed name for a station that integrates the existing Penn and the post office building is Empire Station .
In September 2016 , Governor Andrew Cuomo outlined the details of a proposal that would speed up the construction of Phase 2 of the renovated Moynihan Station .
The new hall would be and be underneath a large glass skylight .
The Farley Post Office would be divided so that there would be some space for a shared Amtrak / LIRR train hall and a retail area , as well as space for the post office .
Phase 2 , which is now expected to cost $ 1.6 billion , is being built by Skanska AB , and the retail space would be developed by Related Companies and Vornado Realty ; all three companies are supposed to sign a contract by 2017 .
In August 2017 , ground was broken on the now-$1.6 billion project .
Although the LIRR and Amtrak will move to the new train hall , NJ Transit will keep using its current platforms because there is no space to extend the NJ Transit platforms westward .
If the Gateway Project is built , NJ Transit would instead move to the southern annex that would be built as part of the project .
As part of Moynihan Phase 2 , a new direct entrance from 33rd Street and Seventh Avenue to the LIRR concourse and subway platforms would be built .
33rd Street between Seventh and Eighth Avenues would be permanently closed to vehicular traffic and converted into a pedestrian plaza .
The LIRR concourse would be nearly doubled in width , from , and the ceilings would be raised to a minimum height of The expected completion date for these improvements is 2022 .
In total , seven new entrances to Penn Station would be built as part of the Moynihan Hall project .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * Pennsylvania Tunnel and Terminal Railroad
* Transportation in New York City REFERENCES NOTES CITATIONS
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* Includes track diagram .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Penn Station – NJ Transit