SEAWISE GIANT Seawise Giant , later Happy Giant , Jahre Viking , Knock Nevis , Oppama , and Mont , was a ULCC supertanker that was the longest ship ever , built by Sumitomo Heavy Industries in Yokosuka , Kanagawa , Japan .
She possessed the greatest deadweight tonnage ever recorded .
Fully loaded , her displacement was , the heaviest ship of any kind , and with a laden draft of , she was incapable of navigating the English Channel , the Suez Canal or the Panama Canal .
Overall , she is generally considered the largest ship ever built .
She was sunk during the Iran – Iraq War , but was later salvaged and restored to service .
She was last used as a floating storage and offloading unit ( FSO ) moored off the coast of Qatar in the Persian Gulf at the Al Shaheen Oil Field .
The vessel was sold to Indian ship breakers , and renamed Mont for its final journey in December 2009 .
After clearing Indian customs she sailed to Alang , Gujarat , where she was beached for scrapping .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Seawise Giant was ordered in 1974 and delivered in 1979 by Sumitomo Heavy Industries , Ltd. at its Oppama shipyard in Yokosuka , Kanagawa , Japan , as a 418,611 ton ULCC .
The vessel remained unnamed for a long time , and was identified by its hull number , 1016 .
During sea trials , 1016 exhibited massive vibration problems while going astern .
The Greek owner refused to take delivery and the vessel was subject to a lengthy arbitration proceeding .
Following settlement the vessel was sold and christened Oppama by S.H.I.
The shipyard exercised its right to sell the vessel and a deal was brokered with Hong Kong Orient Overseas Container Line founder C. Y. Tung to lengthen the ship by several metres and add 146,152 tonnes of cargo capacity through jumboisation .
Two years later it was relaunched as Seawise Giant .
" Seawise " , a pun on " C.Y. 's " , was used in the names of other ships owned by C.Y. Tung , including Seawise University .
After the refit , the ship had a capacity of , a length overall of and a draft of .
It had 46 tanks , of deck space , and drew too much water to pass through the English Channel .
The rudder weighed 230 tons , the propeller 50 tons .
Seawise Giant was damaged and sunk during the 1980 - 1988 Iran – Iraq War by an Iraqi Air Force attack while anchored off Larak Island , Iran , on 14 May 1988 and carrying Iranian crude oil .
The ship was struck by parachute bombs .
Fires ignited aboard the ship and blazed out of control , and it sank in the shallow waters off the coast .
It was declared a total loss and was written off .
Shortly after the Iran - Iraq war ended , Norman International bought the shipwreck , salvaged and repaired it .
It was renamed Happy Giant after the repairs .
These repairs were done at the Keppel Company shipyard in Singapore after towing it from the Persian Gulf .
It entered service in October 1991 as Happy Giant .
Jørgen Jahre bought the tanker in 1991 for US$ 39 million and renamed it Jahre Viking .
From 1991 to 2004 , it was owned by Loki Stream AS and flew the Norwegian flag .
In 2004 , it was purchased by First Olsen Tankers Pte . Ltd. , renamed Knock Nevis , and converted into a permanently moored storage tanker in the Qatar Al Shaheen oil field in the Persian Gulf .
Knock Nevis was renamed Mont , and reflagged to Sierra Leone by new owners Amber Development Corporation , for its final voyage to India where it was scrapped by Priyablue Industries .
The vessel was beached on December 22 , 2009 .
Its 36 tonne anchor was saved and sent to the Hong Kong Maritime Museum for exhibition .
SIZE RECORD Section::::Size record .
Seawise Giant was the longest ship ever constructed , at 458.45 m , longer than the height of many of the world 's tallest buildings : although slightly smaller than Taipei 101 's , it was larger than the Petronas Twin Towers ' .
Despite its great length , Seawise Giant was not the largest ship by gross tonnage , ranking fifth at 260,941 GT , behind the four 274,838 to 275,276 GT Batillus - class supertankers .
It is the longest and largest by deadweight : 564,763 tonnes .
Batillus - class ships and Seawise Giant were the largest self - propelled objects ever constructed .
Seawise Giant was featured on the BBC series Jeremy Clarkson 's Extreme Machines while it was underway as Jahre Viking .
According to its captain , S. K. Mohan , it could reach up to in good weather , it took to stop from that speed , and its turning circle in clear weather was about .
SEE ALSO
* List of longest ships * TI - class supertanker
* Freedom Ship REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS