SAINT DAVID 'S
DAY
Saint David 's Day ( , ) is the feast day of Saint David , the patron saint of Wales , and falls on 1 March , the date of Saint David 's death in 589 AD .
The feast has been regularly celebrated since the canonisation of David in the 12th century ( by Pope Callistus II ) , though it is not a national holiday in the UK .
Traditional festivities include wearing daffodils and leeks , recognised symbols of Wales and Saint David respectively , eating traditional Welsh food including cawl and Welsh rarebit , and women wearing traditional Welsh dress .
An increasing number of cities and towns across Wales including Cardiff , Swansea and Aberystwyth also put on parades throughout the day .
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE DAY Section::::Significance of the day .
Saint David ( ) was born in Caerfai , south west Wales into an aristocratic family .
He was reportedly a scion of the royal house of Ceredigion , and founded a Celtic monastic community at Glyn Rhosyn ( The Vale of Roses ) on the western headland of Pembrokeshire ( ) at the spot where St David 's Cathedral stands today .
David 's fame as a teacher and his asceticism spread among Celtic Christians , and he helped found about 12 monasteries .
His foundation at Glyn Rhosyn became an important Christian shrine , and the most important centre in Wales .
The date of Saint David 's death is believed to be 1 March 589 .
His final words to the community of monks were : " Brothers be ye constant .
The yoke which with single mind ye have taken , bear ye to the end ; and whatsoever ye have seen with me and heard , keep and fulfil . "
For centuries , 1 March has been a national festival .
Saint David was recognised as a national patron saint in the 12th century at a peak time of Welsh resistance to the Normans .
He was canonised by Pope Callixtus II in 1120 .
The 17th - century diarist Samuel Pepys noted how Welsh celebrations in London for Saint David 's Day would spark wider counter - celebrations amongst their English neighbours : life - sized effigies of Welshmen were symbolically lynched , and by the 18th century the custom had arisen of confectioners producing " taffies"—gingerbread figures baked in the shape of a Welshman riding a goat — on Saint David 's Day .
Unlike Saint Patrick 's Day in Ireland , Saint David 's Day is not a national holiday , though there is strong support for it becoming a bank holiday in Wales .
In the past , schools have taken a half - day holiday , which continues in some parts of Wales .
Saint David 's Day is also celebrated in expatriate Welsh communities outside the UK .
Cross - party support resulted in the National Assembly for Wales voting unanimously to make Saint David 's Day a public holiday in 2000 .
A poll conducted for Saint David 's Day in 2006 found that 87 % of people in Wales wanted it to be a bank holiday , with 65 % prepared to sacrifice a different bank holiday to achieve this .
A petition in 2007 to make Saint David 's Day a bank holiday was rejected by the office of the British Prime Minister Tony Blair .
In the poem Armes Prydein ( The Prophesy of Britain ) , composed in the early to mid-10th century , the anonymous author prophesies that the Cymry ( the Welsh people ) will unite and join an alliance of fellow - Celts to repel the Anglo - Saxons , under the banner of Saint David :
A lluman glân Dewi a ddyrchafant
( " And they will raise the pure banner of Dewi " ) .
Although there were occasional Welsh uprisings in the Middle Ages , the country was briefly united by various Welsh princes before its conquest at different times , and it arguably had a very short period of independence during the rising of Owain Glyndŵr , but Wales as a whole was never an independent kingdom for long .
Henry Tudor , 2nd Earl of Richmond , who was born in Pembroke Castle as a patrilineal descendant of the Tudor Dynasty of North Wales , became King Henry VII of England after his victory over Richard III at the Battle of Bosworth Field in 1485 , to end the Wars of the Roses .
Henry 's green and white banner with a red dragon became a rallying point for Welsh patriotism with the memory of Saint David on his Feast Day .
Henry was the first monarch of the House of Tudor , and during the reign of that dynasty the royal coat of arms included the Welsh Dragon , a reference to the monarch 's origin .
The banner from Henry 's victory was not adopted as the official Flag of Wales until 1959 .
The flag of Saint David , however , a golden cross on a black background , was not part of the symbolism of House of Tudor .
SAINT DAVID 'S DAY
EVENTS
CARDIFF
Section::::Saint David 's Day events .
Section::::Cardiff .
Around Wales each year , Saint David is commemorated in parades , the largest of which in Cardiff .
The parade is a non - military celebration of Welsh heritage and culture .
To mark Saint David 's Day , and their return from a six - month tour of Afghanistan , soldiers from the Royal Welsh Regiment provided The Changing of the Guard ceremony at Cardiff Castle 's south gate on 27 and 28 February 2010 .
On 1 March 2010 , the seventh National Saint David 's Day Parade took place in Cardiff city centre .
Celebrations included concerts , a parade and a food festival .
The food festival ran from 26 February with the third annual Really Welsh Food Festival in Queen Street , featuring all - Welsh produce .
Following the parade , a number of Welsh entertainers performed and in the evening Cardiff Central Library provided free entertainment and food .
OTHER LOCATIONS
Section::::Other locations .
Public celebrations of Saint David 's Day , although still small in number , are becoming more commonplace .
In many towns an annual parade through the centre of town is now held .
Concerts are held in pubs , clubs , and other venues .
In the town of Colwyn Bay in north Wales , an annual parade through the centre of town is now held with several hundred citizens and schoolchildren taking part .
Other events are centred on the parade .
The town of Prestatyn closes the top of the High Street for local schools to participate in Welsh singing and local fundraising .
Swansea inaugurated a St David 's Week festival in 2009 with a range of musical , sporting and cultural events held throughout the city to mark the national day .
Disneyland Paris also organises yearly events to celebrate Saint David 's Day which include a Welsh - themed week , fireworks , parades and Disney characters dressed in traditional Welsh attire .
Washington , DC holds a St. David 's Day congressional reception at the United States Capitol in honor of the First Minister of Wales ' biannual visits .
The Los Angeles St. David 's Day Festival – National Day of Wales is the largest annual event of its kind in the United States encompassing an eisteddfod , Celtic marketplace , classes , and a concert .
TRADITIONS Section::::Traditions .
Children in Wales take part in school concerts or eisteddfodau , with recitation and singing being the main activities .
Formerly , schoolchildren were given a half - day holiday .
Officially this custom does not continue , although the practice can vary between schools .
The younger girls sometimes wear traditional Welsh costumes to school .
This costume consists of a long woollen skirt , apron , white blouse , woollen shawl and a Welsh hat .
Also , various Welsh Regiments of the British Army use aspects of Saint David 's cross , Saint David himself , or songs of Saint David in their formalities during the celebrations .
Many Welsh people wear one or both of the National symbols of Wales to celebrate St. David : the daffodil ( a generic Welsh symbol ) or the leek ( Saint David 's personal symbol ) on this day .
The leek arises from an occasion when a troop of Welsh were able to distinguish each other from a troop of English enemy ( some historical accounts indicate Saxon invading forces ) , dressed in similar fashion , by wearing leeks .
The flag of Saint David often plays a central role in the celebrations and can be seen flying throughout Wales .
Popular dishes traditionally eaten on Saint David 's Day include cawl ( soup ) , bara brith tea loaf , lamb and Welsh rarebit .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * www.stdavidsday.org
The official site of the St .
David 's Day Parade in Cardiff * BBC News –
1st
St David 's Day Parade in Cardiff ( 2004 )
* St. David 's day ( 2009 ) on ABC7 Chicago , Illinois * Full text of Illinois House Resolution HR0149 proclaiming St. David 's Day and the Welsh contribution to the State of Illinois
*
www.wales.com/stdavidsday – celebration resources