TICK ( COMICS )
The Tick is a fictional superhero created by cartoonist Ben Edlund in 1986 as a newsletter mascot for the New England Comics chain of Boston area comic book stores .
The character is a spoof of American comic book superheroes .
After its creation , the character spun off into an independent comic book series in 1988 , and gained mainstream popularity through an animated TV series on Fox in 1994 .
Two live - action TV series , a video game and various merchandise have also been based on the character .
IGN 's list of the Top 100 Comic Book Heroes of All Time ranked The Tick as # 57 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1986 , 18-year - old cartoonist Ben Edlund created The Tick as a mascot for a newsletter of the Norwood , Massachusetts store New England Comics where he was a customer .
Edlund expanded this into stories , beginning with the three - page tale " The Tick " in New England Comics Newsletter # 14–15 ( July / August – September / October 1986 ) , in which the hero escapes from a mental institution .
The character became popular and the store financed a black - and - white comic book series , with the first issue released in June , 1988 , and subsequently reprinted at least nine times through the next decade , including later editions with additional content .
The Tick 's sidekick , Arthur , was introduced in The Tick # 4 ( April 1989 ) .
Spin - offs followed featuring characters such as Paul the Samurai , Man - Eating Cow , and Chainsaw Vigilante .
Edlund continued to write and illustrate these projects initially through his years as an undergraduate film student at the Massachusetts College of Art .
The Chainsaw Vigilante spin - off , which was never completed , was written and illustrated by Zander Cannon .
Other series , such as the second Paul the Samurai series and the Man - Eating Cow series , were written by North Carolina writer Clay Griffith .
In 1994 , the Fox network introduced The Tick as a Saturday morning cartoon series , which Edlund wrote and co - produced .
Lasting three seasons , the animated series would provide The Tick 's greatest mainstream fame .
Townsend Coleman voiced the title character and Micky Dolenz played his sidekick Arthur , in season 1 .
Rob Paulsen took over the Arthur role during seasons 2 and 3 .
The series also featured Die Fledermaus , Sewer Urchin and American Maid .
Reruns on Comedy Central helped make the series a cult hit with adults .
The 1997 book
The Tick : Mighty Blue Justice !
by Greg Hyland ( creator of Lethargic Lad ) was published as a tie - in with the animated series .
In 2001 , Fox introduced a live - action TV series ( produced by Columbia TriStar Television ) , written and executive produced by Edlund .
The series starred Patrick Warburton as The Tick , David Burke as Arthur , Nestor Carbonell as Batmanuel and Liz Vassey as Captain Liberty .
The series was short lived , however , and it only lasted nine episodes .
A DVD release of the complete series ( including several unaired episodes ) was released on September 30 , 2003 .
In June 2005 , the Toon Disney network began airing The Tick animated series .
The series also occasionally aired on ABC Family as part of the Jetix cartoon block .
The following year , Buena Vista Home Entertainment released the first season of The Tick animated series on DVD .
The second season was released on August 7 , 2007 ; however , both collections were missing an episode for different reasons .
In July 2016 , Amazon announced that a new live - action The Tick series , starring Peter Serafinowicz and directed by Wally Pfister , would air on Amazon Video .
The pilot was picked up as a series and the first half of episodes ( 6 of 12 )
in season one were released on August 25 , 2017 .
The second half of season one was released on February 23 , 2018 .
CHARACTER
BIOGRAPHY Section::::Character biography .
The Tick seems to have no memory of his life before being The Tick , and indeed not much memory of anything ; more than likely due to frequent head injuries .
Each media adaption has a different origin of the Tick :
*
In the original comic series , The Tick is apparently legally insane , having escaped from a mental institution located not too far from The City .
*
In the 1994 animated series , he has passed his official superhero initiation test and was assigned to The City .
*
In the 2001 live - action series .
The Tick was tricked into moving to ( and protecting )
The City after irritating the employees of a remote bus station he had sworn to protect .
He has no memory of his life before that , although Batmanuel suggests that The Tick may be from space .
*
In the 2016 live - action series , The Tick has no memory of from where he comes , and his past has not yet been explained or uncovered .
A square - jawed , muscular , bright blue - costumed figure with antennae sticking up from his head
, The Tick is a surrealistic parody of superheroes , in the vein of Dave Sim 's character , The Cockroach .
He is well - intended , friendly , childlike , good - natured , high - spirited , bombastic , frequently obtuse , and prone to quipping odd , dim remarks and " inspirational " speeches filled with bizarre metaphors .
The Tick is known for his nonsensical battle cry , " Spoooooon ! " , which he decided upon one day while eating a bowl of Drama Flakes cereal .
Actor Patrick Warburton described his perception of The Tick character , as Warburton played him : Originally , The Tick 's costume was meant to be brown , but it was decided that blue looked better in print .
In The Tick vs. The Tick , wherein The Tick is confronted by Barry , an unstable pseudo - hero who also calls himself " The Tick " , Barry wears a brown costume similar to The Tick 's .
The Tick is named after an arachnid , much like Spider - Man .
The logo of the series also resembles that of the 1994 Spider - Man series .
According to the live - action series , The Tick is 6 feet 6 inches tall , weighs 230 pounds ( 6 inches and 170 pounds less than his dimensions in the comic ) , and has blue hair and eyes .
In the comic series , The Tick gets a job at the Weekly World Planet newspaper .
He works in the same office as Clark Oppenheimer , who is also a superhero called the Caped Wonder .
Oppenheimer has all the typical Superman powers , including X - ray vision ( " see - through vision " ) , super strength , invulnerability , flight , heat - vision ( " very hot vision " ) , and super hearing .
Consequently , he looks down on The Tick as a lower form of superhero with limited powers .
Like many superheroes , The Tick has a sidekick , a rather plump former accountant named Arthur .
Arthur wears a white moth suit that allows him to fly ; however he is often mistaken for a bunny due to the long ear - like antennae of his costume and the fact that his wings are often folded up .
The Tick is impulsive and Arthur serves as a sort of conscience .
He also figures out the schemes of villains and formulates plans to stop them .
Arthur 's " battle cry " is " Not in the face !
Not in the face ! "
In the Amazon Prime video series , The Tick is fixated on Arthur , and even mentions at one point that his thinking is fuzzy when away from Arthur .
Despite Arthur 's repeated attempts to push The Tick away , the hero wo n't leave Arthur 's side for long .
The Tick also frequently talks about Destiny as if she is a literal person , guiding Arthur 's path ( " Destiny gave him the suit .
I just acted in more of a ' delivery man ' role " ) , alluding to the Parcae in Roman mythology .
At one point , Arthur starts to believe that The Tick is merely another hallucination , but that thought is quickly dispelled when Arthur 's sister , Dot , interacts with " The Blue Guy . "
In all of his incarnations , The Tick is surrounded by a cast of equally absurd heroes and villains , many of them parodies of popular comic book characters and character types .
Few of the " superheroes " in the Tick mythos have powers that would measure up to those of DC Comics or Marvel Comics characters , but their foes are often equally silly and/or weak .
The Tick lives in a city simply called " The City " .
In the animated series , The Tick was assigned to The City after his " Cabinet of Terror " ( described by The Tick as the " deadliest engine of destruction 1974 had to offer " ) exploded , leaving him unharmed , during his city assignment selection trials at the National Super Institute Convention in Reno , Nevada .
According to the series ' companion book , The Tick : Mighty Blue Justice ! , at least one of the judges was amazed by this , awarding The Tick a score of 10 out of 10 .
POWERS AND ABILITIES Section::::Powers and abilities .
The Tick possesses superhuman strength and mass , which makes him capable of inflicting great damage on his surroundings if he is not careful .
His full strength is never actually quantified , although he is at the very least capable of lifting whole cars with a single hand , and comfortably bending steel girders .
In the pilot of the 2016 series , The Tick claims to have the strength of " ten , perhaps twenty men — a crowded bus stop of men . "
The Tick is also " nigh - invulnerable " , which means it is almost impossible to injure him in any serious way ( although he is vulnerable to feelings of pain and his antennae are particularly sensitive ) .
Because of this he can survive moments of extreme stress , and has demonstrated this ability on numerous occasions .
In one noteworthy instance , in the animated episode " Evil Sits Down for a Moment " , he fell 4,000 feet out of the sky , crashing through the concrete road below into a subway tunnel , yet before he reached a stop he was subsequently hit by an oncoming train — and he survived it all without any lasting physical injury .
Several powerful supervillains have been able to knock the Tick unconscious in several fights , but he never comes to any lasting harm .
He also does not possess a super - powered immune system , as he has been seen sick with the common cold just like a normal person .
One of the Tick 's few limitations is that harming or removing his antennae will destroy his sense of balance .
Finally , The Tick possesses something referred to as " drama power " , or basically a tendency for The Tick 's powers to increase as the situation becomes more dramatic .
He can also survive in space without a suit , and under water without oxygen for " at least " a long time .
In the 2017 Amazon adaption , he is shown to be able to leap and bound great heights with ease and speed .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The Tick has been well received as a comic book character .
Empire magazine ranked him as the 28th greatest comic book character of all time , stating that the Tick is a lovable lunk , given to overly dramatic declarations on behalf of justice .
IGN ranked him as the 57th greatest comic book hero of all time , saying that if you like your heroes on the bizarre side , you wo n't find anyone more surreal than The Tick .
IGN also stated that whatever his mental state , The Tick 's adventures are thoroughly enjoyable on both the printed page and television .
Wizard magazine rated him as the 187th greatest comic book character of all time .
IN OTHER MEDIA
TELEVISION
* The Tick ( 1994 TV series ) , a 1994–1997 animated television series , with Townsend Coleman voicing " The Tick " * The Tick ( 2001 TV series ) , a 2001–2002 live - action television series , with Patrick Warburton as " The Tick " * The Tick ( 2016 TV series ) , a 2016–present live - action television series , with Peter Serafinowicz as " The Tick " MERCHANDISING Section::::In other media .
Section::::Merchandising .
While The Tick comic book series included some extras , such as trading cards , the merchandising of The Tick increased dramatically with the launch of the animated series .
Action figures , stickers , pogs , T - shirts , hats , party favors , costumes , and a board game were created .
In addition , many fast food restaurant chains , such as Carl 's Jr. and Taco Bell offered Tick - related giveaways .
In 1994 , Fox Interactive also released a beat 'em up video game based on the animated series .
The game , however , was not well received .
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Tick ( 1994–1997 ) – Official site * Comic Vine * Michael Legg : Leggman 's the Tick Super Fanpage !
* The Tick - Compendium of Comics