SEVEN BRIDGES OF KÖNIGSBERG
The Seven Bridges of Königsberg is a historically notable problem in mathematics .
Its negative resolution by Leonhard Euler in 1736 laid the foundations of graph theory and prefigured the idea of topology .
The city of Königsberg in Prussia ( now Kaliningrad , Russia ) was set on both sides of the Pregel River , and included two large islands - Kneiphof and Lomse - which were connected to each other , or to the two mainland portions of the city , by seven bridges .
The problem was to devise a walk through the city that would cross each of those bridges once and only once .
By way of specifying the logical task unambiguously , solutions involving either * reaching an island or mainland bank other than via one of the bridges , or
* * accessing any bridge without crossing to its other end
* are explicitly unacceptable .
Euler proved that the problem has no solution .
The difficulty he faced was the development of a suitable technique of analysis , and of subsequent tests that established this assertion with mathematical rigor .
EULER 'S ANALYSIS Section::::Euler 's analysis .
First , Euler pointed out that the choice of route inside each land mass is irrelevant .
The only important feature of a route is the sequence of bridges crossed .
This allowed him to reformulate the problem in abstract terms ( laying the foundations of graph theory ) , eliminating all features except the list of land masses and the bridges connecting them .
In modern terms , one replaces each land mass with an abstract " vertex " or node , and each bridge with an abstract connection , an " edge " , which only serves to record which pair of vertices ( land masses ) is connected by that bridge .
The resulting mathematical structure is called a graph .
Since only the connection information is relevant , the shape of pictorial representations of a graph may be distorted in any way , without changing the graph itself .
Only the existence ( or absence ) of an edge between each pair of nodes is significant .
For example , it does not matter whether the edges drawn are straight or curved , or whether one node is to the left or right of another .
Next , Euler observed that ( except at the endpoints of the walk ) , whenever one enters a vertex by a bridge , one leaves the vertex by a bridge .
In other words , during any walk in the graph , the number of times one enters a non - terminal vertex equals the number of times one leaves it .
Now , if every bridge has been traversed exactly once , it follows that , for each land mass ( except for the ones chosen for the start and finish ) , the number of bridges touching that land mass must be even ( half of them , in the particular traversal , will be traversed " toward " the landmass ; the other half , " away " from it ) .
However , all four of the land masses in the original problem are touched by an odd number of bridges ( one is touched by 5 bridges , and each of the other three is touched by 3 ) .
Since , at most , two land masses can serve as the endpoints of a walk , the proposition of a walk traversing each bridge once leads to a contradiction .
In modern language , Euler shows that the possibility of a walk through a graph , traversing each edge exactly once , depends on the degrees of the nodes .
The degree of a node is the number of edges touching it .
Euler 's argument shows that a necessary condition for the walk of the desired form is that the graph be connected and have exactly zero or two nodes of odd degree .
This condition turns out also to be sufficient — a result stated by Euler and later proved by Carl Hierholzer .
Such a walk is now called an Eulerian path or Euler walk in his honor .
Further , if there are nodes of odd degree , then any Eulerian path will start at one of them and end at the other .
Since the graph corresponding to historical Königsberg has four nodes of odd degree , it can not have an Eulerian path .
An alternative form of the problem asks for a path that traverses all bridges and also has the same starting and ending point .
Such a walk is called an Eulerian circuit or an Euler tour .
Such a circuit exists if , and only if , the graph is connected , and there are no nodes of odd degree at all .
All Eulerian circuits are also Eulerian paths , but not all Eulerian paths are Eulerian circuits .
Euler 's work was presented to the St. Petersburg Academy on 26 August 1735 , and published as Solutio problematis ad geometriam situs pertinentis ( The solution of a problem relating to the geometry of position ) in the journal Commentarii academiae scientiarum Petropolitanae in 1741 .
It is available in English in The World of Mathematics .
SIGNIFICANCE IN THE HISTORY AND PHILOSOPHY OF MATHEMATICS Section::::Significance in the history and philosophy of mathematics .
In the history of mathematics , Euler 's solution of the Königsberg bridge problem is considered to be the first theorem of graph theory and the first true proof in the theory of networks , a subject now generally regarded as a branch of combinatorics .
Combinatorial problems of other types had been considered since antiquity .
In addition , Euler 's recognition that the key information was the number of bridges and the list of their endpoints ( rather than their exact positions ) presaged the development of topology .
The difference between the actual layout and the graph schematic is a good example of the idea that topology is not concerned with the rigid shape of objects .
Hence , as Euler recognized , the " geometry of position " is not about " measurements and calculations " but about something more general .
That called in question the traditional Aristotelian view that mathematics is the " science of quantity " .
Though that view fits arithmetic and Euclidean geometry , it did not fit topology and the more abstract structural features studied in modern mathematics .
Philosophers have noted that Euler 's proof is not about an abstraction or a model of reality , but directly about the real arrangement of bridges .
Hence the certainty of mathematical proof can apply directly to reality .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
The classic statement of the problem , given above , uses unidentified nodes — that is , they are all alike except for the way in which they are connected .
There is a variation in which the nodes are identified — each node is given a unique name or color .
The northern bank of the river is occupied by the Schloß , or castle , of the Blue Prince ; the southern by that of the Red Prince .
The east bank is home to the Bridge 's Ritcher , or church ; and on the small island in the center is a Gasthaus , or inn .
It is understood that the problems to follow should be taken in order , and begin with a statement of the original problem :
It being customary among the townsmen , after some hours in the Gasthaus , to attempt to walk the bridges , many have returned for more refreshment claiming success .
However , none have been able to repeat the feat by the light of day .
Bridge 8 :
The Blue Prince , having analyzed the town 's bridge system by means of graph theory , concludes that the bridges can not be walked .
He contrives a stealthy plan to build an eighth bridge so that he can begin in the evening at his Schloß , walk the bridges , and end at the Gasthaus to brag of his victory .
Of course , he wants the Red Prince to be unable to recur the triumph from the Red Castle .
Where does the Blue Prince build the eighth bridge ?
Bridge 9 :
The Red Prince , infuriated by his brother 's Gordian solution to the problem , wants to build a ninth bridge , enabling him to begin at his Schloß , walk the bridges , and end at the Gasthaus to rub dirt in his brother 's face .
As an extra bit of revenge , his brother should then no longer be able to walk the bridges starting at his Schloß and ending at the Gasthaus as before .
Where does the Red Prince build the ninth bridge ?
Bridge 10 :
The Bishop has watched this furious bridge - building with dismay .
It upsets the town 's Weltanschauung and , worse , contributes to excessive drunkenness .
He wants to build a tenth bridge that allows all the inhabitants to walk the bridges and return to their own beds .
Where does the Bishop build the tenth bridge ?
SOLUTIONS Section::::Solutions .
Reduce the city , as before , to a graph .
Color each node .
As in the classic problem , no Euler walk is possible ; coloring does not affect this .
All four nodes have an odd number of edges .
Bridge 8 :
Euler walks are possible if exactly zero or two nodes have an odd number of edges .
If we have 2 nodes with an odd number of edges , the walk must begin at one such node and end at the other .
Since there are only 4 nodes in the puzzle , the solution is simple .
The walk desired must begin at the blue node and end at the orange node .
Thus , a new edge is drawn between the other two nodes .
Since they each formerly had an odd number of edges , they must now have an even number of edges , fulfilling all conditions .
This is a change in parity from an odd to even degree .
Bridge 9 :
The 9th bridge is easy once the 8th is solved .
The desire is to enable the red castle and forbid the blue castle as a starting point ; the orange node remains the end of the walk and the white node is unaffected .
To change the parity of both red and blue nodes , draw a new edge between them .
Bridge 10 :
The 10th bridge takes us in a slightly different direction .
The Bishop wishes every citizen to return to his starting point .
This is an Euler circuit and requires that all nodes be of even degree .
After the solution of the 9th bridge , the red and the orange nodes have odd degree , so their parity must be changed by adding a new edge between them .
PRESENT STATE OF THE BRIDGES Section::::Present state of the bridges .
Two of the seven original bridges did not survive the bombing of Königsberg in World War II .
Two others were later demolished and replaced by a modern highway .
The three other bridges remain , although only two of them are from Euler 's time ( one was rebuilt in 1935 ) .
Thus , , there are five bridges remaining that were involved in Euler 's problem .
In terms of graph theory , two of the nodes now have degree 2 , and the other two have degree 3 .
Therefore , an Eulerian path is now possible , but it must begin on one island and end on the other .
The University of Canterbury in Christchurch has incorporated a model of the bridges into a grass area between the old Physical Sciences Library and the Erskine Building , housing the Departments of Mathematics , Statistics and Computer Science .
The rivers are replaced with short bushes and the central island sports a stone tōrō .
Rochester Institute of Technology has incorporated the puzzle into the pavement in front of the Gene Polisseni Center , an ice hockey arena that opened in 2014 .
SEE ALSO * Eulerian path
* Five room puzzle
* Glossary of graph theory * Hamiltonian path
* Icosian game * Water , gas , and electricity REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Kaliningrad and the Konigsberg Bridge Problem at Convergence
* Euler 's original publication ( in Latin )
*
The Bridges of Königsberg
* How the bridges of Königsberg help to understand the brain
* Euler 's Königsberg 's Bridges Problem at Math Dept .
Contra Costa College
* Pregel – A Google graphing tool named after this problem