CODING REGION
The coding region of a gene , also known as the CDS ( from coding sequence ) , is that portion of a gene 's DNA or RNA that codes for protein .
The region usually begins at the 5 ' end by a start codon and ends at the 3 ' end with a stop codon .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The coding region in a mRNA is flanked by the five prime untranslated region ( 5'-UTR ) and the three prime untranslated region ( 3'-UTR ) .
The CDS is that portion of an mRNA transcript that is translated by a ribosome .
CDS is a keyword ( feature - key ) used to denote the ' protein - coding sequence ' in a gene feature table by the major sequence databases INSDC .
They also read CDS as both coding sequence and coding region .
DIFFERENCE
WITH
CDNA
Section::::Difference with cDNA .
A cDNA sequence is derived from the transcript by reverse transcription , but in this case it also contains the 5 ' and 3 ' UTRs , which are not part of the CDS ( they are transcribed , but not translated ) .
A CDS will almost always start with an AUG initiation codon in eukaryotes and stop at one of the three stop codons ( UAA , UGA , UAG ) .
CODING SEQUENCE
ANNOTATION Section::::Coding sequence annotation .
While identification of open reading frames within a DNA sequence is straightforward , identifying coding sequences is not , because the cell translates only a subset of all open reading frames to proteins .
Currently CDS prediction uses sampling and sequencing of mRNA from cells , although there is still the problem of determining which parts of a given mRNA are actually translated to protein .
CDS prediction is a subset of gene prediction , the latter also including prediction of DNA sequences that code not only for protein but also for other functional elements such as RNA genes and regulatory sequences .
SEE ALSO
* Coding strand
The strand that codes for a protein
* Gene structure The other elements that make up a gene * Non - coding DNA Parts of genomes that do n't encode genes
* Non - coding RNA Genes that do not encode proteins , have no CDS REFERENCES