ALUMINIUM HYDROXIDE Aluminium hydroxide , Al(OH ) , is found in nature as the mineral gibbsite ( also known as hydrargillite ) and its three much rarer polymorphs : bayerite , doyleite , and nordstrandite .
Aluminium hydroxide is amphoteric in nature , i.e. , it has both basic and acidic properties .
Closely related are aluminium oxide hydroxide , AlO(OH ) , and aluminium oxide or alumina ( AlO ) , the latter of which is also amphoteric .
These compounds together are the major components of the aluminium ore bauxite .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
The naming for the different forms of aluminium hydroxide is ambiguous and there is no universal standard .
All four polymorphs have a chemical composition of aluminium trihydroxide ( one aluminium atom attached to three hydroxide groups ) .
Gibbsite is also known as hydrargillite , named after the Greek words for water ( ' ) and clay ( ' ) .
The first compound named hydrargillite was thought to be aluminium hydroxide , but was later found to be aluminium phosphate ; despite this , both gibbsite and hydrargillite are used to refer to the same polymorphism of aluminium hydroxide , with gibbsite used most commonly in the United States and hydrargillite used more often in Europe .
In 1930 , it was referred to as α - alumina trihydrate to contrast it with bayerite , which was called β - alumina trihydrate ( the alpha and beta designations were used to differentiate the more- and less - common forms respectively ) .
In 1957 , a symposium on alumina nomenclature attempted to develop a universal standard , resulting in gibbsite being designated γ - Al(OH ) , bayerite becoming α - Al(OH ) , and nordstrandite being designated Al(OH ) .
Based on their crystallographic properties , a suggested nomenclature and designation is for gibbsite to be α - Al(OH ) , bayerite to be designated β - Al(OH ) , and both nordstrandite and doyleite are designated Al(OH ) .
Under this designation , the α and β prefixes refer to hexagonal , close - packed structures and altered or dehydrated polymorphisms respectively , with no differentiation between nordstrandite and doyleite .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Gibbsite has a typical metal hydroxide structure with hydrogen bonds .
It is built up of double layers of hydroxyl groups with aluminium ions occupying two - thirds of the octahedral holes between the two layers .
Aluminium hydroxide is amphoteric .
In acid , it acts as a Brønsted - Lowry base by picking up hydrogen ions and neutralizes the acid , yielding a salt :
In bases , it acts a Lewis acid by taking an electron pair from the hydroxide ions :
POLYMORPHISM Section::::Polymorphism .
Four polymorphs of aluminium hydroxide exist , all based on the common combination of one aluminium atom and three hydroxide molecules into different crystalline arrangements that determine the appearance and properties of the compound .
The four combinations are : *
Gibbsite
* Bayerite * Nordstrandite * Doyleite
All polymorphs are composed of layers of octahedral aluminium hydroxide units with the aluminium atom in the centre and the hydroxyl groups on the sides , with hydrogen bonds holding the layers together .
The polymorphisms vary in how the layers stack together , with the arrangements of the molecules and layers determined by the acidity , presence of ions ( including salt ) and the surface of the minerals the substance forms on .
Under most conditions , gibbsite is the most chemically stable form of aluminium hydroxide .
All forms of Al(OH ) crystals are hexagonal .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Virtually all the aluminium hydroxide used commercially is manufactured by the Bayer process which involves dissolving bauxite in sodium hydroxide at temperatures up to .
The waste solid , bauxite tailings , is removed and aluminium hydroxide is precipitated from the remaining solution of sodium aluminate .
This aluminium hydroxide can be converted to aluminium oxide or alumina by calcination .
The residue or bauxite tailings , which is mostly iron oxide , is highly caustic due to residual sodium hydroxide .
It was historically stored in lagoons ; this led to the Ajka alumina plant accident in 2010 in Hungary , where a dam bursting led to the drowning of nine people .
An additional 122 sought treatment for chemical burns .
The mud contaminated of land and reached the Danube .
While the mud was considered non - toxic due to low levels of heavy metals , the associated slurry had pH of 13 .
USES Section::::Uses .
One of the major uses of aluminium hydroxide is as a feedstock for the manufacture of other aluminium compounds : speciality calcined aluminas , aluminium sulfate , polyaluminium chloride , aluminium chloride , zeolites , sodium aluminate , activated alumina , and aluminium nitrate .
Freshly precipitated aluminium hydroxide forms gels , which are the basis for the application of aluminium salts as flocculants in water purification .
This gel crystallizes with time .
Aluminium hydroxide gels can be dehydrated ( e.g. using water - miscible non - aqueous solvents like ethanol ) to form an amorphous aluminium hydroxide powder , which is readily soluble in acids .
Aluminium hydroxide powder which has been heated to an elevated temperature under carefully controlled conditions is known as activated alumina and is used as a desiccant , as an adsorbent in gas purification , as a Claus catalyst support for water purification , and as an adsorbent for the catalyst during the manufacture of polyethylene by the Sclairtech process .
FIRE RETARDANT Section::::Fire retardant .
Aluminium hydroxide also finds use as a fire retardant filler for polymer applications in a similar way to magnesium hydroxide and mixtures of huntite and hydromagnesite .
It decomposes at about , absorbing a considerable amount of heat in the process and giving off water vapour .
In addition to behaving as a fire retardant , it is very effective as a smoke suppressant in a wide range of polymers , most especially in polyesters , acrylics , ethylene vinyl acetate , epoxies , PVC and rubber .
PHARMACEUTICAL Section::::Pharmaceutical .
Under the generic name " algeldrate " , aluminium hydroxide is used as an antacid in humans and animals ( mainly cats and dogs ) .
It is preferred over other alternatives such as sodium bicarbonate because Al(OH ) , being insoluble , does not increase the pH of stomach above 7 and hence , does not trigger secretion of excess acid by the stomach .
Brand names include Alu - Cap , Aludrox , Gaviscon or Pepsamar .
It reacts with excess acid in the stomach , reducing the acidity of the stomach content , which may relieve the symptoms of ulcers , heartburn or dyspepsia .
Such products can cause constipation , because the aluminium ions inhibit the contractions of smooth muscle cells in the gastrointestinal tract , slowing peristalsis and lengthening the time needed for stool to pass through the colon .
Some such products ( such as Maalox ) are formulated to minimize such effects through the inclusion of equal concentrations of magnesium hydroxide or magnesium carbonate , which have counterbalancing laxative effects .
This compound is also used to control hyperphosphatemia ( elevated phosphate , or phosphorus , levels in the blood ) in people and animals suffering from kidney failure .
Normally , the kidneys filter excess phosphate out from the blood , but kidney failure can cause phosphate to accumulate .
The aluminium salt , when ingested , binds to phosphate in the intestines and reduce the amount of phosphorus that can be absorbed .
Precipitated aluminium hydroxide is included as an adjuvant in some vaccines ( e.g. anthrax vaccine ) .
One of the well - known brands of aluminium hydroxide adjuvant is Alhydrogel , made by Brenntag Biosector .
Since it absorbs protein well , it also functions to stabilize vaccines by preventing the proteins in the vaccine from precipitating or sticking to the walls of the container during storage .
Aluminium hydroxide is sometimes called " alum " , a term generally reserved for one of several sulfates .
Vaccine formulations containing aluminium hydroxide stimulate the immune system by inducing the release of uric acid , an immunological danger signal .
This strongly attracts certain types of monocytes which differentiate into dendritic cells .
The dendritic cells pick up the antigen , carry it to lymph nodes , and stimulate T cells and B cells .
It appears to contribute to induction of a good Th2 response , so is useful for immunizing against pathogens that are blocked by antibodies .
However , it has little capacity to stimulate cellular ( Th1 ) immune responses , important for protection against many pathogens , nor is it useful when the antigen is peptide - based .
POTENTIAL ADVERSE EFFECTS Section::::Potential adverse effects .
In the 1960s and 1970s it was speculated that aluminium was related to various neurological disorders , including Alzheimer 's disease .
Since then , multiple epidemiological studies have found no connection between exposure to aluminium and neurological disorders .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * International Chemical Safety Card 0373 *
" Some properties of aluminum hydroxide precipitated in the presence of clays " , Soil Research Institute , R C Turner , Department of Agriculture ,
Ottawa
* Effect of ageing on properties of polynuclear hydroxyaluminum cations *
A second species of polynuclear hydroxyaluminum cation , its formation and some of its properties