HIATAL HERNIA
A hiatal hernia is a type of hernia in which abdominal organs ( typically the stomach ) slip through the diaphragm into the middle compartment of the chest .
This may result in gastroesophageal reflux disease ( GERD ) or laryngopharyngeal reflux ( LPR ) with symptoms such as a taste of acid in the back of the mouth or heartburn .
Other symptoms may include trouble swallowing and chest pains .
Complications may include iron deficiency anemia , volvulus , or bowel obstruction .
The most common risk factors are obesity and older age .
Other risk factors include major trauma , scoliosis , and certain types of surgery .
There are two main types : a sliding hernia , in which the body of the stomach moves up , and a paraesophageal hernia , in which an abdominal organ moves beside the esophagus .
The diagnosis may be confirmed with endoscopy or medical imaging .
Endoscopy is typically only required when concerning symptoms are present , symptoms are resistant to treatment , or the person is over 50 years of age .
Symptoms from a hiatal hernia may be improved by changes such as raising the head of the bed , weight loss , and adjusting eating habits .
Medications that reduce gastric acid such as H2 blockers or proton pump inhibitors may also help with the symptoms although they can also create significant side effects .
If the condition does not improve with medications , a surgery to carry out a laparoscopic fundoplication may be an option .
Between 10 % and 80 % of people in the United States are affected .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Hiatal hernia has often been called the " great mimic " because its symptoms can resemble many disorders .
Among them , a person with a hiatal hernia can experience dull pains in the chest , shortness of breath ( caused by the hernia 's effect on the diaphragm ) , heart palpitations ( due to irritation of the vagus nerve ) , and swallowed food " balling up " and causing discomfort in the lower esophagus until it passes on to the stomach .
In addition , hiatal hernias often result in heartburn but may also cause chest pain or pain with eating .
In most cases however , a hiatal hernia does not cause any symptoms .
The pain and discomfort that a patient experiences is due to the reflux of gastric acid , air , or bile .
While there are several causes of acid reflux , it occurs more frequently in the presence of hiatal hernia .
In newborns , the presence of Bochdalek hernia can be recognised from symptoms such as difficulty breathing fast respiration , increased heart rate .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
The following are potential causes of a hiatal hernia .
* Increased pressure within the abdomen caused by : * Heavy lifting or bending over * Frequent or hard coughing *
Hard sneezing
* Violent vomiting
* Straining during defecation ( i.e. , the Valsalva maneuver ) Obesity and age - related changes to the diaphragm are also general risk factors .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The diagnosis of a hiatal hernia is typically made through an upper GI series , endoscopy or high resolution manometry .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Four types of esophageal hiatal hernia are identified : Type
I :
A type I hernia is also known as a sliding hiatal hernia .
There is a widening of the muscular hiatal tunnel and circumferential laxity of the phrenoesophageal ligament , allowing a portion of the gastric cardia to herniate upward into the posterior mediastinum .
The clinical significance of type I hernias is in their association with reflux disease .
Sliding hernias are the most common type and account for 95 % of all hiatal hernias .
( C ) Type II : A type II hernia results from a localized defect in the phrenoesophageal ligament while the gastroesophageal junction remains fixed to the pre aortic fascia and the median arcuate ligament .
The gastric fundus then serves as the leading point of herniation .
Although type II hernias are associated with reflux disease , their primary clinical significance lies in the potential for mechanical complications .
( D ) Type III :
Type III hernias have elements of both types I and II hernias .
With progressive enlargement of the hernia through the hiatus , the phrenoesophageal ligament stretches , displacing the gastroesophageal junction above the diaphragm , thereby adding a sliding element to the type II hernia .
Type IV :
Type IV hiatus hernia is associated with a large defect in the phrenoesophageal ligament , allowing other organs , such as colon , spleen , pancreas and small intestine to enter the hernia sac .
The end stage of type I and type II hernias occurs when the whole stomach migrates up into the chest by rotating 180 ° around its longitudinal axis , with the cardia and pylorus as fixed points .
In this situation the abnormality is usually referred to as an intrathoracic stomach .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
In the great majority of cases , sufferers experience no life - altering discomfort , and no treatment is required .
If there is pain or discomfort , 3 or 4 sips of room temperature water will usually relieve the pain .
Symptomatic patients should elevate the head of their beds and avoid lying down directly after meals .
If the condition has been brought on by stress , stress reduction techniques may be prescribed , or if overweight , weight loss may be indicated .
Antisecretory drugs like proton pump inhibitors and H receptor blockers can be used to reduce acid secretion .
Medications that reduce the lower esophageal sphincter
( LES ) pressure should be avoided .
However , in some unusual instances , as when the hiatal hernia is unusually large , or is of the paraesophageal type , it may cause esophageal stricture or severe discomfort .
About 5 % of hiatal hernias are paraesophageal .
If symptoms from such a hernia are severe for example if chronic acid reflux threatens to severely injure the esophagus or is causing Barrett 's esophagus , surgery is sometimes recommended .
However surgery has its own risks including death and disability , so that even for large or paraesophageal hernias , watchful waiting may on balance be safer and cause fewer problems than surgery .
Complications from surgical procedures to correct a hiatal hernia may include gas bloat syndrome , dysphagia ( trouble swallowing ) , dumping syndrome , excessive scarring , and rarely , achalasia .
Surgical procedures sometimes fail over time , requiring a second surgery to make repairs .
One surgical procedure used is called Nissen fundoplication .
In fundoplication , the gastric fundus ( upper part ) of the stomach is wrapped , or plicated , around the inferior part of the esophagus , preventing herniation of the stomach through the hiatus in the diaphragm and the reflux of gastric acid .
The procedure is now commonly performed laparoscopically .
With proper patient selection , laparoscopic fundoplication recent studies have indicated relatively low complication rates , quick recovery , and relatively good long term results .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Incidence of hiatal hernias increases with age ; approximately 60 % of individuals aged 50 or older have a hiatal hernia .
Of these , 9 % are symptomatic , depending on the competence of the lower esophageal sphincter ( LES ) .
95 % of these are " sliding " hiatal hernias , in which the LES protrudes above the diaphragm along with the stomach , and only 5 % are the " rolling " type ( paraesophageal ) , in which the LES remains stationary , but the stomach protrudes above the diaphragm .
Hiatal hernias are most common in North America and Western Europe and rare in rural African communities .
Some have proposed that insufficient dietary fiber and the use of a high sitting position for defecation may increase the risk .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Hiatal hernia CT Scans - CT Cases