SUBSCRIBER IDENTITY MODULE
A subscriber identity module or subscriber identification module ( SIM ) , widely known as a SIM card , is an integrated circuit that is intended to securely store the international mobile subscriber identity ( IMSI ) number and its related key , which are used to identify and authenticate subscribers on mobile telephony devices ( such as mobile phones and computers ) .
It is also possible to store contact information on many SIM cards .
SIM cards are always used on GSM phones ; for CDMA phones , they are only needed for newer LTE - capable handsets .
SIM cards can also be used in satellite phones , smart watches , computers , or cameras .
The SIM circuit is part of the function of a universal integrated circuit card ( UICC ) physical smart card , which is usually made of PVC with embedded contacts and semiconductors .
SIM cards are transferable between different mobile devices .
The first UICC smart cards were the size of credit and bank cards ; sizes were reduced several times over the years , usually keeping electrical contacts the same , so that a larger card could be cut down to a smaller size .
A SIM card contains its unique serial number ( ICCID ) , international mobile subscriber identity ( IMSI ) number , security authentication and ciphering information , temporary information related to the local network , a list of the services the user has access to , and two passwords : a personal identification number ( PIN ) for ordinary use , and a personal unblocking code ( PUC ) for PIN unlocking .
HISTORY AND PROCUREMENT Section::::History and procurement .
The SIM was initially specified by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute in the specification with the number TS 11.11 .
This specification describes the physical and logical behaviour of the SIM .
With the development of UMTS , the specification work was partially transferred to 3GPP .
3GPP is now responsible for the further development of applications like SIM ( TS 51.011 ) and USIM ( TS 31.102 ) and ETSI for the further development of the physical card UICC .
The first SIM card was developed in 1991 by Munich smart - card maker Giesecke & Devrient , who sold the first 300 SIM cards to the Finnish wireless network operator Radiolinja .
Today , SIM cards are ubiquitous , allowing over 7 billion devices to connect to cellular networks around the world .
According to the International Card Manufacturers Association ( ICMA ) , there were 5.4 billion SIM cards manufactured globally in 2016 creating over $ 6.5 billion in revenue for traditional SIM card vendors .
The rise of cellular IoT and 5 G networks is predicted to drive the growth of the addressable market for SIM card manufacturers to over 20 billion cellular devices by 2020 .
The introduction of Embedded SIM ( eSIM ) and Remote SIM Provisioning ( RSP ) from the GSMA may disrupt the traditional SIM card ecosystem with the entrance of new players specializing in " digital " SIM card provisioning and other value - added services for mobile network operators .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
There are three operating voltages for SIM cards : , and ( ISO / IEC 7816 - 3 classes A , B and C , respectively ) .
The operating voltage of the majority of SIM cards launched before 1998 was .
SIM cards produced subsequently are compatible with and .
Modern cards support , and .
Modern SIM cards allow applications to load when the SIM is in use by the subscriber .
These applications communicate with the handset or a server using SIM Application Toolkit , which was initially specified by 3GPP in TS 11.14 .
( There is an identical ETSI specification with different numbering . )
ETSI and 3GPP maintain the SIM specifications .
The main specifications are : ETSI TS 102 223 , ETSI TS 102 241 , ETSI TS 102 588 , and ETSI TS 131 111 .
SIM toolkit applications were initially written in native code using proprietary APIs .
To provide interoperability of the applications , ETSI chose Java Card ..
Additional standard size and specifications of interest are maintained by GlobalPlatform .
DATA Section::::Data .
SIM cards store network - specific information used to authenticate and identify subscribers on the network .
The most important of these are the ICCID , IMSI , Authentication Key ( Ki ) , Local Area Identity ( LAI ) and Operator - Specific Emergency Number .
The SIM also stores other carrier - specific data such as the SMSC ( Short Message Service Center ) number , Service Provider Name ( SPN ) , Service Dialing Numbers ( SDN ) , Advice - Of - Charge parameters and Value Added Service ( VAS ) applications .
( Refer to GSM 11.11 )
SIM cards can come in various data capacities , from to at least .
All can store a maximum of 250 contacts on the SIM , but while the has room for 33 Mobile Network Codes ( MNCs ) or network identifiers , the version has room for 80 MNCs .
This is used by network operators to store data on preferred networks , mostly used when the SIM is not in its home network but is roaming .
The network operator that issued the SIM card can use this to have a phone connect to a preferred network that is more economic for the provider instead of having to pay the network operator that the phone ' saw ' first .
This does not mean that a phone containing this SIM card can connect to a maximum of only 33 or 80 networks , but it means that the SIM card issuer can specify only up to that number of preferred networks .
If a SIM is outside these preferred networks it uses the first or best available network .
ICCID Section::::ICCID .
ICCID is the identifier of the actual SIM card itself - i.e. an identifier for the SIM chip .
Nowadays ICCID numbers are also used to identify eSIM profiles , and not only physical SIM cards .
Each SIM is internationally identified by its integrated circuit card identifier ( ICCID ) .
ICCIDs are stored in the SIM cards and are also engraved or printed on the SIM card body during a process called personalisation .
The ICCID is defined by the ITU - T recommendation E.118 as the Primary Account Number .
Its layout is based on ISO / IEC 7812 .
According to E.118 , the number is up to 22 digits long , including a single check digit calculated using the Luhn algorithm .
However , the GSM Phase 1 defined the ICCID length as 10 octets ( 20 digits ) with operator - specific structure .
The number is composed of the following subparts : Issuer identification number ( IIN ) Maximum of seven digits : * Major industry identifier ( MII ) , 2 fixed digits , 89 for telecommunication purposes .
* Country code , 1–3 digits , as defined by ITU - T recommendation E.164 .
* Issuer identifier , 1–4 digits .
Individual account identification * Individual account identification number .
Its length is variable , but every number under one IIN has the same length .
Check digit
* Single digit calculated from the other digits using the Luhn algorithm .
With the GSM Phase 1 specification using 10 octets into which ICCID is stored as packed BCD , the data field has room for 20 digits with hexadecimal digit " F " being used as filler when necessary .
In practice , this means that on GSM SIM cards there are 20-digit ( 19 + 1 ) and 19-digit ( 18 + 1 ) ICCIDs in use , depending upon the issuer .
However , a single issuer always uses the same size for its ICCIDs .
To confuse matters more , SIM factories seem to have varying ways of delivering electronic copies of SIM personalization datasets .
Some datasets are without the ICCID checksum digit , others are with the digit .
As required by E.118 , the ITU - T updates a list of all current internationally assigned IIN codes in its Operational Bulletins twice a month ( the last is No . 1160 from 15 November 2018 ) .
ITU - T also publishes complete lists : as of November 2018 list issued on 15 November 2015 was current , having all issuer identifier numbers before 15 November 2015 .
INTERNATIONAL MOBILE SUBSCRIBER IDENTITY ( IMSI )
Section::::International mobile subscriber identity ( IMSI ) .
SIM cards are identified on their individual operator networks by a unique International Mobile Subscriber Identity ( IMSI ) .
Mobile network operators connect mobile phone calls and communicate with their market SIM cards using their IMSIs .
The format is : *
The first three digits represent the Mobile Country Code ( MCC ) .
*
The next two or three digits represent the Mobile Network Code ( MNC ) .
Three - digit MNC codes are allowed by E.212
but are mainly used in the United States and Canada .
*
The next digits represent the mobile subscriber identification number ( MSIN ) .
Normally there are 10 digits , but can be fewer in the case of a 3-digit MNC or if national regulations indicate that the total length of the IMSI should be less than 15 digits .
* Digits are different from country to country .
AUTHENTICATION KEY ( K )
Section::::Authentication key ( K ) .
The K is a 128-bit value used in authenticating the SIMs on a GSM mobile network ( for USIM network , you still need K but other parameters are also needed ) .
Each SIM holds a unique K assigned to it by the operator during the personalization process .
The K is also stored in a database ( termed authentication center or AuC ) on the carrier 's network .
The SIM card is designed to prevent someone from getting the K by using the smart - card interface .
Instead , the SIM card provides a function , Run GSM Algorithm , that the phone uses to pass data to the SIM card to be signed with the K. This , by design , makes using the SIM card mandatory unless the K can be extracted from the SIM card , or the carrier is willing to reveal the K. In practice , the GSM cryptographic algorithm for computing SRES_2 ( see step 4 , below ) from the K has certain vulnerabilities that can allow the extraction of the K from a SIM card and the making of a duplicate SIM card .
Authentication process :
* When the mobile equipment starts up , it obtains the international mobile subscriber identity ( IMSI ) from the SIM card , and passes this to the mobile operator , requesting access and authentication .
The mobile equipment may have to pass a PIN to the SIM card before the SIM card reveals this information .
*
* The operator network searches its database for the incoming IMSI and its associated K. * * The operator network then generates a random number ( RAND , which is a nonce ) and signs it with the K associated with the IMSI ( and stored on the SIM card ) , computing another number , that is split into the Signed Response 1 ( SRES_1 , 32 bits ) and the encryption key K ( 64 bits ) .
*
* The operator network then sends the RAND to the mobile equipment , which passes it to the SIM card .
The SIM card signs it with its K , producing SRES_2 and K , which it gives to the mobile equipment .
The mobile equipment passes SRES_2 on to the operator network .
*
* The operator network then compares its computed SRES_1 with the computed SRES_2 that the mobile equipment returned .
If the two numbers match , the SIM is authenticated and the mobile equipment is granted access to the operator 's network .
K is used to encrypt all further communications between the mobile equipment and the network .
* LOCATION AREA IDENTITY Section::::Location area identity .
The SIM stores network state information , which is received from the Location Area Identity ( LAI ) .
Operator networks are divided into Location Areas , each having a unique LAI number .
When the device changes locations , it stores the new LAI to the SIM and sends it back to the operator network with its new location .
If the device is power cycled , it takes data off the SIM , and searches for the prior LAI .
SMS MESSAGES AND CONTACTS Section::::SMS messages and contacts .
Most SIM cards store a number of SMS messages and phone book contacts .
It stores the contacts in simple " name and number " pairs .
Entries that contain multiple phone numbers and additional phone numbers are usually not stored on the SIM card .
When a user tries to copy such entries to a SIM , the handset 's software breaks them into multiple entries , discarding information that is not a phone number .
The number of contacts and messages stored depends on the SIM ; early models stored as few as five messages and 20 contacts , while modern SIM cards can usually store over 250 contacts .
FORMATS Section::::Formats .
SIM cards have been made smaller over the years ; functionality is independent of format .
Full - size SIM were followed by mini - SIM , micro - SIM , and nano - SIM .
SIM cards are also made to embed in devices .
+
SIM card formats and dimensions ! scope="col " SIM card format !
scope="col " Introduced ! scope="col " Standard reference ! scope="col " Length ( mm ) ! scope="col " Width ( mm ) ! scope="col " Thickness ( mm ) ! scope="row " Full - size ( 1FF ) ! scope="row " Mini - SIM ( 2FF ) ! scope="row " Micro - SIM ( 3FF ) ! scope="row " Nano - SIM ( 4FF ) !
scope="row " Embedded - SIM(eSIM ) FULL - SIZE SIM Section::::Full - size SIM .
The full - size SIM ( or 1FF , 1st form factor ) was the first form factor to appear .
It has the size of a credit card ( 85.60 mm × 53.98 mm × 0.76 mm ) .
Later smaller SIMs are often supplied embedded in a full - size card from which they can be removed .
MINI - SIM Section::::Mini - SIM .
The mini - SIM ( or 2FF ) card has the same contact arrangement as the full - size SIM card and is normally supplied within a full - size card carrier , attached by a number of linking pieces .
This arrangement ( defined in ISO / IEC 7810 as ID-1/000 ) lets such a card be used in a device that requires a full - size card or in a device that requires a mini - SIM card , after breaking the linking pieces .
As the full - size SIM is no longer used , some suppliers refer to the mini - SIM as a " standard SIM " or " regular SIM " .
MICRO - SIM Section::::Micro - SIM .
The micro - SIM ( or 3FF ) card has the same thickness and contact arrangements , but reduced length and width as shown in the table above .
The micro - SIM was introduced by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute ( ETSI ) along with SCP , 3GPP ( UTRAN / GERAN ) , 3GPP2 ( CDMA2000 ) , ARIB , GSM Association ( GSMA SCaG and GSMNA ) , GlobalPlatform , Liberty Alliance , and the Open Mobile Alliance ( OMA ) for the purpose of fitting into devices too small for a mini - SIM card .
The form factor was mentioned in the December 1998 3GPP SMG9 UMTS Working Party , which is the standards - setting body for GSM SIM cards , and the form factor was agreed upon in late 2003 .
The micro - SIM was designed for backward compatibility .
The major issue for backward compatibility was the contact area of the chip .
Retaining the same contact area makes the micro - SIM compatible with the prior , larger SIM readers through the use of plastic cutout surrounds .
The SIM was also designed to run at the same speed ( 5 MHz ) as the prior version .
The same size and positions of pins resulted in numerous " How - to " tutorials and YouTube video with detailed instructions how to cut a mini - SIM card to micro - SIM size .
The chairman of EP SCP , Dr. Klaus Vedder , said Micro - SIM cards were introduced by various mobile service providers for the launch of the original iPad , and later for smartphones , from April 2010 .
The iPhone 4 was the first smartphone to use a micro - SIM card in June 2010 , followed by many others .
NANO - SIM Section::::Nano - SIM .
The nano - SIM ( or 4FF ) card was introduced on 11 October 2012 , when mobile service providers in various countries started to supply it for phones that supported the format .
The nano - SIM measures 12.3 × 8.8 × 0.67 mm and reduces the previous format to the contact area while maintaining the existing contact arrangements .
A small rim of isolating material is left around the contact area to avoid short circuits with the socket .
The nano - SIM is 0.67 mm thick , compared to the 0.76 mm of its predecessor .
4FF can be put into adapters for use with devices designed for 2FF or 3FF SIMs , and is made thinner for that purpose , but many phone companies do not recommend this .
The iPhone 5 , released in September 2012 , was the first device to use a nano - SIM card , followed by other handsets .
SECURITY Section::::Security .
In July 2013 , Karsten Nohl , a security researcher from SRLabs , described vulnerabilities in some SIM cards that supported DES , which , despite its age , is still used by some operators .
The attack could lead to the phone being remotely cloned or let someone steal payment credentials from the SIM .
Further details of the research were provided at BlackHat on July 31 , 2013 .
In response , the International Telecommunication Union said that the development was " hugely significant " and that it would be contacting its members .
In February 2015 , it was reported by The Intercept that the NSA and GCHQ had stolen the encryption keys ( Ki 's ) used by Gemalto ( the manufacturer of 2 billion SIM cards annually ) , enabling these intelligence agencies to monitor voice and data communications without the knowledge or approval of cellular network providers or judicial oversight .
Having finished its investigation , Gemalto claimed that it has " reasonable grounds " to believe that the NSA and GCHQ carried out an operation to hack its network in 2010 and 2011 , but says the number of possibly stolen keys would not have been massive .
DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Developments .
When GSM was already in use , the specifications were further developed and enhanced with functionality such as SMS and GPRS .
These development steps are referred as releases by ETSI .
Within these development cycles , the SIM specification was enhanced as well : new voltage classes , formats and files were introduced .
USIM
Section::::USIM .
In GSM - only times , the SIM consisted of the hardware and the software .
With the advent of UMTS this naming was split : the SIM was now an application and hence only software .
The hardware part was called UICC .
This split was necessary because UMTS introduced a new application , the universal subscriber identity module ( USIM ) .
The USIM brought , among other things , security improvements like the mutual authentication and longer encryption keys and an improved address book .
UICC
Section::::UICC .
" SIM cards " in developed countries today are usually UICCs containing at least a SIM application and a USIM application .
This configuration is necessary because older GSM only handsets are solely compatible with the SIM application and some UMTS security enhancements rely on the USIM application .
OTHER VARIANTS
Section::::Other variants .
On cdmaOne networks , the equivalent of the SIM card is the R - UIM and the equivalent of the SIM application is the CSIM .
A virtual SIM is a mobile phone number provided by a mobile network operator that does not require a SIM card to connect phone calls to a user 's mobile phone .
EMBEDDED - SIM Section::::Embedded - SIM .
An Embedded - SIM ( eSIM ) or
embedded universal integrated circuit card ( eUICC ) is a form of programmable SIM that is embedded directly into a device .
The surface mount format provides the same electrical interface as the full size , 2FF and 3FF SIM cards , but is soldered to a circuit board as part of the manufacturing process .
In M2 M applications where there is no requirement to change the SIM card , this avoids the requirement for a connector , improving reliability and security .
An eSIM can be provisioned remotely ; end - users can add or remove operators without the need to physically swap a SIM from the device .
The GSMA had been discussing the possibilities of a software - based SIM card since 2010 .
While Motorola noted that eUICC is geared at industrial devices , Apple " disagreed that there is any statement forbidding the use of an embedded UICC in a consumer product . "
In 2012 , The European Commission has selected the Embedded UICC format for its in - vehicle emergency call service known as eCall .
All new car models in the EU must have one by 2018 to instantly connect the car to the emergency services in case of an accident .
Russia has a similar plan with the ERA - GLONASS regional satellite positioning system .
Singapore is seeking public opinions on introducing eSIM as a new standard as more compatible devices enter the market .
Apple implemented eSIM support in its Apple Watch series 3 and second generation iPad Pro devices .
In October 2017 , Google unveiled the Pixel 2 , which added eSIM support for use with its Project Fi service .
The following year , Apple released the iPhone XS and iPhone XR with eSIM support .
PLINTRON implemented eSIM4Things product based on eSIM support for the Devices and available in 28 Countries .
USAGE IN MOBILE PHONE STANDARDS Section::::Usage in mobile phone standards .
The use of SIM cards is mandatory in GSM devices .
The satellite phone networks Iridium , Thuraya and Inmarsat 's BGAN also use SIM cards .
Sometimes , these SIM cards work in regular GSM phones and also allow GSM customers to roam in satellite networks by using their own SIM card in a satellite phone .
Japan 's 2 G PDC system ( which was shut down in 2012 ; SoftBank Mobile has already shut down PDC from March 31 , 2010 )
also specifies a SIM , but this has never been implemented commercially .
The specification of the interface between the Mobile Equipment and the SIM is given in the RCR STD-27 annex 4 .
The Subscriber Identity Module Expert Group was a committee of specialists assembled by the European Telecommunications Standards Institute ( ETSI ) to draw up the specifications ( GSM 11.11 ) for interfacing between smart cards and mobile telephones .
In 1994 , the name SIMEG was changed to SMG9 .
Japan 's current and next generation cellular systems are based on W - CDMA ( UMTS ) and CDMA2000 and all use SIM cards .
However , Japanese CDMA2000-based phones are locked to the R - UIM they are associated with and thus , the cards are not interchangeable with other Japanese CDMA2000 handsets ( though they may be inserted into GSM / WCDMA handsets for roaming purposes outside Japan ) .
CDMA - based devices originally did not use a removable card , and the service for these phones bound to a unique identifier contained in the handset itself .
This is most prevalent in operators in the Americas .
The first publication of the TIA-820 standard ( also known as 3GPP2 C.S0023 ) in 2000 defined the Removable User Identity Module ( R - UIM ) .
Card - based CDMA devices are most prevalent in Asia .
The equivalent of a SIM in UMTS is called the universal integrated circuit card ( UICC ) , which runs a USIM application .
The UICC is still colloquially called a SIM card .
SIM AND CARRIERS Section::::SIM and carriers .
The SIM card introduced a new and significant business opportunity for MVNOs mobile virtual network operators who lease capacity from one of the network operators rather than owning or operating a cellular telecoms network , and only provide a SIM card to their customers .
MVNOs first appeared in Denmark , Hong Kong , Finland and the UK .
Today they exist in over 50 countries , including most of Europe , United States , Canada , Mexico , Australia and parts of Asia , and account for approximately 10 % of all mobile phone subscribers around the world .
On some networks , the mobile phone is locked to its carrier SIM card , meaning that the phone only works with SIM cards from the specific carrier .
This is more common in markets where mobile phones are heavily subsidised by the carriers , and the business model depends on the customer staying with the service provider for a minimum term ( typically 12 , 18 or 24 months ) .
SIM cards that are issued by providers with an associated contract are called SIM - only deals .
Common examples are the GSM networks in the United States , Canada , Australia , the UK and Poland .
Many businesses offer the ability to remove the SIM lock from a phone , effectively making it possible to then use the phone on any network by inserting a different SIM card .
Mostly , GSM and 3 G mobile handsets can easily be unlocked and used on any suitable network with any SIM card .
In countries where the phones are not subsidised , e.g. , India , Israel and Belgium , all phones are unlocked .
Where the phone is not locked to its SIM card , the users can easily switch networks by simply replacing the SIM card of one network with that of another while using only one phone .
This is typical , for example , among users who may want to optimise their carrier 's traffic by different tariffs to different friends on different networks , or when traveling internationally .
In 2016 , carriers started using the concept of automatic SIM reactivation whereby they let users reuse expired SIM cards instead of purchasing new ones when they wish to re - subscribe to that operator .
This is particularly useful in countries where prepaid calls dominate and where competition drives high churn rates , as users had to return to a carrier shop to purchase a new SIM each time they wanted to churn back to an operator .
SIM - ONLY Section::::SIM - only .
Commonly sold as a product by mobile telecommunications companies , " SIM - only " refers to a type of legally binding contract between a mobile network provider and a customer .
The contract itself takes the form of a credit agreement and is subject to a credit check .
Within a SIM - only contract the mobile network provider supplies their customer with just one piece of hardware , a SIM card , which includes an agreed amount of network usage in exchange for a monthly payment .
Network usage within a SIM - only contract can be measured in minutes , text , data or any combination of these .
The duration of a SIM - only contract varies depending on the deal selected by the customer , but in the UK they are available over 1 , 3 , 6 , and 12 month periods .
SIM - only contracts differ from mobile phone contracts in that they do not include any hardware other than a SIM card .
In terms of network usage , SIM - only is typically more cost effective than other contracts because the provider does not charge more to offset the cost of a mobile device over the contract period .
Short contract length is one of the key features of SIM - only made possible by the absence of a mobile device .
SIM - only is increasing in popularity very quickly .
In 2010 pay monthly based mobile phone subscriptions grew from 41 percent to 49 percent of all UK mobile phone subscriptions .
According to German research company Gfk , 250,000 SIM - only mobile contracts were taken up in the UK during July 2012 alone , the highest figure since GfK began keeping records .
Increasing smartphone penetration combined with financial concerns are leading customers to save money by moving onto a SIM - only when their initial contract term is over .
MULTIPLE - SIM DEVICES Section::::Multiple - SIM devices .
Devices with two SIM slots are known as dual SIMs .
Dual - SIM mobile phones usually come with two slots for SIMs , one behind the battery and another on the side of the phone , though in some devices both slots can be found on the battery tray , or on the side of the phone if the device does not have a removable battery .
Multiple - SIM devices are commonplace in developing markets such as in Africa , East Asia , the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia , where billing rates and variable network coverage / mode , make it desirable for consumers to use multiple SIMs from competing networks .
It 's also useful when you split work and home number for better privacy .
They are not common in the Western world .
THIN SIM Section::::Thin SIM .
A thin SIM ( or overlay SIM or SIM overlay ) is a very thin device shaped like a SIM card , approximately 120 microns thick .
It has contacts on its front and back .
It is used by sticking it on top of a regular SIM card .
It provides its own functionality while passing through the functionality of the SIM card underneath .
It can be used to bypass the mobile operating network and run custom applications , particularly on non - programmable cell phones .
Its top surface is a connector which connects to the phone in place of the normal SIM .
Its bottom surface is a connector which connects to the SIM in place of the phone .
With electronics , it can modify signals in either direction , thus presenting a modified SIM to the phone , and/or presenting a modified phone to the SIM .
It is a similar concept to the Game Genie , which connects between a game console and a game cartridge , creating a modified game .
Similar functionality is given by dual SIM phones , but they are not always available .
A bank in Kenya is issuing thin SIMs to its customers .
There are security concerns because the thin SIM can observe data passing to and from the SIM .
SEE ALSO
* Apple SIM
* International Mobile Equipment Identity ( IMEI ) * GSM 03.48
* SIM cloning
* SIM connector * IP Multimedia Services Identity Module ( ISIM ) * W - SIM ( Willcom - SIM )
* Mobile equipment identifier ( MEID ) * VMAC * Mobile signature * Single Wire Protocol ( SWP ) *
SIM Application Toolkit ( STK ) * Mobile broadband
* Tethering
* Smart card * Regional lockout * GSM USSD codes Unstructured Supplementary Service Data : list of standard GSM codes for network and SIM related functions
* Remote SIM provisioning REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * ETSI Smart Card standards ( 102 221 )
* GSM 11.11 – Specification of the Subscriber Identity Module - Mobile Equipment ( SIM - ME ) interface .
* GSM 11.14 – Specification of the SIM Application Toolkit for the Subscriber Identity Module - Mobile Equipment ( SIM - ME ) interface * GSM 03.48 – Specification of the security mechanisms for SIM application toolkit
* GSM 03.48 Java API – API and realization of GSM 03.48 in Java * ITU - T E.118 –
The International Telecommunication Charge Card 2006 ITU - T