DENATURED
ALCOHOL Denatured alcohol , also called methylated spirit ( in Australia , New Zealand , South Africa and the United Kingdom ) or denatured rectified spirit , is ethanol that has additives to make it poisonous , bad - tasting , foul - smelling , or nauseating to discourage recreational consumption .
It is sometimes dyed .
Pyridine , methanol , or both can be added to make denatured alcohol poisonous , and denatonium can be added to make it bitter .
Denatured alcohol is used as a solvent and as fuel for alcohol burners and camping stoves .
Because of the diversity of industrial uses for denatured alcohol , hundreds of additives and denaturing methods have been used .
The main additive has traditionally been 10 % methanol , giving rise to the term " methylated spirits " .
Other typical additives include isopropyl alcohol , acetone , methyl ethyl ketone , methyl isobutyl ketone , and denatonium .
Denaturing alcohol does not chemically alter the ethanol molecule .
Rather , the ethanol is mixed with other chemicals to form a toxic or bad tasting solution .
For many of these solutions , there is no practical way to separate the components .
USES Section::::Uses .
Denatured alcohol is used identically to ethanol itself except for applications that involve fuel , surgical and laboratory stock .
Regular ethanol is required for food and beverage applications and certain chemical reactions where the denaturant would interfere .
In molecular biology , denatured ethanol can be used for precipitating nucleic acids .
PURPOSE Section::::Purpose .
In some countries , sales of alcoholic beverages are heavily taxed .
In order to avoid paying beverage taxes on alcohol that is not meant to be consumed , the alcohol must be " denatured " , or treated with added chemicals to make it unpalatable .
Denatured alcohol is not , in itself , a product that would be normally demanded if given the alternative of normal ethanol .
Denatured alcohol and its manufacture are a public policy compromise .
The supply and demand for denatured alcohol arises from the fact that normal alcohol ( which in everyday language refers specifically to ethanol , suitable for human ingestion as a recreational drink or extractive medium for medicinal tinctures ) is usually very expensive in comparison with similar chemicals , being highly taxed for revenue and public health policy purposes ( see Pigovian tax ) .
If pure ethanol were made cheaply available for fuel , solvents , or medicinal purposes , some people might ingest it .
Denatured alcohol provides a solution to permit industrial use and manufacture of ethanol , whereby cheap ethanol can be made available for non - consumption use without the risk of its being converted for consumption .
The process creates an ethanol - containing solution that is not suitable for drinking , but is otherwise somewhat similar to ethanol for certain purposes .
As a result , there is no duty on denatured alcohol in most countries , making it considerably cheaper than pure ethanol .
As a consequence , its composition is tightly defined by government regulations that vary between countries .
TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
Despite its poisonous content , denatured alcohol is sometimes consumed as a surrogate alcohol .
This can potentially result in blindness or death if it contains methanol .
For instance , during the American Prohibition , federal law required methanol in domestically - manufactured industrial alcohols .
On Christmas Day , 1926 , and the two following days , which was roughly at the midpoint of the " Great Experiment " of nationwide alcohol prohibition , 31 people in New York City alone died of methanol poisoning .
To help prevent this , denatonium is often added to give the substance an extremely bitter flavour .
Substances such as pyridine are added to give the mixture an unpleasant odour , and agents such as syrup of ipecac may also be included to induce emesis ( vomiting ) .
New Zealand has removed methanol from its government - approved " methylated spirits " formulation .
FORMULATIONS Section::::Formulations .
Different additives are used to make it difficult to use distillation or other simple processes to reverse the denaturation .
Methanol is commonly used both because its boiling point is close to that of ethanol and because it is toxic .
Another typical denaturant is pyridine .
Often the denatured alcohol is dyed with methyl violet .
There are several grades of denatured alcohol , but in general the denaturants used are similar .
As an example , the formulation for completely denatured alcohol , according to 2005 British regulations was as follows : Completely denatured alcohol must be made in accordance with the following formulation : with every 90 parts by volume of alcohol mix 9.5 parts by volume of wood naphtha or a substitute and 0.5 parts by volume of crude pyridine , and to the resulting mixture add mineral naphtha ( petroleum oil ) in the proportion of 3.75 litres to every 1000 litres of the mixture and synthetic organic dyestuff ( methyl violet ) in the proportion of 1.5 grams to every 1000 litres of the mixture .
The European Union agreed in February 2013 to the mutual procedures for the complete denaturing of alcohol : SPECIALLY DENATURED ALCOHOL
Section::::Specially denatured alcohol .
A specially denatured alcohol ( SDA ) is one of many types of denatured alcohol specified under the US Code of Federal Regulations Title 27 Section 21.151 .
A specially denatured alcohol is a combination of ethanol and another chemical , e.g. ethyl acetate in SDA 29 , 35 , and 35A , added to render the mixture unsuitable for drinking .
Often an SDA is used in cosmetic products but can also be used in chemical manufacturing , pharmaceuticals , and solvents .
Another example is SDA 40-B , which contains tert - butyl alcohol and denatonium benzoate , N.F ..
The use of denatured non - beverage suitable alcohol in the United States avoids excise taxes on alcohol .
SEE ALSO
* Isopropyl alcohol
*
Rubbing alcohol
*
E85
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS * 27 CFR 20 , regulations relating to denatured alcohol in the United States * Specifications and licensing of methylated spirits in the United Kingdom * European Community COMMISSION REGULATION ( EC )
No 162/2013 on the mutual recognition of procedures for the complete denaturing of alcohol for the purposes of exemption from excise duty * HM Revenue and Customs : Production , distribution and use of denatured alcohol * " List of SDAs with denaturing chemical "