ROLLIE FINGERS Roland Glen Fingers ( born August 25 , 1946 ) is an American retired professional baseball pitcher .
Fingers pitched in Major League Baseball for the Oakland Athletics ( 1968–76 ) , San Diego Padres ( 1977–80 ) and Milwaukee Brewers ( 1981–85 ) .
Fingers is a three - time World Series champion , a seven - time MLB All - Star , a four - time Rolaids Relief Man of the Year , and three - time MLB saves champion .
Fingers won the American League Most Valuable Player Award and Cy Young Award in 1981 .
In 1992 , he became only the second reliever to be elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame .
Fingers is also one of only a few MLB players to have his number retired by more than one club ( Oakland Athletics and Milwaukee Brewers ) .
Fingers is also known for his neatly groomed handlebar mustache .
EARLY LIFE AND MINOR LEAGUE CAREER
Section::::Early life and minor league career .
Fingers was born in Steubenville , Ohio to George Michael Fingers and Edna Pearl
( née Stafford ) Fingers .
His father ( who had also played major league baseball for the St. Louis Cardinals and roomed with Stan Musial ) , worked in a Steubenville steel mill .
George Fingers came home from work fed - up one day , said " That 's it , we 're moving to California " , and sold the house for US$ 1,500 and bought a car and took the family to Cucamonga .
They could not afford hotels so they slept in sleeping bags beside the highway .
After getting to California George Fingers had to eventually go back to work in another steel mill .
Fingers attended Upland High School in the Californian city of Upland , and then one semester at Chaffey Junior College .
The Los Angeles Dodgers offered Fingers a signing bonus of $ 20,000 , but because they had a solid pitching staff , that included Sandy Koufax and Don Drysdale , were already winning pennants , and their farm system appeared to be full of talented players , he felt he had no chance to reach the major leagues for years .
He turned them down and signed for less money , a $ 13,000 signing bonus , with the Kansas City Athletics , on Christmas Eve 1964 .
At first the Athletics did not know whether to make him a pitcher or outfielder , but after deciding on pitcher , he was assigned to the Leesburg A 's of the Class A Florida State League for the 1965 season , then the Modesto Reds of the Class A California League in 1966 , and finally to the Birmingham A 's of the Class AA Southern League for two seasons , 1967 and 1968 .
Just nine days after he got married to his high school sweetheart and the Upland High School team statistician ( Jill ) , on minor league opening day 1967 in Birmingham , a ball hit Fingers in the face , breaking his cheekbone , jaw , and knocking out some teeth .
His jaw was wired shut for five weeks and when he returned he jumped every time the ball was hit ; it took him about half the remaining season to get used to being on the mound again .
MAJOR LEAGUE CAREER Section::::Major league career .
Fingers was a starter throughout his minor league career .
He had started 19 games in 1970 .
But a May 15 , 1971 start against the Royals in Kansas City was his last in regular rotation
( he gave up one run on four hits in five full innings ; final score Royals 5 –
A 's 4 ) .
He came in on May 21 , 1971 in the first inning against the Minnesota Twins in Oakland after Blue Moon Odom gave up three runs and three walks facing eight batters .
He pitched 5 - 1/3 allowing three hits and two runs ( Twins 10 – Oakland 1 ) .
After that his earliest entrance to a game was in the sixth inning , and only three times .
Mainly he came in the seventh , eighth , or ninth ( he came in once in the eleventh and once in the twelfth ) .
By the end of May 1971 his manager with the Athletics , Dick Williams , had made up his mind that Fingers was the late inning closer .
The following season , 1972 , Fingers entered the game in the fifth inning on four occasions , otherwise he entered in the sixth inning or later .
He did start two games in 1973 ( April 21 versus the California Angels at Oakland and May 7 against the Orioles at Baltimore ; his May 7 , 1973 start was the last of his career ) , other than that he came into the game no earlier than the sixth on three more occasions .
After that he rarely entered a game before the seventh inning for the rest of his career .
Fingers was on the Oakland Athletics team that accomplished the first modern - day " three - peat " , winning the World Series in ' 72 , ' 73 and ' 74 .
In 1974 , he won the World Series MVP Award while with Oakland , earning two saves and one win .
Just prior to the start of the 1974 World Series against the Los Angeles Dodgers , Fingers and Blue Moon Odom got into a fight in the A 's locker room after Odom made a comment about Fingers ' wife .
The incident lasted less than a minute , however , Fingers required six stitches on his head , and Odom sprained his ankle and had a noticeable limp .
With the end of baseball 's reserve clause , all players not under a multiyear contract were set to become free agents after the 1976 season .
Athletics ' owner Charlie Finley , believing he would not be able to afford to re - sign his key players , attempted to sell Fingers and Joe Rudi to the Boston Red Sox for $ 1 million each and Vida Blue to the New York Yankees for $ 1.5 million in June .
Bowie Kuhn , the Commissioner of Baseball , nullified the sale , saying that the transactions were " not in the best interests of baseball .
"
Finley sued Kuhn , and benched Fingers , Rudi , and Blue , saying that they belonged to other teams .
Members of the Athletics threatened to strike against Finley if they did not play , and he relented .
After the season , Fingers signed with the San Diego Padres as a free agent .
Fingers won the Rolaids Relief Man of the Year Award in 1977 , 1978 , and 1980 with the Padres .
After the 1980 season , on December 8 , the Padres traded Fingers , Gene Tenace , Bob Shirley , and a player to be named later ( later identified as Bob Geren ) to the St. Louis Cardinals for Terry Kennedy , John Littlefield , Al Olmsted , Mike Phillips , Kim Seaman , Steve Swisher , and John Urrea .
A few days later , the Cardinals traded Fingers , Ted Simmons , and Pete Vuckovich to the Milwaukee Brewers for Sixto Lezcano , Lary Sorensen , David Green , and Dave LaPoint .
In 1981 , Fingers won the Rolaids Relief Man of the Year Award , the American League ( AL )
Most Valuable Player Award , and AL Cy Young Award .
He saved 29 games for the 1982 Brewers , but he pitched most of the season in pain and was forced to miss the Brewers ' first ( and to date , only ) trip to the World Series , where they were beaten in seven games by the Cardinals .
Fingers missed the 1983 season with injury , and had a laminectomy to remove a herniated disk from his back in August 1984 .
His last major league appearance was on September 17 , 1985 against the Baltimore Orioles at Memorial Stadium .
He pitched in relief of Teddy Higuera in the bottom of the eighth inning , facing two batters .
He allowed a home run to Gary Roenicke , but he struck out Rick Dempsey to end the inning as the Orioles won 6 - 0 .
At the end of his career , after being released by the Brewers the previous season , he was offered a contract by Pete Rose to play for the Cincinnati Reds for 1986 , but owner Marge Schott had a " clean cut " policy for her players ( mandating that all players must be clean shaven ) .
Fingers 's reply to Reds general manager Bill Bergesch was : " Well , you tell Marge Schott to shave her Saint Bernard , and I 'll shave my moustache " .
FINGERS AND MODERN RELIEF PITCHING
Section::::Fingers and modern relief pitching .
When Fingers reached the major leagues , the role of relief pitchers was limited , as starting pitchers rarely left games while holding a lead ; but as team offense increased following the 1968 season , and especially with the American League 's introduction of the designated hitter in 1973 , managers became more willing to replace starters in the late innings with a lead in order to forestall any late rallies by opponents .
Through the 1960s , both leagues ' annual saves leaders tended toward totals of 20–25 saves ; few pitchers remained in the role more than two or three years , with significant exceptions such as Roy Face and knuckleballer Hoyt Wilhelm .
But in the 1970s , in an era allowing for greater opportunities for closers than had previously been available , Fingers ' excellence in relief allowed him to gradually increase his annual saves totals past 30 .
In 1980 he broke Wilhelm 's record of 227 saves , and eventually finished with 341 , a record that stood until Jeff Reardon passed it in 1992 .
Fingers is regarded as a pioneer of modern relief pitching , defining the role of the closer for years to come .
As had generally been true in baseball through the 1960s , Fingers was moved to the bullpen — and eventually to his role as a closer — due to struggles with starting .
Before Fingers ' time , a former starter 's renewed success in the bullpen led back to a spot in the starting rotation ; but since the successes of not only Fingers but also contemporaries such as Sparky Lyle and Goose Gossage , it has been widely accepted that an excellent pitcher might actually provide a greater benefit to his team as a closer than as a third or fourth starter .
( Gossage , for example , was moved to the starting rotation after a first few seasons in relief — and he got clobbered despite pitching 17 complete games and was then moved back to the bullpen to stay . )
As a result , later teams have been more willing to move successful starters — notably Dennis Eckersley , Dave Righetti , and John Smoltz — to the permanent role of closer , with no plans to bring them back to the rotation ( although Smoltz bucked that trend by successfully returning to the rotation in 2005 ) .
In 2006 , Bruce Sutter became the first pitcher in baseball history elected to the Hall of Fame who never started a game in his major league career .
MOUSTACHE Section::::Moustache .
In addition to his pitching ability , he was noted for his waxed handlebar moustache which he originally grew to get a $ 300 bonus from Athletics owner Charles O. Finley .
On the first day of spring training for the 1972 season , Reggie Jackson showed up with a beard .
In protest , Fingers and a few other players started going without shaving to force Jackson to shave off his beard , in the belief that management would also want Jackson to shave .
Instead , Finley , ever the showman who would do almost anything to sell tickets , then offered prize - money to the player who could best grow and maintain their facial hair until Opening Day .
April 15 versus Minnesota .
Fingers went all out for the monetary incentive offered by Finley and patterned his moustache after the images of the players of the late 19th century .
Taking it even further , Finley came up with " Moustache Day " at the ballpark , where any fan with a moustache could get in free .
Catfish Hunter and Ken Holtzman also went for the bonus , but Fingers with his Snidely Whiplash took the prize .
He later said , " Most of us would have grown one anywhere on our bodies for $ 300 " .
The players became known as the " Moustache Gang " .
Although most former Athletics players shaved their handlebar moustaches off after the team traded most of their players in 1975–76 , Fingers maintained his after signing with the San Diego Padres as a free agent in 1977 , and still has the moustache today .
HONORS Section::::Honors .
In 1992 he was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame , joining Wilhelm to become only the second reliever inducted ( Bruce Sutter and Rich Gossage have since followed , as has Dennis Eckersley , who was a starter for half of his career and a reliever for the other half ) .
In 1999 , he ranked Number 96 on The Sporting News list of Baseball 's Greatest Players , and was nominated as a finalist for the Major League Baseball All - Century Team .
Fingers later pitched a season in the short - lived Senior Professional Baseball League .
Fingers is one of only eight players who have had their numbers retired from more than one team .
In 2000 , Fingers was also inducted by the San Diego Hall of Champions into the honoring San Diego 's finest athletes both on and off the playing surface .
INCOME TAX CONTROVERSY
Section::::Income tax controversy .
Sports Illustrated reported on January 2 , 2007 that Fingers owed the state of Wisconsin ( in 2007 )
more than $ 1.4 million in income taxes dating back to his time with the Brewers ( including $ 1.1 million in interest ) and was at the time the seventh biggest tax delinquent in the state .
Fingers disputed the claim , saying he was shocked when he learned of it in 2005 and that taxes were properly withheld from his Brewers paychecks .
On August 15 , 2007 , the Associated Press reported that Fingers ' name had been removed from Wisconsin 's delinquent tax list the previous month .
" That 's all been taken care of " , he told the AP .
" I 've had more people try to tell me , ' You know , you owe 1.4 million dollars . '
I said , ' No , I do n't . '
We got all that squared away .
I had to go all the way back to 1981 on my income taxes .
That 's all been taken care of , and I did pay my taxes back then , so there 's no problem .
The revenue department 's happy with me right now , so it 's all been resolved . "
IN MEDIA BOOKS Section::::In media .
Section::::Books .
On April 1 , 2009 Rollie Fingers and co - author Christopher " Yellowstone " Ritter released : * Rollie 's Follies : A Hall of Fame Revue of Baseball Lists and Lore , Stats and Stories – Cincinnati , Ohio : Clerisy Press . .
The work is a non - fiction baseball book that combines elements of humor , anecdotal storytelling , odd lists and historical trivia .
The first book inspired a sequel , released March 16 , 2010 by Fingers and Ritter :
* The Rollie Fingers Baseball Bible : Lists and Lore , Stories and Stats Cincinnati , Ohio : Clerisy Press . .
TELEVISION APPEARANCES Section::::Television appearances .
Rollie Fingers and 4 other members of his family appeared on a 1983 episode of the game show Family Feud .
After the opening theme , to honor Fingers , host Richard Dawson led the crowd in a chorus of " Take Me Out to the Ball Game " .
Fingers also appeared in a pair of commercials for Pepsi Max , playing himself in a Field of Dreams setting along with other legendary players .
In one commercial , when the Pepsi Max delivery man replenishes an empty vending machine , Fingers appears to take his moustache off and give it to the delivery man , saying , " Great save , kid .
You deserve this . "
RADIO Section::::Radio .
In 1994/1995 a comedy segment entitled " Rollie TV " , concerning a fictitious cable television channel devoted solely to the life of Rollie Fingers and helmed by a Rollie Fingers obsessed host named Greg Shuttlecock , aired once a week on The Steve Dahl Radio Show on WMVP AM1000 in Chicago .
The idea and segment were created & performed by Jeffery C. Johnson and Jim Toth .
A " Rollie TV " skit had originally aired in 1993 on Toth & Johnson 's Chicago cable TV show " Color TV " and was then adapted into segments for radio .
SEE ALSO * Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame
* List of Major League Baseball annual saves leaders
* List of Major League Baseball all - time saves leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders
* Games finished REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Rollie Fingers Official Website
* Rollie 's Baseball Follies * Retrosheet * SABR Biography Project