TREATY OF PARIS ( 1783 )
The Treaty of Paris , signed in Paris by representatives of King George III of Great Britain and representatives of the United States of America on September 3 , 1783 , ended the American Revolutionary War .
The treaty set the boundaries between the British Empire in North America and the United States , on lines " exceedingly generous " to the latter .
Details included fishing rights and restoration of property and prisoners of war .
This treaty and the separate peace treaties between Great Britain and the nations that supported the American cause — France , Spain , and the Dutch Republic — are known collectively as the Peace of Paris .
Only Article 1 of the treaty , which acknowledges the United States ' existence as free , sovereign , and independent states , remains in force .
AGREEMENT Section::::Agreement .
Peace negotiations began in April 1782 , and continued through the summer .
Representing the United States were Benjamin Franklin , John Jay , Henry Laurens , and John Adams .
David Hartley and Richard Oswald represented Great Britain .
The treaty was signed at the Hotel d'York ( at present 56 ) in Paris on September 3 , 1783 , by Adams , Franklin , Jay , and Hartley .
Regarding the American Treaty , the key episodes came in September 1782 , when French Foreign Minister Vergennes proposed a solution that was strongly opposed by his ally , the United States .
France was exhausted by the war , and everyone wanted peace except for Spain , which insisted on continuing the war until it could capture Gibraltar from the British .
Vergennes came up with the deal that Spain would accept instead of Gibraltar .
The United States would gain its independence but be confined to the area east of the Appalachian Mountains .
Britain would take the area north of the Ohio River .
In the area south of that would be set up an independent Indian state under Spanish control .
It would be an Indian barrier state .
However , the Americans realized that they could get a better deal directly from London .
John Jay promptly told the British that he was willing to negotiate directly with them , cutting off France and Spain .
The British Prime Minister Lord Shelburne agreed .
He was in charge of the British negotiations ( some of which took place in his study at Lansdowne House , now a bar in the Lansdowne Club ) and he now saw a chance to split the United States away from France and make the new country a valuable economic partner .
The western terms were that the United States would gain all of the area east of the Mississippi River , north of Florida , and south of Canada .
The northern boundary would be almost the same as today .
The United States would gain fishing rights off Canadian coasts , and agreed to allow British merchants and Loyalists to try to recover their property .
It was a highly favorable treaty for the United States , and deliberately so from the British point of view .
Prime Minister Shelburne foresaw highly profitable two - way trade between Britain and the rapidly growing United States , as indeed came to pass .
Great Britain also signed separate agreements with France and Spain , and ( provisionally ) with the Netherlands .
In the treaty with Spain , the territories of East and West Florida were ceded to Spain ( without a clear northern boundary , resulting in a territorial dispute resolved by the Treaty of Madrid in 1795 ) .
Spain also received the island of Menorca ; the Bahama Islands , Grenada , and Montserrat , captured by the French and Spanish , were returned to Britain .
The treaty with France was mostly about exchanges of captured territory ( France 's only net gains were the island of Tobago , and Senegal in Africa ) , but also reinforced earlier treaties , guaranteeing fishing rights off Newfoundland .
Dutch possessions in the East Indies , captured in 1781 , were returned by Britain to the Netherlands in exchange for trading privileges in the Dutch East Indies , by a treaty which was not finalized until 1784 .
The United States Congress of the Confederation ratified the Treaty of Paris on January 14 , 1784 .
Copies were sent back to Europe for ratification by the other parties involved , the first reaching France in March 1784 .
British ratification occurred on April 9 , 1784 , and the ratified versions were exchanged in Paris on May 12 , 1784 .
TREATY KEY POINTS Section::::Treaty key points .
This treaty and the separate peace treaties between Great Britain and the nations that supported the American cause — France , Spain , and the Dutch Republic — are known collectively as the Peace of Paris .
Only Article 1 of the treaty , which acknowledges the United States ' existence as free sovereign and independent states , remains in force .
The borders of the USA changed in later years , which is a major reason for specific articles of the treaty to be superseded .
Preamble .
Declares the treaty to be " in the Name of the Most Holy and Undivided Trinity " ( followed by a reference to the Divine Providence ) states the bona fides of the signatories , and declares the intention of both parties to " forget all past misunderstandings and differences " and " secure to both perpetual peace and harmony " .
*
Britain acknowledges the United States ( New Hampshire , Massachusetts Bay , Rhode Island and Providence Plantations , Connecticut , New York , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Delaware , Maryland , Virginia , North Carolina , South Carolina and Georgia ) to be free , sovereign , and independent states , and that the British Crown and all heirs and successors relinquish claims to the Government , property , and territorial rights of the same , and every part thereof ; * * Establishing the boundaries of the United States , including but not limited to those between the United States and British North America ; * * Granting fishing rights to United States fishermen in the Grand Banks , off the coast of Newfoundland and in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence ; * * Recognizing the lawful contracted debts to be paid to creditors on either side ; * * The Congress of the Confederation will " earnestly recommend " to state legislatures to recognize the rightful owners of all confiscated lands and " provide for the restitution of all estates , rights , and properties , which have been confiscated belonging to real British subjects " ( Loyalists ) ; * * United States will prevent future confiscations of the property of Loyalists ; * * Prisoners of war on both sides are to be released ; all property of the British army ( including slaves ) now in the United States is to remain and be forfeited ; * * Great Britain and the United States are each to be given perpetual access to the Mississippi River ; * * Territories captured by Americans subsequent to the treaty will be returned without compensation ; * * Ratification of the treaty is to occur within six months from its signing .
* Eschatocol .
" Done at Paris , this third day of September in the year of our Lord , one thousand seven hundred and eighty - three . " CONSEQUENCES Section::::Consequences .
Historians have often commented that the treaty was very generous to the United States in terms of greatly enlarged boundaries .
Historians such as Alvord , Harlow , and Ritcheson have emphasized that British generosity was based on a statesmanlike vision of close economic ties between Britain and the United States .
The concession of the vast trans - Appalachian region was designed to facilitate the growth of the American population and create lucrative markets for British merchants , without any military or administrative costs to Britain .
The point was the United States would become a major trading partner .
As the French foreign minister Vergennes later put it , " The English buy peace rather than make it " .
Vermont was included within the boundaries because the state of New York insisted that Vermont was a part of New York , although Vermont was then under a government that considered Vermont not to be a part of the United States .
Privileges that the Americans had received from Britain automatically when they had colonial status ( including protection from pirates in the Mediterranean Sea ; see : the First Barbary War and the Second Barbary War ) were withdrawn .
Individual states ignored federal recommendations , under Article 5 , to restore confiscated Loyalist property , and also ignored Article 6 ( e.g. , by confiscating Loyalist property for " unpaid debts " ) .
Some , notably Virginia , also defied Article 4 and maintained laws against payment of debts to British creditors .
The British often ignored the provision of Article 7 about removal of slaves .
The actual geography of North America turned out not to match the details used in the treaty .
The Treaty specified a southern boundary for the United States , but the separate Anglo - Spanish agreement did not specify a northern boundary for Florida , and the Spanish government assumed that the boundary was the same as in the 1763 agreement by which they had first given their territory in Florida to Britain .
While that West Florida Controversy continued , Spain used its new control of Florida to block American access to the Mississippi , in defiance of Article 8 .
The treaty stated that the boundary of the United States extended from the " most northwesternmost point " of the Lake of the Woods ( now partly in Minnesota , partly in Manitoba , and partly in Ontario ) directly westward until it reached the Mississippi River .
But in fact the Mississippi does not extend that far northward ; the line going west from the Lake of the Woods never intersects the river .
Great Britain violated the treaty stipulation that they should relinquish control of forts in United States territory " with all convenient speed .
"
British troops remained stationed at six forts in the Great Lakes region , plus two at the north end of Lake Champlain .
The British also built an additional fort in present - day Ohio in 1794 , during the Northwest Indian War .
They found justification for these actions in the unstable and extremely tense situation that existed in the area following the war , in the failure of the United States government to fulfill commitments made to compensate loyalists for their losses , and in the British need for time to liquidate various assets in the region .
All posts were relinquished peacefully through diplomatic means as a result of the 1794 Jay Treaty .
They were : !
Name !
Present day location
Fort
au Fer Lake ChamplainChamplain ,
New York Fort Dutchman 's Point Lake ChamplainNorth Hero , Vermont Fort Lernoult ( including Fort Detroit ) Detroit RiverDetroit , Michigan Fort Mackinac Straits of MackinacMackinac Island , Michigan Fort Miami Maumee RiverMaumee , Ohio Fort Niagara Niagara RiverYoungstown , New York Fort Ontario Lake OntarioOswego , New York Fort Oswegatchie Saint Lawrence RiverOgdensburg , New York SEE
ALSO
* Ratification Day ( United States )
* List of United States treaties * Confederation Period , the era of United States history in the 1780s after the American Revolution and prior to the ratification of the U.S. Constitution * History of the United States ( 1776–89 )
* Diplomacy in the American Revolutionary War REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
Specialized essays by scholars
PRIMARY SOURCES
* Franklin , Benjamin .
The Papers of Benjamin Franklin : January 21 Through May 15 , 1783 ( Vol . 39 .
Yale University Press , 2009 )
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Treaty of Paris , 1783 ; International Treaties and Related Records , 1778–1974 ; General Records of the United States Government , Record Group 11 ; National Archives .
* Approval of the American victory in England Unique arch inscription commemorates " Liberty in N America Triumphant MDCCLXXXIII " *
The Paris Peace Treaty of September 30 , 1783 Text of the treaty provided by Yale Law School 's Avalon Project