LENZ 'S LAW
Lenz 's law ( pronounced ) , named after the physicist Emil Lenz who formulated it in 1834 , states that the direction of the current induced in a conductor by a changing magnetic field is such that the magnetic field created by the induced current opposes the initial changing magnetic field .
Or as informally , yet concisely summarised by D.J. Griffiths :
Lenz 's law is shown by the negative sign in Faraday 's law of induction : which indicates that the induced electromotive force formula_2 and the rate of change in magnetic flux formula_3 have opposite signs .
It is a qualitative law that specifies the direction of induced current but says nothing about its magnitude .
Lenz 's law explains the direction of many effects in electromagnetism , such as the direction of voltage induced in an inductor or wire loop by a changing current , or why eddy currents exert a drag force on moving objects in a magnetic field .
Lenz 's law can be seen as analogous to Newton 's third law in classic mechanics .
Schmitt , Ron .
Electromagnetics explained .
2002 .
Retrieved 16 July 2010 .
For a rigorous mathematical treatment , see electromagnetic induction and Maxwell 's equations .
OPPOSING CURRENTS
Section::::Opposing currents .
If a change in the magnetic field of current i induces another electric current , i , the direction of i is opposite that of the change in i.
If these currents are in two coaxial circular conductors ℓ and ℓ respectively , and both are initially 0 , then the currents
i and i must counter - rotate .
The opposing currents will repel each other as a result .
Lenz 's law states that the current induced in a circuit due to a change or a motion in a magnetic field is so directed as to oppose the change in flux and to exert a mechanical force opposing the motion .
EXAMPLE Section::::Example .
Currents bound inside the atoms of strong magnets can create counter - rotating currents in a copper or aluminum pipe .
This is shown by dropping the magnet through the pipe .
The descent of the magnet inside the pipe is observably slower than when dropped outside the pipe .
When a voltage is generated by a change in magnetic flux according to Faraday 's Law , the polarity of the induced voltage is such that it produces a current whose magnetic field opposes the change which produces it .
The induced magnetic field inside any loop of wire always acts to keep the magnetic flux in the loop constant .
In the examples below , if the flux is increasing , the induced field acts in opposition to it .
If it is decreasing , the induced field acts in the direction of the applied field to oppose the change .
DETAILED INTERACTION OF CHARGES IN THESE CURRENTS Section::::Detailed interaction of charges in these currents .
In electromagnetism , when charges move along electric field lines work is done on them , whether it involves storing potential energy ( negative work ) or increasing kinetic energy ( positive work ) .
When net positive work is applied to a charge q , it gains speed and momentum .
The net work on q thereby generates a magnetic field whose strength ( in units of magnetic flux density ( 1 tesla = 1 volt - second per square meter ) ) is proportional to the speed increase of q.
This magnetic field can interact with a neighboring charge q , passing on this momentum to it , and in return , q loses momentum .
The charge q can also act on q in a similar manner , by which it returns some of the momentum that it received from q. This back - and - forth component of momentum contributes to magnetic inductance .
The closer that q and q are , the greater the effect .
When q is inside a conductive medium such as a thick slab made of copper or aluminum , it more readily responds to the force applied to it by q.
The energy of q is not instantly consumed as heat generated by the current of q but is also stored in two opposing magnetic fields .
The energy density of magnetic fields tends to vary with the square of the magnetic field 's intensity ; however , in the case of magnetically non - linear materials such as ferromagnets and superconductors , this relationship breaks down .
CONSERVATION OF MOMENTUM Section::::Conservation of momentum .
Momentum must be conserved in the process , so if q is pushed in one direction , then q ought to be pushed in the other direction by the same force at the same time .
However , the situation becomes more complicated when the finite speed of electromagnetic wave propagation is introduced ( see retarded potential ) .
This means that for a brief period the total momentum of the two charges is not conserved , implying that the difference should be accounted for by momentum in the fields , as asserted by Richard P. Feynman .
Famous 19th century electrodynamicist James Clerk Maxwell called this the " electromagnetic momentum " .
Yet , such a treatment of fields may be necessary when Lenz 's law is applied to opposite charges .
It is normally assumed that the charges in question have the same sign .
If they do not , such as a proton and an electron , the interaction is different .
An electron generating a magnetic field would generate an EMF that causes a proton to accelerate in the same direction as the electron .
At first , this might seem to violate the law of conservation of momentum , but such an interaction is seen to conserve momentum if the momentum of electromagnetic fields is taken into account .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Eddy Currents and Lenz 's Law ( audio slideshow from the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory )
* MIT A brief video demonstrating Lenz 's law * with an aluminum block in an MRI * Eddy currents produced by magnet and copper pipe .