MOUNT MITCHELL Mount Mitchell is the highest peak of the Appalachian Mountains and the highest peak in mainland eastern North America .
It is located near Burnsville in Yancey County , North Carolina , in the Black Mountain subrange of the Appalachians , and about northeast of Asheville .
It is protected by Mount Mitchell State Park and surrounded by the Pisgah National Forest .
Mount Mitchell 's elevation is above sea level .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The peak is the highest mountain in the United States east of the Mississippi River , and the highest in all of eastern North America south of the Arctic Cordillera .
The nearest higher peaks are in the Black Hills of South Dakota and the highland foothills of Colorado .
The mountain 's topographic isolation is calculated from the nearest discernible single higher point :
Lone Butte , which is 1,189 miles ( 1,913 km ) away in southwestern Colorado . HISTORY Section::::History .
The mountain , previously known as Black Dome for its rounded shape , was named after Elisha Mitchell , a professor at the University of North Carolina , who first explored the Black Mountain region in 1835 , and determined that the height of the range exceeded by several hundred feet that of Mount Washington in New Hampshire , commonly thought at the time to be the highest point east of the Rocky Mountains .
Mitchell fell to his death at nearby Mitchell Falls in 1857 , having returned to verify his earlier measurements .
A road ( NC 128 ) connects the scenic Blue Ridge Parkway to a parking lot where a steep paved trail leads through a conifer forest to the summit .
The stone observation tower on the summit was torn down in late 2006 .
A new observation deck was constructed and opened to visitors in January 2009 .
Also on the summit is the tomb of Dr. Mitchell .
Mount Mitchell was formed during the Precambrian when marine deposits were metamorphosed into gneiss and schist .
These metasedimentary rocks were later uplifted during the Alleghenian orogeny .
The soils are well drained , dark brown and stony with fine - earth material ranging in texture from sandy clay loam to loam or sandy loam ; Burton and Craggey are the most common series around the summit .
ENVIRONMENT Section::::Environment .
The mountain 's summit is coated in a dense stand of Southern Appalachian spruce - fir forest , which consists primarily of two evergreen species — the red spruce and the Fraser fir .
Most of the mature Fraser firs , however , were killed off by the non - native Balsam
woolly adelgid in the latter half of the 20th century .
The high elevations also expose plant life to high levels of pollution , including acid precipitation in the form of rain , snow , and fog .
These acids damage the red spruce trees in part by releasing natural metals from the soil like aluminum , and by leaching important minerals .
To what extent this pollution harms the high - altitude ecosystem is debatable .
While the mountain is still mostly lush and green in the summer , many dead Fraser fir trunks can be seen due to these serious problems .
Repairing the damage is a difficult issue , as the pollutants are often carried in from long distances .
Sources can be local or hundreds of miles or kilometers away , requiring cooperation from as far away as the Midwest .
Wildflowers are abundant all summer long .
Young fir and spruce trees do well in the subalpine climate , and their pine cones feed the birds along with wild blueberry and blackberry shrubs .
The second highest point in eastern North America , Mount Craig at , is roughly a mile to the north of Mount Mitchell .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
The summit area of Mount Mitchell is marked by a humid continental climate ( Köppen Dfb ) bordering extremely close to a subalpine climate ( köppen climate classification Dfc ) , with mild summers and long , moderately cold winters , being more similar to southeastern Canada than the southeastern U.S ..
The monthly daily average temperature ranges from in January to in July .
The coldest temperature ever recorded in the state occurred there on January 21 , 1985 when it fell to , during a severe cold spell that brought freezing temperatures as far south as Miami .
It is also the coldest average reporting station in the state at ( based on data collected from 1971 to 2000 ) which is well below any other station .
Unlike the lower elevations in the surrounding regions , heavy snows often fall from December to March , with accumulating in the Great Blizzard of 1993 and in the January 2016 blizzard .
Snow flurries have been reported on the summit even in the summer months of June , July , and August .
Due to the high elevation , precipitation is heavy and reliable year - round , averaging for the year , with no month receiving less than of average precipitation .
The summit is often windy , with gusts that can blow up to .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * List of mountain peaks of North America
* List of mountain peaks of the United States
* List of mountains in North Carolina
* List of U.S. states by elevation
* List of Ultras of the United States
* Mountains - to - Sea Trail
*
The Assault on Mount Mitchell , bicycling endurance
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Mount Mitchell State Park