JOINT
A joint or articulation ( or articular surface ) is the connection made between bones in the body which link the skeletal system into a functional whole .
They are constructed to allow for different degrees and types of movement .
Some joints , such as the knee , elbow , and shoulder , are self - lubricating , almost frictionless , and are able to withstand compression and maintain heavy loads while still executing smooth and precise movements .
Other joints such as sutures between the bones of the skull permit very little movement ( only during birth ) in order to protect the brain and the sense organs .
The connection between a tooth and the jawbone is also called a joint , and is described as a fibrous joint known as a gomphosis .
Joints are classified both structurally and functionally .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Joints are mainly classified structurally and functionally .
Structural classification is determined by how the bones connect to each other , while functional classification is determined by the degree of movement between the articulating bones .
In practice , there is significant overlap between the two types of classifications .
CLINICAL , NUMERICAL CLASSIFICATION
* monoarticular – concerning one joint * oligoarticular or pauciarticular –
concerning 2–4 joints
* polyarticular – concerning 5 or more joints STRUCTURAL CLASSIFICATION ( BINDING TISSUE )
Section::::Structural classification ( binding tissue ) .
Structural classification names and divides joints according to the type of binding tissue that connects the bones to each other .
There are three structural classifications of joints :
* fibrous joint – joined by dense regular connective tissue that is rich in collagen fibers * cartilaginous joint – joined by cartilage .
There are two types : primary cartilaginous joints composed of hyaline cartilage , and secondary cartilaginous joints composed of hyaline cartilage covering the articular surfaces of the involved bones with fibrocartilage connecting them .
* synovial joint – not directly joined – the bones have a synovial cavity and are united by the dense irregular connective tissue that forms the articular capsule that is normally associated with accessory ligaments .
* facet joint – joint between two articular processes between two vertebrae .
FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION ( MOVEMENT ) Section::::Functional classification ( movement ) .
Joints can also be classified functionally according to the type and degree of movement they allow : Joint movements are described with reference to the basic anatomical planes .
* synarthrosis – permits little or no mobility .
Most synarthrosis joints are fibrous joints ( e.g. , skull sutures ) .
* amphiarthrosis – permits slight mobility .
Most amphiarthrosis joints are cartilaginous joints ( e.g. , intervertebral discs ) .
* synovial joint ( also known as a diarthrosis ) – freely movable .
Synovial joints can in turn be classified into six groups according to the type of movement they allow : plane joint , ball and socket joint , hinge joint , pivot joint , condyloid joint and saddle joint .
Joints can also be classified , according to the number of axes of movement they allow , into nonaxial ( gliding , as between the proximal ends of the ulna and radius ) , monoaxial ( uniaxial ) , biaxial and multiaxial .
Another classification is according to the degrees of freedom allowed , and distinguished between joints with one , two or three degrees of freedom .
A further classification is according to the number and shapes of the articular surfaces : flat , concave and convex surfaces .
Types of articular surfaces include trochlear surfaces .
BIOMECHANICAL CLASSIFICATION Section::::Biomechanical classification .
Joints can also be classified based on their anatomy or on their biomechanical properties .
According to the anatomic classification , joints are subdivided into simple and compound , depending on the number of bones involved , and into complex and combination joints :
* Simple joint : two articulation surfaces ( e.g. shoulder joint , hip joint ) *
* Compound joint : three or more articulation surfaces ( e.g. radiocarpal joint ) * * Complex joint : two or more articulation surfaces and an articular disc or meniscus ( e.g. knee joint )
* ANATOMICAL Section::::Anatomical .
The joints may be classified anatomically into the following groups :
* Joints of hand * * Elbow joints
* * Wrist joints *
* Axillary articulations *
* Sternoclavicular joints *
* Vertebral articulations
*
* Temporomandibular joints
*
* Sacroiliac joints *
* Hip joints * * Knee joints * * Articulations of foot * CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Clinical significance .
Damaging the cartilage of joints ( articular cartilage ) or the bones and muscles that stabilize the joints can lead to joint dislocations and osteoarthritis .
Swimming is a great way to exercise the joints with minimal damage .
A joint disorder is termed arthropathy , and when involving inflammation of one or more joints the disorder is called arthritis .
Most joint disorders involve arthritis , but joint damage by external physical trauma is typically not termed arthritis .
Arthropathies are called polyarticular ( multiarticular ) when involving many joints and monoarticular when involving only a single joint .
Arthritis is the leading cause of disability in people over the age of 55 .
There are many different forms of arthritis , each of which has a different cause .
The most common form of arthritis , osteoarthritis ( also known as degenerative joint disease ) , occurs following trauma to the joint , following an infection of the joint or simply as a result of aging and the deterioration of articular cartilage .
Furthermore , there is emerging evidence that abnormal anatomy may contribute to early development of osteoarthritis .
Other forms of arthritis are rheumatoid arthritis and psoriatic arthritis , which are autoimmune diseases in which the body is attacking itself .
Septic arthritis is caused by joint infection .
Gouty arthritis is caused by deposition of uric acid crystals in the joint that results in subsequent inflammation .
Additionally , there is a less common form of gout that is caused by the formation of rhomboidal - shaped crystals of calcium pyrophosphate .
This form of gout is known as pseudogout .
Temporomandibular joint syndrome ( TMJ ) involves the jaw joints and can cause facial pain , clicking sounds in the jaw , or limitation of jaw movement , to name a few symptoms .
It is caused by psychological tension and misalignment of the jaw ( malocclusion ) , and may be affecting as many as 75 million Americans .
HISTORY ETYMOLOGY Section::::History .
Section::::Etymology .
The English word joint is a past participle of the verb join , and can be read as joined .
Joint is derived from Latin iunctus , past participle of the Latin verb iungere , join together , unite , connect , attach .
The English term articulation is derived from Latin articulatio .
Humans have also developed lighter , more fragile joint bones over time due to the decrease in physical activity compared to thousands of years ago .
SEE ALSO
* Arthrology * Cracking joints
* Kinesiology
* Ligament * Replacement joint REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Synovial joints Illustrations and Classification