SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
The United States Social Security Administration ( SSA ) is an independent agency of the U.S. federal government that administers Social Security , a social insurance program consisting of retirement , disability , and survivors ' benefits .
To qualify for most of these benefits , most workers pay Social Security taxes on their earnings ; the claimant 's benefits are based on the wage earner 's contributions .
Otherwise benefits such as Supplemental Security Income ( SSI ) are given based on need .
The Social Security Administration was established by a law codified at .
Its current leader , Deputy Commissioner of Operations Nancy Berryhill , was acting commissioner from January 19 , 2017 through November 17 , 2017 .
SSA is headquartered in Woodlawn , Maryland , just to the west of Baltimore , at what is known as Central Office .
The agency includes 10 regional offices , 8 processing centers , approximately 1300 field offices , and 37 Teleservice Centers . , about 60,000 people were employed by SSA .
Headquarters non - supervisory employees of SSA are represented by American Federation of Government Employees Local 1923 .
Social Security is the largest social welfare program in the United States .
For 2014 , the net cost of Social Security was $ 906.4 billion , an amount corresponding to 21 % of US Federal Government expenditures .
It has been named the 12th best place to work in the U.S. federal government ( out of 18 large agencies ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Social Security Act created a Social Security Board ( SSB ) , to oversee the administration of the new program .
It was created as part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal with the signing of the Social Security Act of 1935 on August 14 , 1935 .
The Board consisted of three presidentially appointed executives , and started with no budget , no staff , and no furniture .
It obtained a temporary budget from the Federal Emergency Relief Administration headed by Harry Hopkins .
The first counsel for the new agency was Thomas Elliott , one of Felix Frankfurter 's " happy hot dogs . "
The first Social Security office opened in Austin , Texas , on October 14 , 1936 Social Security taxes were first collected in January 1937 , along with the first one - time , lump - sum payments .
The first person to receive monthly retirement benefits was Ida May Fuller of Brattleboro , Vermont .
Her first check , dated January 31 , 1940 was in the amount of US$ 22.54 .
In 1939 , the Social Security Board merged into a cabinet - level Federal Security Agency , which included the SSB , the U.S. Public Health Service , the Civilian Conservation Corps , and other agencies .
In January 1940 , the first regular ongoing monthly benefits began .
In 1946 , the SSB was renamed the Social Security Administration under President Harry S. Truman 's Reorganization Plan .
In 1953 , the Federal Security Agency was abolished and SSA was placed under the Department of Health , Education , and Welfare , which became the Department of Health and Human Services in 1980 .
In 1994 , President Bill Clinton signed into law returning SSA to the status of an independent agency in the executive branch of government .
In 1972 , Cost of Living Adjustments ( COLAs ) were introduced into SSA programs to deal with the effects of inflation on fixed incomes .
LEADERS Section::::Leaders .
Social Security Commissioners * Arthur J. Altmeyer ( 1937–1953 )
* William L. Mitchell ( Acting ) ( 1953 )
* John W. Tramburg ( 1953–1954 )
* Charles I. Schottland ( 1954–1958 )
* William L. Mitchell ( 1959–1962 ) * Robert M. Ball ( 1962–1973 )
* Arthur E. Hess ( Acting ) ( 1973 )
* James B. Cardwell ( 1973–1977 )
* Don I. Wortman ( Acting ) ( 1977–1978 )
* Stanford G. Ross ( 1978–1979 )
* William J. Driver ( 1980–1981 ) * Herbert R. Doggette ( Acting ) ( 1981 ) * John A. Svahn ( 1981–1983 )
* Martha A. McSteen ( Acting ) ( 1983–1986 ) * Dorcas R. Hardy ( 1986–1989 ) * Gwendolyn S. King ( 1989–1992 )
* Louis D. Enoff ( Acting ) ( 1992–1993 ) * Lawrence H. Thompson ( Acting ) ( 1993 ) * Shirley S. Chater ( 1993–1997 )
* John J. Callahan ( Acting ) ( 1997 )
* Kenneth S. Apfel ( 1997–2001 )
* William Halter ( Acting ) ( 2001 ) * Larry G. Massanari ( Acting ) ( 2001 )
* Jo Anne B. Barnhart ( 2001–2007 ) * Linda S. McMahon ( Acting ) ( 2007 ) * Michael J. Astrue ( 2007–2013 ) * Carolyn W. Colvin ( Acting ) ( 2013–2017 )
* Nancy A. Berryhill ( Acting ) ( 2017–present ) HEADQUARTERS Section::::Headquarters .
SSA was one of the first federal agencies to have its national headquarters outside of Washington , D.C. , or its adjacent suburbs .
It was located in Baltimore initially due to the need for a building that was capable of holding the unprecedented amount of paper records that would be needed .
Nothing suitable was available in Washington in 1936 , so the Social Security Board selected the Candler Building on Baltimore 's harbor as a temporary location .
Soon after locating there , construction began on a permanent building for SSA in Washington that would meet their requirements for record storage capacity .
However , by the time the new building was completed , World War II had started , and the building was commandeered by the War Department .
By the time the war ended , it was judged too disruptive to relocate the agency to Washington .
The Agency remained in the Candler Building until 1960 , when it relocated to its newly built headquarters in Woodlawn .
The road on which the headquarters is located , built especially for SSA , is named Security Boulevard ( Route 122 ) and has since become one of the major arteries connecting Baltimore with its western suburbs .
Security Boulevard is also the name of SSA 's exit from the nearby Baltimore Beltway ( Interstate 695 ) .
A nearby shopping center has been named Security Square Mall , and Woodlawn is often referred to informally as " Security . "
Interstate 70 , which runs for thousands of miles from Utah to Maryland , terminates in a park and ride lot that adjoins the SSA campus .
Due to space constraints and ongoing renovations , many headquarters employees work in leased space throughout the Woodlawn area .
Other SSA components are located elsewhere .
For example , the headquarters ( also known as Central Office ) of SSA 's Office of Disability Adjudication and Review is located in Falls Church , Virginia .
COVERAGE Section::::Coverage .
SSA 's coverage under the Social Security Acts originally extended to nearly all workers in the continental U.S. and the territories of Alaska , Hawaii , Guam and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands below the age of 65 .
All workers in interstate commerce and industry were required to enter the program , except railroad , state and local government workers .
In 1939 , the age restriction for entering Social Security was eliminated .
Railroad workers were covered by the Railroad Retirement Board before Social Security was founded .
Today , they still are , though a portion of each railroad pension is designated as " equivalent " to Social Security .
Railroad workers also participate in Medicare .
Most state and local government workers were eventually brought into the Social Security system under " Section 218 Agreements " .
The original 218 interstate instrumentalities were signed in the 1950s , and all states have a Section 218 agreement with the federal government 's Social Security Administration .
The Social Security Handbook defines an " interstate instrumentality " .
The provisions of Section 218 of the Social Security Act and the instrumentalities agreement and subsequent modifications determine Social Security and Medicare benefits or Medicare - only coverage for state and local government employees enrolled in state and local government retirement systems .
All state and local government employees hired since 1986 , or whom are covered by Section 218 Agreements , participate in Medicare even if not covered by Social Security financial benefits .
To see how state and local government employees are covered by Social Security and Medicare see the Federal - State reference guide appendix .
Other local and state employees were brought into coverage under a 1991 Social Security law that required these employees to join Social Security if their employer did not provide them with a pension plan .
Some state and local governments continue to maintain pension plans and have not executed Section 218 agreements ; if so , those workers may not participate in Social Security taxation .
( If workers have previously paid appropriate Social Security taxation or an equivalent , their Social Security benefits are reduced by a rule known as the Windfall Elimination Provision ; there is also a similar Government Pension Offset for their spouses . )
OLD AGE , SURVIVORS AND DISABILITY Section::::Old age , survivors and disability .
SSA administers the retirement , survivors , and disabled social insurance programs , which can provide monthly benefits to aged or disabled workers , their spouses and children , and to the survivors of insured workers .
In 2010 , more than 54 million Americans received approximately $ 712 billion in Social Security benefits .
The programs are primarily financed by taxes which employers , employees , and the self - insured pay annually .
These revenues are placed into a special trust fund .
These programs are collectively known as Retirement , Survivors , Disability Insurance ( RSDI ) .
SSA administers its disability program partly through its Office of Disability Adjudication and Review ( ODAR ) , which has regional offices and hearing offices across the United States .
ODAR publishes a manual , called HALLEX , which contains instructions for its employees regarding how to implement its guiding principles and procedures .
The RSDI program is the primary benefits program administered by the U.S. federal government , and for some beneficiaries is the vital source of income .
Increasing access to this benefit program for low - income or homeless individuals is one of SSA 's goals .
SSA is a member of the United States Interagency Council on Homelessness and works with other municipal , county , state , local and federal partners to increase access and approval for SSI / SSDI benefits who are eligible .
SUPPLEMENTAL SECURITY INCOME ( SSI ) Section::::Supplemental Security Income ( SSI ) .
SSA also administers the Supplemental Security Income ( SSI ) program , which is needs - based , for the aged , blind , or disabled .
This program originally went under two separate names , Old Age Assistance ( originally Title I of the Social Security Act of 1935 ) , and Disability Assistance ( added in 1946 ) .
In 1973 , these assistance programs were renamed and reassigned to SSA .
SSI recipients are paid out of the general revenue of the United States of America .
In addition , some states pay additional SSI funds .
As of January 2018 , over 8 million people receive SSI .
For some claimants , this program is harder to receive than funds from RSDI .
To warrant a processing time of anything more than a day and an immediate denial , certain specific criteria must be met , including citizenship status , having less than $ 2,000.00 in countable financial resources , or having countable income of less than $ 718.00 per month from any source .
Disposal of a financial resource ( i.e. , a deliberate spend - down to fall under SSI resource ceilings ) can prevent a person from receiving SSI benefits for a period up to 36 months .
Every person with or without a Social Security Number is eligible to apply .
But if a person does not meet any of the above criteria or is not a documented resident of the United States , his or her claim can only be taken on paper and will be immediately denied .
Even documented residents with legal permanent resident status after August 1996 are immediately denied unless they meet some or all of the SSI criteria listed above .
MEDICARE
Section::::Medicare .
The administration of the Medicare program is a responsibility of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services , but SSA offices are used for determining initial eligibility , some processing of premium payments , and for limited public contact information .
They also administer a financial needs - based program which supplements Medicare Part D program enrollees .
This program may be applied for at any time , even previous to enrollment in Part D.
It only provides no more than a $ 40.00 relief for monthly Medicare Part D premiums .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
To ensure consistent and efficient treatment of Social Security beneficiaries across its vast bureaucracy , SSA has compiled a giant book known as the Program Operations Manual System ( POMS ) which governs practically all aspects of SSA 's internal operations .
POMS describes , in excruciating detail , a huge variety of situations regularly encountered by SSA personnel , and the exact policies and procedures that apply to each situation .
AUTOMATION
Section::::Automation .
While the establishment of Social Security predated the invention of the modern digital computer , punched card data processing was a mature technology , and the Social Security system made extensive use of automated unit record equipment from the program 's inception .
This allowed the Social Security Administration to achieve a high level of efficiency .
SSA expenses have always been a small fraction of benefits paid .
As a percentage of assets , the administration costs are 0.39 % .
ADJUDICATION Section::::Adjudication .
SSA operates its own administrative adjudication system , which has original jurisdiction when claims are denied in part or in full .
SSA decisions are issued by Administrative Law Judges and Senior Attorney Adjudicators ( supported by about 6,000 staff employees ) at locations throughout the United States of the U.S. Office of Disability Adjudication and Review ( ODAR ) , who hear and decide challenges to SSA decisions .
Dissatisfied claimants can appeal to ODAR 's Appeals Council , and if still dissatisfied can appeal to a U.S. District Court .
Over the years , ODAR has developed its own procedural system , which is documented in the Hearings and Appeals Litigation Law Manual ( HALLEX ) .
ODAR was formerly known as the Office of Hearings and Appeals ( OHA ) and , prior to the 1970s , the Bureau of Hearings and Appeals .
The name was changed to ODAR in 2007 to reflect the fact that about 75 % of the agency 's docket consists of disability cases .
ODAR also adjudicates disputes relating to retirement claims and has jurisdiction when the paternity of a claimant or the validity of a marriage is at issue when a claim is filed for benefits under the earnings record of a spouse or parent .
The agency also adjudicates a limited number of Medicare claim issues , which is a residual legacy from when SSA was part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services .
CRITICISM AND CONTROVERSY Section::::Criticism and controversy .
Bloomberg reported that SSA made a $ 32.3 billion mistake when reporting 2009 U.S. wage statistics .
The error when corrected , further reduces the average 2009 U.S. wage to $ 39,055 .
In 2009 the average U.S. wage was reported as $ 39,269 .
BABY NAME POPULARITY REPORT Section::::Baby name popularity report .
Each year , just before Mother 's Day , SSA releases a list of the names most commonly given to newborn babies in the United States in the previous year , based on applications for Social Security cards .
The report includes the 1,000 most common names for both genders .
The Popular Baby Names page on the SSA website provides the complete list and allows searches for past years and particular names .
SEE ALSO
* American welfare state * Government operations *
Social Security Death Index * Social Security disability insurance * Michael J. Astrue , Commissioner of the Social Security Administration from 2007 to 2013 * NOSSCR , National Organization of Social Security Claimants ' Representatives
* Richardson v. Perales * Ticket to Work , SSA 's Ticket to Work Program
*
Title 20 of the Code of Federal Regulations
* Data.gov * USAFacts REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Social Security Disability Advocate 's Handbook , by David Traver , James Publishing , 2006 ,
* " Social Security Handbook , Germania Publishing , 2006 .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Social Security Administration in the Federal Register
* Papers of Charles I. Schottland , former Commissioner of Social Security , Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library
* SSA Pub .
No 25 - 1556 .
Teleservice Representative Basic Training Curriculum Introduction Unit 1 Lessons
01 - 08 Student .
pp .
7–15 .
Social Security Administration .
April 2006 .
* Social Security Office Locator