GLUTINOUS
RICE
Glutinous rice ( Oryza sativa var .
glutinosa ; also called sticky rice , sweet rice or waxy rice ) is a type of rice grown mainly in Southeast and East Asia and the eastern parts of South Asia , which has opaque grains , very low amylose content , and is especially sticky when cooked .
While it is widely consumed across Asia , it is only a staple food in northeastern Thailand and Laos .
It is called glutinous ( Latin : glūtinōsus ) in the sense of being glue - like or sticky , and not in the sense of containing gluten ( which it does not ) .
While often called " sticky rice " , it differs from non - glutinous strains of japonica rice which also become sticky to some degree when cooked .
There are numerous cultivars of glutinous rice , which include japonica , indica and tropical japonica strains .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In China , glutinous rice has been grown for at least 2,000 years .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Glutinous rice is grown in Laos , Thailand , Cambodia , Vietnam , Malaysia , Indonesia , Myanmar , Nepal , Bangladesh , Northeast India , China , Japan , Korea , Taiwan , and the Philippines .
An estimated 85 % of Lao rice production is of this type .
The rice has been recorded in the region for at least 1,100 years .
The improved rice varieties ( in terms of yield ) adopted throughout Asia during the Green Revolution were non - glutinous , and Lao farmers rejected them in favor of their traditional sticky varieties .
Over time , higher - yield strains of glutinous rice have become available from the Lao National Rice Research Programme .
By 1999 , more than 70 % of the area along the Mekong River Valley were of these newer strains .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Glutinous rice is distinguished from other types of rice by having no ( or negligible amounts of ) amylose , and high amounts of amylopectin ( the two components of starch ) .
Amylopectin is responsible for the sticky quality of glutinous rice .
The difference has been traced to a single mutation that was selected for by farmers .
Like all types of rice , glutinous rice does not contain dietary gluten ( i.e. does not contain glutenin and gliadin ) , and should be safe for gluten - free diets .
Glutinous rice can be used either milled or unmilled ( that is , with the bran removed or not removed ) .
Milled glutinous rice is white and fully opaque ( unlike non - glutinous rice varieties , which are somewhat translucent when raw ) , whereas the bran can give unmilled glutinous rice a purple or black color .
Black and purple glutinous rice are distinct strains from white glutinous rice .
In developing Asia , there is little regulation , and some governments have issued advisories about toxic dyes being added to colour adulterated rice .
Both black and white glutinous rice can be cooked as discrete grains , or ground into flour and cooked as a paste or gel .
USE IN FOODS Section::::Use in foods .
Sticky rice is used in many recipes throughout Southeast and East Asia .
ASSAMESE Section::::Assamese .
Sticky rice called bora saul is the core component of Assamese sweets , snacks , and breakfast .
This rice is widely used in the traditional sweets of Assam , which are very different from the traditional sweets of India whose basic component is milk .
Such traditional sweets in Assam are Pitha ( Narikolor pitha , Til pitha , Ghila pitha , Tel pitha , Kettle pitha , etc . ) .
Also , its powder form is used as breakfast or other light meal directly with milk .
They are called Pitha guri ( If powder was done without frying the rice , by just crushing it after soaking ) or Handoh guri ( If rice is dry fried first , and then crushed ) .
The soaked rice is also cooked with no added water inside a special kind of bamboo ( called sunga saul bnaah ) .
This meal is called sunga saul .
During religious ceremonies , Assamese people make Mithoi ( Kesa mithoi and Poka mithoi ) using Gnud with it .
Sometimes Bhog , Payakh and Khir are also made from it using milk and sugar with it .
Different Assamese communities make rice beer from it which is preferred more than other rice , as it is sweeter and more alcoholic .
They also offer this beer to their gods and ancestors ( demi - gods ) .
Rice cooked with it is also taken directly as lunch or dinner on rare occasions .
BANGLADESHI Section::::Bangladeshi .
In Bangladesh , especially in the Chittagong , Cox 's Bazar and Sylhet areas , the sticky rice called bini dhan(unhusked sticky rice ) is very popular .
Both white and pink varieties are cultivated at many homestead farms .
Husked sticky rice is called bini choil ( chal ) in some dialects .
Boiled or steamed bini choil is called Bini Bhat .
With meat or fish curry and grated coconut , Bini Bhat is a popular breakfast .
Sometimes it is eaten with a splash of sugar , salt , and coconut only without any curry .
Bin dhan also used to make khoi ( pop rice like popcorn ) and chida ( bitten husked rice ) .
A part of these many other sweet items made of bini choil are popular .
One of the favorite pitas made of bini choil is atikka pita ( pita).It is made with the mixture of cubed or small sliced coconut , sugar or brown sugar , ripe banana and bini choil wrapped with banana leaf and steamed .
Another delicacy is Patishapta pita made of ground bini choil .
Ground bini choil is sprayed over a hot pan and a mixture of grated coconut , sugar , milk powder ; then ghee is sprayed over that and rolled out .
Dumplings made of powdered fried bini choil called laru .
First bini choil is fried and ground into flour .
This flour is mixed with sugar or brown sugar , and ghee or butter and is made into small balls or dumplings .
One kind of porridge or khir made of bini choil is called modhu ( honey )
bhat .
This modhu bhat becomes naturally sweet without mixing any sugar .
It is one of the delicacies of local people .
To make modhu bhat first prepare some normal paddy or rice ( dhan ) for germination by soaking it in the water for few days .
After coming out of little sprout dry the paddy and husk and grind the husked rice called jala choil into flour .
It tastes sweet .
Mixing this sweet flour with freshly boiled or steamed warm bini bhat and then fermenting the mixture overnight yields modhu bhat .
It is eaten either on its own or with milk , jaggery or grated coconut .
BURMESE
Section::::Burmese .
Glutinous rice , called kao hnyin ( ) , is very popular in Myanmar ( also known as Burma ) .
* Kao hnyin baung ( ) is a breakfast dish with boiled peas ( pèbyouk ) or with a variety of fritters , such as urad dal ( baya gyaw ) , served on a banana leaf .
It may be cooked wrapped in a banana leaf , often with peas , and served with a sprinkle of salted toasted sesame seeds and often grated coconut .
* The purple variety , known as kao hynin ngacheik ( ) , is equally popular cooked as ngacheik paung .
* They may both be cooked and pounded into cakes with sesame called hkaw bouk , another favourite version in the north among the Shan and the Kachin , and served grilled or fried .
*
The Htamanè pwè festival ( ) takes place on the full moon of Dabodwè ( )
( February ) , when htamanè ( ) is cooked in a huge wok .
Two men , each with a wooden spoon the size of an oar , and a third man coordinate the action of folding and stirring the contents , which include kao hnyin , ngacheik , coconut shavings , peanuts , sesame and ginger in peanut oil .
* Si htamin ( ) is glutinous rice cooked with turmeric and onions in peanut oil , and served with toasted sesame and crisp - fried onions ; it is a popular breakfast like kao hnyin baung and ngacheik paung .
* Paung din ( ) or " Kao hyin kyi tauk " ( ) is another ready - to - eat portable form cooked in a segment of bamboo .
When the bamboo is peeled off , a thin skin remains around the rice and also gives off a distinctive aroma .
*
Mont let kauk ( ) is made from glutinous rice flour ; it is donut - shaped and fried like baya gyaw , but eaten with a dip of jaggery or palm sugar syrup .
* Nga pyaw douk ( ) or " Kao hynin htope " ( ) , banana in glutinous rice , wrapped in banana leaf and steamed and served with grated coconut - another favourite snack , like kao hnyin baung and mont let kauk , sold by street hawkers .
*
Mont lone yei baw ( ) are glutinous rice balls with jaggery inside , thrown into boiling water in a huge wok , and ready to serve as soon as they resurface .
Their preparation is a tradition during Thingyan , the Burmese New Year festival .
* Htoe mont ( ) , glutinous rice cake with raisins , cashews and coconut shavings , is a traditional dessert for special occasions .
It is appreciated as a gift item from Mandalay .
CHINESE Section::::Chinese .
In the Chinese language , glutinous rice is known as nuòmǐ ( 糯米 ) or chu̍t - bí ( 秫米 ) in Hokkien .
Glutinous rice is also often ground to make glutinous rice flour .
This flour is made into niangao and sweet - filled dumplings tangyuan , both of which are commonly eaten at Chinese New Year .
It also used as a thickener and for baking .
Glutinous rice or glutinous rice flour are both used in many Chinese bakery products and in many varieties of dim sum .
They produce a flexible , resilient dough , which can take on the flavors of whatever other ingredients are added to it .
Cooking usually consists of steaming or boiling , sometimes followed by pan - frying or deep - frying .
Sweet glutinous rice is eaten with red bean paste .
Nuòmǐ fàn ( 糯米飯 ) , is steamed glutinous rice usually cooked with Chinese sausage , chopped Chinese mushrooms , chopped barbecued pork , and optionally dried shrimp or scallop ( the recipe varies depending on the cook 's preference ) .
Zongzi ( Traditional Chinese 糭子/糉子 , Simplified Chinese 粽子 ) is a dumpling consisting of glutinous rice and sweet or savory fillings wrapped in large flat leaves ( usually bamboo ) , which is then boiled or steamed .
It is especially eaten during the Dragon Boat Festival , but may be eaten at any time of the year .
It is popular as an easily transported snack , or a meal to consume while traveling .
It is a common food among Chinese in Hong Kong , Singapore and Malaysia .
Cifangao ( Traditional Chinese 糍飯糕 , Simplified Chinese 糍饭糕 ) is a popular breakfast food originating in Eastern China consisting of cooked glutinous rice compressed into squares or rectangles , and then deep - fried .
Additional seasoning and ingredients such as beans , zha cai , and sesame seeds may be added to the rice for added flavour .
It has a similar appearance and external texture to hash browns .
Cifantuan ( Traditional Chinese 糍飯糰 , Simplified Chinese 糍饭团 ) is another breakfast food consisting of a piece of youtiao tightly wrapped in cooked glutinous rice , with or without additional seasoning ingredients .
Japanese onigiri resembles this Chinese food .
Lo mai gai ( 糯米雞 ) is a dim sum dish consisting of glutinous rice with chicken in a lotus - leaf wrap , which is then steamed .
It is served as a dim sum dish in Hong Kong , Singapore , and Malaysia .
Ba bao fan ( 八寶飯 ) , or " eight treasure rice " , is a dessert made from glutinous rice , steamed and mixed with lard , sugar , and eight kinds of fruits or nuts .
HAKKA Section::::Hakka .
A distinctive feature of Hakka cuisine is its variety of steamed snack - type buns , dumplings and patties made with a dough of coarsely ground rice , or ban .
Collectively known as " rice snacks " , some kinds are filled with various salty or sweet ingredients .
Common examples of rice snacks made with ban from glutinous or sticky rice and non - glutinous rice include Aiban ( mugwort patty ) , Caibao ( turnip bun)[This ' turnip ' is not the Western turnip .
The proper name is yam bean .
[ In Mandarin Chinese , it is known as dòushǔ(豆薯 ) or liáng shǔ ( 涼薯 ) ]
Ziba ( sticky rice balls ) and Bantiao ( Mianpaban or flat rice noodles ) .
Aiban encompasses several varieties of steamed patties and dumplings of various shapes and sizes , consisting of an outer layer made of glutinous ban dough filled with salty or sweet ingredients .
It gets its name from the aromatic ai grass ( mugwort ) , which after being dried , powdered and mixed with the ban , gives the dough a green color and an intriguing tea - like taste .
Typical salty fillings include ground pork , mushrooms , and shredded white turnips .
The most common sweet filling is made with red beans .
Caibao is a generic term for all types of steamed buns with various sorts of filling .
Hakka - style caibao are distinctive in that the enclosing skin is made with glutinous rice dough in the place of wheat flour dough .
Besides ground pork , mushrooms and shredded turnips , fillings may include ingredients such as dried shrimp and dry fried - shallot flakes .
Ziba is glutinous rice dough which , after steaming in a big container , is mashed into a sticky , putty - like mass from which small patties are formed and coated with a layer of sugary peanut powder .
It has no filling .
FILIPINO Section::::Filipino .
In the Philippines , glutinous rice is known as malagkit in Tagalog or pilit in Visayan .
Both meaning " sticky " .
The most common way glutinous rice is prepared in the Philippines is through soaking uncooked glutinous rice in water or coconut milk ( usually overnight ) and then grinding it into a thick paste ( traditionally with stone mills ) .
This produces a rich and smooth viscous rice dough known as galapóng , which is the basis for numerous rice cakes in the Philippines .
However , in modern preparation methods , galapong is sometimes made directly from dry glutinous rice flour ( or from commercial Japanese mochiko ) , with poorer - quality results .
Galapong was traditionally allowed to ferment , which is still required for certain dishes .
A small amount of starter culture of microorganisms ( tapay or bubod ) or palm wine ( tubâ ) may be traditionally added to rice being soaked to hasten the fermentation .
These can be substituted with yeast or baking soda in modern versions .
Other versions of galapong may also be treated with wood ash lye .
Dessert delicacies in the Philippines are known by the umbrella term kakanin ( from kanin , " prepared rice " ) .
These were originally made primarily from rice , but in recent centuries , the term has come to encompass dishes made from other types of flour , including corn flour ( masa ) , cassava , wheat , and so on .
Glutinous rice figures prominently in two main subtypes of kakanin : the puto ( steamed rice cakes ) , and the bibingka ( baked rice cakes ) .
Both largely utilize glutinous rice galapong .
A notable variant of puto is puto bumbong which uses a unique heirloom variety of glutinous rice called pirurutong , which is deep purple to almost black in color .
However , pirurutong is endangered , and most puto bumbong nowadays substitute it with dyed regular glutinous rice or infuse purple yam ( ube ) to achieve the same coloration .
Other kakanin that use glutinous rice include suman , biko , and sapin - sapin among others .
There is also a special class of boiled galapong dishes like palitaw , moche , mache , and masi .
Fried galapong is also used to make various types of buchi , which are the local Chinese - Filipino versions of jian dui .
Aside from kakanin , glutinous rice is also used in traditional Filipino rice gruels or porridges known as lugaw .
They include both savory versions like arroz caldo or goto which are similar to Chinese - style congee ; and dessert versions like champorado , binignit , and ginataang mais .
INDONESIAN Section::::Indonesian .
Glutinous rice is known as beras ketan or simply ketan in Java and most of Indonesia , and pulut in Sumatra .
It is widely used as an ingredient for a wide variety of sweet , savoury or fermented snacks .
Glutinous rice is used as either hulled grains or milled into flour .
It is usually mixed with santan , meaning coconut milk in Indonesian , along with a bit of salt to add some taste .
Glutinous rice is rarely eaten as a staple .
One example is lemang , which is glutinous rice and coconut milk cooked in bamboo stem lined by banana leaves .
Glutinous rice is also sometimes used in a mix with normal rice in rice dishes such as nasi tumpeng or nasi tim .
It is widely used during the Lebaran seasons as traditional food .
It is also used in the production of alcoholic beverages such as tuak and brem bali .
SAVOURY SNACKS
* Ketan - traditionally refers to the glutinous rice itself as well as sticky rice delicacy in its simplest form .
The handful mounds of glutinous rice are rounded and sprinkled with grated coconut , either fresh or sauteed as serundeng .
* Ketupat - square shaped crafts made from the same local leaves as palas , but it is usually filled with regular rice grains instead of pulut , though it depends on the maker .
* Gandos - a snack made from ground glutinous rice mixed with grated coconut , and the fried .
* Lemang - wrapped in banana leaves and inside a bamboo , and left to be barbecued /
grilled on an open fire , to make the taste and texture tender and unique * Lemper - cooked glutinous rice with shredded meat inside and wrapped in banana leaves , popular in Java
* Nasi kuning - either common rice or glutinous rice can be made into ketan kuning , yellow rice colored with turmeric * Tumpeng - glutinous rice can be made into tumpeng nasi kuning , yellow rice colored by turmeric , and shaped into a cone .
SWEET SNACKS
* Variety of kue - glutinous rice flour is also used in certain traditional local desserts , known as kue , such as kue lapis .
* Bubur ketan hitam - black glutinous rice porridge with coconut milk and palm sugar syrup
* Candil - glutinous rice flour cake with sugar and grated coconut
* Dodol - traditional sweets made of glutinous rice flour and coconut sugar .
Similar variants are wajik ( or wajit ) .
* Klepon - glutinous rice flour balls filled with palm sugar and coated with grated coconut
* Lupis - glutinous rice wrapped in individual triangles using banana leaves and left to boil for a few hours .
The rice pieces are then tossed with grated coconut all over and served with palm sugar syrup .
* Onde - onde - glutinous rice flour balls filled with sweetened mung bean paste and coated with sesame similar with Jin deui * Wingko babat - baked glutinous rice flour with coconut * Gemblong - white glutinous rice flour balls smeared with palm sugar caramel .
In East Java , it was known as getas , except it 's using black glutinous rice flour as the main ingredient .
FERMENTED SNACKS
* Brem - solid cake from the dehydrated juice of pressed fermented glutinous rice * Tapai ketan - cooked glutinous rice fermented with yeast , wrapped in banana or roseapple leaves .
Usually eaten as is or in a mixed cold dessert
CRACKERS
* Rengginang - a traditional rice crackers related to kerupuk Section::::Crackers .
In addition , glutinous rice dishes adapted from other cultures are easily available .
Examples include kue moci ( mochi , Japanese ) and bacang ( zongzi , Chinese ) .
Indonesian glutinous rice dishes JAPANESE Section::::Japanese .
In Japan , glutinous rice is known as mochigome [ mō - chee - gōmay ] ( ) .
It is used in traditional dishes such as sekihan is known as the red rice , okowa , and ohagi .
It may also be ground into mochiko ( もち粉 ) a rice flour , used to make mochi ( もち ) which are known as sweet rice cakes to the non - Japanese , mochi a traditional rice cake prepared for the Japanese New Year but also eaten year - round .
See also Japanese rice .
KOREAN Section::::Korean .
In Korea , glutinous rice is called chapssal ( Hangul : 찹쌀 ) , and its characteristic stickiness is called chalgi ( Hangul : 찰기 ) .
Cooked rice made of glutinous rice is called chalbap ( Hangul : 찰밥 ) and rice cakes ( Hangul : 떡 , ddeok ) are called chalddeok or chapssalddeok ( Hangul : 찰떡 , 찹쌀떡 ) .
Chalbap is used as stuffing in samgyetang ( Hangul : 삼계탕 ) .
LAO Section::::Lao .
Glutinous rice is the main rice eaten in Laos ( see Lao cuisine ) , where it is known as khao niao ( Lao : ເຂົ້າໜຽວ ) : " khao " means rice , and " niao " means sticky .
It is cooked by soaking for several hours and then steaming in a bamboo basket or houat ( Lao : ຫວດ ) .
After that , it should be turned out on a clean surface and kneaded with a wooden paddle to release the steam ; this results in rice balls that will stick to themselves but not to fingers .
The large rice ball is kept in a small basket made of bamboo or tip khao ( Lao : ຕິບເຂົ້າ ) .
The rice is sticky but dry , rather than wet and gummy like non - glutinous varieties .
The fingers of the right hand are used to eat it by wadding the rice .
Laotians consume glutinous rice as part of their main diet ; they also use toasted glutinous rice khao khoua ( Lao:ເຂົ້າຄົ່ວ ) to add a nut - like flavor to many dishes .
A popular Lao meal is a combination of Lao grilled chicken ping kai ( Lao:ປີ້ງໄກ່ ) , Lao papaya salad tam mak houng ( Lao:ຕຳໝາກຫູ່ງ ) , and Lao sticky rice ( khao niao ) .
Khao Niao has also been used for preparing a popular dish from Laos called Naem Khao ( or Laotian crispy rice salad ) .
It is made with deep - fried sticky rice balls , chunks of Lao - style fermented pork sausage called som moo , chopped peanuts , grated coconut , sliced scallions or shallots , mint , cilantro , lime juice , fish sauce , and other ingredients .
Khao niao is also used as an ingredient in desserts .
Khao niao mixed with coconut milk can be served with ripened mango or durian .
Khao tôm ( Lao:ເຂົ້າຕົ້ມ ) is a steamed mixture of khao niao with sliced fruits and coconut milk .
MALAYSIAN Section::::Malaysian .
In Malaysia , glutinous rice is known as pulut .
It is usually mixed with santan , coconut milk in English , along with a bit of salt to add some taste .
It is widely used during the Raya festive seasons as traditional food , such as : * Dodol - traditional sweets made of glutinous rice flour and coconut sugar .
Similar variants are wajik ( or wajit ) .
* Inang - inang - glutinous rice cracker .
Popular in Melaka .
* Kelupis - a type of glutinous rice kuih in East Malaysia .
* Ketupat - square shaped crafts made from the same local leaves as palas , but it is usually filled with regular rice grains instead of pulut , though it depends on the maker .
* Kochi - Malay - Peranakan sweet and sticky kuih .
* Lamban - another type of glutinous rice dessert in East Malaysia .
* Lemang - wrapped in banana leaves and inside a bamboo , and left to be barbecued /
grilled on an open fire , to make the taste and texture tender and unique .
* Pulut inti – wrapped in banana leaf in the shape of a pyramid , this kuih consists of glutinous rice with a covering of grated coconut candied with palm sugar .
*
Pulut panggang – glutinous rice parcels stuffed with a spiced filling , then wrapped in banana leaves and char - grilled .
Depending on the regional tradition , the spiced filling may include pulverised dried prawns , caramelised coconut paste or beef floss .
In the state of Sarawak , the local pulut panggang contains no fillings and are wrapped in pandan leaves instead .
* Tapai - cooked glutinous rice fermented with yeast , wrapped in banana , rubber tree or roseapple leaves .
THAI Section::::Thai .
In Thailand , glutinous rice is known as khao niao (; lit . "
sticky rice " ) in central Thailand and Isan , and as khao nueng (; lit .
"
steamed rice " ) in northern Thailand .
Northern Thais ( Lanna people ) and northeastern Thais traditionally eat glutinous rice as their staple food .
Southern and central Thais , and northeastern Thais from Surin Province and neighboring areas influenced by the Khmer - Thai people favor non - sticky khao chao .
* Steamed glutinous rice is one of the main ingredients in making the sour - fermented pork skinless sausage called naem , or its northern Thai equivalent chin som , which can be made from pork , beef , or water buffalo meat .
It is also essential for the fermentation process in the northeastern Thai sausage called sai krok Isan .
This latter sausage is made , in contrast to the first two , with a sausage casing .
* Sweets and desserts : Famous among tourists in Thailand is khao niao mamuang ( ): sweet coconut sticky rice with mango , while khao niao tat , sweet sticky rice with coconut cream and black beans , Khao niao na krachik ( ) , sweet sticky rice topped with caramelized roasted grated coconut , khao niao kaeo , sticky rice cooked in coconut milk and sugar and khao tom hua ngok , sticky rice steamed with banana with grated coconut and sugar , are traditional popular desserts .
* Khao lam ( ) is sticky rice with sugar and coconut cream cooked in specially prepared bamboo sections of different diameters and lengths .
It can be prepared with white or dark purple ( khao niao dam ) varieties of glutinous rice .
Sometimes a few beans or nuts are added and mixed in .
Thick khao lam containers may have a custard - like filling in the center made with coconut cream , egg and sugar .
* Khao chi ( ) are cakes of sticky rice having the size and shape of a patty and a crunchy crust .
In order to prepare them , the glutinous rice is laced with salt , often also slightly coated with beaten egg , and grilled over a charcoal fire .
They were traditionally made with leftover rice and given in the early morning to the children , or to passing monks as offering .
* Khao pong ( ) is a crunchy preparation made of leftover steamed glutinous rice that is pounded and pressed into thin sheets before being grilled .
* Khao tom mat ( ) , cooked sticky rice mixed with banana and wrapped in banana leaf , khao ho , sticky rice molded and wrapped in conical shape , khao pradap din , kraya sat and khao thip are preparations based on glutinous rice used as offerings in religious festivals and ceremonies for merit - making or warding off evil spirits .
* Khao niao ping ( ) , sticky rice mixed with coconut milk and taro ( khao niao ping pheuak ) , banana ( khao niao ping kluai ) or black beans ( khao niao ping tua ) , wrapped in banana leaf and grilled slowly over charcoal fire .
Glutinous rice is traditionally eaten using the right hand
* Khao khua ( ) , roasted ground glutinous rice , is indispensable for making the northeastern Thai dishes larb , nam tok , and nam chim chaeo .
Some recipes also ask for khao khua in certain northern Thai curries .
It imparts a nutty flavor to the dishes in which it is used .
* Naem khluk or yam naem khao thot is a salad made from crumbled deep - fried , curried - rice croquettes , and naem sausage
*
Chin som mok is a northern Thai specialty made with grilled , banana leaf - wrapped pork skin that has been fermented with glutinous rice * Sai krok Isan : grilled , fermented pork sausages , specialty of northeastern Thailand
* Glutinous rice is also used as the basis for the brewing of sato ( ) , an alcoholic beverage also known as " Thai rice wine " .
VIETNAMESE Section::::Vietnamese .
Glutinous rice is called " gạo nếp " in Vietnamese .
Dishes made from glutinous rice in Vietnam are typically served as desserts or side dishes , but some can be served as main dishes .
There is a wide array of glutinous rice dishes in Vietnamese cuisine , the majority of them can be categorized as follows :
* Bánh , the most diverse category , refers to a wide variety of sweet or savoury , distinct cakes , buns , pastries , sandwiches , and food items from Vietnamese cuisine , which may be cooked by steaming , baking , frying , deep - frying , or boiling .
It is important to note that not all bánh are made from glutinous rice ; they can also be made from ordinary rice flour , cassava flour , taro flour , or tapioca starch .
The word " bánh " is also used to refer to certain varieties of noodles in Vietnam , and absolutely not to be confused with glutinous rice dishes .
Some bánh dishes that are made from glutinous rice include : * Bánh chưng : a square - shaped , boiled glutinous rice dumpling filled with pork and mung bean paste , wrapped in a dong leaf , usually eaten in Vietnamese New Year .
* Bánh giầy : white , flat , round glutinous rice cake with tough , chewy texture filled with mung bean or served with Vietnamese sausage ( chả ) , usually eaten in Vietnamese New Year with bánh chưng .
*
Bánh dừa : glutinous rice mixed with black bean paste cooked in coconut juice , wrapped in coconut leaf .
The filling can be mung bean stir - fried in coconut juice or banana .
*
Bánh rán : a northern Vietnamese dish of deep - fried glutinous rice balls covered with sesame , scented with jasmine flower essence , filled with either sweetened mung bean paste ( the sweet version ) or chopped meat and mushrooms ( the savory version ) .
* Bánh cam : a southern Vietnamese version of bánh rán .
Unlike bánh rán , bánh cam is coated with a layer of sugary liquid and has no jasmine essence .
* Bánh trôi : made from glutinous rice mixed with a small portion of ordinary rice flour
( the ratio of glutinous rice flour to ordinary rice flour is typically 9:1 or 8:2 ) filled with sugarcane rock candy .
*
Bánh gai : made from the leaves of the " gai " tree ( Boehmeria nivea ) dried , boiled , ground into small pieces , then mixed with glutinous rice , wrapped in banana leaf .
The filling is made from a mixture of coconut , mung bean , peanuts , winter melon , sesame , and lotus seeds .
*
Bánh cốm : the cake is made from young glutinous rice seeds .
The seeds are put into a water pot , stirred on fire , juice extracted from pomelo flower is added .
The filling is made from steamed mung bean , scraped coconut , sweetened pumpkin , and sweetened lotus seeds .
* Other bánh made from glutinous rice are bánh tro , bánh tét , bánh ú , bánh măng , bánh ít , bánh khúc , bánh tổ , bánh in , bánh dẻo , bánh su sê , bánh nổ ...
* Xôi are sweet or savory dishes made from steamed glutinous rice and other ingredients .
Sweet xôi are typically eaten as breakfast .
Savory xôi can be eaten as lunch .
Xôi dishes made from glutinous rice include : * Xôi lá cẩm : made with the magenta plant .
* Xôi lá dứa : made with pandan leaf extract for the green color and a distinctive pandan flavor .
* Xôi chiên phồng :
deep - fried glutinous rice patty
*
Xôi gà : made with coconut juice and pandan leaf served with fried or roasted chicken and sausage .
* Xôi thập cẩm : made with dried shrimp , chicken , Chinese sausage , Vietnamese sausage ( chả ) , peanuts , coconut , onion , fried garlic ... * Other xôi dishes made from glutinous rice include :
xôi lạc , xôi lúa , xôi đậu
xanh , xôi nếp than , xôi gấc , xôi vò , xôi sắn , xôi sầu riêng , xôi khúc , xôi xéo , xôi cá ,
xôi vị ...
* Chè refers to any traditional Vietnamese sweetened soup or porridge .
Though chè can be made using a wide variety of ingredients , some chè dishes made from glutinous rice include : * Chè đậu trắng : made from glutinous rice and black - eyed peas .
* Chè con ong : made from glutinous rice , ginger root , honey , and molasses .
*
Chè cốm : made from young glutinous rice seeds , kudzu flour , and juice from pomelo flower .
* Chè xôi nước : balls made from mung bean paste in a shell made of glutinous rice flour ; served in a thick clear or brown liquid made of water , sugar , and grated ginger root .
*
Cơm nếp : glutinous rice that is cooked in the same way as ordinary rice , except that the water used is flavored by adding salts or by using coconut juice , or soups from chicken broth or pork broth .
* Cơm rượu : Glutinous rice balls cooked and mixed with yeast , served in a small amount of rice wine .
* Cơm lam :
Glutinous rice cooked in a tube of bamboo of the genus Neohouzeaua and often served with grilled pork or chicken .
Glutinous rice can also be fermented to make Vietnamese alcoholic beverages , such as rượu nếp , rượu cần and rượu đế .
BEVERAGES
*
Choujiu
* Sato ( rice wine ) * Home brew sato kits *
Rượu nếp *
Rượu cần NON - FOOD USES Section::::Non - food uses .
According to legend , glutinous rice was used to make the mortar in the construction of the Great Wall of China .
Chemical tests have confirmed that this is true for the city walls of Xi'an .
In Assam also , this rice was used for building palaces during Ahom rule .
Glutinous rice starch is often used as a vegetarian glue or adhesive .
SEE ALSO
* Cuisine of Assam * Cuisine of Burma * Cuisine of Cambodia * Cuisine of China * Hakka cuisine * Cuisine of Indonesia * Cuisine of Japan * Cuisine of Korea * Cuisine of Laos
* Cuisine of Malaysia * Cuisine of the Philippines * Cuisine of Thailand * Cuisine of Vietnam REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS