THE RED VIOLIN
The Red Violin ( ) is a 1998 drama film directed by François Girard and starring Samuel L. Jackson , Carlo Cecchi and Sylvia Chang .
It spans four centuries and five countries as it tells the story of a mysterious red - coloured violin and its many owners .
The instrument , made in Cremona in 1681 with a future forecast by tarot cards , makes its way to Montreal in 1997 , where an appraiser identifies it
and it goes to auction .
The film was an international co - production among companies in Canada , Italy , and the United Kingdom .
The screenplay was written by Don McKellar , who also acts , and Girard , inspired by a historic 1720 Stradivarius violin nicknamed the " Red Mendelssohn " .
The film was shot in Austria , Canada , China , England and Italy and features a soundtrack by John Corigliano , with solos performed by violinist Joshua Bell .
After premiering in the Venice Film Festival , it received some positive reviews from critics and grossed $ 10 million in the U.S. box office .
It received numerous honours , including the Academy Award for Best Original Score and eight Genie Awards , including Best Motion Picture .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Cremona , 1681 ( ) Nicolò Bussotti is a violin - maker whose wife , Anna Rudolfi , is pregnant .
Anna asks her servant Cesca to foretell her unborn child 's future .
Cesca can not determine the future of someone not born , but she does offer to read Anna 's future using tarot cards .
The first , The Moon , signifies that Anna will live a long life .
In the meantime , Nicolò has fashioned a new violin .
He is about to varnish it when he finds that both she and the child have died .
Distraught , Nicolò returns to his shop and begins to varnish the violin .
The violin then makes its way to an orphanage in Austria .
Cesca turns over the second card , The Hanged Man , which means disease and suffering for those around Anna .
At the orphanage , the violin comes into the possession of Kaspar Weiss , a young but brilliant violin prodigy .
The monks at the orphanage ask a violin instructor , Poussin , to adopt the boy to further his development .
Poussin brings Weiss and the violin to Vienna .
They learn that Prince Mannsfeld is visiting Vienna and is looking for a prodigy to accompany him back to Prussia , promising a generous reward .
Poussin puts Weiss through a strict practice regimen .
However , the regimens and " Poussin Meter " ( a primitive metronome ) take a toll on Weiss ' heart defect .
On the day of the recital , as he starts playing , Weiss 's heart gives out from the stress and he collapses , dead .
Weiss is buried at the orphanage he grew up in .
When Poussin inquires about the violin , the monks explain that they buried it with Weiss .
The violin is later stolen by grave robbers travelling in a gypsy procession , who take it to England .
Oxford , late 1890s ( ) Cesca 's third card is The Devil and she explains that Anna will meet a handsome and intelligent man that will seduce her .
Frederick Pope comes across the gypsy procession setting up camp on his estate , as a gypsy woman plays the violin .
He offers his hospitality in exchange for the violin .
Frederick finds great praise in his public concerts with the violin as well as his compositions , with his lover Victoria Byrd serving as his carnal muse .
Victoria , a writer , announces to Frederick that she needs to travel to Russia to research a novel she is working on .
While Victoria is absent , Frederick loses his inspiration to compose and degenerates .
When Victoria does not receive his letters for a full week , she resolves to return immediately .
But when she arrives , she finds him in the arms of a new muse , the violinist gypsy woman .
In a moment of rage , Victoria shoots the violin , grazing its neck and detaching its strings and tailpiece , before storming out .
Frederick 's final letter to Victoria states that he will be committing suicide and that he is leaving his entire estate to her .
The violin ends up in the hands of Frederick 's Chinese servant , who returns to Shanghai and sells it to an antiques dealer , who repairs the damage .
The instrument is sold to a young woman with her daughter during the 1930s .
Shanghai , late 1960s ( ) Cesca predicts the fourth card , Justice , means tough times ahead , featuring a trial and persecution , where Anna shall be guilty .
In the chaos of China 's Cultural Revolution , any ideas or items deemed " bourgeois " are denounced and should be destroyed .
One target for public denunciation and self - criticism is a music teacher named Zhou Yuan , who is berated for his fondness for Western classical music .
A political officer , Xiang Pei , successfully defends Zhou .
Xiang then returns to her residence and retrieves the Red Violin , given as a gift from her mother .
Several Red Guards raid Xiang 's apartment after learning of its existence , finding nothing .
Xiang arrives at Zhou 's house and pleads with him to take the violin to keep it safe .
He relents and vows to keep it hidden , while Xiang leaves to face possible prosecution from Communist Party officials .
Years later , Chinese police enter Zhou 's home to find his dead body amid a " sanctuary " of dozens of musical instruments .
Upon this discovery , the present - day Chinese government ships these items to Montreal for appraisal and sale at auction .
Montréal , 1997 ( ) The final card , Death , Cesca sees not as predicting death , but , due to its upside - down positioning , as rebirth .
Morritz arrives in Montreal as an appraiser for the violins sent by the Chinese government .
Almost immediately , he notices the Red Violin and believes it may be the legendary last violin of Nicolò Bussotti .
He has restorer
Evan Williams perform some work on it , while sending samples of the varnish to a lab at the University of Montreal .
At the same time , he purchases a copy of the Red Violin from a private collection in London , the closest copy to the original available .
When the results of the varnish tests arrive , Morritz is shocked to learn that the violin 's varnish contains human blood .
Nicolò had carried his wife 's body to his shop after her death and slit her wrist to collect blood for making the red varnish .
He admits to the auction manager , Leroux , that he has the Red Violin .
As he prepares to fly home , Morritz stops by the auction house " Duval 's " , with the London copy in hand .
As the auction for the previous lot ends , Morritz switches the Red Violin for the London copy , which is sold for $ 2.4 million .
Morritz calls his wife at home in New York City and asks to speak to his daughter , telling her he has a special present for her upon his return .
CAST Section::::Cast .
Cremona * Carlo Cecchi – Nicolò Bussotti
* Irene Grazioli – Anna Rudolfi Bussotti
* Anita Laurenzi – Cesca * Samuele Amighetti –
Boy Vienna * Christoph Koncz – Kaspar Weiss * Jean - Luc Bideau – Georges Poussin
* Clotilde Mollet – Antoinette Poussin
* Arthur Denberg – Prince Mannsfeld
Oxford
* Jason Flemyng – Frederick Pope
* Greta Scacchi – Victoria Byrd
* Eva Marie Bryer –
Sara * Joshua Bell –
Orchestra member :
First violin ( cameo ) Shanghai * Sylvia Chang –
Xiang Pei ( & Xiang Pei 's mother )
*
Tao Hong – Chen Gang
* Liu Zifeng –
Zhou Yuan
*
Han Xiaofei –
Ming
* Wang Xiaoshuai – one of the four cops ( cameo ) Montreal * Samuel L. Jackson – Charles Morritz * Colm Feore – Auctioneer * Monique Mercure – Madame Leroux
* Don McKellar – Evan Williams
* Ireneusz Bogajewicz – Ruselsky * Julian Richings –
Nicolas Olsberg * Marvin Mill – Limousine Driver * Russell Yuen – Older Ming *
Sandra Oh
– Madame Ming * Rémy Girard – Customs Agent PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
The film was inspired by one of the violins of Antonio Stradivari , the 1721 Red Mendelssohn , which features a unique red stripe on its top right side .
By the time the film was made , the Red Mendelssohn was owned by Elizabeth Pitcairn , heiress to the PPG fortune , whose grandfather purchased it for her 16th birthday for $ 1.7 million at auction at Christie 's London .
Despite rumours and the film , the Red Mendelssohn is varnished with burgundy rather than blood .
Stradivarius used red varnish on numerous other violins from 1704 to 1720 , the so - called " golden period " , and other red - coloured violins besides the Red Mendelssohn survived .
Director François Girard opted to make a film about a violin due to his belief that " Making film is making music " .
The concept of a history of a violin was the starting point , with Girard not initially realizing the project would call for five languages or an unusually large budget .
His screenplay , written with Don McKellar , sees the eponymous instrument travel over greater distances , while the years separating each segment become shorter .
This suggests a musical structure , though Girard said this was not planned and only developed as he and McKellar continued to write .
Girard and McKellar proposed their story and project to various Hollywood companies , but were unwilling to give up creative control , or to limit the number of languages spoken in the film , as U.S. companies requested .
As a result , they produced the film with Rhombus Media .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The film is an international co - production , allowing for a larger budget to be accumulated from various sources , making The Red Violin one of the most costly Canadian films produced to date .
Its final budget was $ 15 million .
Girard and McKellar employed a few crew members from their previous film , Thirty Two Short Films About Glenn Gould ( 1993 ) , including cinematographer Alain Dostie , editor Gaétan Huot and actor Colm Feore .
The co - production also allowed for shooting in Canada , China and around Europe , including the cities of Vienna , Shanghai and Montreal .
Girard , McKellar and producer Niv Fichman went location scouting at the beginning of production , visiting Prague and Hong Kong and meeting writers who helped correct foreign - language dialogue .
Ultimately , they decided they needed to film in Vienna and Shanghai to properly depict those cities .
In Cremona , Italy , Girard visited violin - making schools and met some people who made the instruments , recruiting some as extras .
The most challenging part was securing permission from the government of China to simulate the Cultural Revolution in Shanghai , with Fichman travelling to China seven times before the government allowed shooting , which took place only five days later .
Shooting in Shanghai took place on Hong Zhen Old Street in the Hongkou District .
Hundreds of Chinese police , with guns , closed the streets where shooting took place , due to the 450 extras loudly calling for revolution .
Fichman claimed " there was the possibility that we were going to cause a riot " .
The action in the Montreal segments was the most complex , which Girard said put the greatest strain on himself and the cast .
Filming completed after six months , with shooting on 60 of those days .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
Girard was not a true musician , mainly working with it as a film director .
The film score was written by composer John Corigliano , with every violin solo in the film performed by violinist Joshua Bell .
The conductor was Esa - Pekka Salonen .
The score is mainly of the Chaconne genre , while the ostensibly Romani music was also actually written by Corigliano .
Bell said he was eager to join the film crew , citing his enthusiasm for Corigliano 's work and his use of form .
Corigliano , looking for a romantic musical performance , also referred to Bell as the ideal choice for a musician , calling him " an aristocrat as a violinist " .
Girard stated Bell and Corigliano were involved from the outset , and reviewed every version of the screenplay as it was in development .
Much of the score had to be written before principal photography , which is rare in film .
Since the violin movements seen in the film had to match Corigliano 's music , real - life child prodigy Christoph Koncz was cast .
However , Girard tied up two musicians to actor Jason Flemyng to help him give his performance as a violinist , the " Octopus " method .
After shooting completed , Corigliano finished " Anna 's theme " .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The Red Violin premiered at the Venice Film Festival on September 2 , 1998 , where it received standing applause .
It opened in the Toronto International Film Festival in September 1998 .
It was also screened in international film festivals in London and Tokyo .
Odeon Films gave The Red Violin a wider release in Canada on 13 November 1998 .
A limited release followed in the United Kingdom on 9 April 1999 .
and the film opened in the United States on 11 June 1999 , distributed by Lions Gate Entertainment .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
By February 1999 , The Red Violin had grossed $ 2 million in Canada , surpassing the previous year 's winner of the Genie Award for Best Motion Picture , The Sweet Hereafter .
By August 1999 , the film grossed $ 6 million in the United States , which Lions Gate Entertainment declared " a huge success for a specialty film " .
It was the distributor 's most successful Canadian film of the year .
The film finished its run having made US$ 10 million in the United States .
In Canada , it finished with a gross of $ 3,378,800 , making it one of most seen English Canadian films in national box - office history .
It was not a major hit overseas .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
On the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds an approval rating of 74 % based on 40 reviews , and an average rating of 7.2/10 .
On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 57 out of 100 , based on 22 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Canadian Maclean 's critic Brian D. Johnson , referencing Thirty Two Short Films About Glenn Gould , wrote " The Red Violin amounts to more than Five Short Films About a Fiddle " , crediting Corigliano 's music for supplying intensity and the story for making the eponymous violin into its own interesting character .
Roger Ebert called the film " heedlessly ambitious " , possessing " the kind of sweep and vision that we identify with elegant features from decades ago " .
For The Guardian , Jonathan Romney wrote that " as flawed movies go , it 's elegant , entertaining and quite breathtakingly ambitious " .
Stephen Holden wrote in The New York Times that the film did not live up to its score .
Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B , with Lisa Schwarzbaum writing the fictional violin surpassed all real fiddles in colourful pedigree , and finding the storytelling interesting .
The Washington Post critic Stephen Hunter assessed the score to be the strongest element of the film , and the story to be intriguing and occasionally " macabre " .
Xan Brooks ' The Independent review compared the production design unfavourably to a BBC work for students .
Laura Kelly of the Sun - Sentinel called the film " praise - worthy " .
In The San Francisco Gate , Bob Graham accepted the film 's ambition and judged Samuel L. Jackson to be cool in the role , in a very different way than in Pulp Fiction ( 1994 ) .
In National Review , Jay Nordlinger praised Corigliano 's soundtrack but criticized Girard 's direction and film .
In Queen 's Quarterly , Maurice Yacowar analyzed the film as presenting the characters of Kaspar , Xian , Peng and Morritz as manifestations of different aspects of Bussoti 's passions , while the characters of Poussin and bidder Ruselsky wanted to use the instrument to further their own interests .
Yacowar concluded the film " explores passions directed outwards " .
In the Canadian Journal of Film Studies , Brenda Longfellow criticized the film for materialism and depicting " the sacrifice of a woman on the altar of art " .
In 2002 , readers of Playback voted The Red Violin the third best Canadian film ever .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Composer John Corigliano was previously nominated for the Academy Award for Best Original Score for the 1980 film Altered States before winning for The Red Violin .
He won over American Beauty , which he had considered the front - runner before the ceremony .
At the Genie Awards , Don McKellar was effectively competing against himself as a screenwriter of both Last Night and The Red Violin .
The Red Violin dominated the awards , with eight wins .
The film also competed in the 1st Jutra Awards , launched to honour the Cinema of Quebec .
Due to the international production and amount of English , numerous English Canadians accepted awards . ! scope="col " Award ! scope="col " Date of ceremony ! scope="col " Category ! scope="col " Recipient(s ) ! scope="col " Result ! scope="col " class="unsortable " ! scope="row
" Academy Awards !
scope="row
" Chicago Film Critics Association !
scope="row " rowspan=10 Genie Awards ! scope="row " Golden Globes !
scope="row " rowspan=11
Jutra Awards !
scope="row " Online Film Critics Society !
scope="row " Satellite Awards ! scope="row " Tokyo International Film Festival ! scope="row " Toronto Film Critics Association LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Corigliano adapted his score into a concert , Concerto for Violin and Orchestra
( The Red Violin ) , performed in Baltimore , Dallas and Atlanta from 2003 to 2004 .
In 2005 , it was performed at the San Francisco Ballet .
He later wrote another adaptation , The Red Violin : Chaconne for Violin and Orchestra .
After the film 's release , Red Mendelssohn owner Elizabeth Pitcairn also learned its Chaconne , which she called " spooky " , adding " that 's when the violin can tell its own story ; that 's when it can actually speak " .
Pitcairn brought the " Red Violin " to the Prince George Symphony Orchestra in 2012 .
REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY EXTERNAL LINKS