EYE FOR AN EYE " Only one eye for one eye " , also known as " An eye for an eye " or " A tooth for a tooth " , or the law of retaliation , is the principle that a person who has injured another person is to be penalized to a similar degree , and the person inflicting such punishment should be the injured party .
In softer interpretations , it means the victim receives the [ estimated ] value of the injury in compensation .
The intent behind the principle was to restrict compensation to the value of the loss .
The principle is sometimes referred using the Latin term lex talionis or the law of talion .
The English word talion ( from the Latin talio ) means a retaliation authorized by law , in which the punishment corresponds in kind and degree to the injury .
DEFINITION AND METHODS Section::::Definition and methods .
The term lex talionis does not always and only refer to literal eye - for - an - eye codes of justice ( see rather mirror punishment ) but applies to the broader class of legal systems that specify formulate penalties for specific crimes , which are thought to be fitting in their severity .
Some propose that this was at least in part intended to prevent excessive punishment at the hands of either an avenging private party or the state .
The most common expression of lex talionis is " an eye for an eye " , but other interpretations have been given as well .
Legal codes following the principle of lex talionis have one thing in common : prescribed ' fitting ' counter punishment for a felony .
In the famous legal code written by Hammurabi , the principle of exact reciprocity is very clearly used .
For example , if a person caused the death of another person , the killer would be put to death .
The simplest example is the " eye for an eye " principle .
In that case , the rule was that punishment must be exactly equal to the crime .
Conversely , the twelve tables of Rome merely prescribed particular penalties for particular crimes .
The Anglo - Saxon legal code substituted payment of wergild for direct retribution : a particular person 's life had a fixed value , derived from his social position ; any homicide was compensated by paying the appropriate wergild , regardless of intent .
Under the British Common Law , successful plaintiffs were entitled to repayment equal to their loss ( in monetary terms ) .
In the modern tort law system , this has been extended to translate non - economic losses into money as well .
The meaning of the principle Eye for an Eye is that a person who has been injured by another person returns the offending action to the originator in compensation , or that an authority does so on behalf of the injured person .
The exact Latin ( lex talionis ) to English translation of this phrase is " The law of retaliation .
" The root principle of this law is to provide equitable retribution .
ANTECEDENTS Section::::Antecedents .
Various ideas regarding the origins of lex talionis exist , but a common one is that it developed as early civilizations grew and a less well - established system for retribution of wrongs , feuds and vendettas , threatened the social fabric .
Despite having been replaced with newer modes of legal theory , lex talionis systems served a critical purpose in the development of social systems — the establishment of a body whose purpose was to enact the retaliation and ensure that this was the only punishment .
This body was the state in one of its earliest forms .
The principle is found in Babylonian Law .
If it is surmised that in societies not bound by the rule of law , if a person was hurt , then the injured person ( or their relative ) would take vengeful retribution on the person who caused the injury .
The retribution might be worse than the crime , perhaps even death .
Babylonian law put a limit on such actions , restricting the retribution to be no worse than the crime , as long as victim and offender occupied the same status in society .
As with blasphemy or lèse - majesté ( crimes against a god or a monarch ) , crimes against one 's social betters were punished more severely .
Roman law moved toward monetary compensation as a substitute for vengeance .
In cases of assault , fixed penalties were set for various injuries , although talio was still permitted if one person broke another 's limb .
IN RELIGION Section::::In religion .
The principle was first referenced in the Code of Hammurabi , which predates the Hebrew bible .
In the Hebrew Law , the " eye for eye " was to restrict compensation to the value of the loss .
Thus , it might be better read ' only one eye for one eye ' .
The idiomatic biblical phrase " an eye for an eye " in Exodus and Leviticus ( , ayin tachat ayin ) literally means ' an eye under/(in place of ) an eye ' while a slightly different phrase ( עַיִן בְּעַיִן שֵׁן בְּשֵׁן , literally " eye for an eye ; tooth for a tooth " ) is used in another passage ( Deuteronomy ) in the context of possible reciprocal court sentences for failed false witnesses .
The passage in Leviticus states , " And a man who injures his countrymanas he has done , so it shall be done to him [ namely , ] fracture under / for fracture , eye under / for eye , tooth under / for tooth .
Just as another person has received injury from him , so it will be given to him . "
( Lev . 24:19–21 ) .
For an example of being used in its regular sense of under , see Lev .
22:27
"
A bull , sheep or goat , when it is born shall remain under its mother , and from the eighth day ... "
JUDAISM Section::::Judaism .
Isaac Kalimi explains that the " lex talionis was humanized by the Rabbis who interpreted " an eye for an eye " to mean reasonable pecuniary compensation .
As in the case of the Babylonian ' lex talionis ' , ethical Judaism and humane Jewish jurisprudence replaces the peshat ( literal meaning ) of the written Torah .
Pasachoff and Littman point to the reinterpretation of the lex talionis as an example of the ability of Pharisaic Judaism to " adapt to changing social and intellectual ideas . "
TALMUD Section::::Talmud .
The Talmud interprets the verses referring to " an eye for an eye " and similar expressions as mandating monetary compensation in tort cases and argues against the interpretations by Sadducees that the Bible verses refer to physical retaliation in kind , using the argument that such an interpretation would be inapplicable to blind or eyeless offenders .
Since the Torah requires that penalties be universally applicable , the phrase can not be interpreted in this manner .
However , the Torah also discusses a form of direct reciprocal justice , where the phrase ayin tachat ayin makes another appearance .
Here , the Torah discusses false witnesses who conspire to testify against another person .
The Torah requires the court to " do to him as he had conspired to do to his brother " .
Assuming the fulfillment of certain technical criteria ( such as the sentencing of the accused whose punishment was not yet executed ) , wherever it is possible to punish the conspirators with exactly the same punishment through which they had planned to harm their fellow , the court carries out this direct reciprocal justice ( including when the punishment constitutes the death penalty ) .
Otherwise , the offenders receive lashes .
Since there is no form of punishment in the Torah that calls for the maiming of an offender ( punitary amputation ) there is no case where a conspiratorial false witness could possibly be punished by the court injuring to his eye , tooth , hand , or foot .
There is one case where the Torah states " … and you shall cut off her hand … "
The sages of the Talmud understood the literal meaning of this verse as referring to a case where the woman is attacking a man in potentially lethal manner .
This verse teaches that , although one must intervene to save the victim , one may not kill a lethal attacker if it is possible to neutralize that attacker through non - lethal injury .
Regardless , there is no verse that even appears to mandate injury to the eye , tooth , or foot .
OBJECTIVE OF RECIPROCAL JUSTICE IN JUDAISM Section::::Objective of reciprocal justice in Judaism .
The Talmud discusses the concept of justice as measure - for - measure retribution ( middah k'neged middah ) in the context of divinely implemented justice .
Regarding reciprocal justice by court , however , the Torah states that punishments serve to remove dangerous elements from society ( " … and you shall eliminate the evil from your midst " ) and to deter potential criminals from violating the law ( "
And the rest shall hear and be daunted , and they shall no longer commit anything like this evil deed in your midst " ) .
Additionally , reciprocal justice in tort cases serves to compensate the victim ( see above ) .
The ideal of vengeance for the sake of assuaging the distress of the victim plays no role in the Torah 's conception of court justice , as victims are cautioned against even hating or bearing a grudge against those who have harmed them .
The Torah makes no distinction between whether the potential object of hatred or a grudge has been brought to justice , and all people are taught to love their fellow Israelites .
SOCIAL HIERARCHY AND RECIPROCAL JUSTICE Section::::Social hierarchy and reciprocal justice .
In Exodus 21 , as in the Code of Hammurabi , the concept of reciprocal justice seemingly applies to social equals ; the statement of reciprocal justice " life for life , eye for eye , tooth for tooth , hand for hand , foot for foot , burn for burn , wound for wound , stripe for stripe " is followed by an example of a different law : if a slave - owner blinds the eye or knocks out the tooth of a slave , the slave is freed but the owner pays no other consequence .
On the other hand , the slave would probably be put to death for the injury of the eye of the slave - owner .
However the reciprocal justice applies across social boundaries :
the " eye for eye " principle is directly followed by the proclamation
" You are to have one law for the alien and the citizen .
"
This shows a much more meaningful principle for social justice , in that the marginalized in society were given the same rights under the social structure .
In this context , the reciprocal justice in an ideal functioning setting , according to Michael Coogan , " to prevent people from taking the law into their own hands and exacting disproportionate vengeance for offenses committed against them . " CHRISTIANITY Section::::Christianity .
In the Sermon on the Mount , Jesus urges his followers to turn the other cheek :
Some interpret this as an admonition not to seek legal steps for any compensation that corresponds in kind and degree to the injury .
Others interpret it as Jesus simply teaching his followers not to take personal vengeance , rather than commenting on any legal practice .
Christian interpretation of the Biblical passage has been heavily influenced by the Church father Augustine of Hippo .
He already discussed in his Contra Faustum , Book XIX , the points of ' fulfilment or destruction ' of the Jewish law .
George Robinson characterizes the passage of Exodus ( " an eye for an eye " ) as one of the " most controversial in the Bible " .
According to Robinson , some have pointed to this passage as evidence of the vengeful nature of justice in the Hebrew Bible .
Similarly , Abraham Bloch speculates that the " lex talionis has been singled out as a classical example of biblical harshness . "
Harry S. Lewis points to Lamech , Gideon and Samson as Biblical heroes who were renowned for " their prowess in executing blood revenge upon their public and private enemies .
"
Lewis asserts that this " right of ' wild ' justice was gradually limited . "
Stephen Wylen asserts that the lex talionis is " proof of the unique value of each individual " and that it teaches " equality of all human beings for law . "
ISLAM Section::::Islam .
The Qur'an mentions the " eye for an eye " concept as being ordained for the Children of Israel .
The principle of Lex talionis in Islam is Qiṣāṣ ( Arabic : قصاص ) as mentioned in :
" O you who have believed , prescribed for you is legal retribution ( Qisas ) for those murdered – the free for the free , the slave for the slave , and the female for the female .
But whoever overlooks from his brother anything , then there should be a suitable follow - up and payment to him with good conduct .
This is an alleviation from your Lord and a mercy .
But whoever transgresses after that will have a painful punishment . "
Muslim countries that use Islamic Sharia law , such as Iran or Saudi Arabia , apply the " eye for an eye " rule literally .
NOTABLE CRITICISM * Martin Luther King , Jr. later used this phrase in the context of racial violence : " The old law of an eye for an eye leaves everyone blind . "
SEE ALSO
* Aggression * An Eye for an Eye ,
novel * Bubuti system * Capital punishment
* Deterrence theory * Divine retribution * Forgiveness * Golden Rule * Moral hazard *
Mutual assured destruction * Non - aggression principle
* Norm of reciprocity
* Pacifism * Punitive * Revenge * Retorsion * Tit for tat
* Two wrongs make a right * Vigilante REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
* .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* .
* : the author of " Eye for an Eye " , about the Lex talionis .
* & Part 2