NORDSTROM
Nordstrom Inc. ( ) is an American chain of luxury department stores , also operating in Canada and headquartered in Seattle , Washington .
Founded in 1901 by Swedish American John W. Nordstrom and Carl F. Wallin , the company began as a shoe retailer and expanded its inventory to include clothing , accessories , handbags , jewelry , cosmetics , and fragrances .
Select Nordstrom stores also include wedding and home furnishings departments .
The company also has in - house cafes , restaurants and espresso bars .
STORES Section::::Stores .
Nordstrom has 380 stores operating in 40 US states , Puerto Rico and Canada , a number which includes 122 full - line stores and 239 Nordstrom Rack stores , seven Trunk Club clubhouses , two Jeffrey boutiques and two clearance stores .
Nordstrom also serves customers through nordstrom.com , nordstromrack.com , and its online private sale site , HauteLook .
STOCK EXCHANGE Section::::Stock Exchange .
Nordstrom , Inc. 's common stock is publicly traded on the NYSE under the symbol JWN .
HISTORY EARLY HISTORY Section::::History .
Section::::Early history .
In 1887 , John W. Nordstrom immigrated to the United States at the age of 16 .
He was born in the village of Alvik , close to the city of Luleå in Northern Sweden .
His name at birth was Johan Nordström , which he later anglicized to John Nordstrom .
After landing in New York , he first began working in Michigan and was able to save enough money to purchase a potato farm in Arlington , Washington .
In 1897 , he joined the Klondike Gold Rush in Canada 's Yukon Territory .
After two years of prospecting , he finally struck gold , but sold his disputed claim for $ 13,000 .
Returning to Seattle with his newfound wealth , he married Hilda Carlson and looked for a business venture , finally settling on a shoe store that opened in 1901 , called Wallin & Nordstrom .
Carl F. Wallin , the co - founder of the store , was the owner of the adjacent shoe repair shop .
John and Hilda had five children , three of whom would follow him into the family business , Everett W. ( 1903 ) , Elmer J. ( 1904 ) and Lloyd N. Nordstrom .
In 1928 , John W. Nordstrom retired and sold his shares to two of his sons , Everett and Elmer .
In 1929 , Wallin also retired and sold his shares to them .
The 1930 grand opening of the remodeled Second Avenue store marked the change of name to Nordstrom .
Lloyd Nordstrom subsequently joined the company in 1933 , and the three brothers ran the business together for almost forty years .
By 1958 , Nordstrom had expanded to eight stores in two states but still sold only shoes .
Their expansion was based on customer service , deep product offerings and full size ranges .
Apparel came with its purchase of Best Apparel of Seattle in 1963 , and the company 's name was changed to Nordstrom 's Best .
In 1971 , the company was taken public on NASDAQ .
It was moved to the New York Stock Exchange in 1999 under the ticker symbol JWN after John W. Nordstrom , its founder .
1970S–90S
Section::::1970s–90s .
By 1975 , Nordstrom expanded into Alaska ( the only time by acquisition ) by purchasing Northern Commercial Company and opened its first Nordstrom Rack clearance store in Seattle .
A strong northwest regional retailer with sales already approaching $ 250 million making it the third - largest specialty retailer in the United States , the company opened its first Southern California store at South Coast Plaza in Costa Mesa in 1978 .
By the early 1990s , it had opened 26 stores plus Racks in California .
Subsequent expansion relied on creating a strongly decentralized regional structure , beginning with the Northeast in the Tysons Corner Center in Virginia ( 1988 ) , the Midwest in the Oakbrook Center in Illinois ( 1991 ) , the Southeast in Atlanta ( 1998 ) , and the Southwest in Dallas ( 1996 ) .
In a new region , the initial store was used as a base for training and recruitment for subsequent expansion , and was usually backed by its own distribution center .
From 1978 to 1995 , Nordstrom opened a total of 46 full - line department stores .
In 1976 , Nordstrom opened a series of stores called Place Two to sell a more limited selection of apparel in smaller markets .
By 1983 , there were ten Place Two stores , but the cost of upgrading the smaller stores , especially from a systems perspective , outweighed the benefit , and the division was discontinued .
The company also expanded into direct sales in 1993 , beginning with a catalog division led by John N. 's son Dan that was followed by an e - commerce business .
Nordstrom.com 's fulfillment and contact centers are located in Cedar Rapids , Iowa ; and Seattle , Washington .
Currently , it has distribution centers in Ontario , California ; Newark , California ; Portland , Oregon ; Dubuque , Iowa ; Upper Marlboro , Maryland ; and Gainesville , Florida .
Nordstrom FSB , a wholly owned subsidiary of Nordstrom , Inc. , is a federally chartered savings bank doing business as Nordstrom Bank .
It was formed in 1991 in Scottsdale , Arizona , with its customer contact center in Centennial , Colorado .
Nordstrom FSB was formerly known as Nordstrom National Credit Bank and changed its name to Nordstrom FSB in March 2000 .
The bank offers various banking and credit products , such as Nordstrom Signature VISA , Nordstrom retail credit and debit cards , interest - bearing checking accounts , check cards , and certificates of deposits .
It offers Nordstrom customers cards under Nordstrom Rewards – its customer loyalty program – where customers earn points when making purchases with the card at Nordstrom and other retailers .
Other rewards include Nordstrom Notes which are redeemed or used like cash in stores for new purchases and the Nordstrom Signature VISA card also has an optional travel / leisure rewards feature .
The Nordstrom Rewards program features 4 levels of status depending on annual spending and offers various promotional times throughout the year to earn double , triple and even ten - times points .
Beginning in 1995 , the fourth generation of brothers and cousins served as co - presidents for a time .
After John Whitacre served as the first non - Nordstrom CEO in 1997 , in 2001 the family reasserted its control , with the sons of Bruce A. ( Blake , Erik and Peter ) assuming senior roles in the company which they continue to hold .
In 1998 , Nordstrom replaced its downtown Seattle store with a new flagship location in the former Frederick & Nelson building across the street .
At , the downtown Seattle location is the chain 's largest store .
By contrast , the smallest Nordstrom store , as of September 2008 , opened in 1980 in Salem , Oregon , with a total area of just under .
2000–2015
Section::::2000–2015 .
Nordstrom sold its stand - alone boutique chain Façonnable in 2007 , though it still offers that label in its lineup .
In February 2011 , Nordstrom announced the acquisition of HauteLook , an LA - based online retailer that offers flash sales on designer goods .
The deal included Nordstrom paying $ 180 million in stock and a three - year " earn - out " payment based on HauteLook 's financial performance .
On May 26 , 2011 , Nordstrom announced that they would be closing the downtown Indianapolis , Indiana Circle Center Mall location due to declining business at the site .
The remaining location on the north side of the city at the Fashion Mall at Keystone as well as the future Nordstrom Rack store in the Rivers Edge Shopping Center , also on the north side , remained as the only two locations in the state .
Erik Nordstrom , president of stores at Nordstrom stated , " We 've enjoyed serving our customers in downtown Indianapolis , but unfortunately our business has declined over the long term for some time and despite our efforts to turn things around we do n't see the outlook significantly changing . "
In August 2011 , Nordstrom opened the store Treasure & Bond in SoHo , New York .
Intended to test the waters of the tumultuous high - end department store scene in New York , all profits of Treasure & Bond are donated to charity .
The customer base of the smaller store is thought to be the younger sisters of the typical Nordstrom customer .
Nordstrom announced plans to open a Nordstrom Rack in Milwaukee in 2014 .
In late November 2012 , Nordstrom announced that they would also be opening a full - line Nordstrom Department Store in 2015 in Milwaukee at Mayfair Mall , a half - mile away from the Nordstrom Rack location .
Milwaukee was the largest metropolitan area in the country that did not have a Nordstrom until 2015 .
Such unmet demand was highlighted in Nordstrom 's decision to open in the Milwaukee area .
On January 4 , 2013 , Nordstrom confirmed a new location in the Minneapolis - Saint Paul metropolitan region .
To be located at the Ridgedale Center , it would be the second in the Minneapolis - Saint Paul area .
Following the success of its Mall of America opening in 1991 , Nordstrom has sought to expand in the Twin Cities market .
Plans were originally made in 2007 to open at Ridgedale Center in 2011 , only to be canceled in 2009 .
It opened in September 2015 .
Nordstrom opened its first Rack location in Philadelphia in the fall of 2014 .
In the fall of 2015 , Nordstrom opened their first Nordstrom Rack store in Delaware .
The company is opening its first full - line store in New York City on April 12 , 2018 , a three - floor store at 57th Street and Broadway .
2016–PRESENT
Section::::2016–present .
In 2016 , Nordstrom entered into a partnership with Tesla Motors under which the automaker opened retail galleries inside the Nordstrom locations in The Grove , Los Angeles , in SouthPark Mall in Charlotte , North Carolina and in Somerset Collection in Troy , Michigan .
In 2016 , Nordstrom began selling products from J. Crew , Olivia Palermo + Chelsea28 , Adore Me , and Eloquii .
In 2017 , Nordstrom announced they would be expanding their natural beauty - focused stations .
Stations would include products from Origins , Tata Harper , and Bare Minerals .
On February 2 , 2017 , Bloomberg News reported that Nordstrom would cease to carry Ivanka Trump 's branded fashion line , citing weak sales .
The retailer cuts 10 percent of its most poorly performing brands each year .
Nordstrom 's action came after a boycott campaign against retailers carrying products having Trump family labels .
President Donald Trump responded with a tweet directed at Nordstrom , condemning the brand for its treatment of his daughter .
The company 's stock dropped by 0.65 % in the aftermath of the tweet before ending the day with a gain of more than 4 % .
Fortune declared this quick recovery to have broken Trump 's market - moving " tweet curse " .
In October 2017 , Nordstrom launched its first " Nordstrom Local " in West Hollywood , which is set to focus on personal shopping and styling , rather than carrying merchandise .
In June 2017 , Nordstrom Inc. 's founding family , which owned 31.2 percent of the company , said it was looking to take Nordstrom private .
In October , the family suspended its efforts , because of trouble completing a financing package .
Lenders were asking for 13 percent interest , about twice the typical rate for retailers .
EXPANSION INTO CANADA Section::::Expansion into Canada .
The Calgary store opened in Chinook Centre on September 19 , 2014 , the Ottawa store opened in Rideau Centre on March 6 , 2015 , the Vancouver Pacific Centre store opened on September 18 , 2015 , and the Toronto Eaton Centre in 2016 .
Later in 2016 , a second Toronto location was opened at Yorkdale Shopping Centre on October 21 , 2016 .
Additionally , a third Toronto store in Sherway Gardens opened on September 15 , 2017 .
The first Nordstrom Rack opened at Vaughan Mills on March 21st and the a second location in Deerfoot Meadows in Calgary and a flagship location at One Bloor in Toronto on May 3 , 2018 .
Nordstrom Rack is set to open three other additional stores within 2018 ; one in September 2018 at Heartland Town Centre in Mississauga , one at Ottawa Trainyards and finally one at South Edmonton Commons .
Additional store opening locations have not been announced .
PUERTO RICO Section::::Puerto Rico .
Nordstrom opened a 138,000-square - foot , two - level , full - line store March 2015 in The Mall of San Juan in San Juan , Puerto Rico .
After Hurricane Maria in 2017 , the store suffered major water damage and it closed temporarily after the hurricane .
Nordstrom announced plans to reopen the store on November 9 , 2018 .
SALES EVENTS
Section::::Sales events .
Nordstrom holds six designated sale events each year .
Two of these are Half - Yearly sales , which take place semi - annually in May and late December , as well as three additional seasonal sales .
Nordstrom 's largest sale event is the Nordstrom Anniversary Sale , which is held each July .
Limited amounts of merchandise set to be released for the following fall are sent to Nordstrom stores early , where they are sold at a large discount .
For ten days prior to Anniversary Sale , Nordstrom rewards members are able to make appointments with sales associates to shop the sale early through the store 's Early Access event .
RANKINGS Section::::Rankings .
Nordstrom was listed at No . 72 in Fortune magazine 's 100 Best Companies to Work For 2009 .
Nordstrom is a Hall of Fame member of Fortune magazine 's " 100 Best Companies to Work For " .
Nordstrom was No . 36 on the same list in 2008 , No . 24 in 2007 , No . 46 in 2006 and No . 88 in 2005 .
For the 20th year in a row , they made the list coming in at No . 94 in 2017 .
In 2010 , it ranked number 53 , and dropped to 61 in 2012 .
As of 2018 , the company ranked 183rd on the Fortune 500 list of the largest United States corporations by revenue .
In December 2013 , the fashion trade magazine , Women 's Wear Daily reported Nordstrom as the top fashion retailer .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website