BBC RADIO 4 EXTRA BBC Radio 4
Extra is a British digital radio station broadcasting archived repeats of comedy , drama and documentary programmes nationally , 24 hours a day .
It is the principal broadcaster of the BBC 's spoken - word archive , and as a result the majority of its programming originates from that archive .
It also broadcasts extended and companion programmes to those broadcast on sister station BBC Radio 4 , and provides a " catch - up " service for certain Radio 4 programmes .
The station launched in December 2002 as BBC 7 , broadcasting a similar mix of archive comedy , drama and current children 's radio .
The station was renamed BBC Radio 7 in 2008 , then relaunched as Radio 4 Extra in April 2011 .
For the first quarter of 2013 , Radio 4 Extra had a weekly audience of 1.642 million people and had a market share of 0.95 % ; in the last quarter of 2016 the numbers were 2.184 million listeners and 1.2 % of market share .
HISTORY BBC 7 Section::::History .
Section::::BBC 7 .
The station was initially launched as BBC 7 on 15 December 2002 by comedian Paul Merton .
The first programme was broadcast at 8 pm and was simulcast with Radio 4 .
The station , referred to by the codename ' Network Z ' while in development , was so named to reflect the station 's presence on the internet and on digital television in addition to radio .
The station broadcast mostly archived comedy and drama , in that the programme was either three or more years old or had been broadcast twice on their original station .
The station also broadcast a themed section for Children 's programmes .
This section carried a variety of programmes , including The Little Toe Radio Show ( later renamed CBeebies Radio ) , aimed at younger children and consisting of short serials , stories and rhymes , and The Big Toe Radio Show with phone - ins , quizzes and stories for the 8 + age group .
The segment also hosted the only news programme on the network presented by the Newsround team .
The station won the Sony Radio Academy Award for station sound in 2003 , was nominated for the Promo Award in 2004 , and in 2005 received a silver for the Short - Form award , plus nominations in the speech and digital terrestrial station - of - the - year sections .
Because of the station 's archive nature the station was scheduled , produced and researched by 17 people , excluding presenters .
The station was renamed on 4 October 2008 as BBC Radio 7 in an effort to bring it in line with other BBC Radio brands .
It also coincided with the introduction of a new network logo for the station .
During this later period , Radio 7 saw growth in its audience , with a growth rate of 9.5 % annually in 2010 , going from 931,000 listeners in the first quarter of that year to 949,000 a quarter later , making it the second most listened to BBC digital radio station at the time .
However , despite this growth , the audience of children between 4 and 14 was reported to be only at 25,000 and in February 2011
the BBC Trust approved a reduction in hours dedicated to children from 1,400 to 350 .
BBC RADIO 4
EXTRA Section::::BBC Radio 4 Extra .
The BBC announced their intention to relaunch the station on 2 March 2010 and following a public consultation , the proposal was approved by the corporation 's governing body the BBC Trust in February 2011 .
As a result , the station relaunched as BBC Radio 4 Extra on Saturday 2 April 2011 .
The relaunched station contained much of the same mix of programming with some new additions that reflected the new alignment with Radio 4 , many of which were extended , archive or spin offs of flagship Radio 4 programmes .
BROADCAST Section::::Broadcast .
BBC Radio
4 Extra is broadcast from Broadcasting House in central London , although due to the nature of the channel very little of the channel 's content is broadcast live from there with even the continuity announcements being pre - recorded .
The channel uses ten continuity announcers to link between programmes .
These currently are Wes Butters , Kathy Clugston , Jim Lee , David Miles , Joanna Pinnock , Susan Rae , Debbie Russ , Neil Sleat , Alan Smith , Zeb Soanes and Luke Tuddenham .
Previous presenters , including those presenting Radio 7 , include Penny Haslam , Helen Aitken , Rory Morrison , Steve Urquhart , Alex Riley and Michaela Saunders .
The station only operates on digital networks and so has no allocated analogue radio signal .
Instead it is broadcast over the internet on the BBC website , on services such as Radioplayer and TuneIn and for users of IPTV 's .
It is also available on digital radio ( on which it is broadcast monophonically ) and television services including digital terrestrial provider Freeview , cable television providers including Virgin Media and on satellite television providers Freesat and Sky who receive their signal from the Astra 2E satellite .
The pan - European nature of this satellite means that the signal can be received across northern Europe .
The controller of the station is Gwyneth Williams who is answerable to the Radio board in the BBC .
BBC Radio 4
Extra is currently only available in stereo on Digital TV ( Freeview / FreeSat / Sky / Virgin Media ) and online but not on DAB as its maximum bit rate is only 80kbps , only sufficient for it to be broadcast in mono .
PROGRAMMING Section::::Programming .
Although the current station is a rebranding of Radio 7 and contains a similar mix of archived programming , content has been brought further in line with BBC Radio 4 with new additions based upon their schedule .
These include extended versions of programmes such as The News Quiz and Desert Island Discs , the broadcast of archived editions of the latter as Desert Island Discs Revisited .
It has also previously included the addition of the programme Ambridge Extra , a more youth - orientated version of long - running radio soap The Archers , and an extended version of The Now Show .
Some programming is organised into programme blocks of similar programmes .
The late night Comedy Club segment broadcasts " two hours of contemporary comedy " most nights of the week and is primarily hosted by Arthur Smith .
A long - standing segment that remained following the change from Radio 7 , it was previously fronted by Alex Riley and Phil Williams .
Comedy previously available as CDs on the Laughing Stock label is also broadcast .
Drama is also broadcast , notably in The 7th Dimension evening segment .
A long - running segment continued from Radio 7 , the block airs speculative fiction , science fiction , fantasy and horror stories presented by Nicholas Briggs .
The segment contains programmes including Doctor Who audio dramas starring Paul McGann as the Eighth Doctor , as well as programmes imported from overseas including American broadcasts The Twilight Zone and Garrison Keillor 's Radio Show as well as Stuart McLean 's Vinyl Cafe from Canada .
However , The 7th Dimension has been recently controversially scrapped on weekday evenings , and with increasing additions of repeats of old Radio 4 documentaries , interviews and " educational / cultural " programmes concern is growing that the station 's original mandate to provide comedy , drama and entertainment is being increasingly sidelined , turning Radio 4 Extra into what some are already starting to refer to as " Radio Bore(4 ) " , Mk 2 .
ARCHIVE Section::::Archive .
Much of the channels schedule is formed of repeats from classic comedy and drama .
The schedule spans The Goon Show ( 1950s ) and Round the Horne ( 1960s ) , through Radio 2 favourites like The News Huddlines , Castle 's On The Air and Listen to Les to recent Radio 4 shows such as Little Britain and Dead Ringers .
Some of this content is newly discovered , such as copies of the version of Dick Barton Special Agent that were made for international distribution and early episodes of The Goon Show .
Despite having 50 years of archive material to draw from , R4e 's programming schedule , in the vast majority , consists of repeating the same content across a 2 year cycle .
ORIGINAL PROGRAMMES
Section::::Original programmes .
The station has broadcast original programmes .
Newsjack is a topical news sketch show in the spirit of Radio 4s Week
Ending which encourages contributions from listeners .
Spanking New on Seven was stand - up comedy , and the BBC New Comedy Competition a competition for new comedians .
Those who went on to have their own series on Radio 7 include John - Luke Roberts with Spats and Miriam Elia with A Series of Psychotic Episodes .
The Mitch Benn Music Show featured comedy songs introduced by Mitch Benn .
The Colin and Fergus ' Digi Radio comedy sketch show ran for two series in 200506 .
Serious About Comedy was a weekly show presented by Robin Ince in which comedians and comedy critics discussed comedy television , radio , DVDs , and films .
Tilt was a satirical look at the week 's news of views other than the norm .
Knocker was a sitcom about a market researcher , written by and starring Neil Edmond .
ORIGINAL RADIO 7 PROGRAMMES Section::::Original Radio 7 programmes .
While most shows on Radio 7 were repeats , original programmes included :
* Big Toe Books ( Children 's show ) * Serious About Comedy ( Comedy review show )
* Tilt ( Satirical sketch comedy )
* Newsjack ( Satirical sketch comedy )
* Spats ( Sketch comedy ) * Knocker ( Sitcom ) * The Penny Dreadfuls Present … ( Comedy )
* Undone ( Sci - fi comedy )
* The Spaceship ( Sci - fi comedy )
* Oneira ( Sci - fi comedy )
*
The Laxian Key ( Sci - fi comedy )
* Cold Blood ( Sci - fi drama )
* The Voice of God ( Sci - fi drama )
* Slipstream ( Sci - fi drama ) * A Series of Psychotic Episodes ( Sketch comedy )
* CBeebies Radio ( Children 's show ) * Colin and Fergus ' Digi Radio ( Sketch comedy )
* No Tomatoes ( Sketch comedy )
*
The Mitch Benn Music Show ( Musical comedy )
* Spanking New on Seven ( Stand - up )
* Play and Record ( Sketch comedy )
* Pleased to Meet You ( Comedy )
* Gus Murdoch 's Sacred Cows ( Comedy ) * Planet B ( Sci - fi drama )
*
Doctor
Who : The Eighth Doctor Adventures ( Sci - fi Drama )
*
The Man in Black ( Horror )
* The Scarifyers ( Horror comedy )
*
This is Pulp Fiction ( Crime fiction ) ORIGINAL RADIO 4 EXTRA PROGRAMMES Section::::Original Radio 4 Extra programmes .
Original programmes made for Radio 4 Extra .
*
Ambridge Extra ( Soap opera , spin - off from The Archers )
* Arthur Smith 's Balham Bash ( Variety show , debuted on Radio 4 Extra before being aired on Radio 4 )
* The 4 O'Clock Show ( Chat show , including children 's entertainment )
* Let 's Get Quizzical ( Documentary ) * Lord of the Flies ( dramatisation of William Golding 's novel )
*
Meet David Sedaris ( Comedy , debuted on Radio 4 Extra before being aired on Radio 4 )
*
The Nine Billion Names of God ( readings from Arthur C. Clarke 's short story collection of the same name )
*
Sarah Millican 's Support Group ( Sketch show , debuted on Radio 4 Extra before being aired on Radio 4 )
*
What 's So Funny ?
( Comedy review show )
* Neverwhere ( Neil Gaiman 's fantasy , first episode aired on Radio 4 with subsequent episodes on Radio 4 Extra ) SEE ALSO
* List of BBC radio stations REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS