THE LIZZIE MCGUIRE MOVIE
The Lizzie McGuire Movie is a 2003 American teen comedy film released by Walt Disney Pictures on May 2 , 2003 .
The film serves as the finale of the Disney Channel television series of the same name , and was the first theatrical film based on a Disney Channel series .
The film stars Hilary Duff , Adam Lamberg , Robert Carradine , Hallie Todd and Jake Thomas , and tells the story of Lizzie 's graduation trip to Rome .
At its release , the film peaked at number two at the domestic box office behind X2 : X - Men United .
The Lizzie McGuire Movie was released on August 12 , 2003 on VHS and DVD .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film begins as Lizzie McGuire prepares for her junior - high graduation with one of her two closest friends , David " Gordo " Gordon .
Her other best friend , Miranda , has chosen to skip the graduation ceremony in favor of a trip to Mexico City to visit relatives .
During the ceremony , Lizzie trips onstage and accidentally brings the curtain down on her fellow graduates ; this causes her to be teased by her ex - best friend Kate Sanders and her younger brother Matt .
After graduation , Lizzie and some of her class embark on a trip to Rome , Italy , chaperoned by their future high school principal , the rude and stern Angela Ungermeyer .
To their dismay , Lizzie and Kate are assigned to the same hotel room .
Their class visits the Trevi Fountain , where Lizzie is approached by an Italian pop star named Paolo who mistakes her for his singing partner , Isabella .
Paolo asks Lizzie to meet him at the fountain the next day , and she feigns illness to sneak away .
He explains that he and Isabella are booked for the Italian Music Awards , but she left Italy after their breakup .
Paolo tells Lizzie that Isabella lip syncs , and begs her to pose as Isabella for the concert .
Lizzie reluctantly agrees but soon begins to enjoy the experience and to fall in love with Paolo .
Lizzie continues to fake being ill to prepare for the concert , but Kate quickly figures out her secret .
To Lizzie 's surprise , Kate agrees to help her and the two become friends again .
Meanwhile , Ms. Ungermeyer interrogates the students to learn who has been sneaking out .
Gordo takes the blame and is sent back home as punishment .
Lizzie is shocked when Kate says that Gordo sacrificed himself to protect her .
Back home , Matt browses the Internet and finds Italian gossip sites with pictures of Lizzie as Isabella .
When he tells his parents , the family flies to Rome .
At the airport Gordo meets Isabella , who is upset that someone is impersonating her .
She and Gordo realize that Paolo is planning to have a nervous Lizzie unknowingly sing live at the concert ( as Isabella actually does ) , creating the impression that Isabella is a fake , which would damage Isabella 's career and embarrass Lizzie .
Gordo and Isabella rush to the concert to stop him .
When Lizzie 's parents arrive in Rome , Ms. Ungermeyer learns that Lizzie is missing .
Ethan reveals that she is performing at the Italian Music Awards , and Lizzie 's family and the class also rush to the concert .
Backstage , Gordo and Isabella find Lizzie preparing for the show and warn her about Paolo 's scheme .
Lizzie refuses to believe them at first , but Isabella convinces her that Paolo is using her .
Ms. Ungermeyer gets the class ( and Lizzie 's family ) into the concert by pushing through the bouncers .
During the performance Isabella and Gordo expose Paolo ( who is actually the one who lip syncs ) by turning on his microphone , revealing his real voice .
Embarrassed , Paolo runs off stage and is ambushed outside by paparazzi .
Isabella introduces Lizzie to the crowd , and the two of them sing " What Dreams Are Made Of " ; when Isabella leaves the stage , Lizzie finishes the song solo , displaying a newfound confidence .
Later , they all celebrate at the hotel 's after party , where Ms. Ungermeyer rescinds Gordo 's punishment .
Lizzie and Gordo sneak away from the party to go up to the roof , where they promise to never let things change between them .
The two kiss and then rejoin the party .
CAST
* Hilary Duff as Elizabeth Brooke " Lizzie " McGuire / Isabella Parigi
* Singing voice for Isabella Parigi provided by Haylie Duff * Adam Lamberg as David Zephyr " Gordo " Gordon , Lizzie 's best friend * Robert Carradine as Samuel " Sam " McGuire , Lizzie and Matt 's father * Hallie Todd as Joanne " Jo " McGuire , Lizzie and Matt 's mother
* Jake Thomas as Matthew " Matt " McGuire , Lizzie 's younger brother * Yani Gellman as Paolo Valisari * Alex Borstein as Ms. Angela Ungermeyer * Clayton Snyder as Ethan Craft , Lizzie 's classmate * Ashlie Brillault as Katherine " Kate " Sanders , Lizzie 's popular ex - best friend * Brendan Kelly as Sergei , Paolo 's bodyguard * Carly Schroeder as Melina Bianco , Matt 's best friend * Daniel Escobar as Mr. Escobar , the drama teacher / choir director at Hillridge Junior High School
* Jody Raicot as Giorgio
* Terra MacLeod as Franca DiMontecatini * Claude Knowlton as the stage manager PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film , produced by Stan Rogow , was directed by Jim Fall from a screenplay by Susan Estelle Jansen , Ed Decter and John J. Strauss , was filmed on location in Rome , Italy in the fall of 2002 .
All the series characters reprised their roles except for Lalaine ( Miranda Sanchez ) , who left the series late in the second season to film the Disney Channel original movie You Wish !
Her character was said to be on vacation with her family in Mexico City .
RECEPTION REVIEWS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Reviews .
The film had a mixed critical reception based on 98 reviews on Rotten Tomatoes , giving a 41 % overall approval rating .
The site 's consensus stated it was a " harmless piece of fluff that ought to satisfy fans of the TV show " .
Scott Brown of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B+ : "
Let 's face it : Lizzie McGuire ( Hilary Duff ) is just too darn polished to be a junior - high underdog , even by the standards of her ' luxe suburban environs ' .
But that has n't tarnished her comeback - kid cred among the six - and - ups who faithfully follow her Disney Channel show — and it does n't make The Lizzie McGuire Movie , a clever , agreeably weightless theatrical outing , any less enjoyable . "
Conversely , Roger Ebert gave the film two stars out of four , but praised Borstein 's performance , calling her work " the only really delightful element in the movie ; everything else is simply slick and professional . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
In its opening weekend the film grossed $ 17,338,755 in 2,825 theaters in the United States and Canada , ranking second behind .
By the end of its run , The Lizzie McGuire Movie grossed $ 42,734,455 domestically and $ 12,800,000 internationally for a worldwide total of $ 55,534,455 .
AWARDS * 2003 ( won ) : Teen Choice Award for Movie Breakout Star , Female ( Hilary Duff ) * 2003 ( nominated ) :
Teen Choice Awards for Movie Comedy , Movie Comedy Actress ( Hilary Duff ) * 2004
( nominated ) :
Leo Award for Feature - Length Drama :
Best Visual Effects ( Gary Gutierrez , Jayne Craig , Bruce Woloshyn , Simon Ager and Wes Sargent ) SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The Lizzie McGuire Movies soundtrack was released on April 22 , 2003 .
It is composed primarily of songs from ( or inspired by ) the film , including Hilary Duff 's " Why Not " and her sister Haylie 's " Girl in the Band " .
" Why Not " was released as a single outside the United States on June 23 , 2003 and later included on Hilary Duff 's second album , Metamorphosis ( with different lyrics in the first verse ) .
The album has been certified platinum by the CRIA , and 2x platinum by the RIAA for selling 2,000,000 copies in the U.S. TRACK LISTING CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
align="left"Chart ( 2003 ) !
align="left"Peakposition
align="left"Australian
Albums Chart align="left"Canadian
Albums Chart !
align="left"Chart ( 2004 ) !
align="left"Peakposition
align="left"US Billboard 200 align="left"US Billboard Top Kid Albums
align="left"US Billboard Top Soundtracks CERTIFICATIONS Section::::Certifications . ! scope="col
" Region ! scope="col " Certification ! scope="col " Certified units / Sales !
scope="row " United States ( RIAA ) ! scope="row " Canada ( CRIA ) CANCELLED SEQUEL
Section::::Cancelled sequel .
Following the film , there were plans to continue the Lizzie McGuire series , one of which included a planned sequel film .
Nothing came to this due to creative difference with Duff and Disney .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Review : The Lizzie McGuire Movie - Disney Family
* Article about " Why Not " on TotalGirl !
Australia * Walt Disney Records Lizzie McGuire Movie Soundtrack