PRIME MINISTER 'S
QUESTIONS
Prime Minister 's Questions ( often abbreviated to PMQs and officially known as Questions to the Prime Minister ) is a constitutional convention in the United Kingdom , currently held as a single session every Wednesday at noon when the House of Commons is sitting , during which the Prime Minister spends around half an hour answering questions from Members of Parliament ( MPs ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Although prime ministers have answered questions in parliament for centuries , until the 1880s questions to the prime minister were treated the same as questions to other Ministers of the Crown : asked without notice , on days when ministers were available in whatever order MPs rose to ask them .
In 1881 fixed time - limits for questions were introduced and questions to the prime minister were moved to the last slot of the day as a courtesy to the 72-year - old prime minister at the time , William Gladstone , so he could come to the Commons later in the day .
In 1953 , when Winston Churchill was prime minister , it was agreed that questions would be submitted on fixed days ( Tuesdays and Thursdays ) .
A Procedure Committee report in 1959 recommended that questions to the prime minister be taken in two fixed - period , 15-minute slots on Tuesday and Thursday afternoons .
The recommendations were put into practice under Harold Macmillan during a successful experiment from 18 July 1961 to the end of the session ( 4 August ) .
The very first question was delivered by Labour MP Fenner Brockway , asking to which Minister the UK Ambassador to South Africa would be responsible .
In response to the Prime Minister 's answer , Brockway said " May I express our appreciation of this new arrangement for answering Questions and the hope that it will be convenient for the Prime Minister as well as useful to the House ? " PMQs were made permanent in the following parliamentary session , with the first of these on 24 October 1961 .
The style and culture of PMQs has changed gradually over time .
According to Speaker Selwyn Lloyd , the now famous disorderly behaviour of MPs during PMQs first arose as a result of the personal animosity between Harold Wilson and Edward Heath ; before this PMQs had been lively but comparatively civilised .
In the past , prime ministers often opted to transfer questions to the relevant minister , and Leaders of the Opposition did not always take their allocated number of questions in some sessions , sometimes opting not to ask any questions at all .
This changed during the premiership of Margaret Thatcher , when the prime minister chose not to transfer any questions to other members of her Cabinet , and Labour leader Neil Kinnock began asking more questions than his predecessors .
His successor , John Smith , established the precedent of always taking his full allocation of questions .
One of Tony Blair 's first acts as prime minister was to replace the two 15-minute sessions with a single 30-minute session on Wednesdays , initially at 3 p.m.
but since 2003 at noon .
The allocated number of questions in each session for the Leader of the Opposition was doubled from three to six , and the leader of the third - largest party in the Commons was given two questions .
The first PMQs to use this new format took place on 21 May 1997 .
During the Conservative - Liberal Democrat coalition government from 2010–2015 , the leader of the Liberal Democrats , as a member of the government , did not ask questions during PMQs .
Instead the leader of the second largest parliamentary opposition party at the time , Nigel Dodds of the Democratic Unionist Party ( DUP ) , usually asked a single question later in the session followed by at least one MP from another smaller party such as the Scottish National Party or Plaid Cymru .
PRACTICE Section::::Practice .
Backbench MPs wishing to ask a question must enter their names on the Order Paper .
The names of entrants are then shuffled in a ballot to produce a random order in which they will be called by the Speaker .
The Speaker will then call on MPs to put their questions , usually in an alternating fashion : one MP from the government benches is followed by one from the opposition benches .
MPs who are not selected may be chosen to ask a supplementary question if they " catch the eye " of the Speaker , which is done by standing and sitting immediately before the prime minister gives an answer .
The Leader of the Opposition usually asks six questions at PMQs , either as a whole block or in two separate groups of three .
If the first question is asked by a government backbencher , the Leader of the Opposition is the second MP to ask questions .
If the first question is asked by an opposition MP , this will be followed by a question from a government MP and then by the questions from the Leader of the Opposition .
The leader of the third largest parliamentary party ( the Liberal Party until 1988 , the Liberal Democrats from 1988–2010 and the Scottish National Party from 2015 ) would then ask two questions .
The first formal question on the Order Paper , posed by simply saying " Number one , Mr. Speaker " , is usually to ask the Prime Minister " if s / he will list his / her engagements for the day " .
The Prime Minister usually replies : The reason for such a question is that , historically , the Prime Minister may be questioned only as to those matters for which he or she is directly responsible .
Such matters are relatively few in number , because many substantive matters are handled by the other Ministers in the Cabinet .
By requiring the Prime Minister to list his or her engagements , the members may then inquire whether the Prime Minister ought to be engaged in some other activity or be taking some other action .
Before listing the day 's engagements , the Prime Minister sometimes extends condolences or offers congratulations after significant events .
During the Iraq War , Tony Blair introduced the practice of naming any British military personnel who had been killed in service since the last time he addressed the House .
This practice was continued by Blair 's successors as prime minister .
After this , the MP may ask a supplementary question about any subject which might occupy the Prime Minister 's time .
Most MPs table the same engagements question and so after it has been asked for the first time , any other MPs who have tabled the same question are simply called to ask an untabled question , meaning that the Prime Minister will not know what questions will be asked .
Occasionally the first question tabled is on a specific area of policy , not the engagements question .
This , though , is quite rare as it would allow the Prime Minister to prepare a response in advance ; the non - descript question allows some chance of catching him or her out with an unexpected supplementary question .
At times of national or personal tragedy or crisis , PMQs have been temporarily suspended .
The last such suspension occurred on 25 February 2009 when the Speaker , at the request of Prime Minister Gordon Brown , suspended the Commons until 12:30 p.m. as a mark of respect following the unexpected death of Opposition leader David Cameron 's son .
Prime Minister 's Questions was also suspended after the sudden death of the leader of the Labour Party , John Smith , in 1994 .
PMQs has been filmed since 1989 , and have been broadcast live since 1990 .
They are broadcast live in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two and BBC Parliament TV channels .
It is also broadcast outside the United Kingdom , most notably on the US cable network C - SPAN and has been spoofed on the American late - night television sketch comedy Saturday Night Live .
In a C - SPAN interview in 1991 , shortly after the network started to broadcast PMQs , US President George H. W. Bush said , " I count my blessings for the fact I do n't have to go into that pit that John Major stands in , nose - to - nose with the opposition , all yelling at each other . "
DEPUTY PRIME MINISTER 'S QUESTIONS Section::::Deputy Prime Minister 's Questions .
If the Prime Minister is away on official business when PMQs is scheduled , their role is usually filled by the Deputy Prime Minister .
If this office is not occupied or the Deputy Prime Minister is not available , the next most senior member of the Cabinet will receive questions ( such as the First Secretary of State or the Deputy Leader of the government party ) .
In the absence of the Leader of the Opposition , the opposition questions will be led by the deputy leader of the opposition .
In Cameron – Clegg coalition , Nick Clegg has answered 15 PMQs and William Hague twice .
In Second Cameron ministry , George Osborne has answered 3 times .
In the second May ministry , Damian Green has replied twice and three times for David Lidington .
CONCERNS OVER
NOISE LEVELS
Section::::Concerns over noise levels .
On 17 April 2014 , Speaker Bercow told the BBC that the " histrionics and cacophony of noise " in PMQs were so bad that a number of female MPs had told him they would stop attending .
Bercow described it as being a " real problem " and that " A number of seasoned parliamentarians , who are not shrinking violets , not delicate creatures at all , are saying , ' This is so bad that I am not going to take part , I am not going to come along , I feel embarrassed by it . '
" Since becoming Leader of the Opposition , Jeremy Corbyn has attempted to reform PMQs by using questions submitted by members of the public and attempting to reduce the theatrical element .
However , YouGov polling of viewers in February 2017 suggested that Corbyn had failed in his attempts at reform , with 77 % of respondents agreeing that it consists of ' too much point scoring ' .
LEADERS AT THE DISPATCH BOX SINCE 1961 Section::::Leaders at the dispatch box since 1961 .
The most high - profile contributors at Prime Minister 's questions are the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition , who speak opposite each other at the dispatch boxHarold Macmillan rowspan="4 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " rowspan="17 " colspan="2 "
None 1961–1963 rowspan="2 " Harold Wilson 1963 rowspan="2 " width="1 " bgcolor= " "
rowspan="2"Harold Wilson
rowspan="2 " width="1 " bgcolor=
" " Alec Douglas - Home 1964–1965 Edward Heath Harold Wilson 1970–1974 rowspan="3 " width="1 " bgcolor=
" " rowspan="2"Harold Wilson rowspan="3 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " Edward Heath 1974–1975 rowspan="2 " Margaret Thatcher 1975–1976 rowspan="7 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " rowspan="3"Margaret Thatcher rowspan="7 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " James Callaghan 1979–1980 rowspan="2 " Neil Kinnock 1983–1990 rowspan="4 " John Major 1990–1992 John Smith 1992–1994 rowspan="10 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " rowspan="7"Tony Blair rowspan="10 " width="1 " bgcolor=
" " John Major rowspan="10 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " rowspan="2 " Paddy Ashdown 1997 rowspan="2 " William Hague 1997–1999 rowspan="4 " Charles Kennedy 1999–2001 rowspan="5 " David Cameron 2005–2006 rowspan="2 " Menzies Campbell 2006–07 rowspan="3 " Gordon Brown 2007–2010 Vince Cable 2007 Nick Clegg 2007–2010 rowspan="6 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " rowspan="4"David Cameron rowspan="6 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " Harriet Harman rowspan="2 " colspan="2 " None 2010 Harriet Harman rowspan="6 " width="1 " bgcolor= " " rowspan="3 " Angus Robertson 2015 rowspan="3 " Jeremy Corbyn 2015–2016 rowspan="2 " Theresa May 2016–2017 Ian Blackford 2017 – MEDIA COVERAGE Section::::Media coverage .
In the United Kingdom , Prime Minister 's Questions is broadcast live via cameras within the Press Gallery inside the House of Commons on domestic national television channels BBC Two , the BBC News Channel , BBC Parliament and Sky News .
It is also broadcast live on the national radio station BBC Radio 5 Live .
In the United States , Prime Minister 's Questions is broadcast live on the national C - SPAN television network .
There is no live radio coverage of Prime Ministers Question 's in that country .
Worldwide , Prime Ministers Question 's is broadcast live via the official British Parliament website parliamentlive.tv , in visual and audio form .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS