BB GUN BB guns are a type of air guns designed to shoot metallic ball projectiles called BBs — metal balls approximately the same size as the " BB " lead birdshots .
Modern BB guns usually have a barrel with a bore caliber of and are available in many varieties .
These guns usually use steel BB shots , either zinc- or copper - plated to resist corrosion , and measuring in diameter and in weight .
Some manufacturers still make the traditional lead balls around in weight and slightly larger in diameter , which are generally intended for use in rifled barrels due to lead having better malleability .
The term " BB gun " is often incorrectly used to describe a pellet gun , which fires non - spherical projectiles .
Although in many cases a steel BB can be fired in a pellet gun , pellets usually can not be fired in a gun specifically designed for BBs .
Similarly , the term is also often used incorrectly to address airsoft guns , which shoot plastic balls that are larger but much less dense and have significantly lower ballistic performance .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The term BB originated from the nomenclature of the size of steel shots used in a shotgun .
Size " BB " shots were normally , but tended to vary considerably in size due to the loose tolerances in shotgun shells .
The highest size shotgun pellet commonly used was named OO or double ought and was used for hunting deer and thus called buckshot , while the smaller BB - sized shot was typically used to shoot small / medium - sized birds and therefore was a birdshot .
In 1886 , the Markham Air Rifle Company in Plymouth , Michigan produced the first wooden - construct spring - piston air rifle design as a youth training gun , and used the BB - size birdshot as the chosen ammunition .
Two years later , the neighbouring Plymouth Air Rifle Company ( later renamed Daisy Manufacturing Company in 1895 ) introduced the first full - metal airgun that also shot BB shots — the Daisy BB Gun , which became very popular household name due to successful marketing .
Around 1900 , Daisy changed their BB - size bore diameter to , and began to market precision - made lead shot specifically for their BB guns .
They called these " round shots " , but the BB name was already well established , and most users continued calling their guns BB guns , and the projectiles as BB shots or just BBs .
Subsequently , the term BB became generic , and is used loosely referring to any small spherical projectiles of various calibers and materials .
This includes bearing balls often utilized by anti - personnel mines , .177 caliber lead / steel shots used by air guns , plastic round balls ( such as the pellets used by airsoft guns ) , small marbles and many others .
It has become ubiquitous to refer to any steel ball , such as a BB , as a " ball bearing " .
However , BBs should not be confused with a ball bearing , which is a mechanical component using bearing balls .
OPERATION Section::::Operation .
BB guns can use any of the operating mechanisms used for air guns .
However , due to the inherent limited accuracy and short range of the BB , only the simpler and less expensive mechanisms are generally used for guns designed to fire only BBs .
Because the strength of the steel BB does not allow it to be swaged with the low energies used to accelerate it through the barrel , BBs are slightly smaller ( ) than the internal diameter of the barrel ( ) .
This limits accuracy because little spin is imparted on the BB .
It also limits range , because some of the compressed air used to accelerate it is lost around the BB .
Since a BB will easily roll unhindered down the barrel , it is common to find guns that use a magnet in the loading mechanism to hold the BB at the rear of the barrel until it is fired .
The traditional , and still most common powerplant for BB guns is the spring piston , usually patterned after a lever - action rifle or a pump - action shotgun .
The lever - action rifle was the first type of BB gun , and still dominates the inexpensive youth BB gun market .
The Daisy Model 25 , modeled after a pump - action shotgun with a trombone pump - action mechanism , dominated the low - price , higher - performance market for over 50 years .
Lever - action models generally have very low velocities , around , a result of the weak springs used to keep cocking efforts low for use by youths .
The Daisy Model 25 typically achieved the highest velocities of its day , ranging from .
Multiple - pump pneumatic guns are also common .
Many pneumatic pellet guns provide the ability to use BBs as a cheaper alternative to lead shot .
Some of these guns have rifled barrels , but the slightly undersized BBs do n't swage in the barrel , so the rifling does not impart a significant spin .
These are the types of guns that will benefit most from using precision lead BB shot .
The pneumatic BB gun can attain much higher velocities than the traditional spring piston types .
The last common type of power for BB guns is pre - compressed gas , most commonly the 12 gram CO powerlet .
The powerlet is a disposable metal flask containing 12 grams of compressed carbon dioxide , which expands to propel the BB .
These are primarily used in pistol BB guns , and unlike spring - piston or pneumatic types , these are capable of rapid fire .
A typical CO BB pistol uses a spring - loaded magazine to feed BBs , and a double - action trigger mechanism to chamber a BB and cock the hammer .
However some guns ( either to stay true to the original gun or to make the trigger pull easier ) do have a single - action trigger .
Either type of gun may also have blowback action , where CO will push the slide back in addition to firing a BB .
When firing , the hammer strikes a valve hooked to the CO source , which releases a measured amount of CO gas to fire the BB , this also gives it a realistic feature .
Velocities of CO powered BB pistols are moderate , and drop off as the pressure in the CO source drops .
Many CO BB guns are patterned after popular firearms such as the Colt M1911 , and can be used for training as well as recreation .
Some gas - powered BB guns use a larger source of gas , and provide machine gun - like fire .
These types , most notably the Shooting Star Tommy Gun ( originally known as the Feltman ) are commonly found at carnivals .
The MacGlashan BB Gun , was used to train antiaircraft gunners in the United States Army Air Corps and United States Navy during World War II .
A popular commercial model was the Larc M-19 , which used 1 pound ( 454 g ) canisters of Freon-12 refrigerant .
These types have very simple operating mechanisms , based on a venturi pump .
The gas is released in a constant stream , and this is used to suck the BBs up into the barrel at rates as high as 3600 rounds per minute .
COMPETITION USE Section::::Competition use .
It is possible to shoot competitively with a BB gun .
The National Rifle Association youth shooting program has classifications for smoothbore BB guns , open to ages 14 – 18 , and these classes are popular with youth groups such as Boy Scouts of America and 4H. SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Most BB - firing airguns can shoot faster than .
Some airguns have the ability to fire considerably faster , even beyond .
Although claims are often exaggerated , a few airguns can actually fire a standard 0.177 caliber lead pellet faster than , but these are generally not BB - firing guns .
A BB with a velocity of has skin piercing capability , and a velocity reaching can fracture bone .
The potential exists for killing someone ; this potential increases with velocity , but also rapidly decreases with distance .
The effective penetrating range of a BB gun with a muzzle velocity of is approximately .
A person wearing jeans at this distance would not sustain serious injury .
However , even at this distance a BB still might penetrate bare skin , and even if not , could leave a severe and painful bruise .
The maximum range of a BB gun in the range is , provided the muzzle is elevated to the optimum angle .
Steel BBs are also notably prone to ricochet off hard surfaces such as brick , concrete , metal , or wood end grain .
Eye protection is essential when shooting BBs at these materials .
More so than when shooting lead pellets , since a BB bouncing off a hard surface can retain a large portion of its initial energy
( pellets usually flatten and absorb energy ) , and could easily cause serious eye damage .
QUICK KILL / QUICK FIRE TRAINING Section::::Quick Kill / Quick Fire training .
The U.S. Army trained recruits in Quick Kill techniques using Daisy Model 99 BB guns to improve soldiers using their weapons in the Vietnam War from 1967 to 1973 .
The technique was developed for the Army by Bobby Lamar " Lucky " McDaniel and Mike Jennings .
The sights were removed from the BB guns for this training .
The name was later changed to " Quick Fire " training .
LEGAL STATUS Section::::Legal status .
BB guns are often regulated as a type of air gun .
Air gun laws vary widely by jurisdiction .
BB GUNS IN POPULAR
CULTURE Section::::BB guns in popular culture .
One of the most famous BB guns is the Red Ryder BB Gun by Daisy Outdoor Products , modeled after the Winchester lever - action rifle .
First introduced in 1940 , it became an iconic American toy , and is still in production today .
It was prominently featured in A Christmas Story , in which Ralphie Parker requests one for Christmas , but is repeatedly rebuffed with the warning
" You 'll shoot your eye out " .
The movie 's fictional BB gun , described as the " Red Ryder carbine - action , two hundred shot Range Model air rifle with a compass in the stock and this thing which tells time " , was not a real gun .
The Red Ryder featured in the movie was specially made to match author Jean Shepherd 's story ( which may be artistic license , but was the configuration Shepherd claimed to remember ) .
The guns and a stand - up advertisement featuring the Red Ryder character appeared in a Higbee 's store window in the film , along with dolls , a train , and Radio Flyer wagons .
An episode of My Name Is Earl called " BB " focused on the title character having accidentally shot a girl with a BB gun when he was younger , inadvertently causing a falling - out between her and her father .
SEE ALSO
* List of air guns
* Pellet ( air gun )
* Airsoft gun REFERENCES EXTERNAL
LINKS
* US Patent 4,083,349 Rapid - fire
, fluid actuated B.B. gun , the patent for the Larc M-19 BB machine gun
* How to Get Started , Airgun Competition page from NRA site , covering air gun and BB gun competitions
* US Army Quick Kill training https://web.archive.org/web/20080321020849/http://www.i-kirk.info/misc/quickkill/qwikill.htm
* How to Get Started , Airgun Competition page from NRA site , covering air gun and BB gun competitions
* BB guns Reference to BB gun history , and BB gun types