MEERKAT
The meerkat or suricate ( Suricata suricatta ) is a small carnivoran belonging to the mongoose family ( Herpestidae ) .
It is the only member of the genus Suricata .
Meerkats live in all parts of the Kalahari Desert in Botswana , in much of the Namib Desert in Namibia and southwestern Angola , and in South Africa .
A group of meerkats is called a " mob " , " gang " or " clan " .
A meerkat clan often contains about 20 meerkats , but some super - families have 50 or more members .
In captivity , meerkats have an average life span of 12–14 years , and about half this in the wild .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
" Meerkat " is a loanword from Afrikaans ( ) .
The name has a Dutch origin , but by misidentification .
In Dutch , meerkat means the guenon , a monkey of the genus Cercopithecus .
The word meerkat is Dutch for " lake cat " , but although the suricata is a feliform , it is not of the cat family ; the word possibly started as a Dutch adaptation of a derivative of Sanskrit markaṭa =
" ape " , perhaps in Africa via an Indian sailor on board a Dutch East India Company ship .
In early literature , suricates were referred as mierkat .
In colloquial Afrikaans , mier means termite , and kat means cat .
It has been speculated that the name comes from their frequent association with termite mounds or the termites they eat .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
Three subspecies are currently recognized : !
Image ! !
Scientific name ! !
Common Name ! !
Distribution DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The meerkat is a small diurnal herpestid ( mongoose ) weighing on average about .
Its long slender body and limbs give it a body length of and an added tail length of around .
The meerkat uses its tail to balance when standing upright , as well as for signaling .
Its face tapers , coming to a point at the nose , which is brown .
The eyes always have black patches around them , and they have small black crescent - shaped ears .
Like cats , meerkats have binocular vision , their eyes being on the front of their faces .
At the end of each of a meerkat 's " fingers " is a claw used for digging burrows and digging for prey .
Claws are also used with muscular hindlegs to help climb trees .
Meerkats have four toes on each foot and long slender limbs .
The coat is usually peppered gray , tan , or brown with silver .
They have short parallel stripes across their backs , extending from the base of the tail to the shoulders .
The patterns of stripes are unique to each meerkat .
The underside of the meerkat has no markings , but the belly has a patch which is only sparsely covered with hair and shows the black skin underneath .
The meerkat uses this area to absorb heat while standing on its rear legs , usually early in the morning after cold desert nights .
DIET AND FORAGING BEHAVIOUR Section::::Diet and foraging behaviour .
Meerkats are primarily insectivores , but also eat other animals ( lizards , snakes , scorpions , spiders , eggs , small mammals , millipedes , centipedes and , more rarely , small birds ) , plants and fungi ( the desert truffle Kalaharituber pfeilii ) .
Meerkats are immune to certain types of venom , including the very strong venom of the scorpions of the Kalahari Desert .
Baby meerkats do not start foraging for food until they are about 1 month old , and do so by following an older member of the group who acts as the pup 's tutor .
Meerkats forage in a group with one " sentry " on guard watching for predators while the others search for food .
Sentry duty is usually approximately an hour long .
The meerkat standing guard makes peeping sounds when all is well .
A meerkat has the ability to dig through a quantity of sand equal to its own weight in just seconds .
Digging is done to create burrows , to get food and also to create dust clouds to distract predators .
PREDATORS Section::::Predators .
Martial eagles , tawny eagles and jackals are the main predators of meerkats .
Meerkats sometimes die of snakebite in confrontations with snakes ( puff adders and Cape cobras ) .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Meerkats become sexually mature at about two years of age and can have one to four pups in a litter , with three pups being the most common litter size .
Meerkats are iteroparous and can reproduce any time of the year .
The pups are allowed to leave the burrow at two to three weeks old .
There is no precopulatory display ; the male may fight with the female until she submits to him and copulation begins .
Gestation lasts approximately 11 weeks and the young are born within the underground burrow and are altricial ( undeveloped ) .
The young 's ears open at about 10 days of age , and their eyes at 10–14 days .
They are weaned around 49 to 63 days .
Usually , the alpha pair reserves the right to mate and normally kills any young not its own , to ensure that its offspring have the best chance of survival .
The dominant couple may also evict , or kick out the mothers of the offending offspring .
New meerkat groups are often formed by evicted females joining a group of males .
Females appear to be able to discriminate the odour of their kin from the odour of their non - kin .
Kin recognition is a useful ability that facilitates cooperation among relatives and the avoidance of inbreeding .
When mating does occur between meerkat relatives , it often results in negative fitness consequences or inbreeding depression .
Inbreeding depression was evident for a variety of traits : pup mass at emergence from the natal burrow , hind - foot length , growth until independence and juvenile survival .
These negative effects are likely due to the increased homozygosity that arises from inbreeding and the consequent expression of deleterious recessive mutations .
The avoidance of inbreeding and the promotion of outcrossing allow the masking of deleterious recessive mutations .
( Also see Complementation ( genetics ) . )
BEHAVIOUR
Section::::Behaviour .
Meerkats are small burrowing animals , living in large underground networks with multiple entrances which they leave only during the day , except to avoid the heat of the afternoon .
They are very social creatures and they live in colonies together .
Animals in the same group groom each other regularly .
The alpha pair often scent - mark subordinates of the group to express their authority .
There may be up to 30 meerkats in a group .
To look out for predators , one or more meerkats stand sentry , to warn others of approaching dangers .
When a predator is spotted , the meerkat performing as sentry gives a warning bark or whistle , and other members of the group run and hide in one of the many holes they have spread across their territory .
Meerkats also babysit the young in the group .
Females that have never produced offspring of their own often lactate to feed the alpha pair 's young .
They also protect the young from threats , often endangering their own lives .
On warning of danger , the babysitter takes the young underground to safety and is prepared to defend them if the danger follows .
Meerkats are also known to share their burrow with the yellow mongoose and ground squirrel .
Like many species , meerkat young learn by observing and mimicking adult behaviour , though adults also engage in active instruction .
For example , meerkat adults teach their pups how to eat a venomous scorpion : they will remove the stinger and help the pup learn how to handle the creature .
Despite this altruistic behaviour , meerkats sometimes kill young members of their group .
Subordinate meerkats have been seen killing the offspring of more senior members in order to improve their own offspring 's position .
When colonies are exposed to human presence for a long time , they will become habituated , which allows for documentation of their natural behavior .
It is not unusual for camera crews , who must largely stay still for long periods while filming , to be utilized as convenient sentry posts .
VOCALIZATION Section::::Vocalization .
Meerkat calls may carry specific meanings , with particular calls indicating the type of predator and the urgency of the situation .
In addition to alarm calls , meerkats also make panic calls , recruitment calls , and moving calls .
They chirrup , trill , growl , or bark , depending on the circumstances .
Meerkats make different alarm calls depending upon whether they see an aerial or a terrestrial predator .
Moreover , acoustic characteristics of the call will change with the urgency of the potential predatory episode .
Therefore , six different predatory alarm calls with six different meanings have been identified : aerial predator with low , medium , and high urgency ; and terrestrial predator with low , medium , and high urgency .
Meerkats respond differently after hearing a terrestrial predator alarm call than after hearing an aerial predator alarm call .
For example , upon hearing a high - urgency terrestrial predator alarm call , meerkats are most likely to seek shelter and scan the area .
On the other hand , upon hearing a high - urgency aerial predator alarm call , meerkats are most likely to crouch down .
On many occasions under these circumstances , they also look towards the sky .
MEERKATS AS PETS Section::::Meerkats as pets .
Meerkats , being wild animals , make poor pets .
They can be aggressive , especially toward guests and they may also bite .
They will scent - mark their owner and the house ( their " territory " ) .
SEE ALSO
* Kalahari Meerkat Project , a long - term research project
* Meerkats in popular culture *
The Meerkats , a 2008 documentary feature film REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* David Macdonald ( Photography by Nigel Dennis ) : Meerkats .
London :
New Holland Publishers , 1999 .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Animal Diversity – Meerkat , University of Michigan
* Meerkat enquiries on the increase – BBC Nottingham