HOMILY
A homily is a commentary that follows a reading of scripture .
In Catholic , Anglican , Lutheran , and Eastern Orthodox Churches , a homily is usually given during Mass ( Divine Liturgy or Holy Qurbana for Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Churches , and Divine Service for the Lutheran Church ) at the end of the Liturgy of the Word .
Many people consider it synonymous with a sermon .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
According to The Catholic Encyclopedia ( 1910 ) : The word homily is derived from the Greek word ὁμιλία homilia ( from ὁμιλεῖν homilein ) , which means to have communion or hold verbal intercourse with a person .
In this sense homilia is used in 1 Corinthians 15:33 .
In Luke 24:14 , we find the word homiloun , and in Acts 24:26 , homilei , both used in the sense of " speaking with " .
Origen was the first to distinguish between logos ( sermo ) and homilia ( tractatus ) .
Since Origen 's time homily has meant , and still means , a commentary , without formal introduction , division , or conclusion , on some part of Sacred Scripture , the aim being to explain the literal , and evolve the spiritual , meaning of the Sacred Text .
The latter , as a rule , is the more important ; but if , as in the case of Origen , more attention be paid to the former , the homily will be called expository rather than moral or hortatory .
It is the oldest form of Christian preaching .
ROMAN CATHOLIC MASS HOMILY Section::::Roman Catholic Mass homily .
The General Instruction of the Roman Missal ( GIRM ) OTHER SENSES
Section::::Other senses .
Contemporary Protestant clergy often use the term ' homily ' to describe a short sermon , such as one created for a wedding or funeral .
In colloquial , non - religious , usage , homily often means a sermon concerning a practical matter , a moralizing lecture or admonition , or an inspirational saying or platitude , but sermon is the more appropriate word in these cases .
SEE ALSO
* Homiliarium * Homiletics *
D'var Torah
FOOTNOTES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Sunday and Feast Homily Resources in English and Homily Videos in Malayalam by Fr .
Abraham Mutholath *
Daily Homilies Website * Read Malayalam and English Homilies , Reflections and Talks By Archbishop Soosa Pakiam , Metropolitan Archdiocese of
Trivandrum * 2002 General Instruction of the Roman Missal – England and Wales edition ( pdf ) *
Homily Points
* The Homilies of Father Robert S. Smith –
Smith 's Homilies