UNIVERSAL MUSIC GROUP Universal Music Group ( also known in the United States as UMG Recordings , Inc. and abbreviated as UMG ) is an American global music corporation that is a subsidiary of the French media conglomerate Vivendi .
UMG 's global corporate headquarters are located in Santa Monica , California .
It is considered one of the " Big Three " record labels , along with Sony Music and Warner Music Group .
Since 2004 , the corporation is no longer related to the film studio Universal Studios .
HISTORY EARLY HISTORY Section::::History .
Section::::Early history .
Universal Music was once the record company attached to film studio Universal Pictures .
The company 's origins go back to the formation of the American branch of Decca Records in September 1934 .
The Decca Record Co. Ltd. of England spun American Decca off in 1939 .
MCA Inc. merged with American Decca in 1962 .
In November 1990 , Japanese multinational conglomerate Matsushita Electric agreed to acquire MCA for $ 6.59 billion .
In 1995 , Seagram acquired 80 percent of MCA from Matsushita .
On December 9 , 1996 , the company was renamed Universal Studios , Inc. , and its music division was renamed Universal Music Group ; MCA Records continued as a label within the Universal Music Group .
In May 1998 , Seagram purchased PolyGram and merged it with Universal Music Group in early 1999 .
Between 1995 and 2000 , music companies were found to have artificially inflated compact disc prices through the use of illegal marketing practices such as minimum advertised pricing , doing so in order to end price wars that began in the early 1990s by discounters such as Best Buy and Target .
A settlement in 2002 included the music publishers and distributors ; Sony Music , Warner Music , Bertelsmann Music Group , EMI Music and Universal Music Group .
In restitution for price fixing they agreed to pay a $ 67.4 million fine and distribute $ 75.7 million in CDs to public and non - profit groups but admitted no wrongdoing .
It is estimated people were overcharged by nearly $ 500 million and up to $ 5 per album which conflicts with proof of sale and purchase interests .
VIVENDI SUBSIDIARY Section::::Vivendi subsidiary .
With the 2004 acquisition of Universal Studios by General Electric and merging with GE 's NBC , Universal Music Group was cast under separate management from the eponymous film studio .
This is the second time a music company has done so , the first being the separation of Time Warner and Warner Music Group .
In February 2006 , the label became 100 percent owned by French media conglomerate Vivendi when Vivendi purchased the last 20 percent from Matsushita .
On June 25 , 2007 , Vivendi completed its € 1.63 billion ( $ 2.4 billion ) purchase of BMG Music Publishing , after receiving European Union regulatory approval , having announced the acquisition on September 6 , 2006 .
In May 2007 , UMG was accused of abusing the Digital Millennium Copyright Act in order to quell criticism , by forcing YouTube to remove several videos which contained UMG 's music .
Eventually , UMG retracted its claims after being challenged by the Electronic Frontier Foundation .
In the same year , UMG was accused of using the Digital Millennium Copyright Act to indiscriminately remove content related to the artist Prince , most notably a 29-second home video in which a child danced to one of Prince 's songs .
In April 2016 , UMG had the audio muted of a video clip showing Katherine Jenkins singing the British national anthem .
They claimed that " God Save the Queen " was a copyrighted song , and YouTube initially complied with this request , but later allowed the video to be viewed with the original audio track .
In May 2006 , an investigation led by then New York Attorney General , Eliot Spitzer , concluded with a determination that Universal Music Group bribed radio stations to play songs from Ashlee Simpson , Brian McKnight , Big Tymers , Nick Lachey , Lindsay Lohan and other performers under Universal labels .
The company paid $ 12 million to the state in settlement .
In December 2007 , UMG announced a deal with Imeem which allows users of the social network to listen to any track from Universal 's catalogue for free with a portion of the advertising generated by the music being shared with the record label .
Two weeks after the deal was announced Michael Robertson speculated on the secret terms of the deal and argued that ultimately this was a bad deal for imeem .
This speculation lead to a flame war on the Pho digital media email list as imeem representatives denied his claims and dismissed his theories as unfounded .
All traffic was redirected to MySpace after the company acquired Imeem on December 8 , 2009 .
2010S AND EMI PURCHASE Section::::2010s and EMI purchase .
Doug Morris stepped down from his position as CEO on January 1 , 2011 .
Former chairman / CEO of Universal Music International Lucian Grainge was promoted to CEO of the company .
Grainge later replaced him as chairman on March 9 , 2011 .
Morris became the next chairman of Sony Music Entertainment on July 1 , 2011 .
With Grainge 's appointment as CEO at UMG , Max Hole was promoted to COO of UMGI , effective July 1 , 2010 .
Starting in 2011 UMG 's Interscope Geffen A&M Records will be signing contestants from American Idol / Idol series .
On January 2011 , UMG announced it was donating 200,000 master recordings from the 1920s to 1940s to the Library of Congress for preservation .
In March 2011 , Barry Weiss became chairman and CEO of The Island Def Jam Music Group and Universal Republic Records .
Both companies were restructured under Weiss .
In December 2011 , David Foster was named Chairman of Verve Music Group .
In 2011 , EMI sold its recorded music operations to Universal Music Group for £ 1.2 billion ( $ 1.9 billion ) and its music publishing operations to a Sony - led consortium for $ 2.2 billion .
Among the other companies that had competed for the recorded music business was Warner Music Group which was reported to have made a $ 2 billion bid .
IMPALA opposed the merger .
In March 2012 , the European Union opened an investigation into the acquisition The EU asked rivals and consumer groups whether the deal would result in higher prices and shut out competitors .
Coincidentally , UMG sister company StudioCanal had owned the EMI Films library for several years .
On December 9 , 2011 , Megaupload published a music video titled " The Mega Song " , showing artists including Kanye West , Snoop Dogg , Alicia Keys , and will.i.am endorsing the company .
The music video was also uploaded to YouTube , but was removed following a takedown request by UMG .
Megaupload said that the video contained no infringing content , commenting : " we have signed agreements with every featured artist for this campaign .
"
Megaupload requested an apology from UMG , and filed a lawsuit against the company in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California , on December 12 , 2011 .
UMG denied that the takedown was ordered under the terms of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act , and said that the takedown was pursuant to the UMG - YouTube agreement , which gave UMG the right to block or remove user - posted videos through YouTube 's CMS ( Content Management System ) based on a number of contractually specified criteria .
The video was subsequently returned to YouTube , with the reasons for the UMG takedown remaining unclear .
Lawyers for will.i.am initially claimed that he had never agreed to the project , and on December 12 , he denied any involvement in the takedown notice .
On September 21 , 2012 , the sale of EMI to UMG was approved in Europe and the United States by the European Commission and Federal Trade Commission respectively .
However , the European Commission approved the deal only under the condition the merged company divest one third of its total operations to other companies with a proven track record in the music industry .
UMG divested Mute Records , Parlophone , Roxy Recordings , MPS Records , Cooperative Music ,
Now That 's What I Call Music ! , Jazzland , Universal Greece , Sanctuary Records , Chrysalis Records , EMI Classics , Virgin Classics , and EMI 's European regional labels to comply with this condition .
UMG retained The Beatles ( formerly of Parlophone ) and Robbie Williams ( formerly of Chrysalis ) .
The Beatles catalogue was transferred to UMG 's newly formed Calderstone Productions , while Williams ' catalogue was transferred to Island Records .
2012–2017 :
EMI INTEGRATION AND DIVISIONS REORGANIZATION Section::::2012–2017 : EMI integration and divisions reorganization .
Universal Music Group completed their acquisition of EMI on September 28 , 2012 .
In November 2012 , Steve Barnett was appointed chairman and CEO of Capitol Music Group .
He formerly served as COO of Columbia Records .
In compliance the conditions of the European Commission after purchase of EMI , Universal Music Group sold the Mute catalogue to the German - based BMG Rights Management on December 22 , 2012 .
Two months later , BMG acquired Sanctuary Records for € 50 million .
On November 8 , 2012 , Universal Music and Hewlett - Packard launched a marketing operation that allows customers with an HP computer with HP Connected Music software to access music from Universal artists , as well as exclusive content .
On February 8 , 2013 , Warner Music Group acquired the Parlophone Label Group ( consisting of Parlophone Records , Chrysalis Records , EMI Classics , Virgin Classics and EMI Records ' Belgian , Czech , Danish , French , Norwegian , Portuguese , Spanish , Slovak and Swedish divisions ) for $ 765 million ( £ 487 million ) .
Later in February , Sony Music Entertainment acquired Universal 's European share in Now
That 's What I Call Music for approximately $ 60 million .
Play It
Again Sam acquired Co - Operative Music for £ 500,000 in March 2013 .
With EMI 's absorption into Universal Music complete , its British operations will consist of five label units : Island , Polydor , Decca , Virgin EMI and Capitol .
In April 2013 , Universal Music Greece ( excluding Nana Mouskouri ) was sold to Victoras Antippas , who renamed the company Cobalt Music .
Edel AG acquired the MPS catalogue from Universal in January 2014 .
On March 20 , 2013 , UMG announced the worldwide extension of their exclusive distribution deal with the Disney Music Group , excluding Japan and Russia .
As a result of this deal DMG 's labels and artists have access to UMG 's roster of multiplatinum and Grammy Award - winning producers and songwriters on a worldwide basis .
The exclusive deal also saw UMG granted unlimited access to all rights pertaining to Disney 's 85-year back catalog of soundtracks and albums .
On April 2 , 2013 , the gospel music divisions of Motown Records and EMI merged to form a new label called Motown Gospel .
In May 2013 , Japanese company SoftBank offered $ 8.5 billion to Vivendi for the acquisition of UMG , but Vivendi rejected it .
As of November 14 , 2013 , Universal Music will now distribute Warner Music Group 's releases in the Middle East as a result of the integration of EMI 's branch in the said region .
On April 1 , 2014 , Universal Music announced the disbandment of Island Def Jam Music , one of four operational umbrella groups within Universal Music .
Universal CEO Lucian Grainge said of the closure , " No matter how much we might work to build ' IDJ ' as a brand , that brand could never be as powerful as each of IDJ 's constituent parts .
"
Under terms of the agreement Island Records and Def Jam would operate as autonomous record labels .
David Massey and Bartels , who worked respectively at Island and Def Jam Records , would lead the new record labels independently .
Barry Weiss , who previously moved from Sony Music to head up Island Def Jam Music in 2012 when Motown Records was incorporated into Island Def Jam , stepped down from Universal Music .
Additionally , as part of the changes to the labels , Motown Records would transfer to Los Angeles to become part of the Capitol Music Group and previous Vice President Ethiopia Habtemariam was promoted to Label President for Motown Records .
Republic Records would operate independently while the Interscope Geffen A&M group remained unchanged .
Universal Music Group entered into film and TV production with the 2014 purchase of Eagle Rock Entertainment .
UMG 's first major film production was Amy while taking part in and documentaries .
In January 2016 , UMG hired David Blackman from Laurence Mark Production where he was president of production as head of film and television development and production , and theater producer Scott Landis as special advisor on theatrical development and production .
UMG Executive Vice President Michele Anthony and Universal Music Publishing Group Chairman and CEO
Jody Gerson have oversight of the pair .
On February 11 , 2017 , PolyGram Entertainment was relaunched as a film and television unit of Universal Music Group under David Blackman .
Vivendi and Red Bull GmbH combined StudioCanal , Universal Music Group and Terra Mater Film Studios in a co - development partnership for feature films in May 2017 .
In August 2017 , UMG and Grace / Beyond agreed to develop three new music - based television series , 27 , Melody Island and Mixtape .
27 would focus on musicians at the age of 27 , an age at which several iconic musicians died .
Melody Island is an animated series based on uplifting tropical island feel music with live craft segments .
Mixtape is dramatically structured similar to how a mixtape works with each connecting to a song .
In December 2017 , Universal Music Group acquired the catalogues of Stiff Records and ZTT Records , along with Perfect Songs Publishing , from Trevor Horn 's SPZ Group .
2018–PRESENT
Section::::2018–present .
On July 30 , 2018 , Vivendi announced it was selling half of Universal Music Group .
On November 19 , 2018 , singer Taylor Swift signed a new multi - album deal with Universal Music Group .
In addition to the promised ownership of her master recordings , UMG agreed to , in the event that it sells portions of its stake in Spotify , distribute proceeds among its artists and make them non - recoupable .
LABELS MULTIMEDIA CONTENT DELIVERY Section::::Multimedia content delivery .
Universal Music Group co - developed Vevo , a site designed for music videos inspired by Hulu.com , which similarly allows free ad - supported streaming of videos and other music content .
LOCATIONS LOS ANGELES METROPOLITAN AREA
SANTA MONICA Section::::Locations .
Section::::Los Angeles metropolitan area .
Section::::Santa Monica .
The UMG main global headquarters are located at 2220 Colorado Avenue in Santa Monica .
The Santa Monica headquarters oversees its legal obligations in the US and Canada .
Interscope - Geffen - A&M and Verve Music Group are based at its Los Angeles headquarters with John Janick heading Interscope - Geffen - A&M and David Foster heading Verve .
Def Jam , Island and Republic Records has offices at the Santa Monica headquarters .
The building is also home to Universal Music Enterprises ( UME ) .
UMG chairman & CEO Lucian Grainge works out of the company 's Santa Monica headquarters .
Universal Music Publishing is headquartered at 2100 Colorado Avenue .
HOLLYWOOD
Section::::Hollywood .
The Capitol Music Group is headquartered at the Capitol Records Building in Hollywood .
Tom Cage was assigned to the record label in 2004 after a short outing with A&M Records .
UNIVERSAL CITY Section::::Universal City .
Universal Music Group Distribution is headquartered in Universal City .
WOODLAND HILLS Section::::Woodland Hills .
Universal Music Latin Entertainment is headquartered in Woodland Hills .
NEW YORK CITY Section::::New York City .
UMG has headquarters in New York City where Island Records , Def Jam Recordings , Republic Records , Decca Label Group , Spinefarm Records , and Geffen Records are headquartered .
LONDON Section::::London .
Universal Music Group Global ( formerly known as Universal Music Group International ( UMGI ) ) is headquartered in Kensington , London .
Global manages UMG 's offices in most countries outside of North America .
BERLIN Section::::Berlin .
Universal Music GmbH , the German subsidiary , is headquartered in Berlin .
It moved in 2002 from Hamburg to the district Friedrichshain at the river Spree .
WARSAW Section::::Warsaw .
Universal Music Group 's Universal Music Polska is located in Warsaw .
OTHER LOCATIONS
Section::::Other locations .
Universal Music Group Nashville is headquartered in Nashville , Tennessee .
Universal Music Group 's parent company , Vivendi , is headquartered in Paris , France .
SEE ALSO
* List of record labels * List of RIAA member labels
* List of Universal Music Group artists REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* UMG History page