NOON Noon ( also midday or noon time ) is 12 o'clock in the daytime , as opposed to midnight .
The term 12 p.m. ( for post meridiem , and also written as 12 pm or similar variations thereof ) is sometimes used for noon .
Solar noon is the time when the Sun appears to contact the local celestial meridian .
This is when the Sun apparently reaches its highest point in the sky , at 12 noon apparent solar time .
The local or clock time of solar noon depends on the longitude and date .
In many cultures in the Northern Hemisphere , noon had ancient geographic associations with the direction " south " ( as did midnight with " north " in some cultures ) .
Remnants of the noon =
south association are preserved in the words for noon in French ( Midi ) and Italian ( Mezzogiorno ) , both of which also refer to the southern parts of the respective countries .
Modern Russian , Polish , Belarusian , Ukrainian , and Serbian go a step farther , with the words for noon ( полдень , południe , поўдзень , південь , пoднeliterally " half - day " ) also meaning " south " and the words for " midnight " ( północ , поўнач , північ , пoнoħliterally " half - night " , as with English mid(dle ) meaning " half " ) also meaning " north " .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word noon is derived from Latin nona hora , the ninth hour of the day , and is related to the liturgical term none .
The Roman and Western European medieval monastic day began at 6:00 a.m. ( 06:00 ) at the equinox by modern timekeeping , so the ninth hour started at what is now 3:00 p.m. ( 15:00 ) at the equinox .
In English , the meaning of the word shifted to midday and the time gradually moved back to 12:00 local time ( that is , not taking into account the modern invention of time zones ) .
The change began in the 12th century and was fixed by the 14th century .
SOLAR NOON Section::::Solar noon .
Solar noon ( informally high noon ) is the moment when the Sun contacts the observer 's meridian , reaching its highest position above the horizon on that day ( " Sun transit time " ) .
This is also the origin of the terms ante meridiem ( a.m. ) and post meridiem ( p.m. ) , as noted below .
The Sun is directly overhead at solar noon at the Equator on the equinoxes , at the Tropic of Cancer ( latitude N ) on the June solstice and at the Tropic of Capricorn ( S ) on the December solstice .
In the Northern Hemisphere , north of the Tropic of Cancer , the Sun is due south of the observer at solar noon ; in the Southern Hemisphere , south of the Tropic of Capricorn , it is due north .
The elapsed time from the local solar noon of one day to the next is exactly 24 hours on only four instances in any given year .
This occurs when the effects of Earth 's obliquity of ecliptic and its orbital speed around the Sun offset each other .
These four days for the current epoch are centered on 11 February , 13 May , 25 July , and 3 November .
It occurs at only one particular line of longitude each event .
This line varies year to year , since Earth 's true year is not an integer number of days .
This event time and location also varies due to Earth 's orbit being gravitationally perturbed by the planets .
These four 24-hour days occur in both hemispheres simultaneously .
The precise UTC times for these four days also mark when the opposite line of longitude , 180 ° away , experiences precisely 24 hours from local midnight to local midnight the next day .
Thus , four varying great circles of longitude define from year to year when a 24-hour day ( noon to noon or midnight to midnight ) occurs .
The two longest time spans from noon to noon occur twice each year , around 20 June ( 24 hours plus 13 seconds ) and 21 December ( 24 hours plus 30 seconds ) .
The shortest time spans occur twice each year , around 25 March ( 24 hours minus 18 seconds ) and 13 September ( 24 hours minus 22 seconds ) .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
In the US , noon is commonly indicated by 12 p.m. , and midnight by 12 a.m.
While some argue that such usage is " improper " based on the Latin meaning ( a.m. stands for ante meridiem and p.m. for post meridiem , meaning " before midday " and " after midday " respectively ) , digital clocks are unable to display anything else , and an arbitrary decision must be made .
An earlier standard of indicating noon as " 12 M " or " 12 m " ( for " meridies " ) , which was specified in the U.S. GPO Government Style Manual , has fallen into relative obscurity ; the current edition of the GPO makes no mention of it .
However , due to the lack of an international standard , the use of 12 a.m. and 12 p.m. can be confusing .
Common alternative methods of representing these times are : * to use a 24-hour clock ( 00:00 and 12:00 , 24:00 ; but never 24:01 ) * to use " 12 noon " or " 12 midnight " ( though " 12 midnight " may still present ambiguity regarding the specific date ) * to specify midnight as between two successive days or dates ( as in " midnight Saturday / Sunday " or " midnight December 14/15 " ) * to avoid those specific times and to use " 11:59 p.m. " or " 12:01 a.m. " instead .
( This is common in the travel industry to avoid confusion to passengers ' schedules , especially train and plane schedules . )
SEE ALSO
* 12-hour clock
* Dipleidoscope * Hour angle * Solar azimuth angle
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Generate a solar noon calendar for your location
* U.S. Government Printing Office Style Manual ( 2008 ) ,
30th edition * Shows the hour and angle of sunrise , noon , and sunset drawn over a map .