SCAPULA
In anatomy , the scapula ( plural scapulae or scapulas ) , also known as shoulder bone , shoulder blade , wing bone or blade bone , is the bone that connects the humerus ( upper arm bone ) with the clavicle ( collar bone ) .
Like their connected bones the scapulae are paired , with the scapula on either side of the body being roughly a mirror image of the other .
The name derives from early Roman times when it was thought that the bone resembled a trowel or small shovel .
In compound terms , the prefix omo- is used for the shoulder blade in Latin medical terminology .
The prefix is derived from ὦμος ( ōmos ) , the Ancient Greek word for shoulder , and is cognate with the Latin ( h)umerus .
The scapula forms the back of the shoulder girdle .
In humans , it is a flat bone , roughly triangular in shape , placed on a posterolateral aspect of the thoracic cage .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The scapula is a wide , flat bone lying on the thoracic wall that provides an attachment for three groups of muscles : intrinsic , extrinsic , and stabilising and rotating muscles .
The intrinsic muscles of the scapula include the muscles of the rotator cuff — the subscapularis , teres minor , supraspinatus , and infraspinatus .
These muscles attach to the surface of the scapula and are responsible for the internal and external rotation of the shoulder joint , along with humeral abduction .
The extrinsic muscles include the biceps , triceps , and deltoid muscles and attach to the coracoid process and supraglenoid tubercle of the scapula , infraglenoid tubercle of the scapula , and spine of the scapula .
These muscles are responsible for several actions of the glenohumeral joint .
The third group , which is mainly responsible for stabilization and rotation of the scapula , consists of the trapezius , serratus anterior , levator scapulae , and rhomboid muscles .
These attach to the medial , superior , and inferior borders of the scapula .
The head , processes , and the thickened parts of the bone contain cancellous tissue ; the rest consists of a thin layer of compact tissue .
The central part of the supraspinatus fossa and the upper part of the infraspinatous fossa , but especially the former , are usually so thin in humans as to be semitransparent ; occasionally the bone is found wanting in this situation , and the adjacent muscles are separated only by fibrous tissue .
The scapula has two surfaces , three borders , three angles , and three processes .
SURFACES Front or subscapular fossa
The front of the scapula ( also known as the costal or ventral surface ) has a broad concavity called the subscapular fossa , to which the subscapularis muscle attaches .
The medial two - thirds of the fossa have 3 longitudinal oblique ridges , and another thick ridge adjoins the lateral border ; they run outward and upward .
The ridges give attachment to the tendinous insertions , and the surfaces between them to the fleshy fibers , of the subscapularis muscle .
The lateral third of the fossa is smooth and covered by the fibers of this muscle .
Section::::Surfaces .
At the upper part of the fossa is a transverse depression , where the bone appears to be bent on itself along a line at right angles to and passing through the center of the glenoid cavity , forming a considerable angle , called the subscapular angle ; this gives greater strength to the body of the bone by its arched form , while the summit of the arch serves to support the spine and acromion .
The costal surface superior of the scapula is the origin of 1st digitation for the serratus anterior origin .
+ Figure 1 :
Left scapula .
Costal surface .
Back
The back of the scapula ( also called the dorsal or posterior surface ) is arched from above downward , and is subdivided into two unequal parts by the spine of the scapula .
The portion above the spine is called the supraspinous fossa , and that below it the infraspinous fossa .
The two fossae are connected by the spinoglenoid notch , situated lateral to the root of the spine .
*
The supraspinous fossa , the smaller of the two , is concave , smooth , and broader at its vertebral than at its humeral end ; its medial two - thirds give origin to the Supraspinatus .
*
The infraspinous fossa is much larger than the preceding ; toward its vertebral margin a shallow concavity is seen at its upper part ; its center presents a prominent convexity , while near the axillary border is a deep groove which runs from the upper toward the lower part .
The medial two - thirds of the fossa give origin to the Infraspinatus ; the lateral third is covered by this muscle .
There is a ridge on the outer part of the back of the scapula .
This runs from the lower part of the glenoid cavity , downward and backward to the vertebral border , about 2.5 cm above the inferior angle .
Attached to the ridge is a fibrous septum , which separates the infraspinatus muscle from the Teres major and Teres minor muscles .
The upper two - thirds of the surface between the ridge and the axillary border is narrow , and is crossed near its center by a groove for the scapular circumflex vessels ; the Teres minor attaches here .
The broad and narrow portions above alluded to are separated by an oblique line , which runs from the axillary border , downward and backward , to meet the elevated ridge : to it is attached a fibrous septum which separates the Teres muscles from each other .
Its lower third presents a broader , somewhat triangular surface , the inferior angle of the scapula , which gives origin to the Teres major , and over which the Latissimus dorsi glides ; frequently the latter muscle takes origin by a few fibers from this part .
+ Figure 2 :
Left scapula .
Dorsal surface .
Side
The acromion forms the summit of the shoulder , and is a large , somewhat triangular or oblong process , flattened from behind forward , projecting at first laterally , and then curving forward and upward , so as to overhang the glenoid cavity .
+ Figure 3 :
Left scapula .
Lateral surface .
ANGLES Section::::Angles .
There are 3 angles :
The superior angle of the scapula or medial angle , is covered by the trapezius muscle .
This angle is formed by the junction of the superior and medial borders of the scapula .
The superior angle is located at the approximate level of the second thoracic vertebra .
The superior angle of the scapula is thin , smooth , rounded , and inclined somewhat lateralward , and gives attachment to a few fibers of the levator scapulae muscle .
The inferior angle of the scapula is the lowest part of the scapula and is covered by the latissimus dorsi muscle .
It moves forwards round the chest when the arm is abducted .
The inferior angle is formed by the union of the medial and lateral borders of the scapula .
It is thick and rough and its posterior or back surface affords attachment to the teres major and often to a few fibers of the latissimus dorsi .
The anatomical plane that passes vertically through the inferior angle is named the scapular line .
The lateral angle of the scapula or glenoid angle also known as the head of the scapula is the thickest part of the scapula .
It is broad and bears the glenoid cavity on its articular surface which is directed forward , laterally and slightly upwards , and articulates with the head of the humerus .
The inferior angle is broader below than above and its vertical diameter is the longest .
The surface is covered with cartilage in the fresh state ; and its margins , slightly raised , give attachment to a fibrocartilaginous structure , the glenoidal labrum , which deepens the cavity .
At its apex is a slight elevation , the supraglenoid tuberosity , to which the long head of the biceps brachii is attached .
The neck of the scapula is the slightly constricted portion which surrounds the head and is more distinct below and behind than above and in front .
BORDERS Section::::Borders .
There are three borders of the scapula :
* The superior border is the shortest and thinnest ; it is concave , and extends from the superior angle to the base of the coracoid process .
It is referred to as the cranial border in animals .
*
The axillary border ( or " lateral border " ) is the thickest of the three .
It begins above at the lower margin of the glenoid cavity , and inclines obliquely downward and backward to the inferior angle .
It is referred to as the caudal border in animals .
*
The medial border ( also called the vertebral border or medial margin ) is the longest of the three borders , and extends from the superior angle to the inferior angle .
In animals it is referred to as the dorsal border .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The scapula is ossified from 7 or more centers : one for the body , two for the coracoid process , two for the acromion , one for the vertebral border , and one for the inferior angle .
Ossification of the body begins about the second month of fetal life , by an irregular quadrilateral plate of bone forming , immediately behind the glenoid cavity .
This plate extends to form the chief part of the bone , the scapular spine growing up from its dorsal surface about the third month .
Ossification starts as membranous ossification before birth .
After birth , the cartilaginous components would undergo endochondral ossification .
The larger part of the scapula undergoes membranous ossification .
Some of the outer parts of the scapula are cartilaginous at birth , and would therefore undergo endochondral ossification .
At birth , a large part of the scapula is osseous , but the glenoid cavity , the coracoid process , the acromion , the vertebral border and the inferior angle are cartilaginous .
From the 15th to the 18th month after birth , ossification takes place in the middle of the coracoid process , which as a rule becomes joined with the rest of the bone about the 15th year .
Between the 14th and 20th years , the remaining parts ossify in quick succession , and usually in the following order : first , in the root of the coracoid process , in the form of a broad scale ; secondly , near the base of the acromion ; thirdly , in the inferior angle and contiguous part of the vertebral border ; fourthly , near the outer end of the acromion ; fifthly , in the vertebral border .
The base of the acromion is formed by an extension from the spine ; the two nuclei of the acromion unite , and then join with the extension from the spine .
The upper third of the glenoid cavity is ossified from a separate center ( sub coracoid ) , which appears between the 10th and 11th years and joins between the 16th and the 18th years .
Further , an epiphysial plate appears for the lower part of the glenoid cavity , and the tip of the coracoid process frequently has a separate nucleus .
These various epiphyses are joined to the bone by the 25th year .
Failure of bony union between the acromion and spine sometimes occurs ( see os acromiale ) , the junction being effected by fibrous tissue , or by an imperfect articulation ; in some cases of supposed fracture of the acromion with ligamentous union , it is probable that the detached segment was never united to the rest of the bone .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The following muscles attach to the scapula :
MOVEMENTS Section::::Movements .
Movements of the scapula are brought about by the scapular muscles .
The scapula can perform six actions : * Elevation : upper trapezius and levator scapulae * Depression :
lower trapezius * Retraction ( adduction ) : rhomboids and middle trapezius * Protraction ( abduction ) :
serratus anterior * Upward rotation : upper and middle trapezius * Downward rotation : rhomboids CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE SCAPULAR FRACTURES Section::::Clinical significance .
Section::::Scapular fractures .
Because of its sturdy structure and protected location , fractures of the scapula are uncommon .
When they do occur , they are an indication that severe chest trauma has occurred .
Scapular fractures involving the neck of the scapula have two patterns .
One ( rare ) type of fracture is through the anatomical neck of the scapula .
The other more common type of fracture is through the surgical neck of the scapula .
The surgical neck exits medial to the coracoid process .
An abnormally protruding inferior angle of the scapula is known as a winged scapula and can be caused by paralysis of the serratus anterior muscle .
In this condition the sides of the scapula nearest the spine are positioned outward and backward .
The appearance of the upper back is said to be wing - like .
In addition , any condition causing weakness of the serratus anterior muscle may cause scapular " winging " .
IMPINGEMENT SYNDROME
Section::::Impingement syndrome .
The scapula plays an important role in shoulder impingement syndrome .
Abnormal scapular function is called scapular dyskinesis .
One action the scapula performs during a throwing or serving motion is elevation of the acromion process in order to avoid impingement of the rotator cuff tendons .
If the scapula fails to properly elevate the acromion , impingement may occur during the cocking and acceleration phase of an overhead activity .
The two muscles most commonly inhibited during this first part of an overhead motion are the serratus anterior and the lower trapezius .
These two muscles act as a force couple within the glenohumeral joint to properly elevate the acromion process , and if a muscle imbalance exists , shoulder impingement may develop .
HISTORY ETYMOLOGY SCAPULA / SCAPULAE Section::::History .
Section::::Etymology .
Section::::Scapula / Scapulae .
The name scapula as synonym of shoulder blade is of Latin origin .
It is commonly used in medical English and is part of the current official Latin nomenclature , Terminologia Anatomica .
In classical Latin scapula is only used in its plural scapulae .
Although some sources mention that scapulae is used to refer during Roman antiquity to the shoulders or to the shoulder blades , others persist in that the Romans used scapulae only to refer to the back , in contrast to the pectus , the Latin name for breast or chest .
OS LATUM SCAPULARUM AND RELATED Section::::Os latum scapularum and related .
The Roman encyclopedist Aulus Cornelius Celsus who lived during the beginning of the era , also used scapulae to refer to the back .
He used os latum scapularum to refer to the shoulder blade .
This expressions can be translated as broad ( Latin : latum ) bone ( Latin : os ) of the back ( Latin : scapularum ) .
A similar expression in ancient Greek can be seen in the writings of the Greek philosopher Aristoteles and in the writings of the Greek physician Galen .
They both use the name ὠμοπλάτη to refer to the shoulder blade .
This compound consists of ancient Greek ὦμος , shoulder and πλάτη , blade or flat or broad object .
Πλάτη in its plural πλάται without ὦμο- was also used in ancient Greek to refer to the shoulder blades .
In anatomic Latin , ὠμοπλάτη is Latinized as omoplata .
The Latin word umerus is related to ὦμος .
The Romans referred with umerus to what is now commonly known in English as the following 3 bones : humerus or the upper bone of the arm , the clavicle or the collarbone and the scapula or the shoulder blade .
The spelling humerus is actually incorrect in classical Latin .
Those three bones were referred to as the ossa ( Latin : bones ) umeri (
Latin : of the umerus ) .
Umerus was also used to refer specifically to the shoulder .
This mirrors the use of ὦμος in ancient Greek as that could refer to the shoulder with the upper arm or to the shoulder alone .
Since Celsus , the os umeri could refer specifically to the upper bone of the arm .
The 16th century anatomist Andreas Vesalius used humerus to refer to the clavicle .
Besides the aforementioned os latum scapularum , Celsus used os latum umeri to refer to the shoulder blade .
Similarly , Laurentius used the expression latitudo umeri ( Latitudo = breadth , width ) to refer to the shoulder blade .
PALA Section::::Pala .
The Roman physician Caelius Aurelianus ( 5th century ) used pala to refer to the shoulder blade .
The name pala is normally used to refer to a spade in Latin and was therefore probably used by Caelius Aurelianus to describe the shoulder blade , as both exhibit a flat curvature .
SPATHULA / ΣΠΆΘΗ Section::::Spathula / Σπάθη .
During the Middle Ages spathula was used to refer to the shoulder blade .
Spathula is a diminutive of spatha , with the latter originally meaning broad , two - edged sword without a point , broad , flat , wooden instrument for stirring any liquid , a spattle , spatula or spathe of the palm tree and its diminutive used in classical and late Latin for referring to a leg of pork or a little palmbranch .
The English word spatula is actually derived from Latin spatula , an orthographic variant of spathula .
Oddly enough , classical Latin non - diminutive spatha can be translated as English spatula , while its Latin diminutive spatula is not translated as English spatula .
Latin spatha is derived from ancient Greek σπάθη .
Therefore , the form spathula is more akin to its origin than spatula .
Ancient Greek σπάθη has a similar meaning as Latin spatha , as any broad blade , and can also refer to a spatula or to the broad blade of a sword . , but also to the blade of an oar .
The aforementioned πλάται for shoulder blades was also used for blades of an oar .
Concordantly σπάθη was also used to refer to the shoulder blade .
The English word spade , as well as the Dutch equivalent spade is cognate with σπάθη .
Please notice , that the aforementioned term pala as applied by Roman physician Caelius Aurelianus , also means spade .
Pala is probably related to the Latin verb pandere , to spread out , and to extend .
This verb is thought to be derived from an earlier form spandere , with the root spa- .
Σπάθη is actually derived from the similar root spē(i ) , that means to extend .
It seems that os latum scapularum , ὠμοπλάτη , πλάται , pala , spathula and σπάθη all refer to the same aspect of the shoulder blade , i.e. being a flat , broad blade , with the latter three words etymological related to each other .
SCAPULA
AFTER THE MIDDLE AGES Section::::Scapula after the Middle Ages .
After the Middle Ages , the name scapula for shoulder blade became dominant .
The word scapula can etymologically be explained by its relatedness to ancient Greek verb σκάπτειν , to dig .
This relatedness give rise to several possible explanations .
First , the noun σκάπετος , trench derived from this verb , and the to scapula related noun σκαφη , similarly derived from the aforementioned verb , might connect scapula to the notion of ( con)cavity .
The name scapula might be related that due to existence of the spine of the scapula a concavity exist in the scapula .
Otherwise , the designation scapulae is also seen as synonym of ancient Greek συνωμία , the space between the shoulder blades , that is obviously concave .
Συνωμία consists of σύν , together with , and ὦμος , shoulder .
Second , scapula , due to its relatedness to σκάπτειν might originally meant shovel .
Similarly to the resemblance between the Latin pala ( spade ) and the shoulder blade , a resemblance might be felt between the shape of a shovel and the shoulder blade .
Alternatively , the shoulder blade might be used originally for digging and shoveling .
SHOULDER BLADE Section::::Shoulder blade .
Shoulder blade is colloquial name for this bone .
Shoulder is cognate to German and Dutch equivalents Schulter and schouder .
There are a few etymological explanations for shoulder .
The first supposes that shoulder can be literally translated as that which shields or protects , as its possibly related to Icelandic skioldr , shield and skyla , to cover , to defend .
The second explanation relates shoulder to ancient Greek σκέλος , leg .
The latter spots the possible root skel- , meaning to bend , to curve .
The third explanation links the root skel- to to cleave .
This meaning could refer to the shape of the shoulder blade .
IN OTHER ANIMALS Section::::In other animals .
In fish , the scapular blade is a structure attached to the upper surface of the articulation of the pectoral fin , and is accompanied by a similar coracoid plate on the lower surface .
Although sturdy in cartilagenous fish , both plates are generally small in most other fish , and may be partially cartilagenous , or consist of multiple bony elements .
In the early tetrapods , these two structures respectively became the scapula and a bone referred to as the procoracoid ( commonly called simply the " coracoid " , but not homologous with the mammalian structure of that name ) .
In amphibians and reptiles ( birds included ) , these two bones are distinct , but together form a single structure bearing many of the muscle attachments for the forelimb .
In such animals , the scapula is usually a relatively simple plate , lacking the projections and spine that it possesses in mammals .
However , the detailed structure of these bones varies considerably in living groups .
For example , in frogs , the procoracoid bones may be braced together at the animal 's underside to absorb the shock of landing , while in turtles , the combined structure forms a Y - shape in order to allow the scapula to retain a connection to the clavicle ( which is part of the shell ) .
In birds , the procoracoids help to brace the wing against the top of the sternum .
In the fossil therapsids , a third bone , the true coracoid , formed just behind the procoracoid .
The resulting three - boned structure is still seen in modern monotremes , but in all other living mammals , the procoracoid has disappeared , and the coracoid bone has fused with the scapula , to become the coracoid process .
These changes are associated with the upright gait of mammals , compared with the more sprawling limb arrangement of reptiles and amphibians ; the muscles formerly attached to the procoracoid are no longer required .
The altered musculature is also responsible for the alteration in the shape of the rest of the scapula ; the forward margin of the original bone became the spine and acromion , from which the main shelf of the shoulder blade arises as a new structure .
IN
DINOSAURS Section::::In dinosaurs .
In dinosaurs the main bones of the pectoral girdle were the scapula ( shoulder blade ) and the coracoid , both of which directly articulated with the clavicle .
The clavicle was present in saurischian dinosaurs but largely absent in ornithischian dinosaurs .
The place on the scapula where it articulated with the humerus ( upper bone of the forelimb ) is the called the glenoid .
The scapula serves as the attachment site for a dinosaur 's back and forelimb muscles .
GALLERY
SEE ALSO * Scapulimancy / Oracle
bone
REFERENCES
* Nickel , Schummer , & Seiferle ; Lehrbuch der Anatomie der Haussäugetiere .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* - " Joints of the Upper Extremity : Scapula "