POWDERED SUGAR Powdered sugar , also called confectioners ' sugar , icing sugar , and icing cake , is a finely ground sugar produced by milling granulated sugar into a powdered state .
It usually contains a small amount of anti - caking agent to prevent clumping and improve flow .
Although most often produced in a factory , powdered sugar can also be made by processing ordinary granulated sugar in a coffee grinder , or by crushing it by hand in a mortar and pestle .
Powdered sugar is utilized in industrial food production when a quick - dissolving sugar is required .
Home cooks use it principally to make icing or frosting and other cake decorations .
It is often dusted onto baked goods to add a subtle sweetness and delicate decoration .
Powdered sugar is available in varying degrees of fineness , most commonly XXX , XXXX , and 10X :
the greater the number of Xs , the finer the particles .
Finer particles absorb more moisture , which results in caking .
Corn starch or tricalcium phosphate is added at 3 to 5 % concentration to absorb moisture and to improve flow by reducing friction between sugar crystals .
Because of these anticaking agents , it can not always be used as a substitute for granulated sugar .
OTHER VARIETIES
Section::::Other varieties .
Caster sugar ( also referred to as superfine or baker 's sugar ) has a larger particle size than powdered sugar , approximately half that of granulated sugar .
It is commonly used in baking and cold mixed drinks because it dissolves faster than granulated white sugar .
Caster sugar can be easily prepared at home by grinding white sugar in a food processor to make it finer .
The most common food caster sugar is used in is meringue .
Snow powder ( or snow sugar ) is a non - melting form of icing sugar usually consisting of dextrose , starch , and anti - binding agents , useful for retaining its structure when dusted onto cakes or pastries that require refrigeration .
It is mostly used for decorative purposes .
It also contains titanium dioxide which gives it a vibrant white colour .
This sugar is used for visual appeal without the sugar melting into the pastry from moisture .
It is mostly used on baked goods that are slightly wet like fruit bars and tarts .
It will not melt even if it is sprinkled on whipped cream or ice cream .
Snow sugar is less sweet than regular powdered sugar because dextrose ( a type of sugar made when starchy plants are broken down into monosaccharides using enzymes ) is around 20 % less sweet than regular sugar .
REFERENCES
* Asadi , Mosen .
Beet - Sugar Handbook .
John Wiley & Sons , 2006 .
* Chen , James C. P. , Chung Chi Chou .
Cane Sugar Handbook :
A Manual for Cane Sugar Manufacturers and Their Chemists .
John Wiley & Sons , 1993 .
EXTERNAL LINKS