MAHI - MAHI
The mahi - mahi ( ) or common dolphinfish ( Coryphaena hippurus ) is a surface - dwelling ray - finned fish found in off - shore temperate , tropical , and subtropical waters worldwide .
Also widely called dorado and dolphin , it is one of two members of the family Coryphaenidae , the other being the pompano dolphinfish .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
The name mahi - mahi comes from the Hawaiian language and means " very strong " , through the process of reduplication .
Though the species is also referred to as the common dolphinfish , the use of " dolphin " can be misleading as they are not related to dolphins ; see Coryphaena for the possible etymologies of " dolphinfish " .
In parts of the Pacific and along the English - speaking coast of South Africa , the mahi - mahi is commonly referred to by its name in Spanish , dorado .
In the Mediterranean island of Malta , the mahi - mahi is referred to as the lampuka .
Linnaeus named the genus , derived from the Greek word , κορυφή , koryphe , meaning top or apex , in 1758 .
Synonyms for the species include Coryphaena argyrurus , Coryphaena chrysurus , and Coryphaena dolfyn .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Mahi - mahi have compressed bodies and a single long - based dorsal fin extending from the head almost to the tail .
Mature males have prominent foreheads protruding well above the body proper .
Females have a rounded head .
Their caudal fins and anal fins are sharply concave .
They are distinguished by dazzling colors - golden on the sides , and bright blues and greens on the sides and back .
The pectoral fins of the mahi - mahi are iridescent blue .
The flank is broad and golden .
Out of the water , the fish often change color ( giving rise to their Spanish name , dorado , " golden " ) , going through several hues before finally fading to a muted yellow - grey upon death .
Mahi - mahi can live up to five years , although they seldom exceed four .
Females are usually smaller than males .
Catches typically are and a meter in length .
They rarely exceed , and mahi - mahi over are exceptional .
Mahi - mahi are among the fastest - growing of fish .
They spawn in warm ocean currents throughout much of the year , and their young are commonly found in rafts of Sargassum weeds .
Mahi - mahi are carnivorous , feeding on flying fish , crabs , squid , mackerel , and other forage fish .
They have also been known to eat zooplankton .
Males and females are sexually mature in their first year , usually by 4–5 months old .
Spawning can occur at body lengths of 20 cm .
Females may spawn two to three times per year , and produce between 80,000 and 1,000,000 eggs per event .
In waters at 28 ° C/83 ° F , mahi - mahi larvae are found year - round , with greater numbers detected in spring and fall .
Mahi - mahi fish are mostly found in the surface water .
Their flesh is soft and oily , similar to sardines .
The body is slightly slender and long , making them fast swimmers ; they can swim as fast as 50 knots ( 92.6 km / h , 57.5 mph ) .
RECREATIONAL FISHING Section::::Recreational fishing .
Mahi - mahi are highly sought for sport fishing and commercial purposes .
Sport fishermen seek them due to their beauty , size , food quality , and healthy population .
Mahi - mahi can be found in the Caribbean Sea , on the west coast of North and South America , the Pacific coast of Costa Rica , the Gulf of Mexico , the Atlantic coast of Florida and West Africa , South China Sea and Southeast Asia , Hawaii , Tahiti , and many other places worldwide .
Fishing charters most often look for floating debris and frigatebirds near the edge of the reef in about of water .
Mahi - mahi ( and many other fish ) often swim near debris such as floating wood , five - gallon bucket lids , palm trees and fronds , or sargasso weed lines and around fish buoys .
Frigatebirds search for food accompanying the debris or sargasso .
Experienced fishing guides can tell what species are likely around the debris by the birds ' behavior . Thirty-
to 50-pound gear is more than adequate when trolling for mahi - mahi .
Fly - casters may especially seek frigatebirds to find big mahi - mahis , and then use a bait - and - switch technique .
Ballyhoo or a net full of live sardines tossed into the water can excite the mahi - mahis into a feeding frenzy .
Hookless teaser lures can have the same effect .
After tossing the teasers or live chum , fishermen throw the fly to the feeding mahi - mahi .
Once on a line , mahi - mahi are fast , flashy , and acrobatic , with beautiful blue , yellow , green , and even red dots of color .
COMMERCIAL FISHING Section::::Commercial fishing .
The United States and the Caribbean countries are the primary consumers of this fish , but many European countries are increasing their consumption every year .
It is a popular eating fish in Australia , usually caught and sold as a byproduct by tuna and swordfish commercial fishing operators .
Japan and Hawaii are significant consumers .
The Arabian Sea , particularly the coast of Oman , also has mahi - mahi .
At first , mahi - mahi were mostly bycatch in the tuna and swordfish longline fishery .
Now , they are sought by commercial fishermen on their own merits .
In French Polynesia , fishermen use harpoons , using a specifically designed boat , the poti marara , to pursue it , because mahi - mahi do not dive .
The poti marara is a powerful motorized V - shaped boat , optimized for high agility and speed , and driven with a stick so the pilot can hold his harpoon with his right hand .
The method is also practiced by fishermen in the Philippines , especially in the northern province of Batanes , where the harpooning is called pagmamamataw .
ENVIRONMENTAL AND FOOD SAFETY CONCERNS
Section::::Environmental and food safety concerns .
Depending on how it is caught , mahi - mahi is classed differently by various sustainability rating systems :
* The Monterey Bay Aquarium classifies mahi - mahi , when caught in the US Atlantic , as a best choice , the top of its three environmental - impact categories .
The aquarium advises to avoid imported mahi - mahi harvested by long line , but rates troll and pole - and - line caught as a good alternative .
*
The Natural Resources Defense Council classifies mahi - mahi as a " moderate mercury " fish ( its second - lowest of four categories ) , and suggests eating six servings or fewer per month .
*
The Environmental Defense Fund classifies mahi - mahi caught by line / pole in the US as " Eco - Best " in its three - category system , but classifies all mahi - mahi caught by longline as only " Eco - OK " or " Eco - Worst " due to longline " high levels [ of ] bycatch , injuring or killing seabirds , sea turtles and sharks . "
The mahi - mahi is also a common vector for ciguatera poisoning .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Atlantic mahimahi NOAA FishWatch .
Retrieved 11 November 2012 .
* Pacific mahimahi NOAA FishWatch .
Retrieved 11 November 2012 .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Monterey Bay Aquarium 's Regional Seafood Watch * Blue Ocean Institute 's Guide to Ocean Friendly Seafood
* Guide to Fishing Dorado