SHEPHERD 'S PIE
Shepherd 's pie or cottage pie is a meat pie with a crust or topping of mashed potato .
The recipe has many variations , but the defining ingredients are minced red meat ( commonly , " cottage pie " refers to beef and " shepherd 's pie " to lamb ) , cooked in a gravy or sauce with onions and sometimes other vegetables , such as peas , celery or carrots , and topped with a layer of mashed potato before it is baked .
The pie is sometimes also topped with grated cheese to create a layer of melted cheese on top .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term cottage pie was in use by 1791 , when the potato was being introduced as an edible crop affordable for the poor ( cf . " cottage " , meaning a modest dwelling for rural workers ) .
The term shepherd 's pie did not appear until 1854 , and was used synonymously with cottage pie , regardless of whether the meat was beef or mutton .
In the United Kingdom , the term shepherd 's pie is now commonly used when the meat is lamb .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In early cookery books , the dish was a means of using leftover roasted meat of any kind , and the pie dish was lined on the sides and bottom with mashed potato , as well as having a mashed potato crust on top .
VARIATIONS AND SIMILAR DISHES Section::::Variations and similar dishes .
Other potato - topped pies include : *
The modern Cumberland pie is a version with either beef or lamb and a layer of breadcrumbs and cheese on top .
In medieval times , and modern - day Cumbria , the pastry crust had a filling of meat with fruits and spices .
*
In Quebec , a variation on the cottage pie is called Pâté chinois .
It is made with ground beef on the bottom layer , canned corn in the middle , and mashed potato on top .
*
The shepherdess pie is a vegetarian version made without meat , or a vegan version made without meat and dairy .
*
In the Netherlands , a very similar dish called philosopher 's stew ( ) often adds ingredients like beans , apples , prunes , or apple sauce .
*
In Brazil , a dish called in refers to the fact that a manioc puree hides a layer of sun - dried meat .
The dish often includes cheese and chicken or cod is sometimes used instead of beef .
* A St. Stephen 's Day pie is made with turkey and ham .
* Fish pie is another part of English cuisine , made of fish and seafood in a sauce , all topped with mashed potato .
*
In Irish this dish is known as pióg an aoire .
SEE ALSO
* Antoine - Augustin Parmentier *
Pâté chinois
* British cuisine * English cuisine
* Hachis Parmentier
* Irish cuisine
* List of English dishes * List of Irish dishes
* List of pies , tarts and flans REFERENCES