NELL ( FILM )
Nell is a 1994 American drama film directed by Michael Apted from a screenplay written by William Nicholson .
The film stars Jodie Foster ( who also produced ) in the titular role .
Liam Neeson , Natasha Richardson , Richard Libertini , and Nick Searcy are featured in supporting roles .
Based on Mark Handley 's play Idioglossia , which was inspired by Handley 's time living in the Cascade Mountains in the 1970s , and the story of Poto and Cabengo , twins who created their own language , the film 's narrative follows a young woman who has to face other people for the first time after being raised by her mother in an isolated cabin .
The original musical score is composed by Mark Isham .
Nell received limited release on December 16 , 1994 , before expanding into wide release on December 23 .
The film upon release received mixed reviews from critics who praised the direction , score and performances but criticised its execution and limited exploration of the titular character .
Nevertheless , it was a box office success grossing $ 106.7 million worldwide , on a $ 31 million production budget .
Foster 's performance was widely praised and brought her various awards and nominations .
She won the inaugural Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role and was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
When Violet Kellty , who had an undiagnosed stroke , dies in her isolated cabin in the North Carolina mountains , Dr. Jerome " Jerry " Lovell , the town doctor , finds a terrified young woman hiding in the house rafters .
She speaks angrily and rapidly , but seems to have a language of her own .
Looking at Violet 's Bible , Jerry finds a note asking whoever finds it to look after Violet 's daughter Nell .
Sheriff Todd Peterson shows Jerry a news clipping that Nell was conceived through rape .
Jerry seeks the help of Dr. Paula Olsen , a researcher working with autistic children .
Paula and her colleague Dr. Alexander " Al " Paley are interested in studying a " wild child " ( feral child ) , and Al continues calling Nell this even after studying films showing that Nell does not fit the " wild child " profile .
Paula and Al get a court order to institutionalize Nell for further study .
Jerry hires lawyer Don Fontana and prevents it .
The judge gives Jerry and Paula three months to interact with Nell and discover her needs .
Paula shows up on a houseboat with electronic equipment to monitor Nell 's behavior while Jerry chooses to stay in Nell 's cabin and quietly observe .
Paula discovers that Nell 's seemingly indecipherable language is English , based partly on her mother 's aphasic speech after a stroke , and partly on the secret language she shared with her decades - deceased identical twin sister .
Jerry and Paula begin a grudging friendship .
Nell sleeps during the day or works inside her home and is active outdoors only after sunset .
She explains to Jerry that her mother told her about the rape and warned her that men were evildoers .
As Nell comes to trust Jerry , she sees him as a friend , the " gah'inja " her mother promised would come .
Jerry later realizes that " gah'inja " is Nell 's phrase for " guardian angel . "
Using popcorn as an incentive , Jerry is able to lead Nell outside and into the sun .
Nell leads Jerry and Paula to the decayed remains of her identical twin sister , May , who died in a fall while the two were playing in the woods .
Mike Ibarra , a reporter , learns of Nell 's existence and visits her cabin .
Nell is curious of the visitor at first , but when he snaps a photo , the flash frightens Nell .
Jerry arrives and throws the reporter out .
Paula believes that Nell would be safer in a hospital , while Jerry feels that Nell should be left alone and allowed to live as she pleases .
The two decide that Nell should be shown a little of the world , and they make the decision to bring Nell into town .
While in town , Nell befriends Mary , Todd 's depressed wife , but also encounters some raunchy boys in a pool hall until Jerry gets her out .
With increased intrusion by the press , Jerry and Paula take Nell to a hospital for her protection .
There , Nell becomes extremely despondent and unresponsive .
Jerry removes her from the hospital and hides her in a hotel .
Paula joins him , and the two admit that they love each other .
At the court hearing the next day , Al , who wants to study Nell in a controlled environment , delivers his opinion that Nell has Asperger syndrome and belongs in an institution .
Nell then comes forward and , with Jerry interpreting , speaks for herself .
Five years later , Jerry and Paula bring their daughter , Ruthie , to visit Nell in her house .
It is Nell 's birthday , and friends surround her .
CAST * Jodie Foster as Nell Kellty
* Liam Neeson as Dr. Jerome " Jerry " Lovell * Natasha Richardson as Dr. Paula Olsen
* Richard Libertini as Dr. Alexander " Al " Paley * Nick Searcy as Sheriff Todd Peterson * Jeremy Davies as Billy Fisher * Robin Mullins as Mary Peterson * O'Neal Compton as Don Fontana
* Sean Bridgers as Mike Ibarra * Joe Inscoe as Judge * Heather M. Bomba and Marianne E. Bomba as Twins
* Stephanie Dawn Wood as Ruthie Lovell
* Nicole Adair as Autistic Child * Marlon Jackson as Male Nurse PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Production took place in North Carolina , including the town of Robbinsville and the city of Charlotte .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film debuted with $ 5.7 million .
It eventually grossed $ 33.6 million domestically while bringing over $ 73 million around the world to a total of $ 106.6 million worldwide .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Nell received mixed reviews from critics , who praised the cast but criticised the screenplay .
Foster received widespread praise for her performance .
The Washington Post 's review noted that " Jodie Foster , transcendent in the bravura title role , is far grander than the film itself , and her performance helps camouflage the weaknesses of its structure and the naivete of its themes . "
In her review for The New York Times , Janet Maslin noted that : " For all its technical brilliance , not even Ms. Foster 's intense , accomplished performance in the title role holds much surprise .
The wild - child story of ' Nell ' unfolds in unexpectedly predictable ways , clinging fiercely to the banal thought that Nell 's innocence makes her purer than anyone else in the story .
" Maslin also wished the film had explored Nell 's adult sexuality .
Roger Ebert liked the movie , commenting that " Despite its predictable philosophy , however , Nell is an effective film , and a moving one . "
He also singled out the performances of Foster and Neeson .
The film currently holds a score of 53 % on Rotten Tomatoes .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Academy Awards rowspan=1Best
Actress rowspan=15Jodie Foster rowspan=1Chicago
Film Critics Association Awards rowspan=1Best Actress rowspan=1Dallas –
Fort Worth Film Critics Association Awards
rowspan=1Best
Actress
rowspan=1David di Donatello Awards rowspan=1Best
Foreign Actress rowspan=1MTV Movie Awards rowspan=1Best Female Performance rowspan=1Los
Angeles Film Critics Association Awards rowspan=1Best
Actress
rowspan=1Boston Society of Film Critics Awards rowspan=1Best
Actress rowspan=1National Society of Film Critics Awards rowspan=1Best Actress rowspan=1New
York Film Critics Circle Awards
rowspan=1Best Actress
rowspan=1Goldene Kamera rowspan=1Best
International Actress rowspan=1Screen Actors
Guild Awards
rowspan=1Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role
rowspan=1Southeastern Film Critics Association Awards
rowspan=1Best Actress
rowspan=1Golden Screen Awards
rowspan=1Best
Actress
rowspan=5Golden Globe Awards Best Actress in a Motion Picture –
Drama rowspan=3Best Motion Picture - Drama
Renee Missel
Graham Place
Best Original Score Mark Isham REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS