HALF - ELVEN
In J. R. R. Tolkien 's fictional universe of Middle - earth , the Half - elven ( Sindarin singular Peredhel , plural Peredhil , Quenya singular Perelda ) are the children of the union of Elves and Men .
Of these , the most significant were the products of couplings between the Eldar ( the Elves who followed the Call to Valinor ) and the Edain ( the Men of the Three Houses of early Men who allied themselves with the Eldar in their war against Morgoth ) .
There were three recorded unions of the Edain and Eldar that generated descendants : They were Idril and Tuor , Lúthien and Beren , Arwen and Aragorn .
The first two couples we d during the final part of the First Age of Middle - earth while the third married at the end of the Third Age ( some six thousand - five hundred years later ) .
The third couple descended not only from the first two couples , but also from the twin Peredhil , Elros Tar - Minyatur ( 32–442 ) and Elrond , who chose mankind and elvenkind as their respective races — thereby severing their fates and those of their descendants .
In Appendix A of The Return of the King , Tolkien notes that by the marriage of Arwen and Aragorn " the long - sundered branches of the Half - elven were reunited and their line was restored " .
The second union was the only one of the three marriages in which the Elf involved ( Idril ) did not become mortal ; instead Tuor was joined to the Elves .
In all known cases , the husband was mortal , while the wife was Elven .
There were two " near " cases of unions between Edain and Eldar : the Elf Finduilas fell in love with the Adan Turin , and the woman Andreth fell in love with the Elf Aegnor ( brother of the Elven King Finrod Felagund ) .
In neither case was the union completed ; in the former , Finduilas perished after the Sack of Nargothrond ; in the latter , Aegnor chose not to marry in time of war .
There was at least one case when an Elf of " lesser " kindred joined with a Man between Imrazôr and Mithrellas , was the traditional founding of Prince Imrahil 's line .
Like many other ideas in Tolkien 's mythos , the notion of half - elves is borrowed from Norse mythology , in which elves occasionally had children with humans .
INTERNAL HISTORY
THE FIRST AGE Section::::Internal history .
Section::::The First Age .
Two important marriages in the First Age of Middle - earth resulted in the blending of Elvish and mortal blood .
The first of these was between the mortal Beren , of the House of Bëor , and Lúthien , daughter of the Elf Thingol , king of the Sindar , and Melian , a Maia .
Beren died in the quest for the Silmaril , and in despair , Lúthien 's spirit departed her body and made its way to the halls of Mandos .
Mandos allowed them a unique fate , and they were re - bodied as mortals in Middle - earth , where they dwelt until their second deaths .
Their son Dior , heir of the Sindarin kingdom of Doriath and of the Silmaril , was thus one - quarter Elvish by blood and one - quarter Maian ( thus half - immortal ) , and half - human ( thus half - mortal ) .
He was killed while still young , when the sons of Fëanor sacked Doriath .
Dior 's wife was Nimloth , a Sindarin Elf , and with her he had three children :
Elwing , Eluréd and Elurín .
Eluréd and Elurín were slain along with Dior — or escaped , never to be heard of again , while Elwing escaped to the Mouths of Sirion .
The second marriage of Men and Elves in the First Age was between Tuor of the House of Hador , another branch of the Edain , and Idril , an Elf , though half Noldorin and half Vanyarin in ancestry .
Their son was Eärendil .
After the fall of Gondolin , Eärendil also escaped to the Mouths of Sirion , and married Elwing .
They had twin sons , Elrond and Elros .
Both sons are one sixteenth Maiar , nine sixteenths elven ( five thirty - seconds Vanyarin , three thirty - seconds Noldorin , five sixteenths Sindarin ) and three eighths human ( one quarter of the House of Bëor , one sixteenth of the House of Haleth , and one sixteenth of the House of Hador ) .
THE CHOICE Section::::The Choice .
Uniquely , Eärendil and Elwing , together with their sons Elrond and Elros , were granted their choice of fates : to be counted as Elves ( free to dwell in the blessed Undying Lands for as long as Arda endures ) or to be counted as Human ( entitled to the Gift of Men whereby , through death , their spirits are freed to enter the unknown beyond Arda ) .
Should this Choice have not been granted , they , like all other Half - Elves , would have been automatically mortal .
Eärendil would rather have chosen the kindred of Men , but Elwing preferred elvenkind .
Moreover , having sailed to the Undying Lands with the power of the Silmaril , Eärendil was not permitted to return to mortal lands .
Thereafter he was set aloft , to sail forever the heavens in his ship Vingilot , the Silmaril of Beren and Lúthien on the prow .
In Middle - earth , he was seen as the evening star , and the light of his Silmaril was captured in the Phial of Galadriel .
Elwing built a tower in the Shadowy Seas and often met him on his daily return .
Elros chose to be counted among mortals , and became Tar - Minyatur , the first king of Númenor .
He finally took his death ( for those kings had the freedom and grace to die at will ) at the age of five hundred .
The descendants of Elros were not given this choice , but their lifespan was enhanced several times
that of ordinary Men .
In later times the Númenórean kings , descendants of Elros , regretted their forefather 's choice , and this helped lead to the Downfall of Númenor .
Elrond chose to be counted among the Elves , joining the court of Gil - galad until the end of the Second Age .
He also founded Rivendell — haven of the Peredhil — in the Second Age .
He married the Elf Celebrían , daughter of Celeborn and Galadriel , and sailed into the West at the conclusion of the War of the Ring .
The children of Elrond were also given choice of kindred , and therefore Arwen could choose to be counted among the Edain even though her father hoped she would accompany him to Elvenhome in the West .
But she chose otherwise , marrying Aragorn II Elessar , king of the Reunited Kingdom , and died alone at the age of 2,901 years , grieving the brevity of her mortal happiness .
Their son Eldarion and their daughters were not counted as Half - elven , but rather as Dúnedain restored .
It is not stated in Tolkien 's books whether Arwen 's brothers , Elladan and Elrohir , chose to be of the Edain or Eldar .
But their decision , too , was to be manifested by accompanying their father over the sea at the time of his own departure — or not .
Yet they are described as remaining at Rivendell , so some readers conclude that they exercised their right to live and die in Middle - earth as Edain .
LINE OF THE HALF - ELVEN OTHER LINES Section::::Other lines .
It was a tradition in Dol Amroth that Imrazôr the Númenórean had married an Elf and therefore his descendants , the Princes of Dol Amroth , were of Elven descent .
Legolas , an Elf of Mirkwood , believed as much upon meeting Prince Imrahil , but the matter is probed no further in The Lord of the Rings .
In Tolkien 's Unfinished Tales , however , Imrazôr 's wife in one account is given as Mithrellas , handmaiden of Nimrodel , a Silvan Elf who resisted the encroachment of the Eldar in her homeland , Lothlórien .
In The Hobbit reference is made to a rumour among Hobbit folk that a Took ancestor of Bilbo Baggins had taken a " fairy " ( i.e. Elf ) wife , but the allegation is immediately dismissed as a simplistic explanation for the sometimes atypical behaviour of the Took clan .
In The Book of Lost Tales ( published in two parts ) , the young Tolkien originally intended Eärendil , then spelled Earendel , to be the first of the Half - elven .
Early versions of The Tale of Beren and Lúthien had Beren as an Elf .
The earliest version of the tale of Túrin Turambar had Tamar , the character
Tolkien later renamed Brandir , as a Half - elf ; Tolkien mentioned this in a way that implied he did not consider Half - elven descent especially remarkable at the time he wrote that story .
FURTHER READING
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS