CATCH ME
IF YOU CAN
Catch Me
If You Can is a 2002 American biographical crime film directed and produced by Steven Spielberg from a screenplay by Jeff Nathanson .
The film stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Tom Hanks , with Christopher Walken , Martin Sheen , and Nathalie Baye in supporting roles .
The film is based on the life of Frank Abagnale , who , before his 19th birthday , successfully performed cons worth millions of dollars by posing as a Pan American World Airways pilot , a Georgia doctor , and a Louisiana parish prosecutor .
His primary crime was check fraud ; he became so experienced that the FBI eventually turned to him for help in catching other check forgers .
Development for the film started in 1980 , but did not progress until 1997 , when Spielberg 's DreamWorks bought the film rights to Abagnale 's book .
David Fincher , Gore Verbinski , Lasse Hallström , Miloš Forman , and Cameron Crowe had all been possible candidates for director before Spielberg decided to direct .
Filming took place from February to May 2002 .
The film was a financial and critical success .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1963 , teenager Frank Abagnale lives in New Rochelle , New York with his father Frank Abagnale , Sr . , and French mother Paula .
When Frank Sr . is denied a business loan at Chase Manhattan Bank due to unknown difficulties with the IRS , the family is forced to move from their large home to a small apartment .
Paula carries on an affair with Jack , a friend of her husband .
Meanwhile , Frank poses as a substitute teacher in his French class .
Frank 's parents file for divorce , and Frank runs away .
When he runs out of money , he begins relying on confidence scams to get by .
Soon , Frank 's cons increase and he even impersonates an airline pilot .
He forges Pan Am payroll checks and succeeds in stealing over $ 2.8 million .
Meanwhile , Carl Hanratty , an FBI bank fraud agent , begins tracking Frank .
Carl intercepts Frank at a hotel but Frank convinces Carl that his name is Barry Allen of the Secret Service and that he is also after the fraudster .
Frank leaves and Carl angrily realizes a minute too late that he has been fooled .
Later , at Christmas , Carl is still at work when Frank calls him , attempting to apologize for duping Carl .
Carl rejects his apology and tells him he will soon be caught , but laughs when he realizes Frank actually called him because he has no one else to talk to .
Frank hangs up , and Carl continues to investigate , suddenly realizing ( thanks to a waiter ) that the name " Barry Allen " is from the Flash comic books and that Frank is actually a teenager .
Frank , meanwhile , has expanded his con to include the identities of a doctor and lawyer .
While playing Dr. Frank Conners , he falls in love with Brenda .
While asking her father 's permission to marry her , he admits the truth about himself and asks for help with the Louisiana State Bar exam .
Carl tracks him to his engagement party and Frank is able to sneak out a bedroom window minutes before Carl bursts in .
Before leaving , Frank makes Brenda promise to meet him in Miami two days later so they can elope .
Frank sees her waiting for him two days later , but also notices plainclothes agents waiting to arrest him ; realizing he has been set up , he escapes on a flight to Europe .
Seven months later , Carl shows his boss that Frank has been forging checks all over western Europe and asks permission to go to Europe to look for him .
When his boss refuses , Carl brings Frank 's checks to printing professionals who claim that the checks were printed in France .
From an interview with Frank 's mother , Carl remembers that she was actually born in Montrichard , France .
He goes there and locates Frank , and tells him that the French police will kill him if he does not go with Carl quietly .
Frank assumes he is lying at first , but Carl promises Frank he would never lie to him , and Carl takes him outside , where the French police escort him to prison .
The scene then flashes forward to a plane returning Frank home from prison , where Carl informs him that his father has died .
Grief - stricken , Frank escapes from the plane and goes back to his old house , where he finds his mother with the man she left his father for , as well as a girl who Frank realizes is his half - sister .
Frank gives himself up and is sentenced to 12 years in prison , getting visits from time to time from Carl .
When Frank points out how one of the checks Carl is carrying as evidence is fake , Carl convinces the FBI to offer Frank a deal by which he can live out the remainder of his sentence working for the bank fraud department of the FBI , which Frank accepts .
While working at the FBI , Frank misses the thrill of the chase and even attempts to fly as an airline pilot again .
He is cornered by Carl , who insists that Frank will return to the FBI job since no one is chasing him .
On the following Monday , Carl is nervous that Frank has not yet arrived at work .
However , Frank eventually arrives and they discuss their next case .
The ending credits reveal that Frank is real and has been happily married for 26 years , has three sons , lives in the Midwest , is still good friends with Carl , has caught some of the world 's most elusive money forgers , and earns millions of dollars each year because of his work creating unforgeable checks .
CAST * Leonardo DiCaprio as Frank Abagnale Jr. * Tom Hanks as Carl Hanratty * Christopher Walken as Frank Abagnale Sr .
* Nathalie Baye as Paula Abagnale
* Amy Adams as Brenda Strong * Martin Sheen as Roger Strong * James Brolin as Jack Barnes * Nancy Lenehan as Carol Strong Section::::Cast .
Brian Howe , Frank John Hughes and Chris Ellis portray FBI agents .
Jennifer Garner cameos as a call girl .
Ellen Pompeo , Elizabeth Banks , and Kaitlin Doubleday have supporting roles .
The real Frank Abagnale appears in a cameo as a French police officer arresting his character .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
Frank Abagnale sold the film rights to his autobiography in 1980 .
According to Abagnale , producers Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin purchased the film rights after seeing him on the Tonight Show with Johnny Carson .
Two years later they sold the rights to Columbia Pictures who in turn sold the rights to producer Hall Bartlett .
Bartlett hired Steven Kunes to write the screenplay and then died before the project found a distributor .
Bartlett 's widow sold the rights to Hollywood Pictures , a division of Disney , and when the project went into turnaround , the rights were again sold to Tri - Star Pictures , more specifically Bungalow 78 Productions .
From there the project was presented to Steven Spielberg at Dreamworks .
Yet according to Daily Variety , Executive Producer Michel Shane purchased the film rights in 1990 , for Paramount Pictures .
By December 1997 , Barry Kemp purchased the film rights from Shane , bringing the project to DreamWorks , with Jeff Nathanson writing the script .
By April 2000 , David Fincher was attached to direct over the course of a few months , but dropped out in favor of Panic Room .
In July 2000 , Leonardo DiCaprio had entered discussions to star , with Gore Verbinski to direct .
Steven Spielberg signed on as producer , and filming was set to begin in March 2001 .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Verbinski cast James Gandolfini as Carl Hanratty , Ed Harris as Frank Abagnale , Sr . , and Chloë Sevigny as Brenda Strong .
Verbinski dropped out because of DiCaprio 's commitment on Gangs of New York .
Lasse Hallström was in negotiations to direct by May 2001 , but dropped out in July 2001 .
At this stage Harris and Sevigny left the film , but Gandolfini was still attached .
Spielberg , co - founder of DreamWorks , offered the job of director to Miloš Forman , and considered hiring Cameron Crowe .
During this negotiation period , Spielberg began to consider directing the film himself , eventually dropping projects such as Big Fish and Memoirs of a Geisha .
Spielberg officially committed to directing in August 2001 .
The search for Strong 's portrayer lasted months but Amy Adams was eventually cast .
Spielberg " loved " her tape and producer Walter F. Parkes
commented that she was " as fresh and honest as anyone we 'd seen , " which was an important element in the role .
Christopher Walken was cast as Frank Abagnale , Sr .
following Parkes ' suggestion .
Martin Sheen played Roger Strong as he had " intimidating presence " .
Spielberg wanted a French actress to portray Paula Abagnale to stay true to the facts .
He asked for the help of Brian De Palma , who was living in Paris and he did tests with several actresses such as Nathalie Baye .
Spielberg had seen Jennifer Garner on Alias and wanted her to play a small role in the film due to her busy schedule .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The original start date was January 2002 , but was pushed to February 7 in Los Angeles , California .
Locations included Burbank , Downey , New York City , LA / Ontario International Airport ( which doubled for Miami International Airport ) , Quebec City and Montreal .
The film was shot in 147 locations in only 52 days .
DiCaprio reflected , " Scenes that we thought would take three days took an afternoon " .
Filming ran from April 25–30 in Park Avenue , just outside the Waldorf - Astoria Hotel .
Production moved to Orange , New Jersey and returned to Brooklyn for bank and courthouse scenes .
Shooting also took place at the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport .
Quebec City was chosen for its European character and French feel .
Place Royale , within Old Quebec , stands for Montrichard — the church in the background of the arrest scene is Notre - Dame - des - Victoires .
Filming ended on May 12 in Montreal .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film 's soundtrack was released on December 10 , 2002 by DreamWorks Records .
The original score was composed and conducted by John Williams .
HISTORICAL ACCURACY Section::::Historical accuracy .
Despite the various changes from real - life events , Abagnale believed Spielberg was the only filmmaker who " could do this film justice " .
However , Abagnale had little involvement with the film .
In November 2001 Abagnale reported , " I 've never met nor spoken to Steven Spielberg
and I have not read the script .
I prefer not to .
I understand that they now portray my father in a better light , as he really was .
Steven Spielberg has told the screenplay writer ( Jeff Nathanson ) that he wants complete accuracy in the relationships and actual scams that I perpetrated .
I hope in the end the movie will be entertaining , exciting , funny and bring home an important message about family , childhood and divorce " .
The real Abagnale never saw his father again after he ran away from home .
Spielberg " wanted to continue to have that connection where Frank kept trying to please his father ; by making him proud of him ; by seeing him in the uniform , the Pan - American uniform " .
However , Abagnale praised the idea .
" Even though I did n't see my dad again , every night after living a brilliant day and meeting many women , and making much money , I 'd come back alone to a hotel room
and I would just think of my mom and dad and fantasize about getting them back together again , and cry .
It 's the justification of a fantasy . "
In the shooting script , Hanks ' character was referred to as Joseph Shea , the real name of the actual FBI agent who tracked and later worked with Abagnale , but the name was changed to Carl Hanratty for unknown reasons .
Abagnale has since stated that the name was changed because Shea did not want his name to be used in the film , with Hanks choosing the name of a football player , Carl Hanratty .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
Catch Me
if You Can deals with themes of broken homes and troubled childhoods .
Spielberg 's parents divorced when he was a teenager , similar to Frank Abagnale 's situation .
In the film , Carl Hanratty is also divorced from his wife , who lives with their daughter in Chicago .
"
Some of my films have had to do with broken homes and people on the run from their sad pasts " , Spielberg stated .
" But there are those strands that got me to say : you know , there 's something also about me that I can say through the telling of this kind of lighthearted story " .
Spielberg also wanted to create a film that sympathized with a crook .
He explained , " Frank was a 21st century genius working within the innocence of the mid ' 60s , when people were more trusting than they are now .
I do n't think this is the kind of movie where somebody could say , ' I have a career plan .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Game Show Network aired the 1977 episode of the television game show To Tell the Truth that featured Frank Abagnale .
Segments were shown on December 29 , 2002 and January 1 , 2003 as promotion .
The marketing department was careful to market the film as " inspired by a true story " in order to avoid controversy similar to that surrounding A Beautiful Mind ( 2001 ) and The Hurricane ( 1999 ) , both of which deviated from history .
The premiere took place at Westwood , Los Angeles , California on December 18 , 2002 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Catch Me
If You Can was released on December 25 , 2002 , earning slightly above $ 30 million in 3,225 theaters during its opening weekend .
The film went on to gross $ 164.6 million in North America and $ 187.5 million in foreign countries , coming at a worldwide total of $ 352.1 million .
The film was a financial success , recouping the $ 52 million budget six times over .
Catch Me
If You Can was the eleventh highest - grossing film of 2002 .
Minority Report ( also directed by Spielberg ) was tenth highest .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has a certified fresh rating of 96 % , based on 197 reviews , with an average rating of 7.9/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reading , " With help from a strong performance by Leonardo DiCaprio as real - life wunderkind con artist Frank Abagnale , Steven Spielberg
crafts a film that 's stylish , breezily entertaining , and surprisingly sweet .
"
On Metacritic the film has a score of 76 out of 100 , based on 38 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Roger Ebert heavily praised DiCaprio 's performance , and concluded " This is not a major Spielberg film , although it is an effortlessly watchable one " .
Mick LaSalle said it was " not Spielberg 's best movie , but one of his smoothest and maybe his friendliest .
The colorful cinematography , smart performances and brisk tempo suggest a filmmaker subordinating every other impulse to the task of manufacturing pleasure . "
Stephen Hunter believed DiCaprio shows " the range and ease and cleverness that Martin Scorsese so underutilized in Gangs of New York " .
James Berardinelli observed , " Catch Me if You Can never takes itself or its subjects too seriously , and contains more genuinely funny material than about 90 % of the so - called ' comedies ' found in multiplexes these days " .
In addition Berardinelli praised John Williams ' film score , which he felt was " more intimate and jazzy than his usual material , evoking ( intentionally ) Henry Mancini " .
Peter Travers was one of few who gave the film a negative review .
Travers considered Catch Me if You Can to be " bogged down over 140 minutes .
A film that took off like a hare on speed ends like a winded tortoise . "
At the 75th Academy Awards , Christopher Walken and John Williams were nominated for Best Supporting Actor and Best Original Score .
Walken won the same category at the 56th British Academy Film Awards , while Williams , costume designer Mary Zophres and screenwriter Jeff Nathanson received nominations .
DiCaprio was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama .
Williams also earned a Grammy Award nomination .
Elements of the film were later parodied in The Simpsons episode " Catch ' Em
If You Can " .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Catch Me
If You Can was released on DVD on May 6 , 2003 and on Blu - ray on December 4 , 2012 .
MUSICAL ADAPTATION
Section::::Musical adaptation .
A musical adaptation of the same name premiered at the 5th Avenue Theatre in Seattle , Washington in July 2009 , starring Aaron Tveit and Norbert Leo Butz .
It began previews on Broadway at the Neil Simon Theatre on March 11 , 2011 and officially opened April 10 , 2011 .
The musical was nominated for four Tony Awards , including Best Musical .
SEE ALSO
*
The Great Impostor , a 1961 film based on the story of an impostor named Ferdinand Waldo Demara .
*
The Pretender , a TV series REFERENCES * Frank Abagnale Jr. and Stan Redding .
Catch Me
If You Can : The Amazing True Story of the Youngest and Most Daring Con Man in the History of Fun and Profit .
( ) .
EXTERNAL LINKS * An Interview with Leonardo DiCaprio - Movies Feature at IGN * Official website for Catch Me
If You Can the musical