BLARNEY STONE
The Blarney Stone ( ) is a block of Carboniferous limestone built into the battlements of Blarney Castle , Blarney , about from Cork , Ireland .
According to legend , kissing the stone endows the kisser with the gift of the gab ( great eloquence or skill at flattery ) .
The stone was set into a tower of the castle in 1446 .
The castle is a popular tourist site in Ireland , attracting visitors from all over the world to kiss the stone and tour the castle and its gardens .
The word blarney has come to mean " clever , flattering , or coaxing talk " .
Irish politician John O'Connor Power defined it this way : " Blarney is something more than mere flattery .
It is flattery sweetened by humour and flavoured by wit .
Those who mix with Irish folk have many examples of it in their everyday experience . "
Letitia Elizabeth Landon described its contemporary meaning in an article entitled ' Blarney Castle ' in 1832 .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
A number of stories attempt to explain the origin of the stone and surrounding legend .
An early story involves the goddess Clíodhna .
Cormac Laidir McCarthy , the builder of Blarney Castle , being involved in a lawsuit in the 15th century , appealed to Clíodhna for her assistance .
She told McCarthy to kiss the first stone he found in the morning on his way to court , and he did so , with the result that he pleaded his case with great eloquence and won .
Thus the Blarney Stone is said to impart " the ability to deceive without offending " .
MacCarthy then incorporated it into the parapet of the castle .
The proprietors of Blarney Castle list several other explanations of the origins of the stone on their website .
Many of these suppose that the stone had previously been in Ireland , was taken to Scotland and then returned to Ireland in 1314 .
The stories listed include one suggesting that the stone was presented to Cormac McCarthy by Robert the Bruce in 1314 in recognition of his support in the Battle of Bannockburn .
This legend holds that this was a piece of the Stone of Scone and was installed at McCarthy 's castle of Blarney .
Although colourful , this folk legend does not account for the fact that it supposes that the stone was removed from Scotland 18 years before Bannockburn , and modern analysis suggests that the stone is not related to the Stone of Scone .
RITUAL
Section::::Ritual .
The ritual of kissing the Blarney Stone , according to the castle 's proprietors , has been performed by " millions of people " , including " world statesmen , literary giants [ and ] legends of the silver screen " .
The kiss , however , is not casually achieved .
To touch the stone with one 's lips , the participant must ascend to the castle 's peak , then lean over backwards on the parapet 's edge .
This is traditionally achieved with the help of an assistant .
Although the parapet is now fitted with wrought - iron guide rails and protective crossbars , the ritual can still trigger attacks of acrophobia , an extreme or irrational fear of heights .
Before the safeguards were installed , the kiss was performed with real risk to life and limb , as participants were grasped by the ankles and dangled bodily from the height .
In the Sherlock Holmes radio dramatisation " The Adventure of the Blarney Stone " ( first broadcast on 18 March 1946 ) , a man attempting to kiss the Blarney Stone falls to his death .
Holmes ' investigation reveals this as a murder as the man 's boots having been surreptitiously greased before the attempt .
William Henry Hurlbert wrote in 1888 that the legend of the stone seemed to be less than a hundred years old at that time , suggesting the tradition began late in the 18th century .
The legend of the Blarney Stone was described in A classical dictionary of the vulgar tongue by Francis Grose , printed 1785 .
LEGEND Section::::Legend .
It is claimed that the synonymy of " blarney " with " empty flattery " or " beguiling talk " derives from one of two sources .
One story involves the goddess Clíodhna and Cormac Laidir MacCarthy ( see " Origins " above ) .
Another legend suggests that Queen Elizabeth I requested Cormac Teige McCarthy , the Lord of Blarney , be deprived of his traditional land rights .
Cormac travelled to see the queen , but was certain he would not persuade her to change her mind as he was n't an effective speaker .
He met an old woman on the way who told him that anyone who kissed a particular stone in Blarney Castle would be given the gift of eloquent speech .
Cormac went on to persuade the queen that he should not be deprived of his land .
Echoing the supposed power of the stone , an Irish bard of the early 19th century , Francis Sylvester Mahony , added a number of ( humorous ) lines to Richard Alfred Millikin 's " The Groves of Blarney " ( right ) .
According to tradition at Texas Tech University , a stone fragment on display since 1939 outside the old Electrical Engineering Building is a missing piece of the Blarney Stone .
How this was determined is unknown .
SEE ALSO
* Answering Stone
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official Website ( Blarney Castle )
* Photos and Description