MINERAL OIL Mineral oil is any of various colorless , odorless , light mixtures of higher alkanes from a mineral source , particularly a distillate of petroleum .
The name mineral oil by itself is imprecise , having been used for many specific oils over the past few centuries .
Other names , similarly imprecise , include white oil , paraffin oil , liquid paraffin ( a highly refined medical grade ) , paraffinum liquidum ( Latin ) , and liquid petroleum .
Baby oil is a perfumed mineral oil .
Most often , mineral oil is a liquid by - product of refining crude oil to make gasoline and other petroleum products .
This type of mineral oil is a transparent , colorless oil , composed mainly of alkanes and cycloalkanes , related to petroleum jelly .
It has a density of around 0.8 g / cm .
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
Some of the imprecision in the definition of the names ( e.g. , " mineral oil " , " white oil " ) reflects usage by buyers and sellers who did not know , and usually did not need to care about , the precise chemical makeup .
Merriam - Webster states the first use of the term " mineral oil " was 1771 .
Prior to the late 19th century , the chemical science to determine such makeup was unavailable in any case .
A similar lexical situation occurred with the term " white metal " .
" Mineral oil " , sold widely and cheaply in the USA , is not sold as such in Britain .
Instead British pharmacologists use the terms " Paraffinum perliquidum " for light mineral oil and " Paraffinum liquidum " or " Paraffinum subliquidum " for somewhat thicker ( more viscous ) varieties .
The term " Paraffinum Liquidum " is often seen on the ingredient lists of baby oil and cosmetics .
British aromatherapists commonly use the term " white mineral oil " .
In lubricating oils , mineral oil is termed from groups 1 to 2 worldwide and group 3 in certain regions .
This is because the high end of group 3 mineral lubricating oils are so pure that they exhibit properties similar to polyalphaolefin - PAO oils ( group 4 synthetics ) .
TOXICOLOGY Section::::Toxicology .
The World Health Organization classifies untreated or mildly treated mineral oils as Group 1 carcinogens to humans ; highly refined oils are classified as Group 3 , meaning they are not suspected to be carcinogenic but available information is not sufficient to classify them as harmless .
The UK Food Standards Agency ( FSA ) carried out a risk assessment on the findings of a survey made in 2011 on risks due to migration of components from printing inks used on carton - board packaging , including mineral oils , into food .
The FSA did not identify any specific food safety concerns due to inks .
People can be exposed to mineral oil mist in the workplace by breathing it in , skin contact , or eye contact .
In the United States , the Occupational Safety and Health Administration has set the legal limit for mineral oil mist exposure in the workplace as 5 mg / m over an 8-hour workday .
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has set a recommended exposure limit of 5 mg / m over an 8-hour workday and 10 mg / m short - term exposure .
Levels of 2500 mg / m and higher are indicated as immediately dangerous to life and health .
However , current toxicological data does not contain any evidence of irreversible health effects due to short term exposure at any level ; the current value of 2500 mg / m is indicated as being arbitrary .
APPLICATIONS
BIOMEDICINE
CELL CULTURE
Section::::Applications .
Section::::Biomedicine .
Section::::Cell culture .
Mineral oil of special purity is often used as an overlay covering microdrops of culture medium in petri dishes , during the culture of oocytes and embryos in IVF and related procedures .
The use of oil presents several advantages over the open culture system : it allows for several oocytes and embryos to be cultured simultaneously , but observed separately , in the same dish ; it minimizes concentration and pH changes by preventing evaporation of the medium ; it allows for a significant reduction of the medium volume used ( as few as 20 microlitres per oocyte instead of several millilitres for the batch culture ) ; and it serves as a temperature buffer minimizing thermal shock to the cells while the dish is taken out of the incubator for observation .
VETERINARY
Section::::Veterinary .
Over the counter veterinarian use mineral oil is intended as a mild laxative for pets and livestock .
Certain mineral oils are used in livestock vaccines , as an adjuvant to stimulate a cell - mediated immune response to the vaccinating agent .
In the poultry industry , plain mineral oil can also be swabbed onto the feet of chickens infected with scaly mites on the shank , toes , and webs .
Mineral oil suffocates these tiny parasites .
In beekeeping , food grade mineral oil - saturated paper napkins placed in hives are used as a treatment for tracheal and other mites .
It is also used along with a cotton swab to remove un - shed skin ( ashes ) on reptiles such as lizards and snakes .
COSMETICS Section::::Cosmetics .
Mineral oil is a common ingredient in baby lotions , cold creams , ointments , and cosmetics .
It is a lightweight inexpensive oil that is odorless and tasteless .
It can be used on eyelashes to prevent brittleness and breaking and , in cold cream , is also used to remove creme make - up and temporary tattoos .
One of the common concerns regarding the use of mineral oil is its presence on several lists of comedogenic substances .
These lists of comedogenic substances were developed many years ago and are frequently quoted in the dermatological literature .
The type of highly refined and purified mineral oil found in cosmetic and skincare products is noncomedogenic ( does not clog pores ) .
MECHANICAL , ELECTRICAL , AND INDUSTRIAL Section::::Mechanical , electrical , and industrial .
Mineral oil is used in a variety of industrial / mechanical capacities as a non - conductive coolant or thermal fluid in electric components as it does not conduct electricity and functions to displace air and water .
Some examples are in transformers , where it is known as transformer oil , and in high - voltage switchgear , where mineral oil is used as an insulator and as a coolant to disperse switching arcs .
The dielectric constant of mineral oil ranges from 2.3 at to 2.1 at .
Mineral oil is used as a lubricant , a cutting fluid , and a jute batching oil .
Spindle oils are light mineral oils used as lubricants in textile industries .
Electric space heaters sometimes use mineral oil as a heat transfer oil .
Because it is noncompressible , mineral oil is used as a hydraulic fluid in hydraulic machinery and vehicles .
An often cited limitation of mineral oil is that it is poorly biodegradable ; in some applications , vegetable oils such as cottonseed oil or rapeseed oil may be used instead .
FOOD PREPARATION Section::::Food preparation .
Food grade mineral oil has an E number of E905a , although it has not been approved in food products in the European Union , and incidental amounts in foods are carefully regulated .
Because of its properties that prevent water absorption , combined with its lack of flavor and odor , food grade mineral oil is a popular preservative for wooden cutting boards , salad bowls , and utensils .
Rubbing a small amount of mineral oil into a wooden kitchen item periodically , will impede absorption of food liquids , and thereby food odors , and ease cleaning .
By impeding water absorption , wetting and drying cycles , which can cause cracks or splits in wood , are reduced although some of the mineral oil is picked up by the food and ingested .
Outside of the European Union , it is occasionally used in the food industry , particularly for confectionery .
In this application , it is typically used for the glossy effect it produces , and to prevent the candy pieces from adhering to each other .
It has been discouraged for use in children 's foods , though it is still found in many confectioneries , including Swedish Fish .
The use of food grade mineral oil is self - limiting because of its laxative effect .
The maximum daily intake is calculated to be about 100 mg , of which some 80 mg are contributed from its use on machines in the baking industry .
It is sometimes used as a lubricant in enema preparations , because most of the ingested material is excreted in the stool rather than being absorbed by the body .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
Mineral oil 's ubiquity has led to its use in some niche applications as well .
It is used for treating and preserving wooden butcher block counter tops .
It is recommended by the American Society for Reproductive Medicine for use as a fertility - preserving vaginal lubrication .
The degrading effect of oils on latex condoms should be borne in mind .
Mineral oil is commonly used to create a " wear " effect on new clay poker chips , which can otherwise be accomplished only through prolonged use .
Either the chips are placed in mineral oil ( and left there for a short period of time ) or the oil is applied to each chip individually , then the chip is rubbed clean .
This removes any chalky residue left over from manufacture , and also improves the look and " feel " of the chips .
It is used as the principal fuel in some types of gel - type scented candles .
It is used for cooling , for example liquid submersion cooling of components in some custom - built computers .
Veterinarian - grade mineral oil is an inexpensive source for mineral oil and is frequently used by amateur radio operators as coolant in RF dummy loads .
Mineral oil is typically used as the insulating and cooling fluid in large electrical equipment such as transformers .
Mineral oil is used as a brake fluid in some cars and bicycle disc brakes .
It is used for polishing alabaster in stonework and lubricating and cleaning pocket knives or food handling tools that use an open bearing , thus needing periodic lubrication .
Light mineral oil ( paraffinum perliquidum ) is used as a honing oil when sharpening edge tools ( such as chisels ) on abrasive oil stones .
Mineral oil USP or light mineral oil can be used as an anti - rust agent for blades .
It is an inexpensive alternative for storing reactive metals ( lithium , sodium , etc . ) .
Horticultural oil is often made of a combination of mineral oil and detergent .
It is sprayed on plants to control scale , aphid , and other pest populations by suffocation .
It is used to overlay polymerase chain reactions in biotechnology to prevent loss of water during heating cycles .
It is often used to suspend crystals for use in X - ray crystallography .
It is used as a transparent collision material for reactions in particle physics , as in the MiniBooNE neutrino oscillation experiment .
As a relatively low heat combustible with no flavor or odor , mineral oil can be used in firebreathing and firedancing , but there is an inherent risk of injury .
Paraffin oil is also commonly being used to fill Galileo thermometers .
Due to paraffin oil 's freezing temp being lower than water ( approx .
24 ° F or −4 ° C ) , this makes them less susceptible to freezing during shipment or when temporarily being stored in a non - climate - controlled environment .
SEE ALSO
* Oil analysis
* Penetrating oil REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Safety and Health Guideline for Oil Mist , Mineral Oil " , Occupational Safety and Health Administration
* Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory – Safe handling of Alkali Metals * FAO –
Report on food safety of mineral oil , 1970