COTTAGE CHEESE
Cottage cheese is a fresh cheese curd product with a mild flavor .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
The first known use of the term " cottage cheese " dates back to 1831 .
It is believed to have originated because the simple cheese was usually made in cottages from any milk left over after making butter .
The ancient Mesopotamians made a type of salty , sour cheese very similar to cottage cheese that dates back to at least 3000
B.C. A common legend is that it was invented when a desert traveler filled his sheep stomach saddle bags with milk prior to beginning his journey .
MANUFACTURE
Section::::Manufacture .
Cottage cheese is drained , but not pressed , so some whey remains and the individual curds remain loose .
The curd is usually washed to remove acidity , giving sweet - curd cheese .
It is not aged or colored .
Different styles of cottage cheese are made from milk with different fat levels and in small - curd or large - curd preparations .
Pressed cottage cheese becomes hoop cheese , farmer cheese , pot cheese , or queso blanco .
CURD SIZE Section::::Curd size .
Curd size is the size of the chunks in the cottage cheese .
The two major types of cottage cheese are small - curd , high - acid cheese made without rennet , and large - curd , low - acid cheese made with rennet .
Rennet is a natural complex of enzymes that speeds curdling and keeps the curd that forms from breaking up .
Adding rennet shortens the cheese - making process , resulting in a lower acid and larger curd cheese , and reduces the amount of curd poured off with leftover liquid ( whey ) .
Sometimes large - curd cottage cheese is called " chunk style . "
CONSUMPTION Section::::Consumption .
Cottage cheese can be eaten in a variety of different ways : by itself , with fruit and sugar , with salt and pepper , with fruit puree , on toast , with tomatoes , with granola and cinnamon , in salads , as a chip dip , as a replacement for mayonnaise in tuna salad or as an ingredient in recipes such as jello salad and various desserts .
Cottage cheese with fruit , such as pears , peaches , or mandarin oranges , is a standard side dish in many " home cooking " or meat - and - three restaurants ' menus in the United States .
It is also used in dishes such as lasagna , in place of ricotta .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
A 113-g ( 4-oz ) serving of 4 % fat product has about 120 calories , 5 g fat ( 3 g saturated ) , 3 g carbohydrates , and 12 g protein .
It also contains about 500 mg sodium , 70 mg calcium , and 20 mg cholesterol .
Some manufacturers also produce low - fat and nonfat varieties .
A fat - free kind of a similar serving size has 80 calories , 0 g fat ( 0 g saturated ) , 6 g carbohydrates , and 14 g protein .
Cottage cheese is popular among dieters and some health food devotees .
It is also a favorite food among bodybuilders , runners , swimmers , and weightlifters for its high content of casein protein ( a long - lasting protein ) while being relatively low in fat .
Pregnant women are advised that cottage cheese is safe to eat , in contrast to some cheese products that are not recommended during pregnancy .
SEE ALSO
* Cottage cheese boycott , a consumer boycott in 2011 in Israel against the rise of food prices
* Faisselle , a French cheese , similar to cottage cheese
* Fromage blanc , a soft French cheese
* Mascarpone , an Italian cheese made from cream , coagulated with citric acid or acetic acid * Chhena , an Indian cheese , similar to cottage cheese
* Ricotta , an Italian whey cheese
* Quark , a European curd and cheese * Queso fresco , a Spanish and Latin American soft cheese
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS