COD LIVER OIL
Cod liver oil is a dietary supplement derived from liver of cod fish ( Gadidae ) .
As with most fish oils , it contains the omega-3 fatty acids , eicosapentaenoic acid ( EPA ) and docosahexaenoic acid ( DHA ) .
Cod liver oil also contains vitamin A and vitamin D. Historically , it was given to children because vitamin D had been shown to prevent rickets , a consequence of vitamin D deficiency .
MANUFACTURE
Section::::Manufacture .
Cod liver oil has traditionally come in many grades .
Cod liver oil for human consumption is pale and straw colored , with a mild flavor .
Ancient Scandinavian Vikings produced cod liver oil by laying birch tree branches over a kettle of water , and fresh livers were laid over the branches .
The water was brought to a boil and as the steam rose , the oil from the liver dripped into the water and was skimmed off .
There was also a method for producing fresh raw cod liver oil .
In the Industrial Revolution , cod liver oil became popular for industrial purposes .
Livers placed in barrels to rot , with the oil skimmed off over the season , was the main method for producing this oil .
The resulting oil was brown and foul tasting .
In the 1800s cod liver oil became popular as a medicine and both pale and brown oils were used .
Brown oils were common because they were cheaper to produce .
Some doctors believed in only using the fresh pale oil , while others believed the brown oil was better .
However the brown oils tended to cause intestinal upset .
The Möller Process was invented by Peter Möller in 1850 .
The livers are ground with water into a slurry , then this is gently simmered until the oil rises to the top .
The oil is skimmed off and purified .
Other methods used in modern times include the Cold Flotation Process , Pressure Extraction , and Pressure Cooking .
These all require further purification steps to get a pure oil .
THERAPEUTIC USES Section::::Therapeutic uses .
Though similar in fatty acid composition to other fish oils , cod liver oil has higher concentrations of vitamins A and D.
According to the United States Department of Agriculture , a tablespoon ( 13.6 grams or 14.8 mL ) of cod liver oil contains 4,080 μg of retinol ( vitamin A ) and 34 μg ( ) of vitamin D.
The Dietary Reference Intake of vitamin
A is 900 μg per day for adult men and 700 μg per day for women , while that for vitamin D is 15 μg per day .
The Tolerable upper intake levels ( ULs ) are 3000 μg / day and 100 μg / day , respectively .
People consuming cod liver oil as a source of omega-3 fatty acids should pay attention to how much vitamin A and vitamin D this adds to their diet .
Cod liver oil is approximately 20 % omega-3 fatty acids .
For this reason cod liver oil may be beneficial in secondary prophylaxis after a heart attack .
Diets supplemented with cod liver oil have also been demonstrated to have beneficial effects on psoriasis , and depression .
POTENTIAL ADVERSE EFFECTS Section::::Potential adverse effects .
A tablespoon ( 13.6 g ) of cod liver oil contains 136 % of the UL for preformed vitamin A ( retinol ) .
Vitamin A accumulates in the liver , and can reach harmful levels sufficient to cause hypervitaminosis A. Pregnant women may want to consider consulting a doctor when taking cod liver oil because of the high amount of retinol .
Fatty acid oxidation and environmental toxins content are reduced when purification processes are applied to produce refined fish oil products .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
In Newfoundland , cod liver oil was sometimes used as the liquid base for traditional red ochre paint , the coating of choice for use on outbuildings and work buildings associated with the cod fishery .
In Tübingen , Germany , drinking a glass of cod liver oil is the punishment for the loser at the traditional , a punting boat race by University of Tübingen groups .
SEE ALSO
* Dan Dale Alexander
*
Vitamin A overdose
* Shark liver oil REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS