TAPETUM LUCIDUM
The tapetum lucidum ( Latin : " bright tapestry ; coverlet " , plural tapeta lucida ) is a layer of tissue in the eye of many vertebrates .
Lying immediately behind the retina , it is a retroreflector .
It reflects visible light back through the retina , increasing the light available to the photoreceptors ( although slightly blurring the image ) .
The tapetum lucidum contributes to the superior night vision of some animals .
Many of these animals are nocturnal , especially carnivores , while others are deep sea animals .
Similar adaptations occur in some species of spiders .
Most primates , including humans , lack a tapetum lucidum , and compensate for this using perceptive recognition methods .
FUNCTION AND MECHANISM Section::::Function and mechanism .
Presence of a tapetum lucidum enables animals to see in dimmer light than would otherwise be possible .
The tapetum lucidum , which is iridescent , reflects light roughly on the interference principles of thin - film optics , as seen in other iridescent tissues .
However , the tapetum lucidum cells are leucophores , not iridophores .
The tapetum lucidum functions as a retroreflector which reflects light directly back along the light path .
This serves to match the original and reflected light , thus maintaining the sharpness and contrast of the image on the retina .
The tapetum lucidum reflects with constructive interference , thus increasing the quantity of light passing through the retina .
In the cat , the tapetum lucidum increases the sensitivity of vision by 44 % , allowing the cat to see light that is imperceptible to human eyes .
It has been speculated that some flashlight fish may use eyeshine both to detect and to communicate with other flashlight fish .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
A classification of anatomical variants of tapeta lucida defines four types : *
Retinal tapetum , as seen in teleosts , crocodiles , marsupials and fruit bats .
The tapetum lucidum is within the retinal pigment epithelium ; in the other three types the tapetum is within the choroid behind the retina .
*
*
Choroidal guanine tapetum , as seen in elasmobranchii ( skates , rays , and sharks ) and chimaeras .
The tapetum is a palisade of cells containing stacks of flat hexagonal crystals of guanine .
*
*
Choroidal tapetum cellulosum , as seen in carnivores , rodents and cetacea .
The tapetum consists of layers of cells containing organized , highly refractive crystals .
These crystals are diverse in shape and makeup .
*
*
Choroidal tapetum fibrosum , as seen in cows , sheep , goats and horses .
The tapetum is an array of extracellular fibers .
*
The functional differences between these four different types of tapeta lucida are not known .
This classification does not include tapeta lucida in birds .
Kiwis , stone - curlews , the boat - billed heron , the flightless kakapo and many nightjars , owls , and other night birds such as the swallow - tailed gull also possess a tapetum lucidum .
This classification also does not include the extraordinary focusing mirror in the eye of the brownsnout spookfish .
Like humans , some animals lack a tapetum lucidum and they usually are diurnal .
These include most primates , squirrels , some birds , red kangaroo , and pig .
Among primates only the strepsirrhines , with the exception of several diurnal Eulemur species , have a tapetum lucidum .
When a tapetum lucidum is present , its location on the eyeball varies with the placement of the eyeball in the head , such that in all cases the tapetum lucidum enhances night vision in the center of the animal 's field of view .
Apart from its eyeshine , the tapetum lucidum itself has a color .
It is often described as iridescent .
In tigers it is greenish .
In ruminants it may be golden green with a blue periphery , or whitish or pale blue with a lavender periphery .
In dogs it may be whitish with a blue periphery .
EYESHINE Section::::Eyeshine .
Eyeshine is a visible effect of the tapetum lucidum .
When light shines into the eye of an animal having a tapetum lucidum , the pupil appears to glow .
Eyeshine can be seen in many animals , in nature and in flash photographs .
In low light , a hand - held flashlight is sufficient to produce eyeshine that is highly visible to humans ( despite our inferior night vision ) .
Eyeshine occurs in a wide variety of colors including white , blue , green , yellow , pink and red .
However , since eyeshine is a type of iridescence , the color varies with the angle at which it is seen and the minerals which make up the reflective tapetum - lucidum crystals .
White eyeshine occurs in many fish , especially walleye ; blue eyeshine occurs in many mammals such as horses ; green eyeshine occurs in mammals such as cats , dogs , and raccoons ; and red eyeshine occurs in coyote , rodents , opossums and birds .
Although human eyes lack a tapetum lucidum , they still exhibit a weak reflection from the fundus , as can be seen in photography with the red - eye effect and with near - infrared eyeshine .
Another effect in humans and other animals that may resemble eyeshine is leukocoria , which is a white shine indicative of abnormalities such as cataracts and cancers .
IN BLUE - EYED CATS AND DOGS Section::::In blue - eyed cats and dogs .
Cats and dogs with a blue eye color may display both eyeshine and red - eye effect .
Both species have a tapetum lucidum , so their pupils may display eyeshine .
In flash color photographs , however , individuals with blue eyes may also display a distinctive red eyeshine .
Individuals with heterochromia may display red eyeshine in the blue eye and normal yellow / green / blue / white eyeshine in the other eye .
These include odd - eyed cats and bi - eyed dogs .
The red - eye effect is independent of the eyeshine : in some photographs of individuals with a tapetum lucidum and heterochromia , the eyeshine is dim , yet the pupil of the blue eye still appears red .
This is most apparent when the individual is not looking into the camera because the tapetum lucidum is far less extensive than the retina .
IN SPIDERS Section::::In spiders .
Most species of spider also have a tapetum , which is located only in their smaller , lateral eyes ; the larger central eyes have no such structure .
This consists of reflective crystalline deposits , and is thought to have a similar function to the structure of the same name in vertebrates .
Four general patterns can be distinguished in spiders : * Primitive type ( e.g. Mesothelae , Orthognatha ) - a simple sheet behind the retina * * Canoe - shape type ( e.g. Araneidae , Theridiidae ) - two lateral walls separated by a gap for the nerve fibres * * Grated type ( e.g. Lycosidae , Pisauridae ) - a relatively complex , grill - shaped structure
*
* No tapetum ( e.g. Salticidae )
* USES BY HUMANS Section::::Uses by humans .
Humans use scanning for reflected eyeshine to detect and identify the species of animals in the dark , and deploying trained search dogs and search horses at night , as these animals benefit from improved night vision through this effect .
Using eyeshine to identify animals in the dark employs not only its color but also several other features .
The color corresponds approximately to the type of tapetum lucidum , with some variation between species .
Other features include the distance between pupils relative to their size ; the height above ground ; the manner of blinking ( if any ) ; and the movement of the eyeshine ( bobbing , weaving , hopping , leaping , climbing , flying ) . ARTIFICIAL TAPETUM LUCIDUM Section::::Artificial tapetum lucidum .
Manufactured retroreflectors modeled after a tapetum lucidum are described in numerous patents and today
have many uses .
The earliest patent , first used in " Catseye " brand raised pavement markers , was inspired by the tapetum lucidum of a cat 's eye .
A more recent use of retroreflectors , helping to provide secure communications between two stations in line of sight , is modeled after the combination of tapetum lucidum and bioluminescent " flashlight " in flashlight fish of the families Anomalopidae and Stomiidae .
PATHOLOGY Section::::Pathology .
In dogs , certain drugs are known to disturb the precise organization of the crystals of the tapetum lucidum , thus compromising the dog 's ability to see in low light .
These drugs include ethambutol , macrolide antibiotics , dithizone , antimalarial medications , some receptor H - antagonists , and cardiovascular agents .
The disturbance " is attributed to the chelating action which removes zinc from the tapetal cells . "
GALLERY
Section::::Gallery .
Traditionally it has been difficult to take retinal images of animals with a tapetum lucidum because ophthalmoscopy devices designed for humans rely on a high level of on - axis illumination .
This kind of illumination causes a great deal of reflex , or back - scatter , when it interacts with the tapetum .
New devices with variable illumination can make this possible , however .
SEE ALSO
* Defense mechanism ( biology )
* Emission theory ( vision ) * Walleye REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS