CHERYL BLOSSOM
Cheryl Marjorie Blossom is a fictional character of the Archie Comics universe .
She is a wealthy teenage girl , the privileged daughter of a businessman .
HISTORY AND CHARACTER Section::::History and character .
Cheryl Blossom was introduced in 1982 in Betty and Veronica # 320 as a third love interest for Archie Andrews , but she and her twin brother Jason disappeared two years later .
In the 1980s , when a number of alternate universe series were published , Cheryl was a minor recurring character in the short - lived title Archie 's Explorers of the Unknown .
She appeared as Blaze Blossom and would brief the Explorers on their missions .
The character was reintroduced in the main continuity and back into Archie Andrews ' life during the " Love Showdown " four - part series in 1994 .
During the series , Archie receives a letter from Cheryl which states she will be returning to Riverdale .
Archie , infatuated with girls as always , decides to keep Cheryl 's return a secret from Betty Cooper and Veronica Lodge .
He merely acts in a typical Archie girl crush maneuver ( looking dreamy , uttering nonsense ) .
Unknown to Archie is that Betty and Veronica both think the other person did this to Archie , and they declare war on each other to win back Archie once and for all .
Super Soakers , dirty dancing , and fraud are just some of the tactics that the girls use on each other .
Cheryl returns to Riverdale , leaving readers wondering whom Archie will choose in the end .
Cheryl has appeared in several comic book stories over the years , including her own series .
In one story , it was revealed that an ancestor of Archie once fell in love with an ancestor of Cheryl 's back in Scotland .
In another story , she decides to join a band titled " The Sugar Girls " , ( a spoof of the popular band " The Spice Girls " )
because Ginger Sugar had quit the group .
In most stories , Cheryl behaves in a way that reflects her wealth and upbringing .
She is very proud of her wealth and occasionally squabbles with Veronica over who leads the more extravagant lifestyle .
She can be selfish and manipulative , sometimes plotting to lure Archie away from Betty and Veronica .
There are stories where Cheryl is rude and condescending to the Riverdale " townies , " and sometimes only appearing as an antagonist to Betty and Veronica .
Other times , particularly in the stories in her eponymous series , Cheryl can be kind and caring .
She cares for her dog , a Pomeranian named Sugar , and rescues animals in need .
In stories featuring Betty , Veronica , and Cheryl , Cheryl is usually the most adventurous .
Cheryl is popular within her Pembrooke crowd and popular with the boys in Riverdale , but loathed by the girls for her flirtatious nature , her manipulations and her attractiveness .
In Archie & Friends
# 145 , Cheryl is 18 years old .
Cheryl Blossom was ranked 92nd in Comics Buyer 's Guides " 100 Sexiest Women in Comics " list .
FRIENDS AND FAMILY Section::::Friends and family .
Cheryl has a twin brother , Jason , an arrogant rival of Archie .
Jason is smitten with Betty , despite claiming that he only dates rich girls .
Cheryl has never complained about his choice of girls .
She often shows full support towards her brother , although sometimes , she warns Betty about Jason 's womanizing behavior .
At one point , in the story " Undercover Blossom " , Cheryl decided that she would try to get into Riverdale High under false pretenses .
She chose the moniker , " Shirley Merriwether " and at first , nobody thought anything amiss , until she decides to cause trouble , ( i.e. , sending fake love letters ; and stealing a couple of term papers ) and then she 'd frame Archie for it , almost turning his friends against him .
She had almost succeeded in destroying their friendship forever , but was thwarted when Mr. Weatherbee discovered her fraudulent enrollment papers .
At a dance , the following evening , Cheryl 's parents , who had been informed of her deceit by Mr. Weatherbee , exposed the entire scam to Cheryl 's embarrassment .
Her punishment was that she would attend Riverdale High .
Her parents thought that since she got in by less than honest means , she would stay there and finish out her school year there .
Betty became Cheryl 's best friend in the three - part story and loved her dearly . "
Friendly Fire " in an issue of Cheryl 's title series after Veronica humiliated Cheryl on Betty and Veronica 's local public - access television cable TV show , which alienated Betty from Veronica .
Veronica , for no other reason than missing Betty 's friendship , eventually very publicly apologized to Cheryl , winning back Betty 's friendship in the process .
Cheryl was shown to still be friends with Betty in a later issue , inviting Betty over to her house .
It is unclear how much Archie writers other than
Holly Golightly ( the writer of " Friendly Fire " ) portrayed Betty and Cheryl as friends , but a story in Archie & Friends in early 2006 involves Betty suggesting that she , Veronica , and Cheryl go to Pop Tate 's Chock'lit Shoppe and hang out .
Veronica and Cheryl accept and walk off with Betty , indicating that Betty and Cheryl are still friends .
In the late 1990s , Cheryl began dating Dilton Doiley .
They were paired together online , without knowing each other 's true identity , fell in love , met in real life , and decided to continue their romantic relationship , though this was largely ignored in later stories .
At one point , Reggie and Cheryl started dating because they both had devilish minds and were very alike .
Their relationship was unsuccessful , so Cheryl appeared on a dating show .
In a reader - poll event , Archie Comics finally gave Cheryl a new boyfriend , with readers voting on the potential boyfriends featured on the show : blond - haired fitness - guru Austin , dark - complected computer genius Brandon , and shaved - headed gourmet chef George .
The winner of the ' contest ' was George .
Raj Patel 's younger sister Tina Patel , who was introduced to Archie Comics in 2007 , has been written into the CW television series Riverdale , which is described as a subversive take on the Archie comics and the characters .
Tina Patel is cast as one of Cheryl Blossom 's best friends .
PEMBROOKE Section::::Pembrooke .
Cheryl and Jason lived in the neighboring , upscale community of Pembrooke during her second stay in the comic books , which lasted until the quiet cancellation of her title series and her subsequent move to Paris .
However , Cheryl was soon brought back by popular demand from her fans .
Cheryl now lives in Riverdale , and no longer attends Pembrooke , although in some stories she and her brother return to visit friends there .
( After her family almost lost all their wealth in one story , the Blossom family decide to make their son and daughter attend Riverdale High for the same reasons that the Lodge family make Veronica attend public school instead of private school ) .
Pembrooke Academy is the local private school in Pembrooke .
The students who attend are frequently portrayed as antagonists to Riverdale High School , often disdaining Riverdale students as " townies . "
The Blossom twins are the only students who openly date Riverdale " townies , " a practice that most Pembrooke students find barely tolerable were it not for the Blossom twins ' wealth and popularity .
Pembrooke Academy 's athletics were not above using unfair tactics such as sabotage to win a competition .
In many stories that feature a rivalry between Riverdale and Pembrooke , Pembrooke often loses despite their attempts to cheat to victory , or the two teams decide to come to a truce .
OTHER VERSIONS
AFTERLIFE WITH ARCHIE
Section::::Other versions .
Section::::Afterlife with Archie .
Cheryl along with her brother Jason appear in the 2013 adult zombie comics series Afterlife with Archie .
Jason expresses jealousy with Archie .
He later states that he wants to grow old together alone with Cheryl with no one to bother or judge them .
In issue 7 , after scouting with her brother , she returns alone , covered in blood , and saying to call her " Blaze " .
LIFE WITH ARCHIE : THE MARRIED LIFE Section::::Life with Archie :
The Married Life .
In 2010 , Cheryl Blossom made a guest appearance in the first issue of the revival series , Life with Archie : The Married Life .
She was seen as a washed - up actress waiting tables in Los Angeles .
It was revealed that her parents cut her off financially because they disapproved of her moving there to become an actress .
Her brother , Jason , was revealed to be working for Mr. Lodge .
Cheryl returned to Life with Archie in issue 21 ( July 2012 ) .
In this issue , Cheryl returns to Riverdale ; however , unknown to her family and friends back home , she was being treated for breast cancer .
Part of this storyline will feature an underlying issue on the affordability of , and the right to , healthcare .
NEW
RIVERDALE Section::::New Riverdale .
Cheryl Blossom appeared in Archie # 13 , her first appearance in a New Riverdale series .
She was introduced as Pembrooke 's queen bee who is not interested with making friends with the newly transferred Veronica Lodge .
IN OTHER MEDIA LIVE - ACTION Section::::In other media .
Section::::Live - action .
Cheryl Blossom appears in The CW 's teen drama series Riverdale as a series regular , played by Madelaine Petsch .
She is portrayed as the mean girl of Riverdale High School , a " rich , entitled , and manipulative girl who recently lost her twin brother in a mysterious accident .
" She is also the daughter of Penelope and Clifford Blossom , who operate Blossom Maple Farms , which produces the town 's main export , maple syrup , amongst other things .
It is revealed that her parents ' constant emotional abuse is the main cause of her mental instability , which leads to her attempted suicide in season one .
In the second season , her mother forces her into " conversion therapy " due to her feelings for other girls and , after escaping , Cheryl begins a relationship with Toni Topaz , joining the Serpents in the season finale .
Meanwhile , Petsch has confirmed Cheryl to be bisexual .
REFERENCES NOTES