LONESOME DOVE
Lonesome Dove is a 1985 Western novel by Texan author Larry McMurtry .
It is the first published book of the Lonesome Dove series but the third installment in the series chronologically .
The story focuses on the relationship among several retired Texas Rangers and their adventures driving a cattle herd from Texas to Montana .
Set in the closing years of the Old West , the novel explores themes of old age , death , unrequited love , and friendship .
The novel was a bestseller and won the 1986 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction .
In 1989 , it was adapted as a TV miniseries starring Tommy Lee Jones and Robert Duvall , which won both critical and popular acclaim .
McMurtry went on to write a sequel , Streets of Laredo ( 1993 ) , and two prequels , Dead Man 's Walk ( 1995 ) and Comanche Moon ( 1997 ) , all of which were also adapted as TV series .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
Following the success of The Last Picture Show in 1971 , Peter Bogdanovich was keen to collaborate with McMurtry on a Western .
Their original script was welcomed by the studio , but disliked by the actors McMurtry and Bogdanovich had in mind : Jimmy Stewart , Henry Fonda , and John Wayne .
According to McMurtry , the script languished in development hell for 12 years before he bought the rights back for $ 35,000 , to adapt the story as a novel .
He spent several years working on it intermittently , between writing Cadillac Jack ( 1983 ) and The Desert Rose , and eventually submitted it to his publishers in 1984 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
It is the late 1870s .
Captain Woodrow F. Call and Captain Augustus " Gus " McCrae , two famous retired Texas Rangers , run the Hat Creek Cattle Company and Livery Emporium in the small Texas border town of Lonesome Dove .
Working with them are Joshua Deets , an excellent black tracker and scout from their Ranger days ; Pea Eye Parker , another former Ranger who is reliable but unintelligent ; Bolivar , a retired Mexican bandit who works as their cook ; and Newt Dobbs , a 17-year - old boy whose mother was a prostitute named Maggie and whose father is widely thought by the outfit to be Call , though Call has never acknowledged this .
Jake Spoon , another former Ranger , arrives in Lonesome Dove after an absence of more than 10 years , during which he has travelled widely across the United States .
He is on the run , having accidentally shot a dentist in Fort Smith , Arkansas .
The dentist 's brother happens to be the sheriff , July Johnson .
Reunited with Gus and Call , Jake 's description of Montana inspires Call to gather a herd of cattle and drive them north to begin the first cattle ranch north of the Yellowstone River .
Call , who has grown listless in retirement , is attracted to the romantic notion of settling pristine country .
Gus is less enthusiastic but changes his mind when reminded that the love of his life , Clara , lives on the Platte River near Ogallala , Nebraska , which would be on the route to Montana .
The Hat Creek outfit rustles cattle from across the border in Mexico and recruits local cowboys in preparation for the drive .
Ironically , Jake Spoon decides not to go at all , having made himself comfortable with the town 's only prostitute , Lorena Wood , who is smitten with him after he promises to take her to San Francisco .
At Lorena 's insistence , however , she and Jake ultimately trail along behind the cattle drive .
In Fort Smith , the sheriff July Johnson has departed town on the trail of Jake Spoon , taking his 12-year - old stepson Joe with him .
July 's wife Elmira , who regrets her recent marriage to him , leaves shortly afterwards to search for her former lover Dee Boot .
Inept deputy sheriff Roscoe Brown is sent after July to inform him of her disappearance , and has many misadventures and strange encounters through Arkansas and Texas , assisted by a young girl named Janey who escapes from sexual slavery to accompany him .
Roscoe eventually reunites with July and Joe when they rescue him and Janey from bandits in Texas .
As the cattle drive moves north through Texas , Jake tires of Lorena and abandons her to go gambling in Austin .
Left alone , she is abducted by an Indian bandit named Blue Duck , an old nemesis of the Texas Rangers ' .
Gus goes in pursuit , and while travelling along the Canadian River he encounters July 's group .
Gus and July attack Blue Duck 's bandit encampment , killing the bandits and rescuing Lorena ; however , Blue Duck has already made his escape , having murdered Roscoe , Joe , and Janey in the process .
A devastated July continues his journey in search of Elmira , while Gus and Lorena return to the cattle drive .
Lorena has been repeatedly raped and , suffering from post - traumatic stress disorder , is frightened of interacting with anybody other than Gus .
The two of them , still following the cattle drive north , sleep in a tent some distance behind the other cowboys .
Meanwhile , Jake Spoon is in Fort Worth .
Hearing that July Johnson has been looking for him , Jake leaves Texas in a hurry in the company of the Suggs brothers , whom he soon realizes
are bandits .
Jake becomes increasingly alarmed by the brothers ' actions as they travel north into Kansas ; the gang progresses from robbery to outright murder , but Jake is too frightened and outnumbered to either kill them or escape .
When the gang attacks a trail boss known to Gus and Call , the former Rangers of the Hat Creek outfit go in pursuit of them .
The ex - Rangers are dismayed when they apprehend the Suggs brothers and find Jake alongside them .
Jake pleads with his former comrades that he had no choice but to go along with things for fear of his own life , but Gus and Call stand firm that he has " crossed a line , " and they solemnly hang him alongside the Suggs brothers .
Newt , who had idolized Jake as a child , is left deeply upset .
Meanwhile , Elmira , pregnant with July 's child , has come into the company of a rough buffalo hunter named Zwey , a simple man who seems to believe he is now " married " to her .
Arriving in Nebraska they come across the horse ranch of Clara Allen , Gus 's former love , whose husband Bob has become a brain - damaged invalid after being kicked by a mustang .
Clara delivers Elmira 's baby son , but Elmira and Zwey leave almost immediately afterwards for Ogallala .
Dee Boot is held in the Ogallala jail , scheduled to be hanged for his accidental murder of a settler ; Elmira collapses while speaking to him , and Boot is hanged while she recuperates in a doctor 's house , leaving her heartbroken and depressed .
July arrives at Clara 's ranch , learns what has transpired , and goes to see her , but Elmira refuses to speak to him .
Shortly afterwards she orders Zwey to take her east , back towards St. Louis .
July feels compelled to follow her , but at Clara 's insistence he remains at the ranch with her family and his son instead , anguished and heartbroken .
Word later reaches them that Elmira and Zwey were killed by Sioux .
The Hat Creek outfit arrives in Nebraska , and Gus takes Lorena , Call , and Newt to visit Clara .
She is happy to see him but has no desire to rekindle their romance ; however , she takes in Lorena , whose PTSD is easing and who feels comfortable with Clara and her daughters .
Gus , rebuffed by Clara and no longer Lorena 's sole carer , decides to go with the cattle drive and see the journey to Montana through to its end .
In Wyoming , several horses are stolen by half - starved Indians .
Call , Gus , and Deets chase after them , and Deets is killed in the ensuing confrontation by the group 's only remaining brave .
Shortly afterwards Gus informs Newt that Call is his father , something Newt has always dreamed of , but he is too upset by Deets ' death to give it much thought .
The cattle drive arrives in Montana , which is as lush and beautiful as Jake had described .
Scouting ahead of the main herd , Gus and Pea Eye are attacked by Blood Indians , and Gus is badly wounded by two arrows to the leg .
Besieged in a makeshift dugout in the bank of the Musselshell River for several days , Gus ' wounds become infected , and his health declines .
After a heavy rain he sends Pea Eye down the swollen river to seek help , but Pea Eye loses his clothing in the river and stumbles naked across the plains .
Starving , delirious and suffering from exposure , he returns to the main herd on the verge of death .
Call then sets out alone to rescue Gus .
Meanwhile , Gus leaves the river shortly after Pea Eye , feverish and dying , taking his chances and escaping the Indians .
He makes it to Miles City , Montana , and collapses unconscious , waking to find that a doctor has sawed off his gangrenous leg .
His other leg is also infected , but Gus refuses to let the doctor amputate it .
Call arrives in Miles City and fruitlessly tries to convince Gus to have his other leg removed ; Gus , however , would rather die than be an invalid .
Gus asks Call to bury him by the spring in Texas where he used to picnic with Clara , and Call begrudgingly agrees .
After writing letters to Clara and Lorena , and urging Call to accept Newt as his son , Gus dies of blood poisoning .
Call leaves Gus ' body in storage in Miles City , intending to return him to Texas after the winter .
He continues north with the cattle drive , despondent over losing his closest friend .
Eventually , he establishes a ranch between the Missouri River and the Milk River .
Call suffers from depression all winter , no longer caring about the cattle drive or the ranch , and contemplating what to do about Newt .
Before leaving in the spring , he puts Newt in charge of the ranch and gives him his horse , his rifle , and his family watch , but still can not bring himself to claim the boy as his son .
Newt is inwardly upset but accepts the gifts nonetheless .
Call , ashamed of himself , leaves the ranch .
Call retrieves Gus ' body , packed in a coffin with salt and charcoal , and begins the long journey south .
In Nebraska , he gives Gus ' letters to Clara and Lorena .
Clara considers the journey a whimsical folly typical of Gus and urges Call to bury him on her ranch , but Call refuses , having given Gus his word .
Clara tells Call she despises him as a " vain coward " for refusing to claim Newt as his son , and he leaves Nebraska haunted by her condemnation .
The story of the cowboy transporting his dead friend 's body spreads across the plains , and Call takes a circuitous route through Colorado and New Mexico to avoid the increasing attention .
In Santa Rosa , New Mexico , he discovers that Blue Duck has been captured by a sheriff 's deputy .
Call visits Blue Duck in his jail cell , and the Indian taunts him , pointing out that he raided , killed , raped , and kidnapped with impunity throughout his life despite the best efforts of the Texas Rangers .
On the day of his hanging , Blue Duck tackles the sheriff 's deputy who caught him through an upper - story courthouse window , killing them both .
Arriving back in Texas exhausted and despondent , Call buries Gus by the spring in San Antonio , true to his word .
He then rides on to Lonesome Dove , where the cook Bolivar , who had abandoned the cattle drive before it left Texas , is delighted to see him again .
In town , Call finds that the saloon has burned down ; the proprietor was in love with Lorena and committed suicide after her departure .
CHARACTERS
*
Captain Woodrow F. Call — Co - owner of the Hat Creek outfit and former Texas Ranger .
A largely silent leader of men who believes in discipline , duty and honour , he is a foil to his best friend Gus .
McMurtry describes Call as a Stoic .
* Captain Augustus " Gus " McCrae - Co - owner of the Hat Creek outfit and former Texas Ranger .
A lazy , loquacious and charismatic rake with a fondness for alcohol , gambling and whores , he is nonetheless a brave and competent fighter when required .
He is tall and lanky , famed for his excellent eyesight , and has had silver hair since his twenties .
He serves as a foil to his best friend Call , and is described by McMurtry as an Epicurean .
* Pea Eye Parker — The wrangler and blacksmith of the Hat Creek Cattle Company , Pea Eye served as a corporal in the Rangers under Gus and Call .
Pea Eye ( his real name long forgotten ) is not especially bright , but he is reliable , brave , and kind .
He follows Call 's lead without question .
* Joshua Deets — An ex - slave and former Ranger , Deets is a ranch hand at the company .
On the drive , he serves as scout .
A remarkable tracker and loyal friend , he is one of the few men whom Call respects and trusts .
* Newt Dobbs — A 17-year - old orphan raised by Gus and Call .
His mother was a prostitute named Maggie , who died when he was a child .
He knows his mother was a prostitute but has no idea who his father might be .
Most observers , notably Gus and Clara Allen , are confident Call is his father .
McMurtry refers to Newt as " the lonesome dove of the title . "
* Jake Spoon — A former Ranger who left his friends ten years ago to travel around America , returning to Texas near the beginning of the novel .
Like Gus , Jake is a drinker , gambler and womaniser , and possesses a great personal charm .
* Dishwater " Dish " Boggett — Though only 21 , Dish is a cowboy of great skill and the " top hand " for Call 's cattle drive .
He suffers greatly from unrequited love for Lorena Wood .
His nickname derives from once having drunk dishwater on a cattle drive , being so thirsty that he could not wait for the water barrel .
* Bolivar — A former Mexican bandit and the cook for the Hat Creek Cattle Company .
He is obsessed with loudly and unnecessarily ringing the dinner bell to call the company for dinner .
Bolivar is uneasy about venturing far from the Rio Grande and abandons the cattle drive before it leaves Texas .
* Po Campo —
The cattle drive 's enigmatic new cook , hired by Call in Austin after Bolivar 's departure .
He uses exotic ingredients like grasshoppers in his meals and refuses to ride animals .
He hints at being well - travelled , and also off - handedly remarks that he killed his wife .
* Lorena Wood — A beautiful young woman from Alabama who was coerced into prostitution by a former lover , later washing up in Lonesome Dove , where she works as the town 's only whore .
Lorena is taciturn , strong - willed and intimidating , generally viewing her clients and admirers with contempt .
Discontent with her life , Lorena harbours a dream of travelling to San Francisco .
* Blue Duck — The son of Comanche war chief Buffalo Hump and his Mexican captive , Blue Duck leads a band of renegade Indians and Caucasian bandits .
He is feared across the plains as a murderer , rapist , and slaver .
He has managed to evade the law even as the West gradually grows safer and more civilised .
* July Johnson — The sheriff of the town of Fort Smith , Arkansas .
July is a kind young man recently married to Elmira , whom he deeply loves despite her being openly disdainful of him .
After his brother Ben is accidentally killed by Jake Spoon , July sets off in pursuit of him .
* Elmira Johnson - a former whore from Kansas , recently married to July Johnson .
She is unhappy with her life and suffers from depression , eventually leaving Fort Smith to seek out her old love Dee Boot .
* Roscoe Brown —
The deputy sheriff of Fort Smith , Arkansas .
Roscoe is a simple man in his forties who is content to spend his life minding the sleepy town 's jail , but is bullied by July 's sister - in - law into tracking down the sheriff and his missing wife .
* Clara Allen —
A former love of Gus , she declined his repeated marriage proposals during their youth in Texas - for reasons that were never entirely clear to Gus - instead marrying the horse trader Bob Allen and moving to a ranch near Ogallala , Nebraska .
She still grieves for her sons who died of respiratory disease from the sod house
she and Bob first lived in , and treasures her daughters .
* Jimmy and Ben Rainey , Bill and Pete Spettle , Soupy Jones , Needle Nelson , Jasper Fant , Bert Borum , Lippy Jones , Sean and Allen O'Brien — Other hands hired by Call to work the cattle drive . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Lonesome Dove was the winner of the 1986 Pulitzer Prize in Fiction .
The novel received favorable reviews .
In the New York Times , Nicholas Lemann praised the novel as " thrilling and almost perfectly realized , " calling it " the great cowboy novel . "
McMurtry himself eventually expressed dissatisfaction with the popularity of the novel , particularly after the miniseries adaptation .
In the preface to the 2000 edition he wrote : " It 's hard to go wrong if one writes at length about the Old West , still the phantom leg of the American psyche .
I thought I had written about a harsh time and some pretty harsh people , but , to the public at large , I had produced something nearer to an idealization ; instead of a poor man 's Inferno , filled with violence , faithlessness and betrayal , I had actually delivered a kind of Gone With The Wind of the West , a turnabout I 'll be mulling over for a long , long time . "
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
A television miniseries adaptation produced by Motown Productions was broadcast on CBS in 1989 , starring Robert Duvall as Augustus McCrae and Tommy Lee Jones as Woodrow F. Call .
The series was a commercial and critical success , eventually garnering a cult following .
HISTORICAL REFERENCES Section::::Historical references .
According to McMurtry , Gus and Call were not modeled after historical characters , but there are similarities with real - life cattle drivers Charles Goodnight and Oliver Loving .
When Goodnight and Loving 's African American guide Bose Ikard died , Goodnight carved a wooden grave marker for him , just as Call does for Deets .
Upon Loving 's death , Goodnight brought him home to be buried in Texas , as Call does for Augustus .
( Goodnight himself appears as a minor but generally sympathetic character in this novel , and more so in the sequel , Streets of Laredo , and the prequels Dead Man 's Walk and Comanche Moon . )
According to McMurtry 's memoir , Books : A Memoir , the ultimate sources for Gus and Call were Quixote , the crazy old knight , and Sancho , the peasant pragmatist , from Don Quixote .
He stated : " What is important that , early on , I read some version of Don Quixote and pondered the grave differences ( comically cast ) between Sancho and the Don .
Between the two is where fiction , as I 've mostly read and written it , lives . "
Other books of the Lonesome Dove series feature more - prominent historical events and locations such as the Texan Santa Fe Expedition , the Great Raid of 1840 , and the King Ranch , and characters such as Buffalo Hump , John Wesley Hardin , and Judge Roy Bean .
SEE ALSO
* Andy Adams ( writer ) , wrote the Log of a Cowboy , an account of a five - month drive of 3,000 cattle from Brownsville , Texas , to Montana in 1882 along the Great Western Cattle Trail * Bose Ikard REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* McMurtry , Larry .
( 1985 ) .
Lonesome Dove : A Novel .
New York :
Simon & Schuster .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Lonesome Dove exhibit at Texas State University - San Marcos *
Pappy 's Holdup wagon journey - Location where part of Movie was filmed .
* Photos of the first edition of Lonesome Dove * Study Guide for Lonesome Dove