CLOPEN SET
In topology , a clopen set ( a portmanteau of closed - open set ) in a topological space is a set which is both open and closed .
That this is possible may seem counter - intuitive , as the common meanings of open and closed are antonyms , but their mathematical definitions are not mutually exclusive .
A set is closed if its complement is open , which leaves the possibility of an open set whose complement is also open , making both sets both open and closed , and therefore clopen .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
In any topological space X , the empty set and the whole space
X are both clopen .
Now consider the space X which consists of the union of the two open intervals ( 0,1 ) and ( 2,3 ) of R.
The topology on X is inherited as the subspace topology from the ordinary topology on the real line R.
In X , the set ( 0,1 ) is clopen , as is the set ( 2,3 ) .
This is a quite typical example : whenever a space is made up of a finite number of disjoint connected components in this way , the components will be clopen .
As a less trivial example , consider the space Q of all rational numbers with their ordinary topology , and the set A of all positive rational numbers whose square is bigger than 2 .
Using the fact that formula_1 is not in Q , one can show quite easily that A is a clopen subset of Q.
( Note also that A is not a clopen subset of the real line R ; it is neither open nor closed in R. ) PROPERTIES * A topological space
X is connected if and only if the only clopen sets are the empty set and X.
*
A set is clopen if and only if its boundary is empty .
*
Any clopen set is a union of ( possibly infinitely many ) connected components .
* If all connected components of X are open ( for instance , if X has only finitely many components , or if X is locally connected ) , then a set is clopen in X if and only if it is a union of connected components .
* A topological space
X is discrete if and only if all of its subsets are clopen .
* Using the union and intersection as operations , the clopen subsets of a given topological space
X form a Boolean algebra .
Every Boolean algebra can be obtained in this way from a suitable topological space : see Stone 's representation theorem for Boolean algebras .
NOTES REFERENCES