ZEN AND THE ART OF MOTORCYCLE MAINTENANCE Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance : An Inquiry into Values ( ZAMM ) , by Robert M. Pirsig , is a book that was first published in 1974 .
It is a work of fictionalized autobiography , and is the first of Pirsig 's texts in which he explores his Metaphysics of Quality .
The title is an apparent play on the title of the book Zen in the Art of Archery by Eugen Herrigel .
In its introduction , Pirsig explains that , despite its title , " it should in no way be associated with that great body of factual information relating to orthodox Zen Buddhist practice .
It 's not very factual on motorcycles , either . "
Initially , the book sold at least 5 million copies worldwide .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
According to Edward Abbey , the book is Pirsig 's fictionalized autobiography of a 17-day journey he made on a motorcycle from Minnesota to Northern California along with his son Chris .
The story of this journey is recounted in a first - person narrative , although the author is not identified .
Father and son are also accompanied , for the first nine days of the trip , by close friends John and Sylvia Sutherland , with whom they part ways in Montana .
The trip is punctuated by numerous philosophical discussions , referred to as Chautauquas by the author , on topics including epistemology , ethical emotivism and the philosophy of science .
Many of these discussions are tied together by the story of the narrator 's own past self , who is referred to in the third person as Phaedrus ( after Plato 's dialogue ) .
Phaedrus , a teacher of creative and technical writing at a small college , became engrossed in the question of what defines good writing , and what in general defines good , or " Quality " , which he understands similar to Tao .
His philosophical investigations eventually drove him insane , and he was subjected to electroconvulsive therapy , which permanently changed his personality .
Towards the end of the book , Phaedrus 's strong and unorthodox personality , presented as dangerous to the narrator , begins to re - emerge and the narrator is reconciled with his past .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
In a 1974 interview with National Public Radio , Pirsig stated that the book took him four years to write .
During two of these years , Pirsig continued working at his job of writing computer manuals .
This caused him to fall into an unorthodox schedule , waking up very early and writing Zen from 2 a.m. until 6 a.m. , then eating and going to his day job .
He would sleep during his lunch break and then go to bed around 6 in the evening .
Pirsig joked that his co - workers noticed that he was " a lot less perky " than everyone else .
THEMES PHILOSOPHICAL CONTENT
Section::::Themes .
Section::::Philosophical content .
In Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance , Pirsig explores the meaning and concept of " quality " ; a term he conceives as undefinable .
Quality is a phenomenon that exists between the subject and the object .
The perception of a painting , for example , requires both an observer and an object .
His thesis is that to truly experience quality one must both embrace and apply it as best fits the requirements of the situation .
According to Pirsig , such an approach would avoid a great deal of frustration and dissatisfaction common to modern life .
In the book , the narrator describes the " romantic " approach to life of his friend , John Sutherland , who chooses not to learn how to maintain his expensive new motorcycle .
John simply hopes for the best with his bike , and when problems do occur he often becomes frustrated and is forced to rely on professional mechanics to repair it .
In contrast , the " classical " narrator has an older motorcycle which he is usually able to diagnose and repair himself through the use of rational problem - solving skills .
In an example of the classical approach , the narrator explains that one must pay continual attention : when the narrator and his friends came into Miles City , Montana he notices that the " engine idle is loping a little " , a possible indication that the fuel / air mixture is too rich .
The next day he is thinking of this as he is going through his ritual to adjust the valves on his cycle 's engine .
During the adjustment , he notes that both spark plugs are black , confirming a rich mixture .
He recognizes that the higher elevation is causing the engine to run rich .
The narrator rectifies this by installing new jets with the valves adjusted , and the engine runs well again .
With this , the book details two types of personalities : those who are interested mostly in gestalts ( romantic viewpoints focused on being " in the moment " , and not on rational analysis ) , and those who seek to know details , understand inner workings , and master mechanics ( classic viewpoints with application of rational analysis , vis - a - vis motorcycle maintenance ) .
The Sutherlands represent an exclusively romantic attitude toward the world .
The narrator initially appears to prefer the classic approach .
It later becomes apparent that he understands both viewpoints and is aiming for the middle ground .
He understands that technology , and the " dehumanized world " it carries with it , appears ugly and repulsive to a romantic person .
He knows that such persons are determined to shoehorn all of life 's experience into the romantic view .
Pirsig is capable of seeing the beauty of technology and feels good about mechanical work , where the goal is " to achieve an inner peace of mind " .
The book demonstrates that motorcycle maintenance may be dull and tedious drudgery or an enjoyable and pleasurable pastime ; it all depends on attitude .
The narrator examines the modern pursuit of " Pure Truths " , claiming it derives from the work of early Greek philosophers who were establishing the concept of truth in opposition to the force of " The Good " .
He argues that although rational thought may find a truth ( or The Truth ) it may never be fully and universally applicable to every individual 's experience .
Therefore , what is needed is an approach to life that is more inclusive and has a wider range of application .
He makes a case that originally the Greeks did not distinguish between " Quality " and " Truth"—they were one and the same , arete — and that the divorce was , in fact , artificial ( though needed at the time ) and is now a source of much frustration and unhappiness in the world , particularly overall dissatisfaction with modern life .
The narrator aims towards a perception of the world that embraces both sides , the rational and the romantic .
This means encompassing " irrational " sources of wisdom and understanding as well as science , reason and technology .
In particular , this must include bursts of creativity and intuition that seemingly come from nowhere and are not ( in his view ) rationally explicable .
He seeks to demonstrate that rationality and Zen - like " being in the moment " can harmoniously coexist .
He suggests such a combination of rationality and romanticism can potentially bring a higher quality of life .
It has been noted that Pirsig 's romantic / classical dichotomy resembles Nietzsche 's Dionysian / Apollonian dichotomy as described in The Birth of Tragedy .
For example , in his book The Person of the Therapist , Edward Smith writes , " In his popular novel ...
Pirsig also addressed the Apollonian and Dionysian worldviews , naming them respectively classical understanding and romantic understanding . "
THE SELF AND RELATIONSHIPS Section::::The self and relationships .
Beverly Gross ( 1984 ) writes that Pirsig is seeking a synthesis of " the normal , everyday , functioning self with the person given to extremes , excesses , dizzying heights , obsessions — our crazy self with our sane self , the greatness in us with our ordinariness " .
The exceptional in the narrator is represented by Phaedrus , who , despite the narrator 's attempt to keep him in the past , pushes to the foreground of his mind toward the book 's end , threatening the narrator 's stability and relationship with his son .
However , the narrator 's difficulties with his son during the journey also question whether giving up parts of himself in exchange for " sanity " has even helped this relationship .
Gross writes , " He relates to mechanical things , not to people .
There is beauty in his recognition that personality inheres in motorcycles , riding gloves ; there is sadness and sickness in his removal from the personality of people , his own most notably " .
The Chautauquas , which emphasize the narrator 's tendency toward solitary thought and over - analysis , may reflect his avoidance of the problems before him : his relationships and the resurrection of Phaedrus .
To the extent that the narrator denies Phaedrus , the Chautauquas are practical , but when he decides that he will admit himself to hospital again , he realizes the undeniable presence of Phaedrus in him , and the Chautauquas are given over to those more abstruse topics .
SEE ALSO
* Dehumanized * Gumption
trap * Quality ( philosophy ) REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Audio : 1974 NPR Interview with Pirsig
* Audio : 1992 NPR Interview with Pirsig
*
Guardian interview from 2006 Short version and Long version .