ANTHEM ( NOVELLA )
Anthem is a dystopian fiction novella by Ayn Rand , written in 1937 and first published in 1938 in the United Kingdom .
The story takes place at an unspecified future date when mankind has entered another Dark Age .
Technological advancement is now carefully planned and the concept of individuality has been eliminated .
A young man known as Equality 7 - 2521 rebels by doing secret scientific research .
When his activity is discovered , he flees into the wilderness with the girl he loves .
Together they plan to establish a new society based on rediscovered individualism .
Rand originally conceived of the story as a play , then decided to write for magazine publication .
At her agent 's suggestion , she submitted it to book publishers .
The novella was first published by Cassell in England .
It was published in the United States only after Rand 's next novel , The Fountainhead , became a best seller .
Rand revised the text for the US edition , which was published in 1946 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Equality 7 - 2521 , a 21-year - old man writing by candlelight in a tunnel under the earth , tells the story of his life up to that point .
He exclusively uses plural pronouns ( " we " , " our " , " they " ) to refer to himself and others .
He was raised like all children in his society , away from his parents in collective homes .
He believes he has a " curse " that makes him learn quickly and ask many questions .
He excels at the Science of Things and dreams of becoming a Scholar , but when the Council of Vocations assigns his Life Mandate , he is assigned to be a Street Sweeper .
Equality 7 - 2521 accepts his street sweeping assignment as penance for his Transgression of Preference in secretly desiring to be a Scholar .
He works with Union 5 - 3992 and International 4 - 8818 , who is Equality 's only friend ( which is another Transgression of Preference ) .
Despite International 's protests that any exploration unauthorized by a Council is forbidden , Equality explores a tunnel and finds metal tracks .
Equality believes the tunnel is from the Unmentionable Times of the distant past .
He begins sneaking away from his community to use the tunnel as a laboratory for scientific experiments .
He is using stolen paper to write his journal .
While cleaning a road at the edge of the City , Equality meets Liberty 5 - 3000 , a 17-year - old Peasant girl who works in the fields .
He commits another transgression by thinking constantly of her , instead of waiting to be assigned a woman at the annual Time of Mating .
She has dark eyes and golden hair , and he names her " The Golden One " .
When he speaks to her , he discovers that she also thinks of him .
He reveals his secret name for her , and Liberty tells Equality she has named him " The Unconquered " .
Continuing his scientific work , Equality rediscovers electricity .
In the ruins of the tunnel , he finds a glass box with wires that gives off light when he passes electricity through it .
He decides to take his discovery to the World Council of Scholars ; he thinks such a great gift to mankind will outweigh his transgressions and lead to him being made a Scholar .
However , one night his absence from the Home of the Street Sweepers is noticed .
He is whipped and held in the Palace of Corrective Detention .
The night before the World Council of Scholars is set to meet , he easily escapes ; there are no guards because no one has ever attempted escape before .
The next day he presents his work to the World Council of Scholars .
Horrified that he has done unauthorized research , they assail him as a " wretch " and a " gutter cleaner " and say he must be punished .
They want to destroy his discovery so it will not disrupt the plans of the World Council and the Department of Candles .
Equality seizes the box , cursing the council before fleeing into the forest that lies outside the City .
In the forest , Equality sees himself as damned for having left his fellow men , but he enjoys his freedom .
No one will pursue him into this forbidden place .
He only misses the Golden One .
On his second day of living in the forest , the Golden One appears ; she followed him into the forest .
They live together in the forest and try to express their love for one another , but they lack the words to speak of love as individuals .
They find a house from the Unmentionable Times in the mountains and decide to live in it .
While reading books from the house 's library , Equality discovers the word " I " and tells the Golden One about it .
Having rediscovered individuality , they give themselves new names from the books : Equality becomes " Prometheus " and Liberty becomes " Gaea " .
Gaea is pregnant with Prometheus ' child .
Prometheus wonders how men in the past could have given up their individuality ; he plans a future in which they will regain it .
HISTORY DEVELOPMENT Section::::History .
Section::::Development .
Ayn Rand initially conceived Anthem as a play when she was a teenager living in Soviet Russia .
After migrating to the United States , Rand did n't think of writing Anthem , but reconsidered after reading a short story in The Saturday Evening Post set in the future .
Seeing that mainstream magazines would publish speculative fiction , she decided to try submitting Anthem to them .
She wrote the story in the summer of 1937 , while taking a break from research she was doing for her next novel , The Fountainhead .
Rand 's working title was Ego .
Leonard Peikoff explains the meaning behind this title : " [ Rand ] is ( implicitly ) upholding the central principles of her philosophy and of her heroes : reason , values , volition , individualism . "
Thinking that the original title was too blunt , unemotional , and would give away too much of the theme , Rand changed the title to Anthem .
"
The present novel , in Miss Rand 's mind , was from the outset an ode to man 's ego .
It was not difficult , therefore , to change the working title : to move from ' ego ' to ' ode ' or ' anthem ' , leaving the object celebrated by the ode to be discovered by the reader . "
There are similarities between Anthem and the 1921 novel We by Yevgeny Zamyatin , another author who had lived in communist Russia .
These include : * A novel taking the form of a secret diary or journal .
* People are identified by codes instead of names .
* Children separated from their parents and brought up by the State .
* Individualism disposed of in favor of collective will .
* A male protagonist who discovers individuality through his relationship with a female character .
* A forest as a ' free ' place outside the dystopian city .
*
The protagonist discovers a link to the past , when people were free , in a tunnel under the Earth .
There are also a number of differences between the two stories .
For example , the society of We is in no scientific or technological decay , featuring X - rays , airplanes , microphones , and so on .
In contrast , the people of Anthem believe that the world is flat and the sun revolves around it , and that bleeding people is a decent form of medicine .
The similarities have led to speculation about whether Rand 's story was directly influenced by Zamyatin 's .
However , there is little evidence that Rand was influenced by or even read Zamyatin 's work , and she never mentioned it in discussions of her life in Russia .
PUBLICATION HISTORY Section::::Publication history .
Initially , Rand planned on publishing Anthem as a magazine story or serial , but her agent encouraged her to publish it as a book .
She submitted it simultaneously to Macmillan Publishers in America and Cassell in England .
Both had handled her previous novel , We the Living .
Cassell agreed to publish Anthem , but Macmillan declined it .
According to Peikoff , " [ Macmillan 's ] comment was : the author does not understand socialism . "
Another American publisher also turned it down , and Rand 's agent was unable to sell it as a magazine serial .
Cassell published it in England in 1938 .
After the success of The Fountainhead , a revised edition of Anthem was published in the US in 1946 by Pamphleteers , Inc. , a small libertarian - oriented publishing house owned by Rand 's friends Leonard Read and William C. Mullendore .
The original English edition ( Cassell 1938 ) entered the public domain in the United States in 1966 , due to the failure to renew its copyright after 28 years as then required by US copyright law .
A 50th Anniversary Edition was published in 1995 , including an appendix which reproduces the Cassell edition with Rand 's handwritten editorial changes .
Since its publication in 1946 , the revised version of Anthem has sold more than 3.5 million copies .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The original UK edition received mostly positive reviews ; several praised Rand 's imagination and her support of individualism .
In The Sunday Times , reviewer Dilys Powell complimented its " simplicity and sincerity " .
Anti - communist journalist Malcolm Muggeridge gave a mixed review in The Daily Telegraph , saying it had appeal , but its dystopia was not believable .
A short review by Maurice Richardson in The Observer said it was " highly unconvincing , in spite of some extremely eloquent writing " .
Reviewing the 1953 American edition for a genre audience , Anthony Boucher and J. Francis McComas were unsympathetic .
Saying that " Rand implies that a sinister conspiracy of purveyors of brotherhood has prevented its American publication until now " , they ironically concluded , " One can only regret that the conspiracy finally broke down . "
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations .
The Libertarian Futurist Society awarded Anthem its Hall of Fame Award in 1987 .
In 2014 , Anthem was nominated for a Retrospective Hugo Award for " Best Novella " .
LEGACY ADAPTATIONS Section::::Legacy .
Section::::Adaptations .
Following the release of Anthem in the United States , Rand explored opportunities for having it adapted to other media .
She had discussions about potential film , opera , and ballet adaptations , but these projects were never realized .
In 1950 , a radio adaptation was done for The Freedom Story , a weekly radio program produced by Spiritual Mobilization , a Christian libertarian group .
In 1991 , Michael Paxton wrote , directed , and co - produced a stage adaptation of Anthem , which appeared at the Lex Theater in Hollywood .
In 2011 , Anthem was adapted into a graphic novel by Charles Santino , with artwork by Joe Staton .
In the same year it was released as an unabridged audiobook by ABN , the narration by Jason McCoy described as ' stirring and evocative ' .
The book was adapted into a stage play in 2013 by Jeff Britting , the department manager of the Ayn Rand Archives at the Ayn Rand Institute .
First performed in Denver , it opened Off - Broadway in September 2013 at the Jerome Robbins Theater .
The New York Times review stated , " For a play that celebrates the individual , Anthem sure does n't trust its audience .
Instead of illustrating ideas , this sporadically interesting show too often delivers exposition , desperate to overexplain rather than risk a moment of misunderstanding . "
The novella inspired a spoof rock musical , premiering Off - Broadway at the Lynn Redgrave Theatre in May 2014 .
The cast included Randy Jones of The Village People , Jason Gotay , Jenna Leigh Green , Remy Zaken , and Ashley Kate Adams .
The review in The New York Times criticized the acting of the leads , but called the show " exuberant " and better than a straight adaptation .
INFLUENCE Section::::Influence .
The work has inspired many musical pieces , including full - length albums .
According to Enzo Stuarti , Pat Boone composed the music and his friend Frank Lovejoy wrote the lyrics of the song " Prelude " , featured in the album Stuarti Arrives at Carnegie Hall .
The song begins with a line right out of Anthem .
In another point of the song it reads : " ... I guard my treasures :
my thought , my will , my land , and my freedom .
And the greatest of these is freedom .
"
In Anthem , it reads : " ...
I guard my treasures :
my thought , my will , my land , my freedom .
And the greatest of these is freedom .
"
A memo to Rand dated May 4 , 1964 , mentions the unauthorized adaptation , but there is no indication that she took any legal action .
Robert Silverberg 's 1971 novel
A Time of Changes also depicts a society where I is a forbidden word and where the protagonist rebels against this prohibition .
In a 2009 preface to a reprint edition of his novel , Silverberg said he had read Anthem in 1953 , but had long forgotten it when he wrote A Time of Changes .
He was surprised to see the similarities when he rediscovered Rand 's story , but said overall the two books are very different .
Anthem is also credited by Neil Peart for influencing Rush 's " 2112 " with strong parallels to the plot , structure , and theme of Anthem .
Peart has said that although he had read Anthem , he was not consciously thinking of the story when he wrote the song ; however when the similarities were pointed out , he realized that there must have been some unconscious influence , and gave credit to " the genius of Ayn Rand " in the liner notes .
The band also released a song called " Anthem " on their Fly by Night album , and their Canadian record label ( co - founded by Rush manager Ray Danniels ) is Anthem Records .
SEE ALSO
* Linguistic relativity
*
We ( 1982 film )
* The Glass Fortress ( film ) NOTES
REFERENCES
WORKS
CITED EXTERNAL LINKS
* Page images of 1953 edition from HathiTrust
* Anthem study guide from CliffsNotes