LAMB AND MUTTON Lamb , hogget and mutton are the meat of domestic sheep ( species Ovis aries ) at different ages .
A sheep in its first year is called a lamb , and its meat is also called lamb .
The meat of a juvenile sheep older than one year is hogget ; outside the USA this is also a term for the living animal .
The meat of an adult sheep is mutton , a term only used for the meat , not the living animals .
In the Indian subcontinent the term mutton is also used to refer to goat meat .
Lamb is the most expensive of the three types , and in recent decades sheep meat is increasingly only retailed as " lamb " , sometimes stretching the accepted distinctions given above .
The stronger - tasting mutton is now hard to find in many areas , despite the efforts of the Mutton Renaissance Campaign in the UK .
In Australia , the term prime lamb is often used to refer to lambs raised for meat .
Other languages , for example French , Spanish , Italian and Arabic , make similar , or even more detailed , distinctions between sheep meat by age and sometimes by gender and diet , though these languages do not always use different words to refer to the animal and its meat — for example , lechazo in Spanish refers to meat from milk - fed ( unweaned ) lambs .
CLASSIFICATIONS AND NOMENCLATURE Section::::Classifications and nomenclature .
The definitions for lamb , hogget and mutton vary considerably between countries .
Younger lambs are smaller and more tender .
Mutton is meat from a sheep over two years old , and has less tender flesh .
In general , the darker the colour , the older the animal .
Baby lamb meat will be pale pink , while regular lamb is pinkish - red .
COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES
* Lamb — a young sheep under 12 months of age which does not have any permanent incisor teeth in wear .
( The Australian definition requires 0 permanent incisors , whereas the New Zealand definition allows 0 incisors ' in wear ' . )
* Hogget — A term for a sheep of either sex having no more than two permanent incisors in wear , or its meat .
Still common in farming usage , it is now rare as a domestic or retail term for the meat .
Much of the " lamb " sold in the UK is " hogget " to an Antipodean farmer .
* Mutton — the meat of a female ( ewe ) or castrated male ( wether ) sheep having more than two permanent incisors in wear .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The terms " mutton " and " hogget " are uncommon in the United States .
Federal statutes and regulations dealing with food labeling in the United States permit all sheep products to be marketed as " lamb . "
Sheep products less than 12 - 14 months old can be labeled " prime lamb " or " choice lamb " and all other sheep meat can be labeled simply as " lamb . "
INDIAN SUBCONTINENT Section::::Indian subcontinent .
The term " mutton " is applied to goat meat in most of these countries , and the goat population has been rising .
For example , mutton - curry is always made from goat meat .
It is estimated that over one - third of the goat population is slaughtered every year and sold as mutton .
The husbanded sheep population in India and the Indian subcontinent has been in decline for over 40 years and has survived at marginal levels in mountainous regions , based on wild - sheep breeds , and mainly for wool production .
OTHER DEFINITIONS
* Milk - fed lamb — meat from an unweaned lamb , typically 4–6 weeks old and weighing 5.5 to 8 kg
; this is almost unavailable in countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom .
The flavour and texture of milk - fed lamb when grilled ( such as the tiny lamb chops known as chuletillas in Spain ) or roasted ( lechazo asado or cordero lechal asado ) is generally thought to be finer than that of older lamb , and fetches higher prices .
The areas in northern Spain where this can be found include Asturias , Cantabria , Castile and León , and La Rioja .
Milk - fed lambs are especially prized for Easter in Greece , when they are roasted on a spit .
* Young lamb — a milk - fed lamb between six and eight weeks old * Spring lamb — a milk - fed lamb , usually three to five months old , born in late winter or early spring and sold usually before 1 July ( in the northern hemisphere ) .
* Sucker lambs — a term used in Australia — includes young milk - fed lambs , as well as slightly older lambs up to about seven months of age which are also still dependent on their mothers for milk .
Carcases from these lambs usually weigh between 14 and 30 kg .
Older weaned lambs which have not yet matured to become mutton are known as old - season lambs .
* Lamb — a young sheep that is less than one year old
* Yearling lamb — a young sheep between 12 and 24 months old * Saltbush mutton – a term used in Australia for the meat of mature Merinos which have been allowed to graze on atriplex plants
* Salt marsh lamb ( also known as ' saltmarsh lamb ' or by its French name , agneau de pré - salé ) is the meat of sheep which graze on salt marsh in coastal estuaries that are washed by the tides and support a range of salt - tolerant grasses and herbs , such as samphire , sparta grass , sorrel and sea lavender .
Depending on where the salt marsh is located , the nature of the plants may be subtly different .
Salt marsh lamb has long been appreciated in France and is growing in popularity in the United Kingdom .
Places , where salt marsh lamb are reared in the UK , include Harlech and the Gower Peninsula in Wales , the Somerset Levels , Morecambe Bay and the Solway Firth .
* Saltgrass lamb – a term used to describe a type of lamb exclusive to Flinders Island ( Tasmania ) .
The pastures on the island have a relatively high salt content , leading to a flavor and texture similar to saltmarsh lamb .
BUTCHERY AND COOKERY Section::::Butchery and cookery .
The meat of a lamb is taken from the animal between one month and one year old , with a carcase ( carcass in American English ) weight of between .
This meat generally is more tender than that from older sheep and appears more often on tables in some Western countries .
Hogget and mutton have a stronger flavour than lamb because they contain a higher concentration of species - characteristic fatty acids and are preferred by some .
Mutton and hogget also tend to be tougher than lamb ( because of connective tissue maturation ) and are therefore better suited to casserole - style cooking , as in Lancashire hotpot , for example .
Lamb is often sorted into three kinds of meat : forequarter , loin , and hindquarter .
The forequarter includes the neck , shoulder , front legs , and the ribs up to the shoulder blade .
The hindquarter includes the rear legs and hip .
The loin includes the ribs between the two .
Lamb chops are cut from the rib , loin , and shoulder areas .
The rib chops include a rib bone ; the loin chops include only a chine bone .
Shoulder chops are usually considered inferior to loin chops ; both kinds of chops are usually grilled .
Breast of lamb ( baby chops ) can be cooked in an oven .
Leg of lamb is a whole leg ; saddle of lamb is the two loins with the hip .
Leg and saddle are usually roasted , though the leg is sometimes boiled .
Forequarter meat of sheep , as of other mammals , includes more connective tissue than some other cuts , and , if not from a young lamb , is best cooked slowly using either a moist method , such as braising or stewing , or by slow roasting or American barbecuing .
It is , in some countries , sold already chopped or diced .
Lamb shank definitions vary , but generally include : *
Lamb shank is cut from the arm of shoulder , contains leg bone and part of round shoulder bone , and is covered by a thin layer of fat and fell ( a thin , paper - like covering ) .
*
Lamb shank is a cut of meat from the upper part of the leg .
Mutton barbeque is a tradition in Western Kentucky .
The area was strong in the wool trade , which gave them plenty of older sheep that needed to be put to use .
Thin strips of fatty mutton can be cut into a substitute for bacon called macon .
Lamb tongue is popular in Middle Eastern cuisine both as a cold cut and in preparations like stews .
CUTS
COMMONWEALTH COUNTRIES Section::::Cuts .
Section::::Commonwealth countries .
Approximate zones of the usual UK cuts of lamb :
* Scrag end ( of neck )
* Middle neck
* Best End ( of neck )
* Loin * Chump ( and chump chops )
*
Leg ( gigot in Scotland )
* Shank * Shoulder * Breast US AND IRELAND
* Square cut shoulder –
shoulder roast , shoulder chops and arm chops
* Rack – rib chops and riblets , rib roast
* Loin – loin chops or roast
* Leg – sirloin chops , leg roast ( leg of lamb )
* Neck * Breast * Shanks ( fore or hind ) * Flank PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION FIGURES SHEEP MEAT CONSUMPTION Section::::Production and consumption figures .
Section::::Sheep meat consumption .
According to the OECD - FAO Agricultural Outlook for 2016 , the top consumers of sheep meat in 2015 were as follows : EU countries are not individually surveyed in this list .
Among EU nations , Greece is the per capita leader in consumption at 12.3 kg , while the UK 's annual per capita lamb consumption is 4.7 kg ..
Outside of the OECD , the largest per capita consumer overall is Mongolia , with 45.1 kg .
* – per capita
* * – * * – * * – * * – * SHEEP MEAT PRODUCTION Section::::Sheep meat production .
The table below gives a sample of producing nations , but many other significant producers in the 50 - 120 KT range are not given .
+
Sheep meat production ( kt ) ! ! ! 2008 ! ! 2009 ! !
2010 ! !
2011 ! !
2012
Source :
Helgi Library , World Bank ,
FAOSTAT DISHES Section::::Dishes .
Meat from sheep features prominently in several cuisines of the Mediterranean , for example in Greece , where it is an integral component of many meals , including religious feasts such as Easter ( see avgolemono , magiritsa ) ;
Turkey , in North Africa , the Middle East , in Jordan , Pakistan and Afghanistan ; in the Basque culture , both in the Basque country of Europe and in the shepherding areas of the Western United States .
In Northern Europe , mutton and lamb feature in many traditional dishes , including those of Iceland and of the United Kingdom , particularly in the western and northern uplands , Scotland and Wales .
Mutton used to be an important part of Hungarian cuisine due to strong pastoral traditions but began to be increasingly looked down on with the spread of urbanisation .
It is also very popular in Australia .
Lamb and mutton are very popular in Central Asia and in certain parts of China , where other red meats may be eschewed for religious or economic reasons .
Barbecued mutton is also a specialty in some areas of the United States ( chiefly Owensboro , Kentucky ) and Canada .
However , meat from sheep is generally consumed far less in the US than in many European , Central American and Asian cuisines ; for example , average per - capita consumption of lamb in the United States is only per year , with half the population never having tried it .
In Australia , the leg of lamb roast is considered to be the national dish .
Commonly served on a Sunday or any other special occasion , it can be done in a kettle BBQ or a conventional oven .
Typical preparation involves covering the leg of lamb with butter and rosemary sprigs pushed inside incisions cut in the leg , and rosemary leaves sprinkled on top .
The lamb is then roasted for two hours at and typically served with carrots and potato ( also roasted ) , green vegetables and gravy .
In Indonesia , lamb is popularly served as lamb satay and lamb curry .
Both dishes are cooked with various spices from the islands , and served with either rice or lontong .
A version of lamb and bamboo shoot curry is the specialty of Minang cuisine , although similar dish could also be found in Thai cuisine .
In Mexico , lamb is the meat of choice for the popular barbacoa dish , in which the lamb is roasted or steamed wrapped in maguey leaves underground .
In Medieval India , the armies , unable to cook elaborate meals , would prepare a one - pot dish where they cooked rice with mutton .
This dish led to the famous Biryani .
In Japan , although lamb is not traditionally consumed in most of the country , on the Northern island of Hokkaido and North - eastern Tohoku regions , a hot pot dish called Jingisukan ( i.e. " Genghis Khan " ) is popular .
In that dish , thin - sliced lamb is cooked over a convex skillet alongside various vegetables and mushrooms in front of the diners , then dipped in soy - sauce based dipping sauces and eaten .
It was so named because lamb was thought to be popular in Mongolia .
Lamb 's liver , known as lamb 's fry in New Zealand and Australia , is eaten in many countries .
It is the most common form of offal eaten in the UK , traditionally used in the family favourite ( and pub grub staple ) of liver with onions and/or bacon and mashed potatoes .
It is a major ingredient , along with the lungs and heart ( the pluck ) , in the traditional Scottish dish of haggis .
Lamb testicles , also known as lamb 's fries ( a term also used for other lamb offal ) , is another delicacy .
Lamb kidneys are found in many cuisines across Europe and the Middle East , often split into two halves and grilled ( on kebabs in the Middle East ) , or sautéed in a sauce .
They are generally the most highly regarded of all kidneys .
Lamb sweetbreads are a delicacy in many cuisines .
SEE ALSO
* Lechazo de Castilla y León – milk - fed lamb meat from Spain
* List of lamb dishes
* Mutton curry
* Mutton flaps
* Sheep 's trotters * Smalahove – a Western Norwegian dish of sheep head BIBLIOGRAPHY * K.F. Warner , " Boning Lamb Cuts " , Leaflet 74 , U.S. Department of Agriculture , Bureau of Animal Industry , June 1931 .
full text
* Bob Kennard , " Much ado about mutton " .
Ludlow : Merlin Unwin , 2014
NOTES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Sheep Meat Production