RUNNING OF THE BULLS
The running of the bulls ( , from the verb encerrar , ' to corral , to enclose ' ; , literally ' haste , momentum ' ; , ' street - bulls ' ) is an event that involves running in front of a small group of cattle , typically six but sometimes ten or more , that have been let loose on a course of a sectioned - off subset of a town 's streets , usually as part of a summertime festival .
Particular breeds of cattle may be favored , such as the in Spain , also often used in post - run bullfighting , and Camargue cattle in Occitan France , which are not fought .
Actual bulls ( non - castrated male cattle ) are typically used in such events .
The most famous bull - run –
what a capitalized " the Running of the Bulls " most often refers to in English – is the held in Pamplona during the nine - day festival of Sanfermines in honour of Saint Fermin .
It has become a major global tourism event , today very different from the traditional , local festival .
More traditional summer bull - runs are held in other places such as towns and villages across Spain and Portugal , in some cities in Mexico , and in the Occitan ( Camargue ) region of southern France .
Bull - running was formerly also practiced in rural England , most famously at Stamford until 1837 .
The origin of this event comes from the need to transport the bulls from the fields outside the city , where they were bred , to the bullring , where they would be killed in the evening .
During this " run " , youngsters would jump among them to show off their bravado .
In Pamplona and other places , the six bulls in the event are still those that will feature in the afternoon bullfight of the same day .
Spanish tradition holds that bull - running began in northeastern Spain in the early 14th century .
While transporting cattle in order to sell them at the market , men would try to speed the process by hurrying their cattle using tactics of fear and excitement .
After years of this practice , the transportation and hurrying began to turn into a competition , as young adults would attempt to race in front of the bulls and make it safely to their pens without being overtaken .
When the popularity of this practice increased and was noticed more and more by the expanding population of Spanish cities , a tradition was created and stands to this day .
PAMPLONA BULL RUN Section::::Pamplona bull run .
The Pamplona encierro is the most popular in Spain and has been broadcast live by RTVE , the public Spanish national television channel , for over 30 years .
It is the highest profile event of the San Fermín festival , which is held every year from 6–14 July .
The first bull running is on 7 July , followed by one on each of the following mornings of the festival , beginning every day at 8 am .
Among the rules to take part in the event are that participants must be at least 18 years old , run in the same direction as the bulls , not incite the bulls , and not be under the influence of alcohol .
FENCE Section::::Fence .
In Pamplona , a set of wooden fences is erected to direct the bulls along the route and to block off side streets .
A double wooden fence is used in those areas where there is enough space , while in other parts the buildings of the street act as barriers .
The gaps in the barricades are wide enough for a human to slip through but narrow enough to block a bull .
The fence is composed of approximately three thousand separate pieces of wood .
Some parts of the fence remain in place for the duration of the fiesta , while others are placed and removed each morning .
Spectators can only stand behind the second fence , whereas the space between the two fences is reserved for security and medical personnel and also to participants who need cover during the event .
PRELIMINARIES Section::::Preliminaries .
The encierro begins with runners singing a benediction .
It is sung three times , each time being sung both in Spanish and Basque .
The benediction is a prayer given at a statue of Saint Fermin , patron of the festival and the city , to ask the saint 's protection and can be translated into English as " We ask Saint Fermin , as our Patron , to guide us through the encierro and give us his blessing " .
The singers finish by shouting " and ( ' Long live Saint Fermin ' , in Spanish and Basque , respectively ) .
Most runners dress in the traditional clothing of the festival which consists of a white shirt and trousers with a red waistband ( ) and neckerchief ( ) .
Also some of them hold the day 's newspaper rolled to draw the bulls ' attention from them if necessary .
THE RUNNING Section::::The running .
A first rocket is set off at 8 a.m. to alert the runners that the corral gate is open .
A second rocket signals that all six bulls have been released .
The third and fourth rockets are signals that all of the herd has entered the bullring and its corral respectively , marking the end of the event .
The average duration between the first rocket and the end of the encierro is two minutes , 30 seconds .
The encierro is usually composed of the six bulls to be fought in the afternoon , six steers that run in herd with the bulls , and three more steers that follow the herd to encourage any reluctant bulls to continue along the route .
The function of the steers , who run the route daily , is to guide the bulls to the bullring .
The average speed of the herd is .
The length of the run is .
It goes through four streets of the old part of the city ( Santo Domingo , Ayuntamiento , Mercaderes and Estafeta ) via the Town Hall Square and the short section " Telefónica " ( named for the location of the old telephone office at end of Calle Estafeta ) just before entering into the bullring through its callejón ( tunnel ) .
The fastest part of the route is up Santo Domingo and across the Town Hall Square , but the bulls often became separated at the entrance to Estafeta Street as they slowed down .
One or more would slip going into the turn at Estafeta ( " la curva " ) , resulting in the installation of anti - slip surfacing , and now most of the bulls negotiate the turn onto Estafeta and are often ahead of the steers .
This has resulted in a quicker run .
Runners are not permitted in the first 50 meters of the encierro , which is an uphill grade where the bulls are much faster .
INJURIES , FATALITIES , AND MEDICAL ATTENTION Section::::Injuries , fatalities , and medical attention .
Every year , between 50 and 100 people are injured during the run .
Not all of the injuries require taking the patients to the hospital : in 2013 , 50 people were taken by ambulance to Pamplona 's hospital , with this number nearly doubling that of 2012 .
Goring is much less common but potentially life threatening .
In 2013 , for example , six participants were gored along the festival , in 2012 , only four runners were injured by the horns of the bulls with exactly the same number of gored people in 2011 , nine in 2010 and 10 in 2009 ; with one of the latter killed .
As most of the runners are male , only 5 women have been gored since 1974 .
Before that date , running was prohibited for women .
Another major risk is runners falling and piling up ( a " montón " ) at the entrance of the bullring , which acts as a funnel as it is much narrower than the previous street .
In such cases injuries come both from asphyxia and contusions to those in the pile and from goring if the bulls crush into the pile .
This kind of blocking of the entrance has occurred at least ten times in the history of the run , the last occurring in 2013 and the first dating back to 1878 .
A runner died of suffocation in one such pile up in 1977 .
Overall , since record - keeping began in 1910 , 15 people have been killed in the bull running of Pamplona , most of them due to being gored .
To minimize the impact of injuries every day 200 people collaborate in the medical attention .
They are deployed in 16 sanitary posts ( every 50 metres on average ) , each one with at least a physician and a nurse among their personnel .
Most of these 200 people are volunteers , mainly from the Red Cross .
In addition to the medical posts , there are around 20 ambulances .
This organization makes it possible to have a gored person stabilized and taken to a hospital in less than 10 minutes .
+ 15 Deaths since 1910 in the bull run of Pamplona !
Year Name Age Origin Location Cause of death DRESS CODE Section::::Dress code .
Though there is no formal dress code , the very common and traditional attire is white trousers , white shirt with a red scarf around the waist and a red handkerchief around the neck .
Another common dress practice , seen as a risk by some but as a daring depiction of courage by others is dressing in a conspicuous manner .
Many runners that want to be seen wear colors other than white , a common alternate color choice is blue .
Others include large logos on their shirt to capture the attention of the bulls .
In the age of social media explosion , this is also thought to be a way to highlight someone in a photo .
MEDIA Section::::Media .
The encierro of Pamplona has been depicted many times in literature , television or advertising , but became known worldwide partly because of the descriptions of Ernest Hemingway in books The Sun Also Rises and Death in the Afternoon .
The cinema pioneer Louis Lumière filmed the run in 1899 .
The event is the basis for a chapter in James Michener 's 1971 novel The Drifters .
The run is depicted in the 1991 Billy Crystal film City Slickers , where the character " Mitch " ( Crystal ) is gored ( non - fatally ) from behind by a bull during a vacation with the other main characters .
The run appears in the 2011 Bollywood movie Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara , directed by Zoya Akhtar , as the final dare in the bucket list of the three bachelors who have to overcome their ultimate fear ; death .
At first , the trio run part of the route .
They stop at the square , but then recover their nerve , and continue to the end .
The completion of the run depicts their freedom as they learn that surviving a mortal danger can bring joy .
Running with Bulls , a 2012 documentary of the festival filmed by Construct Creatives and presented by Jason Farrel , depicts the pros and cons of the controversial tradition .
Since 2014 , the Esquire Channel has broadcast the running of the bulls as a show in the US , with both live commentary and then a recorded ' round up ' later in the day by NBCSN commentators the Men in Blazers , including interviews with noted participants such as Madrid - born runner David Ubeda , former US Special Forces soldier turned filmmaker Dennis Clancey , the historic New York - born runner Joe Distler , and former British bullfighter and author Alexander Fiske - Harrison .
In 2014 , the eBook guide , Fiesta : How To Survive The Bulls Of Pamplona , caused headlines around the world when one of the contributors was gored by a bull soon after its publication .
( See Further Reading section below . )
OTHER EXAMPLES
Section::::Other examples .
Although the most famous running of the bulls is that of San Fermín , they are held in towns and villages across Spain , Portugal , and in some cities in southern France during the summer .
Examples are the bull run of San Sebastián de los Reyes , near Madrid , at the end of August which is the most popular of Spain after Pamplona , the bull run of Cuéllar , considered as the oldest of Spain since there are documents of its existence dating back to 1215 , the Highland Capeias of the Raia in Sabugal , Portugal , with horses leading the herd crossing old border passes out of Spain and using the medieval ' Forcåo ' , or the bull run of Navalcarnero held at night .
Other encierros have also caused fatalities .
OR Section::::or . Bous al carrer , correbou or correbous ( meaning in Catalan , ' bulls in the street ' , ' street - bulls ' ) is a typical festivity in many villages in the Valencian region , Terres de l'Ebre , Catalonia , and Fornalutx , Mallorca .
Another similar tradition is soltes de vaques , where cows are used instead of bulls .
Even though they can take place all along the year , they are most usual during local festivals ( normally in August ) .
Compared to encierros , animals are not directed to any bullring .
These festivities are normally organized by the youngsters of the village , as a way for showing their courage and ability with the bull .
Some sources consider this tradition a masculine initiation rite to adulthood .
OCCITAN AREA OF FRANCE Section::::Occitan area of France .
Numerous bull - running events happen in France in the region around Sommières , in accordance with the Camargues tradition , in which no bulls are intentionally injured or killed .
For instance , in Calvisson , the annual event takes place around 20 July over a period of five days .
There are four events :
the , in which at least ten bulls are run together through the street guided by a group of twelve mounted on white Camargue horses ; the , in which one bull is released outside the foyer and finds his own way back to the pen ; the , in which one bull is run , accompanied through the streets ; and the , which is the same thing but after dark .
Boys and men run with the bulls and try and separate them from the horses , stop them , and physically turn them away from the horses .
STAMFORD BULL RUN Section::::Stamford bull run .
The English town of Stamford , Lincolnshire was host to the Stamford bull run for almost 700 years until it was abandoned in 1837 .
According to local tradition , the custom dated from the time of King John when William de Warenne , 5th Earl of Surrey , saw two bulls fighting in the meadow beneath .
Some butchers came to part the combatants and one of the bulls ran into the town , causing a great uproar .
The earl , mounting his horse , rode after the animal , and enjoyed the sport so much , that he gave the meadow in which the fight began , to the butchers of Stamford , on condition that they should provide a bull , to be run in the town every 13 November , for ever after .
As of 2013 the bull run had been revived as a ceremonial , festival - style community event .
MOCK BULL RUNS Section::::Mock bull runs .
A variation is the nightly " fire bull " where balls of flammable material are placed on the horns .
Currently the bull is often replaced by a runner carrying a frame on which fireworks are placed and dodgers , usually children , run to avoid the sparks .
In 2008 , Red Bull Racing driver David Coulthard and Scuderia Toro Rosso driver Sébastien Bourdais performed a version of a ' bull running ' event in Pamplona , Spain , with the Formula One cars chasing 500 runners through the actual Pamplona route .
The Big Easy Rollergirls roller derby team has performed an annual mock bull run in New Orleans , Louisiana since 2007 .
The team , dressed as bulls , skates after runners through the French Quarter .
In 2012 , there were 14,000 runners and over 400 " bulls " from all over the country , with
huge before- and after - parties .
In Ballyjamesduff , Ireland , an annual event called the Pig Run is held with small pigs .
It looks just like a mini-
but with pigs instead of bulls .
In Dewey Beach , Delaware , a bar named The Starboard sponsors an annual Running of the Bull , in which hundreds of red- and white - clad beachgoers are chased down the shore by a single " bull " ( two people in a pantomime horse - style costume ) .
In Rangiora , New Zealand , an annual Running of the Sheep is held , in which 1000–2000 sheep are released down the main street of the small farming town .
The Running of the Bulls UK is a pub crawl event that takes place on London 's Hampstead Heath and uses fast human runners in place of bulls .
In 2014 , Pamplona inaugurated a series of running events in June , the San Fermín Marathon , of a full marathon ( 42.195 km ) , half - marathon ( 21.097 km ) , or 10 km road race that concludes with the final 900 m of each race using the route , runners crossing the finish line inside the bullring .
OPPOSITION Section::::Opposition .
Many opponents argue that bulls are mentally injured by the harassment and voicing of both participants and spectators , and some of animals may also die because of the stress , especially if they are roped or bring flares in their horns ( bou embolat version ) .
Despite all this , the festivities seem to have wide popular support in their villages
Many animal rights activists oppose the event .
PETA activists created the Running of the Nudes , a demonstration done two days before the beginning of San Fermín in Pamplona .
By marching naked , they protested the festival and the following bullfight , arguing the bulls are tortured for entertainment .
The city of San Miguel de Allende , Mexico , cancelled its Sanmiguelada running of the bulls after 2006 , citing public disorder associated with the event .
After the event was cancelled in San Miguel , the city of Salvatierra , also in the state of Guanajuato , picked up the event .
It is now called La Marquesada and the three - day event is held during the last weekend of the month of September or first weekend of October .
FURTHER READING
SEE ALSO * or – variant in which bulls have flares or fireworks attached to their horns * Bull - baiting * Bullfighting * Spanish - style bullfighting
* Bull - leaping ( ancient ) * ( modern France ) * ( modern Spain )
* Bull running – a similar , defunct tradition in England * – a similar tradition in Tamil Nadu ,
India REFERENCES Section::::References .
Some links may contain graphic content where marked .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A blog about Pamplona 's annual bull - running festival * How to attend or view the Pamplona festival * Student Travel and Party at Running of the Bulls
* Google Maps Route Map