NITRIC OXIDE Nitric oxide ( nitrogen oxide or nitrogen monoxide ) is a colorless gas with the formula
NO .
It is one of the principal oxides of nitrogen .
Nitric oxide is a free radical , i.e. , it has an unpaired electron , which is sometimes denoted by a dot in its chemical formula , i.e. , · NO .
Nitric oxide is also a heteronuclear diatomic molecule , a historic class that drew researches which spawned early modern theories of chemical bonding .
An important intermediate in chemical industry , nitric oxide forms in combustion systems and can be generated by lightning in thunderstorms .
In mammals , including humans , nitric oxide is a signaling molecule in many physiological and pathological processes .
It was proclaimed the " Molecule of the Year " in 1992 .
The 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine was awarded for discovering nitric oxide 's role as a cardiovascular signalling molecule .
Nitric oxide should not be confused with nitrous oxide ( NO ) , an anesthetic , or with nitrogen dioxide ( NO ) , a brown toxic gas and a major air pollutant .
REACTIONS
WITH DI- AND TRIATOMIC MOLECULES Section::::Reactions .
Section::::With di- and triatomic molecules .
Upon condensing to a liquid , nitric oxide dimerizes , but the association is weak and reversible .
The N --- N distance in crystalline NO is 218 pm , nearly twice the N - O distance .
Since the heat of formation of · NO is endothermic , NO can be decomposed to the elements .
Catalytic converters in cars exploit this reaction : When exposed to oxygen , nitric oxide converts into nitrogen dioxide .
This conversion has been speculated as occurring via the ONOONO intermediate .
In water , nitric oxide reacts with oxygen and water to form nitrous acid ( HNO ) .
The reaction is thought to proceed via the following stoichiometry :
Nitric oxide reacts with fluorine , chlorine , and bromine to form the nitrosyl halides , such as nitrosyl chloride : With NO , also a radical , NO combines to form the intensely blue dinitrogen trioxide : ORGANIC
CHEMISTRY
Section::::Organic chemistry .
Nitric oxide reacts with acetone and an alkoxide to a diazeniumdiolate or nitrosohydroxylamine and methyl acetate :
This reaction , which was discovered around 1898 , remains of interest in nitric oxide prodrug research .
Nitric oxide can also react directly with sodium methoxide , forming sodium formate and nitrous oxide .
COORDINATION COMPLEXES
Section::::Coordination complexes .
Nitric oxide reacts with transition metals to give complexes called metal nitrosyls .
The most common bonding mode of nitric oxide is the terminal linear type ( M−NO ) .
Alternatively , nitric oxide can serve as a one - electron pseudohalide .
In such complexes , the M−N−O group is characterized by an angle between 120 ° and 140 ° .
The NO group can also bridge between metal centers through the nitrogen atom in a variety of geometries .
PRODUCTION AND PREPARATION Section::::Production and preparation .
In commercial settings , nitric oxide is produced by the oxidation of ammonia at 750–900 ° C ( normally at 850 ° C ) with platinum as catalyst :
The uncatalyzed endothermic reaction of oxygen ( O ) and nitrogen ( N ) , which is effected at high temperature ( > 2000 ° C ) by lightning has not been developed into a practical commercial synthesis ( see Birkeland – Eyde process ) : LABORATORY METHODS Section::::Laboratory methods .
In the laboratory , nitric oxide is conveniently generated by reduction of dilute nitric acid with copper :
An alternative route involves the reduction of nitrous acid in the form of sodium nitrite or potassium nitrite : The iron(II )
sulfate route is simple and has been used in undergraduate laboratory experiments .
So - called NONOate compounds are also used for nitric oxide generation .
DETECTION AND ASSAY Section::::Detection and assay .
Nitric oxide concentration can be determined using a chemiluminescent reaction involving ozone .
A sample containing nitric oxide is mixed with a large quantity of ozone .
The nitric oxide reacts with the ozone to produce oxygen and nitrogen dioxide , accompanied with emission of light ( chemiluminescence ) : which can be measured with a photodetector .
The amount of light produced is proportional to the amount of nitric oxide in the sample .
Other methods of testing include electroanalysis ( amperometric approach ) , where · NO reacts with an electrode to induce a current or voltage change .
The detection of NO radicals in biological tissues is particularly difficult due to the short lifetime and concentration of these radicals in tissues .
One of the few practical methods is spin trapping of nitric oxide with iron - dithiocarbamate complexes and subsequent detection of the mono - nitrosyl - iron complex with electron paramagnetic resonance ( EPR ) .
A group of fluorescent dye indicators that are also available in acetylated form for intracellular measurements exist .
The most common compound is 4,5-diaminofluorescein ( DAF-2 ) .
ENVIRONMENTAL EFFECTS ACID DEPOSITION
Section::::Environmental effects .
Section::::Acid deposition .
Nitric oxide reacts with the hydroperoxy radical ( HO ) to form nitrogen dioxide ( NO ) , which then can react with a hydroxyl radical ( OH ) to produce nitric acid ( HNO ) : Nitric acid , along with sulfuric acid , contribute acid rain deposition .
OZONE DEPLETION Section::::Ozone depletion .
Furthermore , · NO participates in ozone layer depletion .
In this process , nitric oxide reacts with stratospheric ozone to form O and nitrogen dioxide :
As seen in the Concentration Measurement section , this reaction is also utilized to measure concentrations of · NO in control volumes .
PRECURSOR TO NO Section::::Precursor to NO .
As seen in the Acid deposition section , nitric oxide can transform into nitrogen dioxide ( this can happen with the hydroperoxy radical , HO , or diatomic oxygen , O ) .
Symptoms of short - term nitrogen dioxide exposure include nausea , dyspnea and headache .
Long - term effects could include impaired immune and respiratory function .
BIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS
Section::::Biological functions .
NO is a gaseous signaling molecule .
It is a key vertebrate biological messenger , playing a role in a variety of biological processes .
It is a known bioproduct in almost all types of organisms , ranging from bacteria to plants , fungi , and animal cells .
Nitric oxide , known as an endothelium - derived relaxing factor ( EDRF ) , is biosynthesized endogenously from -arginine , oxygen , and NADPH by various nitric oxide synthase ( NOS ) enzymes .
Reduction of inorganic nitrate may also serve to make nitric oxide .
One of the main enzymatic targets of nitric oxide is guanylyl cyclase .
The binding of nitric oxide to the haem region of the enzyme leads to activation , in the presence of iron .
Nitric oxide is highly reactive ( having a lifetime of a few seconds ) , yet diffuses freely across membranes .
These attributes make nitric oxide ideal for a transient paracrine ( between adjacent cells ) and autocrine ( within a single cell )
signaling molecule .
Once nitric oxide is converted to nitrates and nitrites by oxygen and water , cell signaling is deactivated .
The endothelium ( inner lining ) of blood vessels uses nitric oxide to signal the surrounding smooth muscle to relax , thus resulting in vasodilation and increasing blood flow .
Viagra , or the generic : sildenafil , is a common example of a drug that uses that works with the nitric oxide pathway .
Viagra does not produce nitric oxide , but inhibits the pathways that counteract the nitric oxide pathway , allowing for the signal to be enhanced , and thus vasodilation .
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH Section::::Occupational safety and health .
In the U.S. , the Occupational Safety and Health Administration ( OSHA ) has set the legal limit ( permissible exposure limit ) for nitric oxide exposure in the workplace as 25 ppm ( 30 mg / m ) over an 8-hour workday .
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) has set a recommended exposure limit ( REL ) of 25 ppm ( 30 mg / m ) over an 8-hour workday .
At levels of 100 ppm , nitric oxide is immediately dangerous to life and health .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Butler A. and Nicholson R. ; " Life , death and NO .
"
Cambridge 2003 . .
* van Faassen , E. E. ; Vanin , A. F. ( eds ) ; " Radicals for life : The various forms of Nitric Oxide . "
Elsevier , Amsterdam 2007 . .
* Ignarro , L. J. ( ed . ) ; " Nitric oxide : biology and pathobiology . "
Academic Press , San Diego 2000 . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* International Chemical Safety Card 1311
* CDC – NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards
* 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology / Medicine for discovery of NO 's role in cardiovascular regulation
* Microscale Gas Chemistry : Experiments with Nitrogen Oxides *
Your Brain Boots Up Like a Computer – new insights about the biological role of nitric oxide .
*
Assessing The Potential of Nitric Oxide in the Diabetic Foot * New Discoveries About Nitric Oxide Can Provide Drugs For Schizophrenia * Nitric Oxide at the Chemical Database