HORNET Hornets ( insects in the genus Vespa ) are the largest of the eusocial wasps , and are similar in appearance to their close relatives yellowjackets .
Some species can reach up to in length .
They are distinguished from other vespine wasps by the relatively large top margin of the head and by the rounded segment of the abdomen just behind the waist .
Worldwide , there are 22 recognized species of Vespa , Most species only occur in the tropics of Asia , though the European hornet ( Vespa crabro ) , is widely distributed throughout Europe , Russia , North America and Northeast Asia .
Wasps native to North America in the genus Dolichovespula are commonly referred to as hornets ( e.g. baldfaced hornets ) , but are actually yellowjackets .
Like other social wasps , hornets build communal nests by chewing wood to make a papery pulp .
Each nest has one queen , who lays eggs and is attended by workers who , while genetically female , can not lay fertile eggs .
Most species make exposed nests in trees and shrubs , but some ( like Vespa orientalis ) build their nests underground or in other cavities .
In the tropics , these nests may last year - round , but in temperate areas , the nest dies over the winter , with lone queens hibernating in leaf litter or other insulative material until the spring .
Hornets are often considered pests as , except for the European hornet , they aggressively guard their nesting sites when threatened .
The European hornet , however , rarely attacks people even those close to its nest .
Other species , however , should be treated with great respect as their stings can be more dangerous than those of bees .
LIFE CYCLE Section::::Life cycle .
In Vespa crabro , the nest is founded in spring by a fertilized female known as the queen .
She generally selects sheltered places such as dark , hollow tree trunks .
She first builds a series of cells ( up to 50 ) out of chewed tree bark .
The cells are arranged in horizontal layers named combs , each cell being vertical and closed at the top .
An egg is then laid in each cell .
After 5–8 days , the egg hatches , and in the next two weeks , the larva undergoes its five stages .
During this time , the queen feeds it a protein - rich diet of insects .
Then , the larva spins a silk cap over the cell 's opening and , during the next two weeks , transforms into an adult , a process called metamorphosis .
The adult then eats its way through the silk cap .
This first generation of workers , invariably females , now gradually undertakes all the tasks formerly carried out by the queen ( foraging , nest building , taking care of the brood , etc . )
with the exception of egg - laying , which remains exclusive to the queen .
As the colony size grows , new combs are added , and an envelope is built around the cell layers until the nest is entirely covered with the exception of an entry hole .
To be able to build cells in total darkness , they apparently use gravity to aid them .
At the peak of its population , the colony can reach a size of 700 workers , which occurs in late summer .
At this time , the queen starts producing the first reproductive individuals .
Fertilized eggs develop into females ( called " gynes " by entomologists ) , and unfertilized ones develop into males ( sometimes called " drones " ) .
Adult males do not participate in nest maintenance , foraging , or caretaking of the larvae .
In early to mid - autumn , they leave the nest and mate during " nuptial flights " .
Other temperate species ( e.g. the yellow hornet , V. simillima , or the Oriental hornet , V. orientalis ) have similar cycles .
In the case of tropical species ( e.g. , V. tropica ) , life histories may well differ , and in species with both tropical and temperate distributions ( such as the Asian giant hornet , Vespa mandarinia ) , the cycle likely depends on latitude .
DISTRIBUTION Section::::Distribution .
Hornets are found mainly in the Northern Hemisphere .
The common European hornet ( Vespa crabro ) is the best - known species , widely distributed in Europe ( but is never found north of the 63rd parallel ) , Ukraine and European Russia ( except in extreme northern areas ) .
In the east , the species ' distribution area stretches over the Ural Mountains to Western Siberia ( found in the vicinity of Khanty - Mansiysk ) .
In Asia , the common European hornet is found in southern Siberia , as well as in eastern China .
The common European hornet was accidentally introduced to North America about the middle of the 19th century , and has lived there since at about the same latitudes as in Europe .
However , it has never been found in western North America .
The Asian giant hornet ( Vespa mandarinia ) lives in the Primorsky Krai region of Russia , China , Korea , Taiwan , Cambodia , Laos , Vietnam , Indochina , India , Nepal , Sri Lanka , Thailand , but is most commonly found in the mountains of Japan , where they are commonly known as the Giant Sparrow Bee .
The Oriental hornet occurs in semi - dry sub - tropical areas of Central Asia ( Iran , Afghanistan , Oman , Pakistan , Turkmenistan , Uzbekistan , Tajikistan ) , southern Europe ( Italy , Malta , Albania , Romania , Turkey , Greece , Bulgaria , Cyprus ) , North Africa ( Algeria , Libya , Egypt , Sudan , Eritrea , Somalia ) , and along the shores of the Gulf of Aden and in the Middle East .
It has been introduced to Madagascar .
The Asian predatory wasp , Vespa velutina , has been introduced to France , Spain , Portugal and Italy .
STINGS Section::::Stings .
Hornets have stings used to kill prey and defend hives .
Hornet stings are more painful to humans than typical wasp stings because hornet venom contains a large amount ( 5 % ) of acetylcholine .
Individual hornets can sting repeatedly ; unlike honey bees , hornets and wasps do not die after stinging because their stingers are very finely barbed ( only visible under high magnification ) and can easily be withdrawn and so are not pulled out of their bodies when disengaging .
The toxicity of hornet stings varies according to hornet species ; some deliver just a typical insect sting , while others are among the most venomous known insects .
Single hornet stings are not in themselves fatal , except sometimes to allergic victims .
Multiple stings by non - European hornets may be fatal because of highly toxic species - specific components of their venom .
The stings of the Asian giant hornet ( Vespa mandarinia ) are among the most venomous known , and are thought to cause 30–50 human deaths annually in Japan .
Between July and September 2013 , hornet stings caused the death of 42 people in China .
Asian giant hornet 's venom can cause allergic reactions and multiple organ failure leading to death , though dialysis can be used to remove the toxins from the bloodstream .
People who are allergic to wasp venom are also allergic to hornet stings .
Allergic reactions are commonly treated with epinephrine ( adrenaline ) injection using a device such as an epinephrine autoinjector , with prompt follow - up treatment in a hospital .
In severe cases , allergic individuals may go into anaphylactic shock and die unless treated promptly .
ATTACK PHEROMONE Section::::Attack pheromone .
Hornets , like many social wasps , can mobilize the entire nest to sting in defense , which is highly dangerous to humans and other animals .
The attack pheromone is released in case of threat to the nest .
In the case of the Asian giant hornet ( Vespa mandarinia ) this is also used to mobilize many workers at once when attacking colonies of their prey , honey bees and other Vespa species .
Three biologically active chemicals , 2-pentanol , 3-methyl-1-butanol , and 1-methylbutyl 3-methylbutanoate , have been identified for this species .
In field tests , 2-pentanol alone triggered mild alarm and defensive behavior , but adding the other two compounds increased aggressiveness in a synergistic effect .
In the European hornet ( Vespa crabro ) the major compound of the alarm pheromone is 2-methyl-3-butene-2-ol .
If a hornet is killed near a nest it may release pheromones that can cause the other hornets to attack .
Materials that come in contact with this pheromone , such as clothes , skin , and dead prey or hornets , can also trigger an attack , as can certain food flavorings , such as banana and apple flavorings , and fragrances that contain C alcohols and C esters .
DIET AND FEEDING Section::::Diet and feeding .
Adult hornets and their relatives ( e.g. , yellowjackets ) feed themselves with nectar and sugar - rich plant foods .
Thus , they can often be found feeding on the sap of oak trees , rotting sweet fruits , honey and any sugar - containing foodstuffs .
Hornets frequently fly into orchards to feed on overripe fruit .
Hornets tend to gnaw a hole into fruit to become totally immersed into its pulp .
A person who accidentally plucks a fruit with a feeding hornet can be attacked by the disturbed insect .
The adults also attack various insects , which they kill with stings and jaws .
Due to their size and the power of their venom , hornets are able to kill large insects such as honey bees , grasshoppers , locusts and katydids without difficulty .
The victim is fully masticated and then fed to the larvae developing in the nest , rather than consumed by the adult hornets .
Given that some of their prey are considered pests , hornets may be considered beneficial under some circumstances .
The larvae of hornets produce a sweet secretion containing sugars and amino acids , which is consumed by the workers and queens .
HORNETS AND OTHER VESPIDAE
Section::::Hornets and other Vespidae .
While taxonomically well - defined , there may be some confusion about the differences between hornets and other wasps of the family Vespidae , specifically the yellowjackets , which are members of the same subfamily .
Yellowjackets are generally smaller than hornets and are bright yellow and black , whereas hornets may often be black and white .
There is also a related genus of Asian nocturnal vespines , Provespa , which are referred to as " night wasps " or " night hornets " , though they are not true hornets .
Some other large wasps are sometimes referred to as hornets , most notably the bald - faced hornet ( Dolichovespula maculata ) found in North America .
It is set apart by its black and ivory coloration .
The name " hornet " is used for this and related species primarily because of their habit of making aerial nests ( similar to the true hornets ) rather than subterranean nests .
Another example is the Australian hornet ( Abispa ephippium ) , which is actually a species of potter wasp .
SPECIES
* Vespa affinis * Vespa analis * Vespa auraria
* Vespa basalis
* Vespa bellicosa
* Vespa bicincta
* Vespa bicolor
* Vespa binghami
* Vespa crabro
* †Vespa
dasypodia * Vespa ducalis * Vespa dybowskii * Vespa fervida * Vespa fumida * Vespa luctuosa *
" Vespa mandarinia * Vespa mocsaryana * Vespa multimaculata
* Vespa orientalis
* Vespa philippinensis
* Vespa simillima
* Vespa soror
* Vespa tropica
* Vespa
velutina * Vespa vivax NOTABLE
SPECIES * Asian giant hornet Vespa mandarinia
* Vespa mandarinia japonica ( sometimes known as Japanese giant hornet ) – the largest wasp , and the most venomous known insect ( per sting ) .
* Asian predatory wasp Vespa velutina
* Black - bellied hornet Vespa basalis
* Black shield wasp Vespa bicolor * European hornet Vespa crabro , ( sometimes known as Old World Hornet , or Brown Hornet ) .
*
Greater banded hornet Vespa tropica
* Japanese hornet Vespa simillima ( sometimes known as Japanese yellow hornet ) .
*
Lesser banded hornet Vespa affinis
* Oriental hornet Vespa orientalis
* Vespa luctuosa the most lethal wasp venom ( per volume ) .
* Black hornet Vespa dybowskii
GALLERY
SEE ALSO
* Australian hornet
* Bald - faced hornet
* Potter wasp
* Vespid * Yellow jacket * Hymenoepimecis argyraphaga
* Characteristics of common wasps and bees NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS * European hornet protection site ( also available in French , German , Russian , Spanish and Swedish )
* Paper Wasps and Hornets * Controlling Wasps , Hornets , and Yellowjackets * Hornets & Yellowjackets * Yellowjackets and Other Social Wasps
* Vespidae of the World * yellowjackets and hornets of Florida on the UF / IFAS Featured Creatures Web site