DANDELION AND BURDOCK Dandelion and burdock is a beverage consumed in the British Isles since the Middle Ages .
It was originally a type of light mead , but over the years has evolved into the carbonated soft drink commercially available today .
Traditionally it was made from fermented dandelion ( Taraxacum officinale ) and burdock ( Arctium lappa ) roots , hence the name .
It is believed that both plants are beneficial to healthy liver function .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Dandelion and burdock shares a historical origin with a number of drinks originally made from lightly fermented root extracts , such as root beer and sarsaparilla , supposedly as a health benefit .
One story regarding its origin is that in the 13th Century St. Thomas Aquinas , after a hard night 's praying , stumbled out in the dawn and , " trusting in God to Provide " brewed a concoction from the first two plants he encountered .
The dominant flavour in these other drinks is usually sassafras or wintergreen , both now derived artificially rather than from the plant itself , in part because during the 1960s safrole , the major component of the volatile oil of sassafras , was found to be carcinogenic in rats when administered in relatively large doses .
All of these drinks , while tasting similar , do have their own distinct flavour .
Dandelion and burdock is most similar in flavour to sarsaparilla .
The drink has recently seen an increase in popularity after previously poor sales .
IMITATIONS AND VARIANTS Section::::Imitations and variants .
The " dandelion and burdock " drink for sale in many retail outlets rarely contains either plant .
The retail drink is often carbonated , containing artificial sweeteners and flavourings .
Some supermarkets sell the drink with " real plant extracts " with a more faithful flavour than the ones made with artificial flavourings Fentimans , a beverage company based in the United Kingdom , offers a version of the naturally brewed dandelion and burdock drink , containing extracts of both plants ( although its main ingredients are sugar and pear juice concentrate ) .
A.G. Barr , famous for Scottish soft drink Irn - Bru , produce a version of dandelion and burdock under the name D'n'B and the slogan " Tall , dark and drinksome " .
The last of the UK 's original temperance bars , Fitzpatrick 's in Rawtenstall , which opened in 1890 , still produces its dandelion and burdock to an original recipe brought over from Ireland at the end of the 19th century .
IN CULTURE Section::::In culture .
Mentioned in the title track for Suck It and See ( 2011 ) by Sheffield indie rock band Arctic Monkeys .
SEE ALSO
* Dandelion tea
* List of brand name soft drinks products
* List of soft drink flavours REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY