ULTIMATE TENSILE STRENGTH
Tensile Stress : It is the stress which is produced normal to the cross sectional area of that body .
Ultimate tensile strength ( UTS ) , often shortened to tensile strength ( TS ) , ultimate strength , or Ftu within equations , is the capacity of a material or structure to withstand loads tending to elongate , as opposed to compressive strength , which withstands loads tending to reduce size .
In other words , tensile strength resists tension ( being pulled apart ) , whereas compressive strength resists compression ( being pushed together ) .
Ultimate tensile strength is measured by the maximum stress that a material can withstand while being stretched or pulled before breaking .
In the study of strength of materials , tensile strength , compressive strength , and shear strength can be analyzed independently .
Some materials break very sharply , without plastic deformation , in what is called a brittle failure .
Others , which are more ductile , including most metals , experience some plastic deformation and possibly necking before fracture .
The UTS is usually found by performing a tensile test and recording the engineering stress versus strain .
The highest point of the stress – strain curve ( see point 1 on the engineering stress – strain diagrams below ) is the UTS .
It is an intensive property ; therefore its value does not depend on the size of the test specimen .
However , it is dependent on other factors , such as the preparation of the specimen , the presence or otherwise of surface defects , and the temperature of the test environment and material .
Tensile strengths are rarely used in the design of ductile members , but they are important in brittle members .
They are tabulated for common materials such as alloys , composite materials , ceramics , plastics , and wood .
Tensile strength can be defined for liquids as well as solids under certain conditions .
For example , when a tree draws water from its roots to its upper leaves by transpiration , the column of water is pulled upwards from the top by the cohesion of the water in the xylem , and this force is transmitted down the column by its tensile strength .
Air pressure , osmotic pressure , and capillary tension also plays a small part in a tree 's ability to draw up water , but this alone would only be sufficient to push the column of water to a height of less than ten metres , and trees can grow much higher than that ( over 100 m ) .
Tensile strength is defined as a stress , which is measured as force per unit area .
For some non - homogeneous materials ( or for assembled components ) it can be reported just as a force or as a force per unit width .
In the International System of Units ( SI ) , the unit is the pascal ( Pa ) ( or a multiple thereof , often megapascals ( MPa ) , using the SI prefix mega ) ; or , equivalently to pascals , newtons per square metre ( N / m² ) .
A United States customary unit is pounds per square inch ( lb / in² or psi ) , or kilo - pounds per square inch ( ksi , or sometimes kpsi ) , which is equal to 1000 psi ; kilo - pounds per square inch are commonly used in one country ( US ) , when measuring tensile strengths .
CONCEPT
DUCTILE
MATERIALS
Section::::Concept .
Section::::Ductile materials .
Many materials can display linear elastic behavior , defined by a linear stress – strain relationship , as shown in figure 1 up to point 3 .
The elastic behavior of materials often extends into a non - linear region , represented in figure 1 by point 2 ( the " yield point " ) , up to which deformations are completely recoverable upon removal of the load ; that is , a specimen loaded elastically in tension will elongate , but will return to its original shape and size when unloaded .
Beyond this elastic region , for ductile materials , such as steel , deformations are plastic .
A plastically deformed specimen does not completely return to its original size and shape when unloaded .
For many applications , plastic deformation is unacceptable , and is used as the design limitation .
After the yield point , ductile metals undergo a period of strain hardening , in which the stress increases again with increasing strain , and they begin to neck , as the cross - sectional area of the specimen decreases due to plastic flow .
In a sufficiently ductile material , when necking becomes substantial , it causes a reversal of the engineering stress – strain curve ( curve A , figure 2 ) ; this is because the engineering stress is calculated assuming the original cross - sectional area before necking .
The reversal point is the maximum stress on the engineering stress – strain curve , and the engineering stress coordinate of this point is the ultimate tensile strength , given by point 1 .
The UTS is not used in the design of ductile static members because design practices dictate the use of the yield stress .
It is , however , used for quality control , because of the ease of testing .
It is also used to roughly determine material types for unknown samples .
The UTS is a common engineering parameter to design members made of brittle material because such materials have no yield point .
TESTING Section::::Testing .
Typically , the testing involves taking a small sample with a fixed cross - sectional area , and then pulling it with a tensometer at a constant strain ( change in gauge length divided by initial gauge length ) rate until the sample breaks .
When testing some metals , indentation hardness correlates linearly with tensile strength .
This important relation permits economically important nondestructive testing of bulk metal deliveries with lightweight , even portable equipment , such as hand - held Rockwell hardness testers .
This practical correlation helps quality assurance in metalworking industries to extend well beyond the laboratory and universal testing machines .
While most metal forms , such as sheet , bar , tube , and wire , can exhibit the test UTS , fibers , such as carbon fibers , being only 2/10,000th of an inch in diameter , must be made into composites to create useful real - world forms .
As the datasheet on T1000 G below indicates , while the UTS of the fiber is very high at 6,370 MPa , the UTS of a derived composite is 3,040 MPa – less than half the strength of the fiber .
TYPICAL TENSILE STRENGTHS Section::::Typical tensile strengths .
+ Typical tensile strengths of some materials !
Material ! !
data - sort - type="number " Yield strength ( MPa ) ! !
data - sort - type="number " Ultimate tensile strength ( MPa ) ! !
data - sort - type="number " Density ( g / cm³ ) Iron ( pure mono - crystal )
37.874 Limpet Patella vulgata teeth ( Goethite )
49003000–6500 +
Typical properties for annealed elements !
Element!!Young'smodulus(GPa)!!Offset oryield strength(MPa)!!Ultimatestrength(MPa )
silicon1075000–9000 tungsten411550550–620
iron21180–100350
titanium120100–225246–370
copper130117210
tantalum186180200
tin479–1415–200 zinc alloy 85–105200–400200–400
nickel170140–350140–195 silver83170
gold79100
aluminium7015–2040–50
lead1612
SEE ALSO * Flexural strength * Strength of materials * Tensile structure
* Toughness * Failure * Tension ( physics )
* Young 's modulus REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Giancoli , Douglas , Physics for Scientists & Engineers Third Edition ( 2000 ) .
Upper Saddle River : Prentice Hall .
* T Follett , Life without metals
* George E. Dieter , Mechanical Metallurgy ( 1988 ) .
McGraw - Hill , UK