LUNGFISH Lungfish are freshwater rhipidistian fish belonging to the subclass Dipnoi .
Lungfish are best known for retaining characteristics primitive within the Osteichthyes , including the ability to breathe air , and structures primitive within Sarcopterygii , including the presence of lobed fins with a well - developed internal skeleton .
Today there are only six known species of lungfish , living only in Africa , South America and Australia .
The fossil record show that lungfish were abundant since the Triassic .
While vicariance would suggest this represents an ancient distribution limited to the Mesozoic supercontinent Gondwana , the fossil record suggests advanced lungfish had a widespread freshwater distribution and the current distribution of modern lungfish species
reflects extinction of many lineages subsequent to the breakup of Pangaea , Gondwana and Laurasia .
Lungfish have historically been referred to as salamanderfish , but this term more often refers to Lepidogalaxias salamandroides .
ANATOMY AND MORPHOLOGY Section::::Anatomy and morphology .
All lungfish demonstrate an uninterrupted cartilaginous notochord and an extensively developed palatal dentition .
Basal ( " primitive " ) lungfish groups may retain marginal teeth and an ossified braincase , but derived lungfish groups , including all modern species , show a significant reduction in the marginal bones and a cartilaginous braincase .
The bones of the skull roof in primitive lungfish are covered in a mineralized tissue called cosmine , but in post - Devonian lungfishes , the skull roof lies beneath the skin and the cosmine covering is lost .
All modern lungfish show significant reductions and fusions of the bones of the skull roof , and the specific bones of the skull roof show no homology to the skull roof bones of ray - finned fishes or tetrapods .
During the breeding season , the South American lungfish develops a pair of feathery appendages that are actually highly modified pelvic fins .
These fins are thought to improve gas exchange around the fish 's eggs in its nest .
Through convergent evolution , lungfishes have evolved internal nostrils similar to the tetrapods ' choana , and a brain with certain similarities to the lissamphibian brain ( except for the Queensland lungfish , which branched off in its own direction about 277 million years ago and has a brain resembling that of the Latimeria ) .
The dentition of lungfish is different from that of any other vertebrate group .
" Odontodes " on the palate and lower jaws develop in a series of rows to form a fan - shaped occlusion surface .
These odontodes then wear to form a uniform crushing surface .
In several groups , including the modern lepidosireniformes , these ridges have been modified to form occluding blades .
The modern lungfishes have a number of larval features , which suggest paedomorphosis .
They also demonstrate the largest genome among the vertebrates .
Modern lungfish all have an elongate body with fleshy , paired pectoral and pelvic fins and a single unpaired caudal fin replacing the dorsal , caudal and anal fins of most fishes .
LUNGS Section::::Lungs .
Lungfish have a highly specialized respiratory system .
They have a distinct feature that their lungs are connected to the larynx and pharynx without a trachea .
While other species of fish can breathe air using modified , vascularized gas bladders , these bladders are usually simple sacs , devoid of complex internal structure .
In contrast , the lungs of lungfish are subdivided into numerous smaller air sacs , maximizing the surface area available for gas exchange .
Most extant lungfish species have two lungs , with the exception of the Australian lungfish , which only has one .
The lungs of lungfish are homologous to the lungs of tetrapods .
As in tetrapods and bichirs , the lungs extend from the ventral surface of the esophagus and gut .
PERFUSION OF WATER Section::::Perfusion of water .
Of extant lungfish , only the Australian lungfish can respire through its gills .
In other species , the gills are too atrophied to allow for adequate gas exchange .
When a lungfish is obtaining oxygen from its gills , its circulatory system is configured similarly to the common fish .
The spiral valve of the conus arteriosus is open , the bypass arterioles of the third and fourth gill arches ( which do not actually have gills ) are shut , the second , fifth and sixth gill arch arterioles are open , the ductus arteriosus branching off the sixth arteriole is open , and the pulmonary arteries are closed .
As the water passes through the gills , the lungfish uses a buccal pump .
Flow through the mouth and gills is unidirectional .
Blood flow through the secondary lamellae is countercurrent to the water , maintaining a more constant concentration gradient .
PERFUSION OF AIR Section::::Perfusion of air .
When breathing air , the spiral valve of the conus arteriosus closes ( minimizing the mixing of oxygenated and deoxygenated blood ) , the third and fourth gill arches open , the second and fifth gill arches close ( minimizing the possible loss of the oxygen obtained in the lungs through the gills ) , the sixth arteriole 's ductus arteriosus is closed , and the pulmonary arteries open .
Importantly , during air breathing , the sixth gill is still used in respiration ; deoxygenated blood loses some of its carbon dioxide as it passes though the gill before reaching the lung .
This is because carbon dioxide is more soluble in water .
Air flow through the mouth is tidal , and through the lungs it is bidirectional and observes " uniform pool " diffusion of oxygen .
ECOLOGY AND LIFE HISTORY Section::::Ecology and life history .
Lungfish are omnivorous , feeding on fish , insects , crustaceans , worms , mollusks , amphibians and plant matter .
They have an intestinal spiral valve rather than a true stomach .
African and South American lungfish are capable of surviving seasonal drying out of their habitats by burrowing into mud and estivating throughout the dry season .
Changes in physiology allow it to slow its metabolism to as little as 1/60th of the normal metabolic rate , and protein waste is converted from ammonia to less - toxic urea ( normally , lungfish excrete nitrogenous waste as ammonia directly into the water ) .
Burrowing is seen in at least one group of fossil lungfish , the Gnathorhizidae .
Lungfish can be extremely long - lived .
A Queensland lungfish at the Shedd Aquarium in Chicago was part of the permanent live collection from 1933 to 2017 , when it was euthanized following a decline in health consistent with old age .
EXTANT LUNGFISH Section::::Extant lungfish . !
colspan=5 Extant lungfishes !
Order !
Family !
Species !
Image !
Comments !
Ceratodonti - formes !
Neocerato - dontidae !
rowspan=5 Lepidosireni - formes !
Lepido - sirenidae !
rowspan=4 Proto - pteridae
The west African lungfish Protopterus annectens is a species of lungfish found in West Africa .
It has a prominent snout and small eyes .
Its body is long and eel - like , some 9 - 15 times the length of the head .
It has two pairs of long , filamentous fins .
The pectoral fins have a basal fringe and are about three times the head length , while its pelvic fins are about twice the head length .
In general , three external gills are inserted posterior to the gill slits and above the pectoral fins .
It has cycloid scales embedded in the skin .
There are 40 - 50 scales between the operculum and the anus and 36 - 40 around the body before the origin of the dorsal fin .
It has 34 - 37 pairs of ribs .
The dorsal side is olive or brown in color and the ventral side is lighter , with great blackish or brownish spots on the body and fins except on its belly .
They reach a length of about 100 cm in the wild .
The spotted lungfish , Protopterus dolloi , is a species of lungfish found in Africa .
Specifically , it is found in the Kouilou - Niari Basin of the Republic of the Congo and Ogowe River basin in Gabon .
It is also found in the lower and Middle Congo River Basins .
Protopterus dolloi can aestivate on land by surrounding itself in a layer of dried mucus .
It can reach a length of up to 130 cm .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The relationship of lungfishes to the rest of the bony fish is well understood : * Lungfishes are most closely related to Powichthys , and then to the Porolepiformes .
*
Together , these taxa form the Dipnomorpha , the sister group to the Tetrapodomorpha .
*
Together , these form the Rhipidistia , the sister group to the Coelacanths .
Recent molecular genetic analyses strongly support a sister relationship of lungfishes and tetrapods ( Rhipidistia ) , with Coelacanths branching slightly earlier .
The relationships among lungfishes are significantly more difficult to resolve .
While Devonian lungfish had enough bone in the skull to determine relationships , post - Devonian lungfish are represented entirely by skull roofs and teeth , as the rest of the skull is cartilaginous .
Additionally , many of the taxa already identified may not be monophyletic .
Current phylogenetic studies support the following relationships of major lungfish taxa :
Class Osteichthyes , subclass Sarcopterygii , order Dipnoi .
TIMELINE OF GENERA SEE ALSO
* Ceratodus * Lepidogalaxias salamandroides *
Polypteridae REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Ahlberg , PE , Smith , MM and Johanson , Z , ( 2006 ) .
Developmental plasticity and disparity in early dipnoan ( lungfish ) dentitions .
Evolution and Development 8(4):331 - 349 .
* Palmer , Douglas , Ed .
The Simon & Schuster Encyclopedia of Dinosaurs & Prehistoric Creatures .
A Visual
Who 's Who of Prehistoric Life .
Pg .
45 .
Great Britain : Marshall Editions Developments Limited . 1999 .
* Schultze , HP , and Chorn , J. , ( 1997 ) .
The Permo - Carboniferous genus Sagenodus and the beginning of modern lungfish .
Contributions to Zoology 61(7):9 - 70 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Dr Anne Kemps - Lungfish Information site
* Dipnoiformes at Palaeos.com * Dipnoi at the University of California Museum of Paleontology
* Tree of life illustration showing lungfish 's relation to other organisms * Lungfish video