TEMPLE OF THE DOG Temple of the Dog was an American rock supergroup that formed in Seattle , Washington in 1990 .
It was conceived by vocalist Chris Cornell of Soundgarden as a tribute to his friend , the late Andrew Wood , lead singer of the bands Malfunkshun and Mother Love Bone .
The lineup included Stone Gossard on rhythm guitar , Jeff Ament on bass guitar ( both ex - members of Mother Love Bone ) , Mike McCready on lead guitar , and Matt Cameron on drums .
Eddie Vedder appeared as a guest to provide some lead and backing vocals .
The band released its only album , the self - titled Temple of the Dog , in April 1991 through A&M Records .
The recording sessions took place in November and December 1990 at London Bridge Studios , in Seattle , Washington with producer Rakesh " Rick " Parashar .
Although earning praise from music critics at the time of its release , the album was not widely recognized until 1992 , when Vedder , Ament , Gossard , and McCready had their breakthrough with Pearl Jam .
Cameron would later join Pearl Jam , serving as drummer since 1998 .
The band toured in 2016 in celebration of the 25th anniversary of their self - titled album .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Temple of the Dog was started by Soundgarden frontman Chris Cornell , who had been a roommate of Andrew Wood , the lead singer of Malfunkshun and Mother Love Bone .
Wood died on March 19 , 1990 , of a heroin overdose , the day Cornell got back from a tour .
As he went on to tour Europe a few days later , he started writing songs in tribute to his late friend .
The result was two songs , " Reach Down " and " Say Hello 2 Heaven " , which he recorded as soon as he returned home from touring .
The recorded material was slow and melodic , musically different from the aggressive rock music of Soundgarden .
Cornell approached Wood 's former bandmates , Stone Gossard and Jeff Ament — who were still figuring out how to continue without Mother Love Bone — with the intention of releasing the songs as a single .
Ament described the collaboration as " a really good thing at the time " for Gossard and him that put them into a " band situation where we could play and make music .
" The band 's lineup was completed by the addition of Soundgarden ( and later Pearl Jam )
drummer Matt Cameron and future Pearl Jam lead guitarist Mike McCready .
They named themselves Temple of the Dog , a reference to a line in the lyrics of the Mother Love Bone song " Man of Golden Words " .
The band started rehearsing " Reach Down " , " Say Hello 2 Heaven " , and other songs that Cornell had written on tour prior to Wood 's death , as well as re - working some existing material from demos written by Gossard , Ament , and Cameron .
One such demo became a song for two bands , recorded as " Footsteps " by Pearl Jam and " Times of Trouble " by Temple of the Dog .
The idea of doing covers of Wood 's solo material also came up but was abandoned quickly , as they realized it would make people ( including Wood 's close friends and relatives ) think the band was " exploiting his material . "
The release of a single was soon deemed a " stupid idea " by Cornell and dropped in favor of an EP or album .
The album was recorded in only 15 days , produced by the band themselves .
Gossard described the recording process as a " non - pressure - filled " situation , as there were no expectations or pressure coming from the record company .
Eddie Vedder , who had flown up from San Diego to Seattle to audition for Ament , Gossard , and McCready to be the singer of a band initially billing themselves as Mookie Blaylock ( so named for a basketball player but eventually settling on Pearl Jam ) , was at one of the Temple of the Dog rehearsals and ended up providing backing vocals .
"
Hunger Strike " became a duet between Cornell and Vedder .
Cornell was still figuring out the vocals at practice when Vedder stepped in and filled in the blanks singing the low parts because he saw it was hard for Cornell , as Cornell later described it : "
He sang half of that song not even knowing that I 'd wanted the part to be there
and he sang it
exactly the way I was thinking about doing it , just instinctively . "
" Hunger Strike " became Temple of the Dog 's breakout single ; it was also Vedder 's first featured vocal on a record .
On the 2011 documentary Pearl Jam Twenty , Vedder stated ; " That was the first time I heard myself on a real record .
It could be one of my favorite songs that I 've ever been on — or the most meaningful . "
Temple of the Dog was released on April 16 , 1991 , through A&M Records and initially sold 70,000 copies in the United States .
Ament recalled that A&M requested a Pearl Jam sticker be on the cover — as they had just picked their new name — because " it 'll be a good thing for us " , but they refused .
The album received favorable reviews but failed to chart .
Critic Steve Huey of AllMusic later rated the album with four - and - a - half stars out of five , stating that the " record sounds like a bridge between Mother Love Bone 's theatrical ' 70s - rock updates and Pearl Jam 's hard - rocking seriousness .
"
David Fricke of Rolling Stone also wrote in retrospect that the album " deserves immortality .
" The band members were pleased with the material , as it achieved its purpose ; Cornell believed that " Andy really would have liked " the songs , and Gossard also asserted that he thought Wood would be " blown away by the whole thing " .
Soon after the album 's release , Soundgarden and Pearl Jam embarked on recording their next albums , and the Temple of the Dog project was brought to a close .
In the summer of 1992 , the album received new attention .
Although it had been released more than a year earlier , A&M Records realized that they had in their catalog what was essentially a collaboration between Soundgarden and Pearl Jam , who had both risen to mainstream attention in the months since the album 's release with their respective albums , Badmotorfinger and Ten .
A&M decided to reissue the album and promote " Hunger Strike " as a single with an accompanying music video that had been previously filmed .
The attention allowed both the album and single to chart on Billboard and resulted in a boost in album sales .
The album was among the 100 top - selling albums of 1992 .
Temple of the Dog ended up selling more than a million copies , achieving platinum certification by the Recording Industry Association of America .
Ament , Cameron , Cornell , and McCready later reunited under the name M.A.C.C. to record a cover of Jimi Hendrix 's " Hey Baby ( Land of the New Rising Sun ) " for the 1993 tribute album .
The song has since been included as part of the band 's live set .
In a 2007 interview with Ultimate Guitar Archive , Cornell stated he would be open for a Temple of the Dog reunion , or " some collaboration with any combination of those guys " .
He also revealed that Temple of the Dog was the reason he joined Audioslave , as the experience made him " keep an open mind " about collaborations with musicians from other bands .
LIVE PERFORMANCES Section::::Live performances .
During their initial existence the only time Temple of the Dog played a full one - hour set was while rehearsing and writing the material for the album .
The band ( with the exception of Vedder ) performed in Seattle at the Off Ramp Café on November 13 , 1990 .
They also opened for Alice in Chains , following the short lived Seattle group Panic , on December 22 , 1990 , at the Moore Theatre in Seattle .
In the time since the album 's release , the band has re - formed for short live one - off performances on occasions where both Soundgarden and Pearl Jam were performing .
Temple of the Dog performed " Hunger Strike " on October 3 , 1991 at the Foundations Forum in Los Angeles , California ; a three - song set on October 6 , 1991 at the Hollywood Palladium in Hollywood for the RIP Magazine 5th anniversary party ( Temple of the Dog played after secret headlining act Spinal Tap ) ; and " Hunger Strike " on both August 14 , 1992 , at Lake Fairfax Park in Reston , Virginia and September 13 , 1992 at Irvine Meadows Amphitheater in Irvine , California ( both shows were part of the Lollapalooza festival series in 1992 ) .
The band also played " Reach Down " on the latter occasion .
At a Pearl Jam show at the Santa Barbara Bowl in Santa Barbara , California , on October 28 , 2003 , Cornell joined the band on - stage , effectively reuniting Temple of the Dog
( Cameron had been the drummer for Pearl Jam since 1998 ) for renditions of " Hunger Strike " and " Reach Down " .
Cornell also performed Audioslave 's " Like a Stone " and Chris Cornell 's " Ca n't Change Me " .
The version of " Reach Down " recorded that night later appeared on Pearl Jam 's 2003 fan club Christmas single .
Pearl Jam has also been known to perform " Hunger Strike
" live without Cornell on rare occasions .
Cornell 's post - Soundgarden band , Audioslave , added " All Night Thing , " " Call Me a Dog , " and " Hunger Strike " to its live set in 2005 .
Additionally , Cornell has added the aforementioned songs , plus " Pushin Forward Back , " " Wooden Jesus , " " Reach Down , " and " Say Hello 2 Heaven , " to his solo live set .
On October 6 , 2009 , Cornell joined Pearl Jam onstage to perform " Hunger Strike " in Los Angeles , effectively reuniting Temple of the Dog once again .
Following the brief 2009 reunion show , a fan group emerged on Facebook in April 2010 supporting a 20th anniversary benefit reunion tour to take place beginning April 16 , 2011 .
During Labor Day weekend , 2011 , Cornell joined Pearl Jam onstage at Alpine Valley in Wisconsin for PJ20 ( Pearl Jam 's twentieth anniversary celebration ) .
On September 3 , he joined them for a four - song set , which included the songs " Stardog Champion " ( a Mother Love Bone cover with Cornell on vocals ) , " Say Hello 2 Heaven " , " Reach Down " , and " Hunger Strike " .
The September 4 appearance included a four - song set with Cornell joining in on " Hunger Strike " , " Call Me a Dog " , " All Night Thing " , and " Reach Down " ( which also included Glen Hansard , Dhani Harrison of Thenewno2 , Davíd Garza , and Liam Finn ) .
On both October 25 and 26 , 2014 , Cornell joined Pearl Jam onstage to perform " Hunger Strike " at Shoreline Amphitheater in Mountain View , California during the 28th Annual Bridge School Benefit .
The October 26 concert marked the last time that Vedder and Cornell performed the song together .
On January 30 , 2015 , Pearl Jam bandmates ( minus Vedder ) Stone Gossard , Jeff Ament , and Matt Cameron joined Chris Cornell and Mike McCready during the Mad Season Sonic Evolution Concert at Benaroya Hall with the Seattle Symphony .
The group performed two songs , " Reach Down " , and " Call Me A Dog " .
The band finally officially toured in the fall of 2016 in celebration of the 25th anniversary of their self - titled album .
Vedder did not participate on the tour , citing " family commitments " , but the crowd sang his part in " Hunger Strike " , and Cornell dedicated the song to Vedder during the band 's concert at the Paramount Theatre in Seattle on November 21 , 2016 .
DISCOGRAPHY STUDIO ALBUMS
Certifications !
width:40 !
width:40
* Released : April 16 , 1991
* Label : A&M * Format : CD , cassette ( CS ) ,
LP SINGLES
US MainUS ModCANNZUK
" Hunger Strike " " Say Hello 2
Heaven " " Pushin Forward Back " MUSIC VIDEOS * 1991
– " Hunger Strike " MEMBERS
* Chris Cornell – lead vocals , banjo , guitar , harmonica
* Mike McCready – lead guitar , backing vocals
* Stone Gossard – rhythm guitar , backing vocals
* Jeff Ament – bass , backing vocals
* Matt Cameron – drums , backing vocals Guest * Eddie Vedder – backing vocals , co - lead vocals ,
guitar SEE ALSO
* List of alternative rock artists NOTES AND REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS