LEAD(II )
NITRATE Lead(II ) nitrate is an inorganic compound with the chemical formula Pb(NO ) .
It commonly occurs as a colourless crystal or white powder and , unlike most other lead(II )
salts , is soluble in water .
Known since the Middle Ages by the name plumb dulcis , the production of lead(II )
nitrate from either metallic lead or lead oxide in nitric acid was small - scale , for direct use in making other lead compounds .
In the 19th century lead(II )
nitrate began to be produced commercially in Europe and the United States .
Historically , the main use was as a raw material in the production of pigments for lead paints , but such paints have been superseded by less toxic paints based on titanium dioxide .
Other industrial uses included heat stabilization in nylon and polyesters , and in coatings of photothermographic paper .
Since around the year 2000 , lead(II ) nitrate has begun to be used in gold cyanidation .
Lead(II )
nitrate is toxic , an oxidizing agent , and is categorised as probably carcinogenic to humans by the International Agency for Research on Cancer .
Consequently , it must be handled and stored with the appropriate safety precautions to prevent inhalation , ingestion and skin contact .
Due to its hazardous nature , the limited applications of lead(II )
nitrate are under constant scrutiny .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Since the Middle Ages , lead(II )
nitrate has been produced as a raw material for the production of coloured pigments in lead paints , such as chrome yellow
( lead(II ) chromate ) , chrome orange ( lead(II ) hydroxide chromate ) and similar lead compounds .
These pigments were used for dyeing and printing calico and other textiles .
In 1597 , the German alchemist Andreas Libavius first described the compound , coining the medieval names of plumb dulcis and calx plumb dulcis , meaning " sweet lead " , because of its taste .
Although originally not understood during the following centuries , the decrepitation property of lead(II )
nitrate led to its use in matches and special explosives such as lead azide .
The production process was and still is chemically straightforward , effectively dissolving lead in nitric acid and subsequently harvesting the precipitate .
However , the production remained small - scale for many centuries , and the commercial production of lead(II ) nitrate as raw material for the manufacture of other lead compounds was not reported until 1835 .
In 1974 , the U.S. consumption of lead compounds , excluding pigments and gasoline additives , was 642 tons .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The crystal structure of solid lead(II )
nitrate has been determined by neutron diffraction .
The compound crystallizes in the cubic system with the lead atoms in a face - centred cubic system .
Its space group is Pa3
( Bravais lattice notation ) , with each side of the cube with length 784 picometres .
The black dots represent the lead atoms , the white dots the nitrate groups 27 picometres above the plane of the lead atoms , and the blue dots the nitrate groups the same distance below this plane .
In this configuration , every lead atom is bonded to twelve oxygen atoms ( bond length : 281 pm ) .
All N –
O bond lengths are identical , at 127 picometres .
Research interest in the crystal structure of lead(II )
nitrate was partly based on the possibility of free internal rotation of the nitrate groups within the crystal lattice at elevated temperatures , but this did not materialise .
PREPARATION AND PRODUCTION Section::::Preparation and production .
Lead(II )
nitrate can be obtained by dissolving metallic lead in aqueous nitric acid : More commonly , it is obtained by dissolving lead(II ) oxide in nitric acid :
In either case , since the solvent is concentrated nitric acid ( in which lead(II )
nitrate has very low solubility ) and the resulting solution contains nitrate ions , anhydrous crystals of lead(II )
nitrate spontaneously form as a result of the common ion effect :
Most commercially available lead(II ) nitrate , as well as laboratory - scale material , is produced accordingly .
Supply is in 25 kilogram bags up to 1000 kilogram big bags , and in laboratory containers , both by general producers of laboratory chemicals and by producers of lead and lead compounds .
No large - scale production has been reported .
In nitric acid treatment of lead - containing wastes , e.g. , in the processing of lead – bismuth wastes from lead refineries , impure solutions of lead(II )
nitrate are formed as by - product .
These solutions are reported to be used in the gold cyanidation process .
REACTIONS Section::::Reactions .
Apart from lead(II )
acetate , lead(II )
nitrate is the only common soluble lead compound .
Lead(II )
nitrate readily dissolves in water to give a clear , colourless solution .
As an ionic substance , the dissolution of lead(II )
nitrate involves dissociation into its constituent ions .
When concentrated sodium hydroxide solution is added to lead(II )
nitrate solution , basic nitrates are formed , even well past the equivalence point .
Up through the half equivalence point , Pb(NO)·Pb(OH ) predominates , then after this point Pb(NO)·5Pb(OH ) is formed .
No simple Pb(OH ) is formed up to at least pH 12 .
COMPLEXATION Section::::Complexation .
Lead(II )
nitrate is associated with interesting supramolecular chemistry because of its coordination to nitrogen and oxygen electron - donating compounds .
The interest is largely academic , but with several potential applications .
For example , combining lead nitrate and pentaethylene glycol ( EO ) in a solution of acetonitrile and methanol followed by slow evaporation produces a new crystalline material [ Pb(NO)(EO ) ] .
In the crystal structure for this compound , the EO chain is wrapped around the lead ion in an equatorial plane similar to that of a crown ether .
The two bidentate nitrate ligands are in trans configuration .
The total coordination number is 10 , with the lead ion in a bicapped square antiprism molecular geometry .
The complex formed by lead(II )
nitrate , lead(II ) perchlorate and a bithiazole bidentate N - donor ligand is binuclear , with a nitrate group bridging the lead atoms with coordination number of 5 and 6 .
One interesting aspect of this type of complexes is the presence of a physical gap in the coordination sphere ; i.e. , the ligands are not placed symmetrically around the metal ion .
This is potentially due to a lead lone pair of electrons , also found in lead complexes with an imidazole ligand .
This type of chemistry is not unique to the nitrate salt ; other lead(II ) compounds such as lead(II )
bromide also form complexes , but the nitrate is frequently used because of its solubility properties and its bidentate nature .
OXIDATION AND DECOMPOSITION Section::::Oxidation and decomposition .
Lead(II )
nitrate is an oxidizing agent .
Depending on the reaction , this may be due to the Pb(aq ) ion , which has a standard reduction potential ( E ) of −0.125 V , or the nitrate ion , which under acidic conditions has an E of +0.956 V.
The nitrate would function at high temperatures or in an acidic condition , while the lead(II ) works best in a neutral aqueous solution .
When heated , lead(II )
nitrate crystals decompose to lead(II ) oxide , oxygen and nitrogen dioxide .
Because of this property , lead nitrate is sometimes used in pyrotechnics such as fireworks .
SOLUBILITY Section::::Solubility .
Lead(II )
nitrate is soluble in water but is almost insoluble in nitric acid . !
Temperature!!colspan="2"Composition of saturated solution ,
Wt.% Density ! °
CPb(NO)HNOg / L !
rowspan="7"26 !
colspan="4 " !
rowspan="6"40 42.1601516 !
colspan="4 " !
rowspan="5"59.5
33.774.041443 0.0370.541360 !
colspan="4 " !
rowspan="7"80 52.4501692 APPLICATIONS Section::::Applications .
Because of the hazardous nature of lead(II )
nitrate , there is a preference for using alternatives in industrial applications .
In the formerly major application of lead paints , it has largely been replaced by titanium dioxide .
Other historical applications of lead(II )
nitrate , such as in matches and fireworks , have declined or ceased as well .
Current applications of lead(II )
nitrate include use as a heat stabiliser in nylon and polyesters , as a coating for photothermographic paper , and in rodenticides .
On a laboratory scale , lead(II )
nitrate provides one of two convenient and reliable sources of dinitrogen tetroxide .
By carefully drying lead(II )
nitrate and then heating it in a steel vessel
, nitrogen dioxide is produced , which dimerizes into the desired compound .
To improve the leaching process in the gold cyanidation , lead(II )
nitrate solution is added .
Although a bulk process , only limited amounts ( 10 to 100 milligrams lead(II )
nitrate per kilogram gold ) are required .
Both the cyanidation itself , as well as the use of lead compounds in the process , are deemed controversial due to the compounds ' toxic nature .
In organic chemistry , lead(II ) nitrate has been used as an oxidant , for example as an alternative to the Sommelet reaction for oxidation of benzylic halides to aldehydes .
It has also found use in the preparation of isothiocyanates from dithiocarbamates .
Because of its toxicity it has largely fallen out of favour , but it still finds occasional use , for example as a bromide scavenger during S1 substitution .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Lead(II )
nitrate is toxic , and ingestion may lead to acute lead poisoning , as is applicable for all soluble lead compounds .
All inorganic lead compounds are classified by the International Agency for Research on Cancer ( IARC ) as probably carcinogenic to humans ( Category 2A ) .
They have been linked to renal cancer and glioma in experimental animals and to renal cancer , brain cancer and lung cancer in humans , although studies of workers exposed to lead are often complicated by concurrent exposure to arsenic .
Lead is known to substitute for zinc in a number of enzymes , including δ - aminolevulinic acid dehydratase ( porphobilinogen synthase ) in the haem biosynthetic pathway and pyrimidine-5′-nucleotidase , important for the correct metabolism of DNA and can therefore cause fetal damage .
SEE ALSO
* Pigments containing lead , such as white lead , Naples yellow , and red lead * Historical compounds , such as muriatic acid , vitriol , sugar of lead , and sal mirabilis
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Material Safety Data Sheets
* MSDS for lead nitrate , PTCL , Oxford University
*
* MSDS for lead nitrate ,
Science Stuff Inc
* MSDS for lead nitrate , Iowa State University * MSDS for lead nitrate , NIST