MONEY MARKET
As money became a commodity , the money market became a component of the financial market for assets involved in short - term borrowing , lending , buying and selling with original maturities of one year or less .
Trading in money markets is done over the counter and is wholesale .
There are several money market instruments , including treasury bills , commercial paper , bankers ' acceptances , deposits , certificates of deposit , bills of exchange , repurchase agreements , federal funds , and short - lived mortgage- and asset - backed securities .
The instruments bear differing maturities , currencies , credit risks , and structure and thus may be used to distribute exposure .
Money markets , which provide liquidity for the global financial system , and capital markets make up the financial market .
PARTICIPANTS Section::::Participants .
The money market consists of financial institutions and dealers in money or credit who wish to either borrow or lend .
Participants borrow and lend for short periods , typically up to twelve months .
Money market trades in short - term financial instruments commonly called " paper " .
This contrasts with the capital market for longer - term funding , which is supplied by bonds and equity .
The core of the money market consists of interbank lending — banks borrowing and lending to each other using commercial paper , repurchase agreements and similar instruments .
These instruments are often benchmarked to ( i.e. , priced by reference to )
the London Interbank Offered Rate ( LIBOR ) for the appropriate term and currency .
Finance companies typically fund themselves by issuing large amounts of asset - backed commercial paper ( ABCP ) , which is secured by the pledge of eligible assets into an ABCP conduit .
Examples of eligible assets include auto loans , credit card receivables , residential / commercial mortgage loans , mortgage - backed securities and similar financial assets .
Some large corporations with strong credit rating issue commercial paper on their own credit .
Other large corporations arrange for banks to issue commercial paper on their behalf .
In the United States , federal , state and local governments all issue paper to meet funding needs .
States and local governments issue municipal paper , while the U.S. Treasury issues Treasury bills to fund the U.S. public debt :
* Trading companies often purchase bankers ' acceptances to tender for payment to overseas suppliers .
* Retail and institutional money market funds
* Banks * Central banks * Cash management programs * Merchant banks FUNCTIONS OF THE MONEY MARKET Section::::Functions of the money market .
Money markets serve five functions — to finance trade , finance industry , invest profitably , enhance commercial banks ' self - sufficiency , and lubricate central bank policies .
FINANCING TRADE Section::::Financing trade .
The money market plays crucial role in financing domestic and international trade .
Commercial finance is made available to the traders through bills of exchange , which are discounted by the bill market .
The acceptance houses and discount markets help in financing foreign trade .
FINANCING INDUSTRY Section::::Financing industry .
The money market contributes to the growth of industries in two ways :
*
They help industries secure short - term loans to meet their working capital requirements through the system of finance bills , commercial papers , etc .
* Industries generally need long - term loans , which are provided in the capital market .
However , the capital market depends upon the nature of and the conditions in the money market .
The short - term interest rates of the money market influence the long - term interest rates of the capital market .
Thus , money market indirectly helps the industries through its link with and influence on long - term capital market .
PROFITABLE INVESTMENT
Section::::Profitable investment .
The Money Market enables the commercial banks to use their excess reserves in profitable investment .
The main objective of the commercial banks is to earn income from its reserves as well as maintain liquidity to meet the uncertain cash demand of the depositors .
In the money market , the excess reserves of the commercial banks are invested in near - money assets ( e.g. , short - term bills of exchange ) , which are easily converted into cash .
Thus , commercial banks earn profits without sacrificing liquidity .
SELF - SUFFICIENCY OF COMMERCIAL BANK Section::::Self - sufficiency of commercial bank .
Developed money markets help the commercial banks to become self - sufficient .
In the situation of emergency , when the commercial banks have scarcity of funds , they need not approach the central bank and borrow at a higher interest rate .
On the other hand , they can meet their requirements by recalling their old short - run loans from the money market .
HELP TO CENTRAL BANK Section::::Help to central bank .
Though the central bank can function and influence the banking system in the absence of a money market , the existence of a developed money market smooths the functioning and increases the efficiency of the central bank .
Money markets help central banks in two ways : * Short - run interest rates serve as an indicator of the monetary and banking conditions in the country and , in this way , guide the central bank to adopt an appropriate banking policy , * Sensitive and integrated money markets help the central bank secure quick and widespread influence on the sub - markets , thus facilitating effective policy implementation
MONEY MARKET INSTRUMENTS * Certificate of deposit – Time deposit , commonly offered to consumers by banks , thrift institutions , and credit unions .
* Repurchase agreements – Short - term loans — normally for less than one week and frequently for one day — arranged by selling securities to an investor with an agreement to repurchase them at a fixed price on a fixed date .
* Commercial paper – Short term instruments promissory notes issued by company at discount to face value and redeemed at face value
* Eurodollar deposit – Deposits made in U.S. dollars at a bank or bank branch located outside the United States .
* Federal agency short - term securities –
In the U.S. , short - term securities issued by government sponsored enterprises such as the Farm Credit System , the Federal Home Loan Banks and the Federal National Mortgage Association .
Money markets is heavily used function .
* Federal funds –
In the U.S. , interest - bearing deposits held by banks and other depository institutions at the Federal Reserve ; these are immediately available funds that institutions borrow or lend , usually on an overnight basis .
They are lent for the federal funds rate .
* Municipal notes – In the U.S. , short - term notes issued by municipalities in anticipation of tax receipts or other revenues
* Treasury bills – Short - term debt obligations of a national government that are issued to mature in three to twelve months
* Money funds –
Pooled short - maturity , high - quality investments that buy money market securities on behalf of retail or institutional investors
* Foreign exchange swaps –
Exchanging a set of currencies in spot date and the reversal of the exchange of currencies at a predetermined time in the future
* Short - lived mortgage- and asset - backed securities DISCOUNT AND ACCRUAL INSTRUMENTS Section::::Money market instruments .
Section::::Discount and accrual instruments .
There are two types of instruments in the fixed income market that pay interest at maturity , instead of as coupons — discount instruments and accrual instruments .
Discount instruments , like repurchase agreements , are issued at a discount of face value , and their maturity value is the face value .
Accrual instruments are issued at face value and mature at face value plus interest .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Money Market Funds Enter a World of Risk " , New York Times , September 18 , 2008
* Study on the identification of euro money market transactions in TARGET2