CHELSEA FLOWER SHOW
The RHS Chelsea Flower Show , formally known as the Great Spring Show , is a garden show held for five days in May by the Royal Horticultural Society ( RHS ) in the grounds of the Royal Hospital Chelsea in Chelsea , London .
Held at Chelsea since 1912 , it is the most famous flower and landscape gardens show in the United Kingdom , and perhaps in the world .
The show is attended by members of the British Royal Family and attracts visitors from all continents .
Highlights to the Chelsea Flower Show include the avant - garde show gardens designed by leading names with Floral Marquee at the centrepiece .
The Show also features smaller gardens such as the Artisan and Urban Gardens .
HISTORY
THE GREAT SPRING SHOW Section::::History . Section::::The Great Spring Show .
The first Royal Horticultural Society
Great Spring Show was held in 1862 , at the RHS garden in Kensington .
Before this date the RHS had held flower shows from 1833 in their garden in Chiswick , which themselves had been preceded by fetes .
The Kensington Garden was chosen as a site because the flower shows in Chiswick were experiencing falling visitor numbers due to problems such as poor transport links .
The Great Spring Show was held at Kensington for twenty - six years but in 1888 the RHS decided to move the show to the heart of London .
The site chosen was the Temple Gardens , situated between the Embankment and Fleet Street , which had a recorded history dating back to 1307 and which were said to date from the time of the Knights Templar .
The roses for which these Temple Gardens were famous were alluded to in Shakespeare 's Henry VI Part 1 .
Using two marquees requisitioned from the old Kensington shows the 1888 show was a success with exhibits from both amateurs and commercial firms .
By 1897 five marquees were being used with many of the best known plant and seed merchants being attracted to the event including Suttons and Sons .
ROYAL INTERNATIONAL HORTICULTURAL EXHIBITION
Section::::Royal International Horticultural Exhibition .
In 1912 , the Temple Show was cancelled to make way for the Royal International Horticultural Exhibition .
Sir Harry Veitch , the great nurseryman , secured the grounds of the Royal Hospital , Chelsea , for this one - off event .
It proved such a good site for an exhibition that the Great Spring Show was moved there in 1913 , where it has taken place almost every year since .
ROYAL HOSPITAL , CHELSEA - EARLY 20TH CENTURY Section::::Royal Hospital , Chelsea - early 20th century .
The RHS first became involved with the Chelsea Hospital in 1905 .
Three years before , it had leased the grounds of Holland House in Kensington to hold what was first advertised as a Coronation Rose Show , but which turned into a more general show ( with not many roses ) by the time it actually opened in June .
Two further two - day summer shows took place at Holland House in 1903 and 1904 , but then , to the general satisfaction of exhibitors and press , a three - day Summer Show was staged in the Hospital grounds , a more spacious site than Holland House had allowed , with room for five tents .
The Summer Shows reverted to Holland House for the years thereafter , except in 1911 , when both it and Chelsea proved unavailable , and the Show was held at the Olympia exhibition hall .
The Royal International Horticultural Exhibition of 1912 demonstrated , at a time when the complaints from the Temple were increasing annually , what an excellent site for a show the grounds of the Chelsea Hospital provided .
Accordingly , for 1913 , the Great Spring Show was moved there .
The first Chelsea Flower Show opened on May 20 .
The Summer Show reverted to Holland House .
Despite the First World War , the show was held 1914–1916 , but was cancelled in 1917 and 1918 .
By the roaring 1920s , the Chelsea Flower Show was back in full swing , the famous Chelsea tea parties were established and Royal visits resumed .
In 1926 the show was held a week late due to the General Strike .
In 1937 , King George VI and Queen Elizabeth celebrated their Coronation Year , and to mark the occasion , a superb Empire Exhibition was staged .
It featured wattles from Australia , pines from Canada , brilliant gladioli from East Africa and even a big prickly pear from Palestine .
The show was cancelled during the Second World War , as the land was required by the War Office for an anti - aircraft site .
Some doubt arose as to whether the show would resume in 1947 .
The majority of exhibitors wanted a postponement , as stocks of plants were low , staff much depleted and fuel for greenhouses was obtainable only with special permits , but Lord Aberconway ( then RHS President ) and the RHS Council felt strongly that the show should resume as soon as possible .
As it turned out , the show went ahead in 1947 and it was a great success .
ROYAL HOSPITAL , CHELSEA - LATER 20TH CENTURY Section::::Royal Hospital , Chelsea - later 20th century .
The coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in 1953 was a sufficient cause for a flower show that reflected the celebratory mood of the country .
Most members of the royal family attended that year .
Due to other commitments , the only member of the family unable to attend was the Queen herself .
And the Show went on to increase in popularity throughout the second half of the century – until its popularity became its major problem .
Crowding within the tents had been a recurring refrain during the interwar years , but always mastered by increasing the tentage ; photographs show heavy crowds in the open , especially in the vicinity of the rock gardens .
As the 1970s progressed , the attendance at the Chelsea Show climbed , by as much as 6,000 visitors in a single year ( 1978 ) .
In 1979 , crowding became so severe in the mornings that the turnstiles were temporarily closed , and it was clear that some emergency action was needed .
It was decided to open the Show at 8 am next year , and close it at 8.30 in the evenings , with a reduced price for entry after 4 pm , to try to draw people away from the morning time - slot ; and a one - way system was laid out in the marquee ( an expedient that had been rejected as impracticable 20 years earlier ) .
The arrangements worked better than expected in 1980 , when a bare majority of Council voted for the imposition of a ceiling on the number of tickets sold .
But numbers continued to increase , and in 1987 the turnstiles were closed again .
In 1988 a limit of 40,000 visitors per day was imposed – a reduction of 90,000 in total from the previous year – and members were charged for tickets for the first time .
An immediate response was a fall in attendance ; by April , ticket booking was so slow that national advertisements were taken out to encourage people to come to Chelsea , and the original announcement that tickets would not be available at the gates was rescinded .
1988 was also the first year that ticket touts made their presence felt , and the RHS felt the frustration of seeing its tickets sold at a considerable mark - up without being able to do anything .
An alarmed Council now began to look seriously at the idea of moving the show to a larger venue .
Battersea Park , Osterley Park , and Wisley were suggested ; one proposal was that Chelsea should be limited to plant sales , and the sundries rerouted elsewhere ; the firm of Land Use Consultants was hired to prepare a feasibility study , and after examining all these options , concluded that the Show should stay at Chelsea .
The real rescue came from the expansion of the shows programme into other venues , and in particular from the takeover of the Hampton Court Palace Flower Show in 1993 : the increased options for both members and for exhibitors meant that the intense criticisms and conflict of the 1980s over the future of the Show did not return .
THE CHELSEA FLOWER SHOW
TODAY Section::::The Chelsea Flower Show today .
The Chelsea Flower Show receives a lot of publicity .
It is attended by 157,000 visitors each year ( a number limited by the capacity of the ground ) , and all tickets must be purchased in advance .
From 2005 the show was increased from four days to five , with the first two days only open to RHS members .
The show is extensively covered on television by the BBC .
An official DVD of the show is produced on behalf of the RHS by ONE TWO FOUR .
Several members of the British Royal Family attend a preview of the show , as part of the royal patronage of the RHS .
The area of land devoted to show gardens increased steadily between 1970 and 2000 and the show has become an important venue for watching trends .
New plants are often launched at the show and the popularity of older varieties revived under the focus of the horticultural world .
It is the garden design equivalent of a catwalk at a fashion show .
Highlights from the 2011 RHS Chelsea Flower Show included The Irish Sky Garden by Diarmuid Gavin based on the idea of a restaurant in the sky .
Other show - stopping gardens included the HESCO Garden by Leeds City Council , who reconstructed an impressive and idyllic working water wheel in the grounds of the Royal Hospital .
The 2011 show also saw the introduction of the new Artisan garden category which featured beautiful artistic and natural gardens .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
There are four grades of award presented – gold , silver - gilt , silver and bronze – in each of the categories listed below .
Bronze grade exhibits do not actually receive a medal .
AWARDS CATEGORIES
* Flora Gardens and floral exhibits
* Hogg Exhibits of trees * Knightian Exhibits of vegetables , including herbs * Lindley Exhibits of special educational or scientific interest
* Grenfell Exhibits of pictures , photographs , floral arrangements and floristry SPECIAL AWARDS * Best Show Garden Award * Best Courtyard Garden Award *
Best Chic Garden Award * Best City Garden Award * RHS Sundries Bowl *
RHS Junior Display Trophy
* RHS Floral Arrangement Trophies
*
RHS Floristry Trophies
* Show Certificates of Merit * Certificates for Junior Displays * RHS President 's Award
* RHS Best Tradestand Award * RHS Director General 's Award for the Best Tradestand SIGNIFICANT GARDENS AND EXHIBITS
* 1929 Mrs Sherman Hoyt 's exhibit of American cacti , complete with painted backdrops depicting the Mojave desert , which was acquired for Kew and had its own glasshouse there for over half a century , before being absorbed into the Princess of Wales Conservatory * 1930s J. Macdonald 's grass gardens – the lone voice declaring the merits of ornamental grasses for his generation
* 1936 Hilliers ' ' Dingley Dell ' exhibit * 1937
Coronation Year :
the Empire Exhibition , with displays of ornamental and economic plants from around the Empire * 1953
Another Coronation Year : William Wood of Taplow staged a ' Cutty Sark ' garden * 1959 The Times ' Garden of Tomorrow ' , complete with radio - controlled lawn mower * 1960
The great orchid display to accompany the Third World Orchid Conference * 1964
Popular Gardening 's ' Garden of Today ' * 1967
The first garden for the disabled at Chelsea * 1968 Wisley 's exhibit of hostas , which gave a great boost to their popularity
* 1980 Display of penjing from China
* 1982 Brenda Hyatt 's display of auriculas , which launched these plants back into popularity * 1988
John Chambers 's honeybee garden * 1993
Julie Toll 's seaside garden controversially won the last Wilkinson Sword award for best garden , described by David Stevens as " a sand dune garden that was well planted and beautiful , but visitors said it was n't a garden . "
* 1994 Isabel and Julian Bannerman 's Daily Telegraph Old Abbey garden , with a virtuoso display of mature tree transplanting * 1996 Dan Pearson 's London roof garden for the 1990s
* 1997 Christopher Bradley - Hole 's Latin Garden , the first garden at Chelsea to exhibit the new fashion for sparse planting * 2000
The Garden History Society 's Le Nôtre Garden , and Piet Oudolf 's winning ' Evolution ' garden * 2002
Mary Reynolds became the youngest garden designer to ever win the gold medal at the Chelsea Flower Show * 2004 Tourism New Zealand presented the first authentic thermal New Zealand garden entitled " Ora Garden of Well - being " winning a Gold Medal .
* 2009 James May 's Paradise in Plasticine , a garden made entirely of Plasticine .
Its concept and creation was documented for James May 's Toy Stories .
* 2010 Kebony Naturally Norway Garden designed by Darren Saines .
It was the first time Norway was represented in Chelsea Flower Show with a big show garden .
Row after row of exotic orchids from Taiwan , presented by the Taiwan Orchid Growers Association ( TOGA ) .
This was the first time that Taiwan was invited to the Chelsea Flower Show .
* 2011 Diarmuid Gavin 's Irish Sky Garden .
This was the first garden to be suspended in the air .
* 2016 A display of 300,000 individually crocheted poppies , covering nearly 2,000sq m , designed by Phillip Johnson and made by over 50,000 contributors .
SHOW DATES
* The 2009 show was held 19–23 May.
* The 2010 show was held 25–29 May.
* The 2011 show was held 24–28 May.
* The 2012 show was held 22–26 May.
* The 2013 show was held 21–25 May.
* The 2014 show was held 20–24 May.
* The 2015 show was held 19 - 23 May.
* The 2016 show was held 24 - 28 May.
* The 2017 show was held 23 - 27 May.
* The 2018 show was held 21 - 25 May.
* The 2019 show will be held 20 - 24 May.
* The 2020 show will be held
18 - 22 May. SHOW GARDENS PICTURE GALLERY
SEE
ALSO
* Royal Horticultural Society * Tatton Park Flower Show * Hampton Court Palace Flower Show
* Garden festival * Cultural icon * List of cultural icons of England REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* RHS Chelsea Flower Show official site
* Hampton Court Palace Flower Show official site
* Royal Hospital Chelsea website
* RHS Show Tatton Park official site * RHS Show Cardiff official site * The Royal Horticultural Society official site * Coverage from the BBC
* Coverage from The Guardian
* Coverage from The Daily Telegraph