STORM ( MARVEL COMICS )
Storm is a fictional superhero appearing in American comic books published by Marvel Comics .
The character was created by writer Len Wein and artist Dave Cockrum , first appearing in Giant - Size X - Men # 1 ( May 1975 ) .
Cockrum 's original concept for a character with the power of weather control was of a male .
This changed after he realized that multiple females with cat - related abilities , his first idea for a black female hero , had been created and were in development .
Descended from a long line of African witch - priestesses , Storm is a member of a fictional subspecies of humans born with superhuman abilities known as mutants .
She is able to control the weather and atmosphere and is considered to be one of the most powerful mutants on the planet .
Born Ororo Munroe to a tribal princess of Kenya and an American photojournalist father , Storm is raised in Harlem and Cairo .
She was made an orphan after her parents were killed in the midst of an Arab – Israeli conflict .
An incident at this time also traumatized Munroe , leaving her with claustrophobia that she would struggle with for life .
Storm is a member of the X - Men , a group of mutant heroes fighting for peace and equal rights between mutants and humans .
Under the tutelage of a master thief an adolescent Munroe became a skilled pickpocket , the means of which she meets through coincidence the powerful mutant Professor X. Professor X later convinces Munroe to join the X - Men and use her abilities for a greater cause and purpose .
Possessing natural leadership skills and formidable powers of her own , Storm has led the X - Men at times and has been a member of teams such as the Avengers and the Fantastic Four as well .
Created during the Bronze Age of Comic Books , Storm is the first major female character of African descent in comics .
She is regarded by some as being Marvel Comics ' most important female superhero , having drawn favorable comparison to DC Comics ' most famous female lead Wonder Woman .
When Marvel and DC Comics published a DC vs. Marvel miniseries in 1996 , Storm was pitted against Wonder Woman in a one - on - one battle and emerged victorious due to winning a popular vote amongst readers .
Storm is also part of one of the higher profile romantic relationships in all of comics .
Having married childhood sweetheart and fellow superhero Black Panther , ruler of the fictional African nation of Wakanda , Munroe was made queen consort through marriage .
The title was lost however when the two later divorced .
Storm is one of the more prominent characters in the X - Men series , having appeared in various forms of media relating to the franchise , including animation , television , video games , and a series of films .
The character was first portrayed in live - action by Halle Berry in 2000 film X - Men , and by Alexandra Shipp in the 2016 film .
In 2011 , she was ranked 42nd overall on IGN 's " Top 100 Comic Books Heroes " list .
PUBLICATION HISTORY 1975 - 1979 :
ORIGIN AND EARLY STORIES Section::::Publication history .
Section::::1975 - 1979 : Origin and early stories .
Storm first appeared in 1975 in the comic book Giant - Size X - Men # 1 , written by Len Wein and pencilled by Dave Cockrum .
In this comic , Wein uses a battle against the living island Krakoa to replace the first - generation X - Men of the 1960s with new X - Men .
Storm was an amalgam of two characters Cockrum created : The Black Cat and Typhoon .
The Black Cat had Storm 's costume , minus the cape , and was submitted for the new X - Men 's original lineup .
However , during a hiatus in the new X - Men project , other female cat characters like Tigra were introduced , making the Black Cat redundant .
Since the creative team did not want the X - Men to have an all - male lineup , editor Roy Thomas suggested that Cockrum make his character Typhoon , originally designed as a male , into the woman of the group .
Cockrum liked the idea , and outfitted Typhoon with The Black Cat 's costume , a cape , and a new haircut with white hair .
His collaborators feared that Storm 's white hair would make her look like a grandmother , but Cockrum , confident that he could consistently draw the character so that she would appear young , insisted on this aspect of her appearance .
Chris Claremont followed up Wein as the writer of the flagship title Uncanny X - Men in 1975 , writing many notable X - Men stories , among them and " Dark Phoenix Saga " , which served as the basis for the films X2 : X - Men United and , respectively .
In both arcs , Storm is written as a major supporting character .
Claremont stayed the main writer of X - Men for the next 16 years and consequently wrote most of the publications containing Storm .
BACKSTORY Section::::Backstory .
In Uncanny X - Men # 102 ( December 1976 ) , Claremont established Storm 's backstory .
Storm 's mother , N'Dare , was the princess of a tribe in Kenya and descended from a long line of African witch - priestesses with white hair , blue eyes , and a natural gift for sorcery .
N'Dare falls in love with and marries American photojournalist David Munroe .
They move to Harlem in uptown New York City , where Ororo is born .
They later moved to Egypt and lived there until they die during the Suez Crisis in a botched aircraft attack , leaving six - year - old Ororo as an orphan .
Her violent claustrophobia is established as a result of being buried under tons of rubble after that attack .
She becomes a skilled thief in Cairo under the benign Achmed el - Gibar and wanders into the Serengeti as a young woman .
She is worshipped as a goddess when her powers appear before being recruited by Professor X for the X - Men .
Claremont further fleshed out Storm 's backstory in Uncanny X - Men # 117 ( January 1979 ) .
He retroactively added that Professor X , who recruits her in Giant Size X - Men # 1 of 1975 , had already met her as a child in Cairo .
As Ororo grows up on the streets and becomes a proficient thief under the tutelage of master thief Achmed el - Gibar , one of her most notable victims was Charles Francis Xavier , later Professor X.
He is able to use his mental powers to temporarily prevent her escape and recognizes the potential in her .
However , when Xavier is attacked mentally by Amahl Farouk , the Shadow King , the two men are preoccupied enough with their battle to allow the girl to escape .
Both Xavier and the Shadow King recognize Storm as the young girl later .
1980S :
PUNK LOOK AND LOSS OF POWERS
Section::::1980s :
Punk look and loss of powers .
In the following issues , Claremont portrayed Storm as a serene , independent character .
Although Storm was initially written having trouble adjusting to Western culture , e.g. calling the obligation to wear clothing in public " absurd " , in Uncanny X - Men # 139 ( November 1980 ) , Claremont established her as the leader of the X - Men after Cyclops takes a leave of absence , a position she holds in various incarnations .
Claremont also established a maternal relationship between Storm and the 13-year - old X - Man Kitty Pryde .
A short story by Claremont set during Storm 's childhood in Kenya that ran in Marvel Team - Up # 100 ( December 1980 ) , establishes that when she was 12 years old , Storm saved a young Black Panther from racist thugs .
This story would later become the basis for later writers to establish a deeper relationship between both characters .
In the early 1980s , adventures of Storm written by Claremont included a space opera arc , in which the X - Men fight parasitic beings called the Brood .
Storm is infected with a Brood egg and contemplates suicide , but then experiences a last - minute save by the benign whale - like Acanti aliens .
Claremont further established Storm 's strength as a character in the following storyline , in which Storm 's fellow X - Man Angel is abducted by a rogue mutant group called the Morlocks .
The X - Men are outnumbered , and Storm is rendered sick by the Morlock called Plague .
To save Kitty 's life , Storm challenges the Morlocks ' leader Callisto , in a duel to the death for leadership of the Morlocks .
Despite being violently sick , she defeats Callisto by stabbing her with a knife .
Callisto is saved through the efforts of a Morlock healer , and Storm offers the Morlocks refuge at the Xavier Mansion , though they decline .
In The Uncanny X - Men # 173 , October 1983 , Claremont and artist Paul Smith created a new look for Storm , abandoning her old costume for black leather top and pants , and changing her former veil of white hair into a punk mohawk .
The change in appearance was inspired by the decision of colleague Walt Simonson to shave off his beard and mustache while on vacation with his wife , X - Men editor Louise Simonson .
Upon their return , Simonson 's daughter , Julie , upset at her father 's new appearance , ran from the room .
When the editors decided to change Storm 's appearance , Smith submitted a number of designs to them , explaining in a 2008 interview :
I did a number of portraits , all quite lovely and feminine .
As a joke , I included a shot of her as Mr. T. You know , the kind of shot where they HAVE to go the other way .
Weezie [ X - Men editor Louise Simonson ] 's response ? '
They 're going to hang us whichever way we go .
Let 's commit the murder . '
I argued it was a joke and a monstrously bad idea but , given my departure following 175 was set prior to beginning my run , my vote did n't count .
So I did what I could with what I had left ...
So we went with the Mohawk ...
But once you get into the whole leather and stud thing it was a bad joke that got way out of hand .
Julie Simonson 's reaction to her father 's new appearance would be mirrored in X - Man Kitty Pryde 's heartbroken rejection of Storm 's new look .
In the story , Storm 's outlook on life darkens after her struggles with the Brood .
These changes alienate her from Kitty for a time .
Storm is influenced in this by Yukio , a friend of Wolverine , and the two become fast friends .
Claremont wrote an arc in which fellow mutant Forge develops a mutant power neutralizing gun .
The intended target is another X - Man , Rogue , but Storm is hit instead , taking away her powers .
Forge takes her back to his home in Dallas , Texas to recover .
They fall in love , but when she learns that Forge built the weapon that took her powers , she is heartbroken and leaves him .
By 1986 , the question arose of whether the X - Men would be led by Storm or by Cyclops , who was now married to Madelyne Pryor and an expectant husband .
The two settled the matter in a duel in the Danger Room that saw Storm victorious .
It was later revealed during the " Inferno " storyline that Madelyne 's nascent psychic abilities had emerged during that duel , unbeknownst to her or anyone , and that she had subconsciously used those abilities to influence the duel .
During the 1988 " Fall of the Mutants " storyline , Storm is trapped in another dimension with Forge , who restores her elemental powers .
Following her rejoining the X - Men , they defeat a demonic enemy called the Adversary , in a battle in which the public believes the X - Men have died .
They survive , with the help of the celestial being known as Roma .
Using a spell Roma has cast upon them to be invisible to electronic equipment , the X - Men set up new headquarters in a small frontier village in the Australian Outback , after expelling a group of mutant - hunting cyborgs called Reavers who had been living there .
Storm is captured by the cyborg Nanny .
Although believed slain in that encounter , she resurfaced , having become amnesiac as a result of being physically regressed to childhood by Nanny .
She is hunted by the evil telepath Shadow King and framed for murder , and finally returns to thieving .
While she slowly starts to regain her memories , she meets with Gambit and they return to the X - Men together .
In the following arc , " " , she is kidnapped by the mutant - exploiting nation of Genosha and is temporarily transformed into a brainwashed slave , but in the end is restored physically and mentally to her adult prime .
1990S Section::::1990s .
In October 1991 , the X - Men franchise was re - launched , centering on the new eponymous X - Men ( vol . 2 ) comic .
Claremont wrote Storm as the leader of the X - Men 's Gold Team .
The other team , Blue , was led by her colleague Cyclops , the X - Man she once succeeded as leader .
In the sister title Uncanny X - Men , now under Scott Lobdell , Lobdell continued on the romance between Storm and Forge , which culminated in Forge 's proposal to we d in 1992 .
Storm 's slight hesitation , however , is misinterpreted by Forge , who then rescinds his offer before it can be accepted .
Lobdell waited until November 1993 before he wrote a reconciliation between the deeply pained Storm and Forge .
In 1995 , Lobdell continued an arc again pitting the X - Men against the Morlocks .
As Claremont did with Callisto in 1983 , Lobdell has Storm ending the battle by wounding her opponent in the heart .
Here , Storm rips out one heart of the two - hearted Morlock girl Marrow , which has a bomb affixed to it .
In February 1996 , Storm got her first miniseries , the eponymous Storm .
In the first arc of the series , Warren Ellis writes a story in which Storm is sucked into an alternate dimension and pitted against villain Mikhail Rasputin .
2000S Section::::2000s .
In X - Treme X - Men , conceived by a newly reinstated Chris Claremont in July 2001 , Storm was written as the leader of this team , and the central character of the book , until its end in issue # 46 ( June 2004 ) .
During this time , Storm enjoys a brief flirtation with younger fellow X - Man Slipstream and is kidnapped by the intergalactic warlord Khan .
In the series , Storm also becomes leader of the X - Treme Sanctions Executive , a special police task force of mutants policing mutants given worldwide authority .
During the 2005 " Decimation " storyline , in which 90 % of the mutants lose their powers , Storm is among the 198 mutants who retain their powers .
Also that year , the miniseries Ororo : Before the Storm by writer Mark Sumerak retold her backstory in greater detail , concentrating on her relationship with surrogate father figure Achmed el - Gibar during her childhood .
The following year , Marvel Comics announced that Ororo would marry fellow African super hero Black Panther .
Collaborating writer Eric Jerome Dickey explained that it was a move to explicitly target the female and African American audience .
Storm 's history with Black Panther , including the initial meeting of the characters , was retconned by Marvel during the lead up to their marriage .
Initially , in Marvel Team - Up # 100 ( 1980 ) , Storm is seen at age twelve rescuing Black Panther from a white racist called Andreas de Ruyter , but in Dickey 's miniseries , T'Challa saves Ororo ( who is still twelve ) from de Ruyter and his brother .
A Black Panther # 24 ( 2006 ) flashback is ambiguous when it comes to the physical aspect of their first meeting , while the miniseries depicts Ororo giving her virginity to T'Challa a few days after they meet .
Collaborating writer Axel Alonso , editor of Black Panther , has stated : " Eric 's story , for all intents and purposes ( ... ) is Ororo 's origin story .
" The relationship led to the marriage of the two most prominent black African Marvel Comics heroes in
Black Panther # 18 by writer Reginald Hudlin , July 2006 , as a tie - in to the " Civil War " storyline .
Marvel Comics editor - in - chief Joe Quesada was highly supportive of this marriage , stating it was the Marvel Comics equivalent of the marriage of " Lady Diana and Prince Charles " , and he expected both characters to emerge strengthened .
Shawn Dudley , the Emmy - Award Winning Costume Designer for TV 's Guiding Light designed Storm 's wedding dress , which was revealed in the April 17 issue of TV Guide , though the design was greatly altered for the comic event .
In 2007 , when Mister Fantastic and the Invisible Woman taking time off from the Fantastic Four to work on their marriage in the aftermath of the " Civil War " storyline , Storm and Black Panther become temporary members of the Fantastic Four .
Storm later returned to the Uncanny X - Men .
Storm joins the reformed Astonishing X - Men ( # 25 )
because , she explains , Wakanda is a supporter of Mutantes Sans Frontieres and she believes she should be on the front line , however , she is also somewhat bored of her life as queen .
The reemergence of the Shadow King later forces Storm to choose between her role as queen and her role as an X - Man .
Confronting the Panther God Bast , Storm asserts that she is not limited to being one or the other or anything else and that she is unafraid to do whatever is necessary to fulfill those responsibilities .
Regaining Bast 's favor , the two defeat the Shadow King and Storm decides that she will remain Queen of Wakanda and remain with the X - Men , refusing to choose between them .
Seeking to re - learn his limitations , T'Challa later leaves Africa and takes a new role as the guardian of Hell 's Kitchen following the events of Shadowland ; Though the two remain a couple , Storm sadly but respectfully accepts T'Challa 's request for temporary isolation so that he can find himself .
2010S Section::::2010s .
After the Storm appears as the leader of a defensive , reconnaissance based team of X - Men in the ongoing X - Men title .
In November that year , Storm joined the Avengers in Avengers Vol .
4 # 19 .
She leaves the team to fight alongside the X - Men during the " Avengers vs. X - Men " storyline , which has her facing off against T'Challa when he sides with the Avengers .
When a Phoenix - empowered Namor destroys Wakanda , Storm realizes the Phoenix Five are out of control and returns to help the Avengers .
However , she is stunned when T'Challa tells her he has annulled their marriage .
In April 2013 , Marvel debuted a new all - female series simply named X - Men .
Written by Brian Wood with art by Olivier Coipel , X - Men features a roster of Storm , Jubilee , Rogue , Kitty Pryde , Rachel Grey and Psylocke .
In late 2013 , Marvel debuted Amazing X - Men by writer Jason Aaron , which featured Storm as member of the team .
July 2014 saw the debut of a Storm solo series written by Greg Pak with art by Victor Inanez .
In the aftermath of " Secret Wars " storyline , Storm became the leader of the Extraordinary X - Men .
The aim of the team is to provide a safe haven for mutants following the release of the Terrigen Mist , which is toxic to mutants .
Storm reluctantly leads the X - Men into a war with the Inhumans .
Following the war with the Inhumans , Storm steps down as leader of the X - Men and is replaced by Kitty Pryde .
However , she continues to be a team member in X - Men : Gold .
Additionally , Storm appears as a cast member of Black Panther and The Crew , before its cancellation .
Storm 's magical hammer , known as Stormcaster , returns to her .
Later , Munroe joins the roster , led by the newly resurrected Jean Grey .
During the Hunt for Wolverine , Storm helps the X - Men search for Logan in Madripoor .
HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Historical significance .
Storm was one of the first black comic book characters , and the first black female , except for Misty Knight , who debuted in a comic dated March 1975 , to play either a major or supporting role in the big two comic book houses , Marvel Comics and DC Comics .
Within these two companies , her 1975 debut was only preceded by a few male black characters and Misty Knight .
In Marvel Comics , preceding characters were Gabe Jones ( debuted in 1963 ) , Black Panther ( 1966 ) , Bill Foster ( 1966 ) , Spider - Man supporting characters Joe Robertson ( 1967 ) , his son Randy ( 1968 ) , Hobie Brown ( the Prowler ) & The Falcon ( 1969 ) , Luke Cage ( 1972 ) , Blade ( 1973 ) , Abe Brown ( 1974 ) , and Misty Knight ( March 1975 ) .
In DC Comics , she was preceded by Teen Titans member Mal Duncan who debuted in 1970 , Green Lantern wielder John Stewart ( 1971 ) , and Mister Miracle protégé Shilo Norman ( 1973 )
; she preceded DC 's other black heroes , Legion of Super - Heroes member Tyroc ( who debuted in 1976 ) , Black Lightning ( 1977 ) , Bumblebee ( 1977 ) , Cyborg ( 1980 ) , Vixen ( 1981 ) and Amazing Man ( 1983 ) .
While not the first black character to be introduced , since her creation Storm has remained the most successful and recognizable black superhero .
Gladys L. Knight , author of Female Action Heroes : A Guide to Women in Comics , Video games , Film , and Television ( 2010 ) wrote that " two defining aspects of her persona are her racial identity and her social status as a mutant . "
The X - Men have symbolically represented marginalized minorities and the debut of the X - Men series coincided with the Civil Rights Movement , in which their plight as mutants mirrored that of African Americans .
Storm 's creation in particular " was during the heyday of blaxploitation films . "
FICTIONAL
CHARACTER
BIOGRAPHY
Section::::Fictional character biography .
Ever since her inception in 1975 , Storm 's biography has largely stayed the same .
The framework was laid first by Chris Claremont , who fleshed out her backstory in Uncanny X - Men # 102 ( 1976 ) ,
# 113 ( 1978 ) and # 117 ( 1979 ) .
Some reinterpretations were made in 2005 and 2006 , where writers Mark Sumerak and Eric Jerome Dickey , respectively , rewrote part of her early history in the miniseries Ororo : Before the Storm and Storm ( vol . 2 ) .
According to established Marvel canon , Ororo Munroe is born in New York City as the child of Kenyan tribal princess N'Dare and American photographer David Munroe .
When Ororo is six months old , she and her parents move to the Egyptian capital of Cairo .
Five years later , during the Suez Crisis , a fighter jet crashes into her parents ' house , killing them .
Buried under tons of rubble , Ororo survives but is orphaned and left with intense claustrophobia .
Her fear was once so intense that she was known to revert to a fetal position and approach a catatonic state .
In late 2000s storylines , however , writers like Ed Brubaker and Christopher Yost have indicated that Storm had largely conquered her claustrophobia , and can freely move in tight spaces , even over long periods of time .
After the death of her parents , Ororo wanders Cairo 's back - alleys for a few weeks , until she is picked up by the benign street lord Achmed el - Gibar and becomes a prolific thief ; among her victims is her future mentor Professor X who is there to meet the Shadow King .
Following an inner urge , she wanders into the Serengeti as a teenager and meets T'Challa , who would become her future husband .
Despite strong mutual feelings , the two part ways .
In the Serengeti , Ororo first displays her mutant ability to control the weather .
Sometime after this , she met the witch - priestess , Ainet , who took her in and became her surrogate mother .
Once , when their village was going through a terrible drought , Storm commanded rain for days just to help them .
By doing this , she threw off the natural order of nature , and droughts were formed over numerous villages , and hundreds of animals were killed .
Sensing the damage she had done , Ainet told Storm of her kind but ill - thought - out gesture , and of the damage she caused .
Ainet took this opportunity to explain to Ororo how her powers worked with nature , and how she could fix the problem by properly distributing rain .
For a time , she is worshiped as a rain goddess to an African tribe , practicing nudism and tribal spirituality , before being recruited by Professor X into the X - Men .
Ororo receives the code name " Storm " and is established as a strong , serene character .
In her early career with the X - Men , she suffers a major claustrophobic attack , which prompts a revelation of her origin to her teammates .
When Magneto captures the team , Storm frees the X - Men from captivity .
Storm is later captured by the White Queen , leading up to the X - Men 's clash with Dark Phoenix .
She becomes deputy leader of the X - Men , and supplants her colleague Cyclops as leader of the X - Men , a role she fills out during most of her time as a superhero .
She briefly became " Rogue Storm " , and even switched bodies with the White Queen .
She is attacked by Dracula , and defeats Callisto , becoming the new leader of the Morlocks .
Following her leadership of the Morlocks through combat with Callisto , Storm begins to develop a darker side .
Eventually , the X - Men are invited to Japan for Wolverine 's wedding to Mariko Yashida .
It is here that she meets Wolverine 's old friend Yukio , and the two become fast friends .
Storm is inspired by Yukio , who encourages Storm to embrace her emerging darker side .
This leads Storm to drastically change her outward appearance to match her inner self and thus don her iconic punk drab .
In a storyline that began in 1984 , Storm is deprived of her superhuman powers by an energy weapon fired by Henry Peter Gyrich ; unknown to her , this device was designed by the mutant inventor Forge .
The depowered Ororo subsequently meets and falls in love with Forge , but leaves him when she discovers that he is the inventor of the weapon behind her power loss .
She helps Forge battle Dire Wraiths , before leaving him to rejoin the X - Men .
She aids the New Mutants against the Shadow King Amahl Farouk .
She next journeys to Asgard with the X - Men , where she is briefly enslaved by Loki .
She is nearly killed in a confrontation with Andreas von Strucker .
She defeats Cyclops in a competition to become the X - Men 's leader .
During the " Fall of the Mutants " storyline , she is reunited with Forge , regains her superhuman powers , and dies with the X - Men in giving her life force to defeat the Adversary ; she is resurrected by Roma .
She is reverted to childhood by the mutant Nanny , meets Gambit , and is finally returned to adulthood - however , she is enslaved by the Genoshans , but regains her free will and escapes captivity .
Concerning her personal life , she is for a long time romantically involved with fellow X - Man Forge , and even considers marrying him before their relationship dissolves .
After 90 % of the mutants of the world lose their powers , Storm leaves the X - Men to go to Africa ; rekindles her relationship with T'Challa , now a superhero known as Black Panther ; marries him ; and becomes the queen of the kingdom of Wakanda and joins the new Fantastic Four alongside her husband when Reed and Sue take a vacation .
On a mission in space , the Watcher told Black Panther and Storm that their children would have a special destiny .
Upon Reed and Sue 's return to the Fantastic Four , Storm and the Black Panther leave , with Storm returning to the Uncanny X - Men to help out with events in .
After joining with the X - Men again , Storm is confronted by Cyclops over her position as an X - Man and a Queen .
Cyclops reminds her that she made him choose between family and duty before , and she needs to make the same decision .
Storm reacts by returning to Wakanda to face a despondent Black Panther , with the two seemingly falling out with each other , although it is later revealed that the Black Panther has been possessed by the Shadow King .
After incapacitating the possessed T'Challa , Storm battled Cyclops , who had been mentally enthralled by the Shadow King to kill the other X - Men .
After being forced to drive him out by striking Cyclops through the chest with a massive lightning bolt , the Shadow King then took control of Storm , only to be devoured in vengeance by Bast , the Panther God , who had agreed to hide inside of Storm 's mind in order to take revenge on the Shadow King for possessing T'Challa .
POWERS AND ABILITIES
WEATHER CONTROL Section::::Powers and abilities .
Section::::Weather control .
Storm is one of the most powerful mutants on Earth and has demonstrated a plethora of abilities , most of which are facets of her power to manipulate the weather .
Storm possesses the psionic ability to control all forms of weather over vast areas .
She has been able to control both Earthly and extraterrestrial ecosystems .
She can modify the temperature of the environment , control all forms of precipitation , humidity and moisture ( at a molecular level ) , generate lightning and other electromagnetic atmospheric phenomena , and has demonstrated excellent control over atmospheric pressure .
She can incite all forms of meteorological tempests , such as tornadoes , thunderstorms , blizzards , and hurricanes , as well as mist .
She can dissipate such weather to form clear skies as well .
Her precise control over the atmosphere allows her to create special weather effects .
She can create precipitation at higher or lower altitudes than normal , make whirlwinds travel pointing lengthwise in any direction , channel ambient electromagnetism through her body to generate electric blasts , flash freeze objects and people , coalesce atmospheric pollutants into acid rain or toxic fog , and , along with her natural ability of flight , summon wind currents strong enough to support her weight to elevate herself ( or others ) to fly at high altitudes and speeds .
Her control is so great that she can even manipulate the air in a person 's lungs .
She can also control the pressure inside the human inner ear , an ability she uses to cause intense pain .
She can also bend light using moisture in the air and her manipulation of mist and fog to appear partially transparent , and in later comics , nearly invisible .
Storm has also demonstrated the ability to control natural forces that include cosmic storms , solar wind , ocean currents , and the electromagnetic field .
She has demonstrated the ability to separate water molecules into oxygen and hydrogen via electrolysis , allowing her to breathe underwater .
While in outer space , she is able to affect and manipulate the interstellar and intergalactic media .
Storm can alter her visual perceptions so as to see the universe in terms of energy patterns , detecting the flow of kinetic , thermal and electromagnetic energy behind weather phenomena and can bend this energy to her will .
Storm has been shown to be sensitive to the dynamics of the natural world , and her psionic powers over weather are affected by her emotions .
One consequence of this connection to nature is that she often suppresses extreme feelings to prevent her emotional state from resulting in violent weather .
She has once sensed a diseased and dying tree on the X - Mansion grounds , detected objects within various atmospheric mediums — including water , and sensed the incorrect motion of a hurricane in the Northern Hemisphere and the gravitational stress on the tides by the Moon and Sun as well as the distortion of a planet 's magnetosphere .
Storm can view the Earth as weather patterns , and is able to precisely recognize her geographic position through interpretations of these patterns .
Storm 's mutant abilities are limited by her willpower and the strength of her body .
Sentinels have considered Storm an Omega - level mutant on one occasion .
MAGICAL POTENTIAL
Section::::Magical potential .
Storm 's ancestry supports the use of magic and witchcraft .
Many of her ancestors were sorceresses and priestesses .
Storm 's matrilineal powers have even been linked to the real - world Rain Queens of Balobedu , the region from which her Sorceress Supreme ancestor , Ayesha , hails .
The Mystic Arcana series deals with Storm 's ancestor Ashake , who worships the Egyptian goddess Ma'at , also known as Oshtur — the mother of Agamotto .
Oshtur appears to have strong favor for the bloodline of Ororo .
For some unknown reason , since the dawn of Atlantis , this line of African women has been given distinguishing features of white hair , blue eyes , and powerful magic potential .
Although Storm has not developed her magical potential , it has been hinted at .
The Mystic Arcana series lists the characters with magic potential according to the Marvel Tarot deck .
The Tarot asserts Storm as being " High Priestess " , the First Tarot 's choice one - third of the time .
The other draws were the Scarlet Witch and Agatha Harkness .
These three characters split the High Priestess card equally .
A timeline - divergent Storm became the sorceress who taught sorcery to Magik and some of Storm 's alternate universe selves possess considerable magical talent .
On a separate note , it has been stated that Storm 's spirit is so strong that she was able to host the consciousness of an avatar ( or " manifestation body " ) of Eternity ; in a gathering consisting of herself , Doctor Strange , Black Panther , Silver Surfer and the Fantastic Four , she and Doctor Strange were the only viable candidates .
COMBAT AND THIEVERY Section::::Combat and thievery .
Storm is an expert thief , and a skilled , cunning and gifted hand - to - hand fighter , trained by Achmed el - Gibar , Professor X , Wolverine and T'Challa , the Black Panther .
By using superior strategy , Storm has overcome physically stronger foes like Callisto and the Crimson Commando in hand - to - hand combat .
Storm is an excellent marksman with handguns , and is proficient in the use of knives .
Storm is also fluent in Russian , Arabic and Swahili .
As part of her paraphernalia , Storm carries a set of lock - picks ( with which she has an extraordinary ability at picking locks , in an early appearance she was able to pick a lock with her teeth while her physical coordination was reduced to the level of an infant ) and her ancestral ruby , which allows inter - dimensional transportation with the help of her lightning .
PHYSICAL ABILITIES AND TRAITS Section::::Physical abilities and traits .
Storm 's weather powers allow her body to compensate for climate extremes ; on one occasion as she was trying to control an unnatural storm she becomes overwhelmed as her body temperature rises too high .
In The Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe - X - Men ( 2004 ) , it is stated that her powers enable her to breathe while moving at any speed and protect her from air friction , while granting her protection from temperature extremes of heat and cold ; the All - New Official Handbook of the Marvel Universe Update # 1 ( 2007 ) states that Storm 's body changes temperature in opposition to her environment so that the colder the environment the warmer her body gets , and the warmer the environment the colder her body gets .
Her body compensates for rapid decreases or increases in atmospheric pressure .
She can see in near - complete darkness and has superb dexterity .
Storm has been described as having one of the strongest wills among the X - Men , making her highly resistant to psychic attacks especially in tandem with electrical fields she creates around herself .
Telepaths have found it difficult to track her down and probe her thoughts .
Several of these traits are independent of her mutant status and are a result of her ancestry .
Also , when utilizing her powers , Storm 's eyes turn solid white .
Storm has been stated to be a possible Omega - Level Mutant .
Her potential is as of yet unrealized , and on one occasion the Super Giant stated that Storm was an " Omega - Level Mutate " , grouping and targeting her with Omega - Level mutants such as Iceman and Rachel Grey .
Storm 's real name " Ororo " is translated in her language as " Beauty " .
OTHER VERSIONS
IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::In other media .
Storm has made numerous appearances in other media , including the X - Men animated television series , and the Wolverine and the X - Men .
She has appeared in five live - action X - Men films ; she is portrayed by actress Halle Berry in four of the films and her younger self is portrayed by Alexandra Shipp in .
She has also been in a large number of video games : a guest appearance in and a playable character in every game in the X - Men Legends// series .
COLLECTED EDITIONS
Section::::Collected editions . !
Title ! !
Material collected ! !
Publication date ! !
ISBN RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
In the 2007 Glyph Comics Awards , the Fan Award for Best Comic was won by Storm , by Eric Jerome Dickey , David Yardin & Lan Medina , and Jay Leisten & Sean Parsons .
Storm was ranked as the 89th greatest comic book character of all time by Wizard magazine .
IGN also ranked her as the 42nd greatest comic book hero of all time quoting that " fans have seen Storm as a thief , an X - Man , a fighter , and even a queen .
Through it all , she remains one of the most relatable mutant heroes " , # 8 on their list of " The Top 25 X - Men " opining that " even though Cyclops may be the default leader of the X - Men , in particular because of his allegiance to The Dream , Storm is the better choice to be in charge " , and 37th in their list of " The Top 50 Avengers " .
Storm was ranked 30th in Comics Buyer 's Guide 's " 100 Sexiest Women in Comics " list in 2011 .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* World of Black Heroes : Storm Biography * Storm profile at Marvel Database Project * UncannyXmen.net Spotlight on Storm
* Storm profile at Comicvine