THE LAST SAMURAI
The Last Samurai is a 2003 American period drama war film directed and co - produced by Edward Zwick , who also co - wrote the screenplay with John Logan and Marshall Herskovitz .
The film stars Tom Cruise , who also co - produced , with Timothy Spall , Ken Watanabe , Billy Connolly , Tony Goldwyn , Hiroyuki Sanada , Koyuki , and Shin Koyamada in supporting roles .
Tom Cruise portrays a United States Captain of the 7th Cavalry Regiment , whose personal and emotional conflicts bring him into contact with samurai warriors in the wake of the Meiji Restoration in 19th Century Japan .
The film 's plot was inspired by the 1877 Satsuma Rebellion led by Saigō Takamori , and the westernization of Japan by foreign powers , though in the film the United States is portrayed as the primary force behind the push for westernization .
To a lesser extent it is also influenced by the stories of Jules Brunet , a French army captain who fought alongside Enomoto Takeaki in the earlier Boshin War and Frederick Townsend Ward , an American mercenary who helped Westernize the Chinese army by forming the Ever Victorious Army .
The Last Samurai grossed a total of $ 456 million at the box office and was well - received upon its release , receiving praise for the acting , writing , directing , score , visuals , costumes and messages .
It was nominated for several awards , including four Academy Awards , three Golden Globe Awards , and two National Board of Review Awards .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Former US Army Captain Nathan Algren , a bitter alcoholic traumatized by the atrocities he committed during the American Indian Wars , is approached by his former commanding officer Colonel Bagley to train the newly created Imperial Japanese Army for a forward - thinking Japanese businessman Omura , who intends to use the army to suppress a Samurai - headed rebellion against Japan 's new Emperor .
Despite his hatred of Bagley for his role in the Indian Wars , an impoverished Algren takes the job for the money , and is accompanied to Japan by his old friend , Sergeant Zebulon Gant .
Upon arriving , Algren meets Simon Graham , a British translator knowledgeable about the Samurai .
Algren finds the Imperial soldiers are actually conscripted peasants that have no knowledge of firearms or battle .
Early in their training , Algren is informed that the Samurai are attacking one of Omura 's railroads ; Omura sends the army there , despite Algren 's protests that they are not ready .
The battle is a disaster ; the undisciplined conscripts are routed and Gant is killed .
Algren fights to the last before he is surrounded ; expecting to die , he is taken prisoner when Samurai leader Katsumoto decides to spare him .
Algren is taken to Katsumoto 's village to live among his family .
While he is poorly treated at first , he eventually gains the Samurai 's respect and actually becomes friends with Katsumoto .
Algren overcomes his alcoholism and guilt , and learns the Japanese language and culture .
He develops sympathy for the Samurai , who are upset that the pace of spread of modern technology has eroded the traditions of their society .
Algren and Taka , Katsumoto 's sister and the widow of a Samurai Algren killed , develop an unspoken affection for each other .
One night , a group of ninjas infiltrate the village and attempt to assassinate Katsumoto .
Algren saves Katsumoto 's life , and then helps defend the village .
Katsumoto requests a meeting with Emperor Meiji and is given safe passage to Tokyo .
He brings Algren , intending to release him .
Upon arriving in Tokyo , Algren finds the Imperial Army is now a well - trained and fully equipped fighting force .
Katsumoto , to his dismay , discovers that the young and inexperienced Emperor has essentially become a puppet of Omura .
At a government meeting , Omura orders Katsumoto 's arrest for carrying a sword in public and asks him to commit Seppuku to redeem his honor .
Algren refuses Omura 's offer to lead the new army to crush the rebels .
Omura sends assassins to kill Algren , but Algren kills them .
Algren assists the Samurai in freeing Katsumoto ; in the process , Katsumoto 's son Nobutada is mortally wounded , and he sacrifices himself to allow the others to escape .
As the Imperial Army marches to crush the rebellion , a grieving Katsumoto contemplates Seppuku , but Algren convinces him to fight until the end , and joins the Samurai in battle .
The Samurai use the Imperial Army 's overconfidence to lure them into a trap and deprive them of artillery support .
The ensuing battle inflicts massive casualties on both sides and forces the Imperial soldiers to retreat .
Knowing that Imperial reinforcements are coming and defeat is inevitable , Katsumoto orders a suicidal charge on horseback .
During the charge , the Samurai break through Bagley 's line .
Bagley is killed by Algren , but the Samurai are quickly mowed down by gatling guns .
The Imperial captain , previously trained by Algren and horrified by the sight of the dying Samurai , orders all of the guns to cease fire , disregarding Omura 's orders .
A mortally wounded Katsumoto commits Seppuku with Algren 's help as the soldiers at the scene kneel in respect .
Days later , as trade negotiations conclude , Algren , though injured , arrives and interrupts the proceedings .
He presents the Emperor with Katsumoto 's sword and asks him to remember the traditions for which Katsumoto and his fellow Samurai died .
The Emperor realizes that while Japan should modernize , it can not forget its own culture and history ; he rejects the trade offer and chooses to seize the Omura family assets for the benefit of his subjects .
While various rumours regarding Algren 's fate circulate , Graham concludes that Algren had returned to the village to reunite with Taka .
CAST
* Tom Cruise as Nathan Algren , a Civil War and Indian Wars veteran haunted by the massacre of Native American civilians at the Washita River .
Algren was born in the United Kingdom but is a naturalized American .
Following a dismissal from his job , he agrees to help the new Meiji Restoration government train its first Western - style conscript army for a hefty sum .
During the army 's first battle he is captured by the samurai Katsumoto and taken to the village of Katsumoto 's son , where he soon becomes intrigued with the way of the samurai and decides to join them in their cause .
His journal entries reveal his impressions about traditional Japanese culture , which almost immediately evolves to admiration .
* Ken Watanabe as Lord Katsumoto , a warrior - poet who was once Emperor Meiji 's most trusted teacher .
He is displeased with Mr. Omura 's bureaucratic reform policies which leads him into organizing a revolt against the Imperial Army .
Katsumoto is based on real life samurai Saigō Takamori .
* Shin Koyamada as Nobutada , Katsumoto 's son who is lord of the village that the Samurai are encamped in and befriends Algren .
Katsumoto , the leader samurai , advises Nobutada to teach Algren in the Japanese way – Japanese culture and Japanese language .
* Tony Goldwyn as Colonel Bagley , Nathan Algren 's commanding officer in the 7th Cavalry Regiment , who was to train the Imperial Army .
Algren dislikes Bagley for his role in the Washita River massacre of the Native Americans that Algren can not get over .
His facial hair is very similar to the way Custer wore his and is intended to evoke that image .
Bagley is killed by Algren in the climactic battle When Algren throws his sword into his chest .
* Masato Harada as Mr. Omura , an industrialist and pro - reform politician who dislikes the old samurai and shogun related lifestyle .
He quickly imports westernization and modernization while making money for himself through his railroads .
Coming from a merchant family that was like many repressed during the days of Samurai rule and cause for his extreme dislike for their nobility , he assumes a great deal of power during the Meiji Restoration and takes advantages of Meiji 's youth to become his chief advisor ( wielding power similar to those of the Shoguns ) .
His image is designed to evoke the image of Okubo Toshimichi , a leading reformer during the Meiji Restoration .
Masato Harada noted that he was deeply interested in joining the film after witnessing the construction of Emperor Meiji 's conference room on sound stage 19 ( where Humphrey Bogart had once acted ) at Warner Brothers studios .
* Shichinosuke Nakamura as Emperor Meiji : Credited with the implementation of the 1868 Meiji Restoration , the Emperor is eager to import Western ideas and practices to modernize and empower Japan to become a strong nation .
His appearance bears a strong resemblance to Emperor Meiji during that 1860 's rather than during the 1870s , when The Last Samurai takes place .
* Hiroyuki Sanada as Ujio , one of the most dedicated , loyal and fierce samurai under Katsumoto .
He teaches Algren the art of Samurai sword fighting , none too gently but eventually grows to respect him .
He is one of the remaining samurai to die in the final charge in the last battle .
* Timothy Spall as Simon Graham , a British interpreter for Captain Algren and his non - English speaking soldiers .
Initially portrayed as a typical practical - minded Englishman , he later comes to understand the Samurai cause .
This character is shown to have some resemblances also to the real - world Corfiote photographer Felice Beato .
* Seizo Fukumoto as Silent Samurai , an elderly man assigned to follow Algren ( who later calls the samurai " Bob " ) as he travels through the village .
Ultimately , the Samurai saves Algren 's life ( and speaking for the first and only time , " Algren - san ! " ) by taking a fatal bullet for him .
He bears a marked resemblance to Kyuzo from Seven Samurai .
* Koyuki as Taka , Katsumoto 's sister and the wife of the red - masked Samurai Hirotaro , whom Nathan Algren kills earlier .
*
Billy Connolly as Zebulon Gant , an ex - soldier who served with and is loyal to Algren , talked him into coming to Japan .
He , along with Algren , train the imperial army before confronting the samurai .
He is later killed in the opening battle by Hirotaro ( Taka 's husband ) .
* Shun Sugata as Nakao , a tall jujutsu and naginata - skilled samurai , who takes part in Katsumoto 's rescue , and is later killed in the final battle .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Filming took place in New Zealand , mostly in the Taranaki region , with Japanese cast members and an American production crew .
This location was chosen due to the fact that Egmont / Mount Taranaki resembles Mount Fuji , and also because there is a lot of forest and farmland in the Taranaki region .
American Location Manager , Charlie Harrington , saw the mountain in a travel book and encouraged the producers to send him to Taranaki to scout the locations .
This acted as a backdrop for many scenes , as opposed to the built up cities of Japan .
Several of the village scenes were shot on the Warner Bros. Studios backlot in Burbank , California .
Some scenes were shot in Kyoto and Himeji , Japan .
There were 13 filming locations altogether .
Tom Cruise did his own stunts for the film .
The film is based on an original screenplay entitled " The Last Samurai " , from a story by John Logan .
The project itself was inspired by writer and director Vincent Ward .
Ward became executive producer on the film – working in development on it for nearly four years and after approaching several directors ( Francis Ford Coppola , Peter Weir ) , until he became interested with Edward Zwick .
The film production went ahead with Zwick and was shot in Ward 's native New Zealand .
The film was based on the stories of Jules Brunet , a French army captain who fought alongside Enomoto Takeaki in the earlier Boshin War and Frederick Townsend Ward , an American mercenary who helped Westernize the Chinese army by forming the Ever Victorious Army .
The historical roles of the British Empire , the Netherlands and France in Japanese westernization are largely attributed to the United States in the film , for American audiences .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The Last Samurai : Original Motion Picture Score was released on November 25 , 2003 by Warner Sunset Records .
All music on the soundtrack was composed , arranged , and produced by Hans Zimmer , performed by the Hollywood Studio Symphony , and conducted by Blake Neely .
It peaked at number 24 on the US Top Soundtracks chart .
RECEPTION CRITICAL RESPONSE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Critical response .
The film achieved higher box office receipts in Japan than in the United States .
Critical reception in Japan was generally positive .
Tomomi Katsuta of The Mainichi Shinbun thought that the film was " a vast improvement over previous American attempts to portray Japan " , noting that director Edward Zwick " had researched Japanese history , cast well - known Japanese actors and consulted dialogue coaches to make sure he did n't confuse the casual and formal categories of Japanese speech .
" Katsuta still found fault with the film 's idealistic , " storybook " portrayal of the samurai , stating : " Our image of samurai is that they were more corrupt . "
As such , he said , the noble samurai leader Katsumoto " set ( his ) teeth on edge . "
The Japanese premiere was held at Roppongi Hills multiplex in Tokyo on November 1 , 2003 .
The entire cast was present ; they signed autographs , provided interviews and appeared on stage to speak to fans .
Many of the cast members expressed the desire for audiences to learn and respect the important values of the samurai , and to have a greater appreciation of Japanese culture and custom .
In the United States , critic Roger Ebert of Chicago Sun - Times gave the film three - and - a - half stars out of four , saying it was " beautifully designed , intelligently written , acted with conviction , it 's an uncommonly thoughtful epic . "
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 66 % of critics have given the film a positive review based on 219 reviews , with an average score of 6.4/10 .
The site 's consensus states : " With high production values and thrilling battle scenes , The Last Samurai is a satisfying epic " .
At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the film received an average score of 55 , based on reviews from 43 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
BOX OFFICE RECEPTION Section::::Box office reception .
As of January 1 , 2016 , the film had grossed $ 456.8 million against a production budget of $ 140 million .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated for four Academy Awards :
Best Supporting Actor ( Ken Watanabe ) , Best Art Direction , Best Costume Design and Best Sound ( Andy Nelson , Anna Behlmer and Jeff Wexler ) .
It was also nominated for three Golden Globe Awards : Best Supporting Actor ( Watanabe ) , Best Actor – Motion Picture Drama ( Tom Cruise ) and Best Score ( Hans Zimmer ) .
Awards won by the film include Best Director by the National Board of Review , Outstanding Supporting Visual Effects at the Visual Effects Society Awards , Outstanding Foreign Language Film at the Japan Academy Prize , four Golden Satellite Awards and Best Fire Stunt at the Taurus World Stunt Awards .
CRITICISM AND DEBATE Section::::Criticism and debate .
Motoko Rich of The New York Times observed that the film has opened up a debate , " particularly among Asian - Americans and Japanese , " about whether the film and others like it were " racist , naïve , well - intentioned , accurate – or all of the above . "
Todd McCarthy , a film critic for the Variety magazine , wrote : " Clearly enamored of the culture it examines while resolutely remaining an outsider 's romanticization of it , yarn is disappointingly content to recycle familiar attitudes about the nobility of ancient cultures , Western despoilment of them , liberal historical guilt , the unrestrainable greed of capitalists and the irreducible primacy of Hollywood movie stars . "
According to history professor Cathy Schultz , " Many samurai fought Meiji modernization not for altruistic reasons but because it challenged their status as the privileged warrior caste .
Meiji reformers proposed the radical idea that all men essentially being equal ...
The film also misses the historical reality that many Meiji policy advisors were former samurai , who had voluntarily given up their traditional privileges to follow a course they believed would strengthen Japan . "
The fictional character of Katsumoto bears a striking resemblance to the historical figure of Saigō Takamori , a hero of the Meiji Restoration and the leader of the ineffective Satsuma Rebellion , who appears in the histories and legends of modern Japan as a hero against the corruption , extravagance , and unprincipled politics of his contemporaries . "
Though he had agreed to become a member of the new government , " writes the translator and historian Ivan Morris , " it was clear from his writings and statements that he believed the ideals of the civil war were being vitiated .
He was opposed to the excessively rapid changes in Japanese society and was particularly disturbed by the shabby treatment of the warrior class . "
Suspicious of the new bureaucracy , he wanted power to remain in the hands of the samurai class and the Emperor , and it was for this purpose that he had joined the central government .
" Edicts like the interdiction against carrying swords and wearing the traditional topknot seemed like a series of gratuitous provocations ; and , though Saigō realized that Japan needed an effective standing army to resist pressure from the West , he could not countenance the social implications of the military reforms .
For this reason Saigō , although participating in the Okinoerabu government , continued to exercise a powerful appeal among disgruntled ex - samurai in Satsuma and elsewhere .
"
Saigō fought for a moral revolution , not a material one , and he described his revolt as a check on the declining morality of a new , Westernizing materialism .
In 2014 , the movie was one of several discussed by Keli Goff in The Daily Beast in an article concerning white savior narratives in film , a cinematic trope studied in sociology , for which The Last Samurai has been analyzed .
SEE ALSO * Foreign government advisors in Meiji Japan * Ōmura Masujirō * French Military Mission to Japan ( 1867 )
* Mark Rappaport ( creature effects artist )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Does The Last Samurai have the saddest movie death ?
at AMCTV.com