CASTLE OF MEY
The Castle of Mey ( also known for a time as Barrogill Castle ) is located in Caithness , on the north coast of Scotland , about west of John o ' Groats .
In fine weather there are views from the castle north to the Orkney Islands .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The lands of Mey belonged to the Bishops of Caithness .
The Castle of Mey was built between 1566 and 1572 , possibly on the site of an earlier fortification , by George Sinclair , 4th Earl of Caithness .
Originally a Z - plan tower house of three storeys , it had a projecting wing at the south - east , and a square tower at the north - west .
The castle passed to George Sinclair 's younger son William , founder of the Sinclairs of Mey , although it later became the seat of the Earls .
The castle 's name was changed to Barrogill , and the structure was extended several times , in the 17th and 18th centuries , and again in 1821 when Tudor Gothic style alterations were made , to designs by William Burn .
Barrogill passed out of the Sinclair family in 1889 , on the death of the 15th Earl , when it passed to F.G. Heathcote ( Sinclair ) .
In 1929 it was purchased by Captain FB Imbert - Terry .
The castle was used as an officers ' rest home during the Second World War , and in 1950 the estate farms were sold off .
ROYAL RESIDENCE
Section::::Royal residence .
Barrogill Castle was in a semi - derelict state when , in 1952 , the estate was purchased by Queen Elizabeth The Queen Mother , the widow of King George VI , who had died earlier in the year .
The Queen Mother set about restoring the castle for use as a holiday home , removing some of the 19th - century additions , and reinstating the Castle 's original name .
As part of the restoration , the castle was for the first time supplied with electricity and water .
The Queen Mother hung several portraits of the previous owners - the Earl of Caithness around the castle .
She regularly visited it in August and October from 1955 until her death in March 2002 ; the last visit was in October 2001 .
In July 1996 , The Queen Mother made the property , the policies , and the farm over to the Queen Elizabeth Castle of Mey Trust , which has opened the castle and garden to the public regularly since her death .
It is now open seven days a week from 1 May until 30 September each year , with a closed period of ten days at the end of July and the beginning of August , when Their Royal Highnesses The Duke and Duchess of Rothesay usually stay at Mey .
The Trust opened a new Visitor Centre in early 2007 , and the visitor numbers for that year topped 29,000 .
THE CASTLE OF MEY TRUST Section::::The Castle of Mey Trust .
The Castle of Mey Trust was established by a Deed of Trust executed on 11 June 1996 .
As of March 2014 , the list of Trustees included : Ashe Windham , CVO ( Chairman ) ; The Rt .
Hon The Earl of Caithness , PC , FRICS ;
The Rt .
Hon The Viscount Thurso ; Sir Ian Grant , CBE , DL , FRAgS.
There are also a number of Honorary Patrons associated with the trust :
Lady Elizabeth Anson ; Ken Bruce ; Susan Hampshire ; Kirsty King ; HE Mahfouz bin Mahfouz ; Alan Titchmarsh ( who is noted as being the first Honorary Patron ) .
The trust together with the Friends and Patrons help to maintain and promote the castle and all fundraising events .
IN
FICTION Section::::In fiction .
The ruins of Barrogill Castle are the scene of a black mass in the Nick Carter novel Spy Castle ( 1966 )
The castle is featured in the Netflix show The Crown ( episode 8 of the first season ) .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* McCann , N. ( 2008 ) , The Castle and Gardens of Mey , The Queen Elizabeth Castle of Mey Trust , . EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Castle and Gardens of Mey