PUMP AND DUMP
" Pump and dump " ( P&D ) is a form of securities fraud that involves artificially inflating the price of an owned stock through false and misleading positive statements , in order to sell the cheaply purchased stock at a higher price .
Once the operators of the scheme " dump " sell their overvalued shares , the price falls and investors lose their money .
This is most common with small cap cryptocurrencies and very small corporations , i.e. " microcaps " .
See Microcap stock fraud .
While fraudsters in the past relied on cold calls , the Internet now offers a cheaper and easier way of reaching large numbers of potential investors through spam email , bad data , social media , and false information .
SCENARIOS Section::::Scenarios .
Pump and dump schemes may take place on the Internet using an e - mail spam campaign , through media channels via a fake press release , or through telemarketing from " boiler room " brokerage houses ( such as that dramatized in the 2000 film Boiler Room ) .
Often the stock promoter will claim to have " inside " information about impending news .
Newsletters may purport to offer unbiased recommendations , then tout a company as a " hot " stock , for their own benefit .
Promoters may also post messages in chat rooms or stock message boards such as ADVFN , urging readers to buy the stock quickly .
If a promoter 's campaign to " pump " a stock is successful , it will entice unwitting investors to purchase shares of the target company .
The increased demand , price , and trading volume of the stock may convince more people to believe the hype , and to buy shares as well .
When the promoters behind the scheme sell ( dump ) their shares and stop promoting the stock , the price plummets , and other investors are left holding a stock that is worth significantly less than they paid for it .
Fraudsters frequently use this ploy with small , thinly traded companies — known as " penny stocks , " generally traded over - the - counter ( in the United States , this would mean markets such as the OTC Bulletin Board or the Pink Sheets ) , rather than markets such as the New York Stock Exchange ( NYSE ) or NASDAQ — because it is easier to manipulate a stock when there is little or no independent information available about the company .
The same principle applies in the United Kingdom , where target companies are typically small companies on the AIM or OFEX .
A more modern spin on this attack is known as hack , pump and dump .
In this form , a person purchases penny stocks and then uses compromised brokerage accounts to purchase large quantities of that stock .
The net result is a price increase , which is often pushed further by day traders seeing a quick advance in a stock .
The original stockholder then cashes out at a premium .
EXAMPLES STRATTON OAKMONT Section::::Examples .
Section::::Stratton Oakmont .
In the early 1990s the penny - stock brokerage Stratton Oakmont artificially inflated the price of owned stock through false and misleading positive statements , in order to sell the cheaply purchased stock at a higher price .
Firm co - founder Jordan Belfort was criminally convicted for his role in the scheme .
He later turned his story into a memoir , The Wolf of Wall Street , which was later adapted into an Academy Award - nominated film of the same name .
JONATHAN LEBED Section::::Jonathan Lebed .
During the dot - com era , when stock - market fever was at its height and many people spent significant amounts of time on stock Internet message boards , a 15-year - old named Jonathan Lebed showed how easy it was to use the Internet to run a successful pump and dump .
Lebed bought penny stocks and then promoted them on message boards , pointing at the price increase .
When other investors bought the stock , Lebed sold his for a profit , leaving the other investors holding the bag .
He came to the attention of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ( SEC ) , which filed a civil suit against him alleging security manipulation .
Lebed settled the charges by paying a fraction of his total gains .
He neither admitted nor denied wrongdoing , but promised not to manipulate securities in the future .
ENRON
Section::::Enron .
As late as April 2001 , before the company 's collapse , Enron executives participated in an elaborate scheme of pump and dump , in addition to other illegal practices that fooled even the most experienced analysts on Wall Street .
Studies of the anonymous messages posted on the Yahoo board dedicated to Enron revealed predictive messages that the company was basically a house of cards , and that investors should bail out while the stock was good .
After Enron falsely reported profits which inflated the stock price , they covered the real numbers by using questionable accounting practices .
Twenty - nine Enron executives sold overvalued stock for more than a billion dollars before the company went bankrupt .
PARK FINANCIAL GROUP Section::::Park Financial Group .
In April 2007 , the U.S. SEC brought charges against Park Financial Group as a result of an investigation into a pump and dump scheme during 2002–2003 of the Pink Sheet listed stock of Spear & Jackson Inc.
LANGBAR INTERNATIONAL Section::::Langbar International .
Started as Crown Corporation , Langbar was the biggest pump and dump fraud on the Alternative Investment Market , part of the London Stock Exchange .
The company was at one point valued greater than $ 1 billion , based on supposed bank deposits in Brazil which did not exist .
None of the chief conspirators were convicted , although their whereabouts are known .
A patsy who made a negligent false statement about the assets was convicted and banned from being a director .
The investors who lost as much as £ 100 million sued one of the fraudsters and recovered £ 30 million .
SCAM Section::::Scam .
Pump and dump stock scams are prevalent in spam , accounting for about 15 % of spam e - mail messages .
A survey of 75,000 unsolicited emails sent between January 2004 and July 2005 concluded that spammers could make an average return of 4.29 % by using this method , while recipients who act on the spam message typically lose close to 5.5 % of their investment within two days .
A study by Böhme and Holz shows a similar effect .
Stocks targeted by spam are almost always penny stocks , selling for less than $ 5 per share , not traded on major exchanges , are thinly traded , and are difficult or impossible to sell short .
Spammers acquire stock before sending the messages , and sell the day the message is sent .
COMPARISON WITH OTHER TYPES OF SCHEMES Section::::Comparison with other types of schemes .
A pump and dump scam is a type of economic bubble , with the main difference between this scheme and most other types of bubbles being that the pump and dump bubble is deliberately perpetrated by unlawful activity .
A pump and dump scheme is similar in many ways to a Ponzi scheme ( in that both types of scam use misrepresentations in an effort to enrich the promoters and/or initial investors with money from later investors ) , however , there are a number of differences between the schemes : * Ponzi - type investments are privately traded , often between individuals that are known to one another , whereas pump and dump schemes are typically marketed to the general public and traded on public stock exchanges and the victims and perpetrators are not acquainted with each other .
* Ponzi schemes typically promise very specific returns on investments and/or include falsified records implying consistent and steady returns , whereas pump and dump schemes only come with general and/or implied promises of substantial profits .
* Ponzi schemes typically come with the expectation of profit over a relatively - extended period of time and typically last for months , years or even decades before their inevitable collapse .
By comparison , pump and dump scams are designed to make profits extremely quickly and are executed over a period of weeks , days or even hours .
*
Pump and dump schemes are invariably intended to be scams from their conception , whereas Ponzi schemes are occasionally the result of investment vehicles that are originally intended to be legitimate but ultimately fail to perform as expected .
* For all of the above reasons , Ponzi schemes tend to leave a far more extensive trail of evidence .
They are typically much easier to prosecute after they are discovered , and often result in much stiffer criminal penalties .
Pump and dump differs from many other forms of spam ( such as advance fee fraud emails and lottery scam messages ) in that it does not require the recipient to contact the spammer to collect supposed " winnings , " or to transfer money from supposed bank accounts .
This makes tracking the source of pump and dump spam difficult , and has also given rise to " minimalist " spam consisting of a small untraceable image file containing a picture of a stock symbol .
SHORT AND DISTORT Section::::Short and distort .
A variant of the pump and dump scam , the " short and distort " works in the opposite manner .
Instead of first buying the stock , and then artificially raising its price before selling , in a " short and distort " the scammer first short - sells the stock , and then artificially lowers the price , using the same techniques as the pump and dump but using criticism or negative predictions regarding the stock .
The scammer then covers their short position when they buy back the stock at a lower price .
This tactic is commonly used by institutions and brokers to dupe individual traders in the Korean stock market , as only institutional traders are allowed to shortsell stocks .
REGULATION
Section::::Regulation .
One method of regulating and restricting pump and dump manipulators is to target the category of stocks most often associated with this scheme .
To that end , penny stocks have been the target of heightened enforcement efforts .
In the United States , regulators have defined a penny stock as a security that must meet a number of specific standards .
The criteria include price , market capitalization , and minimum shareholder equity .
Securities traded on a national stock exchange , regardless of price , are exempt from regulatory designation as a penny stock , since it is thought that exchange traded securities are less vulnerable to manipulation .
Therefore , Citigroup ( NYSE : C ) and other NYSE listed securities which traded below $ 1.00 during the market downturn of 2008–2009 , while properly regarded as " low priced " securities , were not technically " penny stocks " .
Although penny stock trading in the United States is now primarily controlled through rules and regulations enforced by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority ( FINRA ) , the genesis of this control is found in State securities law .
The State of Georgia was the first state to codify a comprehensive penny stock securities law .
Secretary of State Max Cleland , whose office enforced State securities laws was a principal proponent of the legislation .
Representative Chesley V. Morton , the only stockbroker in the Georgia General Assembly at the time , was principal sponsor of the bill in the House of Representatives .
Georgia 's penny stock law was subsequently challenged in court .
However , the law was eventually upheld in U.S. District Court , and the statute became the template for laws enacted in other states .
Shortly thereafter , both FINRA and the SEC enacted comprehensive revisions of their penny stock regulations .
These regulations proved effective in either closing or greatly restricting broker / dealers , such as Blinder , Robinson & Company , which specialized in the penny stocks sector .
Meyer Blinder was jailed for securities fraud in 1992 , after the collapse of his firm .
However , sanctions under these specific regulations lack an effective means to address pump and dump schemes perpetrated by unregistered groups and individuals .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Sergey Perminov , Trendocracy and Stock Market Manipulations 2008 , .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pump and dump stock Schemes in 2005
The SEC
* Pump and dump stock Schemes in 2001
The SEC *
The movie Boiler Room , a fictional account of a pump and dump company