POPCORN Popcorn ( popped corn , popcorns or pop - corn ) is a variety of corn kernel , which expands and puffs up when heated .
A popcorn kernel 's strong hull contains the seed 's hard , starchy endosperm with 14–20 % moisture , which turns to steam as the kernel is heated .
Pressure from the steam continues to build until the hull ruptures , allowing the kernel to forcefully expand from 20 to 50 times its original size — and finally , cool .
Some strains of corn ( taxonomized as Zea mays ) are cultivated specifically as popping corns .
The Zea mays variety everta , a special kind of flint corn , is the most common of these .
The six major types of corn are dent corn , flint corn , pod corn , popcorn , flour corn , and sweet corn .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Corn was first domesticated about 10,000 years ago in what is now Mexico .
Archaeologists discovered that people have known about popcorn for thousands of years .
In Mexico , for example , remnants of popcorn have been found that date to around 3600 BC .
Popping of the kernels was achieved by hand on the stove - top through the 19th century .
Kernels were sold on the East Coast of the United States under names such as Pearls or Nonpareil .
The term popped corn first appeared in John Russell Bartlett 's 1848 Dictionary of Americanisms .
Popcorn is an ingredient in Cracker Jack , and in the early years of the product , it was popped by hand .
Popcorn 's accessibility increased rapidly in the 1890s with Charles Cretors ' invention of the popcorn maker .
Cretors , a Chicago candy store owner , created a number of steam powered machines for roasting nuts , and applied the technology to the corn kernels .
By the turn of the century , Cretors had created and deployed street carts equipped with steam powered popcorn makers .
During the Great Depression , popcorn was fairly inexpensive at 5–10 cents a bag and became popular .
Thus , while other businesses failed , the popcorn business thrived and became a source of income for many struggling farmers , including the Redenbacher family , namesake of the famous popcorn brand .
During World War II , sugar rations diminished candy production , and Americans compensated by eating three times as much popcorn as they had before .
The snack was popular at theaters , much to the initial displeasure of many of the theater owners , who thought it distracted from the films .
Their minds eventually changed , however , and in 1938 a Midwestern theater owner named Glen W. Dickson installed popcorn machines in the lobbies of his theaters .
The venture was a financial success , and the trend soon spread .
In 1970 , Orville Redenbacher 's namesake brand of popcorn was launched .
In 1981 , General Mills received the first patent for a microwave popcorn bag , with popcorn consumption seeing a sharp increase by tens of thousands of pounds in the years following .
At least six localities ( all in the Midwestern United States ) claim to be the " Popcorn Capital of the World ; " : Ridgway , Illinois ; Valparaiso , Indiana ; Van Buren , Indiana ; Schaller , Iowa ; Marion , Ohio ; and North Loup , Nebraska .
According to the USDA , corn used for popcorn production is specifically planted for this purpose ; most is grown in Nebraska and Indiana , with increasing area in Texas .
As the result of an elementary school project , popcorn became the official state snack food of Illinois .
POPPING MECHANISM
Section::::Popping mechanism .
Each kernel of popcorn contains a certain amount of moisture and oil .
Unlike most other grains , the outer hull of the popcorn kernel is both strong and impervious to moisture and the starch inside consists almost entirely of a hard type .
As the oil and the water within the kernel are heated , they turn the moisture in the kernel into pressurized steam .
Under these conditions , the starch inside the kernel gelatinizes , softens , and becomes pliable .
The internal pressure of the entrapped steam continues to increase until the breaking point of the hull is reached : a pressure of approximately and a temperature of .
The hull thereupon ruptures rapidly and explodes , causing a sudden drop in pressure inside the kernel and a corresponding rapid expansion of the steam , which expands the starch and proteins of the endosperm into airy foam .
As the foam rapidly cools , the starch and protein polymers set into the familiar crispy puff .
Special varieties are grown to give improved popping yield .
Though the kernels of some wild types will pop , the cultivated strain is Zea mays everta , which is a special kind of flint corn .
COOKING METHODS
Section::::Cooking methods .
Popcorn can be cooked with butter or oil .
Although small quantities can be popped in a stove - top kettle or pot in a home kitchen , commercial sale of freshly popped popcorn employs specially designed popcorn machines , which were invented in Chicago , Illinois , by Charles Cretors in 1885 .
Cretors successfully introduced his invention at the Columbian Exposition in 1893 .
At this same world 's fair , F.W. Rueckheim introduced a molasses - flavored " Candied Popcorn , " the first caramel corn ; his brother , Louis Ruekheim , slightly altered the recipe and introduced it as Cracker Jack popcorn in 1896 .
Cretors 's invention introduced the first patented steam - driven popcorn machine that popped corn in oil .
Previously , vendors popped corn by holding a wire basket over an open flame .
At best , the result was a hot , dry , unevenly cooked snack .
Cretors 's machine popped corn in a mixture of one - third clarified butter , two - thirds lard , and salt .
This mixture can withstand the temperature needed to pop corn and it produces little smoke .
A fire under a boiler created steam that drove a small engine ; that engine drove the gears , shaft , and agitator that stirred the corn and powered a small automated clown puppet - like figure , " the Toasty Roasty Man , " an attention attracting amusement intended to drum up business .
A wire connected to the top of the cooking pan allowed the operator to disengage the drive mechanism , lift the cover , and dump popped corn into the storage bin beneath .
Exhaust from the steam engine was piped to a hollow pan below the corn storage bin and kept freshly popped corn uniformly warm for the first time .
Excess steam was also used to operate a small , shrill whistle to further attract attention .
A very different method of popcorn - making can still be seen on the streets of some Chinese cities and Korea today .
The un - popped corn kernels are poured into a large cast - iron canister — sometimes called a ' popcorn hammer'—that is then sealed with a heavy lid and slowly turned over a curbside fire in rotisserie fashion .
When a pressure gauge on the canister reaches a certain level , the canister is removed from the fire , a large canvas sack is put over the lid and the seal is released .
With a huge boom , all of the popcorn explodes at once and is poured into the sack .
This method is believed to have originally been developed during the Song dynasty as a method of puffing rice .
Individual consumers can also buy and use specialized popping appliances that typically generate no more than a gallon or about four liters of popped corn per batch .
Some of these appliances also accept a small volume of oil or melted butter to assist thermal transfer from a stationary heating element , but others are " air poppers " which rapidly circulate heated air up through the interior , keeping the un - popped kernels in motion to avoid burning and then blowing the popped kernels out through the chute .
The majority of popcorn sold for home consumption is now packaged in a microwave popcorn bag for use in a microwave oven .
EXPANSION AND YIELD Section::::Expansion and yield .
Popping results are sensitive to the rate at which the kernels are heated .
If heated too quickly , the steam in the outer layers of the kernel can reach high pressures and rupture the hull before the starch in the center of the kernel can fully gelatinize , leading to partially popped kernels with hard centers .
Heating too slowly leads to entirely unpopped kernels : the tip of the kernel , where it attached to the cob , is not entirely moisture - proof , and when heated slowly , the steam can leak out of the tip fast enough to keep the pressure from rising sufficiently to break the hull and cause the pop .
Producers and sellers of popcorn consider two major factors in evaluating the quality of popcorn : what percentage of the kernels will pop , and how much each popped kernel expands .
Expansion is an important factor to both the consumer and vendor .
For the consumer , larger pieces of popcorn tend to be more tender and are associated with higher quality .
For the grower , distributor , and vendor , expansion is closely correlated with profit :
vendors such as theaters buy popcorn by weight and sell it by volume .
For both these reasons , higher - expansion popcorn fetches a higher profit per unit weight .
Popcorn will pop when freshly harvested , but not well : its high moisture content leads to poor expansion and chewy pieces of popcorn .
Kernels with a high moisture content are also susceptible to mold when stored .
For these reasons , popcorn growers and distributors dry the kernels until they reach the moisture level at which they expand the most .
This differs by variety and conditions , but is generally in the range of 14–15 % moisture by weight .
If the kernels are over - dried , the expansion rate will suffer and the percentage of kernels that pop at all will decline .
When the popcorn has finished popping , sometimes unpopped kernels remain .
Known in the popcorn industry as " old maids , " these kernels fail to pop because they do not have enough moisture to create enough steam for an explosion .
Re - hydrating prior to popping usually results in eliminating the unpopped kernels .
Popcorn varieties are broadly categorized by the shape of the kernels , the color of the kernels , or the shape of the popped corn .
While the kernels may come in a variety of colors , the popped corn is always off - yellow or white as it is only the hull ( or pericarp ) that is colored .
" Rice " type popcorn have a long kernel pointed at both ends ; " pearl " type kernels are rounded at the top .
Commercial popcorn production has moved mostly to pearl types .
Historically , pearl popcorn were usually yellow and rice popcorn usually white .
Today both shapes are available in both colors , as well as others including black , red , mauve , purple , and variegated .
Mauve and purple popcorn usually has smaller and nutty kernels .
Commercial production is dominated by white and yellow .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
In the popcorn industry , a popped kernel of corn is known as a " flake . "
Two shapes of flakes are commercially important .
" Butterfly " ( or " snowflake " ) flakes are irregular in shape and have a number of protruding " wings " .
" Mushroom " flakes are largely ball - shaped , with few wings .
Butterfly flakes are regarded as having better mouthfeel , with greater tenderness and less noticeable hulls .
Mushroom flakes are less fragile than butterfly flakes and are therefore often used for packaged popcorn or confectionery , such as caramel corn .
The kernels from a single cob of popcorn may form both butterfly and mushroom flakes ; hybrids that produce 100 % butterfly flakes or 100 % mushroom flakes exist , the latter developed only as recently as 1998 .
Growing conditions and popping environment can also affect the butterfly - to - mushroom ratio .
When referring to multiple pieces of popcorn , it is acceptable to use the term " popcorn " .
When referring to a singular piece of popcorn , the accepted terminology is kernel .
CONSUMPTION Section::::Consumption .
Popcorn is a popular snack food at sporting events and in cinemas , where it has been served since the 1930s .
Cinemas have come under fire due to their high markup on popcorn ; Stuart Hanson , a film historian at De Montfort University in Leicester once said " One of the great jokes in the industry is that popcorn is second only to cocaine or heroin in terms of profit . "
Popcorn smell has an unusually attractive quality for human beings .
This is largely because it contains high levels of the chemicals 6-acetyl-2,3,4,5-tetrahydropyridine and 2-acetyl-1-pyrroline , very powerful aroma compounds that are used by food and other industries to make products that either smell like popcorn , bread , or other foods containing the compound in nature , or for other purposes .
Popcorn as a breakfast cereal was consumed by Americans in the 1800s and generally consisted of popcorn with milk and a sweetener .
Popcorn balls ( popped kernels stuck together with a sugary " glue " ) were hugely popular around the turn of the 20th century , but their popularity has since waned .
Popcorn balls are still served in some places as a traditional Halloween treat .
Cracker Jack is a popular , commercially produced candy that consists of peanuts mixed in with caramel - covered popcorn .
Kettle corn is a variation of normal popcorn , cooked with white sugar and salt , traditionally in a large copper kettle .
Once reserved for specialty shops and county fairs , kettle corn has recently become popular , especially in the microwave popcorn market .
The popcorn maker is a relatively new home appliance , and its popularity is increasing because it offers the opportunity to add flavors of the consumer 's own choice and to choose healthy - eating popcorn styles .
NUTRITIONAL VALUE
Section::::Nutritional value .
Air - popped popcorn is naturally high in dietary fiber and antioxidants , low in calories and fat , and free of sugar and sodium .
This can make it an attractive snack to people with dietary restrictions on the intake of calories , fat or sodium .
For the sake of flavor , however , large amounts of fat , sugar , and sodium are often added to prepared popcorn , which can quickly convert it to a very poor choice for those on restricted diets .
One particularly notorious example of this first came to public attention in the mid-1990s , when the Center for Science in the Public Interest produced a report about " Movie Popcorn " , which became the subject of a widespread publicity campaign .
The movie theaters surveyed used coconut oil to pop the corn , and then topped it with butter or margarine .
" A medium - size buttered popcorn " , the report said , " contains more fat than a breakfast of bacon and eggs , a Big Mac and fries , and a steak dinner combined .
" The practice continues today .
For example , according to DietFacts.com , a small popcorn from Regal Cinema Group ( the largest theater chain in the United States ) still contains 29 g of saturated fat .
the equivalent of a full day - and - a - half 's reference daily intake .
However , in studies conducted by the Motion Picture Association of America it was found that the average American only attends six movies a year and that movie theater popcorn and other movie theater snacks are viewed as a treat that is not intended to be part of a regular diet .
HEALTH RISKS
Section::::Health risks .
Popcorn is included on the list of foods that the American Academy of Pediatrics recommends not serving to children under four , because of the risk of choking .
Microwaveable popcorn represents a special case , since it is designed to be cooked along with its various flavoring agents .
One of these formerly common artificial - butter flavorants , diacetyl , has been implicated in causing respiratory illnesses in microwave popcorn factory workers , also known as " popcorn lung . "
Major manufacturers in the United States have stopped using this chemical , including : Orville Redenbacher 's , Act II , Pop Secret and Jolly Time .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
Popcorn , threaded onto a string , is used as a wall or Christmas tree decoration in some parts of North America , as well as on the Balkan peninsula .
Some shipping companies have experimented with using popcorn as a biodegradable replacement for expanded polystyrene packing material .
However , popcorn has numerous undesirable properties as a packing material , including attractiveness to pests , flammability , and a higher cost and greater density than expanded polystyrene .
A more processed form of expanded corn foam has been developed to overcome some of these limitations .
Currently the world 's largest popcorn ball ( by weight ) is located in Sac City , Iowa , and weighs .
Former title holders were located in Indianapolis , Indiana , and three more times previously in Sac City .
SEE ALSO
* Butter salt
* List of dried foods * List of maize dishes
* List of popcorn brands
* Popcorn maker * Popcorn seasoning
* Puffed grain * Wyandot Popcorn Museum
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Popcorn Board * Popcorn maker * Wyandot Popcorn Museum