ASSOCIATE DEGREE
An associate degree is an undergraduate academic degree awarded by colleges and universities upon completion of a course of study intended to usually last two years or more .
It is considered to be a higher level of education than a high school diploma or GED .
The first associate degrees were awarded in the UK ( where they are no longer awarded ) in 1873 before spreading to the US in 1898 .
They have since been introduced in a small number of other countries .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In 2004 , Australia added " associate degree " to the Australian Qualifications Framework .
This title was given to courses more academically focused than advanced diploma courses , and typically designed to articulate to bachelor 's degree courses .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Associate degrees in arts and science are offered as provincial qualifications in British Columbia .
They are similar to the US associate degree , consisting of a two - year course and allowing articulation onto the third year of bachelor 's degree courses .
Other provinces of Canada do not offer associate degrees as such , but do offer sub - bachelor 's higher education qualifications , e.g. the one - year certificate , two - year diploma , and three - year advanced diploma in Ontario .
In Quebec , the Diplôme d'études collégiales ( diploma of college studies ) , taught at post - secondary collèges d'enseignement général
et professionnel ( colleges of general and professional education ; cégeps ) can be a two - year pre - university qualification that is a pre - requisite for entry onto ( three year ) bachelor 's degree courses , or a three - year technical programme preparing students for employment .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
Qualifications on the short cycle of the Bologna Process / level 6 on the European Qualifications Framework sit between secondary education and bachelor 's degree level and are thus approximately equivalent to an associate degree .
Such qualifications include the Foundation degree ( FdA , FdSc , FdEng ) , Certificate of Higher Education ( CertHE ) and Diploma of Higher Education ( DipHE ) in the United Kingdom , the Higher Certificate in the Republic of Ireland , and the French Diplôme Universitaire de Technologie ( DUT ) and Brevet de Technicien Supérieur ( BTS ) . NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
In the Netherlands , there were four pilots between 2005 and 2011 to assess the added value of the associate degree .
In 2007 the associate degree was added to the Dutch system of higher education within the Higher Professional Education ( HBO ) stream taught at universities of applied sciences ( hogeschool ) .
Associate degree courses form part of HBO bachelor 's degree courses , and advising requirements are the same for the two - year associate degree and the related four - year bachelor 's degree .
Those gaining the associate degree may proceed to an HBO bachelor 's degree in only two years , but it does not articulate to bachelor 's degrees in the research oriented ( WO ) stream .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The title of Associate in Physical Science ( Associate in Science from 1879 ) was used by the University of Durham College of Physical Sciences ( now Newcastle University ) from the 1870s .
It required ( in 1884 ) passes in three of mathematics , physics , chemistry and geology , and allowed students to go on to take the examination for the Bachelor of Science .
As a university - level qualification lying below the bachelor 's degree , this is considered to be the world 's first associate degree in the modern sense , having been first awarded in 1873 , 25 years prior to the introduction of associate degrees into the US by the University of Chicago .
Durham also introduced an Associate in Theology in 1901 .
Both of these have since been discontinued , although the date of their withdrawal is unknown .
There were thirteen different types of associate degrees offered in British universities in 1927 .
The title of Associate in Arts , introduced by the University of Oxford in 1857 and sometimes referred to as the degree of Associate in Arts , predates the Durham degree .
However , it was an examination for " those who are not members of the university " and who were under the age of 18 ; as such it was at the level of a high school qualification rather than a modern associate degree .
Examinations were held in English , languages , mathematics , science , drawing and music , with the title being conferred on those who students who passed any two ( as long as the two were not drawing and music ) .
British equivalents to associate degrees vary depending on the national system which issued them .
Based on assessment by the UK NARIC , American and Canadian associate degrees are considered equivalent to one year higher education courses such as the Higher National Certificate at level 4 of the British Framework for Higher Education Qualifications .
Australian associate degrees , however , are considered equivalent to two year higher education courses such as the Higher National Diploma at level 5 on the framework .
NORWAY Section::::Norway .
A two - year education on BA - level is called Høgskolekandidat , translated " university college graduate " .
Only a few professions require 120 ECTS , e.g. piano tuner , driving instructor .
HONG KONG Section::::Hong Kong .
In Hong Kong , associate degrees were first introduced into the territory in 2000 with the aim of increasing the number of students with post - secondary qualifications .
As originally introduced , the qualification took two or three years , but this was reformed in 2012 to a two - year course .
The associate degree is designed as a general academic education qualification , compared to the more vocational Diploma / Higher / Advanced Diploma ( Qualifications Frameworks Level 4 ) , and allows articulation onto the third year of a four - year ( US - style ) bachelor 's degree or the second year of a three - year ( British - style ) bachelor 's degree .
A survey in 2016 showed that most students believe associate degrees will help them to get onto bachelor 's degree courses , but not ( by themselves ) in gaining a career ; however only 30 % of associate degree graduates gained places for further study , leading to accusations that the degree is " a waste of time and money " and calls for the government to address this by making more bachelor 's degree places available .
This has been criticized , with others saying that education had benefits beyond income , which is only a short - term measure .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , associate degrees are usually earned in two years or more and can be attained at community colleges , technical colleges , vocational schools , and some colleges , as well as at some universities .
A student who completes a two - year program can earn an Associate of Arts / Associate in Arts ( AA ) or an Associate of Science / Associate in Science ( AS ) degree .
AA degrees are usually earned in the Liberal Arts and Sciences such as humanities and social science fields ; AS degrees are awarded to those studying in applied scientific and technical fields and professional fields of study .
Generally , one year of study is focused on College level General Education and the second year is focused on the area of discipline .
Students who complete a two - year technical or vocational program can earn an Associate of Applied Science / Associate in Applied Science
This type of program is designed for persons seeking direct employment upon completion .
Transfer admissions in the United States allows courses taken and credits earned on an AA , AS , or AAS course to sometimes be counted toward a bachelor 's degree via articulation agreements or recognition of prior learning , depending on the courses taken , applicable state laws / regulations , and the transfer requirements of the university .
CALIFORNIA Section::::California .
The Student Transfer Achievement Reform Act was signed into legislation on September 29 , 2010 , which is a legislation that grants any California Community College student who has earned the Associates in Arts degree for Transfer ( AA - T ) or the Associate in Science degree for Transfer ( AS - T ) will be granted priority admission to the CSU ( California State University ) into a similar baccalaureate ( BA ) degree program with a guarantee of junior standing .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES CITATIONS BIBLIOGRAPHY FURTHER READING