SIR
Sir is an honorific address used in a number of situations in many Anglophone cultures .
The term can be used as a formal prefix , especially in the Commonwealth , for men who have been given certain honours or titles ( such as knights and baronets ) , where usage is strictly governed by law and custom .
The term is also commonly used as a respectful way to address a man , usually of superior social status or holding a commissioned military rank .
Equivalent terms of address for women are ' ma'am ' or ' madam ' in most cases , or in the case of an unmarried woman , ' miss ' .
The equivalent term for a knighted woman or baronetess is Dame , while the title ' Lady ' is used for the wife of a knight or baronet .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
' Sir ' derives from the honorific title sire , used in Spanish , Italian , French , German , and Swedish .
Sire developed alongside the word seigneur , also used to refer to a feudal lord .
Both derived from the Vulgar Latin , sire comes from the nominative case declension and seigneur , the accusative case declension .
The form ' Sir ' is first documented in English in 1297 , as title of honour of a knight , and latterly a baronet , being a variant of sire , which was already used in English since at least c.1205 as a title placed before a name and denoting knighthood , and to address the ( male ) Sovereign since c.1225 , with additional general senses of ' father , male parent ' is from c.1250 , and ' important elderly man ' from 1362 .
BRITISH AND COMMONWEALTH HONORIFICS Section::::British and Commonwealth honorifics .
The prefix is used with the holder 's given name or full name , but never with the surname alone .
For example , whilst Sir Alexander and Sir Alexander Fleming would be correct , Sir Fleming would not .
The equivalent for a female who holds a knighthood or baronetcy in her own right is ' Dame ' , and follows the same usage customs as ' Sir ' .
Although this form was previously also used for the wives of knights and baronets , it is now customary to refer to them as ' Lady ' , followed by their surname ; they are never addressed using their full names .
For example , while Lady Fiennes is correct , Lady Virginia and Lady Virginia Fiennes are not .
The widows of knights retain the style of wives of knights , however widows of baronets are either referred to as ' dowager ' , or use their forename before their courtesy style .
For example , the widow of Sir Thomas Herbert Cochrane Troubridge , 4th Baronet , would either be known as Dowager Lady Troubridge or Laura , Lady Troubridge .
COMBINATIONS WITH OTHER TITLES AND STYLES Section::::Combinations with other titles and styles .
In the case of a military officer who is also a knight , the appropriate form of address puts the professional military rank first , then the correct manner of address for the individual , then his name .
Examples include : * Admiral of the Fleet Sir Bruce Fraser , GCB , KBE ( after 1941 ) * Field Marshal Sir Thomas Blamey , GBE , KCB , CMG , DSO , ED ( after 1941 )
This is also the case with academic titles , such as professor .
For example , Patrick Bateson was both a professor and a knight bachelor ; his correct title would be Professor Sir Patrick Bateson .
The title of Doctor , however , is not used in combination with ' sir ' , with the knighthood taking precedence .
Knighted doctors are addressed as knights , though they may still use any post - nominal letters associated with their degrees .
Church of England clergy who receive knighthoods do not use the title ' Sir ' , but instead refer to their knighthood using post - nominal letters .
For example , the Reverend Dr John Polkinghorne , KBE is never referred to as Sir John Polkinghorne .
Clergy of other denominations may use different conventions .
Peers who have been knighted are not addressed as ' Sir ' in the formal sense of the style , as their titles of nobility take precedence .
If the heir apparent to a dukedom , marquessate or earldom holds a courtesy title and has been knighted , the same principle applies to him , as well as to the male heirs of a duke or a marquess , who are styled ' Lord X ' .
For instance , diplomat Lord Nicholas Gordon - Lennox , KCMG , KCVO , who was a younger son of the Duke of Richmond , continued to be styled as ' Lord Nicholas ' following his knighthood in 1986 , not ' Lord Sir Nicholas ' .
Other male heirs of an earl who lack courtesy titles , and the male heirs of a viscount or baron , do however use the style of ' Sir ' if knighted , the style following that of ' The Hon ' .
ENTITLEMENT
Section::::Entitlement .
Today , in the UK and in certain Commonwealth realms , a number of men are entitled to the prefix of ' Sir ' , including knights bachelor , knights of the orders of chivalry and baronets ; although foreign nationals can be awarded these honours , they are explicitly excluded using the prefix , instead using the associated post - nominal letters .
Dual nationals holding a Commonwealth citizenship that recognise the British monarch as head of state are entitled to use the styling .
Common usage varies from country to country : for instance , dual Bahamian - American citizen Sidney Poitier , knighted in 1974 , is often styled ' Sir Sidney Poitier ' , particularly in connection with his official ambassadorial duties , although he himself rarely employs the title .
The permissibility of using the style of ' Sir ' varies .
In general , only dynastic knighthoods in the personal gift of the Sovereign and Head of the Commonwealth – the Order of the Garter , the Order of the Thistle and the knighthoods in the Royal Victorian Order – are recognised across the Commonwealth realms , along with their accompanying styles .
Knighthoods in the gift of the government of a Commonwealth realm typically only permit the bearer to use his title within that country or as its official representative , provided he is a national of that country ; Commonwealth realms may consider knighthoods from other realms to only be foreign honours .
For instance , Anthony Bailey was reprimanded by Buckingham Palace and the British government in 2016 for asserting that an honorary Antiguan knighthood allowed him the style of ' Sir ' in the UK .
COMMONWEALTH REALMS ( DYNASTIC )
* Knight Commander or Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order ( KCVO / GCVO ) UNITED KINGDOM
* Baronet ( Bt . )
* Knight of the Order of the Garter ( KG ) * Knight of the Order of the Thistle ( KT ) * Knight Commander or Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath ( KCB / GCB ) * Knight Commander or Knight Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George ( KCMG / GCMG )
* Knight Commander or Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire ( KBE / GBE )
* Knight Bachelor ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
* Knight of the Order of the National Hero ( KNH ) * Knight Commander , Knight Grand Cross , or Knight Grand Collar of the Order of the Nation ( KCN / KGCN / KGN ) AUSTRALIA
* Knight of the Order of Australia ( AK ; for male Australian subjects only ; discontinued 1986 - 2014 , reintroduced briefly in 2014 , again discontinued in 2015 )
BARBADOS
* Knight of St. Andrew of the Order of Barbados ( KA ) GRENADA
* Knight Commander , Knight Grand Cross , or Knight Grand Collar of the Order of the Nation in the Order of Grenada ( KCNG / GCNG / KN )
NEW ZEALAND * Knight Companion or Knight Grand Companion of the New Zealand Order of Merit ( KNZM / GNZM )
SAINT LUCIA
* Knight Commander of the Order of Saint Lucia ( KCSL ) DORMANT HONOURS Section::::Dormant honours .
Established in 1783 and primarily awarded to men associated with the Kingdom of Ireland , Knight of the Order of St. Patrick were entitled to the style of ' Sir ' .
Regular creation of new knights of the order ended in 1921 upon the formation of the Irish Free State .
With the death of the last knight in 1974 , the Order became dormant .
As part of the consolidation of the crown colony of India , the Order of the Star of India was established in 1861 to reward prominent British and Indian civil servants , military officers and prominent Indians associated with the Indian Empire .
The Order of the Indian Empire was established in 1878 as a junior - level order to accompany the Order of the Star of India , and to recognise long service .
From 1861 to 1866 , the Order of the Star of India had a single class of Knights ( KSI ) , who were entitled to the style of ' Sir ' .
In 1866 , the order was reclassified into three divisions : Knights Grand Commander ( GCSI ) , Knights Commander ( KCSI ) and Companions ( CSI ) ;
holders of the upper two degrees could use the title ' Sir ' .
From its creation in 1878 until 1887 , the Order of the Indian Empire had a single class , Companion ( CIE ) , which did not entitle the recipient to a style of knighthood .
In 1887 , two higher divisions , Knight Grand Commander ( GCIE ) and Knight Commander ( KCIE ) were created , which entitled holders of those ranks to the style of ' Sir ' .
The last creations of knights of either order were made on 15 August 1947 upon Indian independence .
All British honours and their accompanying styles were officially made obsolete in India when the Dominion of India became a modern Commonwealth republic in 1950 , followed by Pakistan in 1956 .
The Order of the Star of India became dormant in the Commonwealth realms from February 2009 , and the Order of the Indian Empire after August 2010 , when the last knights of the orders died .
PHILIPPINES HONORIFIC
Section::::Philippines honorific .
As a privilege of the members of the Order of the Knights of Rizal , the prefix " Sir " is attached to their forenames while wives of Knights add the prefix " Lady " to their first names .
These apply to both spoken and written forms of address .
The Knights of Rizal is the sole order of knighthood in the Philippines and a constituted Order of Merit recognized by the Orders , decorations , and medals of the Philippines .
The prefix is appended with the relevant post - nominal according to their rank at the end of their names : Knight of Rizal ( KR ) , Knight Officer of Rizal ( KOR ) , Knight Commander of Rizal ( KCR ) , Knight Grand Officer of Rizal ( KGOR ) and Knight Grand Cross of Rizal ( KGCR ) .
Among the notable members of the Knights of Rizal include King Juan Carlos I of Spain who was conferred a Knight Grand Cross of Rizal on 11 February 1998 .
NIGERIAN
HONORIFIC Section::::Nigerian honorific .
In Nigeria , holders of religious honors like the Knighthood of St. Gregory make use of the word as a pre - nominal honorific in much the same way as it is used for secular purposes in Britain and the Philippines .
Wives of such individuals also typically assume the title of Lady .
EDUCATIONAL , MILITARY AND OTHER
USAGE
USAGE
WITHIN THE EDUCATION
SYSTEM Section::::Educational , military and other usage .
Section::::Usage within the education system .
' Sir ' , along with miss for females , is commonly used in the British school system to address teachers ; and or members of faculty as well as staff .
Usage of these terms is considered a mark of respect , and can be dated back to the 16th century .
The practice may have been an attempt to reinforce the authority of teachers from lower social classes among classes of largely upper class students .
Jennifer Coates , emeritus professor of English language and linguistics at Roehampton University has criticised the use of the title for male teachers , saying that " Sir is a knight .
There were n't women knights , but ' Miss ' is ridiculous : it does n't match ' Sir ' at all .
It 's just one of the names you can call an unmarried woman " , and that " It 's a depressing example of how women are given low status and men , no matter how young or new in the job they are , are given high status " .
This view is not unchallenged however .
The chief executive of the Brook Learning Trust , Debbie Coslett , said " ... they call me ' Miss '
, I 'm fine with that .
They 're showing respect by giving me a title rather than ' hey ' or ' oi , you ' or whatever " , and dismissed the male / female issue as " That 's just the way the English language works " .
In the Southern United States , the term ' sir ' is often used to address someone in a position of authority or respect , and is commonly used in schools and universities by students to address their teachers and professors .
Whereas the British and Commonwealth female equivalent is miss , students will often refer to female teachers as ma'am .
In the Northeast United States , particularly New England , there remains influence of both the British and French traditions as noted above ; in general parlance , teachers , authority - figures , and so forth , are referred to by a title of respect such as ' Sir ' for males and ' Miss , Ms , or Mrs ' for females : ' Miss ' for unmarried , younger - females ; ' Ms ' for senior , elder , or ranking females that may or may not be married ( see article Ms / Mrs / Miss ) ; and ' Mrs ' for married or widowed females .
The predominant form of address remains " Sir / Ma'am " , though in some sectors -- such as service , hospitality , or politics -- " Sir / Madam(e )
" prevails , while in Northern Maine -- Aroostock County & St John 's Valley -- most female teachers or public officials , regardless of marital status , are addressed " Miss " in English or " Madame " in French , though the two are not interchangeable .
As noted in Coslett 's statement above citing her personal acceptance of ' Miss ' , generally teachers or other public officials may specify to which form they prefer , while in other cases social & cultural norms dictate the appropriate form .
USAGE WITHIN THE MILITARY AND POLICE Section::::Usage within the military and police .
If not specifically using their rank or title , ' sir ' is used in the United States Armed Forces to address a male , senior commissioned officer or civilian .
Privates and non - commissioned officers , such as corporals and sergeants , are addressed using their ranks .
Similarly , in both the United States Air Force ( USAF ) and Royal Air Force ( RAF ) , ' sir ' is used to address all male commissioned officers .
Male non - commissioned officers and airmen are addressed by their rank .
In the RAF , male warrant officers are addressed as Mr by commissioned officers , but as ' sir ' by non - commissioned officers and airmen .
In the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) , only commissioned officers are addressed as ' sir ' ; NCOs and constables are addressed by their rank .
Male British police officers of the rank of Inspector or above are addressed as ' Sir ' ( women of inspecting rank are called Ma'am ) .
In the British Army , a Regimental Sergeant Major ( RSM ) , the most senior non - commissioned officer , is addressed as ' Sir ' by his subordinates .
In the Hong Kong Police Force , male superiors are respectfully known by their surname followed by ' sir ' .
For example , Inspector Wong would be addressed or referred to as ' Wong - sir ' .
Male police officers are sometimes known colloquially as " Ah - sir " ( 阿Sir ) to the wider public .
USAGE WITHIN THE SERVICE INDUSTRY Section::::Usage within the service industry .
The term ' sir ' is also used frequently in the customer service industry , by employees to refer to customers , and sometimes vice versa .
In the USA , it is much more common in certain areas ( even when addressing male peers or men considerably younger ) .
For example , a 1980 study showed that 80 % of service interactions in the South were accompanied by ' sir ' or ma'am , in comparison to the Northern United States , where ' sir ' was only used 25 % of the time .
SEE ALSO
* Salutation * Canadian titles debate NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * EtymologyOnLine.com