FERAL PIGEON Feral pigeons (
Columba livia domestica ) , also called city doves , city pigeons , or street pigeons ' are pigeons that are derived from the domestic pigeons that have returned to the wild .
The domestic pigeon was originally bred from the wild rock dove , which naturally inhabits sea - cliffs and mountains .
Rock ( i.e. , " wild " ) , domestic , and feral pigeons are all the same species and will readily interbreed .
Feral pigeons find the ledges of buildings to be a substitute for sea cliffs , have become adapted to urban life , and are abundant in towns and cities throughout much of the world .
Due to their abilities to create large amounts of excrement and to carry disease , combined with crop and property damage , pigeons are largely considered a nuisance and an invasive species , with steps being taken in many municipalities to lower their numbers or completely eradicate them .
BREEDING BREEDING
SYSTEM
Section::::Breeding .
Section::::Breeding system .
Current evidence suggests that wild , domestic and feral pigeons mate for life , although their long - term bonds are not unbreakable .
They are socially monogamous , but extra - pair matings do occur , often initiated by males .
Due to their ability to produce crop milk , pigeons can breed at any time of year .
COURTSHIP Section::::Courtship .
Courtship rituals can be observed in urban parks at any time of the year .
The male on the ground or rooftops puffs up the feathers on his neck to appear larger and thereby impress or attract attention .
He approaches the hen at a rapid walking pace while emitting repetitive quiet notes , often bowing and turning as he comes closer .
At first , the female invariably walks or flies a short distance away and the male follows her until she stops .
At this point , he continues the bowing motion and very often makes full- or half - pirouettes in front of the female .
The male then proceeds to feed the female by regurgitating food , as they do when feeding the young .
The male then mounts the female , rearing backwards to be able to join their cloacae .
The mating is very brief with the male flapping his wings to maintain balance on top of the female .
NESTING
Section::::Nesting .
Abandoned buildings are favorite nesting areas .
Mass nesting is common as pigeons are a community flocking bird ; often , dozens of birds share a building .
Loose tiles and broken windows provide access , and pigeons are adept at spotting new access points , for example following property damage caused by strong winds .
Nests and droppings tend to stay clustered and remain dry when out of the weather .
Pigeons are particularly fond of roof spaces .
These often contain water tanks .
Any water tank or cistern on a roof must , therefore , be secured and sealed off to keep the pigeons out of them .
The popularity of a nesting area does not seem to be affected by the pigeons ' population density .
On undamaged property , the gutters , window air conditioners and empty air conditioner containers , chimney pots , and external ledges are used as nesting sites .
Many building owners try to limit roosting by using bird control spikes and netting to cover ledges and potential nesting places on buildings .
This has little effect on the size of the pigeon population , but it can reduce the accumulation of droppings on and around a particular building location .
In the UK , only the larger and more wary common wood pigeon , which often shares the same territory and food supply , builds nests in trees , usually close to roads .
COOING
Section::::Cooing .
In Wendell Levi 's The Pigeon , he describes the crowing / cooing of pigeons as mostly being associated with strutting and fighting in male birds .
Hens also coo , but this is noticeably less guttural than the cooing of the cock .
Cooing is also more frequent between couples during mating and nesting .
Both parents participate in the incubation of the eggs .
FOOD Section::::Food .
Pigeons breed when the food supply is abundant enough to support embryonic egg development , which in cities , can be any time of the year .
Laying of eggs can take place up to six times per year .
Pigeons are often found in pairs during the breeding season , but usually the pigeons are gregarious , living in flocks of 50 to 500 birds ( dependent on the food supply ) .
Feral pigeons can be seen eating grass seeds and berries in parks and gardens in the spring , but plentiful sources exist throughout the year from scavenging ( e.g. , remnants left inside of dropped fast - food cartons ) and they also take insects and spiders .
Additional food is also usually available from the disposing of stale bread in parks by restaurants and supermarkets and from tourists buying and distributing birdseed , etc .
Pigeons tend to congregate in large , often thick flocks when feeding on discarded food , and have been observed flying skillfully around trees , buildings , telephone poles , and cables , and even through moving traffic just to reach a food source .
CITY SQUARES FAMOUS FOR PIGEONS Section::::City
squares famous for pigeons .
Many city squares have large pigeon populations , such as Times Square in New York City , George Square in Glasgow the Piazza San Marco in Venice , Dam Square in Amsterdam , The Gateway of India and Kabutarkhana in Mumbai and ( prior to 2000 )
Trafalgar Square in London .
KILLING OR INJURING PIGEONS
Section::::Killing or injuring pigeons .
In the UK , pigeons are covered under the " General Licences " and can be humanely culled by the land owner or their agent for a variety of reasons ( mainly crop protection ) .
It is not legal to kill / destroy nests for any other reason other than those listed under the general licences .
In the United States , the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 , which protects native birds , does not apply to feral pigeons , starlings , or English sparrows , because they are introduced species .
It is usually legal to kill feral pigeons in the U.S. Methods such as poisons may be regulated , however .
POPULATION CONTROL Section::::Population control .
Feral pigeons often only have small populations within cities .
For example , the breeding population of feral pigeons in Sheffield , England , has been estimated at only 12,130 individuals .
Despite this , feral pigeons usually reach their highest densities in the central portions of cities , so they are frequently encountered by people , which may lead to conflict .
Feral pigeons are often considered a pest or even vermin , owing to concerns that they spread disease especially bird flu , but it has been shown pigeons do not carry the deadly H5N1 strain .
It is rare that a pigeon will transmit a disease to humans due to their immune system .
Three studies have been done since the late 1990s by the US Agriculture Department 's Southeast Poultry Research Laboratory in Athens , Georgia , according to the center 's director , David Swayne .
The lab has been working on bird flu since the 1970s .
In one experiment , researchers squirted into pigeons ' mouths liquid drops that contained the highly pathogenic H5N1 virus from a Hong Kong sample .
The birds received 100 to 1,000 times the concentration that wild birds would encounter in nature .
" We could n't infect the pigeons , " Swayne said .
" So that 's good news . "
However , other contagion besides bird flu are transmitted by pigeons .
For example , the bacteria Chlamydophila psittaci is endemic among pigeons and causes psittacosis in humans .
It is generally transmitted from handling pigeons or their droppings ( more commonly the latter ) .
Psittacosis is a serious disease but rarely fatal ( less than 1 % ) .
Pigeons are also important vectors for different species of the bacteria Salmonella , which causes diseases as salmonellosis and paratyphoid fever .
They are also known to host avian mites , which can infest human habitation and bite humans , a condition known as gamasoidosis .
There is ample reason for the concerns of pigeons damaging property , due to their size and proximity to people and their dwellings .
Pigeons often cause significant pollution with their droppings , though there is little evidence of them driving out other bird species .
Pigeons are labeled an invasive species in North America by the USDA .
Long - term reduction of feral pigeon populations can be achieved by restricting food supply , which in turn involves legislation and litter ( garbage ) control .
Some cities have deliberately established favorable nesting places for pigeons — nesting places that can easily be reached by city workers who regularly remove eggs , thereby limiting their reproductive success .
In addition , pigeon populations may be reduced by bird control systems that successfully reduce nesting sites .
PREDATORS Section::::Predators .
Peregrine falcons , which are also originally cliff dwellers , have also adapted to the skyscrapers of large cities and often feed exclusively on rock pigeons .
Some cities actively encourage this through falcon breeding programs .
Projects include Unibase Falcon Project and the Victorian Peregrine Project .
Larger birds of prey occasionally take advantage of this population as well .
In New York City , the abundance of pigeons ( and other small animals ) has created such a conducive environment for predators that the red - tailed hawk has begun to return in very small numbers , including the notable Pale Male .
POISON Section::::Poison .
Due to their non - selective nature , most avian poisons have been banned .
In the United States market , only 4-aminopyridine ( Avitrol ) and DRC-1339 remain registered by EPA .
DRC-1339 is limited to USDA use only , while 4-AP is a restricted - use pesticide , for use only by licensed applicators .
The use of poisons has been proven to be fairly ineffective , however , as pigeons can breed very quickly , and their numbers are determined by how much food is available ; that is , they breed more often when more food is provided to them .
When pigeons are poisoned , surviving birds do not leave the area .
On the contrary , they are left with more food per bird than before .
This attracts pigeons from outside areas as well as encouraging more breeding , and populations are re - established quickly .
An additional problem with poisoning is that it also kills pigeon predators .
Due to this , in cities with peregrine falcon programs it is typically illegal to poison pigeons .
REDUCING FOOD SUPPLY Section::::Reducing food supply .
A more effective tactic to reduce the number of feral pigeons is deprivation .
Cities around the world have discovered that not feeding their local birds results in a steady population decrease in only a few years .
As scavengers , pigeons will still pick at garbage bags containing discarded food or at leftovers carelessly dropped on the ground , but securely disposing of foodstuffs will greatly reduce scavenger populations .
Feeding of pigeons is banned in parts of Venice , Italy .
AVIAN CONTRACEPTIVES Section::::Avian contraceptives .
In 1998 , in response to conservation groups and the public interest , the National Wildlife Research Center ( NWRC ) , a USDA / APHIS laboratory in Fort Collins , Colorado , started work on nicarbazin , a promising compound for avian contraception .
Originally developed for use in resident Canada geese , nicarbazin was introduced for use as a contraceptive for feral pigeons in 2007 .
The active ingredient , nicarbazin , interferes with the viability of eggs by binding the ZP-3 sperm receptor site in the egg .
This unique contraceptive action is non - hormonal and fully reversible .
Registered by the EPA as a pesticide ( EPA Reg .
No . 80224 - 1 ) , " OvoControl P " , brand of nicarbazin , is increasingly used in urban areas and industrial sites to control pigeon populations .
Declared safe and humane , the new technology is environmentally benign and does not represent a secondary toxicity hazard to raptors or scavengers .
Avian contraception has the support of a range of animal welfare groups including the Humane Society of the United States ( HSUS ) , the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( ASPCA ) and People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals ( PETA ) .
DUMMY EGG
NESTING Section::::Dummy egg nesting .
When eggs are removed in artificial pigeon houses , the interval between reproductive attempts is strongly reduced , which reduces the efficiency of the method .
Dummy egg nesting programs have therefore been tested in some cities with mixed results .
There , the eggs are removed and replaced with dummy eggs .
The real eggs are then destroyed .
One such structure , in Batman Park in Melbourne Australia , was unsuccessful in atracting pigeons and has since been removed . "
Melbourne City Council 's $ 70,000 pigeon loft turned into scrap metal
" Park The loft used in Melbourne is on stilts , with a cage door allowing access from beneath for accessing the structure at night when the pigeons are asleep .
SEE ALSO
* Bird feeding * Doves as symbols
* Squab REFERENCES BOOKS EXTERNAL LINKS
* Cornell Lab of Ornithology - Pigeon Colors