CRANE FLY Crane fly is a common name referring to any member of the insect family Tipulidae , of the order Diptera , true flies in the superfamily Tipuloidea .
Cylindrotominae , Limoniinae , and Pediciinae have been ranked as subfamilies of Tipulidae by most authors , though occasionally elevated to family rank .
In the most recent classifications , only Pediciidae is now ranked as a separate family , due to considerations of paraphyly .
In colloquial speech , crane flies are sometimes known as mosquito hawks or daddy longlegs , a term also used to describe opiliones or the family Pholcidae , both of which are arachnids .
The larvae of crane flies are known commonly as leatherjackets .
Crane flies are found worldwide , though individual species usually have limited ranges .
They are most diverse in the tropics , and are also common in northern latitudes and high elevations .
The Tipulidae is one of the largest groups of flies , including over 15,000 species and subspecies in 525 genera and subgenera .
Most crane flies were described by the entomologist Charles Paul Alexander , a fly specialist , in over 1000 research publications .
DESCRIPTION SUMMARY Section::::Description .
Section::::Summary .
An adult crane fly , resembling an oversized mosquito , typically has a slender body and stilt - like legs that are deciduous , easily coming off the body .
The wingspan is generally about 1.0 to 6.5 cm , though some species of Holorusia can reach 11 cm .
The antennae have up to 19 segments .
It is also characterized by a V - shaped suture on the back of the thorax and by its wing venation .
The rostrum is long ; in some species it is as long as the head and thorax together .
FORMAL
Section::::Formal .
Tipulidae are large to medium - sized flies ( 7–35 mm ) with elongated legs , wings , and abdomen .
Their colour is yellow , brown or grey .
Ocelli are absent .
The rostrum ( a snout ) is short to very short with a beak - like point called the nasus ( rarely absent ) .
The apical segment of the maxillary palpi is flagelliform and much longer than the subapical segment .
The antennae have 13 segments ( exceptionally 14–19 ) .
These are whorled , serrate , or ctenidial .
There is a distinct V - shaped suture between the mesonotal prescutum and scutum ( near the level of the wing bases ) .
The wings are monochromatic , longitudinally striped or marbled .
In females the wings are sometimes rudimentary .
The sub - costal vein ( Sc ) joins through Sc2 with the radial vein , Sc1 is at most a short stump .
There are four , rarely ( when R2 is reduced ) three branches of the radial vein merging into the alar margin .
The discoidal wing cell is usually present .
The wing has two anal veins .
Sternite 9 of the male genitalia has , with few exceptions , two pairs of appendages .
Sometimes appendages are also present on sternite 8 .
The female ovipositor has sclerotized valves and the cerci have a smooth or dentate lower margin .
The valves are sometimes modified into thick bristles or short teeth .
The larva is elongated , usually cylindrical .
The posterior two - thirds of the head capsule is enclosed or retracted within the prothoracic segment .
The larva is metapneustic ( with only one pair of spiracles , these on the anal segment of the abdomen ) , but often with vestigial lateral spiracles ( rarely apneustic ) .
The head capsule is sclerotized anteriorly and deeply incised ventrally and often dorsolaterally .
The mandibles are opposed and move in the horizontal or oblique plane .
The abdominal segments have transverse creeping welts .
The terminal segments of the abdomen are glabrous , often partially sclerotized and bearing posterior spiracles .
The spiracular disc is usually surrounded by lobe - like projections and anal papillae or lobes .
BIOLOGY Section::::Biology .
The adult female usually contains mature eggs as she emerges from her pupa , and often mates immediately if a male is available .
Males also search for females by walking or flying .
Copulation takes a few minutes to hours and may be accomplished in flight .
Adults have a lifespan of 10 to 15 days .
The female immediately oviposits , usually in wet soil or mats of algae .
Some lay eggs on the surface of a water body or in dry soils , and some reportedly simply drop them in flight .
Most crane fly eggs are black in color .
They often have a filament , which may help anchor the egg in wet or aquatic environments .
Crane fly larvae ( leatherjackets ) have been observed in many habitat types on dry land and in water , including marine , brackish , and fresh water .
They are cylindrical in shape , but taper toward the front end , and the head capsule is often retracted into the thorax .
The abdomen may be smooth , lined with hairs , or studded with projections or welt - like spots .
Projections may occur around the spiracles .
Larvae may eat algae , microflora , and living or decomposing plant matter , including wood .
Some are predatory .
ECOLOGY
Section::::Ecology .
Larval habitats include all kinds of freshwater , semiaquatic environments .
Some Tipulinae , including Dolichopeza Curtis , are found in moist to wet cushions of mosses or liverworts .
Ctenophora Meigen species are found in decaying wood or sodden logs .
Nephrotoma Meigen and Tipula Linnaeus larvae are found in dry soils of pasturelands , lawns , and steppe .
Tipulidae larvae are also found in rich organic earth and mud , in wet spots in woods where the humus is saturated , in leaf litter or mud , decaying plant materials , or fruits in various stages of putrefaction .
Larvae can be important in the soil ecosystem , because they process organic material and increase microbial activity .
Larvae and adults are also valuable prey items for many animals , including insects , spiders , fish , amphibians , birds , and mammals .
The larvae of a few species consume other living aquatic insects and invertebrates , which could potentially include mosquito larvae , though this has not been documented .
Many adults , however , have such short lifespans that they do not eat at all , and , despite widely held beliefs that adult crane flies ( or " mosquito hawks " ) prey on mosquito populations , the adult crane fly is anatomically incapable of killing or consuming other insects .
PEST STATUS Section::::Pest status .
The common European crane fly , Tipula paludosa , and the marsh crane fly , T. oleracea , are agricultural pests in Europe .
Crane fly larvae of economic importance live in the top layers of soil where they feed on the roots , root hairs , crown , and sometimes the leaves of crops , stunting their growth or killing the plants .
They are pests on a variety of commodities .
Since the late 1900s , T. paludosa and T. oleracea have become invasive in the United States .
The larvae have been observed on many crops , including vegetables , fruits , cereals , pasture , lawn grasses , and ornamental plants .
In 1935 , Lord 's Cricket Ground in London was among venues affected by leatherjackets .
Several thousand were collected by ground staff and burned , because they caused bald patches on the wicket and the pitch took unaccustomed spin for much of the season .
GENERA *
Subfamily Ctenophorinae
* Ctenophora * Dictenidia * Phoroctenia * Pselliophora * Tanyptera * Subfamily Cylindrotominae
* Cylindrotoma *
Diogma * Liogma *
Phalacrocera * Stibadocera
* Stibadocerella * Stibadocerina * Stibadocerodes
*
Triogma * Subfamily Dolichopezinae *
Dolichopeza *
Subfamily
Tipulinae
* Acracantha
* Angarotipula * Austrotipula * Brachypremna * Brithura * Clytocosmus * Elnoretta
* Euvaldiviana
* Goniotipula
* Holorusia * Hovapeza * Hovatipula * Idiotipula
* Indotipula
* Ischnotoma * Keiseromyia * Leptotarsus
*
Macgregoromyia * Megistocera * Nephrotoma *
Nigrotipula * Ozodicera * Platyphasia * Prionocera * Prionota * Ptilogyna
* Scamboneura * Sphaerionotus
* Tipula * Tipulodina * Valdiviana * Zelandotipula PHYLOGENETICS Section::::Phylogenetics .
The phylogenetic position of the Tipulidae remains uncertain .
The classical viewpoint that they are an early branch of Diptera — perhaps ( with the Trichoceridae )
the sister group of all other Diptera — is giving way to modern views that they are more highly derived .
This is thanks to evidence from molecular studies , which is consistent with the more derived larval characters similar to those of ' higher ' Diptera .
The Pediciidae and Tipulidae are sister groups ( the " limoniids " are a paraphyletic clade ) and the Cylindrotominae appear to be a relict group that was much better represented in the Tertiary .
Tipulidae probably evolved from ancestors in the Upper Jurassic , the Architipulidae .
COMMON NAMES
Section::::Common names .
Numerous other common names have been applied to the crane fly .
Many of the names are more or less regional in the U.S. , including mosquito hawk , mosquito eater , gallinipper , and gollywhopper .
They are also known as daddy longlegs around the world , not to be confused with daddy - long - legs that refers to arachnids of the order Opiliones or the family Pholcidae .
The larvae of crane flies are known commonly as leatherjackets .
MISCONCEPTIONS Section::::Misconceptions .
There is an enduring urban legend that crane flies
are the most venomous insects in the world , but have no ability to administer the venom ; this is not true .
The myth likely arose due to their being confused with the cellar spider as they are also informally called " daddy longlegs " , and although the spider does possess venom , this has also been debunked .
Crane flies are sometimes called " mosquito hawks " , but they do not actually eat mosquitoes .
Crane fly larvae mostly feed on roots of forage crops , turf grasses and seedling field crops , while adults , if they feed at all , feed primarily on liquids such as nectar .
SEE ALSO * Tipularia discolor , the crane fly orchid REFERENCES FURTHER READING Identification * Pierre
C.,1924 , Diptères : Tipulidae Faune de France n ° 8 Bibliotheque Virtuelle Numerique Out of date but online at no cost .
In French .
* R. L. Coe , Paul Freeman & P.
F. Mattingly Nematocera : families Tipulidae to Chironomidae ( Tipulidae ) .
Handbooks for the Identification of British Insects Vol 9 Part 2 i. pdf download manual Out of date but online at no cost
* J.F. McAlpine , B.V. Petersen , G.E. Shewell , H.J. Teskey , J.R. Vockeroth ,
D.M. Wood .
Eds .
1987
Manual of Nearctic Diptera Volume 1 Research Branch Agriculture Canada , 1987 pdf key to Nearctic genera
* E. N. Savchenko Family Tipulidae in Bei - Bienko , G. Ya , 1988 Keys to the insects of the European Part of the USSR Volume 5
( Diptera )
Part 2 English edition .
Keys to Palaearctic species but now needs revision .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ohioline.osu.edu , Ohio State University Fact Sheet * Family Tipulidae at EOL
* IZ.carnegiemnh.org , Crane Flies of Pennsylvania , Extensive Specimen Collection , Carnegie Museum of Natural History
* NLBIF.eti.uva.nl , Catalog of Craneflies of the World
* Diptera.info , Image Gallery
* BugGuide.net , photo gallery , many species * Gaga.jes.mlc.edu.tw , Tipulidae of Taiwan , with images under Latin binomials * Insects.tamu.edu , Texas A&M Entomology Field Guide SPECIES LISTS
* West Palaearctic including Russia
*
Australasian / Oceanian
* Nearctic * Japan