HEREDITARY SPASTIC PARAPLEGIA
Hereditary spastic paraplegia ( HSP ) is a group of inherited diseases whose main feature is a progressive gait disorder .
The disease presents with progressive stiffness ( spasticity ) and contraction in the lower limbs .
HSP is also known as hereditary spastic paraparesis , familial spastic paraplegia , French settlement disease , or Strumpell - Lorrain disease .
The symptoms are a result of dysfunction of long axons in the spinal cord .
The affected cells are the primary motor neurons ; therefore , the disease is an upper motor neuron disease .
HSP is not a form of cerebral palsy even though it physically may appear and behave much the same as spastic diplegia .
The origin of HSP is different from cerebral palsy .
Despite this , some of the same anti - spasticity medications used in spastic cerebral palsy are sometimes used to treat HSP symptoms .
HSP is caused by defects in transport of proteins , structural proteins , cell maintaining proteins , lipids , and other substances through the cell .
Long nerve fibers ( axons ) are affected because long distances make nerve cells particularly sensitive to defects in these mentioned mechanisms .
The disease was first mentioned in 1876 by Adolph Seeligmüller , a German neurologist , who described a family of four affected children with spasticity .
Further cases were described in 1883 by Adolph Strümpell , a German neurologist .
Those cases were described more extensively in 1888 by Maurice Lorrain , a French physician .
Due to their contribution in describing the disease , it is still named Strümpell - Lorrain disease in French speaking countries .
The term hereditary spastic paraplegia was coined by Anita Harding in 1983 .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Symptoms depend on the type of HSP inherited .
The main feature of the disease is progressive spasticity in the lower limbs due to pyramidal tract dysfunction .
This also results in brisk reflexes , extensor plantar reflexes , muscle weakness , and variable bladder disturbances .
Furthermore , among the core symptoms of HSP are also included abnormal gait and difficulty in walking , decreased vibratory sense at the ankles , and paresthesia .
Individuals with HSP can experience extreme fatigue associated with central nervous system and neuromuscular disorders , which can be disabling .
Initial symptoms are typically difficulty with balance , stubbing the toe or stumbling .
Symptoms of HSP may begin at any age , from infancy to older than 60 years .
If symptoms begin during the teenage years or later , then spastic gait disturbance usually progresses over many years .
Canes , walkers , and wheelchairs may eventually be required , although some people never require assistance devices .
Disability has been described as progressing more rapidly in adult onset forms .
More specifically , patients with the autosomal dominant pure form of HSP reveal normal facial and extraocular movement .
Although jaw jerk may be brisk in older subjects , there is no speech disturbance or difficulty of swallowing .
Upper extremity muscle tone and strength are normal .
In the lower extremities , muscle tone is increased at the hamstrings , quadriceps and ankles .
Weakness is most notable at the iliopsoas , tibialis anterior , and to a lesser extent , hamstring muscles .
In the complex form of the disorder , additional symptoms are present .
These include : peripheral neuropathy , amyotrophy , ataxia , mental retardation , ichthyosis , epilepsy , optic neuropathy , dementia , deafness , or problems with speech , swallowing or breathing .
Anita Harding classified the HSP in a pure and complicated form .
Pure HSP presents with spasticity in the lower limbs , associated with neurogenic bladder disturbance as well as lack of vibration sensitivity ( pallhypesthesia ) .
On the other hand , HSP is classified as complex when lower limb spasticity is combined with any additional neurological symptom .
This classification is subjective and patients with complex HSPs are sometimes diagnosed as having cerebellar ataxia with spasticity , mental retardation ( with spasticity ) , or leukodystrophy .
Some of the genes listed below have been described in other diseases than HSP before .
Therefore , some key genes overlap with other disease groups .
AGE OF ONSET Section::::Age of onset .
In the past , HSP has been classified as early onset beginning in early childhood or later onset in adulthood .
The age of onsets has two points of maximum at age 2 and around age 40 .
New findings propose that an earlier onset leads to a longer disease duration without loss of ambulation or the need for the use of a wheelchair .
This was also described earlier , that later onset forms evolve more rapidly .
CAUSE Section::::Cause .
HSP is a group of genetic disorders .
It follows general inheritance rules and can be inherited in an autosomal dominant , autosomal recessive or X - linked recessive manner .
The mode of inheritance involved has a direct impact on the chances of inheriting the disorder .
Over 70 genotypes had been described , and over 50 genetic loci have been linked to this condition .
Ten genes have been identified with autosomal dominant inheritance .
One of these , SPG4 , accounts for ~50 % of all genetically solved cases , or approximately 25 % of all HSP cases .
Twelve genes are known to be inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion .
Collectively this latter group account for ~1/3 cases .
Most altered genes have known function , but for some the function have n't been identified yet .
All of them are listed in the gene list below , including their mode of inheritance .
Some examples are spastin ( SPG4 ) and paraplegin ( SPG7 ) are both AAA ATPases .
GENOTYPES Section::::Genotypes .
The genes are designated SPG ( Spastic gait gene ) .
The gene locations are in the format : chromosome - arm ( short or p :
long or q ) - band number .
These designations are for the human genes only .
The locations may ( and probably will ) vary in other organisms .
Despite the number of genes known to be involved in this condition ~40 % of cases have yet to have their cause identified .
In the table below SPG ?
is used to indicate a gene that has been associated with HSP but has not yet received an official HSP gene designation . !
Genotype !
OMIM !
Gene symbol !
Gene locus !
Inheritance !
Age of onset !
Other names and characteristics Pelizaeus –
Merzbacher disease Strumpell disease ( this Wiki )
Variable Kufor –
Rakeb syndrome HSNSP Hereditary sensory neuropathy with spastic paraplegia SPG ? SPG ? SPG ? SPG ? SPG ? SPG ? SPG ? PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Section::::Pathophysiology .
The major feature of HSP is a length dependent axonal degeneration .
These include the crossed and uncrossed corticospinal tracts to the legs and fasciculus gracilis .
The spinocerebellar tract is involved to a lesser extent .
Neuronal cell bodies of degenerating axons are preserved and there is no evidence of primary demyelination .
Loss of anterior horn cells of the spinal cord are observed in some cases .
Dorsal root ganglia , posterior roots and peripheral nerves are not directly affected .
HSP affects several pathways in motor neurons .
Many genes were identified and linked to HSP .
It remains a challenge to accurately define the key players in each of the affected pathways , mainly because many genes have multiple functions and are involved in more than one pathway ( Figure ) .
AXON PATHFINDING Section::::Axon pathfinding .
Pathfinding is important for axon growth to the right destination ( e.g. another nerve cell or a muscle ) .
Significant for this mechanism is the L1CAM gene , a cell surface glycoprotein of the immunoglobulin superfamily .
Mutations leading to a loss - of - function in L1CAM are also found in other X - linked syndromes .
All of these disorders display corticospinal tract impairment ( a hallmark feature of HSP ) .
L1CAM participates in a set of interactions , binding other L1CAM molecules as well as extracellular cell adhesion molecules , integrins , and proteoglycans or intracellular proteins like ankyrins .
The pathfinding defect occurs via the association of L1CAM with neuropilin-1 .
Neurophilin-1 interacts with Plexin - A proteins to form the Semaporin3A receptor complex .
Semaporin3A is then released in the ventral spinal cord to steer corticospinal neurons away from the midline
spinal cord / medullary junction .
If L1CAM does not work correctly due to a mutation , the cortiocospinal neurons are not directed to the correct position and the impairment occurs .
LIPID METABOLISM
Section::::Lipid metabolism .
Axons in the central and peripheral nervous system are coated with an insulation , the myelin layer , to increase the speed of action potential propagation .
Abnormal myelination in the CNS is detected in some forms of hsp HSP .
Several genes were linked to myelin malformation , namely PLP1 , GFC2 and FA2H.
The mutations alter myelin composition , thickness and integrity .
Endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) is the main organelle for lipid synthesis .
Mutations in genes encoding proteins that have a role in shaping ER morphology and lipid metabolism were linked to HSP .
Mutations in ATL1 , BSCL2 and ERLIN2 alter ER structure , specifically the tubular network and the formation of three - way junctions in ER tubules .
Many mutated genes are linked to abnormal lipid metabolism .
The most prevalent effect is on arachidonic acid ( CYP2U1 ) and cholesterol ( CYP7B1 ) metabolism , phospholipase activity ( DDHD1 and DDHD2 ) , ganglioside formation ( B4GALNT-1 ) and the balance between carbohydrate and fat metabolism ( SLV33A1 ) .
ENDOSOMAL TRAFFICKING
Section::::Endosomal trafficking .
Neurons take in substances from their surrounding by endocytosis .
Endocytic vesicles fuse to endosomes in order to release their content .
There are three main compartments that have endosome trafficking :
Golgi to / from endosomes ; plasma membrane to / from early endosomes ( via recycling endosomes ) and late endosomes to lysosomes .
Dysfunction of endosomal trafficking can have severe consequences in motor neurons with long axons , as reported in HSP .
Mutations in AP4B1 and KIAA0415 are linked to disturbance in vesicle formation and membrane trafficking including selective uptake of proteins into vesicles .
Both genes encode proteins that interact with several other proteins and disrupt the secretory and endocytic pathways .
MITOCHONDRIAL FUNCTION Section::::Mitochondrial function .
Mitochondrial dysfunctions have been connected with developmental and degenerative neurological disorders .
Only a few HSP genes encode for mitochondrial proteins .
Two mitochondrial resident proteins are mutated in HSP : paraplegin and chaperonin 60 .
Paraplegin is a m - AAA metalloprotease of the inner mitochondrial membrane .
It functions in ribosomal assembly and protein quality control .
The impaired chaperonin 60 activity leads to impaired mitochondrial quality control .
Two genes DDHD1 and CYP2U1 have shown alteration of mitochondrial architecture in patient fibroblasts .
These genes encode enzymes involved in fatty - acid metabolism .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
Initial diagnosis of HSPs relies upon family history , the presence or absence of additional signs and the exclusion of other nongenetic causes of spasticity , the latter being particular important in sporadic cases .
Cerebral and spinal
MRI is an important procedure performed in order to rule out other frequent neurological conditions , such as multiple sclerosis , but also to detect associated abnormalities such as cerebellar or corpus callosum atrophy as well as white matter abnormalities .
Differential diagnosis of HSP should also exclude spastic diplegia which presents with nearly identical day - to - day effects and even is treatable with similar medicines such as baclofen and orthopedic surgery ; at times , these two conditions may look and feel so similar that the only perceived difference may be HSP 's hereditary nature versus the explicitly non - hereditary nature of spastic diplegia ( however , unlike spastic diplegia and other forms of spastic cerebral palsy , HSP can not be reliably treated with selective dorsal rhizotomy ) .
Ultimate confirmation of HSP diagnosis can only be provided by carrying out genetic tests targeted towards known genetic mutations .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Hereditary spastic paraplegias can be classified based on the symptoms ; mode of inheritance ; the patient 's age at onset ; the affected genes ; and biochemical pathways involved .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
No specific treatment is known that would prevent , slow , or reverse HSP .
Available therapies mainly consist of symptomatic medical management and promoting physical and emotional well - being .
Therapeutics offered to HSP patients include : * Baclofen – a voluntary muscle relaxant to relax muscles and reduce tone .
This can be administered orally or intrathecally .
( Studies in HSP )
* Tizanidine – to treat nocturnal or intermittent spasms ( studies available ) * Diazepam and clonazepam – to decrease intensity of spasms * Oxybutynin chloride – an involuntary muscle relaxant and spasmolytic agent , used to reduce spasticity of the bladder in patients with bladder control problems
*
Tolterodine tartate – an involuntary muscle relaxant and spasmolytic agent , used to reduce spasticity of the bladder in patients with bladder control problems
*
Botulinum toxin – to reduce muscle overactivity ( existing studies for HSP patients ) * Antidepressants ( such as selective serotonin re - uptake inhibitors , tricyclic antidepressants and monoamine oxidase inhibitors ) – for patients experiencing clinical depression
* Physical therapy – to restore and maintain the ability to move ; to reduce muscle tone ; to maintain or improve range of motion and mobility ; to increase strength and coordination ; to prevent complications , such as frozen joints , contractures , or bedsores .
PROGNOSIS Section::::Prognosis .
Although HSP is a progressive condition , the prognosis for individuals with HSP varies greatly .
It primarily affects the legs although there can be some upperbody involvement in some individuals .
Some cases are seriously disabling while others are less disabling and are compatible with a productive and full life .
The majority of individuals with HSP have a normal life expectancy .
EPIDEMIOLOGY Section::::Epidemiology .
Worldwide , the prevalence of all hereditary spastic paraplegias combined is estimated to be 2 to 6 in 100,000 people .
A Norwegian study of more than 2.5 million people published in March 2009 has found an HSP prevalence rate of 7.4/100,000 of population – a higher rate , but in the same range as previous studies .
No differences in rate relating to gender were found , and average age at onset was 24 years .
In the United States , Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia is listed as a " rare disease " by the Office of Rare Diseases ( ORD ) of the National Institutes of Health which means that the disorder affects less than 200,000 people in the US population .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* GeneReviews / NCBI / NIH / UW entry on Spastic Paraplegia 3A
* GeneReviews / NCBI / NIH / UW entry on Hereditary Spastic Paraplegia Overview EXTERNAL LINKS