HYDRAULIC FLUID
A hydraulic fluid or hydraulic liquid is the medium by which power is transferred in hydraulic machinery .
Common hydraulic fluids are based on mineral oil or water .
Examples of equipment that might use hydraulic fluids are excavators and backhoes , hydraulic brakes , power steering systems , transmissions , garbage trucks , aircraft flight control systems , lifts , and industrial machinery .
Hydraulic systems like the ones mentioned above will work most efficiently if the hydraulic fluid used has zero compressibility .
FUNCTIONS AND PROPERTIES Section::::Functions and properties .
The primary function of a hydraulic fluid is to convey power .
In use , however , there are other important functions of hydraulic fluid such as protection of the hydraulic machine components .
The table below lists the major functions of a hydraulic fluid and the properties of a fluid that affect its ability to perform that function : !
Function !
Property
*
Non compressible ( high bulk modulus )
* Fast air release
* Low foaming tendency
* Low volatility Medium for heat transfer
* Good thermal capacity and conductivity Sealing Medium
* Adequate viscosity and viscosity index
* Shear stability
Lubricant
* Viscosity for film maintenance
* Low temperature fluidity
* Thermal and oxidative stability
* Hydrolytic stability / water tolerance
* Cleanliness and filterability * Demulsibility
* Antiwear characteristics * Corrosion control
Pump efficiency
* Proper viscosity to minimize internal leakage
* High viscosity index Special function * Fire resistance * Friction modifications
* Radiation resistance Environmental impact * Low toxicity when new or decomposed * Biodegradability Functioning life
* Material compatibility COMPOSITION
BASE STOCK Section::::Composition .
Section::::Base stock .
The original hydraulics fluid , dating back to the time of ancient Egypt , was water .
Beginning in the 1920s , mineral oil began to be used more than water as a base stock due to its inherent lubrication properties and ability to be used at temperatures above the boiling point of water .
Today most hydraulic fluids are based on mineral oil base stocks .
Natural oils such as rapeseed ( also called canola oil ) are used as base stocks for fluids where biodegradability and renewable sources are considered important .
Other base stocks are used for specialty applications , such as for fire resistance and extreme temperature applications .
Some examples include : glycol , esters , organophosphate ester , polyalphaolefin , propylene glycol , and silicone oils .
NaK-77 , an eutectic alloy of sodium and potassium , can be used as a hydraulic fluid in high - temperature and high - radiation environments , for temperature ranges of 10 to 1400 ° F ( -12 to 760 ° C ) .
Its bulk modulus at 1000 ° F ( 538 ° C ) is 310,000 psi ( 2.14 GPa ) , higher than of a hydraulic oil at room temperature .
Its lubricity is poor , so positive - displacement pumps are unsuitable and centrifugal pumps have to be used .
Addition of caesium shifts the useful temperature range to -95 to 1300
° F ( −70 to 704 ° C ) .
The NaK-77 alloy was tested in hydraulic and fluidic systems for the Supersonic Low Altitude Missile .
OTHER COMPONENTS Section::::Other components .
Hydraulic fluids can contain a wide range of chemical compounds , including : oils , butanol , esters ( e.g. phthalates , like DEHP , and adipates , like bis(2-ethylhexyl ) adipate ) , polyalkylene glycols ( PAG ) , organophosphate ( e.g. tributylphosphate ) , silicones , alkylated aromatic hydrocarbons , polyalphaolefins ( PAO ) ( e.g. polyisobutenes ) , corrosion inhibitors ( incl acid scavengers ) , anti - erosion additives , etc.- BIODEGRADABLE HYDRAULIC FLUIDS Section::::Biodegradable hydraulic fluids .
Environmentally sensitive applications ( e.g. farm tractors and marine dredging ) may benefit from using biodegradable hydraulic fluids based upon rapeseed ( Canola ) vegetable oil when there is the risk of an oil spill from a ruptured oil line .
Typically these oils are available as ISO 32 , ISO 46 , and ISO 68 specification oils .
ASTM standards ASTM - D-6006 , Guide for Assessing Biodegradability of Hydraulic Fluids and ASTM - D-6046 , Standard Classification of Hydraulic Fluids for Environmental Impact are relevant .
ANTI - WEAR HYDRAULIC FLUIDS Section::::Anti - Wear Hydraulic Fluids .
Anti - wear ( AW ) hydraulic oils are made from a petroleum base fluid and commonly contain the anti - wear additive Zinc dialkyldithiophosphate ( ZDDP ) .
This additive works to protect the hydraulic pump .
They come in multiple viscosity grades that have varying applications .
For example , AW 46 hydraulic oils can be used to operate the hydraulic systems in off - road equipment such as dump trucks , excavators , and backhoes , while AW 32 hydraulic oils may be more suitable for colder weather applications like in a snow plow 's pump .
BRAKE FLUID
Section::::Brake fluid .
Brake fluid is a subtype of hydraulic fluid with high boiling point , both when new ( specified by the equilibrium boiling point ) and after absorption of water vapor ( specified by wet boiling point ) .
Under the heat of braking , both free water and water vapor in a braking system can boil into a compressible vapor , resulting in brake failure .
Glycol - ether based fluids are hygroscopic , and absorbed moisture will greatly reduce the boiling point over time .
Mineral oil and silicone based fluids are not hygroscopic .
POWER STEERING FLUID Section::::Power steering fluid .
Power steering fluid is a sub type of hydraulic fluid .
Most are mineral oil or silicone based fluids , while some use automatic transmission fluid , made from synthetic base oil .
Use of the wrong type of fluid can lead to failure of the power steering pump .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
Because industrial hydraulic systems operate at hundreds to thousands of PSI and temperatures reaching hundreds of degrees Celsius , severe injuries and death can result from component failures and care must always be taken when performing maintenance on hydraulic systems .
Fire resistance is a property available with specialized fluids .
Water - gycol and polyol - ester are some of these specialized fluids that contain excellent thermal and hydrolitic properties , which aid in fire resistance .
AIRCRAFT HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS Section::::Aircraft hydraulic systems .
As aircraft performance increased in mid-20th century , the amount of force required to operate mechanical flight controls became excessive , and hydraulic systems were introduced to reduce pilot effort .
The hydraulic actuators are controlled by valves ; these in turn are operated directly by input from the aircrew ( hydro - mechanical ) or by computers obeying control laws ( fly by wire ) .
Hydraulic power is used for other purposes .
It can be stored in accumulators to start an auxiliary power unit ( APU ) for self - starting the aircraft 's main engines .
Many aircraft equipped with the M61 family of cannon use hydraulic power to drive the gun system , permitting reliable high rates of fire .
The hydraulic power itself comes from pumps driven by the engines directly , or by electrically driven pumps .
In modern commercial aircraft these are electrically driven pumps ; should all the engines fail in flight the pilot will deploy a propeller - driven electric generator called a Ram Air Turbine ( RAT ) which is concealed under the fuselage .
This provides electrical power for the hydraulic pumps and control systems as power is no longer available from the engines .
In that system and others electric pumps can provide both redundancy and the means of operating hydraulic systems without the engines operating , which can be very useful during maintenance .
SPECIFICATIONS Section::::Specifications .
Mineral oil base :
* Mil - PRF-5606 ( originally Mil - H-5606 ) :
Mineral base , flammable , fairly low flashpoint , usable from to , red color , developed in the 1940s
* MIL - PRF-6083 :
Usable from −54 ° C to 135 ° C " where corrosion protection is required and a determination has been made that MIL - PRF-46170 ( FRH ) hydraulic fluid can not be used .
This includes use in recoil mechanisms and hydraulic systems for rotating weapons or aiming devices of tactical and support ordnance equipment , except combat armored vehicles / equipment which require FRH .
The hydraulic fluid is also used as a preservative fluid for aircraft hydraulic systems and components where MIL - H-5606 ( OHA ) or MIL - PRF-87257 is used as an operational fluid . "
Synthetic hydrocarbon base :
These synthetic fluids are compatible with mineral - base hydraulic fluids and were developed to address the low flash point draw back of mineral based hydraulic fluids .
* Mil - H-83282 :
Synthetic hydrocarbon base , higher flashpoint , self - extinguishing , backward compatible to -5606 , red color , rated to degrees .
* Mil - H-87257 :
A development of -83282 fluid to improve its low temperature viscosity .
Phosphate - ester base :
* US / NATO Military specification - MIL - H-8446
* Boeing Seattle - BMS3 - 11 *
Boeing Long Beach - DMS2014 * Boeing Long Island - CDS5478
* Lockheed - LAC C-34 - 1224 * Airbus Industrie - NSA307110
*
British Aerospace - BAC M.333.B * Bombardier - BAMS 564 - 003 * SAE - Ac974 * SAE - AS1241
* Skydrol CONTAMINATION Section::::Contamination .
Special , stringent care is required when handling aircraft hydraulic fluid as it is critical to flight safety that it stay free from contamination .
It is also necessary to strictly adhere to authorized references when servicing or repairing any aircraft system .
Samples from aircraft hydraulic systems are taken during heavy aircraft maintenance checks ( primarily C and D checks ) to check contamination .
Military Spec 1246C is one fluid contamination specification .
The ISO fluid contamination scale assigns a contamination category based on particle size count and distribution .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other Uses .
The properties of HLP 32 hydraulic oil make it ideal for lubricating machine tools .
SEE ALSO
* Dexron * Hydraulic brake
* Hydraulic fuse
* Hydraulics International , INC .
* Hydropneumatic suspension - automobile application
* Oleo strut - aircraft application * Osmosis
* Skydrol REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Information and purchase of military specification (
mil - spec ) hydraulic fluid * Information about Fluid Power is also available on the National Fluid Power Association web - site nfpa.com
* USDA Research .
Biodegradable Plant - Based Hydraulic Fluid
* Biodegradable Hydraulic Oils *
Industrial Hydraulic Oils
* Aviation hydraulic fluids