MULTIVERSE ( MAGIC : THE GATHERING )
The Multiverse is the shared fictional universe depicted on cards , novels , comics , and other supplemental products .
Though Magic is a strategy game , an intricate storyline underlies the cards released in each expansion .
On the cards , elements of this multiverse are shown in the card art and through quotations and descriptions on the bottom of most cards ( called flavor text ) .
Novels and anthologies published by HarperPrism and Wizards of the Coast ( WOTC ) , and the comic books published by Armada Comics expand upon the settings and characters hinted at on the cards .
WOTC also publishes a weekly story ( most often related to the plane explored in the current expansion set ) in the Magic Fiction column , previously known as Official Magic Fiction and Uncharted Realms .
In the early days of the game , the name ' Dominia ' was used to describe the story universe but , due to confusion with the name of the plane / planet where the central events of Magic occur ( Dominaria ) , it fell into disuse and was replaced .
COSMOLOGY Section::::Cosmology .
The Multiverse is a collection of planes ( described somewhat like pocket universes ) which are usually named after the primary planet contained within them .
Travel between these planes is possible , and powerful beings known as Planeswalkers are capable of traversing between them .
THE BLIND ETERNITIES Section::::The Blind Eternities .
The Blind Eternities is the term more commonly used to describe the space between the planes of reality .
Filled with chaotic , raw energies such as Aether , Mana and temporal energy , it is a place where matter and life as known within the planes of reality can not subsist .
( The only exceptions are the Planeswalkers , who briefly pass physically through it when they " walk " between planes . )
As such , not much is known or understood about the Blind Eternities .
Unfathomable , reality - warping cosmic horrors known as the Eldrazi are said to be born there .
AETHER Section::::Aether .
Aether ( previously spelled Æther ) is the main type of energy filling the blind eternities , although it can also appear in variable quantities within the planes .
It is inextricably associated with magic within Magic 's shared fictional universe and the use of the word in several Magic cards implies that casting magic involves channeling and manipulating Aether .
Similarly , " summoning " the creatures around which
combat and much of gameplay in Magic revolves is described as " pulling ( them ) from the Aether " .
DOMINARIA Section::::Dominaria .
The majority of the Magic story was set on the plane of Dominaria prior to Mirrodin , encompassing long time periods each detailed in certain card sets or books .
Dominaria is a unique nexus between all the other planes of the Multiverse .
Occasionally , such as in Time Spiral , the storyline returns to it .
STORYLINES
*
The Thran : The Thran were a race of master artificers who were destroyed by Yawgmoth and his Phyrexians ( converted Thran following him ) during the Thran - Phyrexian War about 5,000 years before the .
They are only hinted at in the game , but J. Robert King 's novel
The Thran explores their culture in some depth .
* : War between Urza and Mishra , two brothers who were trained by the archaeologist and artificer Tocasia in creating magical devices based on ancient Thran technology .
As their powers grew , so did their enmity , eventually erupting in an all - out war utilizing powerful constructs .
Marshalling vast armies aided by their impressive machines ( some of the old Thran Empire , some newly made ) the brothers staged a series of battles .
The war devastated the land of Terisiare on the plane of Dominaria and culminated in a world - devastating climax on the island of Argoth .
This caused the Dark , the climate changes which led to the Fall of the Sarpadian Empires and finally to the Ice Age .
This story is the basis for the Antiquities expansion and later the Urza 's Saga Block .
* The devastation wrought by the Brothers led to the fall of many civilizations and the beginning of a Dark Age in Dominaria .
The destruction of Argoth caused a nuclear winter that would later lead to the Dominarian Ice Age .
This story is portrayed in the Fallen Empires and The Dark expansions .
In this age Terisiare 's survivors were bitterly opposed to magic .
Tiny , insular villages dotted a wasted , goblin - infested landscape .
Fanatical priests controlled a few powerful city - states .
Preachers and witch - hunters hunted the countryside for the few remaining wizards .
Despite this oppression , it is during this era that mortal wizards first discover the five - color nature of magic .
This story is fully explained in the novel The Gathering Dark by Jeff Grubb .
The following Ice Age is detailed in Eternal Ice and The Shattered Alliance , also by Jeff Grubb .
*
The harsh climatic changes that followed the destruction of Argoth caused the southern continent , Sarpadia , to struggle for survival .
The elves and humans of Sarpadia begin breeding primitive but adaptable subspecies : saprolings and thrulls , respectively .
These creatures soon turn on their creators and terrorize the people of Sarpadia , while the Merfolk suffered an invasion of crustacean - like homarids , which benefitted from the cooling oceans .
Barraged by invading orcs , goblins , homarids , thrulls , and even fungus , the civilizations of Sarpadia are destroyed , and the continent falls into darkness .
The climate - altering effects of the devastation continued leading to a global ice age .
New empires rose and fought in the cold .
Eventually this cooling climate was reversed and life returned to normal .
This story is portrayed in the Ice Age , Alliances , and Coldsnap expansions , and in the novels Eternal Ice and Shattered Alliance by Jeff Grubb .
Jeff Grubb also wrote a short story " continuing " the story for Coldsnap , which is located in the Player 's Guide insert you can find in a Coldsnap Fat Pack .
*
This short interlude depicts the decimated plane of Ulgrotha , in which many civilizations struggle for power against Baron Sengir , a powerful vampire who has manipulated a number of other characters into serving his ends .
The planeswalkers Serra and Feroz turn the balance in favor of the light , but are killed in battle against a crazed alien planeswalker .
The story has no concrete ending .
The story concerns three of the most powerful nations of Jamuraa ( a tropical continent ) — the militaristic kingdom of the Zhalfirins , the religious state of Femeref , and the trading province of the Suq'Ata empire .
Zhalfir was the warrior nation , based mainly on red .
Femeref was mainly white , and featured clerics and healers , while the seafaring traders of Suq'Ata were mostly blue .
Mirage concerned these three nations and their struggle against the evil wizard Kaervek .
Kaervek has imprisoned the powerful wizard and diplomat Mangara in an amber prison and the bulk of the story details the Jamuraans attempting to free Mangara .
In addition to these events the planeswalker Teferi has caused his island to disappear from existence for almost 200 years .
It is the phasing of the entire island that led Kaervek and Mangara to Jamuraa in the first place .
*
The Phyrexian Invasion : After millennia of peace , the machine - like Phyrexians , who originate on a hellish mechanical world , invade the world of Dominaria led by the former Thran Yawgmoth from the pocket universe of Rath .
The Phyrexian invasion divides in many sub - stories .
* The Urza Saga : Following the destruction of Argoth , Urza becomes a planeswalker and foresees the invasion of Dominaria .
Urza 's travels lead the war to the peaceful universe of Serra 's realm which is destroyed by Phyrexian armies ; survivors of the plane flee to Dominaria and Ulgrotha .
In preparation for the invasion , Urza creates the Tolarian academy , a research and development laboratory - school in which he and other mighty wizards train mages for the upcoming invasion and experiment on weaponry development , time - travel and genetic manipulation in hopes of creating a defensive army .
The time experiments lead to a temporal collapse and the academy becomes laced with time fractures , which are both dangerous and useful to the inhabitants .
Urza himself develops a fearful Legacy Weapon and Karn , a self - aware golem which , combined , can defeat any foe .
This story arc is linked to The Thran , Antiquities , The Dark , Ice Age and Homelands and is depicted in the books The Brothers War , Planeswalker and Time Streams .
*
The Legacy : This follows the travels of many brave adventurers from all across Dominaria who , aboard Urza 's vessel " The Weatherlight " , seek to collect the different artifacts left by Urza and necessary to assemble the Legacy Weapon .
Opposed to them , many Phyrexian allies or lords will try to stop them from their quest .
This story arc is the longest in the Magic continuity , and its characters are depicted in the Weatherlight , Tempest , Stronghold , Exodus , Mercadian Masques , and Nemesis card sets ; later , the story continues and concludes in the Invasion arc .
* Prophecy : Parallel to the " Legacy " history , and following the Mirage and Urza 's Saga histories , in Dominaria the warrior kingdom of Keld ensues war all across Jamuraa .
Many wizards from the Tolarian academy aid the federation of Jamuraa and succeed in stopping the Keldons ' warmongering .
* : The dreaded Phyrexians finally come to Dominaria across many " planar portals " and Urza , who has been spending thousands of years planning a defense against the Invasion , implements his plans .
The Weatherlight leads the Dominarian forces , but the widespread chaos , and the uncompromising nature of Urza 's tactics , threaten to destroy the plane .
The arrival of Yawgmoth himself leads to the Apocalypse , but he is finally defeated by the fully assembled Legacy Weapon .
The Invasion itself occurs in the Invasion block , but is linked to all previous story arcs .
From this point on , the publishers switch to a series of self - contained plotlines with occasional links to older stories , rather than sweeping epics spanning years of card releases .
One hundred years after the devastation of the Invasion , Dominaria is still in the process of rebuilding .
This part of the story takes place in Otaria , a devastated continent that was , surprisingly , the place least affected by the Invasion .
It centers on Kamahl , a barbarian , and his quest to get the Mirari , a magical orb of seemingly endless power .
Having acquired the Mirari with devastating effects , Kamahl renounces it and tries to be rid of it , but the events he triggered have gone far beyond his control .
The story shifts to a battle between Akroma , an angel , and Phage , Kamahl 's corrupted sister , who kills with a touch .
As zealous armies gather behind each of them , Kamahl needs to end their escalating conflict before Otaria itself is decimated .
To this end , he recovers the slumbering Mirari and allies himself with three ancient gods who have been waiting for these events to happen again .
This story is linked to Mirrodin , and sets the scene for the first major storyline not set on Dominaria .
* Mirrodin : The story of Mirrodin takes place on a new , metal world , created by the planeswalker Karn and populated by races stolen from other worlds .
Glissa , an elf , and her allies strive to assemble the mythical Kaldra , so that they can defeat the crazed Memnarch , who lives inside the hollow world .
All the while , we learn about the history of Mirrodin , and its loose , but nonetheless present , connection to previous storylines based on Dominaria .
The Mirrodin story is the first of the new year - long , three - set story arcs , having started in 2003 with the release of Moons of Mirrodin and continuing with 2004 's The Darksteel Eye and The Fifth Dawn .
* The Kami War : The plane of Kamigawa is naturally divided in two : the kakuriyo Kami world ( spirit world ) and the utsushiyo material world ; both working and operating harmoniously until the Kami began to attack the material world twenty years before the story opens .
The books follow the lone samurai Toshiro Umezawa and the princess Michiko as they try to bring peace to Kamigawa .
As well as giving the game an unusual , strong Oriental feel , this storyline is interesting in that the designers deliberately tried to give the story a strong influence over the game itself .
Instead of relying on the traditional " color wheel " conflict ( the game of Magic : the Gathering is based on a five - point circle of allied and enemy color affiliations ) , the color of any given card may often be less important than whether it has a Kami or Material theme .
* Ravnica : Ravnica is a plane covered almost entirely in cityscape .
The city 's ten " guilds " , political organizations each based on a different two - color mana pairing , warred for a long period of time .
After the conflict , a magical document , the Guildpact , was created to ensure that the plane remained at peace and that the guilds would constrain themselves to their social roles .
The main storyline begins 9,999 years later , as anticipation of the decimillennial anniversary builds .
The once - noble guilds have corrupted and decayed over time , and a great political gridlock is all that keeps Ravnica stable .
A series of protagonists - most notably Agrus Kos , a law enforcement officer from the Boros League , and Teysa Karlov , a lawmage from the Orzhov Syndicate , uncover the plots of the various guildmasters , as well as the ambitions of the " secret guild " , House Dimir .
The flavor of the cards again exerted considerable influence over the mechanics of the game , encouraging players to build decks devoted to a particular guild .
The Time Spiral block returns to a post - apocalyptic Dominaria .
Teferi , a planeswalker , abandoned Urza during the Phyrexian Invasion by " phasing " ( temporarily removing from reality ) two landmasses known as Shiv and Zhalfir out .
He returns to Dominaria to find it in a state of ruin .
In addition to having been almost totally devastated by the Apocalypse , mysterious " time rifts " have opened in the skies across the plane , making planeswalking and spellcasting more difficult .
Teferi wants to ensure that Zhalfir and Shiv return to Dominaria safely - however , the time rifts , and the considerably deteriorated state of the plane itself , mean that the two continents no longer " fit .
"
Should Zhalfir and Shiv land , Dominaria and the entire Multiverse would be destroyed .
The Time Spiral block was billed as Magic 's nostalgia block , and would revisit themes and characters from every storyline up to the end of the Otaria arc .
As the Invasion did before , the Time Spiral story is linked to any other story arc before it , harkening back to many earlier settings and characters , even those outside of Dominaria .
It was during this block that The Mending occurred , greatly reducing the powers of all planeswalkers .
* Lorwyn : Whereas most blocks consist of three sets , it was decided to turn the 2007/08 block into two mini blocks of two sets each .
The focus of the first is the plane of Lorwyn , an idyllic , perpetually sunlit world populated by a wide variety of civilized species .
These tribes are generally peaceful but keen to keep to themselves .
The story centers around an elf outcast named Rhys who has triggered a series of events foreseen by his mentor , Colfenor , and a flamekin pilgrim named Ashling who believes her path and Rhys 's are the same .
The coming Aurora , an annual event when the plane darkens and lights appear in the sky , is the key to whatever it is that Rhys needs to do .
* Shadowmoor : Rather than passing harmlessly as it normally does , the Aurora instead transforms Lorwyn into an eerie reflection of itself .
The idyllic , sunlit world is replaced by the shadows and omnipresent malice of Shadowmoor .
Landscapes , races and even individuals become twisted alternatives with no indication that their Lorwyn selves ever existed .
Ashling , now known as the Extinguisher , has a central role in this shift , and it falls to Rhys ( an elvish hero in this place ) and Maralen , a mysterious elf and one of the very few unchanged by the transformation , to discover why .
* Alara : The plane of Alara was shattered long ago by an unknown force ; it is now split unequally into five unique shards , each having no knowledge of the others .
Each shard was denied two of the five colors of magic by the event ( the inhabitants of each shard have had no recollection of the missing two colors of mana for centuries ) , and have evolved around their remaining three :
The militant , feudal , sun - dappled plane of Bant ; the scientific , order - obsessed , windy and cloud covered plane of Esper ; the desperate , lifeless , blackened plane of Grixis ; the violent , harsh , volcanic plane of Jund ; and the green , lush , stampeding plane of Naya .
Many species die off , evolve , or border extinction in each shard due to insufficient mana sustenance ( Zombies ca n't survive without black mana , angels ca n't survive without white mana , etc . ) , and others thrived .
The force that shattered the plane is unknown , but believed to be the five - headed hydra Progenitus ( for unknown reasons ) who disappears at the shattering of the plane and reappears in the expansion " Alara - Conflux " when the shards are reunited .
* Conflux : As the Shards of Alara draw closer together , the millennia - long machinations of a hidden evil come closer to bearing a dire harvest .
Nicol Bolas , once one of the most powerful planeswalkers , has been manipulating the civilizations of Alara for his own reasons .
As the shards violently collide with each other after centuries apart , war erupts on all sides , and in the chaos , Bolas seeks to harness the power of the Maelstrom , the chaotic center of the plane where all five colors come together in a magical storm of unimaginable energies and power .
The planeswalker Elspeth Tirel and the valiant knight Rafiq start to catch wind of an insidious plot and begin investigating .
* Zendikar : A new plane is introduced : Zendikar , a world with powerful , uncontrollable mana and many dangerous features , including the Roil .
Planeswalkers are drawn to Zendikar because of its powerful mana .
Many of Zendikar 's residents must fight against the land itself as mountains become alive and forests move .
It is revealed that thousands of years ago three planeswalkers locked powerful , unstoppable beings known as the Eldrazi in a complex prison on Zendikar , causing the plane 's complex problems .
When three more planeswalkers enter the prison , the Eldrazi are released and start destroying Zendikar as they can not escape from the plane .
* Scars of Mirrodin : As the storyline returns to the metallic plane of Mirrodin , it is found divided .
A corrupted Karn has returned and brought with him the rot of Phyrexia .
As the world faces off , Mirran versus Phyrexian , the idyllic plane is brought to a new form .
This set also marked a deviation from the five color wheel , instead pushing players to align their decks to the Mirran or Phyrexian side of the conflict ; to reenforce this , they created a web site devoted to the war where the player can switch between sides .
In February 2011 , it was announced that Phyrexia had won , and the set New Phyrexia played out as a war amongst five Praetors of Phyrexia , battling each other for dominance .
* Innistrad : A new plane is introduced : Innistrad , set in a gothic - themed world , where vampires , werewolves , and demons run rampant .
Before the events of the block , the human population of Innistrad was constantly beset by supernatural creatures .
In response , the planeswalker Sorin created the arch - angel Avacyn to protect the humans .
Avacyn set out to eradicate all of Innistrad 's demons , leading to an epic battle against the elder demon , Griselbrand .
During the battle , Griselbrand was able to trick Avacyn into locking both beings in the magical prison known as the Helvault .
With Avacyn gone , the angel 's protection disappeared and soon creatures of darkness were free to prey on mankind once more .
When Sorin finds out about this he goes straight to Innistrad ( presumably from Zendikar ) to see what can be done .
While he is searching for Avacyn , Liliana Vess is there searching for Griselbrand so she can slay him and release herself from their bargain for Liliana 's soul .
Liliana discovers the Hellvault and releases Griselbrand and Avacyn .
Liliana slays Griselbrand , and Avacyn 's restored powers guard humanity from the zombies , werewolves , and dangers of Innistrad .
* Return to Ravnica : Returning to the megalopolis of Ravnica , the guilds have been in a state of constant warfare ever since the events of Dissension , when the Guildpact was dissolved .
The Izzet League 's guild leader Niv - Mizzet discovers a maze passing through the Tenth District of the city .
He sets his entire guild on figuring out the point of this " Implicit Maze " .
It is learned later in the story that the being who traverses the maze will become the Ruler of Ravnica .
Niv - Mizzet makes an announcement all over the city of Ravnica , asking all guilds to send a champion to run the maze .
The planeswalker Jace Beleren solves the mystery of the maze and lauds himself the Living Guildpact , settling disputes for the ten guilds .
* Theros : On a new plane , Theros , based on the heroes , myths , and monsters of Ancient Greece , Elspeth arrives and is declared the Champion of the sun god , Heliod .
The planeswalker Xenagos becomes the God of Revels , angering the established pantheon of the other Gods .
Heliod gives Elspeth the Godsend , a sword with which to slay Xenagos .
Ajani Goldmane , another planeswalker , helps Elspeth to kill Xenagos .
Meanwhile , the planeswalker Kiora is searching the seas of Theros for something that will help to defeat the Eldrazi that will inevitably eventually destroy the Multiverse .
The merfolk begin to worship Kiora , mistaking her for Thassa , the God of the Sea .
At this point all of the Gods of Theros are very angry at the planeswalkers .
After Elspeth kills Xenagos , Heliod takes the Godsend and kills Elspeth with it , sending Elspeth to the underworld of Theros .
Ajani is angered and stays on Theros looking for a way to get even with the Gods .
* Khans of Tarkir :
A new plane ( Tarkir ) is the setting of this block .
Tarkir is the homeworld of Sarkhan Vol , a planeswalker known for an obsession with dragons , and the five warring clans , each aligned towards 3 colours .
The Mardu ( RWB ) , The Abzan ( WBG ) , The Jeskai ( URW ) , The Sultai ( BGU ) and the Temur ( GUR ) .
All dragons have gone extinct on Tarkir , hunted to extinction by the 5 clans many years ago , but Sarkhan returns to find the source of the voice within his mind .
The Planeswalker Sorin also comes to Tarkir where he discovers that Ugin , one of the Planeswalkers that helped to seal the Eldrazi on Zendikar , has died many years ago .
Sorin leaves Tarkir saddened by this loss .
With the help of the Jeskai leader Narset , Sarkhan makes his way to the resting place of Ugin and travels back in time through the Nexus ( the remains of Ugin form this Nexus ) but not before he sees Narset killed by Zurgo Helmsmasher , Khan of the Mardu .
* Fate Reforged :
Sarkhan travels through the Nexus 1000 years into the past and discovers the world of Tarkir before the fall of the Dragons .
He discovers that the Dragons are formed within great tempests and that these tempests are powered by Ugin himself .
He arrives in time to see Ugin confront his nemesis Nicol Bolas , Sarkhan 's old master ( although at this point in time Nicol Bolas had not met Sarkhan yet ) .
Sarkhan sees Nicol Bolas kill Ugin and leave Tarkir , leaving Sarkhan distraught that he could not save the great Dragon .
Using the power of the Hedron he had recovered from Zendikar , Sarkhan encases Ugin within a cocoon of Hedrons and seals him away to save his life .
This act changes the future history of Tarkir , as with Ugin still alive the Dragon Tempests would never end , preventing the humans from hunting the Dragons into extinction .
Due to his actions changing his own past , Sarkhan is pulled from the past Tarkir and back into the present .
* Dragons of Tarkir :
Sarkhan returns to the present day Tarkir to find the Dragons have survived and now live together with the humans .
Although the 5 clans still clash among each other , they are now led by the powerful Dragon Lords instead of the human Khans of Sarkhan 's own past .
He sees many people he knew from his own timeline , however none of them remember him and all have changed as Sarkhan 's actions have influenced this new Tarkir .
Sarkhan travels again to the resting place of Ugin and discovers the revived Elder Dragon is gone .
He can not sense Ugin 's power in his plane but takes refuge in the fact that Ugin is safe .
Sarkhan then goes to find Narset where he discovers his old friend has now left the confines of the Dragons Clans and has learnt the secret history of Tarkir , including the history of Sarkhan himself .
We also learn that Narset 's spark has ignited and she has become a Planeswalker .
We leave the pair on Tarkir , neither of them intending to leave for a long time , with too much to see and learn upon the reinvigorated plane of Tarkir .
* Battle for Zendikar : The set picks up the storyline of Zendikar where the released Eldrazi devastate the plane .
Ulamog , one of the 3 released Eldrazi titans , slowly consumes the land itself .
The Zendikari population either flees or unites their strength to fight the Eldrazi together under the leadership of the planeswalker Gideon Jura .
Gideon also convinces Jace on Ravnica to help Zendikar .
Jace agrees , also since he is partly responsible for releasing the Eldrazi from their prison .
He is convinced that the hedrons and leylines of the plane are the key to imprison the Eldrazi once again .
The planeswalker Nissa with her unique connection to the plane itself and Kiora , with the weapon she stole from Thassa on Theros join the fight as well .
With joint forces the Planeswalker and the Zendikari build a trap of aligned hedrons .
For a moment they can imprison Ulamog again , but they were sabotaged by the reignited Demon Planeswalker Ob Nixilis who frees Ulamog , seeking revenge on Nissa and destruction of the plane he despises .
He awakens Kozilek as well leaving the Plane with two ravaging Eldazi titans .
* Shadows over Innistrad : The denizens of Innistrad are beset on all sides .
Their faith in the archangel Avacyn brought them strength when fighting against demons , werewolves , vampires , and all manners of horrors .
But , now the mighty protector of the plane has been twisted into something monstrous by an outside influence .
A very familiar force has stepped into the gothic world , and its corrupting tendrils now touch everything .
The next set , Eldritch Moon , focuses on the fact that Emrakul , the most powerful Eldrazi titan who had been missing from the Battle for Zendikar storyline , is now on Innistrad .
Together , the Gatewatch must find a way to save the plane from Emrakul 's influence .
This story also focuses on cosmic horror instead of the traditional gothic horror of old Innistrad .
* Kaladesh : The Gatewatch go to Chandra Nalaar 's home world , the titular plane of Kaladesh , where she finds her mother ( presumed dead ) and almost kills Tezzeret .
Tezzeret later kidnaps Rashmi , winner of the famous Inventor 's Fair , and begins a dastardly plot to control the ruling Consulate .
With the Consulate imprisoning inventors and confiscating their devices following the Fair , tensions between the populace and the government reach a boiling point , as depicted in Aether Revolt .
The block focuses on a Steampunk aesthetic , with the steam replaced by the powerful material aether .
* Amonkhet : The Gatewatch set out to destroy the evil dragon planeswalker Nicol Bolas after learning of his dominion over the titular desert plane Amonkhet .
In the desert , they find a city ( Naktamun ) teeming with food , water , and life , ruled by five gods , with Bolas seemingly absent altogether .
The people of Naktamun train their entire lives to die in ritual combat , hoping to experience pure bliss in the afterlife when the God - Pharaoh ( Bolas ) returns to Amonkhet .
In Hour of Devastation , Bolas returns as prophesied , only to raze Naktamun and reveal the true purpose of the training and combat : to create an army of physically - perfect and combat - adept mummies to serve as an unquestionably loyal army .
The block 's setting is based ancient Egypt , with themes of social hierarchy and contrast between life and death .
* Ixalan : The plane is home to four primary tribes , each with distinct synergies and advantages that draw off of one another .
As for the tale : the golden city of Orazca , bured deep in the jungle , houses a great secret .
The immortal sun , an artifact of immense power , is hidden there .
Now , that secret has become known .
The great forces of the plane gather to combat one another in a contest to see who will claim the mighty prize .
The merfolk River Herals , the vampiric Legion of Dusk , the Brazen Coalition of pirates , and the Sun Empire 's dinosaur riders all meet in open conflict to decide the fate of their world .
* Dominaria : A return to the place of so many of Magic : The Gathering 's storylines in celebration of the game 's 25th anniversary .
ADDITIONAL PLOTS
Section::::Additional plots .
There are numerous other smaller plots and subplots that take place in Dominaria and on the many planes of the multiverse of Dominia as well as events after the invasion of Dominaria by the Phyrexians .
*
The sets from Weatherlight up to Apocalypse follow the epic story arc of the crew of the airship Weatherlight , their trek across several planes , and their ultimate role in defending Dominaria from the Phyrexian invasion .
*
The sets from Odyssey to Scourge , set in the era of upheaval after the Invasion , involve the Dominarian continent of Otaria and the struggle between various factions for the powerful artifact known as the Mirari .
*
The sets from Mirrodin to Fifth Dawn are set in the world of Mirrodin , where artificial and natural life are inseparably entwined .
*
Several have their own storylines and worlds .
* Starting with The Mending during Time Spiral , many of the stories revolve around the newly created , de - powered Planeswalkers .
These characters recur in multiple sets , and may receive reprints or entirely new cards in new sets .
BOOK TITLES
HARPER PRISM Section::::Book titles .
Section::::Harper Prism . !
Title ! !
Type ! !
Author ! !
release ! !
Isbn ! !
eBook
Arena Novel William R. Forstchen
Nov 1994 Yes Whispering Woods Novel Clayton Emery Jan 1995
No Shattered Chains
Novel Clayton Emery
Mar 1995 No Final Sacrifice Novel Clayton
Emery May 1995
No
The Cursed Land
Novel Teri McLaren Aug 1995
No
The Prodigal Sorcerer Novel Marc
Sumner Nov 1995
No Ashes of the Sun Novel Hanovi Braddock Mar 1996
No Tapestries Anthology Edited by Kathy Ice May 1996
No Distant Planes Anthology Edited by Kathy Ice May 1996
No Song of Time Novel Teri McLaren
Jun 1996
No
And Peace Shall Sleep Novel Sonia Orin Lyris Jul 1996
No Dark Legacy Novel Robert E. Vardeman
Dec 1996
No WIZARDS OF THE COAST Section::::Wizards of the Coast . !
Title ! !
Type ! !
Cycle ! !
Author ! !
release ! !
ISBN ! !
eBook
The Brothers ' War NovelArtifacts ( I ) Jeff Grubb
May 1998
Yes Rath and Storm Anthology Edited by Peter Archer Jul 1998
Yes Planeswalker NovelArtifacts ( II )
Lynn Abbey Sep 1998 Yes Colors of Magic Anthology Jess Lebow , ed .
Feb 1999
No Time Streams Novel Artifacts ( III ) J.
Robert King Apr 1999 Yes
The Gathering Dark
NovelIce Age ( I ) Jeff Grubb Jun 1999 Yes
Bloodlines Novel Artifacts ( IV ) Loren L. Coleman Aug 1999 Yes Mercadian Masques NovelMasquerade Francis Lebaron Sep 1999
Yes
The Thran Novel J.
Robert King Dec 1999
Yes Nemesis NovelMasquerade ( II ) Paul B. Thompson
Feb 2000
Yes
The Eternal Ice NovelIce Age ( II ) Jeff Grubb May 2000
Yes
The Myths of Magic Anthology Edited by Jess Lebow
Jun 2000
No Prophecy NovelMasquerade ( III )
Vance Moore Jun
2000 Yes Invasion Novel Invasion ( I ) J. Robert King Oct 2000
Yes Planeshift NovelInvasion ( II )
J. Robert King Feb 2001
Yes
The Shattered Alliance
NovelIce Age ( III )
Jeff Grubb Dec 2000 Yes
Johan
NovelLegends ( I )
Clayton
Emery Apr 2001
No Apocalypse NovelInvasion ( III ) J. Robert King
Jun 2001
Yes
The Dragons of Magic Anthology Edited by J. Robert King Aug 2001
No
Odyssey
NovelOdyssey ( I ) Vance Moore Sep 2001
Yes
Jedit NovelLegends ( II )
Clayton
Emery Dec 2001
No Chainer 's Torment Novel Odyssey ( II ) Scott McGough Jan 2002 Yes Secrets of Magic Anthology Ed . by Jess Lebow
Mar 2002
No
Judgment NovelOdyssey ( III )
Will McDermott May 2002
Yes Hazezon NovelLegends ( III ) Clayton
Emery Aug 2002
No
Onslaught NovelOnslaught ( I )
J. Robert King Sep 2002 No Assassin 's Blade Novel Legends 2 ( I )
Scott McGough Dec 2002
No
Legions Novel Onslaught ( II )
J. Robert King Jan 2003
No Emperor 's Fist NovelLegends 2 ( II ) Scott McGough Mar 2003
No Scourge Novel Onslaught ( III )
J. Robert King May 2003
No Monsters of Magic Anthology Edited by J. Robert King Aug 2003 No The Moons of Mirrodin NovelMirrodin ( I )
Will McDermott Sep 2003 Yes
The Champion 's Trial NovelLegends 2 ( III )
Scott McGough
Nov 2003
No
The Darksteel Eye Novel Mirrodin ( II )
Jess Lebow Jan 2004 Yes
The Fifth Dawn Novel Mirrodin ( III ) Cory Herndon
May 2004
Yes Outlaw : Champions of Kamigawa Novel Kamigawa ( I ) Scott McGough
Sep 2004
Yes
Heretic : Betrayers of Kamigawa NovelKamigawa ( II ) Scott McGough Jan 2005
Yes
Guardian : Saviors of Kamigawa NovelKamigawa ( III ) Scott McGough
May 2005
Yes
Ravnica : City of Guilds NovelRavnica ( I )
Cory J. Herndon Sep 2005 Yes Guildpact Novel Ravnica ( II )
Cory J.
Herndon Jan 2006 Yes Dissension Novel Ravnica ( III )
Cory J. Herndon May 2006
Yes Time Spiral Novel Time Spiral ( I ) Scott McGough
Oct 2006
Yes Planar Chaos Novel Time Spiral ( II ) Scott McGough & Timothy Sanders Jan 2007
No Future Sight Novel Time Spiral ( III ) Scott McGough & John Delaney Apr 2007
No Lorwyn Novel Lorwyn ( I ) Cory J. Herndon & Scott McGough Sep 2007
No Morningtide Novel Lorwyn ( II ) Cory J. Herndon & Scott McGough
Jan 2008
No ShadowmoorAnthologyShadowmoor ( I)Edited by Peter Archer & Susan J. MorrisApr 2008
No
EventideNovelShadowmoor ( II)Cory J Herndon & Scott McGough Jun 2008
No
Alara Unbroken Novel Alara ( I )
Doug Beyer May 2009
Yes Agents of Artifice Novel Planeswalker ( I )
Ari Marmell November 2009
Yes
The Purifying Fire Novel Planeswalker ( II ) Laura Resnick January 2010
Yes
Zendikar : In the Teeth of Akoum Novel Zendikar Robert B. Wintermute April 2010
Yes Test of Metal Novel Planeswalker ( III ) Matthew Stover October 2010
Yes Scars of Mirrodin :
The Quest for Karn Novel Mirrodin Robert B. Wintermute April 2011
Yes Return to Ravnica :
The Secretist eBook Return To
Ravnica ( I )
Doug Beyer November 2012 ASIN B009MYB82Y
Yes
Gatecrash : The Secretist eBook Return to Ravnica ( II )
Doug Beyer February 2013 ASIN
B009MY9QWS
Yes
Dragon 's Maze : The Secretist eBook
Return to Ravnica ( III )
Doug Beyer May 2013 ASIN B00AD2OXLM
Yes
Theros :
Godsend eBook Theros ( I ) Jenna Helland April 2014 ASIN
B00FUZNL7O
Yes
Journey Into Nyx :
Godsend eBook Theros ( II ) Jenna Helland May 2014 ASIN
B00JNPF4JA
Yes
COMICS TITLES Section::::Comics Titles .
Armada ( Acclaim Comics ) : !
Title ! !
Cycle ! !
Author ! !
release Magic : the Gathering :
The Shadow Mage Planeswalker
WarJeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Val Mayerik & James Dean Pascoe ( art)Jul 1995
Magic : the Gathering :
The Shadow Mage ( 2)Planeswalker WarJeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) & Val Mayerik ( art)Aug 1995 Magic : the Gathering : The Shadow Mage ( 3)Planeswalker WarJeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Val Mayerik & Rick J Bryant ( art)Sep 1995 Magic : the Gathering : The Shadow Mage ( 4)Planeswalker WarJeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Val Mayerik , Rick J Bryant & Gonzalo Mayo ( art)Oct 1995 Ice Age on the World of Magic : the Gathering ?
Jeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Rafael Kayanan & Rodney Ramos ( art ) .
Cover by Charles Vess Jul 1995 Ice Age on the World of Magic :
the Gathering ( 2)?Jeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Rafael Kayanan & Rodney Ramos ( art ) .
Cover by Charles VessAug 1995 Ice Age on the World of Magic : the Gathering ( 3)?Jeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Rafael Kayanan & Rodney Ramos ( art ) .
Cover by Charles VessSep 1995 Ice Age on the World of Magic : the Gathering ( 4)?Jeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Rafael Kayanan & Rodney Ramos ( art ) .
Cover by Charles VessOct 1995 Magic : the Gathering :
Nightmare?Hillary J. Bader ( wr . ) , Anthony Castrillo & Anibal Rodriguez ( art)Nov 1995 Fallen Empires on the World of Magic : the Gathering?Kevin Maples & Jeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Alex Maleev & Rodney Ramos ( art)Sep 1995 Fallen Empires on the World of Magic : the Gathering ( 2 ) ?
Kevin Maples & Jeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Alex Maleev & Rodney Ramos ( art)Oct 1995 Magic : the Gathering :
Wayfarer Planeswalker War / WayfarerJeffrey Gomez ( wr . )
, Val Mayerik , Rick J Bryant & Gonzalo Mayo ( art ) .
Cover by Michael Wm .
KalutaNov 1995 Magic : the Gathering :
Wayfarer ( 2 ) Planeswalker War / WayfarerJeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Val Mayerik , Rick J Bryant & Gonzalo Mayo ( art ) .
Cover by Michael Wm .
KalutaDec 1995 Magic : the Gathering :
Wayfarer ( 3)Planeswalker War / WayfarerJeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Val Mayerik , Rick J Bryant & Gonzalo Mayo ( art ) .
Cover by Michael Wm .
KalutaJan 1996
Magic : the Gathering :
Wayfarer ( 4)Planeswalker War / WayfarerJeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Val Mayerik , Rick J Bryant & Gonzalo Mayo ( art ) .
Cover by Michael Wm .
KalutaFeb 1996 Magic : the Gathering :
Wayfarer ( 5)Planeswalker War / WayfarerJeffrey Gomez ( wr . ) , Val Mayerik , Rick J Bryant & Gonzalo Mayo ( art ) .
Cover by Michael Wm .
KalutaMar 1996
Antiquities War on the World of Magic :
the GatheringAntiquities War ( 1)Jerry Prosser ( wr . ) , Paul Smith & Thomas ' Tom ' Ryder ( art)Nov 1995 Antiquities War on the World of Magic : the GatheringAntiquities War ( 2)Jerry Prosser ( wr . ) , Phil Hester & Thomas ' Tom ' Ryder ( art)Dec 1995 Antiquities War on the World of Magic : the GatheringAntiquities War ( 3)Jerry Prosser ( wr . ) , Phil Hester & Thomas ' Tom ' Ryder ( art)Jan 1996 Antiquities War on the World of Magic : the GatheringAntiquities War ( 4)Jerry Prosser ( wr . ) , Phil Hester & Thomas ' Tom ' Ryder ( art)Feb 1996 Magic :
the Gathering : Arabian NightsArabian NightsJeof Vita & Susan Wright ( wr . ) , Alex Maleev & Rodney Ramos ( art)Dec 1995 Magic : the Gathering : Arabian Nights ( 2)Arabian NightsJeof Vita & Susan Wright ( wr . ) , Alex Maleev & Rodney Ramos ( art)Dec
1995 Convocations :
A Magic : the Gathering GalleryVariousJan 1996 Serra Angel on the World of Magic : the GatheringAnthologyMargaret Weis & ?
Aug 1996 Homelands on the World of Magic :
the Gathering AnthologyD.G. Chichester ( wr . ) & Rebecca Guay ( art )
Feb 1996 Legend of Jedit Ojanen on the World of Magic : the Gathering?Kenn Bell ( wr . ) & David Boller ( art)Mar 1996
Legend of Jedit Ojanen on the World of Magic : the Gathering?Kenn Bell ( wr . ) & David Boller ( art)Apr 1996 Magic : the Gathering :
Shandalar?David Quinn ( wr . ) & Bo Hampton ( art)Apr 1996 Magic :
the Gathering : Shandalar ( 2)?David Quinn ( wr . ) & Bo Hampton ( art)Apr 1996
A Magic : the Gathering Legend :
Fallen Angel?Nancy A. Collins ( wr . ) , Don Perlin , Dennis Callero & Richard Kane Ferguson ( art)May 1996 Elder Dragons : a Magic : the Gathering Legend?Art Holcomb ( wr . ) & Doug Tropea - Wheatley ( art)Apr 1996 Elder Dragons : a Magic : the Gathering Legend ( 2)?Art Holcomb ( wr . ) & Doug Tropea - Wheatley ( art)May 1996
Magic : the Gathering :
Dakkon Blackblade?Jerry Prosser ( wr . ) , Rags Morales & Barbara Kaalberg ( art)Jun 1996 Urza - Mishra War on the World of Magic : The Gathering?Jerry Prosser ( wr . ) , Tom Mandrake & Bill Sienkiewicz ( art ) .
Cover by Bill SienkiewiczSep 1996 Urza - Mishra War on the World of Magic :
The Gathering ( 2)?Jerry Prosser ( wr . ) , Tom Mandrake & Bill Sienkiewicz ( art ) .
Cover by Bill SienkiewiczOct 1996 Dark Horse : !
Title ! !
Type ! !
Cycle ! !
Author ! !
release
Gerrard 's Quest ( 1 ) : Initiation ComicsGerrard 's Quest Mike Grell ( wr . ) , Pop Mhan & Norman Lee ( art ) Mar 1998 Gerrard 's Quest ( 2 ) : Legend ComicsGerrard 's Quest Mike Grell ( wr . ) , Pop Mhan & Norman Lee ( art )
Apr 1998
Gerrard 's Quest ( 3 ) : Crucible ComicsGerrard 's Quest Mike Grell ( wr . ) , Pop Mhan & Norman Lee ( art ) May 1998
Gerrard 's Quest ( 4 ) : Destiny ComicsGerrard 's Quest Mike Grell ( wr . ) , Pop Mhan & Norman Lee ( art )
Sep 1998
Gerrard 's QuestCollectionGerrard 's QuestMike Grell ( wr . ) , Pop Mhan & Norman Lee ( art)Apr 1999
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Wizards of the Coast 's Magic Expansion Story Summaries * Phyrexia.com Storyline Central - information about major characters , places , and artifacts .
*
The Legends of Magic ( Warning :
information from this site is pre - revisionist and occasionally inaccurate )
* The Wizards of the Coast Message Board --
Storyline Info Booth
* MTGSalvation Wiki MTGSalvation Wiki with much storyline information