THE GUESS
WHO The Guess Who is a Canadian rock band , formed in Winnipeg in 1965 .
Initially gaining recognition in Canada , the group found international success from the late 1960s through the mid-1970s with many hit singles , including " No Time " , " American Woman " , " Laughing " , " These Eyes " , " Undun " and " Share the Land " .
The band have continued to perform and record to the present day , and at various times have included many well - known musicians , including Burton Cummings and Randy Bachman ( of Bachman – Turner Overdrive ) .
Formed as a garage rock band , their musical style encompassed the pop rock and psychedelic rock genres .
The band was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame in 1987 .
In 2002 , Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Garry Peterson , Donnie McDougall and Bill Wallace received the Governor General 's Performing Arts Award for Lifetime Artistic Achievement for The Guess
Who 's contribution to popular music in Canada .
HISTORY EARLY YEARS ( 1958–1965 )
Section::::History .
Section::::Early years ( 1958–1965 ) .
The Guess Who started out as a local Winnipeg band formed by singer / guitarist Chad Allan ( real name : Allan Kowbel ) in 1958 and initially called Allan and the Silvertones .
This was changed to Chad Allan and the Reflections in 1962 , by which point the band consisted of five Winnipeg - born musicians : Chad Allan ( lead vocals / guitar ) , Bob Ashley ( keyboards ) , Randy Bachman ( guitars , backing vocals ) , Jim Kale ( bass , backing vocals ) , and Garry Peterson ( drums , backing vocals ) .
The Reflections name was chosen since it was similar to the British group the Shadows .
The band 's debut single ( " Tribute To Buddy Holly " ) was released on Canadian - American Records in 1962 .
Chad Allan and the Reflections then signed with Quality Records and released several singles in 1963/64 , which were regional hits but did not make much of a mark across Canada .
Quality released an instrumental single , " Inside Out " , on their Reo subsidiary , deliberately miscredited to Bob Ashley & The Reflections .
In 1965 , the group changed their name to Chad Allan & the Expressions after a US group called the Reflections released the hit single " ( Just Like ) Romeo and Juliet " .
That year the band produced their first hit , a 1965 rendition of Johnny Kidd & the Pirates ' " Shakin ' All Over " .
This track reached No . 1 in Canada , No . 22 in the United States ( where Quality had licensed the track to the American Scepter label ) , and No . 27 in Australia .
Mimicking a ploy the previous year by " The
You Know
Who Group " in the United States , Quality Records credited the single only to Guess Who ?
in an attempt to build a mystique around the record .
Later in 1965 The Four Seasons attempted a similar masking by recording under the similar nom de disque
The Wonder
Who ?
After Quality Records revealed the band to be Chad Allan & The Expressions , disc jockeys continued to announce the group as Guess
Who ?
, effectively forcing the band to accept the new name .
TRANSITIONAL YEARS AND
LET 'S GO ( 1966–1968 )
Section::::Transitional years
and Let 's Go ( 1966–1968 ) .
The immediate follow - ups to " Shakin ' All Over " met with major success in Canada but very little elsewhere .
Unwilling to participate in the resulting long tours through western Canada , southern Ontario and the United States , Bob Ashley left the group in late 1965 .
Burton Cummings ( from the Winnipeg group
The Deverons ) joined the band as keyboardist in early January 1966 and shared lead vocal work with Chad Allan .
This line - up lasted only a few months ; Allan was now having difficulties singing properly and left in May 1966 to re - enroll in college , leaving Cummings to be the full - time lead singer .
By this point , the band 's name had become The Guess
Who ? , though the question mark would finally be dropped in 1968 ; with Chad Allan gone , the Chad Allan & The Expressions subtitle was also dropped .
Burton Cummings ' The Deverons bandmate , guitarist Bruce Decker , was brought in after Allan left but was let go by the end of that summer and the group was a quartet for the next four years , with Randy Bachman teaching Cummings any extra guitar parts needed for live shows .
Having performed many times in various venues in Winnipeg , the band began playing in Regina , Saskatchewan , in 1966 , performing in some of the same venues as Joni Mitchell and Neil Young .
The group continued to release top 40 singles in Canada , including " Clock on the Wall " .
One single called " His Girl " entered the UK charts in 1967 .
A trip to the United Kingdom to promote this single in February 1967 proved to be a financial mistake , as the single dropped off the charts after only one week , and The Guess Who found themselves unable to get airplay or to book paying gigs without work visas .
They returned to Canada within a matter of weeks , thousands of dollars in debt .
Later in 1967 , they were hired as the house band on the CBC radio show The Swingers and as the house band on CBC television program Let 's Go , a music show oriented toward teenagers ( and hosted , for a time , by their former bandmate Chad Allan ) .
39 weekly shows aired each year and the paycheques allowed the Guess Who to pay off their debts and gave them further exposure in Canada .
The band was initially hired to perform the chart hits of the day , in arrangements as close as possible to the actual hit records ; eventually , the show 's producer encouraged the group to write and perform their own material as well .
The Guess Who stayed with
Let 's Go for two years ; a compilation of some of their Let 's Go performances was released on CD in 2005 .
After seeing The Guess Who on Let 's Go , record producer / sales executive Jack Richardson contacted the band about participating in an advertising project for Coca - Cola ; this turned out to be the recording of a split LP with Ottawa band
The Staccatos ( soon to rename themselves the Five Man Electrical Band ) .
The resulting album was called A Wild Pair , and featured The Guess
Who on one side and The Staccatos on the other .
The album was available for purchase only through mail - order for the price of 10 Coca Cola bottle cap liners and $ 1 ( to cover shipping expenses ) .
Because the album was not sold through normal retail channels , no certified sales figures are available .
During their peak years up to their 1975 dissolution , The Guess Who were managed by Don Hunter .
INITIAL INTERNATIONAL SUCCESS ( 1969–1970 )
Section::::Initial international success ( 1969–1970 ) .
Richardson , who produced their material on A Wild Pair , signed the group to his production company and record label Nimbus 9 ( which handled their Canadian releases ) and mortgaged his house to finance the group 's next batch of recordings in September 1968 , which would become the album Wheatfield Soul ( March 1969 ) and included the ballad " These Eyes " .
This song , released in January 1969 , became the group 's first Top 10 US hit for their new label , RCA Records .
It sold over one million copies and was awarded a gold disc by the Recording Industry Association of America .
Richardson would remain the group 's producer through to their break - up in 1975 .
The band followed up Wheatfield Soul with the release of Canned Wheat in September 1969 .
The album featured the double - sided hit single " Laughing " / " Undun " along with the initial recording of the song " No Time " .
By 1970 , The Guess Who had moved toward an edgier hard - rock sound with the album American Woman .
The album 's A - side single , " American Woman " , with B - side " No Sugar Tonight " , was the first record by a Canadian band to top the US Hot 100 , and was the group 's only No . 1 hit in the United States .
( The Crew Cuts from Toronto had a long - running US # 1 " Sh - Boom " in the summer of 1954 , but that was four years before the existence of the Hot 100 . )
Another single from the album , a re - recording of " No Time " , became a Top Five US hit .
PERSONNEL CHANGES AND CONTINUED SUCCESS ( 1970–1975 )
Section::::Personnel changes and continued success ( 1970–1975 ) .
Randy Bachman had completed a solo album , Axe , in March 1970 , but then became ill with a gall bladder attack ; the group continued touring with an American guitarist from Philadelphia , Bobby Sabellico .
Differences between Bachman and Cummings ( mainly due to Bachman 's conversion to Mormonism ) led Bachman to leave the group after playing a final show at the Fillmore East in New York City on May 16 , 1970 .
Recent studio recordings ( eventually released in 1976 as The Way They Were ) were sidelined .
Bachman returned to Winnipeg and in 1971 formed Brave Belt which evolved into Bachman - Turner Overdrive .
Bachman was replaced by two Winnipeg guitarists : Kurt Winter , from the band Brother , and Greg Leskiw from the band Wild Rice .
Winter became a songwriting collaborator with Cummings .
The Guess Who recorded in Chicago , and continued to produce hit singles , including " Hand Me Down World " , " Share the Land " , " Hang on to Your Life " , " Albert Flasher " , and " Rain Dance " .
The albums Share the Land ( October 1970 ) and The Best of The Guess
Who ( April 1971 ) also achieved gold status for the band .
On July 17 , 1970 , the band was invited to perform at the White House for the Nixon family and its guests , but they were asked to eliminate " American Woman " ( due to political interpretations of the lyrics ) from their setlist as a " matter of taste " .
The group began to experiment with looser and more progressive stylings ; their next releases , So Long , Bannatyne in July 1971 , and Rockin ' in early 1972 , showed a decline in sales .
Leskiw , after differences with Cummings , left the band suddenly after a show in Corpus Christi , Texas on March 17 , 1972 .
The band played their next show in Fort Worth as a quartet before flying in Donnie McDougall ( from the bands Mother Tucker 's Yellow Duck and Vicious Circle ) from Winnipeg for the next gig in Phoenix on March 19 .
In May 1972 they recorded their favorably reviewed album Live at the Paramount at the Paramount Theatre in Seattle .
It was released in August .
After the Paramount shows , bassist Jim Kale was let go ; he went on to join Scrubbaloe Caine .
Winter 's former bandmate from Brother , Bill Wallace , assumed bass guitar duties , and the band went on tour with Three Dog Night in November and December 1972 to Japan , New Zealand , and Australia .
The Guess
Who 's next studio album , Artificial Paradise ( January 1973 ) , was another sales disappointment to the band , as was # 10 ( June 1973 ) .
Cummings , Wallace , and Winter wrote The Guess
Who 's last big hit , " Clap for the Wolfman , " which reached # 4 in Canada and # 6 in the United States .
The song was an homage to disc jockey Wolfman Jack , who lent his voice to the recording .
It appeared on Road Food ( April 1974 ) , which also contained the hit " Star Baby " ( # 39 ) , pulling the band out of their career slump , albeit temporarily .
McDougall and Winter were dropped in June 1974 , and the band brought in a new lead guitarist , Toronto 's Domenic Troiano ( formerly of Bush and Mandala , and fresh from a stint in James Gang ) , who became Cummings ' chief songwriting collaborator .
Troiano had worked with Cummings , Wallace , and Peterson in Los Angeles the month before on a soundtrack to a movie ( A Fool , A Fool , I Met a Fool )
that was never released .
The albums with Troiano , Flavours ( October 1974 ) and Power in the Music ( July 1975 ) , were jazzier and more progressive than the band 's earlier recordings ; Cummings , unhappy with the change , decided to pursue a solo career and The Guess Who broke up in October 1975 .
REFORMATIONS Section::::Reformations .
In November 1977 , CBC approached the band about a reunion .
Cummings and Bachman , busy with solo careers and their work together , were not interested .
Kale , who was on tour in Kenora , Ontario , as well as Peterson , Winter , and McDougall , responded .
Cummings and Bachman gave Kale permission to use The Guess Who name for the one show .
Soon after , Kale found out that the name The Guess Who had never been registered ; he promptly drove back to Winnipeg to register it , and maintains control of the band name to this day .
Kale soon organized a permanent renewal of The Guess
Who ; the bassist was initially joined by returning members Kurt Winter ( guitars ) and Don McDougall ( lead vocals and guitar ) , as well as new recruits David Inglis ( lead guitars ) and Vance Masters ( drums ) .
Masters had been drummer in the Winnipeg group Brother with Winter and Bill Wallace .
A new studio album called Guess
Who 's Back was recorded at Roade Recording Studios in Winnipeg and released in Canada on the Aquarius label to minimal attention in July 1978 .
Winter dropped out shortly after the album 's release , but the remaining quartet recorded a second Aquarius album , All This For a Song , retooling some of this album 's songs for an American release in February 1979 on the Hilltak label , also titled All This For a Song .
Four of the eight tracks contained on Guess
Who 's Back also appear in the American version of All This For A Song , some in re - recorded form ; the rest of the album 's tracks were new .
As was the case with Guess
Who 's Back , this album , featuring a more guitar based sound and without Cummings ' distinctive voice and piano , was commercially unsuccessful .
Ralph Watts , who had been recording engineer on Guess
Who 's Back , joined the band on the road on guitar and keyboards during the second half of 1978 but left after being offered the house engineer position with Century 21 Recording Studios .
In the meantime , Bachman , Cummings , Peterson , and Wallace regrouped for a one - off appearance as The Guess Who for the CBC Television special Burton Cummings : Portage & Main , filmed on November 4 , 1979 , and aired on CBC on February 2 , 1981 .
Kale left the band in 1979 to pursue other projects ; McDougal , Masters , guitarist Bobby Bilan , bassist Brian Sellar , and keyboardist Jimmy Grabowski continued on touring as The Guess
Who without him .
By 1981 , Kale had taken back The Guess Who name and that year
a completely new Guess
Who line - up ( Kale , former Crowbar drummer Sonnie Bernardi and guitarists Dale Russell and Mike McKenna ) put out a new studio LP called Now And Not Then on the El Mocambo label , featuring new vocalist / keyboardist Brent DesJarlais .
The album was released only in Canada and Germany ( on Line Records ) .
At this point , the band was in demand to play shows , mostly in the United States , based on the popularity of their ' 60s and ' 70s hits featuring lead singer Burton Cummings .
Kale and DesJarlais toured as The Guess
Who in 1981 , joined by Brian Tataryn ( guitar ) , Ken Curry ( drums ) , and a returning David Inglis ( who was gone again by 1982 ) .
In 1983 , Bachman , Cummings , Kale , and Peterson ( the " American Woman " line - up ) reunited as The Guess Who to play a series of Canadian gigs and record the Together Again live album ( issued as The Best of The Guess Who - Live !
in the United States ) and video at the Canadian National Exhibition bandshell on June 29 , 1983 .
The concert and subsequent releases were the first time Bachman had performed many of the songs written and recorded after his departure .
Four new studio recordings were also made with overdubbed audience noise .
After the reunion , Cummings resumed his solo work , Bachman took Peterson with him for a Bachman - Turner Overdrive reunion album and tour , and Kale once again resumed touring with various musicians under The Guess Who banner .
In the fall of 1983 , Russell and Bernardi joined Kale , as well as singer Trevor Balicky and keyboardist Mike Hanford ( from the ' 60s Winnipeg band Gettysbyrg Address ) .
In 1985 Balicky was succeeded by former Stilettos singer Bob Fuhr and then , in 1986 , Kenny Carter .
Terry Read ( formerly with The Lyme ) came in briefly to sub for Hanford in 1986 .
In 1987 a four - song cassette of new material from the Kale / Russell / Bernardi / Hanford / Carter line - up appeared , called Guess
Who ' 87 .
In one of the few mainstream reviews it received , Craig MacInnis of the Toronto Star opined , " The playing is roadhouse sloppy and the songs are pure junk .
"
After the BTO reunion played itself out , Drummer Peterson returned to The Guess
Who just after the release of Guess Who ' 87 .
From this point on , the band mostly concentrated on the by now very lucrative US nostalgia circuit , appearing on bills like Super 70s
( in the summer of 1988 ) with Bachman – Turner Overdrive , Rare Earth , Mark Farner and Ray Sawyer ( of Dr. Hook ) and Dick Clark 's American Bandstand Tour in 1989 .
In 1989 , Tom Whinnery stepped in for Hanford but was himself replaced by keyboardist / flautist / saxophonist Leonard " Lewsh " Shaw ( from Ian Thomas 's band ) in 1990 .
Vocalist Terry Hatty ( ex - Sam Moon ) took over from Carter in 1991 .
A new
Guess
Who studio album on Aquarius , Liberty ( also issued as Lonely One on the US Intersound label ) , with Terry Hatty singing , was released in July 1995 .
As with Guess Who 87 , virtually no attention was paid to it in the mainstream press and the few reviews of the album were almost all overwhelmingly negative .
In May 1997 , with their hometown of Winnipeg facing a potentially disastrous flood , Bachman and Cummings reunited in Winnipeg for the first time in ten years in an emotional fund raiser for disaster relief organized by Tom Jackson .
In 1997 , former Coney Hatch singer and guitarist Carl Dixon joined the Guess
Who as lead singer a position he held for eight years in total ; Kale stepped down from touring later in 1998 , and bassist Ken " Spider " Sinnaeve ( ex - Streetheart ) was called in as his successor .
2000S
Section::::2000s .
At the request of the Premier of Manitoba , Cummings , Bachman , Kale and Peterson appeared together at the closing ceremonies of the Pan American Games at Winnipeg Stadium on August 8 , 1999 .
The reunion led Cummings , Bachman , Kale and Peterson , joined by Don McDougall , to begin practising for a reunion tour in May 2000 .
In the meantime , the Dixon / Shaw / Russell / Sinnaeve lineup continued to tour , finishing already booked dates with drummer Charlie Cooley filling in for Peterson .
The reunion band embarked on a cross - Canada and US tour beginning in 2000 , although health problems precluded Kale 's involvement .
Bill Wallace , Kale 's replacement in 1972 , was brought in once again and this lineup of the band played and toured regularly through the end of 2003 .
A live album and DVD release , Running Back Thru Canada , followed the 2000 tour .
On May 26 , 2001 , the band members received honorary doctorates at Brandon University in Brandon , Manitoba .
For Cummings , this was a special privilege , since he had not graduated from high school .
That same year , the group was inducted into Canada 's Walk of Fame ; The signatures of the then - current band members , Bachman , Cummings , McDougall , Peterson and Wallace , are engraved into the commemorative stone .
On July 30 , 2003 , The Guess Who performed before an estimated audience of 450,000 at the Molson Canadian Rocks for Toronto SARS benefit concert .
The show was the largest outdoor ticketed event in Canadian history .
As of 2004 , Bachman , Cummings , McDougall and Wallace ended their association with the band , and Jim Kale and Garry Peterson , who lawfully own the trademark
The Guess
Who , resumed their Guess Who touring schedule of around sixty dates a year , with " Lewsh " Shaw back on keyboards , Carl Dixon on vocals and returning guitarist Bobby Bilan , who was replaced by Laurie MacKenzie in 2006 .
In 2007 Bachman and Cummings began recording together ; unable to use The Guess
Who name , they issued the album Jukebox as " Bachman Cummings " .
The Guess Who continue to perform live dates on a regular basis .
Dixon continued as the group 's lead singer through 2008 , until he was severely injured in an automobile accident in Australia on April 14 of that year .
Dixon was briefly replaced by Colin Wiebe , the singer in Randy Bachman 's solo band .
Wiebe was on loan until Derek Sharp replaced Dixon in the lineup ; Dixon suffered traumatic brain injury , lost an eye and with significant titanium implants in his head , legs and right arm was unable to return .
Drummer Brian Tichy ( formerly of Foreigner and Whitesnake ) filled in for Peterson in the summer of 2010 and again for some shows in 2013 and 2015 .
In September 2012 , Stan Miczek ( from Sass Jordan 's band ) came in briefly to fill in for Kale .
As of 2016 , the Guess Who line - up consisted of Derek Sharp ( vocals , guitar ) , Will Evankovich ( guitar , backing vocals ) , Leonard Shaw ( keyboards , backing vocals ) , Jim Kale ( bass ) and Garry Peterson ( drums ) .
On January 21 , 2016 Dixon appeared as a guest with the band for the first time since his 2008 accident , singing and filling in for Sharp at South Florida Fair West Palm Beach .
Charlie Morgan ( ex - Elton John and Orleans ) filled in on drums for Peterson at this show .
Dixon also performed as lead singer January 22 , 2016 in Albuquerque .
Both shows with Dixon at the helm were sold out .
In the summer of 2016 , Kale once again took time off from the road and was subbed , first by Brent Fitz , then by Michael Devin ( from Whitesnake ) , followed by Rudy Sarzo ( ex - Quiet Riot ) .
Fitz , then Sarzo , returned on bass for the group 's 2017 dates .
In 2018 Sarzo and Devin were again subbing for Kale when Kale announced that he was retiring from the road for good and that Sarzo would be his permanent successor .
A brand new Guess
Who album , The Future IS What It Used To Be , was announced for release on September 14 , 2018 .
DISCOGRAPHY Section::::Discography .
Original Canada LPs
* Shakin ' All Over ( 1965 )
♦
* Hey Ho ( What You Do to Me ! )
( 1965 )
*
It 's Time ( 1966 )
* A Wild Pair ( with The Staccatos ) ( 1968 )
* Wheatfield Soul ( 1969 ) * Canned Wheat ( 1969 )
* American Woman ( 1970 )
* Share the Land ( 1970 )
*
So Long , Bannatyne ( 1971 )
* Rockin ' ( 1972 ) * Artificial Paradise ( 1973 ) * # 10 ( 1973 ) * Road Food ( 1974 )
* Flavours ( 1974 )
* Power in the Music ( 1975 )
*
The Way
They Were ( 1976 )
*
Guess
Who 's Back ( 1978 )
*
All This for a Song ( 1979 )
* Now and Not Then ( 1981 )
*
Lonely One ( 1995 )
*
The Future IS What It Used To Be ( 2018 ) LINEUPS
THE SILVERTONES * 1958 Chad Allan ( Allan Kowbel ) , Bob Ashley , Brian " Ducky " Donald , Johnny Glowa , Jim Kale , Larry Wah , Gordon Murison ( band named after his Silvertone guitar ) ALLAN AND THE SILVERTONES
* 1962 Chad Allan , Bob Ashley , Randy Bachman , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson , Carol West .
CHAD ALLAN AND THE REFLECTIONS * 1962 Chad Allan , Bob Ashley , Randy Bachman , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson CHAD ALLAN & THE EXPRESSIONS
( GUESS WHO ? )
* 1965 Chad Allan , Bob Ashley , Randy Bachman , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson
THE GUESS
WHO * 1965 Chad Allan , Bob Ashley , Randy Bachman , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson * 1966 Chad Allan , Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson
* 1966 Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Bruce Decker , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson
* 1966 Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson ( to end May 1970 ) * 1970 Burton Cummings , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson , Bobby Sabellico ( touring spring 1970 ) * 1970 Burton Cummings , Jim Kale , Greg Leskiw , Garry Peterson , Kurt Winter * 1972 Burton Cummings , Jim Kale , Donnie McDougall , Garry Peterson , Kurt Winter * 1972 Burton Cummings , Donnie McDougall , Garry Peterson , Bill Wallace , Kurt Winter * 1974 Burton Cummings , Garry Peterson , Domenic Troiano , Bill Wallace ( to end 10/75 )
* 1977 Jim Kale , Garry Peterson , Kurt Winter , Donnie McDougall
* 1977 Jim Kale , Vance Masters , Kurt Winter , Donnie McDougall * 1978 Jim Kale , Vance Masters , Kurt Winter , Donnie McDougall , David Inglis
( Guess Who 's Back LP ) * 1978
Jim Kale , Vance Masters , Donnie McDougall , David Inglis , Ralph Watts * 1979 David Inglis , Jim Kale , Vance Masters , Donnie McDougall ( All This For a Song LP )
* 1979 Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Garry Peterson , Bill Wallace ( one time only appearance for the CBC TV special Burton Cummings : Portage & Main filmed on 11/4/79 , aired on CBC 2/8/81 )
* 1979 Vance Masters , Donnie McDougall , Bobby Bilan , Brian Sellar ,
Jimmy Grabowski * 1981
Jim Kale , Brent DeJarlais , Dale Russell , Mike McKenna , Sonnie Bernardi
( Now & Not Then LP )
* 1981 Jim Kale , Brent DesJarlais , David Inglis , Brian Tataryn , Ken Curry * 1981 Jim Kale , Brent DesJarlais , Brian Tataryn , Ken Curry * 1983 Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson
* 1983 Jim Kale , Dale Russell , Sonnie Bernardi , Mike Hanford ,
Trevor Balicky * 1985
Jim Kale , Dale Russell , Sonnie Bernardi , Mike Hanford ,
Bob Fuhr * 1986 Jim Kale , Dale Russell , Sonnie Bernardi , Terry Read , Kenny Carter
* 1987 Jim Kale , Dale Russell , Sonnie Bernardi , Mike Hanford , Kenny Carter
* 1987 Jim Kale , Garry Peterson , Dale Russell , Mike Hanford ,
Kenny Carter * 1989
Jim Kale , Garry Peterson , Dale Russell , Kenny Carter ,
Tom Whinnery * 1990
Jim Kale , Garry Peterson , Dale Russell , Terry Hatty , Leonard Shaw * 1997 Jim Kale , Garry Peterson , Dale Russell , Carl Dixon , Leonard Shaw * 1998 Garry Peterson , Dale Russell , Carl Dixon , Leonard Shaw , Ken " Spider "
Sinnaeve * 1999
Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Jim Kale , Garry Peterson ( one show ) * 2000 Dale Russell , Leonard Shaw , Carl Dixon
, Ken " Spider " Sinnaeve , Charlie Cooley * 2000
Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Jim Kale , Donnie McDougall , Garry Peterson ( one show ) * 2000 Randy Bachman , Burton Cummings , Don McDougall , Garry Peterson , Bill Wallace ( to end 07/31/03 )
* 2004 Carl Dixon , Jim Kale , Bobby Bilan , Garry Peterson ,
Leonard Shaw * 2006 Carl Dixon , Jim Kale , Laurie MacKenzie , Garry Peterson , Leonard Shaw
* 2008 Derek Sharp , Jim Kale , Laurie MacKenzie , Garry Peterson , Leonard Shaw * 2014 Derek Sharp , Jim Kale , Will Evankovich , Garry Peterson , Leonard Shaw * 2016 Derek Sharp , Rudy Sarzo , Will Evankovich , Garry Peterson , Leonard Shaw FILMOGRAPHY * 1983
: Together Again — live concert with interviews .
* 2002 : Running Back Thru Canada ( Live with bonus tracks )
* 2003 : Molson Canadian Rocks for Toronto – Two tracks only – with the Rolling Stones , AC / DC , Rush and others .
* 2006 :
First Time Around ( Bachman , Cummings ) , live concert from a CBC broadcast .
* 2007
: Shakin ' In Las Vegas ( The Guess
Who : Peterson , Kale ) , DVD of four new songs plus Shakin ' All Over , from a live concert in Las Vegas .
FURTHER READING * 1995 :
American Woman : The Story of The Guess Who by John Einarson ; Quarry Press , Ontario , Canada SEE ALSO
* Canadian rock
* List of bands from Canada
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The official website of The Guess
Who