PAUL WALKER Paul William Walker IV ( September 12 , 1973 – November 30 , 2013 ) was an American actor best known for his role as Brian O'Conner in The Fast and the Furious franchise .
Walker first gained prominence in 1999 with roles in the teen films
She 's All That and Varsity Blues .
In 2001 , he gained international fame for his role in the street racing action film The Fast and the Furious ( 2001 ) , a role he reprised in five of the next six installments , but died in 2013 in the middle of filming Furious 7 ( 2015 ) .
Walker began his career guest - starring on TV shows such as The Young and the Restless and Touched by an Angel .
He later starred in films such as Joy Ride ( 2001 ) , Timeline ( 2003 ) , Into the Blue ( 2005 ) , Eight Below ( 2006 ) , and Running Scared ( 2006 ) .
He also appeared in the National Geographic series Expedition Great White ( 2010 ) and in ads for Davidoff Cool Water cologne .
He founded the disaster - relief charity Reach Out
Worldwide ( ROWW ) in response to the 2010 Haiti earthquake .
Walker died on November 30 , 2013 , at the age of 40 as a passenger in a single - car crash alongside friend and driver Roger Rodas .
Walker was working on three films at the time of his death which were released posthumously :
Hours ( 2013 ) , Brick Mansions ( 2014 ) , and Furious 7 ( 2015 ) .
The Wiz Khalifa song " See You Again " , featuring Charlie Puth , was commissioned for the Furious 7 soundtrack as a tribute to Walker .
It was nominated for the Golden Globe for Best Original Song in 2015 and was the number - one song in the United States for 12 weeks .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Walker was born in Glendale , California , and was the son of Cheryl ( née Crabtree ) , a fashion model , and Paul William Walker III , a sewer contractor and boxer who was a two - time Golden Gloves champion .
Paul 's paternal grandfather had a boxing career as " ' Irish ' Billy Walker " .
Paul 's ancestry was mostly English , with some German , Swiss , and Irish .
One of his grandfathers raced factory cars for Ford in the 1960s .
The oldest of five siblings , Walker was raised primarily in the Sunland community of Los Angeles and attended high school in the San Fernando Valley , graduating from Sun Valley 's Village Christian School in 1991 .
He was raised as a member of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter - day Saints .
After high school , Walker attended several community colleges in Southern California , majoring in marine biology .
CAREER
Section::::Career .
Walker began his small screen career as a toddler , when he starred in a television commercial for Pampers .
He began modeling at the age of two and began working on television shows in 1985 , with roles in shows such as Highway to Heaven ,
Who 's the Boss ? , The Young and the Restless , and Touched by an Angel .
That year he starred in a commercial for Showbiz Pizza .
Walker 's film career began in 1986 , with the horror / comedy film Monster in the Closet .
In 1987 he appeared in The Retaliator ( aka Programmed to Kill ) , a low budget cyborg action film , with Robert Ginty .
He and his sister Ashlie were contestants on a 1988 episode of the game show I 'm Telling ! ; they finished in second place .
In 1993 he played Brandon Collins on the CBS soap opera The Young and the Restless .
He and his co - star Heather Tom , who played Victoria Newman , were nominated for Outstanding Lead Actor and Actress in a soap opera at the Youth in Film Awards .
In 1998 , Walker made his feature film debut in the comedy Meet the Deedles , which finally gained him fame .
This subsequently led to supporting roles in the movies
Pleasantville ( 1998 ) , Varsity Blues ( 1999 )
, She 's All That ( 1999 ) , and The Skulls ( 2000 ) .
In 2001 , Walker 's breakthrough role arrived when he starred opposite actor Vin Diesel in the successful action film The Fast and the Furious , the first film in the franchise .
The film established Walker as a notable film star and leading man and led to his reprise of the role in the 2003 sequel 2 Fast 2 Furious .
He continued his career with leading roles in films such as Joy Ride ( 2001 ) , Timeline ( 2003 ) , and Into the Blue ( 2005 ) .
He had a supporting role in Clint Eastwood 's adaptation of Flags of Our Fathers ( 2006 ) .
Walker then starred in the crime thriller Running Scared and Walt Disney Pictures ' Eight Below , both released in 2006 .
Eight Below garnered critical - acclaim and opened in first place at the box office , grossing over US$ 20 million during its first weekend .
During the filming of Running Scared , director Wayne Kramer stated that " [ Walker ] is that guy on some level " when comparing Walker with his character in the movie , Joey Gazelle .
Kramer continued on to say that he " loved working with [ Walker ] because as a director he 's completely supportive of my vision of what the film is .
And even better , he 's completely game for it . "
Walker starred in the independent film The Lazarus Project , which was released on DVD on October 21 , 2008 .
He subsequently returned to The Fast and the Furious franchise , reprising his role in Fast & Furious , which was released on April 3 , 2009 .
Walker then appeared in the crime drama Takers , which began filming in September 2008 and was released in August 2010 .
The Coty Prestige fragrance brand Davidoff Cool Water for Men announced in January 2011 that Walker was going to be the new face of the brand as of July 2011 .
He reprised his role in the fifth installment of The Fast and the Furious series , Fast Five ( 2011 ) , and again in Fast & Furious 6 ( 2013 ) .
For this film , he won the 2014 MTV Movie Award as best on - screen duo , with Vin Diesel .
He was part of an ensemble cast in Wayne Kramer 's Pawn Shop Chronicles ( 2013 ) , which was Walker 's last film released before his death .
Shortly after his death , the Hurricane Katrina based film Hours , which he had completed earlier in 2013 , was released on December 13 , 2013 .
He had also completed the action film Brick Mansions , a remake of the French film District 13 , which was released in April 2014 .
At the time of his death , Walker had been filming Furious 7 , which was slated for release in July 2014 .
The film was completed by using his brothers Caleb and Cody as his body doubles / stand - ins , and CGI , and was released in April 2015 .
Walker was also set to play Agent 47 in the video game adaptation , but died before production began .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Walker lived in Santa Barbara with his dogs .
He and Rebecca McBrain , a one - time girlfriend , had a daughter named Meadow Rain Walker , who lived with her mother in Hawaii for 13 years and then moved to California to live with Walker in 2011 .
Her godfather is Vin Diesel .
At the time of his death , Walker was dating Jasmine Pilchard - Gosnell .
Walker was raised in a Mormon household , but later became a non - denominational Christian .
He held a brown belt in Brazilian jiu - jitsu under Ricardo " Franjinha " Miller at Paragon Jiu - Jitsu and was awarded his black belt by Miller posthumously .
Walker held an interest in marine biology ; he joined the board of directors of The Billfish Foundation in 2006 .
He fulfilled a lifelong dream by starring in a National Geographic Channel series Expedition Great White ( later retitled Shark Men ) , which premiered in June 2010 .
He spent 11 days as part of the crew , catching and tagging seven great white sharks off the coast of Mexico .
The expedition , led by Chris Fischer , founder and CEO of Fischer Productions , along with Captain Brett McBride and Dr. Michael Domeier of the Marine Conservation Science Institute , took measurements , gathered DNA samples , and fastened real - time satellite tags to the great white sharks .
This allowed Dr. Domeier to study migratory patterns , especially those associated with mating and birthing , over a five - year period .
In March 2010 , Walker went to Constitución , Chile , to offer his help and support to the people injured in the 8.8 magnitude earthquake that struck on February 27 .
He flew with his humanitarian aid team , Reach Out Worldwide , to Haiti to lend a helping hand to the 2010 Haiti earthquake victims .
A car enthusiast , he competed in the Redline Time Attack racing series in which he raced on the AE Performance Team driving a BMW E92 M3 .
His car was sponsored by Etnies , Brembo Brakes , Öhlins , Volk , OS Giken , Hankook , Gintani , and Reach Out Worldwide .
Walker had been preparing for an auto show prior to his death .
Walker also had a large car collection of about 30 cars , a portion of which he co - owned along with Roger Rodas .
The collection included ( but is not limited to ) : * A large number of Saleen Mustangs , including a Saleen SSC ( foxbody ) , SA10 ( foxbody ) , 2x S281-E ( SN95 ) , S351 Speedster ( SN95 ) , and 6 others * Audi S4 ( B5 )
* BMW M1 * BMW 2002tii Touring Alpina
* 2x BMW E30 M3 *
3x BMW E36 M3 Lightweight
* Chevrolet Corvette ( C1 ) * Chevrolet Chevelle SS convertible
* Ferrari 360 Challenge Stradale
* Ferrari 400i
* Ferrari F355 Spider Fiorano edition *
Ferrari Testarossa * Ford Bronco II * Ford GT ( 1st gen with a Whipple supercharger producing a claimed 800 hp )
* Boss 302 Mustang ( 1st gen )
* Ford Mustang Cobra R
*
Ford Mustang Eleanor recreation * 2012
Ford Mustang Shelby
GT500 *
2013
Ford Mustang
Shelby GT500
* Lincoln Continental ( 4th gen ) convertible * Maserati Quattroporte * Mercedes - Benz 560 SL * 2009
Nissan 370Z ( movie car driven by Gisele Yashar ( Gal Gadot ) in Fast Five )
* Nissan R34 Skyline Spec V ( not street legal in the U.S. )
* Nissan Silvia ( S15 ) ( not street legal in the U.S. )
* 3x Porsche 911 997 GT3 RS ( two orange on black , one green on black )
* 2x Porsche 930 Turbo ( both in Guards Red )
* Rolls - Royce Ghost
* Saleen S7 * 1965
Shelby Ford Mustang GT350SR continuation car .
* Toyota Supra Mk4
( targa roof , single turbocharger conversion )
* Volvo P1800 Roger Rodas became Walker 's financial adviser in 2007 and helped to establish Reach Out Worldwide .
Rodas , a pro - am racer was the CEO of Always Evolving , a Valencia high - end vehicle performance shop owned by Walker .
Walker was also a close friend of his 2 Fast 2 Furious co - star Tyrese Gibson .
Vin Diesel considered Walker to be like a brother , both on and off screen , and affectionately called him " Pablo " .
Walker 's mother referred to her son as Diesel 's " other half " .
DEATH AND LEGAL REPERCUSSIONS Section::::Death and legal repercussions .
On November 30 , 2013 , at about 3:30 p.m. PST , Walker and Roger Rodas , 38 , left an event for Walker 's charity Reach Out Worldwide for victims of Typhoon Haiyan ( Yolanda ) , with Rodas driving his Porsche Carrera GT .
In a speed zone on Hercules Street near Kelly Johnson Parkway in Valencia , Santa Clarita , California , the car crashed into a concrete lamp post and two trees and burst into flames .
Rodas died of multiple trauma while Walker died from the combined effects of trauma and burns .
Both of their bodies were burned beyond recognition .
The curve where Walker and Rodas were killed is a popular spot for drifting cars .
No alcohol or other drugs were found in either man 's system , and neither mechanical failure nor road conditions appeared to play a role .
Police found no evidence of drag racing .
The investigation concluded that the car 's speedbetween and and age of the tires were the primary reasons for the crash .
With Furious 7 in the middle of filming at the time of Walker 's death , Universal announced an indeterminate hiatus on the production , citing a desire to speak with his family before determining what to do with the film .
Numerous friends and movie stars posted tributes to Walker on social media .
His body was cremated and his ashes were buried in a non - denominational ceremony at Forest Lawn Memorial Park .
His life was later chronicled in the documentary I Am Paul Walker , which was released on August 11 , 2018 .
In December 2014 , Walker 's father , Paul III , filed a wrongful death claim against Rodas 's estate seeking the return of , or " a proportionate share " of revenue generated by a group of automobiles that were jointly owned by both Walker and Rodas .
In September 2015 , Walker 's daughter Meadow filed a wrongful death lawsuit against Porsche for the death of her father , claiming that the Porsche Carrera GT had numerous design defects including a history of instability , and that its seat belt placement can cause harm upon impact .
Porsche 's response denied any wrongdoing and blamed Walker himself , stating : " The perils , risk , and danger were open and obvious and known to him , and he chose to conduct himself in a manner so as to expose himself to such perils , dangers , and risks , thus assuming all the risks involved in using the vehicle . "
In April 2016 , U.S. District Court Judge Philip S. Gutierrez ruled in favor of Porsche in a separate lawsuit filed by Roger Rodas ' widow , Kristine .
The ruling had no bearing on two other cases against Porsche which have been filed by Walker 's father , who is also the executor of the actor 's estate , and his daughter .
Walker 's father and daughter both reached an agreement with Porsche .
FILMOGRAPHY FILM Section::::Filmography .
Section::::Film . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes rowspan="2 " 2001 The Fast and the Furious rowspan="4 "
2013 rowspan=3Posthumous release TELEVISION Section::::Television . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes 1996 MUSIC VIDEOS Section::::Music videos . !
Year !
Artists !
Song ! class="unsortable
" Notes AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS Section::::Awards and nominations . !
Year !
Award !
Category !
Nominated work !
Result REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS