HEAT LIGHTNING Heat lightning , sometimes known as silent lightning , summer lightning , or dry lightning ( mainly used in the American south ; not to be confused with dry thunderstorms , which are also often called dry lightning ) , is a misnomer used for the faint flashes of lightning on the horizon or other clouds from distant thunderstorms that do not appear to have accompanying sounds of thunder .
The actual phenomenon commonly called heat lightning is simply cloud - to - ground lightning that occurs very far away , with thunder that dissipates before it reaches the observer .
At night , it is possible to see the flashes of lightning from very far distances , up to 100 miles ( 160 kilometres ) , but the sound does not carry that far .
In Florida , this type of lightning is often seen over the water at night , the remnants of storms that formed during the day along a sea breeze front coming in from the opposite coast .
Heat lightning is not to be confused with electrically - induced luminosity actually generated at mesospheric altitudes above thunderstorm systems ( and likewise visible at exceedingly great ranges ) , a phenomenon known as " sprites " .
CLOUD - TO - GROUND LIGHTNING Section::::Cloud - to - ground lightning .
The movement of sound in the atmosphere depends on the properties of the air , such as temperature and density .
Because temperature and density change with height , the sound of thunder is refracted through the troposphere .
This refraction results in spaces through which the thunder does not propagate .
The sound of thunder often reflects off the Earth 's surface .
The rumbling sound is partly due to these reflections .
This reflection and refraction leaves voids where thunder can not be heard .
The Earth 's curvature also contributes to distant observers not hearing the thunderclap .
Thunder is more likely to be bounced off the Earth 's surface before it reaches an observer far from the strike , and only the right refraction and reflection of the sound off of the atmosphere will give it range it needs to be heard far away .
The reflection and refraction in the troposphere determines who hears the strike and who does n't .
Usually the troposphere will reflect the light , and leave out the sound - in these cases some fraction of the light emanating from distant thunderstorms ( whose distant clouds may be so low to the horizon as to be essentially invisible ) is scattered by the upper atmosphere and thus visible to remote observers .
Under optimum conditions , the most intense thunderstorms can be seen at up to 100 miles ( 161 km ) over flat terrain or water when the clouds are illuminated by large lightning discharges .
However , an upper limit of 30–50 miles ( 48–80 km ) is more common due to topography , trees on the horizon , low to mid level clouds , and the fact that local visibilities are generally no more than 25 miles ( 40 km ) .
The height of the anvil ( the large , plume - like top of a thunderhead ) also contributes—45,000 feet ( 13,715 m ) is very common in the mid latitudes for warm season thunderstorms , but the anvil height can range from 35,000 feet ( 10,665 m ) to a current record of 78,000 feet ( 23,770 m ) .
SEE ALSO
* Dry lightning * Upper - atmospheric lightning REFERENCES