BOUNTY HUNTER
A bounty hunter is a person who captures fugitives for a bounty .
The occupation , also known as bail enforcement agent , bail agent , recovery agent , bail recovery agents , or fugitive recovery agent , has historically existed in many parts of the world .
However , today , it is found almost exclusively in most of the United States and its former commonwealth , the Philippines , as the practice is illegal under the laws of most other countries .
Illinois , Kentucky , Oregon and Wisconsin have outlawed commercial bail bonds .
UNITED STATES HISTORY
THE OLD WEST Section::::United States .
Section::::History .
Section::::The Old West .
In 1873 , the Supreme Court ruled that bounty hunters were a part of the U.S. law enforcement system with a decision in Taylor v. Taintor : MODERN TIMES Section::::Modern times .
In modern times , bounty hunters are known as bail enforcement agent or fugitive recovery agents ( bail bondsmen ) , and carry out arrests mostly of those who have skipped bail .
The term " bounty hunting " is neither often used nor liked by many in the profession due to its historical associations .
Bounty hunters are sometimes misleadingly called skiptracers , where skiptracing is searching for an individual through less direct methods than active pursuit and apprehension .
When undertaking arrest warrants , agents may wear bullet - resistant vests , badges , and other clothing bearing the inscription " bail enforcement agent " or similar titles .
Many agents also use two - way radios to communicate with each other .
Many agents arm themselves with firearms ; or sometimes with less lethal weapons , such as tasers , batons , tear gas ( CS gas , pepper spray ) or pepper spray projectiles .
In the United States , the National Association of Fugitive Recovery Agents is the professional association representing this industry .
PRACTICE Section::::Practice .
Most bounty hunters are employed by bail bondsmen : the bounty hunter is usually paid about 18 % of the total bail amount , but this commission can vary on an individual , case - by - case basis ; usually depending upon the difficulty level of the assignment and the approach used to exonerate the bail bond .
If the fugitive eludes bail , the bondsman , not the bounty hunter , is responsible for 100 % of the total bail amount .
This is a way of ensuring clients arrive at trial .
As of 2003 , bounty hunters claimed to catch 31,500 bail jumpers per year , about 90 % of people who jump bail .
Bounty hunters have varying levels of authority in their duties with regard to their targets depending on which states they operate in .
Barring restrictions applicable state by state , a bounty hunter may enter the fugitive 's private property without a warrant in order to execute a re - arrest .
A bounty hunter can not , however , enter the property of anyone other than the fugitive without a warrant or the owner 's permission .
In some states , bounty hunters do not undergo any formal training , and are generally unlicensed , only requiring sanction from a bail bondsman to operate .
In other states , however , they are held to varying standards of training and license .
State legal requirements are often imposed on out - of - state bounty hunters , so a fugitive could temporarily escape rearrest by entering a state in which the bail agent has limited or no jurisdiction .
LAWS AND REGULATION Section::::Laws and regulation .
In the United States legal system , the 1873 U.S. Supreme Court case Taylor v. Taintor , 16 Wall ( 83 U.S. 366 , 21 L.Ed . 287 ) , is cited as having established that the person into whose custody an accused is remanded as part of the accuser 's bail has sweeping rights to that person .
Though this may have been accurate at the time the decision was reached , the portion cited was obiter dictum and has no binding precedential value .
As of 2008 , four states , Illinois , Kentucky , Oregon , and Wisconsin prohibited the practice , as they have abolished commercial bail bonds and banned the commercial bail bonds industry within their borders .
As of 2012 , Nebraska and Maine similarly prohibit surety bail bonds .
Some states such as Texas and California require a license to engage in bounty hunting while others may have no restrictions .
There have been some states that have rolled out specific laws that govern bounty hunting .
For example , Minnesota says that you can not drive a white , black , maroon , or dark green vehicle .
They also outline what you can wear .
The statute states that you can wear any colors that are not reserved for the police in the state .
For example , The Minnesota Highway Patrol wears maroon uniforms .
The city police departments along with county sheriffs and their deputies are all blue brown or green , and the Minnesota DNR is green .
Therefore , a bounty hunter in the state in of Minnesota can wear any colors that are not already listed above .
It is recommended that anyone looking to work in this field be knowledgeable of these laws before they hit the streets .
CONNECTICUT Section::::Connecticut .
The State of Connecticut has a detailed licensing process which requires any person who wants to engage in the business as a bail enforcement agent ( bounty hunter ) to first obtain a professional license from the Commissioner of Public Safety ; specifically detailing that " No person shall , as surety on a bond in a criminal proceeding or as an agent of such surety , engage in the business of taking or attempting to take into custody the principal on the bond who has failed to appear in court and for whom a re - arrest warrant or capias has been issued unless such person is licensed as a bail enforcement agent " .
Connecticut has strict standards which require Bail Enforcement Agents to pass an extensive background check and , while engaging in fugitive recovery operations , be uniformed , notify the local police barrack , wear a badge , and only carry licensed and approved firearms , including handguns and long guns which are permitted .
Recently Connecticut State Police converted its Bail Enforcement Agent licensing unit to reflect the important role Bail Enforcement Agents play in the Connecticut criminal justice system ; placing them in the newly defined Department of Emergency Services and Public Protection .
Several schools in Connecticut have obtained certification by the Connecticut State Police to pre - license Bail Enforcement Agents in a minimum of 20 hours of criminal justice training and a minimum of eight hours of firearms training .
Some of the more advanced schools offer specialized training in the area of tactical firearms to prepare BEAs for conducting dangerous recovery operations .
FLORIDA Section::::Florida .
In Florida , a bounty hunter must obtain a " limited surety agent " license from the Florida Department of Financial Services , Bureau of Agent and Agency Licensing , in order to legally apprehend bail fugitives .
LOUISIANA Section::::Louisiana .
Louisiana requires bounty hunters to wear clothing identifying them as such .
NEVADA Section::::Nevada .
A Nevada bounty hunter is referred to as a bail enforcement agent or bail enforcement solicitor .
It requires a minimum 20 hours of training , passing examinations and obtaining a bail enforcement agent license by the Nevada Division of Insurance within nine months of employment as a bail agent .
To acquire such license one must be at least 21 years old , a United States citizen , have a high school diploma or equivalent , undergo the extensive training and pass a state examination .
TEXAS Section::::Texas .
A Texas bounty hunter is required to be a peace officer , Level III ( armed ) security officer , or a private investigator .
INTERNATIONAL ACTION BY U.S. BOUNTY HUNTERS
Section::::International action by U.S. bounty hunters .
Bounty hunters may run into serious legal problems if they try to apprehend fugitives outside the United States , where laws treat the re - arrest of any fugitive by private persons as kidnapping , or the bail agent may incur the punishments of some other serious crime if local and international laws are broken by them .
While the United States government generally allows the activities of bounty hunters within the United States , the governments in other sovereign nations consider them a felony .
Bounty hunter
Duane " Dog " Chapman , star of the TV series Dog the Bounty Hunter , was arrested in Mexico after he apprehended the multi - millionaire rapist and fugitive Andrew Luster .
Chapman was subsequently released and returned to the U.S. but was later declared a fugitive by a Mexican prosecutor and was subsequently arrested in the United States to be extradited back to Mexico .
Chapman has maintained that under Mexico 's citizen arrest law , he and his crew acted under proper policy .
Daniel Kear of Fairfax , Virginia pursued and apprehended Sidney Jaffe at a residence in Canada and returned him to Florida to face trial .
Kear was extradited to Canada in 1983 , and convicted of kidnapping .
Several bounty hunters have been arrested for killing the fugitive or apprehending the wrong individuals , mistaking innocent people for fugitives .
Unlike police officers , they have no legal protections against injuries to non - fugitives and few legal protections against injuries to their targets .
In a Texas case , bounty hunters Richard James and his partner DG Pearson were arrested in 2001 for felony charges during an arrest .
The charges were levied by the fugitive and his family , but were later dismissed against the hunters after the fugitive 's wife shot a deputy sheriff in another arrest attempt of the fugitive by the county sheriff 's department .
The hunters sued the fugitive and family , winning the civil suit for malicious prosecution with a judgment amount of $ 1.5 million .
RHODESIA
Section::::Rhodesia .
During the Rhodesian Bush War , cattle rustling reached epidemic proportions in the late 1970s .
This was part of a twofold strategy of the guerrillas against the white minority government in Salisbury .
First , it led to starvation in the Tribal Trust Lands ; second , it negatively affected the economy of Rhodesia ( now Zimbabwe ) .
Because the army and the British South Africa Police were overstretched on three fronts , mercenaries were hired to confront the rustlers .
They were called " Range Detectives " , and most of them were Vietnam veterans , some of them members of The Crippled Eagles .
Payment was roughly seven Rhodesian dollars a day , and a 750 Rhodesian dollar bonus for each rustler caught .
NOTABLE BOUNTY HUNTERS
SEE ALSO
* Citizen 's arrest
* Citizen 's arrest in the United States
* False arrest
* Mercenary * Skiptrace * Slave catcher * Thief - taker * United States Marshals Service fugitive programs NOTES FURTHER READING * F. E. Devine .
Commercial Bail Bonding : A Comparison of Common Law Alternatives , 232 pages , Praeger ( August 30 , 1991 ) , EXTERNAL LINKS * National Association of Fugitive Recovery Agents ( NAFRA )
* National Association of Bail Bond Investigators ( NABBI )
* Fugitive Recovery Network ( FRN )
* Bounty Hunters Bounty Huners - TSI Swiss National TV Documentary on Bail Agent / Bounty Hunters * Epstein , Edward " House OKs ban on licenses for illegal immigrants ; Bill also encourages bounty hunters to track down those ordered deported " San Francisco Chronicle February 11 , 2005