SUPERIOR VENA CAVA
The superior vena cava ( SVC ) is the superior of the two venae cavae , the great venous trunks that return deoxygenated blood from the systemic circulation to the right atrium of the heart .
It is a large - diameter ( 24 mm ) , yet short , vein that receives venous return from the upper half of the body , above the diaphragm .
( Venous return from the lower half , below the diaphragm , flows through the inferior vena cava . )
The SVC is located in the anterior right superior mediastinum .
It is the typical site of central venous access ( CVA ) via a central venous catheter or a peripherally inserted central catheter .
Mentions of " the cava " without further specification usually refer to the SVC .
STRUCTURE
AND COURSE OF SUPERIOR VENA CAVA Section::::Structure and course of superior vena cava .
It is formed by the left and right brachiocephalic veins ( also referred to as the innominate veins ) , which also receive blood from the upper limbs , eyes and neck , behind the lower border of the first right costal cartilage .
It passes vertically downwards behind first intercostal space and receives azygos vein just before it pierces the fibrous pericardium opposite right second costal cartilage and its lower part is intrapericardial .
And then , it ends in the upper and posterior part of the sinus venarum of the right atrium , at the upper right front portion of the heart .
It is also known as the cranial vena cava in other animals .
No valve divides the superior vena cava from the right atrium .
As a result , the ( right ) atrial and ( right ) ventricular contractions are conducted up into the internal jugular vein and , through the sternocleidomastoid muscle , can be seen as the jugular venous pressure .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
Superior vena cava obstruction refers to a partial or complete obstruction of the superior vena cava , typically in the context of cancer such as a cancer of the lung , metastatic cancer , or lymphoma .
Obstruction can lead to enlarged veins in the head and neck , and may also cause breathlessness , cough , chest pain , and difficulty swallowing .
Pemberton 's sign may be positive .
Tumours causing obstruction may be treated with chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy to reduce their effects , and corticosteroids may also be given .
In tricuspid valve regurgitation , these pulsations are very strong .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
SEE ALSO
*
Persistent left superior vena cava
* Superior vena cava syndrome
*
Inferior vena cava REFERENCES