CALCIUM CARBIDE Calcium carbide is a chemical compound with the chemical formula of CaC.
Its main use industrially is in the production of acetylene and calcium cyanamide .
The pure material is colorless , however pieces of technical - grade calcium carbide are grey or brown and consist of about 80–85 % of CaC ( the rest is CaO ( calcium oxide ) , CaP ( calcium phosphide ) , CaS ( calcium sulfide ) , CaN ( calcium nitride ) , SiC ( silicon carbide ) , etc . ) .
In the presence of trace moisture , technical - grade calcium carbide emits an unpleasant odor reminiscent of garlic .
Applications of calcium carbide include manufacture of acetylene gas , and for generation of acetylene in carbide lamps ; manufacture of chemicals for fertilizer ; and in steelmaking .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Calcium carbide is produced industrially in an electric arc furnace from a mixture of lime and coke at approximately 2200 ° C .
This method has not changed since its invention in 1892 :
The high temperature required for this reaction is not practically achievable by traditional combustion , so the reaction is performed in an electric arc furnace with graphite electrodes .
The carbide product produced generally contains around 80 % calcium carbide by weight .
The carbide is crushed to produce small lumps that can range from a few mm up to 50 mm .
The impurities are concentrated in the finer fractions .
The CaC content of the product is assayed by measuring the amount of acetylene produced on hydrolysis .
As an example , the British and German standards for the content of the coarser fractions are 295 L / kg and 300 L / kg respectively ( at 101 kPa pressure and 20 ° C temperature ) .
Impurities present in the carbide include phosphide , which produces phosphine when hydrolysed .
This reaction was an important part of the industrial revolution in chemistry , and was made possible in the USA as a result of massive amounts of inexpensive hydroelectric power produced at Niagara Falls before the turn of the 20th century .
The method for the production in an electric arc furnace was discovered in 1892 by T. L Willson and independently by H. Moissan in the same year .
CRYSTAL STRUCTURE
Section::::Crystal structure .
Pure calcium carbide is a colourless solid .
The common crystalline form at room temperature is a distorted rock - salt structure with the C units lying parallel .
APPLICATIONS PRODUCTION OF ACETYLENE Section::::Applications .
Section::::Production of acetylene .
The reaction of calcium carbide with water , producing acetylene and calcium hydroxide , was discovered by Friedrich Wöhler in 1862 .
This reaction was the basis of the industrial manufacture of acetylene , and is the major industrial use of calcium carbide .
Today acetylene is mainly manufactured by the partial combustion of methane or appears as a side product in the ethylene stream from cracking of hydrocarbons .
Approximately 400,000 tonnes are produced this way annually ( see Acetylene Preparation ) .
In China , acetylene derived from calcium carbide remains a raw material for the chemical industry , in particular for the production of polyvinyl chloride .
Locally produced acetylene is more economical than using imported oil .
Production of calcium carbide in China has been increasing .
In 2005 output was 8.94 million tons , with the capacity to produce 17 million tons .
In the USA , Europe , and Japan , consumption of calcium carbide is generally declining .
Production levels in the USA in 1990s were 236,000 tons per year .
PRODUCTION OF CALCIUM CYANAMIDE Section::::Production of calcium cyanamide .
Calcium carbide reacts with nitrogen at high temperature to form calcium cyanamide : Commonly known as nitrolim , calcium cyanamide is used as fertilizer .
It is hydrolysed to cyanamide , HNCN .
STEELMAKING
Section::::Steelmaking .
Calcium carbide is used : * in the desulfurisation of iron ( pig iron , cast iron and steel )
* as a fuel in steelmaking to extend the scrap ratio to liquid iron , depending on economics .
* as a powerful deoxidizer at ladle treatment facilities .
CARBIDE LAMPS Section::::Carbide lamps .
Calcium carbide is used in carbide lamps .
Water dripping on carbide produces acetylene gas , which burns and produces light .
While these lamps gave steadier and brighter light than candles , they were dangerous in coal mines , where flammable methane gas made them a serious hazard .
The presence of flammable gases in coal mines led to miner safety lamps such as the Davy lamp , in which a wire gauze reduces the risk of methane ignition .
Carbide lamps were still used extensively in slate , copper , and tin mines where methane is not a serious hazard .
Most miners ' lamps have now been replaced by electric lamps .
Carbide lamps are still used for mining in some less wealthy countries , for example in the silver mines near Potosí , Bolivia .
Carbide lamps are also still used by some cavers exploring caves and other underground areas , although they are increasingly being replaced in this use by LED lights .
Carbide lamps were also used extensively as headlights in early automobiles , motorcycles and bicycles , but have been replaced entirely by electric lamps .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
Calcium carbide is sometimes used as source of acetylene gas , which is a ripening agent similar to ethylene .
However , this is illegal in some countries as , in the production of acetylene from calcium carbide , contamination often leads to trace production of phosphine and arsine .
These impurities can be removed by passing the acetylene gas through acidified copper sulfate solution , but , in developing countries , this precaution is often neglected .
Calcium carbide is used in toy cannons such as the Big - Bang Cannon , as well as in bamboo cannons .
In the Netherlands calcium carbide is used around new - year to shoot with milk churns .
Calcium carbide , together with calcium phosphide , is used in floating , self - igniting naval signal flares , such as those produced by the Holmes ' Marine Life Protection Association .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Calcium Carbide & Acetylene at The Periodic Table of Videos ( University of Nottingham )
* Calcium Carbide Manufacturing * 2008 Material Safety Data Sheet