MR .
POTATO HEAD
Mr. Potato Head is an American toy consisting of a plastic model of a potato which can be decorated with a variety of plastic parts that can attach to the main body .
These parts usually include ears , eyes , shoes , a hat , a nose , and a mouth .
The toy was invented and developed by George Lerner in 1949 , and first manufactured and distributed by Hasbro in 1952 .
Mr. Potato Head was the first toy advertised on television and has remained in production since its debut .
The toy was originally produced as separate plastic parts with pushpins that could be stuck into a real potato or other vegetable .
However , due to complaints regarding rotting vegetables and new government safety regulations , Hasbro began including a plastic potato body within the toy set in 1964 .
Over the years , the original toy was joined by Mrs. Potato Head and supplemented with accessories such as a car and a boat trailer .
Mr. and Mrs. Potato Head may be best known for their appearances in the Toy Story franchise .
Additionally , in 1998 The Mr. Potato Head Show aired but was short - lived , with only one season being produced .
As one of the prominent marks of Hasbro , a Mr. Potato Head balloon has also joined others in the annual Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade .
Today , Mr. Potato Head can still be seen adorning hats , shirts , and ties .
Toy Story Midway Mania !
, in Disney California Adventure at the Disneyland Resort , also features a large talking Mr. Potato Head .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the early 1940s , Brooklyn - born toy inventor George Lerner came up with the idea of inserting small , pronged body and face parts into fruits and vegetables to create a " funny face man " .
Some speculate he got the idea from his wife 's nephew Aaron Bradley , who was seen placing sticks inside of potatoes in the family garden .
Lerner would often take potatoes from his mother 's garden and , using various other fruits and vegetables as facial features , he would make dolls with which his younger sisters could play .
The grape - eyed , carrot - nosed , potato - headed dolls became the principal idea behind the plastic toy which would later be manufactured .
In the beginning , Lerner 's toy proved controversial .
With World War II and food rationing a recent memory for most Americans , the use of fruits and vegetables to make toys was considered irresponsible and wasteful .
Toy companies rejected Lerner 's creation .
After several years of trying to sell the toy , Lerner finally convinced a food company to distribute the plastic parts as premiums in breakfast cereal boxes .
He sold the idea for $ 5,000 .
But in 1951 , Lerner showed the idea to Henry and Merrill Hassenfeld , who conducted a small school supply and toy business called Hassenfeld Brothers ( later changed to Hasbro ) .
Realizing the toy was quite unlike anything in their line , they paid the cereal company $ 2,000 to stop production and bought the rights for $ 5,000 .
Lerner was offered an advance of $ 500 and a 5 % royalty on every kit sold .
The toy was dubbed Mr. Potato Head and went into production .
Mr. Potato Head was " born " on May 1 , 1952 .
The original toy cost $ 0.98 , and contained hands , feet , ears , two mouths , two pairs of eyes , four noses , three hats , eyeglasses , a pipe , and eight felt pieces resembling facial hair .
The original Mr. Potato Head kit did not come with a potato " body " , so parents had to provide their own potato into which children could stick the various pieces .
Shortly after the toy 's initial release , an order form for 50 additional pieces was enclosed in every kit .
On April 30 , 1952 , Mr. Potato Head became the first toy advertised on television .
The campaign was also the first to be aimed directly at children ; before this , commercials were only targeted at adults , so toy adverts had always been pitched to parents .
This commercial revolutionized marketing , and caused an industrial boom .
Over one million kits were sold in the first year .
In 1953 , Mrs. Potato Head was added , and soon after , Brother Spud and Sister Yam completed the Potato Head family with accessories reflecting the affluence of the fifties that included a car , a boat trailer , a kitchen set , a stroller , and pets called Spud - ettes .
Although originally produced as separate plastic parts to be stuck into a real potato or other vegetable , a plastic potato was added to the kit in 1964 .
In the 1960s , government regulations forced the Potato Head parts to be less sharp , leaving them unable to puncture vegetables easily .
By 1964 , the company was therefore forced to include a plastic potato " body " in its kit .
Small children were also choking on the small pieces and cutting themselves with the sharp pieces .
About this time , Hasbro introduced Oscar the Orange and Pete the Pepper , a plastic orange and green pepper with attachable face parts similar to Mr. Potato Head 's .
Each came with Mr. Potato Head in a separate kit .
Female characters Katie the Carrot and Cooky the Cucumber also made an appearance .
Hasbro also made a fast food based line called Mr. Potato Head 's Picnic Pals .
Some characters were Mr. Soda Pop Head and Frankie Frank .
The friends and pals were later discontinued , but Funko revived Oscar and Pete as bobbleheads ( along with a Mr. Potato Head bobblehead ) in 2002 .
In 1975 , the main potato part of the toy doubled in size and the dimensions of its accessories were similarly increased .
This was done mainly because of new toy child safety regulations that were introduced by the U.S. government .
This change in size also increased the market to younger children , enabling them to play and attach the facial pieces easily .
Hasbro also replaced the holes with flat slats , which made it impossible for users to put the face pieces and other body parts the wrong way around .
In the 1980s , Hasbro reduced the range of accessories for Mr. Potato Head to one set of parts .
The company did , however , reintroduce round holes in the main potato body , and once again parts were able to go onto the toy in the wrong locations .
In 1985 , Mr. Potato Head received four postal votes in the run for mayor of Boise , Idaho in the " most votes for Mr. Potato Head in a political campaign " as verified by Guinness World Records .
In 1987 , Mr. Potato Head became " Spokespud " for the annual Great American Smokeout and surrendered his pipe to Surgeon General C. Everett Koop in Washington , D.C.
In 1995 , Mr. Potato Head made his debut in Hollywood with a leading role in the Disney / Pixar animated feature Toy Story , with the voice provided by comedian Don Rickles .
In 2000 , Mr. Potato Head was inducted into the National Toy Hall of Fame at The Strong in Rochester , NY .
In 2006 , Hasbro also began selling sets of pieces without bodies for customers to add to their collections .
Some of these themed sets included Chef , Construction Worker , Firefighter , Halloween , King , Mermaid , Police Officer , Pirate , Princess , Rockstar , and Santa Claus .
In the same year , Hasbro introduced a line called " Sports Spuds " with a generic plastic potato ( smaller than the standard size ) customized to a wide variety of professional and collegiate teams .
VERSIONS Section::::Versions .
In recent years , Hasbro has produced Potato Head sets based on media properties that Hasbro produces toys for under license .
These include the Star Wars - themed " Darth Tater " , " Spud Trooper " and " R2-POTATOO " , a 2007 Transformers film - themed " Optimash Prime "
( the look is based on the original Optimus Prime from the original television series ) , a pair of Spider - Man - themed " Spider - Spud / Peter Tater " ( both red suit and black suit , to tie in with Spider - Man 3 ) , an Indiana Jones - themed " Taters of the Lost Ark " set ( which , despite the title , was released as a tie - in to 2008 's Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull ) , an Iron Man 2-themed " Tony Starch " , and a " Trick or Tater " version for Halloween in October 2008 .
An additional five Star Wars - themed potato heads were sold exclusively through Disney theme parks : " Luke Frywalker , " " Yam Solo , " " Spuda Fett , " " Princess Tater , " and " Darth Mash . "
In 2009 , " Bumble Spud " was produced based on the movie .
A Kiss version of Mr. Potato Head was produced recently .
Disney , in cooperation with Hasbro , also released " Chipbacca " , " Mashter Yoda " , and " C-3PotatO " in October 2009 at Disney Parks .
To celebrate Toy Story 3 , five new Mr. Potato Heads were unveiled including Woody , Buzz Lightyear , Jessie , Mrs. Potato Head , and the classic Mr. Potato Head .
To promote The Looney Tunes Show , Hasbro unveiled Bugs Bunny- , Daffy Duck- and Tasmanian Devil - themed Mr. Potato Head dolls .
In 2011 , it was announced at the New York Toy Fair that a second Elvis Mr. Potato Head ( based on his 1968 TV special ) would be released , as well as sets for The Wizard of Oz ( Dorothy , Scarecrow , Tin Man and the Lion ) , the Three Stooges , and Star Trek ( Kirk and Kor ) .
These were all released through PPW toys .
From Hasbro , there will be a SpongeBob SquarePants release as well .
Since 2011 , new models of the Mr. Potato Head toys , commonly referred to as Jason , have been produced .
The Mrs. Potato Head version of the toy was also brought out in early 2012 , commonly known as Rachel , and has a baked bean - like head .
In 2012 , Hasbro and PPW Toys released Mr. Potato Head in Batman form for the movie The Dark Knight Rises .
The model , known as " The Dark Spud " , features Mr. Potato Head dressed up as the Caped Crusader .
Before the release , the model was unveiled at the 2012 New York Toy Fair .
In 2014 , to celebrate The Simpsons 25th anniversary , there will be a Homer Simpson Mr. Potato Head .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Mr. Potato Head 's popularity has led to some appearances in films and television .
In 1985 , Mr. Potato Head played a supporting role in Potato Head Kids , his first dramatic television appearance .
In 1998–1999 , he had his own short - lived Fox Kids series , The Mr. Potato Head Show .
In addition to film and television , the character has been the subject of a comic strip created by Jim Davis .
Cartoonist Gary Larson included the character in several of his The Far Side cartoons .
In commercial for Bridgestone tires during Super Bowl XLIII in 2009 , Mr. Potato Head is driving a car and Mrs. Potato Head is nagging him .
Mr. Potato Head has also acted as spokesman for several causes .
In 1987 , Mr. Potato Head surrendered his pipe to become the spokesperson for the American Cancer Society 's annual " Great American Smokeout " campaign .
He performed the role for several years .
In 1992 , he received a special award from the President 's Council for Physical Fitness .
In 1996 , Mr. and Mrs. Potato Head joined the League of Women Voters and their " Get Out to Vote " campaign .
Mr. Potato Head is also the inspiration / main character of an upcoming fan film , Potato Headed .
Larger - than - life versions of Mr. and Mrs. Potato Head are " guests " in the 1980s section of Pop Century Resort at Walt Disney World in Florida .
Mr. and Mrs Potato Head also star in commercials for other brands starting in the 2000s .
An example is an ad for Lay 's Potato Chips where Mr. Potato Head comes home to see Mrs. Potato Head eating them despite being a potato herself .
At the end Mr. Potato Head joins in and tells her to keep it their " little secret " .
A spoof , Mr. Zucchini Head , appears as a proposed new toy in the Family Guy episode
" The King Is Dead " .
Another spoof , Mr. Carrot Head , appears in The Simpsons episode " " .
Pop singer Melanie Martinez released a song called " Mrs. Potato Head " on her debut album Cry Baby .
TOY STORY SERIES Section::::Toy Story series .
Mr. Potato Head is also in the Disney / Pixar Toy Story films voiced by Don Rickles .
He is one of Andy 's toys .
In the first film , Toy Story ( 1995 ) , Mr. Potato Head is shown to be very moody towards Andy 's other toys , although he 's good friends with Hamm the piggy bank ( John Ratzenberger ) .
When Woody ( Tom Hanks ) accidentally pushes Buzz Lightyear ( Tim Allen ) out of window , Potato Head accuses Woody of doing it on purpose .
When it is later revealed that Buzz is okay , Potato Head feels guilty about what he 's done .
At the end of the movie , he is overjoyed to hear Molly getting a Mrs. Potato Head on Christmas .
In the second film , Toy Story 2 ( 1999 ) , Mr. Potato Head goes with Buzz , Rex ( Wallace Shawn ) , Slinky Dog ( Jim Varney ) , and Hamm to rescue Woody after he is stolen by Al McWhiggin ( Wayne Knight ) .
After Mr. Potato Head saves three Pizza Planet Aliens ( Jeff Pidgeon ) from falling out of a Pizza Planet truck , his wife , Mrs. Potato Head ( Estelle Harris ) adopts them , making her husband upset .
In the third film , Toy Story 3 ( 2010 ) , Mr. Potato Head is one of Andy 's remaining toys , alongside his wife , the aliens , Woody , Buzz , Rex , Hamm , Slinky ( now voiced by Blake Clark ) , Jessie ( Joan Cusack ) , and Bullseye .
When the toys are donated to Sunnyside , Big Baby puts Mr. Potato Head in the box twice .
After the aliens save Mr. Potato Head and the others from being killed in an incinerator with a giant crane , Mr. Potato Head finally accepts them as his sons .
Eventually , Mr. Potato Head and his friends end up at Bonnie Anderson ( Emily Hahn ) 's house .
Mr. Potato Head has appeared in all three Toy Story Toons shorts : ( 2011 ) , ( 2011 ) , and ( 2012 ) , with Rickles reprising the role in the first and third shorts .
Mr. Potato Head also appeared in the Halloween special Toy Story of Terror !
( 2013 ) , where he disappears and Woody , Buzz , Jessie , Rex , Mr. Pricklepants ( Timothy Dalton ) , and Trixie ( Kristen Schaal ) must find him .
Mr. Potato Head appeared in the Christmas special , Toy Story
That Time Forgot ( 2014 ) , which was also Rickles ' final performance as the character .
Mr. Potato Head will appear in Toy Story 4 ( 2019 ) .
However Rickles died in 2017 , he did not record any lines for the film so Potato Head will likely be recast .
GAMES Section::::Games .
In 1997 , a computer game called " Mr. Potato Head 's Activity Pack " was released by Hasbro Interactive , aimed at young children .
Mr. Potato Head has also appeared as the host in all installments of the popular video game series Hasbro Family Game Night .
He has also appeared in several Toy Story - based video games along with Toy Story Activity Center .
SEE ALSO
* Potato gun
* List of toys REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hasbro – Mr Potato Head Official website
* original Mr. Potato head commercial