HOLIDAY INN ( FILM ) Holiday Inn is a 1942 American musical film directed by Mark Sandrich and starring Bing Crosby and Fred Astaire .
With music by Irving Berlin , the composer wrote twelve songs specifically for the film , the best known being " White Christmas " .
The film features a complete reuse of the song " Easter Parade " , written by Berlin for the 1933 Broadway revue As Thousands Cheer .
The film 's choreography was by Danny Dare .
The film received a 1943 Academy Award for Best Original Song
( Irving Berlin for " White Christmas " ) , as well as Academy Award nominations for Best Score ( Robert Emmett Dolan ) and Best Original Story
( Irving Berlin ) .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Jim Hardy ( Bing Crosby ) , Ted Hanover ( Fred Astaire ) , and Lila Dixon ( Virginia Dale ) have a musical act popular in the New York City nightlife scene .
On Christmas Eve , Jim prepares to give his last performance as part of the act before marrying Lila and retiring with her to a farm in Connecticut .
At the last minute , Lila decides she is not ready to stop performing , and that she has fallen in love with Ted .
She tells Jim that she will stay on as Ted 's dancing partner .
While heartbroken , Jim follows through with his plan and bids the act goodbye .
One year later on Christmas Eve , Jim is back in New York City .
Farm life has proven difficult ; he plans to turn his farm into an entertainment venue called Holiday Inn , to be open only on public holidays .
Ted and his agent Danny Reed ( Walter Abel ) scoff at the plan , but wish him luck .
Later , at the airport flower shop while ordering flowers for Lila from Ted , Danny is accosted by employee Linda Mason ( Marjorie Reynolds ) who recognizes him as a talent agent and begs him for a start in show business .
Danny refers her to Holiday Inn and gives her a pass to Ted 's club .
That night , Linda sits at the performer 's table with Jim , who pretends he owns a big club and is n't sure he could use an act like Hanover and Dixon .
Linda pretends she 's a celebrity and friend of Ted 's , then escapes when the two performers come to Jim 's table .
The next morning , Christmas Day , Linda arrives at Holiday Inn , where she meets Jim — both realizing they were fooling each other the previous evening .
Jim is preparing the place for New Year 's Eve , and they take to each other immediately .
Jim sings her his new song , " White Christmas " , which he would have performed
had the inn been open that night .
Later that week , on New Year 's Eve , Holiday Inn opens to a packed house .
Meanwhile , in New York City , Ted learns that Lila is leaving him for a Texas millionaire .
Drinking heavily , he drives up to Holiday Inn to talk with Jim , arriving at midnight .
While wandering aimlessly across the dance floor , Ted sees Linda , who remembers him from Christmas Eve .
They dance , with Ted bringing down the house despite his inebriated state .
Danny arrives just as the dance ends and is ecstatic that Ted found a new partner .
The next morning , however , Ted remembers very little and does n't remember Linda at all .
Jim does n't say anything and hides Linda away , afraid that Ted will steal her away from the inn .
At the next performance , Lincoln 's Birthday , Ted and Danny return to Holiday Inn in search of Linda .
Jim is ready for them and decides to run the night 's big minstrel show number " Abraham " with disguised performers , including Linda , in an effort to foil the search .
While applying Linda 's blackface make - up , Jim asks if she will stay with him between holidays , and Linda takes this as a proposal .
Having come up empty , Ted and Danny will not give up and plan to be back for the next holiday .
During rehearsals for the Valentine 's Day performance , Jim presents Linda with a unique Valentine , a new song called " Be Careful , It 's My Heart " .
While Jim sings with his back to her , Linda begins dancing alone , and as Ted enters , he spots Linda and launches into an impromptu romantic dance with her .
Convinced that Linda is the girl he danced with on New Year 's Eve , Ted demands that Jim provide a number for them to perform on the next holiday , and Jim reluctantly agrees .
On Washington 's Birthday , Ted and Linda perform in elaborate 18th century period costumes , while Jim attempts to sabotage their dance , changing the tempo from a minuet to jazz every time the couple attempts to kiss .
Afterwards , Ted asks Linda to join him as his new dance partner .
Linda refuses , saying she has promised to stay at the inn and that she and Jim are to be married .
When Ted asks him about the marriage , Jim plays it off , but Ted is unconvinced , telling Danny he will continue to pursue Linda .
At Easter , romance continues to blossom between Jim and Linda as they travel home from church in a carriage .
When they reach the inn , Ted is sitting on the porch waiting for them .
Ted asks Jim if he can remain in his shows , claiming he wants to experience " the true happiness " they 've found at the inn .
Linda is charmed , but Jim is suspicious .
Jim 's suspicions are confirmed on Independence Day when he overhears Ted and Danny discussing an offer Ted received from Hollywood representatives , who will attend that night 's show and determine if Ted and Linda are suitable for motion pictures .
Desperate , Jim bribes hired hand Gus ( Irving Bacon ) to ensure that Linda does not arrive at the inn .
After Gus drives the inn 's car into a creek attempting to delay her , Linda tries to return to the inn and is picked up by Lila , who left the Texas millionaire after his tax problems were revealed .
Lila tells Linda , who is pretending to be a waitress , about the studio tryout and that Lila will be Ted 's partner .
Assuming that Jim arranged for her to take Linda 's place , Linda directs Lila into the same creek .
Back at the inn , Ted is forced to perform a solo dance .
When Linda eventually makes her way to the inn , she finds that Ted has impressed the studio honchos with his improvised solo and the opportunity stands .
Irritated with Jim for not trusting her to make her own decision , Linda takes the offer and leaves for Hollywood .
The producers want to make a film about Holiday Inn , and Jim reluctantly agrees .
At Thanksgiving , the inn is closed and Jim is depressed and sullen , barely touching the turkey dinner prepared by his housekeeper Mamie ( Louise Beavers ) .
Jim is prepared to mail to Hollywood a recording of his new Thanksgiving song , but , before he does , he plays it on a record player and makes negative comments over the positive ones in the recording .
Realizing what is wrong and ignoring decorum , Mamie implores him to travel to California to win Linda back by telling her how he really feels .
Jim arrives at the studio on Christmas Eve , just as Ted is preparing to leave with Linda to get married .
Jim confronts Ted in his dressing room , then locks him in it .
Before Linda films the final scene for her movie , which features a recreation of Holiday Inn , Jim walks around the set with the director , who boasts it is the most exact recreation ever created for a motion picture .
Jim leaves his pipe on the set 's piano and hides nearby .
Linda enters the room and sits at the piano , performing " White Christmas " .
Startled by the pipe 's presence , she falters , then continues as Jim 's voice joins her .
Jim appears and Linda runs to him as the director yells , " Cut ! "
Meanwhile , Ted and Danny finally understand Jim 's plan , but they are too late to stop him .
At Holiday Inn on New Year 's Eve , Ted is reunited with Lila , who is ready and willing to perform with him again .
Jim and Linda prepare to stay together and run the inn .
CAST
* Bing Crosby as Jim Hardy * Fred Astaire as Ted Hanover * Marjorie Reynolds as Linda Mason * Virginia Dale as Lila Dixon * Walter Abel as Danny Reed * Louise Beavers as Mamie
* Irving Bacon as Gus * Leon Belasco as flower store manager
* Marek Windheim as François
* James Bell as Dunbar ( from Hollywood )
* John Gallaudet as Parker ( from Hollywood )
* Shelby Bacon as Vanderbilt
* Joan Arnold as Daphne * Harry Barris as musician PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In May 1940 , Irving Berlin signed an exclusive contract with Paramount Pictures to write songs for a musical film based on his idea of an inn that opened only on public holidays .
Bing Crosby and Fred Astaire were the stars of Holiday Inn with support from Marjorie Reynolds and Virginia Dale .
Filming took place between November 18 , 1941 and January 30 , 1942 .
Produced and directed by Mark Sandrich , Holiday Inn had its premiere at the New York Paramount Theatre August 4 , 1942 .
It was a success in the US and the UK , the highest - grossing film musical to that time .
It was expected that " Be Careful , It 's My Heart " would be the big song .
While that song did very well , it was " White Christmas " that topped the charts in October 1942 and stayed there for eleven weeks .
Another Berlin song , " Happy Holiday " , is featured over the opening credits and within the film storyline .
Filming outside the studio occurred at the Village Inn Resort in Monte Rio on the Russian River , in Sonoma County , California .
Many segments of the film are preceded by shots of a calendar with a visual symbol of the given holiday .
For November , an animated turkey is shown running back and forth between the third and fourth Thursdays , finally shrugging its shoulders in confusion .
This is a satirical reference to the " Franksgiving " controversy when President Franklin D. Roosevelt tried to expand the Christmas shopping season by declaring Thanksgiving a week earlier than before , leading to Congress setting Thanksgiving as the fourth Thursday in November by law .
The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in Hawaii occurred halfway through filming .
As a result , the Fourth of July segment was expanded beyond Fred Astaire 's firecracker dance to include the patriotic number that highlights the strength of the US military .
MUSIC
THE SONG WHITE CHRISTMAS Section::::Music .
Section::::The song White Christmas .
The song that would become " White Christmas " was conceived by Berlin on the set of the film Top Hat in 1935 .
He hummed the melody to Astaire and the film 's director Mark Sandrich as a song possibility for a future Astaire - Ginger Rogers vehicle .
Astaire loved the tune , but Sandrich passed on it .
Berlin 's assignment for Paramount was to write a song about each of the major holidays of the year .
He found that writing a song about Christmas was the most challenging , due to his Jewish upbringing .
When Crosby first heard Berlin play " White Christmas " in 1941 at the first rehearsals , he did not immediately recognize its full potential .
Crosby simply said : " I do n't think we have any problems with that one , Irving . "
Although White Christmas has become iconic , this was not the original intention .
The song Be Careful , It 's My Heart , played during the Valentine 's Day section of the film , was originally intended to be a bigger hit when production of Holiday Inn commenced .
The song is used during the Christmas holiday sections of the movie , most notably when it is introduced to Linda Mason ( Reynolds ) by Jim Hardy ( Crosby ) while she is trying to obtain a position in the shows at the inn .
Hardy begins playing the song to her allowing her to join him and eventually perform solo .
The song is also reprised near the end of the movie .
Chrysotile asbestos was utilized to make the fake snow used in this scene .
SONG RELEASES Section::::Song releases .
Full - length studio recordings of the film 's songs , differing slightly from those in the movie , were made for commercial release .
Initially issued on 78rpm records , they were later collected on LP , cassette and CD .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
These are the song recordings taken directly from the motion picture soundtrack and are often confused with the studio recordings released to the public .
HOME MEDIA RELEASES Section::::Home media releases .
Holiday Inn was first released on VHS and Beta formats in September 1981 by MCA Home Video , re - released in 1986 and again , on VHS only , in 1992 .
It was first released on DVD paired with another Crosby vehicle , Going My Way ( 1944 ) .
It added a trailer for each film and some text - based extras .
This version is also available in many boxed set collections of holiday - themed or Crosby - themed movies .
In 2006 it was released as a single - disc " Special Edition " featuring a commentary by Ken Barnes , with interspersed archival comments by Crosby and Astaire .
It also included A Couple of Song and Dance Men , a documentary on Astaire and Crosby ; All - Singing All - Dancing , a featurette on audio recording of movie musicals ; and a reissue theatrical trailer .
In 2008 it was released as a three - disc " Collector 's Edition " containing the previous DVD and a second disc with a newly computer - colorized version and Coloring a Classic , a featurette on the colorization .
Also included was a CD of the 12-track Song Hits from Holiday Inn album , featuring original full - length studio recordings of the film 's songs .
In 2014 it was released on Blu - ray as a single disc edition featuring both black and white and colorized versions and all previous DVD extras .
In 2017 it was released again on both formats , this time including a second disc featuring a performance of the 2016 Broadway adaptation .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film was placed at No . 8 in the list of top - grossing movies for 1942 in the US .
Theodore Strauss of The New York Times described the film as " all very easy and graceful ; it never tries too hard to dazzle ; even in the rousing and topical Fourth of July number , it never commits a breach of taste by violently waving the flag .
Instead , it has skipped back over the year in an affectionate and light - hearted spirit . "
Variety called it " a winner all the way " with " sterling " performances by the male leads .
Harrison 's Reports called it " a most delightful entertainment ...
The performances of the leading players are very good .
"
Film Daily described it as " a completely satisfying musical filled with crisp comedy , fetching music , snappy dance routines , first - rate acting , smart story touches , and lavish and beautiful settings " .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
The success of the song " White Christmas " eventually led to another film based on the song , White Christmas ( 1954 ) , which starred Crosby , Danny Kaye , Rosemary Clooney , and Vera - Ellen .
It was an extremely loose remake of Holiday Inn , with a plot again involving an inn , but otherwise different from the earlier film .
Fred Astaire was offered the second lead in the new film , but after reading the script , he declined .
The role was then offered to Donald O'Connor , but he was injured before filming began .
Danny Kaye ultimately took the role .
In 2004 , the American Film Institute listed White Christmas at No . 5 in its 100 Years ... 100 Songs .
A colorized version of Holiday Inn was released by Universal on October 14 , 2008 .
The colorization was done by Legend Films , who used Edith Head 's sketch artist , Jan Muckelstone , as a color design consultant for costume authenticity .
The colorized version bears a noticeable error in the " Abraham " sequence , as Crosby 's and Reynold 's make - up is brown , rather than the black of burnt cork .
The name of the Holiday Inn hotel chain was inspired by the film .
The title of the film had also inspired the 1946 renaming of a small 1800s inn in Intervale , New Hampshire .
The owners of that inn were able to bar any other use of the name in that area of New Hampshire until they chose to relinquish the name , as their use preceded the naming of the chain .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Holiday Inn was dramatized as a half - hour radio play on the January 11 , 1943 , CBS broadcast of The Screen Guild Theater , starring Crosby and Astaire with Dinah Shore .
On December 15 , 1952 , The Railroad Hour presented a half - hour adaption of the film .
The episode starred Gordon MacRae and Dorothy Warenskjold .
In 2013 , Universal Stage Productions , the live theater division of Universal Pictures , invited Goodspeed Musicals to develop a stage adaptation of the film .
With book by Gordon Greenberg and Chad Hodge , music from the films Holiday Inn and White Christmas plus other Berlin songs , and directed by Greenberg , the musical premiered at the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam , Connecticut on September 19 , 2014 .
The Roundabout Theatre Company production of Holiday Inn began previews on Broadway at Studio 54 on September 1 , 2016 before the official opening on October 6 .
The cast includes Bryce Pinkham as Jim , Megan Lawrence as Louise , Corbin Bleu as Ted , and Lee Wilkof as Danny .
BLACKFACE CONTROVERSY Section::::Blackface controversy .
Beginning in the 1980s , some broadcasts of the film have entirely omitted the " Abraham " musical number , staged at the Inn for Lincoln 's Birthday , because of its depiction of a blackface minstrel show incorporating images and behaviors that are racist in nature .
However , because Turner Classic Movies airs films uncut and unedited , the network has left the " Abraham " number intact during their screenings of Holiday Inn .
AMC also aired the film intact before they became an advertiser - supported channel .
To avoid advertiser objections , the edited version now airs annually on AMC .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes Bibliography EXTERNAL LINKS