LONG ISLAND SOUND Long Island Sound is a tidal estuary of the Atlantic Ocean , lying between the eastern shores of The Bronx , New York City , southern Westchester County , and Connecticut to the north , and the North Shore of Long Island , to the south .
From west to east , the sound stretches 110 miles ( 177 km ) from the East River in New York City , along the North Shore of Long Island , to Block Island Sound .
A mix of freshwater from tributaries and saltwater from the ocean
, Long Island Sound is 21 miles ( 34 km ) at its widest point and varies in depth from .
SHORELINE Section::::Shoreline .
Several major cities are situated along Long Island Sound and more than 8 million people live within its watershed .
Major Connecticut cities on the Sound include Bridgeport , New London , Stamford , Norwalk , and New Haven .
Cities on the New York side of the Sound include Rye , Glen Cove , New Rochelle , and portions of Queens and the Bronx in New York City .
Mansions and wealthy neighborhoods characterize a good portion of the coast of the sound from Port Jefferson and east on Long Island ; and from Pelham Manor and New Rochelle ( on the mainland of New York ) to Madison in Connecticut .
Property values in Westchester County , Long Island , and southwestern Connecticut are among the highest in the nation , due to the proximity to New York City and their location on " The Sound " .
CLIMATE AND GEOGRAPHY GLACIAL HISTORY Section::::Climate and geography .
Section::::Glacial history .
About 18,000 years ago , Connecticut , Long Island Sound , and much of Long Island were covered by a thick sheet of ice , part of the Late Wisconsin Glacier .
About 3,300 feet ( 1,000 m ) thick in its interior and about thick along its southern edge , it was the most recent of a series of glaciations that covered the area during the past 10 million years .
Sea level at that time was about 330 feet ( 100 m ) lower than today .
The continental ice sheet scraped off an average of 65 feet ( 20 m ) of surface material from the New England landscape , then deposited the material ( known as drift ) from the Connecticut coast into the Sound , creating what is now Long Island ( the terminal moraine ) .
When the ice sheet stopped advancing 18,000 years ago ( as addition of snow at the origin was in equilibrium with the melting at the southern edge ) , a large amount of drift was deposited , known as the Ronkonkoma Moraine , which stretches along much of southern Long Island .
Later , another period of equilibrium resulted in the Harbor Hill Moraine along most of northern Long Island .
The next moraines ( recessional moraines ) to the north were created just on and off the Connecticut coast .
These moraines , created by much smaller deposits ( probably from equilibrium states that were much shorter in time ) are discontinuous and much smaller than those to the south .
The Connecticut coast moraines are in two groups : the Norwalk area and the Madison - Old Saybrook area .
Sandy plains and beaches resulted from the erosion of moraines and redeposition in these areas , and to the east of each , where the drift cover is thinnest , exposed bedrock creates rocky headlands , often with marshlands behind them .
The Captain Islands off Greenwich , Connecticut , along with the Norwalk Islands and Falkner Island off Guilford , Connecticut are parts of a recessional moraine .
Other islands , including the Thimble Islands , are for the most part exposed bedrock with a thin amount of drift , often not continuous .
Other shoals and islands off the Connecticut coast are a mixture of these two extremes .
The glacier also created several sandy outwash deltas off the coast , including one off Bridgeport , Connecticut and another off New Haven , Connecticut .
Fishers Island , New York appears to be related to the Harbor Hill Moraine .
To the east of the Thimble Islands , inland moraines along the Connecticut coast include the broken Madison Moraine and the Old Saybrook Moraine .
The Long Island Sound basin existed before the glaciers came .
It probably had been formed by stream flows .
A relatively thick cover of sand and gravel ( termed outwash ) was left in the basin from glacial meltwater streams .
On the west , a ridge rising to about 65 feet ( 20 m ) below the present sea level is called the Mattatuck Sill .
Its lowest point is about 80 feet ( 25 m ) below sea level .
Glacial meltwater formed " Lake Connecticut " , a freshwater lake in the basin , until about 8,000 years ago , when the sea level rose to about 80 feet ( 25 m ) below today 's level .
Seawater then overflowed into the basin , transforming it from a nontidal , freshwater lake to a tidal , saline arm of the sea .
RIVERS Section::::Rivers .
Numerous rivers empty into the Sound , including : Connecticut * Connecticut River - Old Saybrook * Housatonic River - Stratford & Milford * Mianus River - Greenwich * Mill River ( Quinnipiac River ) - New Haven
* Mill River ( Fairfield )
- Fairfield *
Norwalk River - Norwalk
* Pequonnock River - Bridgeport * Quinnipiac River - New Haven * Rooster River / Ash Creek - Bridgeport & Fairfield * Rippowam River - Stamford
* Saugatuck River - Westport * Thames River ( Connecticut ) -
Groton & New London
* West River ( Connecticut ) -
West Haven New York
* Byram River - Port Chester
* Hutchinson River - The Bronx * Mamaroneck River - Mamaroneck * Nissequogue River - Nissequogue & Ft Salonga Rhode Island * Pawcatuck River
WATERSHED DEMOGRAPHICS Section::::Watershed demographics .
The whole watershed population is about 8.93 million as of the 2010 Census .
Due to the large chunk of New England being under the watershed , due to the Connecticut River , many riverside cities / towns are covered in the watershed , here is a list of some of the large towns and cities in the watershed from south to north , west to east :
NEW YORK * Huntington * Oyster Bay * Smithtown * Parts of these New York City boroughs : * The Bronx * Queens * Brooklyn * Port Chester CONNECTICUT
* Stamford * Bridgeport * New Haven * New London
*
Danbury
* Waterbury *
Norwich
*
Willimantic * Torrington * Hartford RHODE ISLAND *
Westerly MASSACHUSETTS * Springfield
*
Worcester
* Pittsfield
VERMONT
* Brattleboro * White River Jct .
NEW HAMPSHIRE
* Keene * West Lebanon FAUNA AND FLORA FLORA SEAWEED Section::::Fauna and flora .
Section::::Flora .
Section::::Seaweed .
Seaweeds in the Sound occur in greatest abundance in rocky areas between high tide and low tide as well as on rocks on the sea floor .
Green seaweed populations fluctuate with the seasons .
Monostroma , reproduces in the early spring and dies out by late summer .
Grinnellia appears in August and disappears four to six weeks later .
In the rocky areas of the intertidal zone there are the seaweeds , which are characterized by their brown tone , Fucus and Ascophyllum , some species of which have air bladders that allow them to float and receive direct sunlight even at high tide .
Also present are Ectocarpus and red algas Polysiphonia , Neosiphonia , Porphyra and Chondrus ( Irish moss ) .
In the marshy areas of the intertidal zone can be found Cladophora ( mermaid 's hair ) , Ulva ( sea lettuce ) and Codium .
In the subtidal zone ( below low tide ) are Palmaria palmata a red alga , along with two algae , Laminaria ( kelp ) and Chorda .
Kelp can often be found washed up on the beach , and individual specimens are not uncommonly a yard or two long .
Deeper in the subtidal zone are red algae such as Spermothamnion , Antithamnion and Callithamnion , which also often float freely .
In tidal pools can be found red or pink colored Phymatolithon , which can often encrust rocks and mollusk shells .
Also present are green algae , including Ulothrix , Cladophora , and Ulva .
PLANTS FOUND IN
TIDAL MARSHES Section::::Plants found in tidal marshes .
Tidal marshes are some of the most productive biological systems in the world .
Along the sound , they produce three to seven tons per acre per year of vegetation , largely in the form of salt marsh grasses .
Much of this , enriched by decomposition , is flushed yearly into the estuary water where it directly contributes to the great finfish and shellfish production of the sound .
Salt marsh plants Salt water cordgrass ( Spartina alterniflora ) grows along ditches and on the seaside edges of marshes where high tides daily inundate it .
Salt meadow cordgrass ( Spartina patens ) and spikegrass ( Distichlis spicata ) grow in areas less frequently inundated by saltwater , typically closer to dry land .
A short form of salt water cordgrass can sometimes be found in the depressions ( pannes ) in the higher areas where salt water collects and evaporates , leaving water even higher in salinity than seawater .
Other plants in the pannes are sea lavender , salt marsh aster , seaside gerardia , and some species of glasswort .
Plants found near the border of the marsh with the upland include bayberry and groundsel - tree shrubs , switchgrass ( growing where occasional storm tides reach ) , reeds and marsh elder .
Cattail marshes
In areas where the Sound 's salt water is more diluted with freshwater from rivers ( including along the shores of the larger river estuaries such as the Connecticut River , cattail marshes replace salt marshes .
Various types of grasses , including wild rice , and sedges , including bulrushes , are found here .
Eelgrass meadows Eelgrass - sometimes known as " Saltwater Eelgrass " in order to distinguish it from Freshwater Eelgrass , which is a different species ( Vallisneria americana ) - is typically found in protected bays , coves , and other areas of brackish water , but it also persists along areas of exposed shoreline along Long Island 's north shore near Orient .
Eelgrass is one of the few vascular plants found in the marine environment .
Despite its name , it is actually not a species of underwater grass ; instead , it is a plant that bears a physical resemblance to grass .
It can tolerate a wide range of water salinity .
It grows on muddy to sandy sediments ( even among rocks ) , mostly below low tide , often forming large meadows .
it grows best in shallow water because it is dependent upon sunlight , and the water of the Long island Sound can be very murky .
Eelgrass roots help stabilize muddy sediments and can trap moving sand , helping prevent erosion .
The leaves , that can range in size from less than 1 m to 2 m long , slow currents , providing calm environments for many species of mollusks and other invertebrates .
Eelgrass is also an important food source for waterfowl , especially brant , a type of goose .
During the 1930s , the Long Island Sound was struck by an outbreak of a mold infection known as " eelgrass wasting disease " .
As a result , most of the eelgrass that grew in the sound was killed off , and as an extension , populations of wildlife in the area that depended upon the eelgrass either as food or as a habitat went into a sharp decline .
During the succeeding decades , areas along the Connecticut coast saw a slow gradual recovery of eelgrass populations .
Unfortunately , the north shore of Long Island did not see much success , and efforts have been made to re - introduce eelgrass by planting it , especially in the eastern part of the Long Island Sound in the waters of Suffolk County .
It is unlikely that the Long Island Sound will experience a complete recovery of its eelgrass population because there are still occasional outbreaks of eelgrass wasting disease within the Sound .
PLANTS FOUND ON
BEACHES AND DUNES Section::::Plants found on beaches and dunes .
Few undisturbed beach and dune systems exist on the Connecticut shore , the ones that do are located along the eastern portion of the coastline ( east of the Connecticut River ) .
Sea rocket and dune grass occur here , but not in abundance .
Dune grass and plants that thrive on dunes are largely responsible for the creation and growth of the dunes .
On the seaward side of dunes can be found Lathyrus japonicus ( beach pea ) , Dusty Miller , and seaside goldenrod .
Other beach plants are orache , beach clotbur , seaside spurge , and jimson weed .
On the more protected landward side of dunes are beach plum , bayberry and beach rose .
Rare species found on the landward side are beach knotweed and sand false heather .
UPLAND VEGETATION
Section::::Upland vegetation .
In areas next to the shoreline but hardly ever salty , the sound 's environment can nevertheless be a crucial factor in the presence of certain species .
Areas near the Connecticut shore are the northern limit for some species needing the warmer environment provided by proximity to the Sound ( which has a longer growing season than inland Connecticut and winters that are less harsh ) .
These include sweetgum ( only found in Connecticut in the extreme southwestern area of the state ) , the American holly , post oak and persimmon , which only exist in Connecticut along the shore .
For many species which grow typically in sandy soils , the Connecticut shore is the northern limit .
Mature upland vegetation along the Connecticut coast is mostly hardwood forest , with dominant tree species including oaks and hickories , especially white oak , black oak , pignut hickory and mockernut hickory .
Other trees include sassafras , black gum , and black cherry .
Mature trees tend to be sparse in coastal forests , likely because of their greater exposure to the wind .
This results in more sunlight reaching the forest floor , encouraging a jungle - like tangle of vines and shrubs , including the vines catbriar , poison ivy , bramble and bittersweet , and the shrubs blueberry , huckleberry , viburnum and hazelnut .
Along with the moderate climate , rare coastline storms can have an important impact on observable vegetation patterns .
The greatest storms to hit the Sound in the twentieth century were the 1938 hurricane , the 1955 hurricane , Hurricane Belle in 1976 , Hurricane Gloria in 1985 , and Hurricane Irene in 2011 .
After Hurricane Belle , leaves near the coast were badly salt - burned , then turned brown and shriveled .
Many trees were downed by the storm , leaving openings in the forest cover , promoting the growth of vines and shrubs .
FAUNA
FISH Section::::Fauna .
Section::::Fish .
The Sound is inhabited by both marine fish and anadromous fish ( oceanic or estuarine species that spawn in freshwater streams and rivers , see fish migration ) .
The most common marine fish in the Sound include porgy , butterfish , winter flounder , summer flounder , windowpane flounder , fourspot flounder , northern and striped sea robin , little skate , menhaden , Atlantic silversides , black seabass , blackfish ( tautog ) , cunner , bluefish , and smooth dogfish .
Frequently Atlantic bonito and false albacore , both members of the tuna family , enter the sound and can be caught by anglers from small boats and shore .
Many species have declined rapidly since 1975 due to over fishing .
Winter flounder may not be currently present except for rare , small local populations .
Tautog and summer flounder are also less numerous .
Anadromous fishes include striped bass , white perch , alewives , blueback herring , and American and hickory shad .
Although several shark species likely infrequently wander in and out of the Sound , e.g. blue shark , mako shark , hammerhead shark and thresher shark , there are only four species of sharks which are regularly found in the area .
These are the sand tiger shark , the sandbar shark , the spiny dogfish and the smooth dogfish .
MOLLUSKS Section::::Mollusks .
Mollusks ( gastropods and bivalves ) that can be found include the rough periwinkle near the high - tide line , the European periwinkle , the northern yellow periwinkle , the blue mussel ( a popular , edible species ) , the eastern oyster , the Atlantic slipper shell or " common slippershell " ( Crepidula fornicata ) , the hard clam ( also known as the quahog , little neck clam or cherrystone clam ) , the Atlantic bay scallop , the mud snail ( also known as the eastern mud nassa ) , the salt marsh snail ( or " coffee bean snail " ) , the Atlantic oyster drill , the northern moon snail , Atlantic moon snail , the channeled and knobbed whelks .
CRUSTACEA Section::::Crustacea .
Crustaceans include crabs , shrimp and lobsters .
In the Sound there are the green crab ( a non - native species first reported in Boston around 1900 , but a common crab found on the shore , where it feeds on eastern oysters and soft - shell clams ) , blue crab , red crab , Jonah crab in deepwater areas , and the Atlantic rock crab , which settles in large numbers along rocky shores , especially around Millstone Point , Niantic Bay and Fishers Island Sound .
Other crabs found include the lady crab , spider crabs , and fiddler crabs ; hermit crabs and mole crabs are also found .
By the late 1980s , the Japanese shore crab , an invasive species , was the most commonly found crab in the sound .
The sand shrimp Crangon septemspinosa and two species of grass shrimp are plentiful along the shore , especially in late summer and fall .
The American lobster is fished commercially .
MAMMALS , REPTILES , AND AMPHIBIANS Section::::Mammals , reptiles , and amphibians .
Most animal species on the Connecticut side of the Sound also occur inland , but some are much more abundant along the shore .
Animals along the Sound are most concentrated in the salt marshes .
Two species of shrews , the masked shrew and the American short - tailed shrew , are common in salt marshes .
The least shrew has been thought to exist in small numbers in the salt marshes of western Connecticut .
Rodents include the white - footed mouse , the meadow vole ( probably the most abundant coastal mammal ) and the meadow jumping mouse .
Muskrats are heavily trapped but remain abundant .
Raccoons and red foxes who live in areas near the marshes will hunt in them .
The long - tailed weasel and short - tailed weasel are both found near the Sound , occasionally living in the salt marshes .
Harbor seals and gray seals can be found among the rocks off Stonington and Groton at the eastern end .
Long - finned pilot whales and harbor porpoises can also be infrequently sighted in open water , a few miles off the coast .
In 1975 , a finback whale beached itself in Groton .
Animals that need moist woodlands are found in the coastal area ( and elsewhere ) , including the diamondback terrapin in salt marshes and brackish waters ( and deposits and hatches its eggs on nearby sandy beaches ) .
Terrapin meat became such a popular delicacy in the early 1900s that the price for a dozen adult females reached as high as US$ 120 .
Overhunting made the species uncommon and even rare through most of the Sound and completely eliminated at some places .
After its popularity as food declined , the terrapin population started recovering .
Sea turtles occasionally travel north on the Gulf Stream and wander into the Sound .
The loggerhead turtle , green turtle and leatherback turtle are rarely seen along the Connecticut shore .
Other reptiles and amphibians found along the edges of the salt marshes and nearby bodies of water include the green frog , bullfrog , pickerel frog , spotted turtle , painted turtle , northern water snake , and common snapping turtle .
On beaches and sandy areas there are Fowler 's toads ( which are also found inland but find sandy areas preferable ) , the American toad , and the hognose snake ( which feeds on Fowler 's toads ) .
BIRDS
Section::::Birds .
There are six broad categories of bird habitats near Long Island Sound : ( 1 ) open water areas , including bays , coves , rivers and the Sound itself ; ( 2 ) tidal marshes ; ( 3 ) mudflats ; ( 4 ) sandy beaches ; ( 5 ) offshore islands ; and ( 6 )
mainland uplands , including woodlands and fields .
Some birds are summer residents or winter residents , while others are spring and fall transients .
Year round residents include herring gull , greater black - backed gull , common tern and double - crested cormorant .
Much of the terns habitat and nesting areas have been taken over by the over - abundant cormorant over the last several decades .
The terns are now not commonly seen .
Coastal migrants ( also called " transients " ) include shorebirds such as plovers , turnstones , sandpipers , willet and yellowlegs .
Summer residents include the seaside sparrow , sharp - tailed sparrow , Nelson 's sparrow , clapper rail , mallard and black duck , herons and egrets , including the black - crowned night heron and snowy egret as well as the least tern and piping plover .
Upland species include the hooded warbler , white - eyed vireo , eastern meadowlark and Carolina wren .
Winter residents include large flocks of ducks , geese , and swans winter in the Sound .
In West Haven , Connecticut 8,000 scaup ( also called broadbills or bluebills ) were regularly counted in the 1970s .
Greater scaup , black ducks , mallards , and Canada geese are the most abundant wintering birds .
There are also significant populations of red - breasted mergansers , common goldeneyes , buffleheads , scoters , American wigeons ( also sometimes called baldpate ) , canvasbacks , oldsquaws and mute swans .
Others ( less abundant ) include gadwalls , northern pintails , green - winged teal , northern shovelers ( also sometimes called broadbill ) , ruddy ducks , redheads , ring - necked ducks , snow geese , and brant .
RARE AND ENDANGERED SPECIES Section::::Rare and endangered species .
Rare , endangered and extinct species of the Sound include the eastern spadefoot , a rare , toadlike amphibian that has n't been recorded in the area since 1935 .
Its overall coloring is beige or off - white with a pattern of green markings .
Small orange dots punctuate this pattern .
As many as 1,500 shortnose sturgeon , listed as ' endangered ' by the Endangered Species Act , inhabit the Connecticut River ( CDEP 2003 , Savoy 2004 ) .
Approximately 900 of those live downstream of Holyoke Dam ( Savoy and Shake 1992 ) .
While shortnose sturgeon primarily remain in their natal rivers , they will feed in estuarine waters like Long Island Sound and make extended trips along the Atlantic Coast , tagged individuals sometime being identified in multiple rivers during their lifetimes .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Long Island Sound was formed when the terminal moraine that dammed the waters of glacial Lake Connecticut failed , and sea water mixed with the lake 's fresh waters .
The first European to record the existence of Long Island Sound was the Dutch navigator Adriaen Block , who entered the sound from the East River in 1614 .
The sound was known as The Devil 's Belt in colonial times and the reefs that run across the sound were known as Devil 's Stepping Stones , from which Stepping Stones Lighthouse got its name .
USES TRANSPORTATION Section::::Uses .
Section::::Transportation .
Ferries provide service between Long Island and Connecticut , notably the Bridgeport & Port Jefferson Ferry ( between Port Jefferson and Bridgeport ) , and the Cross Sound Ferry ( between Orient Point and New London ) .
The ferries that cross Long Island Sound carry automobiles , trucks and buses , as well as foot passengers .
FISHING Section::::Fishing .
Long Island Sound has historically had rich recreational and commercial fishing , including oysters , lobsters , scallops , blue crabs , tuna flounder , striped bass , and bluefish .
However , in recent years the western part of the sound has become increasingly deficient of marine life .
The fishing and lobster industries have encouraged efforts to identify the cause of the dead water and rectify the problem .
Lobsters have suffered diseases of unknown cause , but recreational fishing improved dramatically in the last 10 years due , in large part , to restoring a key component in the food chain , menhaden ( a.k.a . " bunker " ) fish which are a mainstay of striped bass and other pelagic fish .
The ban of netting of bunker - which were over - fished in the late 1990s - has significantly improved the quality and volume of the striped bass population in Long Island Sound .
FURTHER DEVELOPMENT Section::::Further development .
Underwater cables transmit electricity under Long Island Sound , most notably a new and controversial Cross Sound Cable that runs from New Haven in western Connecticut , to Shoreham in central Long Island , and an older one from Rye in Westchester County to Oyster Bay on Long Island .
Scientists debate whether submarine power cables are safe for underwater lifeforms .
Broadwater Energy LLC , a joint venture between the Shell Oil Company and TransCanada Corporation , has proposed building a floating liquefied natural gas ( LNG ) terminal from the Connecticut shore and from Long Island .
The installation is estimated to save the region in excess of $ 600 million a year in energy costs .
The terminal would regasify LNG offloaded from ships , and this gas would flow through pipelines under the sound to New York and Connecticut .
Some politicians from both states , such as New York Senator Chuck Schumer , are fiercely opposed to the terminal , claiming that alternative energy sources and conservation should be pursued instead of adding new distribution lines and supply sources .
Local Connecticut politicians have little influence since the terminal would be located entirely within waters that are part of New York State
( although Connecticut senators and representatives may be able to stop the platform at the federal level ) .
Certain politicians in the United States Congress have proposed offshore oil drilling in Long Island Sound , which has met staunch opposition by residents of New York and Connecticut , environmentalists , and Democrats .
Over the years , bridges over the sound have been proposed , including a bridge between Rye in Westchester County and Oyster Bay on Long Island ; between New Haven , Connecticut and Shoreham on Long Island ; between Bridgeport , Connecticut and Port Jefferson on Long Island ; or between Orient Point , New York and Rhode Island .
A tunnel under the sound , as between Rye and Oyster Bay has also been proposed , to carry both freeway lanes and railroads .
However , no crossing has been built since the Throgs Neck Bridge in the early 1960s .
POLLUTION Section::::Pollution .
The Long Island Sound ecosystem has historically been polluted by a number of different sources , including industry , agriculture and communities ( untreated sewage and urban runoff ) .
Pollutants entering the Sound include toxic substances such as heavy metals ; a specific example includes mercury discharged by the hatting industry in Danbury , Connecticut .
Other pollutants include pathogens , debris , and nutrients ( which contain nitrogen and phosphorus from fertilizer runoff ) .
Hypoxia and eutrophication ( low oxygen level resulting conditions ) are direct environmental impacts on the Sound that are exacerbated by higher temperatures , stratified water columns ( when the water is not well mixed vertically ) and excess nutrients .
Algal blooms result from the overgrowth of algae that dies in large numbers , sinks to the bottom , and decomposes by using available oxygen in the water and leaving little for other species , causing the system to suffer as a whole .
To date the primary target for water remediation tactics in Long Island Sound have been nutrients entering from waste water treatment facilities and watersheds such as the Connecticut River watershed .
The Connecticut River begins in Canada and extends though New England , carrying pollutants from all of the communities it passes into the Sound , at a rate of 18,400 cubic feet per second .
Long Island Sound sustains significant populations of fish and nurseries .
This biological function has been threatened by both terrestrial and chemical alterations resulting from urbanization of the area .
Specifically 25 - 35 % of the tidal wetlands in the Sound have been dredged , filled , and developed over and hypoxia and eutrophication resulting from pollution have lead to low dissolved oxygen levels ( less that 4.8 mg of oxygen per liter ) in the water .
The low dissolved oxygen levels limit the fishes ability to swim , feed , grow and reproduce and loss of habitat prevents success in fish larval growth .
The impacts listed here are directly associated with these specific species in Long Island Sound : killifishes , silversides , bay anchovy , eels , menhaden , cunner , tautog , sticklebacks , winter flounder , weakfish , bluefish , tomcod and striped bass .
An example of impacts from nitrogen is a shift in the types of plankton that make up their community in Long Island Sound .
Over the last several decades , excess nitrogen may have adversely affected diatoms — microscopic , single - celled algae at the base of the food chain , which make shells ( ' frustules ' ) of opaline silica .
When diatoms are less productive , they are replaced by other phytoplankton such as dinoflagellates or blue - green algae , which grow well in waters with high nitrogen levels , but do not need silica .
Such changes in the base of the food chain leads to consequences such as an increase in abundance of jellyfish and decline in shellfish and other fish .
Starting in the 1990s , Connecticut and federal United States Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) officials defined no - dumping areas in which commercial or recreational boat users were prohibited from releasing untreated sewage into the Sound near the coastline .
In 2007 state and federal officials announced the ban had extended to the entire Connecticut coast and applied to both treated and untreated sewage .
New Hampshire and Maine have similar bans , but Massachusetts , Maine and New York do not ( all are within the contributing watersheds ) .
From the 1990s to 2007 , the number of pumping stations for boat sewage tripled to 90 at marinas up and down the coast .
Violators may be charged with a state misdemeanor and face $ 250 fines , or a federal civil penalty , with fines of up to $ 2,000 .
To address the water quality problems , EPA created the Long Island Sound Study ( LISS ) to support development of a nitrogen total maximum daily load ( TMDL ) in 1992 .
The TMDL implements innovative strategies , including a nitrogen credit trading program for sewage treatment plants in Connecticut , and bubble permits for sewage treatment plants in New York .
Results point to significant nitrogen reductions in Long Island Sound , and significant cost savings .
By 1994 , a plan to reduce nitrogen outputs of effluent into the Sound was agreed upon by the federal government and the states of New York and Connecticut .
The goal was to reduce the amount of nitrogen entering the Sound by 58.5 percent as of 2014 .
New York City agreed with New York state and Connecticut to reduce nitrogen levels in 1998 , but backed off its commitment and was sued by the state .
In early 2006 , the city agreed to lower nitrogen outputs and was given until 2017 to meet its reduction goals .
By 2007 , $ 617 million had been spent in upgrading sewage treatment plants , with 39 out of 104 retrofitted with devices to remove nitrogen .
According to the EPA National Estuary Program Coastal Protection Report for June 2007 , the western part of the Sound was in the worst condition .
The report gives a " fair " rating to water quality in the sound and poor marks to fish , bottom - feeders and sediment .
High levels of PCBs were found in fish samples , and high concentrations of the pesticide DDT were found in sediment .
Development resulting from population increases , past industrial pollution and stormwater runoff all contribute to the poor quality of the water , according to the report .
Nitrogen pollution in the Sound has been declining in the 21st century .
At the end of 2014 , wastewater treatment facilities reached 94 percent of their nitrogen reduction goal set by the TMDL .
Achieving this goal has resulted in 108,000 fewer pounds of nitrogen were discharged into the Sound every day .
In 2015 the Long Island Sound Study concluded that the Sound is cleaner and healthier than it has been , but still impaired from pollution and habitat loss .
To continue improving the quality of Long Island Sound , both ongoing challenges and adapting to new conditions due to climate change need to be addressed .
DUMPING OF DREDGED SEDIMENT Section::::Dumping of dredged sediment .
Polluted sediment from harbor , river and waterway dredging has been dumped in four sites in the Sound , although in late 2007 two of them at the eastern end of the Sound were scheduled to be closed at some future date .
A dumping site near Stamford , Connecticut and another near New Haven , Connecticut were expected to remain open .
In 2007 , the U.S. EPA and U.S. Army Corps of Engineers began a five- to seven - year , $ 16 million study on more environmentally friendly ways to dredge harbors in the Sound .
Dumping the sediment in the Sound is considerably less expensive than other options , according to Connecticut harbor officials and state and federal environmental officials .
Federal officials had concluded that sediment from Bridgeport Harbor was too contaminated for disposal in the Sound , and in 2007 the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection ( DEP ) required Norwalk , Connecticut to " cap " of dumped sediment from a planned Norwalk Harbor dredging project with of material .
Silt and sediment from the harbor contains heavy metals and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons , according to DEP officials .
LEGAL STATUS Section::::Legal status .
In 1985 , the Supreme Court of the United States ruled that Long Island Sound is a juridical bay .
The case involved a jurisdictional dispute among New York State , Rhode Island , and The United States .
The classification of juridical bay means that the states , and not the federal government , have jurisdiction over the Long Island Sound waters .
This also means that the legal coastline of the United States incorporates the southern shore of Long Island , but not the alternative that would have been to consider the coastline to follow additionally the southern shores of Connecticut , and the eastern shores of Westchester County , The Bronx , and Manhattan .
SEE
ALSO
* Coastal and Estuarine Research Federation
* Geography of New York City
* Long Island Crossing - various proposed bridges and tunnels between Long Island and Connecticut / Rhode Island
* Sound ( geography )
REFERENCES
NOTES
SOURCES
* Working for Nature Series :
Shortnose Sturgeon , CDEP ( Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection ) website .
2003 . .
* Savoy , T. 2004 .
Population estimate and utilization of the lower Connecticut River by shortnose sturgeon .
Pages 345 - 352 in P.M.
Jacobson et al .
( Eds . )
The Connecticut River ecological study ( 1965–1973 ) revisited : ecology of the lower Connecticut River 1973 - 2003 .
American Fisheries Society Monograph .
* Savoy , T. and D. Shake .
1992 .
Sturgeon status in Connecticut waters .
Final Report to the National Marine Fisheries Service , Gloucester , Massachusetts .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* What Makes Long Island Sound
So Special ?
- EPA website
* Soundkeeper - non - profit preservation group
* Long Island Sound Foundation - non - profit preservation group
* Cross - Sound Cable - official CSC website * Human Nature - New York Times series on Long Island Sound * - Wesleyan University Research on the Eutrophication of Long Island Sound * SeagrassLI - LIS eelgrass restoration and monitoring * Fraudwater - Information on Shell Oil Broadwater campaign