HARRY POTTER AND THE GOBLET OF FIRE Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire is a fantasy book written by British author J. K. Rowling and the fourth novel in the Harry Potter series .
It follows Harry Potter , a wizard in his fourth year at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry and the mystery surrounding the entry of Harry 's name into the Triwizard Tournament , in which he is forced to compete .
The book was published in the United Kingdom by Bloomsbury and in the United States by Scholastic ; in both countries the release date was 8 July 2000 , the first time a book in the series was published in both countries at the same time .
The novel won a Hugo Award , the only Harry Potter novel to do so , in 2001 .
The book was adapted into a film , which was released worldwide on 18 November 2005 , and a video game by Electronic Arts .
SYNOPSIS PLOT INTRODUCTION
Section::::Synopsis .
Section::::Plot introduction .
Throughout the three previous novels in the Harry Potter series , the main character , Harry Potter , has struggled with the difficulties of growing up , and the added challenge of being a famed wizard : when Harry was a baby , Lord Voldemort , the most powerful Dark wizard in history , killed Harry 's parents but mysteriously vanished after unsuccessfully trying to kill Harry , which left a lightning - shaped scar on Harry 's forehead .
This results in Harry 's immediate fame and his being placed in the care of his abusive muggle , or non - magical , aunt and uncle , Aunt Petunia Dursley and Uncle Vernon Dursley , who have a son named Dudley Dursley .
Harry learns that he is a wizard when he is 11 years old and enrols in Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry .
He befriends Ron Weasley and Hermione Granger , and is confronted by Lord Voldemort who is trying to regain power .
In Harry 's first year he has to protect the Philosopher 's Stone from Voldemort and one of his faithful followers at Hogwarts .
After returning to the school after summer break , students at Hogwarts are attacked by the legendary monster of the " Chamber of Secrets " after the chamber is opened .
Harry ends the attacks by killing a Basilisk and defeating another attempt by Lord Voldemort to return to full strength .
The following year , Harry hears that he has been targeted by escaped mass murderer Sirius Black .
Despite stringent security measures at Hogwarts , Harry is confronted by Black at the end of his third year of schooling , and Harry learns that Black was framed and is actually Harry 's godfather .
He also learned that it was his father 's old school friend Peter Pettigrew who actually betrayed his parents .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
The book opens with Harry seeing Frank Bryce being killed by Lord Voldemort in a vision , and is awoken by his scar hurting .
The Weasleys then take Harry and Hermione Granger to the Quidditch World Cup , using a Portkey , to watch Ireland versus Bulgaria , with Ireland emerging victorious .
There , Harry meets Cedric Diggory , who is attending the match with his father .
After the match , Voldemort 's followers attack the site , destroying spectators ' tents and wreaking havoc .
The Dark Mark gets fired into the sky , which leads to a panic since it is the first time the sign has been seen in 13 years .
Winky , Barty Crouch Senior 's house elf , is falsely accused of casting the Mark after she is found holding Harry 's wand , which is revealed to have been used to cast the Mark , as Harry had lost it during the chaos of the Death Eaters ' attack .
Hermione , angry at this injustice , forms a society to promote the rights of house elves known as S.P.E.W. ( Society for the Promotion of Elvish Welfare ) .
At Hogwarts , Professor Dumbledore announces that Alastor " Mad - Eye " Moody will be the Defence Against the Dark Arts teacher for the year , and also that Hogwarts will host the Triwizard Tournament , with a prize of one thousand gold Galleons .
However , only those over 17—the age of majority in the wizarding world — will be allowed to enter .
It is the first time in 202 years that the Triwizard Tournament will be held .
Students from Beauxbatons Academy and the Durmstrang Institute , other wizarding academies , will travel to Hogwarts , where they will stay for the year , in hopes of competing .
At Halloween , the Goblet of Fire picks Fleur Delacour from Beauxbatons Academy , Viktor Krum ( who is also the Seeker on Bulgaria 's Quidditch team ) from Durmstrang Institute , and Cedric Diggory from Hogwarts to compete in the tournament .
However , it additionally gives a fourth name — Harry Potter — leading to suspicion and indignation from everyone and magically binding Harry to compete .
Ron is jealous that Harry is once again in the limelight and refuses to speak to Harry .
Hagrid reveals to Harry that the first task involves dragons , and since Fleur and Krum 's headmasters are also aware of this , and will surely tell them in advance , Harry informs Cedric as well .
At the task , Harry has to pass a Hungarian Horntail to retrieve a golden egg that contains a hint to the next task , which he does by summoning his Firebolt broomstick with the Accio spell , and finishes the task tied for first with Krum .
Ron and Harry subsequently reconcile , Ron now understanding the full danger of the tournament .
When Harry opens the egg , though , it merely shrieks loudly .
Hermione then takes Harry and Ron to the school kitchens , where house elves work .
There , they meet a distraught Winky , who is struggling to get over the loss of her sacking .
They also meet Harry 's old friend Dobby , who has been employed at Hogwarts to work in the kitchens ; he is the only known house elf to appreciate his freedom , despite his hardworking nature .
Meanwhile , gossipy reporter Rita Skeeter is writing scandalous articles of half - truths and outright fabrications in The Daily Prophet about those at Hogwarts , including Hermione , Harry , Hagrid , and Madame Maxime of Beauxbatons .
With the Yule Ball approaching , Harry must find a partner , but when he finally approaches his crush Cho Chang , Cedric has beaten him to her , so Harry and Ron ask Parvati and Padma Patil .
Ron is shocked and jealous to see that Hermione is attending with Krum .
Cedric gives Harry a tip on the egg , telling him to take it to the prefects ' bathroom , but Harry refuses to listen , jealous over Cho .
Finally acting on the tip , Harry takes the egg to the prefects ' bathroom , where Moaning Myrtle tells him to listen to the egg underwater ; there the words become understandable .
Harry learns that the task is to recover something he will " sorely miss " , and starts looking for spells to help him breathe where the objects will be taken : The Black Lake .
By the morning of the task , Harry still has n't found a solution , but Dobby gives him some Gillyweed to give Harry gills .
Harry completes the task by rescuing Ron from under the lake .
Harry then takes a risk by also rescuing Fleur 's younger sister , Gabrielle , after Fleur was unable to .
After the judges confer , he earns enough points to tie him with Cedric for the lead .
One month before the final task , Harry and Krum are talking when they encounter Crouch , who appears to have gone insane , but manages to tell Harry to get Dumbledore .
Leaving Krum with Crouch , Harry fetches Dumbledore but returns to find Krum stunned and Crouch gone .
Harry returns to preparing for the final task , a hedge maze .
Inside the maze , Harry is forced to incapacitate Krum , who has been bewitched , to save Cedric .
Working together , the two reach the cup .
They agree to touch it at the same time , and doing so , discover that it is a Portkey that transports them to a graveyard .
There , Peter Pettigrew kills Cedric and uses Harry 's blood ( along with his own hand and Tom Riddle Sr . 's bone ) to resurrect Lord Voldemort .
Voldemort summons his Death Eaters , berating them for thinking he was dead , before he reveals that he has a single " faithful servant " concealed at Hogwarts , who has been working to ensure that Harry would make it to the graveyard , and then challenges Harry to a duel .
However , when he and Harry fire curses at each other , their wands connect due to their identical cores .
Voldemort 's wand releases the most recent spells it performed , resulting in imprints of his last victims appearing in the graveyard , including Harry 's parents , who provide a distraction so that Harry can escape back to Hogwarts using the Portkey , taking Cedric 's body with him .
When he returns , Moody takes him to his office , and reveals himself to be Voldemort 's ' faithful servant ' ; he was the one who put Harry 's name into the Goblet of Fire , and has been guiding him through the tournament from behind the scenes to ensure that he would grab the Portkey first .
Before Moody can kill Harry , Dumbledore , McGonagall and Snape intervene .
They learn that Moody is in fact Barty Crouch Jr. , Mr. Crouch 's son , disguised by Polyjuice Potion .
Crouch had sentenced Crouch Jr. to life imprisonment in Azkaban over alleged ties to the Death Eaters but smuggled him out as a last favour to his dying wife .
Crouch Jr. was the one who set off the Dark Mark at the Quidditch World Cup , doing it to scare the Death Eaters he felt had abandoned Voldemort .
Eventually , Voldemort had gotten in contact with Crouch Jr. and had him impersonate Moody as part of his plan .
Crouch Jr. also admits to killing Crouch Sr . , to prevent him telling Dumbledore about Voldemort .
The real Moody is found inside Crouch Jr. 's enchanted trunk and rescued .
Harry is then declared the winner of the Triwizard Tournament and given his winnings .
Many people , including Fudge , do not believe Harry and Dumbledore about Voldemort 's return , and as Fudge has the Dementor 's Kiss performed , Crouch Jr. is unable to give testimony .
Hermione discovers Rita Skeeter is an unregistered Animagus , who can take the form of a beetle , and blackmails her to force her to stop writing her libellous stories .
Not wanting his tournament winnings , Harry gives them to Fred and George to start their joke shop and returns home with the Dursleys .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire is the fourth book in the Harry Potter series .
The first , Harry Potter and the Philosopher 's Stone , was published by Bloomsbury on 26 June 1997 ; the second , Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets , was published on 2 July 1998 ; and the third , Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban , followed on 8 July 1999 .
Goblet of Fire is considerably longer than the first three ; almost twice the size ( the paperback edition was 636 pages ) .
Rowling stated that she " knew from the beginning it would be the biggest of the first four " .
She said there needed to be a " proper run - up " for the conclusion and rushing the " complex plot " could confuse readers .
She also stated that " everything is on a bigger scale " which was symbolic , as Harry 's horizons widened both literally and metaphorically as he grew up .
She also wanted to explore more of the magical world .
Until the official title 's announcement on 27 June 2000 , the book was called by its working title , ' Harry Potter IV . '
Previously , in April , the publisher had listed it as Harry Potter and the Doomspell Tournament .
However , J. K. Rowling expressed her indecision about the title in an Entertainment Weekly interview .
" I changed my mind twice on what [ the title ] was .
The working title had got out — Harry Potter and the Doomspell Tournament .
Then I changed Doomspell to Triwizard Tournament .
Then I was teetering between Goblet of Fire and Triwizard Tournament .
In the end , I preferred Goblet of Fire because it 's got that kind of cup of destiny feel about it , which is the theme of the book . "
Rowling mentioned that she originally had a Weasley relative named Malfalda , who , according to Rowling , " was the daughter of the ' second cousin who 's a stockbroker ' mentioned in Philosopher 's Stone .
This stockbroker had been very rude to Mr. and Mrs. Weasley in the past , but now he and his ( Muggle ) wife had inconveniently produced a witch , they came back to the Weasleys asking for their help in introducing her to wizarding society before she starts at Hogwarts " .
Malfalda was supposed to be a Slytherin and who was to fill in the Rita Skeeter subplot , but eventually was removed as " there were obvious limitations to what an eleven year old closeted at school could discover " .
Rowling considered Rita Skeeter to be " much more flexible " .
Rowling also admitted that the fourth book was the most difficult to write at the time , because she noticed a giant plot hole halfway through writing .
In particular , Rowling had trouble with the ninth chapter , " The Dark Mark " , which she rewrote 13 times .
THEMES Section::::Themes .
Jeff Jensen , who interviewed Rowling for Entertainment Weekly in 2000 , pointed out that bigotry is a big theme in the Harry Potter novels and Goblet of Fire in particular .
He mentioned how Voldemort and his followers are prejudiced against Muggles and how in Goblet of Fire Hermione forms a group to liberate Hogwarts ' house - elves who have " been indentured servants so long they lack desire for anything else " .
When asked why she explored this theme , Rowling replied , She also commented that she did not feel this was too " heavy " for children , as it was one of those things that a " huge number of children at that age start to think about " .
PUBLICATION AND RECEPTION
UK / US RELEASE Section::::Publication and reception .
Section::::UK / US release .
Goblet of Fire was the first book in the Harry Potter series to be released in the United States on the same date as the United Kingdom , on 8 July 2000 , strategically on a Saturday so children did not have to worry about school conflicting with buying the book .
It had a combined first - printing of over five million copies .
It was given a record - breaking print run of 3.9 million .
Three million copies of the book were sold over the first weekend in the US alone .
FedEx dispatched more than 9,000 trucks and 100 planes to fulfil book deliveries .
The pressure in editing caused a mistake which shows Harry 's father emerging first from Voldemort 's wand ; however , as confirmed in Prisoner of Azkaban , James died first , so then Harry 's mother ought to have come out first .
This was corrected in later editions .
LAUNCH PUBLICITY Section::::Launch publicity .
To publicise the book , a special train named Hogwarts Express was organised by Bloomsbury , and run from King 's Cross to Perth , carrying J.K. Rowling , a consignment of books for her to sign and sell , also representatives of Bloomsbury and the press .
The book was launched on 8 July 2000 , on platform 1 at King 's Cross – which had been given " Platform " signs for the occasion – following which the train departed .
En route it called at Didcot Railway Centre , , the Severn Valley Railway , ( overnight stop ) , Manchester , Bradford , , the National Railway Museum ( overnight stop ) , Newcastle , Edinburgh , arriving at Perth on 11 July .
The locomotive was West Country class steam locomotive no .
34027
Taw Valley , which was specially repainted red for the tour ; it later returned to its normal green livery ( the repaints were requested and paid for by Bloomsbury ) .
The coaches of the train included a sleeping car .
A Diesel locomotive was coupled at the other end , for use when reversals were necessary , such as the first stage of the journey as far as Ferme Park , just south of .
The tour generated considerably more press interest than the launch of the film Thomas and the Magic Railroad which was premièred in London the same weekend .
CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Critical reception .
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire has received mostly positive reviews .
In The New York Times Book Review , author Stephen King stated the Goblet of Fire was " every bit as good as Potters 1 through 3 " and praised the humour and subplots , although he commented that " there 's also a moderately tiresome amount of adolescent squabbling ...
it 's a teenage thing " .
Kirkus Reviews called it " another grand tale of magic and mystery ... and clicking along so smoothly that it seems shorter than it is " .
However , they commented that it did tend to lag , especially at the end where two " bad guys " stopped the action to give extended explanations , and that the issues to be resolved in sequels would leave " many readers , particularly American ones , uncomfortable " .
For The Horn Book Magazine , Martha V. Parravano gave a mixed review , saying " some will find [ it ] wide - ranging , compellingly written , and absorbing ; others , long , rambling , and tortuously fraught with adverbs " .
A Publishers Weekly review praised the book 's " red herrings , the artful clues and tricky surprises that disarm the most attentive audience " and saying it " might be her most thrilling yet . "
Writing for The New Yorker , Joan Acocella noted that " where the prior volumes moved like lightning , here the pace is slower , the energy more dispersed .
At the same time , the tone becomes more grim . "
Kristin Lemmerman of CNN said that it is not great literature : ' Her prose has more in common with your typical beach - blanket fare and the beginning contained too much recap to introduce characters to new readers , although Rowling quickly gets back on track , introducing readers to a host of well - drawn new characters . '
Writing for Salon.com , Charles Taylor was generally positive about the change of mood and development of characters .
Entertainment Weekly reviewer Kristen Baldwin gave Goblet of Fire the grade of A- , praising the development of the characters as well as the many themes presented .
However , she did worry that a shocking climax may be a " nightmare factory " for young readers .
AWARDS AND HONOURS Section::::Awards and honours .
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire won several awards , including the 2001 Hugo Award for Best Novel .
It won the 2002 Indian Paintbrush Book Award , the third after Philosopher 's Stone and Prisoner of Azkaban .
The novel also won an Oppenheim Toy Portfolio Platinum Award for one of the best books , who claimed it was " more intense than the first three books " .
In addition , Entertainment Weekly listed Goblet of Fire in second place on their list of The New Classics :
Books – The 100 best reads from 1983 to 2008 .
ADAPTATIONS FILM Section::::Adaptations .
Section::::Film .
Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire was adapted into a film , released worldwide on 18 November 2005 , which was directed by Mike Newell and written by Steve Kloves .
The film grossed $ 102.7 million for the opening weekend , and eventually grossed $ 896 million worldwide .
The film was also nominated for Best Art Direction at the 78th Academy Awards .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
It was also made into a video game for PC , PlayStation 2 , Nintendo DS , Nintendo GameCube , Xbox , Game Boy Advance , and PlayStation Portable by Electronic Arts .
It was released just before the film .
RELATION TO HARRY POTTER AND THE CURSED CHILD
Section::::Relation to Harry Potter and the Cursed Child .
Much of the plot of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child involves revisiting scenes from Goblet of Fire , with younger protagonists born long after these events travelling back in time in a misguided effort to change history and save Cedric Diggory - which only leads to them damaging events in the present and worsening the situation .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS