FROOT
LOOPS
Froot Loops is a brand of sweetened , fruit - flavored breakfast cereal produced by Kellogg 's and sold in many countries .
The cereal pieces are ring - shaped ( hence " loops " ) and come in a variety of bright colors and a blend of fruit flavors ( hence " froot " , a cacography of fruit ) .
However , there is no actual fruit in Froot Loops and they are all the same flavor .
Kellogg 's introduced Froot Loops in 1963 .
Originally , there were only red , orange , and yellow loops , but green , blue , and purple were added during the 1990s .
Different methods of production are used in the UK where , due to the lack of natural colourings for yellow , red and blue , Froot Loops are purple , green and orange , and the loops are also larger in size .
Although the marketing side of Kellogg 's sold the idea that each individual loop color was a different flavor , Kellogg 's has acknowledged that all share the same fruit - blend flavor .
MASCOT
Section::::Mascot .
Toucan Sam has been the mascot of Froot Loops since its first appearance .
Toucan Sam is a blue anthropomorphic toucan ; the colors of his bill correspond to the three original froot loop colors .
While most toucans have a good sense of smell , he is portrayed as having an uncanny ability to smell Froot Loops from great distances and locates a concealed bowl of the cereal while intoning " Follow my nose !
It always knows ! "
or " Follow my nose !
For the fruity taste that shows ! " VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Kelloggs made several varieties of snack foods , including snack bags called Snack Ums .
Snack Ums were similar to the cereal but larger .
Their slogan was " Super - sized bites with deliciously intense natural fruit flavors" ...
"Flavor Bursting ! "
Froot Loops branding by Kellogg 's was also used with the Froot Loops cereal bar .
In the middle of 2012 , Kellogg 's introduced Froot Loops to the UK market for a limited time with only the secondary colors ( orange , green , and purple ) , as natural color substitutes for red , yellow , and blue could not be found .
The recipe also differed from the US version .
Kellogg 's stated that " due to European legislation we have been unable to produce Froot Loops to the same specifications as the US product .
The formulations are different , including sugar and salt levels and the UK version has been produced with natural food additives and flavourings which will account for the differences in appearance and taste between the two products .
"
The UK Froot Loops are also larger in size compared with their American counterparts , and due to the different method of formulation , are a much coarser cereal .
In September 2015 , Kellogg 's removed Froot Loops from the UK market due to a lack of demand for the cereal , although in 2017 , a special Unicorn Froot Loops limited edition was released in the UK .
FROOT
LOOPS BLOOPERS Section::::Froot Loops Bloopers .
In February 2015 , a spinoff cereal called Froot Loops Bloopers was sold and was promoted by licensing a unique Angry Birds Space episode .
IN POPULAR CULTURE
* On All In The Family , Froot Loops is a favorite cereal of Archie Bunker ( Carroll O'Connor ) .
*
In
So I Married An Axe Murderer , Rose ( Amanda Plummer )
offers Charlie ( Mike Myers ) a breakfast of freshly squeezed orange juice , silver dollar pancakes , bacon and Kona coffee .
In the next scene , she pours him a bowl of Froot Loops , stating that she does n't have the other things .
Charlie comments that he cares for Apple Jacks too , and Rose comments that she has them , but it 's unclear if she really does .
*
On The Big Bang Theory , Howard Wolowitz ( Simon Helberg ) is called " Froot Loops " by his fellow International Space Station astronauts after they overhear his mother on the phone , warning him that he should get off the phone because his bowl of Froot Loops is getting soggy .
*
On The Middle , Froot Loops are the favourite cereal of the Heck family 's children .
*
In the Two and a Half Men episode Fart Jokes , Pie and Celeste , Jake mentions that his favorite cereal " used to be Franken Berry , but Froot Loops now " .
SPONSORSHIPS
* Dragon Tales
* Sagwa , the Chinese Siamese Cat REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Kellogg 's corporate Froot Loops site : includes package information and Nutrition Facts .