TONGUE SPLITTING Tongue bifurcation , splitting or forking , is a type of body modification in which the tongue is cut centrally from its tip to as far back as the underside base , forking the end .
It is a common body alteration for body modification enthusiasts .
PROCESS
Section::::Process .
There are several methods used to split tongues :
cutting with a scalpel , cauterizing and tying off .
It is performed by oral surgeons , plastic surgeons , or body modification practitioners , or done oneself , but only oral and plastic surgeons are licensed .
Before splitting with any method , some choose to have a well - healed tongue piercing where the back end of the split is intended to be .
This effectively prevents the tongue from healing forward from the back of the cut , which would result in a split that is not as deep as desired .
When using the scalpel method , the tongue is cut down the middle with a scalpel and each half is stitched or sutured along the cut edge .
This helps prevent the sides from healing back to each other and also achieves a more rounded and natural look .
In some cases the scalpel is heated to provide a cauterizing effect , limiting bleeding .
Cauterizing can be done with a cautery unit or an argon laser .
Both burn the tongue in half which closes off blood vessels , preventing much bleeding .
If an established tongue piercing is not used as the back end of the split with this method , the tongue has a higher tendency to heal and the procedure must be done again to achieve the depth desired .
The tie off or fishing line method is done by the person themselves .
Fishing line is tied through an existing tongue piercing to the tip of the tongue and tightened .
When the line has cinched through the tissue and become loose , it is cut out and a new tighter line is placed in to continue the cut .
This slower process allows the tongue to heal as it is being split , negating the need for stitches or cauterization to control bleeding as blood loss is limited .
It can take anywhere from a few days to a few months to split the tongue this way depending on the individual 's pain tolerance and determination .
The tongue generally heals in 1–2 weeks , during which time the person may have difficulty with speech or their normal dietary habits .
Splitting is reversible but the reversal is even more painful than the tongue splitting procedure .
RESULT Section::::Result .
After the tongue is split and the sides healed , control over the individual sides can be gained with practice .
The two halves can be raised up and down opposite each other , spread apart from the other half which makes the split quite apparent and some objects can be grasped onto and held .
A split tongue is an easy body modification to conceal with a little effort .
Keeping the tongue in the mouth and the two halves pressed together when speaking can keep the split out of view .
When the two sides are held together , it appears as though there is only a deep crevice in the center of the tongue .
MOTIVATION
Section::::Motivation .
Many cite increased sensation , enhancement when kissing for the giver and receiver or novelty , but the reasons can be deeper as well .
Challenging oneself , rites of passage , connecting with or being in control of one 's body , making a spiritual connection or testing the body 's limits are also reasons given .
Like all body modifications , it can be used to connect or identify with a specific group or to ward off those who would make quick undesired judgments based on appearance .
MODERN HISTORY Section::::Modern history .
Dustin Allor , a 19-year - old body piercer in the U.S. , split her tongue in 1996 herself .
Not having any reference of this being done before , she came up with the tie - off or fishing line method .
In 1997 she was featured on the cover of Fakir Musafar 's Body Play Magazine .
Dustin 's documented success with this process inspired coworker Natalie Lowry to follow suit in 2001 .
Erik Sprague , aka The Lizardman had his tongue split on July 18 , 1997 , by oral surgeon
Dr. Lawrence Busino , using an argon laser .
A new deeper split was done on October 3 , 1997 .
This was the third modern tongue bifurcation and the first one done using a laser .
LAWS Section::::Laws .
The legality of tongue splitting varies greatly depending on the country and within those countries , individual states or territories .
Some examples are given below , but do not encompass all the laws regarding this subject .
Some branches of the U.S. military ban body modifications that detract from a professional military image and explicitly include tongue splitting or forking as examples .
In 2003 , Illinois became the first state in the U.S. to regulate tongue splitting , passing a law making it illegal to perform the procedure on another person , unless it is done by someone licensed to practice medicine .
The law does not appear to prohibit performing the procedure on one 's self .
Since then New York , Delaware , and Texas have enacted laws that either ban the practice , ban the procedure on minors without parental consent , or restrict it to being performed by only doctors and/or dentists .
In 2009 , the Australian state of Victoria enacted a ban on splitting the tongues of minors .
In 2017 Brendan McCarthy was prosecuted in the United Kingdom for a number of body modifications including tongue splitting .
The charge was causing grievous bodily harm with intent , with an alternative charge of wounding without intent .
SEE ALSO
* Forked tongue
*
The Lizardman REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Youtube Vlog of someone splitting their tongue