ARPANET
The Advanced Research Projects Agency Network ( ARPANET ) was an early packet - switching network and the first network to implement the protocol suite TCP / IP .
Both technologies became the technical foundation of the Internet .
The ARPANET was initially funded by the Advanced Research Projects Agency ( ARPA ) of the United States Department of Defense .
The packet - switching methodology employed in the ARPANET was based on concepts and designs by Leonard Kleinrock and Paul Baran , British scientist Donald Davies , and Lawrence Roberts .
The TCP / IP communications protocols were developed for the ARPANET by computer scientists Robert Kahn and Vint Cerf , and incorporated concepts from the French CYCLADES project directed by Louis Pouzin .
As the project progressed , protocols for internetworking were developed by which multiple separate networks could be joined into a network of networks .
Access to the ARPANET was expanded in 1981 , when the National Science Foundation ( NSF ) funded the Computer Science Network ( CSNET ) .
In 1982 , the Internet protocol suite ( TCP / IP ) was introduced as the standard networking protocol on the ARPANET .
In the early 1980s the NSF funded the establishment for national supercomputing centers at several universities and provided interconnectivity in 1986 with the NSFNET project , which also created network access to the supercomputer sites in the United States from research and education organizations .
The ARPANET was decommissioned in 1990 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Historically , voice and data communications were based on methods of circuit switching , as exemplified in the traditional telephone network , wherein each telephone call is allocated a dedicated , end to end , electronic connection between the two communicating stations .
Such stations might be telephones or computers .
The temporarily dedicated line typically comprises many intermediary lines which are assembled into a chain that reaches from the originating station to the destination station .
With packet switching , a network could share a single communication link for communication between multiple pairs of receivers and transmitters .
The earliest ideas for a computer network intended to allow general communications among computer users were formulated by computer scientist J. C. R. Licklider of Bolt , Beranek and Newman ( BBN ) , in April 1963 , in memoranda discussing the concept of the " Intergalactic Computer Network " .
Those ideas encompassed many of the features of the contemporary Internet .
In October 1963 , Licklider was appointed head of the Behavioral Sciences and Command and Control programs at the Defense Department 's Advanced Research Projects Agency ( ARPA ) .
He convinced Ivan Sutherland and Bob Taylor that this network concept was very important and merited development , although Licklider left ARPA before any contracts were assigned for development .
Sutherland and Taylor continued their interest in creating the network , in part , to allow ARPA - sponsored researchers at various corporate and academic locales to utilize computers provided by ARPA , and , in part , to quickly distribute new software and other computer science results .
Taylor had three computer terminals in his office , each connected to separate computers , which ARPA was funding : one for the System Development Corporation ( SDC ) Q-32 in Santa Monica , one for Project Genie at the University of California , Berkeley , and another for Multics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .
Taylor recalls the circumstance : " For each of these three terminals , I had three different sets of user commands .
So , if I was talking online with someone at S.D.C. , and I wanted to talk to someone I knew at Berkeley , or M.I.T. , about this , I had to get up from the S.D.C. terminal , go over and log into the other terminal and get in touch with them .
I said , " Oh Man ! " , it 's obvious what to do : If you have these three terminals , there ought to be one terminal that goes anywhere you want to go .
That idea is the ARPANET " .
Meanwhile , since the early 1960s , Paul Baran at the RAND Corporation had been researching systems that could survive nuclear war and developed the idea of distributed adaptive message block switching .
Donald Davies at the United Kingdom 's National Physical Laboratory ( NPL ) independently invented the same concept in 1965 .
His work , presented by a colleague , initially caught the attention of ARPANET developers at a conference in Gatlinburg , Tennessee , in October 1967 .
He gave the first public demonstration , having coined the term packet switching , on 5 August 1968 and incorporated it into the NPL network in England .
Elizabeth Feinler created the first Resource Handbook for ARPANET in 1969 which led to the development of the ARPANET directory .
The directory , built by Feinler and a team made up mostly of women made it possible to navigate the ARPANET .
Larry Roberts at ARPA applied Davies ' concepts of packet switching for the ARPANET .
The NPL network followed by the ARPANET were the first two networks in the world to use packet switching , and were themselves connected together in 1973 .
The NPL network was using line speeds of 768 kbit / s , and the proposed line speed for the ARPANET was upgraded from 2.4 kbit / s to 50 kbit / s .
CREATION Section::::Creation .
Bob Taylor convinced ARPA 's Director Charles M. Herzfeld to fund a network project in February 1966 , and Herzfeld transferred a million dollars from a ballistic missile defense program to Taylor 's budget .
Taylor hired Larry Roberts as a program manager in the ARPA Information Processing Techniques Office in January 1967 to work on the ARPANET .
In April 1967 , Roberts held a design session on technical standards .
The initial standards for identification and authentication of users , transmission of characters , and error checking and retransmission procedures were discussed .
At the meeting , Wesley Clark proposed minicomputers called Interface Message Processors ( IMPs ) should be used to interface to the network rather than the large mainframes that would be the nodes of the ARPANET .
Roberts modified the ARPANET plan to incorporate Clark 's suggestion .
The plan was presented at the ACM Symposium in Gatlinburg , Tennessee , in October 1967 .
Donald Davies ' work on packet switching and the NPL network , presented by a colleague ( Roger Scantlebury ) , came to the attention of ARPANET developers at this conference .
Roberts applied Davies ' concept of packet switching for the ARPANET , and sought input from Paul Baran and Leonard Kleinrock .
Building on his earlier work on queueing theory , Kleinrock modelled the performance of packet - switched networks , which underpinned the development of the ARPANET .
The NPL network was using line speeds of 768 kbit / s , and the proposed line speed for the ARPANET was upgraded from 2.4 kbit / s to 50 kbit / s .
By mid-1968 , Roberts had prepared a complete plan for the computer network and gave a report to Taylor on June 3 , who approved it on June 21 .
After approval by ARPA , a Request for Quotation ( RFQ ) was issued for 140 potential bidders .
Most computer science companies regarded the ARPA proposal as outlandish , and only twelve submitted bids to build a network ; of the twelve , ARPA regarded only four as top - rank contractors .
At year 's end , ARPA considered only two contractors , and awarded the contract to build the network to BBN Technologies on 7 April 1969 .
The initial , seven - person BBN team were much aided by the technical specificity of their response to the ARPA RFQ , and thus quickly produced the first working system .
This team was led by Frank Heart and included Robert Kahn .
The BBN - proposed network closely followed Roberts ' ARPA plan : a network composed of small computers called Interface Message Processors ( or IMPs ) , similar to the later concept of routers , that functioned as gateways interconnecting local resources .
At each site , the IMPs performed store - and - forward packet switching functions , and were interconnected with leased lines via telecommunication data sets ( modems ) , with initial data rates of .
The host computers were connected to the IMPs via custom serial communication interfaces .
The system , including the hardware and the packet switching software , was designed and installed in nine months .
The BBN team continued to interact with the NPL team .
The first - generation IMPs were built by BBN Technologies using a rugged computer version of the Honeywell DDP-516 computer configured with of expandable magnetic - core memory , and a 16-channel Direct Multiplex Control ( DMC ) direct memory access unit .
The DMC established custom interfaces with each of the host computers and modems .
In addition to the front - panel lamps , the DDP-516 computer also features a special set of 24 indicator lamps showing the status of the IMP communication channels .
Each IMP could support up to four local hosts , and could communicate with up to six remote IMPs via leased lines .
The network connected one computer in Utah with three in California .
Later , the Department of Defense allowed the universities to join the network for sharing hardware and software resources .
DEBATE ON DESIGN GOALS
Section::::Debate on design goals .
In A Brief History of the Internet , the Internet Society denies that the ARPANET was designed to survive a nuclear attack : The RAND study was conducted by Paul Baran and was the first to build a theoretical model for communication using packet switching .
In an interview he confirmed that while the ARPANET did not exactly share his project 's goal , his work had greatly contributed to the development of the ARPANET .
Minutes taken by Elmer Shapiro of Stanford Research Institute at the ARPANET design meeting of 9–10 October 1967 indicate that a version of Baran 's routing method and suggestion of using a fixed packet size was expected to be employed .
According to Stephen J. Lukasik , who as Deputy Director and Director of DARPA ( 1967–1974 ) was " the person who signed most of the checks for Arpanet 's development " : The ARPANET incorporated distributed computation , and frequent re - computation , of routing tables .
This increased the survivability of the network in the face of significant interruption .
Automatic routing was technically challenging at the time .
The ARPANET was designed to survive subordinate - network losses , since the principal reason was that the switching nodes and network links were unreliable , even without any nuclear attacks .
Resource scarcity supported the creation of the ARPANET , according to Charles Herzfeld , ARPA Director ( 1965–1967 ) : The ARPANET was operated by the military during the two decades of its existence , until 1990 .
The initial ARPANET consisted of four IMPs : * University of California , Los Angeles ( UCLA ) , where Leonard Kleinrock had established a Network Measurement Center , with an SDS Sigma 7 being the first computer attached to it ; * The Augmentation Research Center at Stanford Research Institute ( now SRI International ) , where Douglas Engelbart had created the ground - breaking NLS system , a very important early hypertext system , and would run the Network Information Center ( NIC ) , with the SDS 940 that ran NLS , named " Genie " , being the first host attached ; * University of California , Santa Barbara ( UCSB ) , with the Culler - Fried Interactive Mathematics Center 's IBM 360/75 , running OS / MVT being the machine attached ; * The University of Utah School of Computing , where Ivan Sutherland had moved , running a DEC PDP-10 operating on TENEX .
The first successful message on the ARPANET was sent by UCLA student programmer Charley Kline , at 10:30 pm PST on 29 October 1969 ( 6:30 UTC on 30 October 1969 ) , from Boelter Hall 3420 .
Kline transmitted from the university 's SDS Sigma 7 Host computer to the Stanford Research Institute 's SDS 940 Host computer .
The message text was the word login ; on an earlier attempt the l and the o letters were transmitted , but the system then crashed .
Hence , the literal first message over the ARPANET was lo .
About an hour later , after the programmers repaired the code that caused the crash , the SDS Sigma 7 computer effected a full login .
The first permanent ARPANET link was established on 21 November 1969 , between the IMP at UCLA and the IMP at the Stanford Research Institute .
By 5 December 1969 , the entire four - node network was established .
GROWTH AND EVOLUTION Section::::Growth and evolution .
In March 1970 , the ARPANET reached the East Coast of the United States , when an IMP at BBN in Cambridge , Massachusetts was connected to the network .
Thereafter , the ARPANET grew : 9 IMPs by June 1970 and 13 IMPs by December 1970 , then 18 by September 1971 ( when the network included 23 university and government hosts ) ; 29 IMPs by August 1972 , and 40 by September 1973 .
By June 1974 , there were 46 IMPs , and in July 1975 , the network numbered 57 IMPs .
By 1981 , the number was 213 host computers , with another host connecting approximately every twenty days .
In 1973 , a transatlantic satellite link connected the Norwegian Seismic Array ( NORSAR ) to the ARPANET , making Norway the first country outside the US to be connected to the network .
At about the same time a terrestrial circuit added a London IMP .
In 1975 , the ARPANET was declared " operational " .
The Defense Communications Agency took control since ARPA was intended to fund advanced research .
In September 1984 work was completed on restructuring the ARPANET giving U.S. military sites their own Military Network ( MILNET ) for unclassified defense department communications .
Controlled gateways connected the two networks .
The combination was called the Defense Data Network ( DDN ) .
Separating the civil and military networks reduced the 113-node ARPANET by 68 nodes .
The MILNET later became the NIPRNet .
RULES AND ETIQUETTE Section::::Rules and etiquette .
Because of its government funding , certain forms of traffic were discouraged or prohibited .
A 1982 handbook on computing at MIT 's AI Lab stated regarding network etiquette : TECHNOLOGY Section::::Technology .
Support for inter - IMP circuits of up to 230.4 kbit / s was added in 1970 , although considerations of cost and IMP processing power meant this capability was not actively used .
1971 saw the start of the use of the non - ruggedized ( and therefore significantly lighter ) Honeywell 316 as an IMP .
It could also be configured as a Terminal Interface Processor ( TIP ) , which provided terminal server support for up to 63 ASCII serial terminals through a multi - line controller in place of one of the hosts .
The 316 featured a greater degree of integration than the 516 , which made it less expensive and easier to maintain .
The 316 was configured with 40 kB of core memory for a TIP .
The size of core memory was later increased , to 32 kB for the IMPs , and 56 kB for TIPs , in 1973 .
In 1975 , BBN introduced IMP software running on the Pluribus multi - processor .
These appeared in a few sites .
In 1981 , BBN introduced IMP software running on its own C/30 processor product .
In 1983 , TCP / IP protocols replaced NCP as the ARPANET 's principal protocol , and the ARPANET then became one subnet of the early Internet .
The original IMPs and TIPs were phased out as the ARPANET was shut down after the introduction of the NSFNet , but some IMPs remained in service as late as July 1990 .
The ARPANET Completion Report , jointly published by BBN and ARPA , concludes that : In the wake of the decommissioning of the ARPANET on 28 February 1990 , Vinton Cerf wrote the following lamentation , entitled " Requiem of the ARPANET " : Senator Albert Gore ,
Jr. authored the High Performance Computing and Communication Act of 1991 , commonly referred to as " The Gore Bill " , after hearing the 1988 concept for a National Research Network submitted to Congress by a group chaired by Leonard Kleinrock .
The bill was passed on 9 December 1991 and led to the National Information Infrastructure ( NII ) which Al Gore called the information superhighway .
The ARPANET project was honored with two IEEE Milestones , both dedicated in 2009 .
SOFTWARE AND PROTOCOLS Section::::Software and protocols .
The starting point for host - to - host communication on the ARPANET in 1969 was the 1822 protocol , which defined the transmission of messages to an IMP .
The message format was designed to work unambiguously with a broad range of computer architectures .
An 1822 message essentially consisted of a message type , a numeric host address , and a data field .
To send a data message to another host , the transmitting host formatted a data message containing the destination host 's address and the data message being sent , and then transmitted the message through the 1822 hardware interface .
The IMP then delivered the message to its destination address , either by delivering it to a locally connected host , or by delivering it to another IMP .
When the message was ultimately delivered to the destination host , the receiving IMP would transmit a Ready for Next Message ( RFNM ) acknowledgement to the sending , host IMP .
Unlike modern Internet datagrams , the ARPANET was designed to reliably transmit 1822 messages , and to inform the host computer when it loses a message ; the contemporary IP is unreliable , whereas the TCP is reliable .
Nonetheless , the 1822 protocol proved inadequate for handling multiple connections among different applications residing in a host computer .
This problem was addressed with the Network Control Program ( NCP ) , which provided a standard method to establish reliable , flow - controlled , bidirectional communications links among different processes in different host computers .
The NCP interface allowed application software to connect across the ARPANET by implementing higher - level communication protocols , an early example of the protocol layering concept incorporated to the OSI model .
In 1983 , TCP / IP protocols replaced NCP as the ARPANET 's principal protocol , and the ARPANET then became one component of the early Internet .
NETWORK APPLICATIONS Section::::Network applications .
NCP provided a standard set of network services that could be shared by several applications running on a single host computer .
This led to the evolution of application protocols that operated , more or less , independently of the underlying network service , and permitted independent advances in the underlying protocols .
In 1971 , Ray Tomlinson , of BBN sent the first network e - mail ( , ) .
By 1973 , e - mail constituted 75 percent of the ARPANET traffic .
By 1973 , the File Transfer Protocol ( FTP ) specification had been defined ( ) and implemented , enabling file transfers over the ARPANET .
The Network Voice Protocol ( NVP ) specifications were defined in 1977 ( ) , then implemented , but , because of technical shortcomings , conference calls over the ARPANET never worked well ; the contemporary Voice over Internet Protocol ( packet voice ) was decades away .
PASSWORD PROTECTION
Section::::Password protection .
The Purdy Polynomial hash algorithm was developed for the ARPANET to protect passwords in 1971 at the request of Larry Roberts , head of ARPA at that time .
It computed a polynomials of degree 2 + 17 modulo
the 64-bit prime p = 2 − 59 .
The algorithm was later sequence used by Digital Equipment Corporation ( DEC ) to hash passwords in the VMS operating system and is still being used for this purpose .
THE ARPANET IN POPULAR CULTURE * , a 30-minute documentary film featuring Fernando J. Corbato , J.C.R. Licklider , Lawrence G. Roberts , Robert Kahn , Frank Heart , William R. Sutherland , Richard W. Watson , John R. Pasta , Donald W. Davies , and economist , George W. Mitchell .
* , a February 1985 episode of the U.S. television sitcom Benson ( season 6 , episode 20 ) , was the first incidence of a popular TV show directly referencing the Internet or its progenitors .
The show includes a scene in which the ARPANET is accessed .
*
There is an electronic music artist known as " Arpanet " , Gerald Donald , one of the members of Drexciya .
The artist 's 2002 album Wireless Internet features commentary on the expansion of the internet via wireless communication , with songs such as NTT DoCoMo , dedicated to the mobile communications giant based in Japan .
* Thomas Pynchon mentions the ARPANET in his 2009 novel Inherent Vice , which is set in Los Angeles in 1970 , and in his 2013 novel Bleeding Edge .
* The 1993 television series
The X - Files featured the ARPANET in a season 5 episode , titled " Unusual Suspects " .
John Fitzgerald Byers offers to help Susan Modeski ( known as Holly ...
" just like the sugar " ) by hacking into the ARPANET to obtain sensitive information .
*
In the spy - drama television series The Americans , a Russian scientist defector offers access to ARPANET to the Russians in a plea to not be repatriated ( Season 2 Episode 5
" The Deal " ) .
Episode 7 of Season 2 is named ' ARPANET ' and features Russian infiltration to bug the network .
*
In the television series Person of Interest , main character Harold Finch hacked the ARPANET in 1980 using a homemade computer during his first efforts to build a prototype of the Machine .
This corresponds with the real life virus that occurred in October of that year that temporarily halted ARPANET functions .
The ARPANET hack was first discussed in the episode 2PiR where a computer science teacher called it the most famous hack in history and one that was never solved .
Finch later mentioned it to Person of Interest Caleb Phipps and his role was first indicated when he showed knowledge that it was done by " a kid with a homemade computer " which Phipps , who had researched the hack , had never heard before .
*
In the third season of the television series Halt and Catch Fire , the character Joe MacMillan explores the potential commercialization of the ARPANET .
SEE ALSO
* .arpa , a top - level domain used exclusively for technical infrastructure purposes
* — 1972 documentary film * The Internet during the Cold War * Project Cybersyn—1970
Chilean national net project
* Usenet , " A Poor Man 's ARPAnet " REFERENCES SOURCES FURTHER READING ORAL HISTORIES
* Focuses on Kahn 's role in the development of computer networking from 1967 through the early 1980s .
Beginning with his work at Bolt Beranek and Newman ( BBN ) , Kahn discusses his involvement as the ARPANET proposal was being written and then implemented , and his role in the public demonstration of the ARPANET .
The interview continues into Kahn 's involvement with networking when he moves to IPTO in 1972 , where he was responsible for the administrative and technical evolution of the ARPANET , including programs in packet radio , the development of a new network protocol ( TCP / IP ) , and the switch to TCP / IP to connect multiple networks .
* Cerf describes his involvement with the ARPA network , and his relationships with Bolt Beranek and Newman , Robert Kahn , Lawrence Roberts , and the Network Working Group .
* Baran describes his work at RAND , and discusses his interaction with the group at ARPA who were responsible for the later development of the ARPANET .
* Kleinrock discusses his work on the ARPANET .
* Lukasik discusses his tenure at the Advanced Research Projects Agency ( ARPA ) , the development of computer networks and the ARPANET .
DETAILED TECHNICAL REFERENCE WORKS
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Timeline .
* Personal anecdote of the first message ever sent over the ARPANET
* Timeline .