ANGEL FOOD CAKE Angel food cake , or angel cake , is a type of sponge cake made with egg whites , flour , and sugar .
A whipping agent , such as cream of tartar , is commonly added .
It differs from other cakes because it uses no butter .
Its structure comes from whipped egg whites known as a protein foam .
Angel food cake originated in the United States and first became popular in the late 19th century .
It gained its unique reputation along with its name due to its light and fluffy texture , said to resemble the " food of the angels " .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Angel food cake requires egg whites whipped until they are stiff ; cream of tartar is added to the mixture to stabilize the egg whites .
Remaining ingredients are gently folded into the egg white mixture .
For this method of leavening to work well , it is useful to have flour that has been made of softer wheat ; cake flour is generally used because of its light texture .
The softer wheat and the lack of fat causes angel food cake to have a very light texture and taste .
Angel food cake should be cut with a serrated knife , as a straight - edged blade tends to compress the cake rather than slice it .
Forks , electric serrated knives , special tined cutters or a strong thread should be used instead .
Angel food cake is usually baked in a tube pan , a tall , round pan with a tube up the center that leaves a hole in the middle of the cake .
A bundt pan may also be used , but the fluted sides can make releasing the cake more difficult .
The center tube allows the cake batter to rise higher by ' clinging ' to all sides of the pan .
The angel food cake pan should not be greased , unlike pans used to prepare other cakes , this allows the cake to have a surface upon which to crawl up helping it to rise .
After baking , the cake pan is inverted while cooling to prevent the cake from falling in on itself .
Angel food cake is sometimes frosted but more often has some sort of sauce , such as a sweet fruit sauce , drizzled over it .
A simple glaze is also popular .
Recently , many chefs ( Alton Brown in particular ) have popularized the idea of adding aromatic spices such as mace and cloves to the cake .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Angel food cake is a white sponge cake made with only stiffly beaten egg whites ( yolks would make it yellow and inhibit the stiffening of the whites ) and no butter .
The first recipe in a cookbook for a white sponge cake is in Lettice Bryan 's The Kentucky Housewife of 1839 .
Since there is no butter in the cake , the angel food cake is not related to the butter cakes : snow - drift cake , silver cake or lady cake .
The Home Messenger Book of Tested Recipes , 2d ed . , 1878 , by Isabella Stewart contained the first recipe for Angel 's Food Cake .
Stewart 's detailed recipe called for eleven egg whites , sugar , flour , vanilla extract and cream of tartar .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The most traditional method , also known as the angel food cake method is as follows .
First the egg whites , and possibly salt and cream of tartar , are mixed at a medium speed until a soft peak forms .
Whipping continues while the sugar is slowly added .
Once a hard peak is formed , the flour is folded into the mixture of egg whites and sugar .
This technique is done in order to disturb the foam as little as possible .
Different equipment is used when preparing an angel food cake at home or in a small bakery as opposed to a large scale production .
Many recipes found in cookbooks advise bakers to whip the egg whites in a copper bowl .
The theory behind this is that the whisk incorporates copper particles or ovotransferrin , which is attached to copper particles , into the egg whites , improving the flexibility and stability of the foam .
Some research has found that the copper significantly increases the dilatational elasticity , which is the elasticity of the protein cell wall at the interface of air / water .
A planetary mixer , such as a stand mixer or handheld mixer , is appropriate for a homemade or bakery cake .
If the cake is being mass - produced , a continuous mixer is preferred .
There are three methods in which the cake can be made at home or in a commercial setting .
The first two methods are most commonly used at home or in a small bakery using planetary mixers in various sizes .
Large planetary mixers may have a vacuum in order to pressurize the ingredients .
This allows for control of the emulsion and temperature .
The first method is the foam process or angel food cake method .
The egg whites are whipped until a foam is formed before any other ingredients are added .
This method ensures that the foam is not disturbed when it is being formed and that the maximum number of bubbles stay intact .
Another method is called the meringue process .
This entails whipping all or most of the ingredients together at the same time .
This may result in a lower quality foam and a final cake with a reduced volume .
The last method is called the continuous process and is usually used in commercial bakeries because it creates a consistent product in large volumes .
Ingredients are fed into the continuous mixer in either one or two stages .
A one - stage process mixes all of the ingredients together and feeds them into an emulsion head .
Upon entry into the emulsion head , air is incorporated , fully mixing the batter .
In a two - stage process , the ingredients are blended separately in different tanks according to the recipe .
The speed of the mixer is controlled , as well as air flow to help mix the batter .
The final batter may then go through a static mixer ( a pipe with a spiral blade inside ) to be deposited in a tube pan , depositor , or hopper .
Normally angel food cakes are baked in a straight - sided tube pan , but similar pans such as a bundt pan are acceptable .
It is very important that the pan does not have a non - stick surface and that no grease is applied to the sides or around the tube .
As the cake bakes , it expands and rises .
The sides and hollow center tube act as supports for the foam as it expands .
The hollow pan also allows for an even heat distribution .
For the optimal angel food cake outcome , experts believe that the cake should be baked for at the shortest amount of time at the highest temperature .
The temperature and duration depends on the size and weight of the cake .
Temperatures range from 325 to 375 ° F , while baking time ranges from 30 minutes to one hour ( Suas , M. 2009 ) .
If the angel food cake does not bake long enough , the foam and gel structures will not reach their full potential .
In a bakery , angel food cakes could be baked in a rack oven , revolving oven , convention oven , or small deck oven .
A commercial bakery may use a tunnel or traveling oven .
When the cake has finished baking , it should have a golden brown color on the exposed area .
The final volume will generally be two to three times larger than the batter volume .
Angel food cakes are cooled upside down .
Some tube pans have " feet " or " fingers " that extend off of the top rim of the pan .
The " feet " are placed on a cooling rack .
If the pan does not have " feet " it is customary for home bakers to place a glass soda bottle or something similar through the tube to ensure that the pan is elevated .
The elevation provides sufficient air flow to the cake , so that it cools properly .
If a non - stick pan or greased pan were used , the cake would fall out when inverted , leading to a collapsed cake .
Angel food cakes have a shelf - life of a few days at room temperature or up to a week in a refrigerator because of the tendency for moisture to migrate and evaporate .
After a few days the cake will be dry and lack flexibility .
MOLECULAR AND STRUCTURAL COMPOSITION EGG
WHITES Section::::Molecular and structural composition .
Section::::Egg whites .
Egg whites play an integral role in the structure of the baked cake .
Egg whites are composed of many proteins , however only ovalbumin , conalbuminm , lysozyme , and globulins have properties which aid in creating a voluminous angel food cake .
Ovalbumin and globulins will produce a foam that is equal or greater to the size of the egg whites .
Egg white proteins have many uses in baking , one of which is the ability to create and maintain a foam .
Whipping incorporates air throughout the egg whites , as well as denaturing or unfolding the proteins to create thinner protein molecules .
Overrun , similar to lightness , describes the amount of air pushed into the foam .
In terms of an angel food cake , overrun is the increase in volume from the original volume caused by the inclusion of air .
The overrun of an egg white foam ranges from 500 to 800 % .
This means that whipping 100 mL of egg whites would result in 500 mL - 800 mL of air incorporated into the foam .
During whipping , protein adsorption allows for rapid foam formation .
Adsorption is the ability to spontaneously form a very thin layer on a surface .
The denatured proteins move to the air / water interface to create the cell walls of the air bubbles .
Cell wall formation occurs when the denatured proteins aggregate , forming an extremely thin network or film .
Many interactions between the proteins and the interface are possible , including hydrogen bonding , electrostatic interactions , disulfate bonds , and Van der Waals interactions .
A cake made with egg yolks would not be as light and airy because they have a lower foaming ability than egg whites .
This move , to the air / water interface , by the proteins is also aided by their hydrophobic and hydrophilic part .
The hydrophobic moieties orient themselves toward the air while the hydrophilic moieties orient themselves toward the water portion of the interface .
The air molecules at the air / water interface interact less with the other molecules that are fully inside the bubble .
This lack of interaction causes the air molecules to have excess energy , resulting in surface tension .
The presence of egg white proteins at the interface acts as a surfactant which lowers the surface tension and promotes foam development .
A foam is a type of emulsion : air in an aqueous solution .
If the surface tension was not lowered , the air bubbles would coalescence and the emulsion would separate .
The interfacial dilational modulus ( E ) describes how the egg white proteins or surfactants covering the air / water interface are able to resist deformation from stretching or compression .
An elastic and viscosity component are incorporated into the value , which account for the energy that is lost and recovered as a result of deformation .
E =
dγ /
d
ln A
E : interfacial dilational modulus γ :
change in interfacial tension
A : change in interfacial area at a constant shape
The most stable and volumous foams are created when the egg white proteins are near their isoelectric points .
Protein adsorption is most rapid at the isoelectric point because electrostatic repulsion is reduced for proteins with a neutral net charge .
The viscoelasticity of protein foam films is usually at its highest near its isoelectric point .
This is why acid is usually added to the cake batter , in order to adjust the pH.
The preparation of the batter should be done as quickly as possible .
When the foam sits , disproportionation will occur .
This is the result of water draining from the foam and collecting at the bottom .
The bubbles at the top of the foam will grow larger as the water leaves and the cell walls or film become too weak and break , forming larger bubbles .
WHIPPING AIDS
Section::::Whipping aids .
Whipping aids improve the foaming properties of albumen , a protein found in egg whites , which means a firmer foam will be established in a shorter amount of time .
Cream of tartar is an acidic salt which adjusts the pH of egg whites so the proteins will be more soluble , as well as reducing protein denaturation during whipping .
If cream of tartar is not used the cake may not reach its maximum achievable volume .
Cream of tartar also decolorizes the flavone pigments in flour , which gives a final cake that is a bright white color .
The whiteness of the cake is also caused by the way cream of tartar creates very small and uniform air bubbles , which gives the cake the appearance of being whiter after baking .
FLOUR
Section::::Flour .
The baking process causes the batter to expand and go from a liquid to a solid foam .
The proteins will not start to denature until the temperature reaches around 158 ° F .
During this rise in temperature the air bubbles will either expand , coalesce , or break .
An egg white foam will continue to expand uniformly until the internal temperature reaches 176 – 185 ° F .
Based on the ideal gas law , as the temperature increases , the volume of the air bubbles will expand .
The temperature will continue to rise , causing the cake to expand at different rates and egg white proteins will gradually denature .
Some of the egg white proteins will start to denature and coagulate at around 135 ° F .
This establishes the setting of the foam structure .
By the time the temperature reaches 180 ° F , all of the egg white proteins will have set in place .
The foam structure will decrease slightly or collapse in order to form a solid foam of less volume .
This occurs while the cake is still baking , not when it is cooling .
The combination of protein denaturation and starch gelatinization determines whether the cake will set or collapse .
When proteins denature , they are not in a stable state .
In order to stabilize , the denatured proteins will aggregate around air bubbles and within the continuous phase of the batter .
The aggregation and overlapping of the proteins forms a very stable network .
The flour plays an important role in the texture , structure and elasticity of an angel food cake .
Minimal folding of the flour allows cell walls to form when it comes in contact with the egg protein foam and sugar mixture .
If the batter is over - mixed , the egg white proteins may coagulate causing the bubbles to break during baking , or the cell walls may become too rigid , lacking elasticity .
This would reduce the volume and result in a coarse texture .
However , if the batter is under - mixed , a weak foam will form .
A gluten matrix is formed when the proteins glutenin and gliadin , found in wheat flour , are mixed in the presence of water .
When the batter is agitated , these two proteins form cross - links , disulfide bonds , ionic bonds , and hydrogen bonds .
The matrix that forms is strong and very flexible .
Although no water is added to the batter , the gluten reacts with the water found in egg whites .
Since air has already been entrapped in the foam , the flour proteins can only coat the already entrapped air .
This helps to strengthen the cell walls and batter during baking or any other handling .
This is beneficial because the meringue on its own is weak , can not expand in heat , and does not have any elasticity normally expected in cakes .
Starch gelatinization occurs around the same time as when expansion stops and the cake sets or collapses .
When starch granules are exposed to heat and water , they swell , leaching out some starch and forming hydrogen bonds with other starch granules .
About 96 % of the starch granules are gelatinized .
Starch granules create very strong and rigid gel networks .
The starch gel network is interspersed throughout the structure along with the aggregated protein network .
The formation of the starch gel may interfere with expanding bubbles , causing them to burst and air to leave the cake .
This would result in s collapsed cake .
SUGAR
Section::::Sugar .
Sugar functions as a sweetener , stabilizer , and tenderizer .
The amount of sugar has a large impact on the overrun and stability of the foam .
When sugar and egg whites are whipped together , a meringue is formed .
If the amount of sugar is less than or equal to the amount of egg whites , a soft meringue is formed .
A stiffer meringue is formed when there is more sugar than egg white .
Angel food cakes usually have equal parts sugar and egg white .
Sugar will disturb protein foam formation in a positive or negative manner .
It is also important that the sugar is added slowly , so that the crystals have a chance to dissolve .
It is typically added after a weak foam has been formed .
This way it can help stabilize the foam instead of impeding on it , causing coagulation and collapse .
When the sugar dissolves , it interacts with the proteins at the air / water interface , creating a thicker and more stable cell wall .
The sugar can also assist in the denaturing and aggregation of egg white proteins , which increases overrun , giving a lighter texture .
Sugar binds water through hydrogen bonds , which allows for a moist final cake and why all of the moisture does not leave during baking .
Since there is no shortening , butter , fat , or oil , sugar is the only tenderizer .
The more sugar added , the more tender the cake will be .
However , if too much is added , the cake may collapse because the foam structure is not strong enough to support itself .
When the cake has finished baking , it should have a golden brown color on the exposed area .
This is due to Maillard browning reactions .
If the cake bakes for too long , more moisture will be removed and the texture will turn out dry , rough and potentially burnt .
ADDITIONAL INGREDIENTS IN COMMERCIALLY - PRODUCED CAKES Section::::Additional ingredients in commercially - produced cakes .
Commercial bakeries have a need to reduce cost and increase the shelf life for mass - produced products .
For these reasons they use many ingredients that vary from the traditional angel food cake recipe .
Dehydrated and frozen egg whites are cheaper and more efficient than fresh egg whites .
However , each lot of dehydrated egg whites varies from the next .
This results in each batch of cakes varying in texture , moisture , volume , and height .
Surfactants that have been used to improve the whipping properties of dehydrated eggs are sodium desoxycholate , triethyl citrate , triacetin , sodium oleate and oleic acid .
Frozen egg whites do not form as firm or stable foams as fresh egg whites .
It may be necessary to adjust the pH if the eggs have been refrigerated for a long time because they become more alkaline than fresh eggs .
Acids can be added in manufacturing such as acetic , malic , tartaric , and citric .
These improve the color and cake structure by lowering the pH , however they do not work as well as cream of tartar .
Instead of using pure cake flour , wheat flour or a mixture of wheat flour and raw wheat starch is used .
The wheat flour is bleached to remove any brown pigments and produce a bright white color .
The pH of the bleached flour is between 3 and 4.5 , although the optimal pH of starch gelatinization is between 3.7 and 3.9 .
Acidifiers are used in order to reach this pH range .
The optimal flour protein content is between 3 % and 4 % , and must be below 4.5 % .
If a mixture is used , at least 20 % by weight should be wheat flour .
A small amount of raw wheat starch may be added to the sugar as a grinding aid .
Pregelatinized starch may be added to increase the rate of starch gelatinization .
One method of pregelatinization starts by heating a mixture of starch and water until a gel forms .
The gel may be placed on a heated roll in a thin layer in order to dry it .
Once all the water has been removed , a starch cake is left on the roll .
The cake is then scraped off and pulverized to form a powder .
When the pregelatinized starch powder is subjected to water , a gel forms .
The pregelatinized starch increases water adsorption .
This in turn increases the batter viscosity and helps retain the entrapped air while the batter is prepared and as it starts to bake .
The gel is not as strong
has it would be if a normal starch was mixed with water and heated .
However , the combination of pregelatinized starch and starch in the wheat flour create an acceptable gel together .
Typically corn starch is used , however a variety of other starches also work .
A balanced chemical leavening such sodium bicarbonate , along with an acidifier is another common ingredient .
When reacted together , the acidifier has the ability to release all of the carbon dioxide from the sodium bicarbonate .
A variety of acidifiers can be used , including potassium bitartrate , tartaric acid , and disodium phosphate .
The type of acidifier used depends on when the preferred release of CO is .
If the release would be most beneficial when the batter is forming , citric acid would be ideal because it is fast acting .
The amount of acidifier depends on which agent , such as sodium bicarbonate , is used because they have varying neutralization points .
An excess acidifier is also added , however it is n't used in combination with the sodium bicarbonate .
Instead it lowers the batter pH to facilitate the starch gelatinization and maintain the egg white protein foam volume in the baking cake .
At a lower pH , the egg white proteins are able to entrap more air during both preparation and baking .
The optimal pH for the batter is between 5.5 and 6.8 .
It also helps to create a whiter cake , which is more desirable to consumers .
It is typical that the excess acidifier is the same as that used to react with the balanced chemical leavener .
Adding a small amount of calcium chloride may be used to alter the pH to the optimum value when dehydrated egg whites with a higher pH are used .
It may also alter the flour gelatinization temperature .
This ensures that when large quantities of cakes are produced , the cakes will be the best possible quality and volume , without a gummy layer forming .
A whipping aid such as modified soy protein can help to account for the decreased foaming ability of dehydrated or frozen egg whites .
Modified soy protein is a soy protein in a solution which is then acidified using hydrochloric acid .
Pepsin or another enzyme is then added to enhance the protein foaming abilities .
Once the enzyme activity has ceased , the solution is heated to deactivate
the enzyme and more hydrochloric acid is added if a pH adjustment is required .
Oxidized wheat starch is a tenderizing agent that may be added to give the angel food cake a lighter texture .
Raw wheat starch is treated with sodium hypochlorite , neutralized , purified , and dried .
The final starch has molecules with shorter chain lengths , which prevents the gel network from being too tough .
Unlike a homemade angel food cake , water may be used when mixing the dry ingredients , as well as to reconstitute dehydrated egg whites .
SEE ALSO
* A variety of chocolate cake known as Devil 's food cake , considered Angel food 's " counterpart " , is another popular American cake that was developed later .
However , unlike angel food cake , devil 's food cake is a type of butter cake .
* Chiffon cake
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of the cake