FEE SIMPLE
In English law , a fee simple or fee simple absolute is an estate in land , a form of freehold ownership .
It is a way that real estate and land may be owned in common law countries , and is the highest possible ownership interest that can be held in real property .
Allodial title is reserved to governments under a civil law structure .
The rights of the fee simple owner are limited by government powers of taxation , compulsory purchase , police power , and escheat , and it could also be limited further by certain encumbrances or conditions in the deed , such as , for example , a condition that required the land to be used as a public park , with a reversion interest in the grantor if the condition fails ; this is a fee simple conditional .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The word " fee " is derived from fief , meaning a feudal landholding .
Feudal land tenures existed in several varieties , most of which involved the tenant having to supply some service to his overlord , such as knight - service ( military service ) .
If the tenant 's overlord was the king , Grand Serjeanty , then this might require providing many different services , such as providing horses in time of war or acting as the king 's ceremonial butler .
These fiefs gave rise to a complex relationship between landlord and tenant , involving duties on both sides .
For example , in return for receiving his tenant 's fealty or homage , the overlord had a duty to protect his tenant .
When feudal land tenure was abolished all fiefs became " simple " , without conditions attached to the tenancy .
COMMON LAW Section::::Common law .
In English common law , the Crown had radical title or the allodium of all land in England , meaning that it was the ultimate " owner " of all land in the past feudal era .
However , the Crown can grant ownership in an abstract entity — called an estate in land — which is what is owned rather than the land it represents .
The fee simple estate is also called " estate in fee simple " or " fee - simple title " , sometimes simply " freehold " in England and Wales .
From the start of the Norman period , when feudalism was introduced to England , the tenant or " holder " of a fief could not alienate ( sell ) it from the possession of his overlord .
However , a tenant could separate a parcel of the land and grant it as a subordinate fief to his own sub - tenant , a process known as sub - enfeoffing or " subinfeudation " .
The 1290 Statute of Quia Emptores abolished subinfeudation and instead allowed the sale of fee simple estates .
The concept of a " fee " has its origins in feudalism .
William Blackstone defined fee simple as the estate in land that a person has when the lands are given to him and his heirs absolutely , without any end or limit put to his estate .
Land held in fee simple can be conveyed to whomsoever its owner pleases ; it can also be mortgaged or put up as security .
Owners of real property in fee simple have the privilege of interest in the property during their lifetime and typically have a say in determining who gets to own an interest in the property after their death .
Historically , estates could be limited in time .
Common temporal limitations include life estate , a land ownership that terminates upon the grantee 's ( or another person 's ) death even if the land had been granted to a third party , or a term of years , a lease for a specified term , such as in an estate for years .
A fee also could be limited through the method of its inheritance , such as by an " entailment " , which created a fee tail .
Traditionally , fee tail was created by words of grant such as " to N. and the male heirs of his body " , which would restrict those who could inherit the property .
If no heirs could be found , then the property would revert to the original grantor 's heirs .
Most common law countries have abolished entailment by statute .
DURATION
Section::::Duration .
An estate in fee simple denotes the maximum ownership in land that can be legally granted ; it is the greatest possible aggregate of rights , powers , privileges and immunities available in land .
The three hallmarks of the fee simple estate are that it is alienable , devisable and descendible .
CREATION AND CHARACTERISTIC OF FEE SIMPLE Section::::Creation and characteristic of fee simple .
Rules requiring words of general inheritance to create fee simple by conveyance have been abolished by statute in the United States .
To convey an estate in fee simple at common law , the deed or will must state " to B and his heirs .
" Anything short of those words transferred a smaller estate .
Modern deeds usually follow a standardized form .
There is a presumption that the testator intends to convey his or her property in fee simple unless the will indicates an intention to transfer a smaller estate , such as a life estate .
LIFE ESTATE Section::::Life estate .
Many jurisdictions retain the possibility of creating a life estate , although this is uncommon .
In the United States , life estates are most commonly used either to grant someone use of the property for the remainder of that person 's life in a will , or by a grantor to reserve the right to continue using the property for the remainder of the grantor 's life after it is sold .
The right to ownership of the property after the death of the life estate owner is called the remainder estate .
In England and Wales fee simple is the only freehold estate that remains ; a life estate can only be created in equity and is not a right in property .
TYPES OF FEE SIMPLE Section::::Types of fee simple .
If previous grantors of a fee simple estate do not create any conditions for subsequent grantees , then the title is called fee simple absolute .
A fee simple absolute is the highest estate permitted by law and it gives the holder full possessory rights and obligations now and in the future .
Other fee simple estates in real property include fee simple defeasible ( or fee simple determinable ) estates .
A defeasible estate is created when a grantor places a condition on a fee simple estate ( in the deed ) .
When a specified event happens , the estate may become void or subject to annulment .
There are two types of defeasible estates : fee simple determinable and the fee simple subject to a condition subsequent .
If the grantor uses durational language in the condition such as " to A. as long as the land is used for a park " , then upon the happening of the specified event ( in this case if the land is used for anything other than a park ) , the estate will automatically terminate and revert to the grantor or the grantor 's estate ; this is called a fee simple determinable .
If the grantor uses language such as " but if alcohol is served " , then the grantor or the heirs have a right of entry if the condition occurs , but the estate does not automatically revert to the grantor ; this is a fee simple subject to a condition subsequent .
In most jurisdictions in the United States these concepts have been modified by statute .
Fee simple determinable was generally preferred by courts in the common law of the early United States .
Recently , that trend has reversed , and most courts in the United States will find a fee simple subject to condition subsequent in situations where the conveying document 's language is unclear .
RENT Section::::Rent .
The claim that no rent or similar obligations are due from the owner of property in fee simple is only partially true .
For example , a rentcharge may exist requiring a freeholder to pay a fixed sum of money closely resembling rent , and many jurisdictions have created financial obligations that may be imposed on a freehold estate .
England and Wales impose an estate charge .
In the United States , fee simple owners are usually subject to property tax and the revenue generated is directed to the municipality 's general fund .
Other local tax assessments called " special purpose taxes " may be assessed in addition to the property taxes for specific purposes such as infrastructure improvements .
Real estate owned as a condominium is usually similarly owned in fee simple , but typically subject to rules in the declaration of condominium or created by the condominium association , such as paying required monthly fees for maintaining the property 's common areas ; however , these are generally treated legally as covenants running with the land ( contracts binding on the possessors of real property ) imposing an affirmative duty to pay money rather than as rent for property held in fee simple .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Fee –
A right in law to the use of land ; i.e. a fief .
Simple – in the unconstrained sense :
* without limit to the inheritance of heirs ; * * unrestricted as to transfer of ownership .
*
The English word fee ultimately goes back to the Indo - European root * peku , which refers to moveable wealth , that is , cattle .
The Latin word pecunia , money , also comes from this root and becomes pecuniary in English .
The root appears in Modern German as Vieh , cattle , beast .
SEE ALSO
* Allodial title * Fee tail
* Ground rent * Leasehold * Life estate * Quia Emptores NOTES