T - BONE STEAK
The T - bone and porterhouse are steaks of beef cut from the short loin ( called the sirloin in Commonwealth countries and Ireland ) .
Both steaks include a " T"-shaped bone with meat on each side .
Porterhouse steaks are cut from the rear end of the short loin and thus include more tenderloin steak , along with ( on the other side of the bone )
a large strip steak .
T - bone steaks are cut closer to the front , and contain a smaller section of tenderloin .
The smaller portion of a T - bone , when sold alone , is known as a filet mignon , especially if it 's cut from the small forward end of the tenderloin .
There is little agreement among experts on how large the tenderloin must be to differentiate a T - bone steak from porterhouse .
The United States Department of Agriculture 's Institutional Meat Purchase Specifications state that the tenderloin of a porterhouse must be at least thick at its widest , while that of a T - bone must be at least .
However , steaks with a large tenderloin are often called a " T - bone " in restaurants and steakhouses despite technically being porterhouse .
Owing to their large size and the fact that they contain meat from two of the most prized cuts of beef ( the short loin and the tenderloin ) , T - bone steaks are generally considered one of the highest quality steaks , and prices at steakhouses are accordingly high .
Porterhouse steaks are even more highly valued owing to their larger tenderloin .
In the United States , the T - bone has the meat - cutting classification IMPS 1174 ; the porterhouse is IMPS 1173 .
In British usage , followed in the Commonwealth countries , " porterhouse " often means a British sirloin steak ( i.e. US strip steak ) on the bone , i.e. without the tenderloin on the other side of T - bone .
However , nowadays some British on - line butchers also offer American style porterhouse steaks .
In New Zealand and Australia , a Porterhouse is striploin steak off the bone .
" PORTERHOUSE " ETYMOLOGY Section::::"Porterhouse " etymology .
The origin of the term " porterhouse " is contentious , with several cities and establishments claiming to have coined it .
The Oxford English Dictionary traces the etymology from proprietor Martin Morrison serving large T - bones in his Pearl Street ( Manhattan ) " Porter House " around 1814 , while noting the lack of contemporary evidence to support the tale .
This origin story gained traction in the late 19th century .
Some sources contend a Cambridge , Massachusetts hotel and restaurant proprietor named Zachariah B. Porter lent his name to the cut of beef .
In that era ( late 18th to early 20th century ) , Porter Square was flanked by cattle yards that used the Porter rail head to transport their beef throughout the US .
Still others claim the steak takes its name from various other 19th Century U.S. hotels or restaurants called Porter House , such as the Porter House Hotel in Flowery Branch , Georgia .
ANATOMY OF THE T - BONE Section::::Anatomy of the T - bone .
To cut a T - bone from butchered cattle , a lumbar vertebra is sawn in half through the vertebral column .
The downward prong of the ' T ' is a transverse process of the vertebra , and the flesh surrounding it is the spinal muscles .
The small semicircle at the top of the ' T ' is half of the vertebral foramen .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
T - bone and porterhouse steaks are suited to fast , dry heat cooking methods , such as grilling or broiling .
Since they contain a small amount of collagen relative to other cuts , longer cooking times are not necessary to tenderize the meat .
The bone also conducts heat within the meat so that it cooks more evenly and prevents meat drying out and shrinking during cooking .
The meat near the bone will cook more slowly than the rest of the steak , and the tenderloin will tend to reach the desired temperature before the strip .
BISTECCA ALLA
FIORENTINA Section::::Bistecca alla Fiorentina .
Bistecca alla fiorentina , or ' beefsteak Florentine style ' , consists of a T - bone traditionally sourced from either the Chianina or Maremmana breeds of cattle .
A favorite of Tuscan cuisine , the steak is grilled over a wood or charcoal fire , seasoned with salt , sometimes with black pepper , and olive oil , applied immediately after the meat is retired from the heat .
Thickly cut and very large , " Bistecca " are often shared between two or more persons , and traditionally served very rare , sometimes garnished with lemon wedges , if not accompanied by red wine , and accompanied by Tuscan beans as a side dish .
COTOLETTA DI VITELLO ALLA
MILANESE Section::::Cotoletta di Vitello alla Milanese .
The same cut of meat , but from a calf , is used for Cotoletta alla milanese , which consists of 1.5 cm - thick cuts which are battered in breadcrumbs and fried in clarified butter with salt .
SEE ALSO
* List of steak dishes * Meat on the bone * Rib eye steak
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * * Porter House name origin article