STAFFORDSHIRE BULL TERRIER
The Staffordshire Bull Terrier is a medium - sized , short - coated breed of dog of English lineage and may be considered to be within the pit bull type .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the United Kingdom before the 19th century , blood sports such as bull baiting , bear baiting and cock fighting were common .
At the cattle market , dogs were set upon bulls , bears , or other large animals , with the intent of tenderizing the meat but more commonly to provide entertainment for the crowd .
Another blood sport dogs were involved in during this time
was dog fighting .
Dog fighting involved gambling on dogs that were released into a pit in hopes of betting on the recognized winner : the last surviving dog .
This breed has been bred for purposes of fighting and aggression .
A dog fighting contest was cheaper to organize and easier to conceal from the law than bull baiting or bear baiting .
These blood sports were officially eliminated in 1835 as Britain began to introduce animal welfare laws .
The early bull and terrier dogs were developed as a result of breeding for the characteristic known as gameness .
Gameness was a desirable trait during a time when pitting dogs against bear or bull was common .
Gameness ultimately tests the strength and skill of the dogs .
Land - race working dogs crossbred with the early bull and terrier types with this gameness trait provided the ancestral foundation stock for the Staffordshire Bull Terrier .
ACCEPTANCE Section::::Acceptance .
The Staffordshire Bull Terrier name was officially accepted by The Kennel Club on May 25 , 1935 .
The Staffordshire Bull Terrier Club was formed in June 1935 , after the acceptance of the breed by The Kennel Club .
It is unusual for a breed to be recognized without first having a club in existence or a breed standard in place .
A standard was not drawn up until June 1935 at the Old Cross Guns , a Black Country pub in Cradley Heath where 30 Stafford enthusiasts gathered .
It was there that the group also elected the club 's first secretary , Joseph Dunn , a well - known figure connected with the breed .
Challenge certificates were awarded to the breed in 1938 , and the first champions were Joseph Dunn 's Ch .
Gentleman Jim and Ch .
Lady Eve taking titles in 1939 .
Staffordshire Bull Terriers have been the traditional mascot of the army regiments in Staffordshire since 1882 .
C / Sgt Watchman V is the current serving mascot .
The breed was recognised in the United States by the American Kennel Club in 1975 .
CHARACTERISTICS
APPEARANCE Section::::Characteristics .
Section::::Appearance .
The Staffordshire Bull Terrier is a medium - sized , stocky , and very muscular dog , with a similar appearance to the much larger American Staffordshire Terrier and American Pit Bull Terrier .
The coat is smooth and clings tightly to the dog 's body , making movement through air and water much easier for the breed .
This dog has a broad , wedge - shaped head ( male considerably more so than female ) , defined occipital muscles , a relatively short fore - face , dark round eyes and a wide mouth with a clean scissor - like bite ( the top incisors slightly overlap the bottom incisors ) .
The breed has small ears , pronounced cheek muscles , and tight jowls .
The breed 's waist is tucked up into their loins and the last 1–2 ribs of the rib - cage are usually visible .
The tail is often straight and thin , with a slight curve at the end .
The hind quarters are well - muscled .
The breed is naturally muscular and may appear intimidating .
Staffordshires come in a variety of colours : brindle , fawn , red , blue , black , and white .
Blending of these colours with white and with any other colour broken up over the body is known as " pied " .
It is advised not to breed from Staffordshires with light eyes or Merle which is a result of a genetic mutation and can cause health issues such as blindness and loss of hearing .
The dogs stand 36 to 41 cm ( 14 to 16 in ) at the withers ( ridge between the shoulder blades ) and weigh 13 to 17 kg ( 29 to 37 lb ) for males ; females are 11 to 15.4 kg ( 24 to 34 lb ) .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
Staffordshire Bull Terriers may be at risk for these health problems : * Hereditary cataracts * L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria — a metabolic disorder resulting in dementia - like symptoms .
These symptoms are detectable by DNA tests .
* Distichiasis ( commonly known as " double eyelash " )
* Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous — a condition the blood supply to the ocular lens fails to regress and fibrovascular tissue forms , causing hazy vision .
This health concern can be checked with an ocular examination throughout the life of the breed to prevent the transfer and spread of these conditions .
The breed is known to be at a higher risk from mastocytoma ( mast cell tumors ) than the general population of dogs .
A UK Kennel Club survey determined the median lifespan of the breed to be 12.75 years .
UK vet clinic data determined the median to be 10.7 years .
TEMPERAMENT Section::::Temperament .
The modern breed is one that has a temperament suitable as a companion dog but due to its breeding and history , the Staffordshire Bull Terrier is known for its character of fearlessness and toughness .
However , this breed is also known to have an affectionate nature and is naturally loyal ; they are also a friendly and lively breed .
The breed is known to be quick learning and
Staffordshire Bull Terrier puppies are considered easy to house train .
Staffordshires are notably adaptable in terms of changing home or even owners but this can cause issues as it makes them vulnerable to dog napping .
AGGRESSION
Section::::Aggression .
With proper socialization of the breed from a young age , Staffordshires can be friendly to both other dogs and humans .
Staffordshires are known to fight if challenged .
When encountering unknown dogs , the Staffordshire could become aggressive if challenged by the unacquainted dog .
This breed is also known to be headstrong and stubborn which contributes to the occurrence of challenge - related aggression .
However , with dutiful obedience training by a confident owner , can alleviate this aggression .
RSPCA chief vet Mark Evans said " Our experience suggests that problems occur when bad owners exploit the Staffie 's desire to please by training them to show aggression . "
COOPER Section::::Cooper .
In March 2018 , Staffordshire Police took Cooper , a two - year - old Staffordshire Bull Terrier , from an RSPCA animal center in Taunton for training .
He is the first police dog of this breed in the UK .. GALLERY BREED - SPECIFIC LEGISLATION Section::::Breed - Specific Legislation .
Staffies are the subject of debate as to whether or not they may be added to the Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 .
Breed - specific legislation includes breed - specific restrictions and requirements : * Required public muzzling
* Carrying liability insurance
* Required " dangerous dog sign " on dog 's residence
*
Mandatory microchipping * Mandatory spay and neuter *
Required " dangerous dog " tags
IRISH STAFFORDSHIRE
BULL TERRIER Section::::Irish Staffordshire bull terrier .
The purported Irish variety of Staffordshire Bull Terrier , also referred to as Irish bull terrier , is not recognized by any notable kennel club or breed registry .
Some suspect the dogs are American Pit Bull Terriers with an Irish nomenclature to circumvent breed - specific legislation bans , such as the United Kingdom 's Dangerous Dogs Act 1991 .
A statement by the RSPCA raised concern that " the ' Irish ' variety – which it does not recognise as a breed " contributed to a rise in incidents of dog fighting at a level equivalent to that of the 1980s .
A 2002 article published in The Telegraph , quoted Beverley Cuddy , then editor of Dogs Today , who called the Irish bull terrier a complete fiction , stating " There is no recognised Irish Staffordshire bull terrier breed . "
SEE ALSO
* American Staffordshire Terrier *
American Pit Bull Terrier *
Blue Paul Terrier * Jock of the Bushveld
* Rat - baiting REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS