MAYBERRY Mayberry , North Carolina is a fictitious community that was the setting for two popular American television sitcoms , The Andy Griffith Show and Mayberry R.F.D. Mayberry was also the setting for a 1986 reunion television movie titled Return to Mayberry .
Mayberry is said to be based on Andy Griffith 's hometown of Mount Airy , North Carolina .
Mount Airy is also known as Mayberry and this town is known by both names to the people who reside there .
THE NAME " MAYBERRY " Section::::The name " Mayberry " .
According to show episodes , the community of Mayberry was named for fictional founder Lord Mayberry .
Historically , the word Mayberry is of Anglo - Saxon origin and is a locational name , a dialectical variant of the placename Maesbury in Shropshire .
Purportedly , Andy Griffith himself chose the name of the fictional community .
Griffith , however , told Larry King in 2003 that Artie Stander is the person who thought of the name Mayberry ; Stander was one of the show 's creators and writers .
Mayberry is a real community in Patrick County , Virginia , located 22 miles northeast of Andy Griffith 's hometown of Mount Airy , North Carolina .
The Mayberry Trading Post , home of the Mayberry , Virginia , post office until it closed in 1922 , told local TV station WGHP - TV that Griffith and his father made many trips to the Mayberry Trading Post .
Griffith incorporated several community places and names from his childhood home into the show .
The term " Mayberry " is mentioned many times in television shows such as Cheers , House , M.D. , Criminal Minds ,
Supernatural , How I Met Your Mother , and Scrubs .
According to the episode " The Battle of Mayberry " , the town was almost named Taylortown in honor of Colonel Carleton Taylor , who was one of the first settlers in the town .
There actually is a Taylortown in North Carolina , but it has nothing to do with the fictional town of Mayberry or the show .
SPECIFIC FEATURES Section::::Specific features .
Mayberry had one traffic light and little in the way of indigenous crime with the exception perhaps of moonshining and bootlegging .
Out - of - town bank robbers , scam artists , escaped convicts , and vagrants occasionally found their way to Mayberry .
The county and the town share the same name and jurisdiction .
In episode 44 " Sheriff Barney " , the mayor of nearby Greendale relates that Mayberry County has had the lowest crime rate in the state for two years in a row under Sheriff Taylor .
The town only had one long - distance telephone line , as referenced in the episode " Man in a Hurry " , that two old ladies shared each Sunday preventing others from using the telephone .
In the opening scene of season 8 , episode 30 ( the last episode ) , a sign at the railroad station lists the population and elevation of Mayberry :
However , this conflicts with the comment made by choir director John Masters to Andy Taylor , that " there 's got to be a decent tenor in a town of two - thousand people " in the episode
The Song Festers - season 4 , episode 20 .
And , in season 7 , episode 23 ( " The Statue " )
, Howard Sprague refers to a population of 1,800 .
MAYBERRIANS
* Ralph Barton ( Charles Lampkin ) , a friend of Sam Jones ( RFD )
* Ernest T. Bass ( Howard Morris ) , a bothersome troublemaker fond of throwing rocks through windows
* Emma Brand ( Cheerio Meredith ) , serial jaywalker and hypochondriac * Emmett Clark ( Paul Hartman ) , fix - it
shop owner * Otis Campbell ( Hal Smith ) , town drunk and a descendant of a Revolutionary War hero
* Rita Campbell ( Dorothy Neumann ) , Otis Campbell 's wife * Old Man Crowley ( Burt Mustin ) * Helen Crump ( Aneta Corsaut ) , a Kansas transplant , Opie 's teacher and Andy 's girlfriend ( later appearing as his wife in Mayberry R.F.D. spinoff series )
*
The Darlings ( Denver Pyle as Briscoe Darling Jr. , Maggie Peterson as Charlene Darling and The Dillards as the Darling Boys ) , a hillbilly family who play bluegrass music with Andy in several episodes
* Clara Edwards ( Hope Summers ) , Aunt Bee 's best friend ( also called Clara Johnson or Bertha Edwards in early episodes ) * Warren Ferguson ( Jack Burns ) , a Boston transplant , replacement deputy ( even more inept than Fife ) * Barney Fife ( Don Knotts ) , Andy 's lifelong friend ( originally portrayed as his cousin in the pilot episode and through the first season ) deputy sheriff , later a detective with the Raleigh , North Carolina Police Department * Charlie Foley ( Frank Ferguson ) , grocer * Harold Grigsby ( Kelly Thordsen ) , owns the saw mill * Orville Hendricks ( Woodrow Chambliss ) , butter and egg man from Mount Pilot *
Evan Hendricks ( Bobby Diamond ) , wild - driving son of Orville , known to break an egg or two *
Cy Hudgins ( Forrest Lewis ) , Local farmer , owns a goat named Jimmy that eats almost anything * Mike Jones ( Buddy Foster ) , son of Sam Jones ( RFD ) * Sam Jones ( Ken Berry ) , farmer ( RFD ) and single parent and widower like Andy , head of the town council of Mayberry in Mayberry R.F.D. spin - off series * Juanita Beasley , a waitress at the Bluebird Diner , who is never seen ( flirts with Barney over the phone ) , though originally the character named Juanita was portrayed as the Mayor 's daughter in season one .
* Floyd Lawson ( Howard McNear ) , barber at Floyd 's Barber Shop
* Jim Lindsey ( James Best ) , a talented guitarist who joins Bobby Fleet and His Band with a Beat
* Leon ( Clint Howard ) , a toddler in a cowboy outfit who wanders the streets of Mayberry
* John Masters ( Olan Soule ) , hotel clerk and director of the town 's singing choir .
* Bert Miller ( Sterling Holloway ) , peddler
* Orville Monroe ( Jonathan Hole ) , undertaker * Mayor Pike ( Dick Elliott ) mayor in first two seasons of show ( 1960–61 ) * Goober Pyle ( George Lindsey ) , auto mechanic at Wally 's Garage and Gas Station ( later service station owner )
* Gomer Pyle ( Jim Nabors ) , service station attendant at Wally 's Garage for three seasons ( 1962–64 ) ( left Mayberry to join the Marine Corps in Gomer Pyle , U.S.M.C. spin - off series )
* Sarah , the often spoken to , but never seen , telephone operator * Skippy ( Joyce Jameson ) and Daphne ( Jean Carson ) , the Fun Girls * Howard Sprague ( Jack Dodson ) , county clerk
* Roy Stoner ( Parley Baer ) , mayor of Mayberry for three seasons ( 1962–64 ) , replacing Mayor Pike
* Millie Swanson ( Arlene Golonka ) , bakery clerk ( RFD ) * Andy Taylor ( Andy Griffith ) , sheriff and widowed father
* Beatrice Taylor ( Frances Bavier ) , Andy 's aunt , known as Aunt Bee
* Opie Taylor ( Ronny Howard ) , Andy 's son * Thelma Lou ( Betty Lynn ) , Barney 's sweetheart , occupation unknown * Ellie Walker ( Elinor Donahue ) , pharmacist and one - time love interest of Andy * Ben Weaver ( Will Wright ) , the flint - hearted store owner and landlord
* Mrs. Wiley ( Doris Packer ) , genealogy researcher , called Ernest T. Bass " a creature "
* Wally ( Norman Leavitt , Trevor Bardette , Cliff Norton , and Blackie Hunt ) , owner and principal mechanic of Wally 's Filling Station .
No last name is ever given for Wally .
* Lydia Crosswaith ( Josie Lloyd ) , an attempted arranged date with Andy and a romantic interest of Goober Pyle * Henry Bennett ( John Qualen ) , accused of being a jinx
* Sandy ( Sherman Sanders ) , a square dance caller * Sam ( Sherwood Keith ) , appeared in three 1962 episodes * Merle ( Sherwood Keith ) , town councilman in one 1962 episode * Art Crowley ( Frank Warren ) , the grocer * Flip Conroy ( Rockne Tarkington ) , the school African - American football coach in one 1967 episode * Asa Breeney ( Charles P. Thompson ) , security guard ARCHETYPAL SMALL TOWN REAL - LIFE MODELS Section::::Archetypal small town .
Section::::Real - life models .
Many assume Mayberry was loosely based on Andy Griffith 's hometown of Mount Airy , North Carolina , but actually , Griffith has indicated that nearby Pilot Mountain , also in Surry County , North Carolina , inspired him in creating the town .
Pilot Mountain likely was the inspiration for the fictional town of " Mount Pilot " , a nearby larger town in relation to Mayberry , often referred to and occasionally visited by the characters in The Andy Griffith Show .
The county seat of Surry County is in Dobson ; thus , this is the location of the nearest courthouse to Mount Airy .
One episode has a fictional nearby location - " Pierce County " .
Another episode has Barney Fife referring to Sheriff Taylor and himself as " the law west of Mount Pilot " .
Other place names used in the show refer to actual places in North Carolina , such as Raleigh — which was also often called " Capital City " – Siler City , Greensboro , Winston - Salem , Chapel Hill , Stokes County , Elm City and Charlotte .
One of the stars of the show , Frances Bavier ( who played Aunt Bee ) retired to Siler City in real life .
In episode 249 " A Girl For Goober " , the towns of Manteo and Toast are mentioned .
Andy Griffith owned a home in Manteo ( on North Carolina 's Atlantic coast ) , and Toast is about two miles outside of Mt. Airy in Surry County .
Stokes County , which borders Surry County to the east , is mentioned as the location of Myers Lake in episode 140 "
Andy And
Helen Have Their Day " .
In episode 62 " Cousin Virgil " , the bus picks up Barney 's cousin in Currituck .
A Currituck County is located in eastern North Carolina .
In episode 17 " Alcohol And Old Lace " while looking for moonshine stills , Barney suggests looking into Fancy Gap , Virginia , a town just across the state line from Mt. Airy .
In episode 60 " Bookie Barber " , Aunt Bee states that Floyd 's Barber Shop has received phone calls from as far away as Morehead City .
In episode 136 " Opie 's Fortune " , a man from Bannertown lost $ 50 .
Bannertown is a few miles from Mt. Airy in Surry County .
In episode 68 " Barney Mends a Broken Heart " , the towns of Harnett and Yancey are mentioned .
Both a Harnett County and a Yancey County are in North Carolina .
In episode 3 " The Guitar Player " played by James Best , who later played Sheriff Rosco P. Coltrane on The Dukes of Hazzard , Best 's character Jim Lindsey buys his guitar picks in Winston - Salem , which is actually the nearest big city to Mount Airy ( 37 miles ) .
ORIGINS AND EXPANSION Section::::Origins and expansion .
Mayberry originated in an episode of The Danny Thomas Show and was the setting for The Andy Griffith Show , Mayberry RFD , and the 1986 reunion movie Return to Mayberry .
Although the county seat of an agricultural county , black people were sometimes seen in the original series , but more often seen on RFD .
EPONYMOUS
REAL LIFE
COMMUNITY Section::::Eponymous real life community .
Mayberry is the name of a real community in Patrick County , Virginia ; located 22 miles northeast of Andy Griffith 's hometown of Mount Airy , North Carolina .
The Mayberry Trading Post , home of the Mayberry , Virginia post office until it closed in 1922 , told local TV station WGHP - TV that Griffith and his father made many trips to the Mayberry Trading Post .
TOWN LANDMARKS
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
* The Mayberry Courthouse was where Sheriff Andy Taylor and Deputy Barney Fife maintained law and order .
It also contained the county jail — two cells , a back room , and the mayor 's office upstairs .
No inside stairs are seen , although there is an outside fire escape .
Aside from Andy Taylor 's home , this was the main setting for The Andy Griffith Show .
* Mayberry Savings Bank , the town 's only bank , was often subject to robberies .
It contains a large vault , and its only security guard is a senile man named Asa , who is constantly sleeping and whose fall - apart dilapidated gun is filled with moldy bullets .
An interesting plot hole about the vault : in one episode , the vault combination was lost so an extra door was put in the vault .
But in another episode , Barney Fife gets himself locked in the safe and only escapes by breaking the wall between the vault and the next - door beauty parlor .
* U.S. Post Office – the town 's only post office * Mayberry Union High School – the high school from which Andy and Barney graduated in 1948 .
In the episode " The Return of Barney Fife " , which originally aired 01/10/1966 , Barney and Andy attend their high school reunion .
Behind the small orchestra playing during the dance hangs a banner that reads " Welcome Class of ' 48 " .
However , in the episode " Class Reunion " , which originally aired 02/04/1963
Andy and Barney organize a class reunion in which the banner reads " Class of ' 45 " .
HOUSES
* Taylor House is a humble , yet handsome , two - story frame house at 332 Maple Road ( though once noted by Barney to be on Elm St. ) , a short walk from the courthouse .
Notable features include a front porch perfect for conversation and guitar playing , a back porch with an extra refrigerator , and a living room with a high ceiling and rough - hewn ( rusticated ashlar ) stone fireplace .
* Mrs. Mendalbright 's Rooming House –
Barney Fife boards upstairs and
his landlady is Mrs. Mendalbright .
*
Thelma Lou 's House – the home of Thelma Lou , Barney 's girlfriend * Helen Crump 's House – the home of Helen Crump , Andy 's girlfriend and Opie 's teacher
* Mrs. Wiley 's House – the home of Mrs. Wiley , which is frequently subject to parties , two of which were crashed by Ernest T. Bass * The Rimshaw House – the " haunted " house of the deceased Old Man Rimshaw where Otis Campbell and Big Jack Anderson were running a still ENTERTAINMENT VENUES
* The Grand Theatre – The movie theater where Andy and Barney often took their girlfriends ( Helen Crump and Thelma Lou , respectively ) on dates COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
* Walker 's Drug Store
– This was the town drug store and soda shop owned by Fred Walker .
His niece Ellie ( Elinor Donahue ) , also a pharmacist , worked there for a while and was Andy 's first girlfriend on the show .
In the early episodes , characters often talked about " going to Walker 's for an ice cream soda . "
* Floyd 's Barber Shop – Run by the scatterbrained Floyd Lawson
, it was the main center of action in Mayberry .
On any given day , it was not unusual to see many of the town 's important figures , including the mayor and the sheriff , gathered here .
* Foley 's Grocery – Run by Mr. Foley , it was where Aunt Bee and her friends shopped .
* Emmett 's Fix - it Shop – handyman Emmett Clark 's business replaced Floyd 's when Howard McNear left the show .
* Weaver 's Department Store – run by the miserly Ben Weaver
* Wally 's Filling Station – The town 's only known gas station , it employed cousins Gomer and Goober Pyle .
It also served as the town 's auto repair garage .
PLACES TO EAT
* Bluebird Diner – This was the restaurant where Barney was often seen calling to talk to his secret love , the enigmatic waitress " Juanita " .
A man named Frank owns the diner .
It is located on the outskirts of Mayberry , near Myer 's Lake .
Mount Airy has a family - owned restaurant called the Bluebird Diner .
* Snappy Lunch – a Mayberry diner named after a real eatery that still serves lunch in Mount Airy , North Carolina .
* Morelli 's - a more upscale restaurant outside of town .
Known for its special dinner , the pounded steak supper , " pounded on the premises .
"
LODGING * Mayberry Hotel – Where out - of - towners often stayed
, the Mayberry Hotel was also where choir director John Masters was employed .
PHYSICAL LANDMARKS
* Myer 's Lake – As seen in the opening credits of The Andy Griffith Show , it was the place Andy and Opie Taylor went fishing , and where Barney often drove with Thelma Lou for their " romantic getaways " .
The fictional lake was mentioned on the show as being located in Stokes County , North Carolina .
Stokes County is a real county next to Surry County where Andy Griffith was born and raised .
Franklin Canyon Park was used for filming .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Due to the success and fame of the television show , " Mayberry " has been used as a term for both idyllic small - town life and for rural simplicity ( for both good and ill ) .
In a song by Rascal Flatts titled " Mayberry " , the town is mentioned : "
Well I miss Mayberry sitting on the porch drinking ice cold Cherry Coke where everything is black and white .
"
In the song called " Grandpa 's Interview " on the Neil Young album Greendale : " Shows with love and affection , Like mama used to say , A little Mayberry livin ' , Can go a long way . "
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Behind the Scenes of the Real Mayberry A behind the scenes look at The Andy Griffith Show and the real Mayberry , includes filming locations , the stars made on the show , and Mayberry trivia .