COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT
A complete blood count ( CBC ) , also known as a complete blood cell count , full blood count ( FBC ) , or full blood exam ( FBE ) , is a blood panel requested by a doctor or other medical professional that gives information about the cells in a patient 's blood , such as the cell count for each blood cell type and the concentrations of hemoglobin .
A scientist or lab technician performs the requested testing and provides the requesting medical professional with the results of the CBC .
Blood counts of various types have been used for clinical purposes since the nineteenth century .
Automated equipment to carry out complete blood counts was developed in the 1950s and 1960s .
Most blood counts today include a CBC count ( i.e. : complete blood count ) and leukocyte differential count ( LDC )
that gives the percentage of each WBC type , such as neutrophils , eosinophils , basophils , monocytes , and lymphocytes ) .
The cells that circulate in the bloodstream are generally divided into three types : white blood cells ( leukocytes ) , red blood cells ( erythrocytes ) , and platelets ( thrombocytes ) .
Abnormally high or low counts may indicate the presence of many forms of disease , and hence blood counts are among the most commonly performed blood tests in medicine , as they can provide an overview of a patient 's general health status .
A CBC is routinely performed during annual physical examinations in some jurisdictions .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Complete blood counts are done to monitor overall health , to screen for some diseases , to confirm a diagnosis of some medical conditions , to monitor a medical condition , and to monitor changes in the body caused by medical treatments .
For patients who need blood transfusion , a blood count may be used to get data which would help plan an amount of treatment .
In such cases , the person should have only one blood count for the day , and the transfusion of red blood cells or platelets should be planned based on that .
Multiple blood draws and counts throughout the day are an excessive use of phlebotomy and can lead to unnecessary additional transfusions , and the extra unnecessary treatment would be outside of medical guidelines .
PROCEDURE Section::::Procedure .
A phlebotomist collects the sample through venipuncture , drawing the blood into a test tube containing an anticoagulant ( EDTA , sometimes citrate ) to stop it from clotting .
The sample is then transported to a laboratory .
Sometimes the sample is drawn off a finger prick using a Pasteur pipette for immediate processing by an automated counter .
Before the advent of automated hematology anayzers , CBCs were performed manually , by counting cells in a diluted sample of blood on a device called a hemocytometer , and by viewing a slide prepared with a sample of the patient 's blood ( a blood film , or peripheral smear ) under a microscope .
However , manual blood cell counts are becoming less common , and instead this process is generally performed by the use of an automated analyzer .
AUTOMATED Section::::Automated .
Typically , analysis begins when a well mixed whole blood sample is placed on a rack in the analyzer .
The instrument utilizes flow cells , photometers and apertures in order to analyze different elements in the blood .
The cell counting component counts the numbers and types of different cells within the blood .
A special photometer called a hemoglobinometer measures the amount of hemoglobin .
This is done by adding a diluent that lyses the red blood cells which is then pumped into a spectro - photometric measuring cuvette .
The change in color of the lysate equates to the hemoglobin content of the blood .
This information can be very helpful to a physician who , for example , is trying to identify the cause of a patient 's anemia .
The results are printed out or sent to a computer for review .
Blood cell counting occurs by flow cytometry when a very small amount of the specimen is aspirated , diluted and passes through an aperture and a laser flow cell .
Sensors count and identify the number of cells passing through the aperture .
The two main types sensors used are laser light detectors and electrical impedance .
The instrument determines the type of blood cell by analyzing data about the size and aspects of light as they pass through the cells .
Some instruments measuring different characteristics of the cells in order to categorize them .
Because an automated hematology cell counter samples and counts so many cells , the results are very precise .
However , certain abnormal cells in the blood may not be identified correctly , requiring manual review of the instrument 's results and identification by other means ( such as microscopy ) of any abnormal cells the instrument could not categorize .
Sophisticated modern analyzers can provide extended WBC differential counts , which include hematopoietic progenitor cells , immature granulocytes , and erythroblasts .
Various Red blood cell indices ( parameters calculated from other CBC results ) are often reported in addition to cell counts and hemoglobin .
Automated hematology analyzers calculate the average amount ( MCH ) and concentration ( MCHC ) of hemoglobin within each red blood cell .
Average RBC size ( MCV ) and shape ( RDW ) are also calculated to provide additional diagnostic information .
For example , if the red cells are smaller or larger than normal , or if there is a lot of variation in the size of the red cells , this data can help guide the direction of further testing and expedite the diagnostic process so patients can get the treatment they need quickly .
MANUAL Section::::Manual . Hemocytometers
( counting chambers that hold a specified volume of diluted blood to enable enumeration with a microscope ) are used to calculate the number of red and white cells per litre of blood .
( The dilution and scaled grid lines on the hemocytometer are used because there are far too many cells without those aids . )
To identify the numbers of different white cells , a blood film is made on a slide , and a large number of white blood cells ( at least 100 ) are counted using a microscope .
This gives the percentage of cells that are of each type .
By multiplying these percentages by the total number of white blood cells , the absolute number of each type of white cell can be obtained .
Manual microscopic counting is useful in cases where automated analyzers can not reliably count abnormal cells , such as those immature or atypical cells ( that are not present in normal patients ) and are only seen in peripheral blood with certain haematological conditions .
Manual counting is subject to sampling error because so few cells are counted compared with automated analysis .
Medical technologists examine blood film via a microscope for some CBCs , not only to find abnormal white cells but also because variation in the shape of red cells is an important diagnostic tool .
Although automated analysers give fast , reliable results regarding the number , average size , and variation in size of red blood cells , they do not identify specific shapes .
Also , some normal patients ' platelets will clump in EDTA anticoagulated blood , which causes automatic analyses to give a falsely low platelet count .
The person viewing the slide in these cases will see clumps of platelets and can estimate if there are low , normal , or high numbers of platelets .
INCLUDED TESTS
Section::::Included tests .
A complete blood count will normally include : WHITE CELLS Section::::White cells .
Total white blood cells are reported , and a differential reports all the white cell types as a percentage and as an absolute number per unit volume .
A high WBC may indicate an infection , leukemia or some other hematological disorder .
Neutrophils : May indicate bacterial infection , and are seen in leukemias .
They may also be raised in acute viral infections .
Because of the segmented appearance of the nucleus , more mature neutrophils are sometimes referred to as " segs " .
The nucleus of less mature neutrophils is not segmented , but has a band or rod - like shape .
Less mature neutrophils are known as " bands " or " stabs " .
Stab is a German term for rod .
Lymphocytes : Higher with some viral infections such as glandular fever .
Raised in chronic lymphocytic leukemia ( CLL ) and other lymphocytic leukemias .
Counts may be decreased by HIV infection .
In adults , lymphocytes are the second most common WBC type after neutrophils .
In young children under age 8 , lymphocytes are more common than neutrophils .
Monocytes : May be raised in bacterial infection , tuberculosis , malaria , Rocky Mountain spotted fever , monocytic leukemia , chronic ulcerative colitis and regional enteritis Eosinophils : Increased in parasitic infections , asthma , or allergic reaction .
Basophils : May be increased in bone marrow related conditions such as leukemia or lymphoma .
RED CELLS Section::::Red cells .
Total red blood cells : The number of red cells is given as an absolute number per litre .
Iron deficiency anemia is one condition that shows up as a Low RBC count .
HEMOGLOBIN Section::::Hemoglobin .
Hemoglobin :
The amount of hemoglobin in the blood , expressed in grams per decilitre .
A low level of hemoglobin is a sign of anemia .
HEMATOCRIT Section::::Hematocrit .
Hematocrit or packed cell volume ( PCV )
: This is the fraction of whole blood volume that consists of red blood cells .
RED BLOOD CELL INDICES Section::::Red Blood Cell Indices .
RBC Indices are typically calculated from other measured RBC parameters .
They include the MHC , MCHC , MCV and RDW .
Automated analyzers measure MCV directly , and use it and the RBC to calculate the Hematocrit .
MCV Section::::MCV .
Mean corpuscular volume ( MCV ) :
the average volume of the red cells , measured in femtolitres .
Anemia is classified as microcytic or macrocytic if the MCV value is above or below the expected normal range ; anemias are classified as normocytic if the MCV is within the expected range .
Other conditions that can affect MCV include thalassemia , reticulocytosis , alcoholism , chemotherapy , vitamin B12 deficiency , and/or folic acid deficiency .
MCH Section::::MCH .
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin ( MCH ) : the average amount of hemoglobin per red blood cell , in picograms .
MCHC Section::::MCHC . Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration ( MCHC ) : the average concentration of hemoglobin in red blood cells .
In Hypochromic anemia , such as caused by an iron deficiency , the MCHC is decreased .
RDW
Section::::RDW .
Red cell distribution width ( RDW ) : reflects the degree of variation in size and shape of red blood cells as calculated by automated analyzers .
RDW determination , in conjunction with RBC count and MCV , is useful in the interpretation of several hematological disorders .
The RDW is measured as a coefficient of variation of red cell size distribution .
PLATELETS Section::::Platelets .
Platelet numbers are given , as well as information about their size and the range of sizes in the blood .
Mean platelet volume ( MPV ) : a measurement of the average size of platelets .
RESULTS Section::::Results .
An example of reference ranges for a complete blood count .
Note that test names , measurement units and reference ranges may vary between countries and laboratories .
Patient results should always be interpreted using the units and reference ranges from the laboratory that produced the results .
INTERPRETATION Section::::Interpretation .
Certain disease states are defined by an absolute increase or decrease in the number of a particular type of cell in the bloodstream .
For example : !
Type of cell Increase Decrease
Many disease states are heralded by changes in the blood count :
leukocytosis can be a sign of infection ; thrombocytopenia can result from drug toxicity ; pancytopenia is generally referred to as the result of decreased production from the bone marrow , and is a common complication of cancer chemotherapy
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Blood Groups and Red Cell
Antigens —
Free online book at NCBI Bookshelf ID :
NBK2261