ON - TO - OTTAWA TREK
The On - to - Ottawa Trek was a long journey where a thousand unemployed men protested the dismal conditions in federal relief camps scattered in remote areas across Western Canada .
The men lived and worked in these camps at a rate of twenty cents per day before walking out on strike in April 1935 .
After a two - month protest in Vancouver , British Columbia , camp strikers voted to bring their grievances to the federal government .
The Great Depression crippled the Canadian economy and left one in nine citizens on relief .
The relief , however , did not come free ; the Bennett Government ordered the Department of National Defence to organize work camps where single unemployed men were used to construct roads and other public works at a rate of twenty cents per day .
The poor working and living conditions led to general unrest in the camps .
The Workers ' Unity League helped the men organize the Relief Camp Workers ' Union in 1933 .
A strike was held in December 1934 with the men leaving the various camps and protesting in Vancouver .
They returned to the camps after a promise of a government commission to look into their complaints .
When a commission was not appointed a second strike was approved by the members and a walkout was called on April 4 , 1935 .
About 1,000 strikers headed for Ottawa .
The strikers ' demands were wages of 50 cents an hour for unskilled work , union wages for skilled , and at least 120 hours of work a month ; the provision of adequate first aid equipment in the camps ; the extension of the Workmen 's Compensation Act to include camp workers ; recognition of democratically elected workers ' committees ; that workers in camps be granted the right to vote in elections ; and the camps be removed from the purview of the Department of National Defence .
Public support for the men was enormous , but the municipal , provincial and federal governments passed responsibility between themselves .
They then decided to take their grievances to the federal government .
On June 3 , 1935 , hundreds of men began boarding boxcars headed east in what would become known as the " On - to - Ottawa Trek . "
MEETING IN OTTAWA Section::::Meeting in Ottawa .
The protesters reached Regina , Saskatchewan , on June 14 and met with two federal cabinet ministers in the government of Prime Minister R. B. Bennett on June 17 .
Robert Manion and Robert Weir invited eight elected representatives of the protest ( including Arthur " Slim " Evans ) to Ottawa to meet Bennett on the condition the rest of the protesters stay in Regina , where a large contingent of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police was located .
The remaining trekkers continued remain in the stadium located on Regina Exhibition Grounds , eating meals in local restaurants .
The June 22nd Ottawa meeting turned into a shouting match , with Bennett attacking the group as radicals and accusing Trek leader Arthur " Slim " Evans of being an " embezzler . "
Evans , in turn , called the Prime Minister " a liar " before the delegation was escorted out of the building and on to the street .
REGINA
RIOT Section::::Regina Riot .
The eight delegates arrived back in Regina on June 26 .
Attempts of the Trekkers to travel east by car or truck or train were thwarted by RCMP .
A public meeting was called for July 1 , 1935 , in Market Square in Germantown ( now the site of the Regina City Police station ) to update the public on the progress of the movement .
It was attended by 1,500 to 2,000 people , of whom only 300 were Trekkers .
Most Trekkers decided to stay at the exhibition grounds .
Three large moving trucks were parked on three sides of the square concealing RCMP riot squads .
Regina police were in the garage of the police station which was in Market Square .
At 8:17 p.m. a whistle was blown , and the police charged the crowd with batons from all four sides .
The attack caught the people off guard before their anger took over .
They fought back with sticks , stones , and anything at hand .
Mounted RCMP officers then started to use tear gas and fired guns .
Driven from the Square , and with the RCMP blocking the roadway back to the Stadium grounds , the battle continued in the surrounding streets for six hours .
Police fired revolvers above and into groups of people .
Tear gas bombs were thrown at any groups that gathered together .
Plate glass windows in stores and offices were smashed , but with one exception , these stores were not looted , they were burned .
People covered their faces with wet handkerchiefs to counter the effects of the tear gas and barricaded streets with cars .
Finally , the Trekkers who had attended the meeting made their way individually or in small groups back to the exhibition stadium where the main body of Trekkers were quartered .
When it was over , 120 Trekkers and citizens had been arrested .
Charles Millar , a plainclothes policeman , died , and Nick Schaack , a Trekker , would later die in the hospital from injuries sustained in the riot .
Hundreds of injured residents and Trekkers were taken to hospitals or private homes .
Those taken to a hospital were also arrested .
Property damage was considerable .
The police claimed 39 injuries in addition to the dead police officer , but denied that any protesters had been killed in the melee ; the hospital records were subsequently altered to conceal the actual cause of death .
Trekkers Arthur Evans and George Black who were on the speakers ' platform were arrested by plainclothes police at the beginning of the melee .
The city 's exhibition grounds were surrounded by constables armed with revolvers as well as automatic fire - arms .
The next day a barbed wire stockade was erected around the area .
News of the police - instigated riot was front - page news across Canada .
About midnight one of the Trek leaders telephoned Saskatchewan Premier Gardiner , who agreed to meet their delegation the next morning .
The RCMP were livid when they heard of this and apprehended the delegates for interrogation but eventually released them in time to see the premier .
Premier Gardiner sent a wire to the Prime Minister , accusing the police of " precipitating a riot " while he had been negotiating a settlement with the Trekkers .
He also told the prime minister the " men should be fed where they are and sent back to camp and homes as they request " and stated his government was prepared to " undertake this work of disbanding the men . "
An agreement to this effect was subsequently negotiated .
Bennett was satisfied that he had smashed what he believed was a communist revolt and Gardiner was glad to rid his province of the strikers .
The Federal Minister of Justice Hugh Guthrie made the false statement in the House of Commons on July 2 that " shots were fired by the strikers , and the fire was replied to with shots from the city police . "
During the lengthy trials that followed , no evidence was ever produced to show that strikers fired shots during the riot .
For his part , Bennett characterized the On - to - Ottawa Trek as " not a mere uprising against law and order but a definite revolutionary effort on the part of a group of men to usurp authority and destroy government . " EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
The events helped to discredit Bennett 's Conservative government , and in the 1935 federal election , his party went from holding 134 seats to just 39 .
After the Trek , the Saskatchewan government provided free transportation as a peace sign back to the west .
The camps were soon dismantled and replaced by seasonal relief camps run by the provinces , and that paid the men slightly more for their labor than the earlier camps .
Although the Trek did not reach Ottawa , its reverberations certainly did .
Several demands of the Trekkers were eventually met , and the public support that galvanized behind the Trek set the tone for the social and welfare provisions of the postwar era .
SEE ALSO
* Canada in the World Wars and Interwar Years
* Great Depression in Canada
* Canadian Cities in the Great Depression
* History of Regina , Saskatchewan
* Bonus Army
* Estevan Riot * List of riots and civil unrest in Calgary REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * On - to - Ottawa Trek - video dramatization ( narrated by Trek participants , with historical footage )
*
The On - to - Ottawa Trek *
On to Ottawa Historical Society * Records of Robert Jackson are held by Simon Fraser University 's Special Collections and Rare Books