MAST CELL
A mast cell ( also known as a mastocyte or a labrocyte ) is a type of white blood cell .
Specifically , it is a type of granulocyte derived from the myeloid stem cell that is a part of the immune and neuroimmune systems and contains many granules rich in histamine and heparin .
Although best known for their role in allergy and anaphylaxis , mast cells play an important protective role as well , being intimately involved in wound healing , angiogenesis , immune tolerance , defense against pathogens , and blood – brain barrier function .
The mast cell is very similar in both appearance and function to the basophil , another type of white blood cell .
Although mast cells were once thought to be tissue resident basophils , it has been shown that the two cells develop from different hematopoietic lineages and thus can not be the same cells .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
Mast cells are very similar to basophil granulocytes ( a class of white blood cells ) in blood .
Both are granulated cells that contain histamine and heparin , an anticoagulant .
Their nuclei differ in that the basophil nucleus is lobated while the mast cell nucleus is round .
The Fc region of immunoglobulin E ( IgE ) becomes bound to mast cells and basophils and when IgE 's paratopes bind to an antigen , it causes the cells to release histamine and other inflammatory mediators .
These similarities have led many to speculate that mast cells are basophils that have " homed in " on tissues .
Furthermore , they share a common precursor in bone marrow expressing the CD34 molecule .
Basophils leave the bone marrow already mature , whereas the mast cell circulates in an immature form , only maturing once in a tissue site .
The site an immature mast cell settles in probably determines its precise characteristics .
The first in vitro differentiation and growth of a pure population of mouse mast cells has been carried out using conditioned medium derived from concanavalin A - stimulated splenocytes .
Later , it was discovered that T cell - derived interleukin 3 was the component present in the conditioned media that was required for mast cell differentiation and growth .
Mast cells in rodents are classically divided into two subtypes : connective tissue - type mast cells and mucosal mast cells .
The activities of the latter are dependent on T - cells .
Mast cells are present in most tissues characteristically surrounding blood vessels and nerves , and are especially prominent near the boundaries between the outside world and the internal milieu , such as the skin , mucosa of the lungs , and digestive tract , as well as the mouth , conjunctiva , and nose .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
Mast cells play a key role in the inflammatory process .
When activated , a mast cell can either selectively release ( piecemeal degranulation ) or rapidly release ( anaphylactic degranulation ) " mediators " , or compounds that induce inflammation , from storage granules into the local microenvironment .
Mast cells can be stimulated to degranulate by allergens through cross - linking with immunoglobulin E receptors ( e.g. , FcεRI ) , physical injury through pattern recognition receptors for damage - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) , microbial pathogens through pattern recognition receptors for pathogen - associated molecular patterns ( PAMPs ) , and various compounds through their associated G - protein coupled receptors ( e.g. , morphine through opioid receptors ) or ligand - gated ion channels .
Complement proteins can activate membrane receptors on mast cells to exert various functions as well .
Mast cells express a high - affinity receptor ( FcεRI ) for the Fc region of IgE , the least - abundant member of the antibodies .
This receptor is of such high affinity that binding of IgE molecules is in essence irreversible .
As a result , mast cells are coated with IgE , which is produced by plasma cells ( the antibody - producing cells of the immune system ) .
IgE antibodies , are typically specific to one particular antigen .
In allergic reactions , mast cells remain inactive until an allergen binds to IgE already coated upon the cell .
Other membrane activation events can either prime mast cells for subsequent degranulation or act in synergy with FcεRI signal transduction .
In general , allergens are proteins or polysaccharides .
The allergen binds to the antigen - binding sites , which are situated on the variable regions of the IgE molecules bound to the mast cell surface .
It appears that binding of two or more IgE molecules ( cross - linking ) is required to activate the mast cell .
The clustering of the intracellular domains of the cell - bound Fc receptors , which are associated with the cross - linked IgE molecules , causes a complex sequence of reactions inside the mast cell that lead to its activation .
Although this reaction is most well understood in terms of allergy , it appears to have evolved as a defense system against parasites and bacteria .
MAST CELL MEDIATORS Section::::Mast cell mediators .
A unique , stimulus - specific set of mast cell mediators is released through degranulation following the activation of cell surface receptors on mast cells .
Examples of mediators that are released into the extracellular environment during mast cell degranulation include : * serine proteases , such as tryptase and chymase * histamine ( 2–5 picograms per mast cell )
* serotonin * proteoglycans , mainly heparin ( active as anticoagulant ) and some chondroitin sulfate proteoglycans
* adenosine triphosphate ( ATP ) * lysosomal enzymes * β - hexosaminidase * β - glucuronidase * arylsulfatases * newly formed lipid mediators ( eicosanoids ) :
* thromboxane * prostaglandin D2 * leukotriene C4 * platelet - activating factor * cytokines
* TNF - α * basic fibroblast growth factor * interleukin-4 * stem cell factor * chemokines , such as eosinophil chemotactic factor * reactive oxygen species Histamine dilates post - capillary venules , activates the endothelium , and increases blood vessel permeability .
This leads to local edema ( swelling ) , warmth , redness , and the attraction of other inflammatory cells to the site of release .
It also depolarizes nerve endings ( leading to itching or pain ) .
Cutaneous signs of histamine release are the " flare and wheal"-reaction .
The bump and redness immediately following a mosquito bite are a good example of this reaction , which occurs seconds after challenge of the mast cell by an allergen .
The other physiologic activities of mast cells are much less - understood .
Several lines of evidence suggest that mast cells may have a fairly fundamental role in innate immunity : They are capable of elaborating a vast array of important cytokines and other inflammatory mediators such as TNFa ; they express multiple " pattern recognition receptors " thought to be involved in recognizing broad classes of pathogens ; and mice without mast cells seem to be much more susceptible to a variety of infections .
Mast cell granules carry a variety of bioactive chemicals .
These granules have been found to be transferred to adjacent cells of the immune system and neurons in a process of transgranulation via mast cell pseudopodia .
IN THE NERVOUS SYSTEM Section::::In the nervous system .
Unlike other hematopoietic cells of the immune system , mast cells naturally occur in the human brain where they interact with the neuroimmune system .
In the brain , mast cells are located in a number of structures that mediate visceral sensory ( e.g. , pain ) or neuroendocrine functions or that are located along the blood –
cerebrospinal fluid barrier , including the pituitary stalk , pineal gland , thalamus , and hypothalamus , area postrema , choroid plexus , and in the dural layer of the meninges near meningeal nociceptors .
Mast cells serve the same general functions in the body and central nervous system , such as effecting or regulating allergic responses , innate and adaptive immunity , autoimmunity , and inflammation .
Across systems , mast cells serve as the main effector cell through which pathogens can affect the gut – brain axis .
IN THE GUT Section::::In the gut .
In the gastrointestinal tract , mucosal mast cells are located in close proximity to sensory nerve fibres , which communicate bidirectionally .
When these mast cells initially degranulate , they release mediators ( e.g. , histamine , tryptase , and serotonin ) which activate , sensitize , and upregulate membrane expression of nociceptors ( i.e. , TRPV1 ) on visceral afferent neurons via their receptors ( respectively , HRH1 , HRH2 , HRH3 , PAR2 , 5-HT3 ) ; in turn , neurogenic inflammation , visceral hypersensitivity , and intestinal dysmotility ( i.e. , impaired peristalsis ) result .
Neuronal activation induces neuropeptide ( substance P and calcitonin gene - related peptide ) signaling to mast cells where they bind to their associated receptors and trigger degranulation of a distinct set of mediators ( β - Hexosaminidase , cytokines , chemokines , PGD2 , leukotrienes , and eoxins ) .
PHYSIOLOGY STRUCTURE OF FCΕR1 Section::::Physiology .
Section::::Structure of FcεR1 .
FcεR1 is a high affinity IgE - receptor that is expressed on the surface of the mast cell .
FcεR1 is a tetramer made of one alpha ( α ) chain ,
one beta ( β ) chain , and two identical , disulfide - linked gamma ( γ ) chains .
The binding site for the IgE is formed by the extracellular portion of the α chain that contains two domains that are similar to Ig .
One transmembrane domain contains an aspartic acid residue , and one contains a short cytoplasmic tail .
The β chain contains , a single immunoreceptor tyrosine - based activation motif ITAM , in the cytoplasmic region .
Each γ chain has one ITAM on the cytoplasmic region .
The signaling cascade from the receptor is initiated when the ITAMs of the β and γ chains are phosphorylated by tyrosine .
This signal is required for the activation of mast cells .
Type 2 helper T cells,(Th2 ) and many other cell types lack the β chain , so signaling is mediated only by the γ chain .
This is due to the α chain containing endoplasmic reticulum retention signals that causes the α - chains to remain degraded in the ER .
The assembly of the α chain with the co - transfected β and γ chains mask the ER retention and allows the α β γ complex to be exported to the golgi apparatus to the plasma membrane in rats .
In humans , only the γ complex is needed to counterbalance the α chain ER retention .
ALLERGEN PROCESS Section::::Allergen process .
Allergen - mediated FcεR1 cross - linking signals are very similar to the signaling event resulting in antigen binding to lymphocytes .
The Lyn tyrosine kinase is associated with the cytoplasmic end of the FcεR1 β chain .
The antigen cross - links the FcεR1 molecules , and Lyn tyrosine kinase phosphorylates the ITAMs in the FcεR1 β and γ chain in the cytoplasm .
Upon phosphorylation , the Syk tyrosine kinase gets recruited to the ITAMs located on the γ chains .
This causes activation of the Syk tyrosine kinase , causing it to phosphorylate .
Syk functions as a signal amplifying kinase activity due to the fact that it targets multiple proteins and causes their activation .
This antigen stimulated phosphorylation causes the activation of other proteins in the FcεR1-mediated signaling cascade .
DEGRANULATION AND FUSION Section::::Degranulation and fusion .
An important adaptor protein activated by the Syk phosphorylation step is the linker for activation of T cells ( LAT ) .
LAT can be modified by phosphorylation to create novel binding sites .
Phospholipase C gamma ( PLCγ ) becomes phosphorylated once bound to LAT , and is then used to catalyze phosphatidylinositol bisphosphate breakdown to yield inositol trisphosphate ( IP3 ) and diacyglycerol ( DAG ) .
IP3 elevates calcium levels , and DAG activates protein kinase C ( PKC ) .
This is not the only way that PKC is made .
The tyrosine kinase FYN phosphorylates Grb2-associated
- binding protein 2 ( Gab2 ) , which binds to phosphoinositide 3-kinase , which activates PKC .
PKC leads to the activation of myosin light - chain phosphorylation granule movements , which disassembles the actin – myosin complexes to allow granules to come into contact with the plasma membrane .
The mast cell granule can now fuse with the plasma membrane .
Soluble N - ethylmaleimide
sensitive fusion attachment protein receptor SNARE complex mediates this process .
Different SNARE proteins interact to form different complexes that catalyze fusion .
Rab3 guanosine triphosphatases and Rab - associated kinases and phosphatases regulate granule membrane fusion in resting mast cells .
ENZYMES Section::::Enzymes . !
Enzyme ! !
Function CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
PARASITIC INFECTIONS
Section::::Clinical significance .
Section::::Parasitic infections .
Mast cells are activated in response to infection by pathogenic parasites , such as certain helminths and protozoa , through IgE signaling .
MAST CELL ACTIVATION
DISORDERS Section::::Mast cell activation disorders .
Mast cell activation disorders are a spectrum of immune disorders that are unrelated to pathogenic infection and involve similar symptoms that arise from secreted mast cell intermediates , but differ slightly in their pathophysiology , treatment approach , and distinguishing symptoms .
The classification of mast cell activation disorders was laid out in 2010 .
ALLERGIC DISEASE Section::::Allergic disease .
Allergies are mediated through IgE signaling which triggers mast cell degranulation .
Many forms of cutaneous and mucosal allergy are mediated in large part by mast cells ; they play a central role in asthma , eczema , itch ( from various causes ) , and allergic rhinitis and allergic conjunctivitis .
Antihistamine drugs act by blocking histamine action on nerve endings .
Cromoglicate - based drugs
( sodium cromoglicate , nedocromil ) block a calcium channel essential for mast cell degranulation , stabilizing the cell and preventing release of histamine and related mediators .
Leukotriene antagonists ( such as montelukast and zafirlukast ) block the action of leukotriene mediators and are being used increasingly in allergic diseases .
Calcium triggers the secretion of histamine from mast cells after previous exposure to sodium fluoride .
The secretory process can be divided into a fluoride - activation step and a calcium - induced secretory step .
It was observed that the fluoride - activation step is accompanied by an elevation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) levels within the cells .
The attained high levels of cAMP persist during histamine release .
It was further found that catecholamines do not markedly alter the fluoride - induced histamine release .
It was also confirmed that the second , but not the first , step in sodium fluoride - induced histamine secretion is inhibited by theophylline .
Vasodilation and increased permeability of capillaries are a result of both H1 and H2 receptor types .
Stimulation of histamine activates a histamine ( H2)-sensitive adenylate cyclase of oxyntic cells , and there is a rapid increase in cellular [ cAMP ] that is involved in activation of H+ transport and other associated changes of oxyntic cells .
ANAPHYLAXIS Section::::Anaphylaxis .
In anaphylaxis ( a severe systemic reaction to allergens , such as nuts , bee stings , or drugs ) , the body - wide degranulation of mast cells leads to vasodilation and , if severe , symptoms of life - threatening shock .
Histamine is a vasodilatory substance released during anaphylaxis .
AUTOIMMUNITY Section::::Autoimmunity .
Mast cells may be implicated in the pathology associated with autoimmune , inflammatory disorders of the joints .
They have been shown to be involved in the recruitment of inflammatory cells to the joints ( e.g. , rheumatoid arthritis ) and skin ( e.g. , bullous pemphigoid ) , and this activity is dependent on antibodies and complement components .
MASTOCYTOSIS AND CLONAL DISORDERS Section::::Mastocytosis and clonal disorders .
Mastocytosis is a rare clonal mast cell disorder involving the presence of too many mast cells ( mastocytes ) and CD34 + mast cell precursors .
Mutations in c - Kit are associated with mastocytosis .
MONOCLONAL
DISORDERS NEOPLASTIC DISORDERS Section::::Neoplastic disorders .
Mastocytomas , or mast cell tumors , can secrete excessive quantities of degranulation products .
They are often seen in dogs and cats .
Other neoplastic disorders associated with mast cells include mast cell sarcoma and mast cell leukemia .
MAST CELL ACTIVATION SYNDROME Section::::Mast cell activation syndrome .
Mast cell activation syndrome ( MCAS ) is an idiopathic immune disorder that involves recurrent and excessive mast cell degranulation and which produces symptoms that are similar to other mast cell activation disorders .
The syndrome is diagnosed based upon four sets of criteria involving treatment response , symptoms , a differential diagnosis , and biomarkers of mast cell degranulation .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Mast cells were first described by Paul Ehrlich in his 1878 doctoral thesis on the basis of their unique staining characteristics and large granules .
These granules also led him to the incorrect belief that they existed to nourish the surrounding tissue , so he named them Mastzellen ( , as of animals ) .
They are now considered to be part of the immune system .
RESEARCH AUTISM Section::::Research .
Section::::Autism .
Research into an immunological contribution to autism suggests that autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) children may present with " allergic - like " problems in the absence of elevated serum IgE and chronic urticaria , suggesting non - allergic mast cell activation in response to environmental and stress triggers .
This mast cell activation could contribute to brain inflammation and neurodevelopmental problems .
HISTOLOGICAL STAINING
Section::::Histological staining .
Toluidine blue : one of the most common stains for acid mucopolysaccharides and glycoaminoglycans , components of mast cells granules .
Surface markers :
cell surface markers of mast cells were discussed in detail by Heneberg , claiming that mast cells may be inadvertently included in the stem or progenitor cell isolates , since part of them is positive for the CD34 antigen .
The classical mast cell markers include the high - affinity IgE receptor , CD117 ( c - Kit ) , and CD203c ( for most of the mast cell populations ) .
Expression of some molecules may change in course of the mast cell activation .
SEE ALSO
* Allergy * Diamine oxidase
* Granulocyte
* Food intolerance * Histamine * Histamine intolerance * Histamine N - methyltransferase or HNMT REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS