COURTS OF ENGLAND AND WALES
The Courts of England and Wales , supported administratively by Her Majesty 's Courts and Tribunals Service , are the civil and criminal courts responsible for the administration of justice in England and Wales .
The United Kingdom does not have a single unified legal system — England and Wales has one system , Scotland another , and Northern Ireland a third .
There are exceptions to this rule ; for example in immigration law , the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal 's jurisdiction covers the whole of the United Kingdom , while in employment law there is a single system of employment tribunals for England , Wales , and Scotland but not Northern Ireland .
Additionally , the Military Court Service has jurisdiction over all members of the armed forces of the United Kingdom in relation to offences against military law .
The Court of Appeal , the High Court , the Crown Court , the County Court , and the magistrates ' courts are administered by Her Majesty 's Courts and Tribunals Service , an executive agency of the Ministry of Justice .
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM Section::::Supreme Court of the United Kingdom .
The Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is the highest appeal court in almost all cases in England and Wales .
Before the Constitutional Reform Act 2005
this role was held by the House of Lords .
The Supreme Court is also the highest court of appeal for devolution matters , a role previously held by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council .
The Supreme Court has a separate administration from the other courts of England and Wales , and its administration is under a Chief Executive who is appointed by the President of the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom .
SENIOR COURTS OF ENGLAND AND WALES Section::::Senior Courts of England and Wales .
The Senior Courts of England and Wales were originally created by the Judicature Acts as the " Supreme Court of Judicature " .
It was renamed the " Supreme Court of England and Wales " in 1981 , and again to the " Senior Courts of England and Wales " by the Constitutional Reform Act 2005 ( to distinguish it from the new Supreme Court of the United Kingdom ) .
It consists of the following courts : * Court of Appeal ( formally Her Majesty 's Court of Appeal in England ) * High Court of Justice ( High Court , formally Her Majesty 's High Court of Justice in England ) * Crown Court The Senior Courts of England and Wales , along with the Tribunals and other courts , are administered and supported by HM Courts and Tribunals Service .
COURT OF APPEAL Section::::Court of Appeal .
The Court of Appeal deals only with appeals from other courts or tribunals .
The Court of Appeal consists of two divisions : the Civil Division hears appeals from the High Court and County Court and certain superior tribunals , while the Criminal Division may only hear appeals from the Crown Court connected with a trial on indictment ( i.e. , for a serious offence ) .
Its decisions are binding on all courts , including itself , apart from the Supreme Court .
HIGH COURT Section::::High Court .
The High Court of Justice functions both as a civil court of first instance and a criminal and civil appellate court for cases from the subordinate courts .
It consists of three divisions : the Queen 's Bench , the Chancery and the Family divisions .
The divisions of the High Court are not separate courts , but have somewhat separate procedures and practices adapted to their purposes .
Although particular kinds of cases will be assigned to each division depending on their subject matter , each division may exercise the jurisdiction of the High Court .
However , beginning proceedings in the wrong division may result in a costs penalty .
The formation of The Business and Property Courts of England & Wales within the High Court was announced in March 2017 , and launched in London in July 2017 .
The courts would in future administer the specialist jurisdictions that had previously been administered in the Queen 's Bench Division under the names of the Admiralty Court , the Commercial Court , and the Technology & Construction Court , and under the Chancery Division 's lists for Business , Company and Insolvency , Competition , Intellectual Property , Revenue , and Trusts and Probate .
CROWN COURT Section::::Crown Court .
The Crown Court is a criminal court of both original and appellate jurisdiction which in addition handles a limited amount of civil business both at first instance and on appeal .
It was established by the Courts Act 1971 .
It replaced the assizes whereby High Court judges would periodically travel around the country hearing cases , and quarter sessions which were periodic county courts .
The Old Bailey is the unofficial name of London 's most famous criminal court , which is now part of the Crown Court .
Its official name is the " Central Criminal Court " .
The Crown Court also hears appeals from magistrates ' courts .
The Crown Court is the only court in England and Wales that has the jurisdiction to try cases on indictment and when exercising such a role it is a superior court in that its judgments can not be reviewed by the Administrative Court of the Queen 's Bench Division of the High Court .
The Crown Court is an inferior court in respect of the other work it undertakes , viz .
inter alia , appeals from the magistrates ' courts and other tribunals .
SUBORDINATE COURTS Section::::Subordinate courts .
The most common subordinate courts in England and Wales are * County Court * Family Court
* Magistrates ' courts * Youth courts COUNTY COURT Section::::County Court .
The County Court is a national court with a purely civil jurisdiction , sitting in 92 different towns and cities across England and Wales .
As from 22 April 2014 there has been a single County Court for England and Wales where previously there was a series of courts .
The County Court is so named after the ancient sheriff 's court held in each county , but it has no connection with it nor indeed was the jurisdiction of the county courts based on counties .
A County Court hearing is presided over by either a district or circuit judge and , except in a small minority of cases such as civil actions against the police , the judge sits alone as trier of fact and law without assistance from a jury .
The old county courts ' divorce and family jurisdiction was passed on 22 April 2014 to the single Family Court .
Until unification in 2014 , county courts were local courts in the sense that each one has an area over which certain kinds of jurisdiction , for example , proceedings for possession of land had to be started in the county court in whose district the property lay , but in general any county court in England and Wales could hear any action and claims were frequently transferred from court to court .
FAMILY COURT Section::::Family Court .
The Family Court is a national Court and has jurisdiction to hear all Family cases in England and Wales .
Local jurisdictional boundaries have disappeared and there is only one single jurisdiction for all family proceedings .
The Family Court sits at many locations in England and Wales , and it usually sits at the County Courts and Magistrates Courts where family work was previously heard by county courts or family proceedings courts .
Family Court judges are now more categories of judges who will be eligible to hear family cases including lay magistrates , district judges , circuit judges , and High Court judges from the Family Division .
MAGISTRATES ' AND YOUTH COURTS
Section::::Magistrates ' and youth courts .
Magistrates ' courts are the criminal court where all criminal proceedings start .
They are presided over by a bench of lay magistrates ( a.k.a . justices of the peace ) , or a legally trained district judge ( formerly known as a stipendiary magistrate ) , sitting in each local justice area .
There are no juries .
They have jurisdiction to hear minor criminal cases , as well as certain licensing appeals .
Youth courts are run on similar lines to adult magistrates ' courts but deal with offenders aged between the ages of ten and seventeen inclusive .
Youth courts are presided over by a specially trained subset of experienced adult magistrates or a district judge .
Youth magistrates have a wider catalogue of disposals available to them for dealing with young offenders and often hear more serious cases against youths ( which for adults would normally be dealt with by the Crown Court ) .
Youth courts are not open to the public for observation , only the parties involved in a case being admitted .
Prior to the enactment of the Crime and Courts Act 2013 , some magistrates ' courts were also a family proceedings court and heard Family law cases including care cases
and they had the power to make adoption orders .
Family cases are no longer heard by the Magistrates ' courts , instead being heard by the single Family Court established by the 2013 Act .
SPECIAL COURTS AND TRIBUNALS Section::::Special courts and tribunals .
In addition , there are many other specialist courts .
These are often described as " tribunals " rather than courts , but the difference in name is meaningless .
For example , an Employment Tribunal is an inferior court of record for the purposes of the law of contempt of court .
In many cases there is a statutory right of appeal from a tribunal to a particular court or specially constituted appellate tribunal .
In the absence of a specific appeals court , the only remedy from a decision of a tribunal may be via judicial review to the High Court , which will often be more limited in scope than an appeal .
Examples of specialist courts are : * Employment tribunals ( formerly industrial tribunals ) with appeal to the Employment Appeal Tribunal * the Employment Appeal Tribunal , which is a superior court of record , and therefore not subject to judicial review , appeals go to the Court of Appeal * the First - tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal established under the Tribunals , Courts and Enforcement Act 2007
have absorbed the function of many pre - existing tribunals .
CORONERS ' COURTS Section::::Coroners ' courts .
The post of coroner is ancient , dating from the 11th century , and coroners still sit today to determine the cause of death in situations where people have died in potentially suspicious circumstances , abroad , or in the care of central authority .
They also have jurisdiction over treasure trove .
ECCLESIASTICAL COURTS Section::::Ecclesiastical courts .
The Church of England is an established church ( i.e. it is the official state church ) and formerly had exclusive or non - exclusive subject matter jurisdiction over marriage and divorce cases , testamentary matters , defamation , and several other areas .
Since the 19th century , the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts has narrowed principally to matters of church property and errant clergy .
Each Diocese has a ' Chancellor ' ( either a barrister or solicitor ) who acts as a judge in the consistory court of the diocese .
The Bishop no longer has the right to preside personally , as he formerly did .
Appeals lie to the Arches Court ( in Canterbury ) and the Chancery Court ( in York ) , and from them to the Court of Ecclesiastical Causes Reserved ( CECR ) .
From the CECR appeals lie to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council .
MILITARY COURTS * Military courts of the United Kingdom ( including the Summary Appeal Court , Service Civilian Court , Court Martial and Court Martial Appeal Court ) OTHER COURTS * Election court ( ad - hoc courts hearing petitions against election results )
* Barmote Court ( largely ceremonial court dealing with lead mining rights in Derbyshire )
* Court of Chivalry ( ancient and rarely convened court dealing with heraldry ) CRIMINAL CASES Section::::Criminal cases .
There are two kinds of criminal trial : ' summary ' and ' on indictment ' .
For an adult , summary trials take place in a magistrates ' court , while trials on indictment take place in the Crown Court .
Despite the possibility of two venues for trial , almost all criminal cases , however serious , commence in a magistrates ' courts .
It is possible to start a trial for an indictable offence by a voluntary bill of indictment , and go directly to the Crown Court , but that would be unusual .
A criminal case that starts in the magistrates ' courts may begin either by the defendant being charged and then being brought forcibly before magistrates , or by summons to the defendant to appear on a certain day before the magistrates .
A summons is usually confined to very minor offences .
The hearing ( of the charge or summons ) before the magistrates is known as a " first appearance " .
Offences are of three categories : indictable only , summary and either way .
Indictable only offences such as murder and rape must be tried on indictment in the Crown Court .
On first appearance , the magistrates must immediately refer the defendant to the Crown Court for trial , their only role being to decide whether to remand the defendant on bail or in custody .
Summary offences , such as most motoring offences , are much less serious and most must be tried in a magistrates ' court , although a few may be sent for trial to the Crown Court along with other offences that may be tried there ( for example assault ) .
The vast majority of offences are also concluded in a magistrates ' court ( over 90 % of cases ) .
Either way offences are intermediate offences such as theft and , with the exception of low - value criminal damage , may be tried either summarily ( by magistrates ) or by judge and jury in the Crown Court .
If the magistrates consider that an either way offence is too serious for them to deal with , they may " decline jurisdiction " which means that the defendant will have to appear in the Crown Court .
Conversely , even if the magistrates accept jurisdiction , an adult defendant has a right to compel a jury trial .
Defendants under eighteen years of age do not have this right and will be tried in a youth court ( similar to a magistrates ' court ) unless the case is homicide or else is particularly serious .
A magistrates ' court is made up in two ways .
Either a group ( known as a ' bench ' ) of ' lay magistrates ' , or a district judge , will hear the case .
A lay bench must consist of at least three magistrates .
Alternatively , a case may be heard by a district judge ( formerly known as a stipendiary magistrate ) , who will be a qualified lawyer and will sit singly , but has the same powers as a lay bench .
District judges usually sit in the more busy courts in cities or hear complex cases ( e.g. extradition ) .
Magistrates have limited sentencing powers .
In the Crown Court , the case is tried before a recorder ( part - time judge ) , circuit judge or a High Court judge , and a jury .
The seniority of the judge depends on the seriousness and complexity of the case .
The jury is involved only if the defendant enters a plea of " not guilty " .
APPEALS Section::::Appeals .
From the magistrates ' courts , an appeal can be taken to the Crown Court on matters of fact and law or , on matters of law alone , to the Administrative Court of Queen 's Bench Division of the High Court , which is called an appeal " by way of case stated " .
The magistrates ' courts are also inferior courts and are therefore subject to judicial review .
The Crown Court is more complicated .
When it is hearing a trial on indictment ( a jury trial )
it is treated as a superior court , which means that its decisions may not be judicially reviewed and appeal lies only to the Criminal Division of the Court of Appeal .
In other circumstances ( for example when acting as an appeal court from a magistrates ' court ) the Crown Court is an inferior court , which means that it is subject to judicial review .
When acting as an inferior court , appeals by way of case stated on matters of law may be made to the Administrative Court .
Appeals from the High Court , in criminal matters , lie only to the Supreme Court .
Appeals from the Court of Appeal ( Criminal Division ) may also only be taken to the Supreme Court .
Appeals to the Supreme Court are unusual in that the court from which appeal is being made ( either the High Court or the Court of Appeal ) must certify that there is a point of law of general public importance .
This additional control mechanism is not present with civil appeals and means that far fewer criminal appeals are heard by the Supreme Court .
CIVIL CASES
Section::::Civil cases .
Under the Civil Procedure Rules 1998 , civil claims under £ 10,000 are dealt with in a county court under the ' small claims track ' .
This is generally known to the lay public as ' small claims court ' but does not exist as a separate court .
Claims between £ 10,000 and £ 25,000 that are capable of being tried within one day are allocated to the ' fast track ' and claims over £ 25,000 to the ' multi track ' .
These ' tracks ' are labels for the use of the court system – the actual cases will be heard in a county court or the High Court depending on their value .
For personal injury , defamation cases and in some landlord and tenant disputes the thresholds for each track have different values .
HISTORY Section::::History .
For nearly 300 years , from the time of the Norman Conquest until 1362 , French was the language of the courts , rather than English .
Until the twentieth century , many legal terms were still expressed in Latin .
The Supreme Court of Judicature was formed in 1875 from the merging of various courts then existing , such as the * Court of Queen 's Bench * High Court of Chancery * Court of Exchequer * High Court of Admiralty * Court of Common Pleas * Court of Probate and Matrimonial Causes * Court of Common Pleas of the County Palatine of Lancaster * Court of Pleas of the County Palatine of Durham and Sadberge
The Court of Appeal in Chancery was merged into the Court of Appeal .
Other historical courts include : * House of Lords * Star Chamber * Court of High Commission * Court of Criminal Appeal * Court for Crown Cases Reserved * Court of Piepowders ( marketplace courts )
* Assize Court * Restrictive Practices Court
* Courts leet
* Quarter sessions LOCAL COURTS OF SPECIAL JURISDICTION Section::::Local courts of special jurisdiction .
The Courts of Session of the County Palatine of Chester and the Principality of Wales were abolished section 14 of by the Law Terms Act 1830 .
The Court of the County of Durham was abolished by section 2 of the Durham ( County Palatine ) Act 1836 .
The Stannary Court was abolished by the Stannaries Court ( Abolition ) Act 1896 .
The following courts were merged into the High Court by section 41 of the Courts Act 1971 : * The Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of Lancaster
* The Court of Chancery of the County Palatine of Durham and Sadberge Section 42 replaced the Mayor 's and City of London Court with a county court of the same name .
Section 43 abolished : * The Tolzey and Pie Poudre Courts of the City and County of Bristol * The Liverpool Court of Passage
*
The Norwich Guildhall Court * The Court of Record for the Hundred of Salford Section 221 of the Local Government Act 1972 abolished the borough civil courts listed in Schedule 28 to that Act .
Part II of Schedule 4 to the Administration of Justice Act 1977 curtailed the jurisdiction of certain other anomalous local courts .
SEE ALSO
* Courts of Northern Ireland
* Courts of Scotland * Judiciary of England and Wales
* Her Majesty 's Courts Service
* List of courts in England and Wales
*
Legal year * English law * Welsh Law
* Scots Law
* European Union Law
* Canon Law * Courts of the Republic of Ireland
* List of Supreme Court of Judicature cases
* Personal Support Unit
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * HM Courts & Tribunals Service website * Official list of senior judges in the courts of England and Wales * Organisation of justice in England and Wales ( pdf )