MAMMA MIA !
Mamma Mia !
( promoted as Benny Andersson & Björn Ulvaeus ' Mamma Mia ! )
is a jukebox musical written by British playwright Catherine Johnson , based on the songs of ABBA composed by Benny Andersson and Björn Ulvaeus , former members of the band .
The title of the musical is taken from the group 's 1975 chart - topper " Mamma Mia " .
Ulvaeus and Andersson , who composed the original music for ABBA , were involved in the development of the show from the beginning .
Singer Anni - Frid Lyngstad has been involved financially in the production and she has also been present at many of the premieres around the world .
The musical includes such hits as " Super Trouper " , " Lay All Your Love on Me " , " Dancing Queen " , " Knowing Me , Knowing You " , " Take a Chance on Me " , " Thank You for the Music " , " Money , Money , Money " , " The Winner Takes It All " ,
" Voulez - Vous " , " SOS " and the title track .
Over 60 million people have seen the show , which has grossed $ 2 billion worldwide since its 1999 debut .
A film adaptation starring Meryl Streep , Colin Firth , Pierce Brosnan
, Amanda Seyfried , Christine Baranski , Stellan Skarsgård and Julie Walters was released in July 2008 .
As of 2018 , the show has productions in London 's West End , where it is the seventh longest - running show in West End history , as well as various international productions .
Its Broadway incarnation closed in September 2015 after a 14-year run , making it the ninth longest - running show in Broadway history .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Mamma Mia ! is based on the songs of ABBA , a Swedish pop / dance group active from 1972 to 1982 and one of the most popular international pop groups of all time , topping the charts again and again in Europe , North and South America and Australia .
Following the premiere of the musical in London in 1999 , topped the charts in the United Kingdom again .
This musical was the brainchild of producer Judy Craymer .
She met songwriters Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson in 1983 when they were working with Tim Rice on Chess .
It was the song "
The Winner Takes It All "
that suggested to her the theatrical potential of their pop songs .
The songwriters were not enthusiastic , but they were not completely opposed to the idea .
In 1997 , Craymer commissioned Catherine Johnson to write the book for the musical .
In 1998 , Phyllida Lloyd became the director for the show .
PRODUCTIONS
ORIGINAL WEST END PRODUCTION Section::::Productions .
Section::::Original West End production .
The musical opened in the West End at the Prince Edward Theatre on April 6 , 1999 , and transferred to the Prince of Wales Theatre on June 9 , 2004 , where it played until September 2012 , when it moved to the Novello Theatre .
Directed by Phyllida Lloyd with choreography by Anthony Van Laast , the original cast featured Siobhan McCarthy , Lisa Stokke , and Hilton McRae .
ORIGINAL BROADWAY AND U.S. PRODUCTIONS Section::::Original Broadway and U.S. productions .
Prior to the musical 's Broadway engagement , it opened in Toronto at the Royal Alexandra Theatre in May 2000 , where it played for five years .
Its US debut was in San Francisco , California , at the Orpheum Theatre from November 17 , 2000 to February 17 , 2001 , moving next to Los Angeles , California , at the Shubert Theatre from February 26 , 2001 to May 12 , 2001 , and finally to Chicago , Illinois , at the Cadillac Palace Theatre from May 13 , 2001 to August 12 , 2001 .
NEW YORK CITY RUN Section::::New York City run .
The musical opened on Broadway at the Winter Garden Theatre on October 18 , 2001 , after beginning previews on October 5 .
The director is Phyllida Lloyd with choreography by Anthony Van Laast .
As of October 2017 , it is the ninth longest - running Broadway show and the longest - running jukebox musical in Broadway history .
On April 18 , 2013 , it was announced that Mamma Mia ! would transfer from its home at the Winter Garden Theatre to the Broadhurst Theatre later that year to make way for the musical adaptation of Rocky .
The show played its final performance at the Winter Garden Theatre on October 19 , 2013 and began performances at the Broadhurst Theatre on November 2 , 2013 .
It was announced on April 9 , 2015 that the show would close on September 5 , 2015 .
On April 21 , 2015 , it was then announced that show would play an additional week and would instead close on September 12 , 2015 .
Mamma Mia ! played 5,773 performances on Broadway before closing .
INTERNATIONAL AND TOURING PRODUCTIONS Section::::International and touring productions .
Mamma Mia ! has been played in more than 50 countries in all 6 continents , including Argentina , Australia , Austria , Belgium , Brazil , Bulgaria , Canada , Chile , China , Colombia , Croatia , Czech Republic , Denmark , Dominican Republic , Germany , Estonia , Finland , France , Greece , Hungary , Iceland , Indonesia , Ireland , Israel , Italy , Japan , Jordan , Latvia , Lituania , Malaysia , Mexico , Monaco , Netherlands , New Zealand , Norway , Panama , Peru , Philippines , Poland , Portugal , Qatar , Romania , Russia , Serbia , Singapore , Slovakia , Slovenia , South Africa , South Korea , Spain , Sri Lanka , Sweden , Switzerland , Taiwan , Thailand , Turkey , United Arab Emirates , United Kingdom , and United States , and has been translated into 26 languages : German , Japanese , Dutch , Korean , Spanish , Swedish , Russian , Norwegian , Italian , Danish , French , Portuguese , Mandarin , Hungarian , Czech , Polish , Serbian , Croatian , Slovene , Icelandic , Estonian , Greek , Slovak , Finnish , Romanian , and Bulgarian .
Over 60 million people have seen the show worldwide and it has set the record for premiering in more cities faster than any other musical in history .
The first city to produce the show after London was Toronto , where it ran from May 22 , 2000 to May 22 , 2005 , being the North America premiere of Mamma Mia ! .
The original cast included Louise Pitre as Donna and Tina Maddigan as Sophie , who both of them later reprised their roles in first US Tour and Broadway premiere .
Mamma Mia ! played in Las Vegas , opening at the Mandalay Bay in February 2003 and closing on January 4 , 2009 .
In June 2005 , Mamma Mia ! " played its 1000th performance in Las Vegas , becoming the longest - running West End / Broadway musical in Las Vegas .
The clothes and scenarios from this production are now used in Brazil .
The show returned to Las Vegas on May 16 , 2014 at the Tropicana Hotel & Casino , but announced its closing soon after on July 22 .
The North American tour started in Providence , Rhode Island in February 28 , 2002 and closed in St. Louis , Missouri in July 30 , 2017 , after more than 4.000 performances .
The first non - English version of the show debuted in Hamburg at the Operettenhaus , where it ran from November 3 , 2002 to September 8 , 2007 .
With the productions of Stuttgart ( 2004 ) and Essen ( 2007 ) , Mamma Mia ! became the first major musical to play concurrently in three German cities .
The show has had ( and in some cases , still has ) permanent productions in London , Toronto , Melbourne , New York , Hamburg , Tokyo ( later transferred to Osaka , Fukuoka and Nagoya ) , Las Vegas , Utrecht , Seoul ( later transferred to Seongnam and Daegu ) , Stuttgart , Madrid ( later transferred to Barcelona ) , Stockholm ( later transferred to Gothenburg ) , Antwerp , Moscow , Essen , Berlin , Oslo , Mexico City , Milan ( later transferred to Rome ) , Copenhagen ( later transferred to Aarhus ) , Paris , São Paulo , Shanghai , Buenos Aires , Vienna and Helsinki .
Since its premiere in Dublin on September 9 , 2004 ( with Helen Hobson as Donna )
the international tour has visited more than 85 cities in 38 countries and has been seen by 5 million people .
In addition there have been several touring productions worldwide , including Australia / Asia ( 2002–2005 ) , Australia ( 2009–2010 ) , China ( 2011 - 2012 , 2013 - 2014 , and 2018 ) , France ( 2012–2013 ) , Germany , Japan , Netherlands ( 2009–2010 ) , North America ( 2002–2017 ) , Spain ( 2009–2011 and 2016–2017 ) , South Africa ( 2010–2011 ) , South Korea , United Kingdom ( 2016–2018 ) , and United States ( 2000–2001 ) .
The Dutch actress Lone van Roosendaal has played Donna in three different countries : Netherlands , Belgium and Germany .
In the Original Danish Tivoli Copenhagen Cast it was actually Kristine Yde Eriksen as Sophie and Nadia Barbara Abrahamsen as Ali .
But when the production moved to Aarhus took Stine Louise Henriksen over for Kristine Yde Eriksen as Sophie and Nadin Reiness took over for Nadia Barbara Abrahamsen as Ali .
Stine Louise Henriksen was actually Kristine 's understudy in Tivoli , Copenhagen and so was Nadin Reiness for Nadia .
The South African tour , conducted at the Artscape Theatre in Cape Town on August 11 , 2010 and 3 months later at The Teatro , Montecasino in Johannesburg , featured an all local cast .
The first Chinese production opened on July 11 , 2011 at the Shanghai Grand Theatre and closed on January 18 , 2012 at Shanghai Cultural Square after a small tour , marking the first time that a blockbuster contemporary Western musical were presented in Mandarin in Shanghai ( there was a previous Mandarin production of Beauty and the Beast in Beijing in 1999 ) .
It was seen by 250,000 people across six venues , with a total of 190 performances .
Shadow Zen played the role of Donna .
On January 24 , 2012 , Mamma Mia ! opened in Manila at the Main Theater of the Cultural Center of the Philippines as part of the international Tour .
The show was originally set to stay only for a week but with the positive response , the organisers decided that it would play until February 19 , 2012 .
The show features Sara Poyzer as Donna Sheridan and Charlotte Wakefield as Sophie .
The cast also included Kate Graham ( Tanya ) , Jenny Dale ( Rosie ) and David Roberts ( Sky ) .
A New Zealand tour production of Mamma Mia ! opened at the Auckland Civic Theatre on March 4 , 2014 , featuring an all new set design by John Harding .
International theatre star Deliah Hannah played Donna , and popular New Zealand entertainment icon Jackie Clark plays Rosie .
The NZ tour visited 11 cities in 2014–2016 .
The musical was originally performed on sailings of Royal Caribbean 's Quantum of the Seas but was latter moved to Allure of the Seas .
Unlike other cruise ship performances of musicals , the show is performed in its entirety .
In Prague , the capital of the Czech Republic , the musical had its premiere on December 12 , 2014 .
Czech is the seventeenth language in which the musical was performed .
At the date of the premiere a record 70,000 tickets were sold .
On February 21 , 2015 , the musical premiered in Warsaw , Poland at Roma Musical Theatre .
The Belgrade , Serbia – Terazije Theatre ( Pozorište na Terazijama ) premiere was on March 27 , 2015 .
On June 15 , 2015 in Ljubljana , the capital of Slovenia , premiere of Slovene production took place in Križanke Outdoor Theatre as a part of Ljubljana Summer Festival ( Poletni festival Ljubljana ) .
On March 18 , 2016 , Mamma Mia ! opened for the first time in Panama City , Panama , at the Anayansi Theatre in the Atlapa Convention Centre , directed by Aaron Zebede .
On May 27 , 2016 the first regional production opened at the Barter Theatre in Abingdon , Virginia .
On 31 August 2016 , it was announced that the musical would once again tour Australia as a new , non - replica production to be directed by Gary Young .
The premier was held in Canberra in November 2017 before continuing on a 1-year national tour to Brisbane , Sydney , Perth , Melbourne and finally Adelaide .
The cast included Sarah Morrison as Sophie , Natalie O'Donnell as Donna , Jayde Westaby as Tanya , Alicia Gardiner as Rose , Ian Stenlake as Sam , Phillip Lowe as Harry , Josef Ber as Bill and Stephen Mahy as Sky .
The production was nominated for the following Helpmann Awards :
Best Musical , Best Choreography ( Tom Hodgson ) , Best Actress ( Natalie O'Donnell ) and Best Actor ( Ian Stenlake ) .
From July 28 , 2017 to July 30 , 2017 , Mamma Mia ! was performed at the Hollywood Bowl .
Directed and choreographed by Kathleen Marshall , the show starred Jennifer Nettles as Donna , Dove Cameron as Sophie , Corbin Bleu as Sky , Jaime Camil as Sam , Tisha Campbell - Martin as Tanya , and Lea Delaria as Rosie .
Nová scéna Theatre in Bratislava , Slovakia opened on November 11 , 2017 for the first time in Slovak .
In Slovakia were formerly performed Czech and original version .
A Finnish - language production premiered at the Messukeskus Helsinki in Helsinki , Finland on May 4 , 2018 .
A Bulgarian production opened on July 18 , 2018 at the National opera and ballet in Sofia .
There will be other shows on July 19 , 20 , 21 , and 22 , 2018 .
A revival of the Dutch production premiered at the Beatrix Theater Utrecht in Utrecht , Netherlands on 6 September 2018 .
SYNOPSIS ACT
I
Section::::Synopsis .
Section::::Act I.
Before the curtain rises , the orchestra starts playing the overture , which is a montage of instrumental versions of some of ABBA 's hit songs .
On the fictional Greek island of Kalokairi ( Skopelos ) , 20-year - old Sophie is preparing to marry her fiancé , Sky .
She wants her father to walk her down the aisle ( " Prologue " ) but does n't know who he is .
Sophie discovers her mother 's old diary and finds entries which describe intimate dates with three men ( Sam Carmichael , Bill Austin
[ Anderson in the film version ] , and Harry Bright )
( " Honey , Honey " ) .
Sophie believes one of these men is her father and , three months before her nuptials , sends each an invitation to her wedding , writing in her mother 's name , Donna , without letting her unsuspecting mother know .
The day before the wedding , Donna begins receiving guests at her taverna .
The first to arrive are her long - term best friends , Tanya , a rich woman who has been married and divorced three times , and Rosie , an unmarried , carefree woman .
The trio used to comprise a girl group called " Donna and the Dynamos " .
The three women catch up and talk about their lives ( " Money , Money , Money " ) .
Later that day , Sophie 's three possible fathers arrive :
Sam ( an American architect ) , Harry ( a British banker ) , and Bill ( originally an Australian writer and adventurer , Swedish in the film , and currently American in New York and on tour ) .
Sophie convinces them not to tell Donna that she invited them ( " Thank You for the Music " ) .
Donna is surprised to see her ex - lovers ( " Mamma Mia " ) and leaves in tears .
Donna , crying , explains to Tanya and Rosie the situation , and they cheer her up ( " Chiquitita " ) .
Tanya and Rosie try to convince Donna that she can still be the girl she once was ( " Dancing Queen " ) .
Sophie had hoped she would know her father the moment she saw him but is now only confused .
She tries to tell her fiancé , Sky , how she feels without confessing what she has done .
Sky tells her he will be the only man she ever needs ( " Lay All Your Love on Me " ) .
At Sophie 's hen party , Donna and the Dynamos don their old costumes and perform a song , ( " Super Trouper " ) .
Sam , Bill , and Harry accidentally walk in on the party , and the guests persuade them to stay ( " Gimme !
Gimme !
Gimme !
( A Man After Midnight ) " ) .
Sophie first pulls Sam out of the room to talk to him .
After he asks why he is there , she is overcome with guilt and goes to talk to Harry , instead .
But Harry asks if Sophie 's father is at the party , and she tells him the whole truth .
Lastly , she draws Bill aside to talk with him .
She learns that Bill has an aunt Sophia who left all her money to Donna 's family .
Bill learns that Donna built the taverna with money she inherited from a friend she lived with when Sophie was a baby ; that friend was Bill 's aunt .
They both think this means he is her father .
Sophie asks Bill to walk her down the aisle , but Bill wants to discuss it first with Donna .
This has been her secret , after all .
But no one knows yet that even Donna does not know who the father is , because she slept with the three men in such swift succession .
Sophie insists they must not tell Donna anything ( " The Name of the Game " ) and finally , Bill agrees .
Afterward , everybody crashes the hen party ( including the guys from the stag party ) .
During the party , Sam pulls Sophie aside and tells her he has figured out why she invited him .
He knows he is her father and promises to walk her down the aisle the next day .
Then , Harry approaches Sophie , apologizing for being so slow on the uptake ; he is also convinced that she is his daughter and promises to walk her down the aisle .
Sophie leaves the party , hopelessly confused ; she does n't want to turn any of them down ( " Voulez - Vous " ) .
ACT II Section::::Act II .
( Entr'acte )
Sophie 's having a nightmare , involving her three possible fathers all fighting for the right to walk her down the aisle and wakes up despairing ( " Under Attack " ) .
Sophie 's upset , and Donna assumes that Sophie wants to cancel the wedding and offers to handle all the details .
Sophie is offended and vows that her children wo n't grow up not knowing who their father is .
As Sophie storms out of the room , Sam enters and tries to tell Donna that Sophie may not be all she seems , but Donna wo n't listen ( " One of Us " ) .
She hates Sam ; at the end of their affair , she said she never wanted to see him again .
But it seems that Sam was the man Donna cared about the most , and both of them wish they could go back to the start ( " SOS " ' ) .
At the beach , Harry asks Tanya what the father of the bride ought to be doing for Sophie 's wedding .
Tanya explains that for her part , her father gave her his advice and then paid .
Pepper , one of the guys who works at Donna 's taverna , makes advances to Tanya , but she rebuffs him ( " Does Your Mother Know " ) .
Sky finds out what Sophie has done in inviting Sam , Harry and Bill to the wedding .
He accuses her of wanting a big white wedding only so that she can find out who her father is .
He 's very hurt that she kept this plan a secret from him .
He storms off just as Sam walks in .
Sam tries to give Sophie some fatherly advice by describing his failed marriage ( " Knowing Me , Knowing You " ) , but Sophie is n't consoled .
Harry offers to Donna to pay for the wedding , and they reminisce about their fling ( " Our Last Summer " ) .
Sophie arrives and Donna helps her get dressed .
She can not believe her daughter is going to be a bride ( " Slipping Through My Fingers " ) .
Donna admits that her own mother disowned her when she learned that she was pregnant .
They reconcile and Sophie asks her mother if she will walk her down the aisle .
Sam arrives and tries to speak to Donna again , but she does n't want to see him , and asks him to leave .
He refuses , and a bitter confrontation ensues .
Donna tells Sam that he broke her heart , presumably when she found out he was engaged
( " The Winner Takes It All " ) .
It emerges that the two still love each other dearly , albeit against Donna 's better judgment .
Rosie is making final preparations in the taverna when Bill arrives .
He 's upset because he has received a note that Donna will be walking Sophie down the aisle .
Bill reaffirms his commitment to the single life , but Rosie has become attracted to him , and urges him to reconsider ( " Take a Chance on Me " ) .
They are about to have sex in the taverna , but the guests arrive , leaving Rosie quite stunned .
The wedding begins , with Donna walking Sophie down the aisle .
Before the priest has a chance to begin the ceremonies , Donna acknowledges to everyone that Sophie 's father is present .
Sophie tells her mother that she knows about her father .
Donna realizes that Sophie invited them to the wedding for that very reason .
The issue of Sophie 's parentage is left unsettled , as none of them have any idea whether they are actually her father .
Everyone involved agrees that it does not matter which one of them her biological parent is , as Sophie loves all three and they are all happy to be " one - third of a father " and a part of her life at last .
Finally , Harry , who has made frequent references to his " other half " throughout the show , is revealed to be in a committed gay relationship .
Suddenly , Sophie calls a halt to the proceedings .
She is n't ready to get married and Sky agrees with Sophie about not getting married .
Sam seizes his chance and proposes to Donna in order to prevent the wedding preparations from going to waste .
He explains that he loved her , even when he left to get married .
It is revealed that he called off the wedding with his fiancée and came back to the island , only to be told that Donna was going out with another man ( Bill ) .
He went back , married his fiancée and had children but he got divorced .
Surprisingly , Donna accepts ( " I Do , I Do , I Do , I Do , I Do " ) .
In the end , Sam and Donna are married , and at the end of the night , Sophie and Sky depart on a round - the - world tour ( " I Have a Dream " ) .
FINALE AND ENCORE Section::::Finale and encore .
After their final bows to the audience , the ensemble performs a reprise of " Mamma Mia " .
A reprise of " Dancing Queen " follows , during which Donna , Tanya , Rosie are revealed wearing brightly colored ABBA inspired costumes .
The cast ends the finale with " Waterloo " , during which Sam , Bill , and Harry join the rest of the cast onstage in brightly colored costumes that match the leading ladies .
The Dynamos and the Dads often invite the audience to clap , dance , and sing along during the finale .
MUSICAL NUMBERS Act
I
* " Overture / Prologue " - Sophie *
" Honey , Honey " - Sophie , Ali & Lisa *
" Money , Money , Money " - Donna , Tanya , Rosie , Pepper & Company *
" Thank You for the Music " - Sophie , Sam , Harry & Bill *
" Mamma Mia " - Donna & Company * " Chiquitita " - Donna , Tanya & Rosie * " Dancing Queen " - Donna , Tanya & Rosie
* " Lay All Your Love on Me " - Sky , Sophie & Male Ensemble
* " Super Trouper " - Donna , Tanya , Rosie & Female Ensemble
* " Gimme !
Gimme !
Gimme !
( A Man After Midnight ) "
- Female Ensemble *
" The Name of the Game " - Sophie & Bill
* " Voulez - Vous " - Company Act II * " Entr'acte " -
Orchestra
* " Under Attack " - Sophie & Company * " One of Us " - Donna
* " SOS " - Donna & Sam * " Does Your Mother Know " - Tanya , Pepper & Company
* " Knowing Me , Knowing You " -
Sam *
" Our Last Summer " - Harry & Donna
* " Slipping Through My Fingers " - Donna & Sophie *
" The Winner Takes It All " - Donna *
" Take a Chance on Me " - Rosie & Bill *
" I Do , I Do , I Do , I Do ,
I Do " - Sam , Donna & Company *
" I Have a Dream " - Sophie Section::::Musical numbers .
Encore
* " Mamma Mia " - Company * " Dancing Queen " - Donna , Tanya , Rosie & Company *
" Waterloo " - Company NOTES ON THE MUSIC Section::::Notes on the music .
During the preview period in London , the musical had the song " Summer Night City " just after the prologue .
The " Summer Night City " scene was a wedding rehearsal and during the song , Ali , Lisa , Tanya , and Rosie arrived on the island .
Now , part of the song is used as underscoring to connect the end of " The Winner Takes It All " and " Take a Chance on Me " .
You can also hear a couple of lines of " Summer Night City " in the ' Entr'acte ' ( the most noticeable line is : ' Time to breathe and time to live ' ) .
Donna hums a few lines of " Fernando " , when she repairs the doors of the taverna just before she sees her three former lovers .
In the Mexican production Donna sings a few lines of ABBA 's original Spanish version of the song .
In the German production , Sky ( Bernhard Forcher ) sang a few lines of " King Kong Song " before starting " Lay All Your Love on Me " .
Niklas Riesbeck uses the same song in the Swedish production .
Andrey Kozhan sang a few lines of Summer Night City in the Russian production .
In the international tour version , Sky ( David Roberts ) sings a few lines of " She 's My Kind of Girl " , a Björn & Benny song .
In the 2015 International tour version , Sky ( Justin Thomas ) sings a few lines of " Dum Dum Diddle " .
The wedding march that is played as Sophie walks down the aisle is a slower arrangement of " Dancing Queen " .
The creators also intended to include " Just Like That " , an unreleased ABBA song recorded in 1982 .
The song was apparently dropped just before the first public previews in March 1999 , though it was listed in the program available during the preview period .
Originally the outro after the encore was a 5-minute instrumental medley ( in the style of the Ouverture and Entr'Acte ) featuring Gimme !
Gimme !
Gimme !
( A Man After Midnight ) , SOS , Voulez - Vous , Does Your Mother Know , Money , Money , Money and Dancing Queen .
It was later replaced with the short Dancing Queen instrumental , still being used today .
The last three songs , performed as an encore / finale by the whole cast are : " Mamma Mia " , " Dancing Queen " and " Waterloo " .
The version of " Mamma Mia " used in the encore / finale is sung by the Company .
The finale song Mamma Mia has been extended in theatres where Donna and the Dynamos had to go downstairs for taking the stage lift in Dancing Queen .
Then , during the intro of " Dancing Queen " , Donna , Tanya and Rosie join the Company ( as the girl - power band " Donna and the Dynamos " , wearing ABBA 's 1970s - style colorful and flashy costumes ) .
Sam , Bill and Harry join them during Waterloo , wearing male versions of the girls ' ABBA 's costumes .
The Encore is included on the 5th Anniversary Cast Recording ( commemorating said anniversary for the Broadway production ) .
In the Brazilian production , all three songs from the encore / finale were kept in English .
Though " Waterloo " was adapted into Brazilian Portuguese , this version was never used .
In the Russian production the song " Happy New Year " is sung at the encore on New Year holidays shows .
PRINCIPAL ROLES AND CASTS Section::::Principal roles and casts .
Character !
Donna Sheridan !
Rosie !
Tanya !
Sam Carmichael !
Bill Austin ( Anderson in the film ) !
Harry Bright !
Sophie Sheridan !
Sky !
Pepper !
Eddie !
Ali !
Lisa FILM ADAPTATIONS Section::::Film adaptations .
Mamma Mia !
was adapted as a film , produced by Judy Craymer and Gary Goetzman , written by Catherine Johnson directed by Phyllida Lloyd and with Tom Hanks , Rita Wilson , Björn Ulvaeus , and Benny Andersson as executive producers .
Meryl Streep stars as Donna Sheridan and Amanda Seyfried as Sophie and Pierce Brosnan as Sam Carmichael .
The movie also features Christine Baranski , Dominic Cooper , Colin Firth , Stellan Skarsgård and Julie Walters .
It premiered July 18 , 2008 , in the US .
Most of the songs remained intact with the exceptions of " Under Attack " , " One of Us " , " Knowing Me , Knowing You " , and " Thank You for the Music " .
" Knowing Me , Knowing You " was used as the wedding music and " Thank You for the Music " is sung during the second half of the end credits .
The first half is occupied with a " Dancing Queen " reprise and " Waterloo " , with a " Mamma Mia " reprise and " I Have a Dream " sung before the credits ( though the latter is sung as Sophie mails the invitations at the start of the film ) .
" When All Is Said and Done " , a song not used in the musical , was added for the film sung by Sam , Donna , and the company .
" Our Last Summer " was used earlier in the movie , with Sophie , Bill , Sam , and Harry singing it .
"
The Name of the Game " , while filmed , was subsequently edited out of the film for the final cut .
The song is included in full on the motion picture soundtrack – an abbreviated version of the song and scene appear on the DVD / Blu - ray as a supplement .
In addition , " Thank You for the Music " is used as a hidden track , and is performed by Amanda Seyfried .
A sequel to the film titled Mamma Mia !
Here We Go Again was released in 2018 .
It tells the story of how Donna met each of the 3 men who are potentially Sophie 's father . "
One of Us " and " Knowing Me , Knowing You " are both included in this film .
MAMMA MIA !
THE PARTY Section::::Mamma Mia !
The Party .
Following its premier in Stockholm in 2016 , Björn Ulvaeus announced that this immersive theatrical and dining experience , inspired by Mamma Mia ! , will open at the O2 Arena in London in Spring 2019 .
The specially adapted venue will be set in a Greek taverna on the island of Skopelos and will feature live musicians and real Mediterranean food .
AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS ORIGINAL WEST END PRODUCTION Section::::Awards and nominations .
Section::::Original West End production .
Year ORIGINAL BROADWAY
PRODUCTION Section::::Original Broadway production .
Year ORIGINAL NORTH AMERICAN
TOUR
Section::::Original North American tour .
Year RESPONSE BOX OFFICE AND BUSINESS Section::::Response .
Section::::Box office and business .
On any given day , there are at least seven performances of Mamma Mia ! being performed around the globe .
On May 15 , 2005 , Mamma Mia ! surpassed the original Broadway runs of The Sound of Music , The King and I , and Damn Yankees with 1,500 performances .
On March 6 , 2014 , it surpassed Rent to become the 8th longest - running Broadway musical and 9th longest - running show of all time with 5,124 performances , then surpassed Beauty and the Beast 's 5,462 performances that same year , on December 14 , to become Broadway 's 7th longest - running musical and 8th longest - running show .
The Broadway run ended on September 12 , 2015 , with its 5,758th performance , and was passed two years later ( August 16 , 2017 ) by Wicked to move one spot down in the list of longest - running Broadway shows .
When Mamma Mia ! opened in Russia , it received a very positive response .
As of January 2008 , Mamma Mia ! became the longest daily running show in the history of Russian theatre .
THEMATIC ANALYSIS
Section::::Thematic analysis .
Mamma Mia ! does not only heighten a nostalgic and emotional reactions to the ABBA fans , it has also been celebrated for its feminist overtones .
The musical features strong female protagonists living in a strong female - power community .
The theme of single motherhood breaks the family stereotype of a child being raised by both parents by showing a different perspective of a family raised single - handedly by a mother , to show that there can still be happiness and love .
Having Donna , her two good friends and her daughter , Sophie as the main strong female characters of the musical , it can be seen as an empowerment for women as it celebrates and caters to the rise in liberation of female in the society , female sexuality , refuses to shame Donna for her promiscuity , and because it asserts that women should prioritise following their goals and enjoying their youths over marriage .
It also celebrates female friendship , and undermines the importance of fathers in women 's lives , prioritising self - actualisation and the role of the mother instead .
Librettist Catherine Johnson manages to express these themes through her transformation of ABBA 's music , as she turns these somewhat stereotypical songs into empowering ones by having characters of different genders sing them .
SEE ALSO
* Abbacadabra , another musical based on the songs of ABBA REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS