HALLOWEEN III : SEASON OF THE WITCH Halloween III : Season of the Witch is a 1982 American science fiction horror film and the third installment in the Halloween film series .
It is the first film to be written and directed by Tommy Lee Wallace .
John Carpenter and Debra Hill , the creators of Halloween , returned as producers .
The film follows the story of Dr. Dan Challis ( Tom Atkins ) as he tries to solve the mysterious murder of a patient in his hospital .
He , along with the patient 's daughter Ellie Grimbridge ( Stacey Nelkin ) , travels to the small town of Santa Mira , California , where Challis discover that Silver Shamrock Novelties , a company run by Conal Cochran ( Dan O'Herlihy ) , is attempting to use the mystic powers of the Stonehenge rocks to resurrect the ancient aspects of the Celtic festival , Samhain , which Cochran connects to witchcraft .
Cochran is using his Silver Shamrock Halloween masks to achieve his goal , which will be achieved when all the children wearing his masks watch the Silver Shamrock commercial airing Halloween night .
Halloween III is the only entry in the series that does not feature the series antagonist Michael Myers , nor does it include story elements from either Halloween ( 1978 ) or Halloween II ( 1981 ) .
In fact , it treats the first film and , apparently , its sequel as fictional films , as one of the characters watches a trailer for the original during the film ; additionally , the film 's tagline is a reference to the tagline from the original as well .
It also departs from the slasher genre which the first two installments were part of , instead featuring a " witchcraft " theme with science fiction aspects and parallels to old Celtic fairy tales .
John Carpenter and Debra Hill believed that the Halloween series had the potential to branch into an anthology series of horror films that centered around the night of Halloween , with each sequel containing its own characters , setting , and storyline .
Director Wallace stated that there were many ideas for Halloween - themed films , some of which could have potentially created any number of their own sequels , and that Season of the Witch was meant to be the first of the anthology series .
However , after the film 's disappointing critical reception and box - office gross , Michael Myers was brought back six years later in ( 1988 ) .
The frequency of graphic violence and blood is less than that of Halloween II , but the film 's death scenes remain intense .
As with other films in the series , suspense and dramatic tension is a key theme .
The dramatic element of violence against young children , something often taboo even for horror films , is explored .
Produced on a budget of $ 2.5 million , Halloween III grossed $ 14.4 million at the box office in the United States , making it the poorest performing film in the Halloween series at the time .
In addition to disappointing box office returns , most critics gave the film negative reviews , largely due to fan disappointment over the absence of Michael Myers .
Despite the film 's initially negative reception , re - evaluation over the past three decades has given Halloween III new legions of fans and established its reputation as a standalone cult film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
On October 23 , shop owner Harry Grimbridge is chased along a barren road in Northern California by mysterious men in suits .
He makes it to a gas station , clutching a jack - o'-lantern mask .
He is driven to the hospital by station attendant Walter Jones .
At the hospital , Grimbridge is placed in the care of Dr. Dan Challis .
That night , another mysterious man in a suit enters Grimbridge 's hospital room , murders him , then immolates himself .
The next morning , Grimbridge 's daughter , Ellie , and Challis agree to investigate his murder , leading them to the small town of Santa Mira , California .
The motel manager explains that Conal Cochran and his company , Silver Shamrock Novelties , which produces wildly popular latex jack - o - lantern , witch and skeleton masks for Halloween , are responsible for the town 's prosperity .
While signing the motel register , Challis learns that Grimbridge stayed at the same motel .
Other motel guests include shop owners Marge Guttman and Buddy Kupfer , Buddy 's wife , Betty , and their son , Little Buddy , who all have business at the company 's factory .
Guttman finds a microchip on the back of a Silver Shamrock button , and is electrocuted by its laser beam after poking it with a hairpin .
Challis and Ellie learn of Guttman 's accident , and Challis attempts to help , but is forced away by a group of men dressed in lab coats , who drive away in a van with Marge 's body .
The next morning , Challis and Ellie tour the factory with the Kupfers , and discover Grimbridge 's car there , guarded by more men dressed in suits .
They return to the motel , but can not contact anyone outside the town .
While Challis attempts to phone for the authorities , Ellie is kidnapped by the men in suits , and driven to the factory .
Challis pursues them , breaks into the factory , and discovers that the men in suits are androids created by Cochran .
Challis is captured by the androids and Cochran reveals his plan to sacrifice children wearing his masks on Halloween , thus bringing about a resurrection of the ancient age of witchcraft .
For Silver Shamrock 's " Big Giveaway " , which will air at 9:00 P.M. on all television channels following the " Horrorthon " , each of these masks contain a fragment of Stonehenge implanted in its trademark microchip .
When activated by a flashing signal of the commercial 's on - screen " magic pumpkin " , the microchip causes the mask wearer to succumb to brain damage from absorbing the energy of Stonehenge and unleashes a swarm of insects and snakes that come out of the wearer 's corpse and kill anyone nearby .
To demonstrate , Cochran kills the Kupfers this way .
That night , Cochran puts a Silver Shamrock mask on Challis , and leaves him to die the same fate as the trick - or - treating children , who will come back home for his false watch - and - win Halloween sweepstakes that he created for his company .
Challis , after destroying the television set and removing the mask , escapes through a ventilation shaft and rescues Ellie .
He dumps the chips from the overhead rafters , and activates their signal with the commercial , killing Cochran and his employees , and destroying the computer chips along with the entire Silver Shamrock factory .
As the two drive away , Ellie attacks Challis , revealing that Cochran replaced the real Ellie with an android duplicate .
Challis crashes the vehicle and decapitates the android with a tire iron .
On foot , Challis arrives at Jones ' gas station , where he contacts the television stations and attempts to warn all the station managers to remove the commercial .
At the same moment , a group of trick - or - treaters , wearing Sliver Shamrock masks , arrive at the station to participate in the " Big Giveaway " .
Challis persuades the stations to take it off channels one and two , but not channel three where the commercial keeps on playing , right onto the " magic pumpkin " sequence .
Challis desperately screams on the telephone for the final station to turn off the commercial , as the animated pumpkin head blinks non - stop in front of him and the children .
CAST PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
When approached about creating a third Halloween film , original Halloween writers John Carpenter and Debra Hill were reluctant to pledge commitment .
According to Fangoria magazine , Carpenter and Hill agreed to participate in the new project only if it was not a direct sequel to Halloween II , which meant no Michael Myers .
Irwin Yablans and Moustapha Akkad , who had produced the first two films , filmed Halloween III on a budget of $ 2.5 million .
Special effects artist Don Post of Post Studios designed the latex masks in the film which included a glow - in - the - dark skull , a lime - green witch and an orange Day - Glo jack - o'-lantern .
Hill told Aljean Harmetz , " We did n't exactly have a whole lot of money for things like props , so we asked Post , who had provided the shape mask for the earlier ' Halloween ' [ II ] ... , if we could work out a deal .
" The skull and witch masks were adaptations of standard Post Studios masks , but the jack - o'-lantern was created specifically for Halloween III .
Post linked the masks of the film to the popularity of masks in the real world :
Every society in every time has had its masks that suited the mood of the society , from the masked ball to clowns to makeup .
People want to act out a feeling inside themselves — angry , sad , happy , old .
It may be a sad commentary on present - day America that horror masks are the best sellers .
Most of the filming took place on location in the small coastal town of Loleta , California .
Familiar Foods , a milk bottling plant in Loleta , served as the Silver Shamrock Novelties factory , but all special effects involving fire , smoke , and explosions were filmed at Post Studios .
WRITING Section::::Writing .
Producers recruited British science fiction writer Nigel Kneale to write the original screenplay , mostly because Carpenter admired his Quatermass series .
Kneale said his script did not include " horror for horror 's sake " .
He adds , " The main story had to do with deception , psychological shocks rather than physical ones . "
Kneale asserts that movie mogul Dino De Laurentiis , owner of the film 's distribution rights , did not care for it and ordered more graphic violence and gore .
While much of the plot remained the same , the alterations displeased Kneale , and he requested that his name be removed from the credits .
Director Tommy Lee Wallace was then assigned to revise the script .
Wallace told Fangoria that he created the title of the film as a reference to " a plot point"—the three masks featured in the film — and an attempt to connect this film with the others in the series .
He explained in the interview the direction that Carpenter and Hill wanted to take the Halloween series , stating , " It is our intention to create an anthology out of the series , sort of along the lines of Night Gallery , or The Twilight Zone , only on a much larger scale , of course . "
Each year , a new film would be released that focused on some aspect of the Halloween season .
Hill told Fangoria that the film was supposed to be " a ' pod ' movie , not a ' knife ' movie . "
As such , Wallace drew inspiration from another pod film : Don Siegel 's Invasion of the Body Snatchers ( 1956 ) .
The fictional town of Santa Mira was originally the setting of Invasion of the Body Snatchers and named as such in Halloween III as an homage to Siegel 's film .
Aspects of the plot proved very similar as well , such as the " snatching " bodies and replacing them with androids .
Halloween III 's subtitle comes from George A. Romero 's second film Season of the Witch ( 1973)—also known as Hungry Wives — but the plot contains no similarity to Romero 's story of a housewife who becomes involved in witchcraft .
Film critics like Jim Harper called Wallace 's plot " deeply flawed " .
Harper argues , " Any plot dependent on stealing a chunk of Stonehenge and shipping it secretly across the Atlantic is going to be shaky from the start . "
He noted , " there are four time zones across the United States , so the western seaboard has four hours to get the fatal curse - inducing advertisement off the air .
Not a great plan .
" Harper was not the only critic unimpressed by the plot .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times wrote , " What 's [ Cochran 's ] plan ?
Kill the kids and replace them with robots ?
Why ? " CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The cast of Halloween III :
Season of the Witch consisted mostly of character actors whose previous acting credits included cameo appearances on various television series .
The exceptions were Tom Atkins and veteran actor Dan O'Herlihy .
Cast as surgeon Daniel " Dan " Challis , Atkins had appeared in several John Carpenter films prior to Halloween III .
Atkins played Nick Castle in The Fog ( 1980 ) and Rehme in Escape from New York ( 1981 ) .
Atkins guest starred in television series such as Harry O , The Rockford Files and Lou Grant .
Atkins told Fangoria that he liked being the hero .
As a veteran horror actor , he added , " I would n't mind making a whole career out of being in just horror movies . "
After Halloween III , Atkins continued to play supporting roles in dozens of films and television series .
Stacey Nelkin co - starred as Ellie Grimbridge , a young woman whose father is murdered by Silver Shamrock .
She landed the role after a make - up artist working on the film told her about the auditions .
In an interview , Nelkin commented on her character : " Ellie was very spunky and strong - minded .
Although I like to think of myself as having these traits , she was written that way in the script .
"
Nelkin considered it an " honor " to be playing Jamie Lee Curtis 's successor .
According to Roger Ebert , Nelkin 's performance was the " one saving grace " in the film .
Ebert explained , " She has one of those rich voices that makes you wish she had more to say and in a better role . ...
Too bad she plays her last scene without a head . "
Prior to her role as Grimbridge , Nelkin was one of the main characters in the 1980 Mad Magazine movie Up the Academy , which also starred Ralph Macchio .
After Halloween III , Nelkin continued working as a character actress on television .
Veteran Irish actor Dan O'Herlihy was cast as Conal Cochran , the owner of Silver Shamrock and the witch from the film 's title ( a 3000-year - old demon in Kneale 's original script ) .
O'Herlihy had played close to 150 roles before co - starring as the Irish trickster and was nominated for an Academy Award for his performance in The Adventures of Robinson Crusoe ( 1954 ) .
He appeared in another twenty films and television series before his death in 2005 .
O'Herlihy admitted in an interview with Starlog magazine that he was not particularly impressed with the finished film .
When asked what he thought of working in the horror film , O'Herlihy responded , " Whenever I use a Cork accent , I 'm having a good time , and I used a Cork accent in [ Halloween III ] .
I thoroughly enjoyed the role , but I did n't think it was much of a picture , no .
" Two members of the supporting cast were not strangers to the Halloween series .
Nancy Kyes played Challis 's ex - wife Linda ; she had appeared in the first two Halloween films as Laurie Strode 's promiscuous friend Annie Brackett .
Stunt performer Dick Warlock makes a cameo appearance as the android assassin .
Warlock had earlier co - starred as Michael Myers in Halloween II .
Jamie Lee Curtis also provided uncredited voice work as the Santa Mira curfew announcer and the telephone operator .
DIRECTING
Section::::Directing .
The film was the directorial debut of Tommy Lee Wallace , although he was not a newcomer to the Halloween series .
Wallace had served as art director and production designer for John Carpenter 's original Halloween and he had previously declined to direct Halloween II in 1981 .
After Halloween III , Wallace directed other horror films such as Fright Night Part 2 ( 1988 ) , ( 2002 ) and the miniseries
It ( 1990 ) , the television adaptation of the Stephen King novel .
Despite disagreements between Wallace and original script writer Nigel Kneale , the actors reported that Wallace was a congenial director to work with .
Stacey Nelkin told one interviewer , " The shoot as a whole was fun , smooth and a great group of people to work with .
Tommy Lee Wallace was incredibly helpful and open to discussion on dialogue or character issues . "
Although the third film departed from the plot of the first two films , Wallace attempted to connect all three films together through certain stylistic themes .
The film 's opening title features a digitally animated jack - o'-lantern , an obvious reference to the jack - o'-lanterns that appeared in the opening titles of Halloween and Halloween II .
Wallace 's jack - o'-lantern is also the catalyst in the Silver Shamrock commercials that activate the masks .
Another stylistic reference to the original film is found in the scene where Dr. Challis tosses a mask over a security camera , making the image on the monitor seem to be peering through the eye holes .
This is a nod to the scene in which a young Michael Myers murders his sister while wearing a clown mask .
Finally , the film contains a brief reference to its predecessors by including a few short scenes from Halloween in a television commercial that advertises the airing of the film for that upcoming holiday as a minor story within a story .
Wallace 's use of gore served a different purpose than in Halloween II .
According to Tom Atkins , " The effects in this [ film ] are n't bloody .
They 're more bizarre than gross .
" Special effects and makeup artist Tom Burman concurred , stating in an interview , " This movie is really not out to disgust people .
It 's a fun movie with a lot of thrills in it ; not a lot of random gratuitous gore . "
Many of the special effects were meant to emphasize the theme of the practical joke that peppers the plot .
New York Times film critic Vincent Canby notes , " The movie features a lot of carefully executed , comically horrible special effects . ...
" Canby stood as one of the few critics of the time to praise Wallace 's directing : " Mr. Wallace clearly has a fondness for the clichés he is parodying and he does it with style . "
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The soundtrack was composed by John Carpenter and Alan Howarth , who worked together on the score for Halloween II and several other films .
Music remained an important element in establishing the atmosphere of Halloween III .
Just as in Halloween and Halloween II , there was no symphonic score .
Much of the music was composed to solicit " false startles " from the audience .
The score of Halloween III differed greatly from the familiar main theme of the original and sequel .
Carpenter replaced the familiar piano melody with a slower , electronic theme played on a synthesizer with beeping tonalities .
Howarth explains how he and Carpenter composed the music for the third film :
The music style of John Carpenter and myself has further evolved in this film soundtrack by working exclusively with synthesizers to produce our music .
This has led to a certain procedural routine .
The film is first transferred to a time coded video tape and synchronized to a 24 track master audio recorder ; then while watching the film we compose the music to these visual images .
The entire process goes quite rapidly and has " instant gratification " , allowing us to evaluate the score in synch to the picture .
This is quite an invaluable asset .
One of the more memorable aspects of the film 's soundtrack was the jingle from the Silver Shamrock Halloween mask commercial .
Set to the tune of " London Bridge Is Falling Down " , the commercial in the film counts down the number of days until Halloween beginning with day eight followed by an announcer 's voice ( Tommy Lee Wallace ) encouraging children to purchase a Silver Shamrock mask to wear on Halloween night : RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Critical response to Halloween III :
Season of the Witch proved to be negative mainly due to the absence of Michael Myers , despite some support .
New York Times reviewer Vincent Canby struggled to apply a definite label to the film 's content .
He remarks , " ' Halloween III ' manages the not easy feat of being anti - children , anti - capitalism , anti - television and anti - Irish all at the same time . "
On the other hand , he says that the film " is probably as good as any cheerful ghoul could ask for .
"
Other critics were far more decisive in their assessments .
Roger Ebert wrote that the film was " a low - rent thriller from the first frame .
This is one of those Identikit movies , assembled out of familiar parts from other , better movies . "
However , he did praise Stacey Nelkin 's performance .
Cinefantastique magazine called the film a " hopelessly jumbled mess " .
Jason Paul Collum points to the absence of Michael Myers and the film 's nihilistic ending as reasons why the film dissatisfied reviewers and audiences alike .
Tom Milne of Time
Out offered a more positive review , calling the title " a bit of a cheat , since the indestructible psycho of the first two films plays no part here . "
Unlike other critics , Milne thought the new plot was refreshing : " With the possibilities of the characters [ of the previous Halloween films ] well and truly exhausted , Season of the Witch turns more profitably to a marvellously ingenious Nigel Kneale tale of a toymaker and his fiendish plan to restore Halloween to its witch cult origins . "
Although Milne was unhappy that Kneale 's original script was reduced to " a bit of a mess " , he still believed the end result was " hugely enjoyable " .
The film currently holds a 40 % approval rating and a weighted average of 4.7/10 on review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , based on 25 reviews .
PopMatters journalist J. C. Maçek III wrote that the film " features no serial killers or slashers of any kind ...
Still , this could have been somewhat interesting , or at least not condemnable , had the film been any good .
It 's not .
Almost every time it starts to get to the point where we might actually become engrossed in the film , director Tommy Lee Wallace throws in something corny like ...
oh , like a human decapitation scene that shows just how much the producers invested in latex .
Seriously , could the special effects look a little more fake , please ?
I was just getting to the point where I could almost tell the robots from the real people ... making a real person look faker than Michael Jackson 's nose blissfully confuses me all over again . "
Academics find the film full of critiques of late 20th - century American society , historian Nicholas Rogers points to an anti - corporate message where an otherwise successful businessman turns " oddly irrational " and seeks to " promote a more robotic future for commerce and manufacture .
" Cochran 's " astrological obsessions or psychotic hatred of children overrode his business sense . "
Tony Williams argues that the film 's plot signified the results of the " victory of patriarchal corporate control . "
In a similar vein , Martin Harris writes that Halloween III contains " an ongoing , cynical commentary on American consumer culture . "
Upset over the commercialization of the Halloween holiday , Cochran uses " the very medium he abhors as a weapon against itself . "
Harris also discusses other big business critiques in the film , including the unemployment of local workers and the declining quality of mass - produced products .
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
Halloween III :
Season of the Witch opened in 1,297 theaters in the United States on October 22 , 1982 , and earned $ 6,333,259 in its opening weekend .
Like its predecessor , the film was distributed through Universal by Italian producer Dino De Laurentiis .
It grossed a total of $ 14,400,000 in the United States , but was the worst performing Halloween film at the time .
Several other horror films that premiered in 1982 performed far better , including Poltergeist ( $ 76,606,280 ) , Friday the 13th Part III ( $ 34,581,519 ) , and Creepshow ( $ 21,028,755 ) .
In 1983 , Edd Riveria , designer of the film 's theatrical poster , received a Saturn Award nomination from the Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films , USA , for Best Poster Art , but lost to John Alvin 's ( 1982 ) artwork .
Riveria 's poster art featured a demonic face descending on three trick - or - treaters .
His artwork was later featured on the cover of Fangoria in October 1982 .
The stylized face on the theatrical poster is actually a distorted image of the witch mask which appears in the film .
The image of the trick - or - treaters is similar to a shot in the movie that shows children in Phoenix , Arizona walking in silhouette with a red sunset in the background .
MERCHANDISING Section::::Merchandising .
As part of a merchandising campaign , the producers requested Don Post to mass - produce the skull , witch , and jack - o'-lantern masks .
Producers had given exclusive merchandising rights to Post as part of his contract for working on the film , and Post Studios had already successfully marketed tie - in masks for the classic Universal monsters , Planet of the Apes ( 1968 ) , Star Wars ( 1977 ) , and ( 1982 ) .
Post used the original molds for the masks in the film to mass - produce masks for retail sale .
He speculated , " Because the masks are so significant to the movie , they could become a cult item , with fans wanting to wear them when they go to see the movie . "
Post also gave mask - making demonstrations for a Universal Studio tour in Hollywood .
The masks retailed for $ 25 when they finally appeared in stores .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Halloween III was later released on VHS and LaserDisc in 1983 by MCA / Universal Home Video and by Goodtimes Home Video in 1996 .
DVD versions were distributed by Goodtimes in 1998 , Universal in 2002 , in 2007 as a two - disc " Universal double feature " with Halloween II , and Shout !
Factory released a collector 's edition DVD and Blu - ray of the film on September 18 , 2012 .
The film was released on Blu - ray for the first time on September 18 , 2012 from Shout !
Factory , containing the same special features as their collector 's edition DVD , which are a commentary , documentary , trailers , and still galleries .
Universal released a bare bones Blu - ray release of the film on August 11 , 2015 .
NOVELIZATION Section::::Novelization .
The script was adapted as a paperback novelization in 1982 by horror writer Dennis Etchison writing under the pseudonym Jack Martin .
The book was a best seller and was reissued in 1984 .
Etchison wrote the novelization to Halloween II only a year before .
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
FURTHER READING *
" The Mask Factor " by Michael Gingold , Fangoria magazine # 317 , October 2012 , pages 60–62 .
Interview of Stacey Nelkin regarding her role in the film Halloween III : Season of the Witch conducted at the 2011 Monster - Mania Con , New Jersey .
Three - page article has seven photos , four of Nelkin , one of her taken at the Con .
EXTERNAL LINKS