DR .
MARTENS
Dr. Martens is an English footwear and clothing brand , which also makes a range of accessories – shoe care products , clothing , bag , etc .
In addition to Dr. Martens , they are also commonly known as Doctor Martens , Doc Martens , DMs or Docs .
The footwear is distinguished by its air - cushioned sole ( dubbed Bouncing Soles ) , upper shape , welted construction and yellow stitching .
The boots have been the choice of footwear among various groups in British culture : in the 1960s skinheads started to wear them , " Docs " being the usual naming , and by the late 1980s , they were popular among scooter riders , punks , some new wave musicians , and members of other youth subcultures , most notably the grunge fashion scene in the early nineties .
In 2006 , Griggs ' 1960
Dr. Martens AirWair boot was named in the list of British design icons which included Concorde , Mini , Jaguar E - Type , Aston Martin DB5 , Supermarine Spitfire , Tube map , World Wide Web and the AEC Routemaster bus .
HISTORY FOUNDING Section::::History .
Section::::Founding .
Klaus Märtens was a doctor in the German army during World War II .
While on leave in 1945 , he injured his ankle while skiing in the Bavarian Alps .
He found that his standard - issue army boots were too uncomfortable on his injured foot .
While recuperating , he designed improvements to the boots , with soft leather and air - padded soles made of tires .
When the war ended and some Germans recovered valuables from their own cities , Märtens took leather from a cobbler 's shop .
With that leather he made himself a pair of boots with air - cushioned soles .
Märtens did not have much success selling his shoes until he met up with an old university friend , Herbert Funck , a Luxembourger , in Munich in 1947 .
Funck was intrigued by the new shoe design , and the two went into business that year in Seeshaupt , Germany , using discarded rubber from Luftwaffe airfields .
The comfortable soles were a big hit with housewives , with 80 % of sales in the first decade to women over the age of 40 .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Sales had grown so much by 1952 that they opened a factory in Munich .
In 1959 , the company had grown large enough that Märtens and Funck looked at marketing the footwear internationally .
Almost immediately , British shoe manufacturer R. Griggs Group Ltd. bought patent rights to manufacture the shoes in the United Kingdom .
Griggs anglicised the name , slightly re - shaped the heel to make them fit better , added the trademark yellow stitching , and trademarked the soles as AirWair .
The first Dr. Martens boots in the United Kingdom came out on 1 April 1960 ( known as style 1460 and still in production today ) , with an eight - eyelet oxblood coloured smooth leather design .
Dr. Martens boots were made in their Cobbs Lane factory in Wollaston , Northamptonshire ( which is still operating today ) .
In addition , a number of shoe manufacturers in the Northamptonshire area produced DMs under licence , as long as they passed quality standards .
The boots were popular among workers such as postmen , police officers and factory workers .
By the later 1960s , skinheads started to wear them , " dms " being the usual naming , and by the late 1970s , they were popular among scooter riders , punks , some new wave musicians , and members of other youth subcultures .
The shoes ' popularity among skinheads led to the brand gaining an association with violence .
Alexei Sayle sang the song " Dr. Martens ' Boots " in a 1982 episode of the British TV comedy The Young Ones .
The boots and shoes became popular in the 1990s as grunge fashion arose .
In late November 1994 , a six - storey Dr. Martens department store was opened in Covent Garden in London which sold food , belts , and watches , as well as shoes .
At this time the R. Griggs company employed 2,700 people , expected to earn annual revenue of £ 170 million , and could produce up to 10 million pairs of shoes per year .
Dr. Martens sponsored Rushden & Diamonds F.C. from 1998 to 2005 .
Diamonds approached owner and local businessman , Max Griggs to request sponsorship from his company .
A new main stand was built at Nene Park in 2001 , named the Airwair Stand .
Dr. Martens were also the principal sponsors of Premier League club , West Ham United F.C. , renaming the upgraded west stand ' The Dr Martens Stand ' until 2009 .
In the 2000s , Dr. Martens were sold exclusively under the AirWair name , and came in dozens of different styles , including conventional black shoes , sandals and steel - toed boots .
AirWair International 's revenue fell from US $ 412 million in 1999 to $ 127 million in 2006 .
In 2003 , the Dr. Martens company came close to bankruptcy .
On 1 April that year , under pressure from declining sales , the company ceased making shoes in the United Kingdom , and moved all production to China and Thailand .
Five factories and two shops were closed in the UK as a result of this decision , and more than of the firm 's employees lost their jobs .
Following the closures , the R. Griggs company employed only 20 people in the UK , all of whom were located in the firm 's head office .
5 million pairs of Dr. Martens were sold during 2003 , which was half the level of annual sales during the 1990s .
In 2004 a new range of Dr. Martens was launched in an attempt to appeal to a wider market , and especially young people .
The shoes and boots were intended to be more comfortable , and easier to break in , and included some new design elements .
Dr. Martens also began producing footwear again at the Cobbs Lane Factory in Wollaston , England in 2004 .
These products are part of the " Vintage " line , which the company advertises as being made to the original specifications .
Sales of these shoes are low in comparison to those made in Asia , however ; in 2010 , the factory was producing about 50 pairs per day .
In 2005 , the R. Griggs company was given an award by the " Institute for Turnaround " for implementing a successful restructure .
Worldwide sales of Dr. Martens shoes grew strongly in the early 2010s , and in 2012 it was assessed as being the eighth fastest - growing British company .
Over 100 million pairs of Dr. Martens shoes have been sold from 1960 to 2010 , and in 2010 , the company offered 250 different models of footwear .
The R. Griggs company opened 14 new Dr. Martens retail stores in the United Kingdom , United States and Hong Kong between 2009 and 2011 , and also launched a line of clothing during 2011 .
In 1999 Dr Martens battled it out in counter lawsuits in US Courts .
Dr Martens brand began a number of lawsuits in 2016 based on trademark law primarily In 2018 Business Insider reported that 10 million pairs of Dr. Martens shoes are produced annually .
Of these , only 1 % are made in the UK .
ACQUISITION Section::::Acquisition .
In October 2013 , the private equity company Permira acquired R. Griggs Group Limited ( the owner of the Dr. Martens brand ) for £ 300M. GALLERY SEE ALSO * Solovair - another footwear brand made in the original factory in Wollaston REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Dr. Martens website