HIGH SOCIETY ( 1956 FILM ) High Society is a 1956 American romantic musical comedy film directed by Charles Walters and starring Bing Crosby , Grace Kelly , and Frank Sinatra .
The film was produced by Sol C. Siegel for Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer , and shot in VistaVision and Technicolor , with music and lyrics by Cole Porter .
The film is a musical remake of the 1940 film The Philadelphia Story starring Cary Grant , Katharine Hepburn , and James Stewart , which was based on the play The Philadelphia Story by Philip Barry ( which had starred Hepburn on Broadway ) .
High Society 's screenplay was written by John Patrick and involves a successful popular jazz musician ( Bing Crosby ) who tries to win back the affections of his ex - wife ( Grace Kelly ) , who is preparing to marry another man .
The cast also features Celeste Holm , John Lund and Louis Calhern , in his final film , with a musical contribution by Louis Armstrong .
High Society was the last film appearance of Grace Kelly , before she became Princess consort of Monaco .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The successful jazz musician C.K. Dexter Haven ( Bing Crosby )
( with a Newport " robber baron for a grandfather " ) is divorced from wealthy Newport , Rhode Island , socialite Tracy Samantha Lord ( Grace Kelly ) , but remains in love with her .
She , however , is about to get married to a bland gentleman of good standing , George Kittredge ( John Lund ) .
Spy Magazine , a fictional tabloid newspaper in possession of embarrassing information about Tracy 's father , sends reporter Mike Connor ( Frank Sinatra ) and photographer Liz Imbrie ( Celeste Holm ) to cover the nuptials .
Tracy begins an elaborate charade as a private means of revenge , introducing her Uncle Willy ( Louis Calhern ) as her proper father Seth Lord ( Sidney Blackmer ) and the latter as her " wicked " Uncle Willy .
Connor falls in love with Tracy , who must choose among three very different men in a course of self - discovery .
After becoming tipsy at a party on the eve of her wedding and going off with Connor for a romantic swim , Tracy decides to go through with it until Kittredge takes umbrage .
While in the process of telling her guests that the wedding is off , Tracy is surprised by a proposal from Dexter to take the groom 's place .
Realizing where her heart truly is , she accepts .
CAST
* Bing Crosby as C. K. Dexter Haven
* Grace Kelly as Tracy
Samantha Lord * Frank Sinatra as Macaulay
" Mike " Connor * Celeste Holm as Liz Imbrie * John Lund as George Kittredge * Louis Calhern as Uncle Willie * Sidney Blackmer as Seth Lord * Louis Armstrong and His Band as themselves
* Edmond Hall –
Clarinetist * Trummy Young – Trombonist * Billy Kyle – Pianist * Arvell Shaw – Bassist * Barrett Deems – Drummer * Margalo Gillmore
as Mrs. Seth Lord * Lydia Reed as Caroline Lord * Gordon Richards as Dexter Haven 's butler * Richard Garrick as Lords ' butler PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Filming took place between January and March 1956 .
The film was shot mostly in and around Clarendon Court in Newport , Rhode Island , which was then owned by Mae Cadwell Hayward , and later purchased in 1970 by Claus von Bulow .
The location , according to Turner Classic Movies , enabled them to take advantage of the Newport Jazz Festival , established in 1954 , incorporating it into the film by giving Crosby 's character a background as a descendant of a Gilded Age robber baron who became a jazz composer and friend of jazz star Louis Armstrong , who plays himself in the film , and patron of the Festival .
As name - checked by Crosby in the song " Now You Has Jazz " , where each musician takes a small solo , Armstrong 's band includes :
Edmond Hall ( clarinet ) , Trummy Young ( trombone ) , Billy Kyle ( piano ) , Arvell Shaw ( bass ) , and Barrett Deems ( drums ) .
This film featured Kelly 's final role before she became Princess of Monaco ; it was released three months after her marriage to Prince Rainier III .
In the film , Kelly wore the Cartier engagement ring given to her by Rainier .
Sinatra was 40 and Crosby 53 while playing the love interests of Kelly , who was only 26 during the filming .
Sinatra biographers George Jacobs and William Stadiem make the claim that Crosby kept his distance from Sinatra during the production and remained strictly professional when Sinatra desired companionship , and that it " killed " Sinatra to think that Crosby considered himself a higher class singer .
However this is refuted by TCM , which states that " in spite of a rumored rivalry between Frank Sinatra and Bing Crosby , the two worked together very amicably during the shoot . "
They claim that Sinatra was fascinated with Grace Kelly – as were many of her previous co - stars – and would have loved to have an affair with her but feared rejection and embarrassment in front of Crosby , who had previously had an affair with Kelly .
The sailboat used in the film , the True Love ( originally the Venona II based on the Malabar design by John Alden built for racing ) , now sails on Seneca Lake out of Watkins Glen , NY as an excursion boat for Schooner Excursions ,
Inc. MUSICAL NUMBERS Section::::Musical numbers .
Producer Sol C. Siegel paid Porter $ 250,000 for his first original film score in eight years ; it introduced a couple of pop standards , including " True Love " and
" You 're Sensational " .
Not only did Sinatra and Crosby collaborate for the first time , but behind the scenes two master orchestrators – Conrad Salinger and Nelson Riddle – melded their arrangements under the baton of Johnny Green .
Armstrong and his band get a couple of standout moments and Kelly has her only role in a musical .
* " Overture " * * " High Society Calypso " – Armstrong & his band
*
* " Little One " –
C.K. * * " Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? " –
Mike , Liz * * " True Love " – C.K. , Tracy
* * " You 're Sensational " –
Mike * *
" I Love You , Samantha " –
C.K. * *
" Now You Has Jazz "
– C.K. , Armstrong & his band , individually introduced by name
*
*
" Well , Did You Evah ! "
– C.K. , Mike
* * " Mind if I Make Love to You ? "
– Mike * A soundtrack album was released the year of the film 's release and was a major success in both America and the United Kingdom .
It has been said that one of the main reasons star Sinatra was drawn to the film was a mock - tipsy duet with his boyhood idol Crosby on "
Well , Did You Evah !
"
, a song from an earlier Porter show , DuBarry Was a Lady ( 1939 ) , re - adapted and added at the last minute when it was noted that the two singers did not have a duet to perform in the film .
The title of the song " Who Wants to Be a Millionaire ? " gained new significance a half - century later as the title of a global game show franchise .
" I Love You , Samantha " has also become a jazz favorite for improvisations .
When Bing Crosby sang " Now You Has Jazz " , he uttered the Porter lyric " rock and roll " , and it very well might have been the first time that phrase was uttered on film .
It would have been ironic coming from Crosby since rock and roll would very soon eclipse the jazz and swing of Crosby , Sinatra , and Armstrong .
The first rock and roll film came out the following year .
RELEASE CRITICAL RECEPTION
Section::::Release .
Section::::Critical reception .
Opening on July 17 , 1956 , High Society garnered mixed reviews , often being compared as a lesser offering to The Philadelphia Story , a previous adaptation in 1940 of the same play starring Cary Grant in the Crosby part , Katharine Hepburn in the Kelly role , and James Stewart in an Oscar - winning turn as the reporter played in the remake by Sinatra .
Variety noted : " High Society should spell high finance business all over .
It 's a solid entertainment every minute of its footage .
Fortified with a strong Cole Porter score , film is a pleasant romp for cast toppers Bing Crosby , Grace Kelly and Frank Sinatra who , tactfully , get alphabetical top billing .
Their impact is almost equally consistent .
Although Sinatra has the top pop tune opportunities , the Groaner makes his specialties stand up and out on showmanship and delivery , and Miss Kelly impresses as the femme lead with pleasantly comedienne overtones .
This is perhaps her most relaxed performance ... "
Bosley Crowther of The New York Times described it as " flimsy as a gossip - columnist 's word , " missing " the snap and the crackle that its un - musical predecessor had . "
According to Time , in spite of its " Who 's Who cast " the film is " simply not top - drawer " ; a " good deal of the screenplay seems as dated today as the idle rich ...
[ Kelly ] lacks the gawky animal energy that Katharine Hepburn brought to the 1939 play and the 1941 movie ,
[ Crosby ] saunters through the part rather sleepily , without much of the old Bing zing [ , and
] Sinatra plays the reporter like a dead - end kid with a typewriter . "
BOX OFFICE Section::::Box office .
At the North American box office , High Society was a success .
It was one of the 10 highest grossing films of 1956 in the US and Canada earning $ 5,602,000 , and $ 2,656,000 elsewhere , resulting in a profit of $ 1,148,000 .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
High Society received two Academy Award nominations , and nearly received a third .
The film was initially nominated in the 1956 Academy Awards for Best Motion Picture Story , even though it was based on the 1940 film The Philadelphia Story and thus was not eligible in that category .
Moreover , the nominated writers , Elwood Ullman and Edward Bernds , had written not this film , but a 1955 Bowery Boys film also titled High Society .
According to the book Inside Oscar , Steve Broidy , president of The Bowery Boys home studio Allied Artists , told the press , " This just proves what we 've known all along – that the Bowery Boys series could n't have lasted this long if not for the fine writers . "
The joking in the press aside , Ullman and Bernds sent a telegram to the Academy Award Board of Governors , acknowledging the error and requesting that their names be removed from the final ballot .
BROADWAY ADAPTATION
Section::::Broadway adaptation .
More than 40 years following the film 's release , it was adapted for the stage as a Broadway musical with several Porter songs from other sources added to the score .
The Broadway production opened on April 27 , 1998 , at the St. James Theatre , where it ran for 144 performances .
SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1956 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS