CONN SMYTHE TROPHY
The Conn Smythe Trophy ( ) is awarded annually to the most valuable player ( MVP ) during the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) Stanley Cup playoffs .
It is named after Conn Smythe , the longtime owner , general manager , and head coach of the Toronto Maple Leafs .
The Conn Smythe Trophy has been awarded 52 times to 45 players since the 1964–65 NHL season .
Each year , at the conclusion of the final game of the Stanley Cup Final , members of the Professional Hockey Writers ' Association vote to elect the player deserving of the trophy .
The trophy is handed out prior to the presentation of the Stanley Cup by the NHL Commissioner and only the winner is announced , in contrast to most of the other NHL awards which name three finalists and are presented at a ceremony .
Unlike the playoff MVP awards presented in the other major professional sports leagues of the United States and Canada ( the Super Bowl MVP , the NBA Finals MVP , and the World Series MVP ) , the Conn Smythe is based on a player 's performance during the entire NHL postseason instead of just the championship game or series .
The most recent winner is Alexander Ovechkin .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Conn Smythe Trophy was introduced in 1964 by Maple Leaf Gardens Limited to honor Conn Smythe , the former owner , General Manager , and coach of the Toronto Maple Leafs and a member of the Hockey Hall of Fame as a builder .
The centerpiece of the trophy is a stylized silver replica of Maple Leaf Gardens , the arena built under Smythe 's ownership of the Maple Leafs , and their home from 1931 to 1999 .
Backing the arena replica is a large silver botanically - accurate maple leaf .
The arena replica and leaf are set atop a square wooden foundation , the front of which bears a dedication plaque .
Additional tiers below the foundation , sloping outward , contain maple leaf - shaped plates bearing the inscriptions of the winners ' names .
The base of the Conn Smythe Trophy has been expanded twice over the years to accommodate more winners .
Although the 16 nameplates on the original base tier were filled up after , a new tier was not added until the 1983–84 season .
Following the 2000 Stanley Cup Finals , the 20 nameplates on the new tier were filled up , so the first nine winners ' nameplates were moved up to the remaining three sides of the foundation tier , with the remaining nameplates shifted accordingly to keep the winners in chronological order .
Due to the cancellation of the 2004–05 season , the trophy was n't filled up again until , after which a new tier was added , making room for 24 more names .
The first winner of the award was center Jean Béliveau of the Montreal Canadiens in .
The first player and only defenseman to win it twice was Bobby Orr , who scored the Cup - clinching goals for the Boston Bruins in and .
Goaltender Bernie Parent ( for the Philadelphia Flyers ) and centers Wayne Gretzky ( for the Edmonton Oilers ) , Mario Lemieux , and Sidney Crosby ( for the Pittsburgh Penguins ) have also won it twice each , with Parent , Lemieux , and Crosby each winning theirs back to back
( / , / , and / respectively ) .
Goaltender Patrick Roy is the only player to win the trophy three times , and also the only player to win it as a member of two different teams ( with the Canadiens in and , and with the Colorado Avalanche in ) ; his wins also fall into three different decades .
Ken Dryden , the Smythe winner , is the only NHL player to win this trophy before winning the Calder Trophy as rookie of the year ( in 1972 ) :
Montreal called him up to play only six regular season games , which is not enough to qualify as a rookie season .
Dave Keon 's eight playoff points in is the fewest ever by a non - goalie Conn Smythe winner , as he was a defensive forward and is the only Maple Leafs player to win the trophy donated by his club 's parent company .
Though the award rewards a player who performed particularly well over the entirety of the playoffs , it has never been given to a player whose team did not at least reach the Stanley Cup Finals .
The trophy has been awarded to members of the team that lost the Finals five times , most recently Jean - Sebastien Giguere of the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim in 2003 , who backstopped his team 's surprise run to the Finals , where they pushed the New Jersey Devils to seven games .
The only skater to win the award in a losing cause is Philadelphia 's Reggie Leach , who won it in as he had set a league record for most goals in the playoffs ( 19 ) , which included a five - goal game in the semifinals and four goals in the Finals , even though the Canadiens swept his Flyers .
With eight exceptions , the winners of the Conn Smythe Trophy have all been Canadian .
The non - Canadian winners are Americans Brian Leetch , who won it in , Tim Thomas in , Jonathan Quick in , and Patrick Kane in ; Russians Evgeni Malkin and Alexander Ovechkin , who won it in and , respectively ; and Swedes Nicklas Lidstrom and Henrik Zetterberg , who won it in and , respectively .
Only three players have won the Conn Smythe Trophy and the Hart Memorial Trophy for Most Valuable Player during the regular season in the same year :
Orr in 1970 and 1972 , Guy Lafleur in and Gretzky in .
These three players also won the Art Ross Trophy as regular season leading scorer , while Orr also won the James Norris Memorial Trophy as top defenceman to give him a record four individual original NHL awards in 1970 .
The trophy had been won sixteen times each by centers and goaltenders , nine times by defensemen , seven times by right wingers , and just twice by left wingers ( Bob Gainey of Montreal in and Ovechkin in ) .
Canadiens players have won it nine times ,
Detroit Red Wings and Pittsburgh Penguins players five times , and Oilers , Flyers , and New York Islanders players four times each .
The St. Louis Blues are the only team without a Stanley Cup victory to have a Conn Smythe Trophy winner , as Glenn Hall won in .
WINNERS Section::::Winners .
+ Positions key !
C !
LW !
D !
RW !
G +
Conn Smythe Trophy winners !
scope="col " Year ! scope="col " Winner ! scope="col " Team !
scope="col " Position ! scope="col " Win # bgcolor="#ffbbbb " bgcolor="#ffbbbb " bgcolor="#ffbbbb " bgcolor="#ffbbbb " bgcolor="#ffbbbb " SEE ALSO * List of National Hockey League awards
* List of Stanley Cup champions
* List of NHL statistical leaders REFERENCES General * Conn Smythe Trophy at NHL.com * Conn Smythe Trophy history at HHOF.net Specific