SAMUEL CHASE Samuel Chase ( April 17 , 1741 – June 19 , 1811 ) was an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court and a signatory to the United States Declaration of Independence as a representative of Maryland .
He was impeached by the House on grounds of letting his partisan leanings affect his court decisions but was acquitted by the Senate and remained in office .
Born near Princess Anne , Maryland , Chase established a legal practice in Annapolis , Maryland .
He served in the Maryland General Assembly for several years and favored independence during the American Revolution .
He won election to the Continental Congress before serving on the Baltimore District Criminal Court and the Maryland General Court .
In 1796 , President George Washington appointed Chase to the United States Supreme Court .
After the 1800 elections , President Thomas Jefferson and the Democratic - Republicans sought to weaken Federalist influence on the federal courts .
Chase 's actions on the court had been accused of demonstrating bias , and Jefferson believed that Chase should be removed from office .
The House of Representatives impeached Chase on eight articles of impeachment , all centering on Chases 's alleged political bias .
The Senate voted to acquit Chase on all counts , and Chase served on the Supreme Court until his death in 1811 .
Some historians have argued that Chase 's acquittal set an important precedent regarding the independence of the federal judiciary .
YOUTH AND EARLY CAREER Section::::Youth and early career .
Samuel Chase was the only child of the Reverend Thomas Chase ( c. 1703–1779 ) and his wife , Matilda Walker ( ? – by 1744 ) , born near Princess Anne , Maryland .
His father was a clergyman who immigrated to Somerset County to become a priest in a new church .
Samuel was educated at home .
He was eighteen when he left for Annapolis where he studied law under attorney John Hall .
He was admitted to the bar in 1761 and started a law practice in Annapolis .
It was during his time as a member of the bar that his colleagues gave him the nickname of " Old Bacon Face . "
FAMILY AND PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Family and personal life .
In May 1762 , Chase married Ann Baldwin , daughter of Thomas and Agnes Baldwin .
Samuel and Ann had three sons and four daughters , with only four surviving to adulthood .
Ann died in 1776 .
In 1784 , Chase traveled to England to deal with Maryland 's Bank of England stock , where he met Hannah Kilty , daughter of Samuel Giles , a Berkshire physician .
They were married later that year and had two daughters , Hannah and Elisa .
CAREER IN ANNAPOLIS Section::::Career in Annapolis .
In 1762 , Chase was expelled from the Forensic Club , an Annapolis debating society , for " extremely irregular and indecent " behavior .
In 1764 , Chase was elected to the Maryland General Assembly where he served for 20 years .
In 1766 , he became embroiled in a war of words with a number of loyalist members of the Maryland political establishment .
In an open letter dated July 18 , 1766 , Chase attacked Walter Dulany , George Steuart ( 1700–1784 ) , John Brice ( 1705–1766 ) , and others for publishing an article in the Maryland Gazette Extraordinary of June 19 , 1766 , in which Chase was accused of being : " a busy , reckless incendiary , a ringleader of mobs , a foul - mouthed and inflaming son of discord and faction , a common disturber of the public tranquility " .
In his response , Chase accused Steuart and the others of " vanity ... pride and arrogance " , and of being brought to power by " proprietary influence , court favour , and the wealth and influence of the tools and favourites who infest this city . "
In 1769 , he started construction of the mansion that would become known as the Chase – Lloyd House , which he sold unfinished in 1771 .
The house is now a National Historic Landmark .
He co - founded Anne Arundel County 's Sons of Liberty chapter with his close friend William Paca , as well as leading opposition to the 1765 Stamp Act .
CONTINENTAL CONGRESS Section::::Continental Congress .
From 1774 to 1776 , Chase was a member of the Annapolis Convention .
He represented Maryland at the Continental Congress , was re - elected in 1776 and signed the United States Declaration of Independence .
He remained in the Continental Congress until 1778 .
The involvement of Chase in an attempt to corner the flour market , using insider information gained through his position in the Congress , resulted in his not being returned to the Continental Congress and damaging his reputation .
JUDICIAL CAREER Section::::Judicial career .
In 1786 , Chase moved to Baltimore , which remained his home for the rest of his life .
In 1788 , he was appointed chief justice of the District Criminal Court in Baltimore and served until 1796 .
In 1791 , he became Chief Justice of the Maryland General Court , again serving until 1796 .
On January 26 , 1796 , President George Washington appointed Chase as an associate justice of the Supreme Court of the United States .
Chase served on the court until his death on June 19 , 1811 .
IMPEACHMENT Section::::Impeachment .
President Thomas Jefferson , alarmed at the seizure of power by the judiciary through the claim of exclusive judicial review , led his party 's efforts to remove the Federalists from the bench .
His allies in Congress had , shortly after his inauguration , repealed the Judiciary Act of 1801 , abolishing the lower courts created by the legislation and terminating their Federalist judges despite lifetime appointments ; Chase , two years after the repeal in May 1803 , had denounced it in his charge to a Baltimore grand jury , saying that it would " take away all security for property and personal liberty , and our Republican constitution will sink into a mobocracy . "
Earlier in April 1800 , Chase acting as a district judge , had made strong attacks upon Thomas Cooper , who had been indicted under the Alien and Sedition Acts ; Chase had taken the air of a prosecutor rather than a judge .
Also in 1800 , when a grand jury in New Castle , Delaware declined to indict a local printer , Chase refused to discharge them , saying he was aware of one specific printer that he wished them to indict for seditious behavior .
Jefferson saw the attack as indubitable bad behavior and an opportunity to reduce the Federalist influence on the judiciary by impeaching Chase , launching the process from the White House when he wrote to Congressman Joseph Hopper Nicholson of Maryland , asking : " Ought the seditious and official attack [ by Chase ] on the principles of our Constitution . .
.to
go unpunished ? "
Virginia Congressman John Randolph of Roanoke took up the challenge and took charge of the impeachment .
The House of Representatives served Chase with eight articles of impeachment in late 1803 , one of which involved Chase 's handling of the trial of John Fries .
Two more focused on his conduct in the political libel trial of James Callender .
One article covered Chase 's conduct with the New Castle grand jury , charging that he " did descend from the dignity of a judge and stoop to the level of an informer by refusing to discharge the grand jury , although entreated by several of the said jury so to do . "
Three articles focused on procedural errors made during Chase 's adjudication of various matters , and an eighth was directed at his " intemperate and inflammatory … peculiarly indecent and unbecoming … highly unwarrantable
… highly indecent " remarks while " charging " or authorizing a Baltimore grand jury .
On March 12 , 1804 , the House voted 73 to 32 to impeach Chase .
The United States Senate — controlled by the Jeffersonian Democratic - Republicans — began the impeachment trial of Chase on February 9 , 1805 , with Vice President Aaron Burr presiding and Randolph leading the prosecution .
All the counts involved Chase 's work as a trial judge in lower circuit courts .
( In that era , Supreme Court justices had the added duty of serving as individuals on circuit courts , a practice that was ended in the late 19th century . )
The heart of the allegations was that political bias had led Chase to treat defendants and their counsel in a blatantly unfair manner .
Chase 's defense lawyers called the prosecution a political effort by his Republican enemies .
In answer to the articles of impeachment , Chase argued that all of his actions had been motivated by adherence to precedent , judicial duty to restrain advocates from improper statements of law , and considerations of judicial efficiency .
The Senate voted to acquit Chase of all charges on March 1 , 1805 .
There were 34 Senators present ( 25 Republicans and 9 Federalists ) , and 23 votes were needed to reach the required two - thirds majority for conviction / removal from office .
Of the eight votes cast , the closest vote was 18 for conviction / removal from office and 16 for acquittal in regards to the Baltimore grand jury charge .
He is the only U.S. Supreme Court justice to have been impeached .
Judge Alexander Pope Humphrey recorded in the Virginia Law Register an account of the impeachment trial and acquittal of Chase .
The impeachment raised constitutional questions over the nature of the judiciary and was the end of a series of efforts to define the appropriate extent of judicial independence under the Constitution .
It set the limits of the impeachment power , fixed the concept that the judiciary was prohibited from engaging in partisan politics , defined the role of the judge in a criminal jury trial , and clarified judicial independence .
The construction was largely attitudinal , as it modified political norms without codifying new legal doctrines .
The acquittal of Chase — by lopsided margins on several counts — set an unofficial precedent that many historians say helped ensure the independence of the judiciary .
As Chief Justice William Rehnquist noted in his book Grand Inquests , some senators declined to convict Chase despite their partisan hostility to him , apparently because they doubted that the mere quality of his judging was grounds for removal .
All impeachments of federal judges since Chase have been based on allegations of legal or ethical misconduct , not on judicial performance .
For their part , federal judges since that time have generally been much more cautious than Chase in trying to avoid the appearance of political partisanship .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
Samuel Chase died of a heart attack in 1811 .
He was interred in what is now Baltimore 's Old Saint Paul 's Cemetery .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
The Impeachment of Justice Samuel Chase .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* ColonialHall.com : Samuel Chase
* Samuel Chase , Freedom Firebrand – Delmarva Heritage Series * Oyez Project , Supreme Court media , Samuel Chase .
* Samuel Chase , Supreme Court Historical Society .
* Booknotes interview with William Rehnquist on Grand Inquests :
The Historic Impeachments of Justice Samuel Chase and President Andrew Johnson , July 5 , 1992 .