AREOLA
The human areola ( areola mammae , or ) is the pigmented area on the breast around the nipple .
Areola , more generally , is a small circular area on the body with a different histology from the surrounding tissue , or other small circular areas such as an inflamed region of skin .
The mature human female nipple has several small openings arranged radially around the tip of the nipple ( lactiferous ducts ) from which milk is released during lactation .
Other small openings in the areola are sebaceous glands , known as Montgomery 's glands .
COLOR
Section::::Color .
The areolae can range from pink to red to dark brown or nearly black , but generally tend to be paler among people with lighter skin tones and darker among people with darker skin tones .
A reason for the differing color may be to make the nipple area more visible to the infant .
SIZE AND SHAPE Section::::Size and shape .
The size and shape of areolae and nipples are also highly variable , with those of women usually being larger than those of men and prepubescent girls .
Human areolae are mostly circular in shape , but many women and some men have areolae that are noticeably elliptical .
The average diameter of male areolae is around .
Sexually mature women have an average of , but sizes can exceed .
Lactating women , and women with particularly large breasts , may have even larger areolae .
A function of the specialized dermis of the areola is to protect the regular breast skin from wear , cracking , and irritation .
Infants sometimes create trauma to the nipple and areolae by latching - on of the infant .
Another function of an areola is to house slowly - adapting mechanoreceptors that trigger oxytocin excretion during nursing .
The size of the areola implies a need to protect a larger area than the nipple due to many factors which are not fully known .
Rated according to the Tanner scale of physical development , in stage four , the areolae are raised .
In stage five , they are no longer raised .
MECHANORECEPTORS Section::::Mechanoreceptors .
Breastfeeding by the baby innervates slowly adapting and rapidly adapting mechanoreceptors that are densely packed around the areolar region .
DISEASES Section::::Diseases .
Paget 's disease of the breast is a malignant condition that outwardly may have the appearance of eczema , with skin changes involving the areola and nipple .
SEE ALSO
* List of specialized glands within the human integumentary system REFERENCES