NARRATIVE
A narrative or story is a report of connected events , real or imaginary , presented in a sequence of written or spoken words , or still or moving images , or both .
The word derives from the Latin verb narrare , " to tell " , which is derived from the adjective gnarus , " knowing " or " skilled " .
Narrative can be organized in a number of thematic or formal categories : non - fiction ( such as definitively including creative non - fiction , biography , journalism , transcript poetry , and historiography ) ; fictionalization of historical events ( such as anecdote , myth , legend , and historical fiction ) ; and fiction proper ( such as literature in prose and sometimes poetry , such as short stories , novels , and narrative poems and songs , and imaginary narratives as portrayed in other textual forms , games , or live or recorded performances ) .
Narrative is found in all forms of human creativity , art , and entertainment , including speech , literature , theatre , music and song , comics , journalism , film , television and video , video games , radio , gameplay , unstructured recreation , and performance in general , as well as some painting , sculpture , drawing , photography , and other visual arts , as long as a sequence of events is presented .
Several art movements , such as modern art , refuse the narrative in favor of the abstract and conceptual .
Oral storytelling is the earliest method for sharing narratives .
During most people 's childhoods , narratives are used to guide them on proper behavior , cultural history , formation of a communal identity , and values , as especially studied in anthropology today among traditional indigenous peoples .
Narratives may also be nested within other narratives , such as narratives told by an unreliable narrator ( a character ) typically found in noir fiction genre .
An important part of narration is the narrative mode , the set of methods used to communicate the narrative through a process narration ( see also " Narrative Aesthetics " below ) .
Along with exposition , argumentation , and description , narration , broadly defined , is one of four rhetorical modes of discourse .
More narrowly defined , it is the fiction - writing mode in which the narrator communicates directly to the reader .
OVERVIEW
Section::::Overview .
A narrative is a telling of some true or fictitious event or connected sequence of events , recounted by a narrator to a narratee ( although there may be more than one of each ) .
Narratives are to be distinguished from descriptions of qualities , states , or situations , and also from dramatic enactments of events ( although a dramatic work may also include narrative speeches ) .
A narrative consists of a set of events ( the story ) recounted in a process of narration ( or discourse ) , in which the events are selected and arranged in a particular order ( the plot ) .
The category of narratives includes both the shortest accounts of events ( for example , the cat sat on the mat , or a brief news item ) and the longest historical or biographical works , diaries , travelogues , and so forth , as well as novels , ballads , epics , short stories , and other fictional forms .
In the study of fiction , it is usual to divide novels and shorter stories into first - person narratives and third - person narratives .
As an adjective , " narrative " means " characterized by or relating to storytelling " : thus narrative technique is the method of telling stories , and narrative poetry is the class of poems ( including ballads , epics , and verse romances ) that tell stories , as distinct from dramatic and lyric poetry .
Some theorists of narratology have attempted to isolate the quality or set of properties that distinguishes narrative from non - narrative writings : this is called narrativity .
HUMAN NATURE Section::::Human nature .
Owen Flanagan of Duke University , a leading consciousness researcher , writes , " Evidence strongly suggests that humans in all cultures come to cast their own identity in some sort of narrative form .
We are inveterate storytellers .
" Stories are an important aspect of culture .
Many works of art and most works of literature tell stories ; indeed , most of the humanities involve stories .
Stories are of ancient origin , existing in ancient Egyptian , ancient Greek , Chinese and Indian cultures and their myths .
Stories are also a ubiquitous component of human communication , used as parables and examples to illustrate points .
Storytelling was probably one of the earliest forms of entertainment .
As noted by Owen Flanagan , narrative may also refer to psychological processes in self - identity , memory and meaning - making .
Semiotics begins with the individual building blocks of meaning called signs ; and semantics , the way in which signs are combined into codes to transmit messages .
This is part of a general communication system using both verbal and non - verbal elements , and creating a discourse with different modalities and forms .
In On Realism in Art Roman Jakobson argues that literature exists as a separate entity .
He and many other semioticians prefer the view that all texts , whether spoken or written , are the same , except that some authors encode their texts with distinctive literary qualities that distinguish them from other forms of discourse .
Nevertheless , there is a clear trend to address literary narrative forms as separable from other forms .
This is first seen in Russian Formalism through Victor Shklovsky 's analysis of the relationship between composition and style , and in the work of Vladimir Propp , who analysed the plots used in traditional folk - tales and identified 31 distinct functional components .
This trend ( or these trends ) continued in the work of the Prague School and of French scholars such as Claude Lévi - Strauss and Roland Barthes .
It leads to a structural analysis of narrative and an increasingly influential body of modern work that raises important theoretical questions :
* What is text ?
* What is its role ( culture ) ?
* How is it manifested as art , cinema , theater , or literature ?
* Why is narrative divided into different genres , such as poetry , short stories , and novels ?
LITERARY THEORY
Section::::Literary theory .
In literary theoretic approach , narrative is being narrowly defined as fiction - writing mode in which the narrator is communicating directly to the reader .
Until the late 19th century , literary criticism as an academic exercise dealt solely with poetry ( including epic poems like the Iliad and Paradise Lost , and poetic drama like Shakespeare ) .
Most poems did not have a narrator distinct from the author .
But novels , lending a number of voices to several characters in addition to narrator 's , created a possibility of narrator 's views differing significantly from the author 's views .
With the rise of the novel in the 18th century , the concept of the narrator ( as opposed to " author " ) made the question of narrator a prominent one for literary theory .
It has been proposed that perspective and interpretive knowledge are the essential characteristics , while focalization and structure are lateral characteristics of the narrator .
The role of literary theory in narrative has been disputed ; with some interpretations like Todorov 's narrative model that views all narratives in a cyclical manner , and that each narrative is characterized by a three part structure that allows the narrative to progress .
The beginning stage being an establishment of equilibrium -- a state of non conflict , followed by a disruption to this state , caused by an external event , and lastly a restoration or a return to equilibrium -- a conclusion that brings the narrative back to a similar space before the events of the narrative unfolded .
Other critiques of literary theory in narrative challenge the very role of literariness in narrative , as well as the role of narrative in literature .
Meaning , narratives and their associated aesthetics , emotions , and values have the ability to operate without the presence of literature and vice versa .
According to Didier Costa , the structural model used by Todorov and others is unfairly biased towards a Western interpretation of narrative , and that a more comprehensive and transformative model must be created in order to properly analyze narrative discourse in literature .
Framing also plays a pivotal role in narrative structure ; an analysis of the historical and cultural contexts present during the development of a narrative is needed in order to more accurately represent the role of narratology in societies that relied heavily on oral narratives .
TYPES OF NARRATORS AND THEIR MODES Section::::Types of narrators and their modes .
A writer 's choice in the narrator is crucial for the way a work of fiction is perceived by the reader .
There is a distinction between first - person and third - person narrative , which Gérard Genette refers to as intradiegetic and extradiegetic narrative , respectively .
Intradiagetic narrators are of two types : a homodiegetic narrator participates as a character in the story .
Such a narrator can not know more about other characters than what their actions reveal .
A heterodiegetic narrator , in contrast , describes the experiences of the characters that appear in the story in which he or she does not participate .
Most narrators present their story from one of the following perspectives ( called narrative modes ) : first - person , or third - person limited or omniscient .
Generally , a first - person narrator brings greater focus on the feelings , opinions , and perceptions of a particular character in a story , and on how the character views the world and the views of other characters .
If the writer 's intention is to get inside the world of a character , then it is a good choice , although a third - person limited narrator is an alternative that does not require the writer to reveal all that a first - person character would know .
By contrast , a third - person omniscient narrator gives a panoramic view of the world of the story , looking into many characters and into the broader background of a story .
A third - person omniscient narrator can be an animal or an object , or it can be a more abstract instance that does not refer to itself .
For stories in which the context and the views of many characters are important , a third - person narrator is a better choice .
However , a third - person narrator does not need to be an omnipresent guide , but instead may merely be the protagonist referring to himself in the third person ( also known as third person limited narrator ) .
MULTIPLE NARRATORS Section::::Multiple narrators .
A writer may choose to let several narrators tell the story from different points of view .
Then it is up to the reader to decide which narrator seems most reliable for each part of the story .
It may refer to the style of the writer in which he / she expresses the paragraph written .
See for instance the works of Louise Erdrich .
William Faulkner 's As I Lay Dying is a prime example of the use of multiple narrators .
Faulkner employs stream of consciousness to narrate the story from various perspectives .
In Indigenous American communities , narratives and storytelling are often told by a number of elders in the community .
In this way , the stories are never static because they are shaped by the relationship between narrator and audience .
Thus , each individual story may have countless variations .
Narrators often incorporate minor changes in the story in order to tailor the story to different audiences .
The use of multiple narratives in a story is not simply a stylistic choice , but rather an interpretive one that offers insight into the development of a larger social identity and the impact that has on the overarching narrative , as explained by Lee Haring .
Haring analyzes the use of framing in oral narratives , and how the usage of multiple perspectives provides the audience with a greater historical and cultural background of the narrative .
She also argues that narratives ( particularly myths and folktales ) that implement multiple narrators deserves to be categorized as its own narrative genre , rather than simply a narrative device that is used solely to explain phenomena from different points of view .
Haring provides an example from the Arabic folktales of A Thousand and One Nights to illustrate how framing was used to loosely connect each story to the next , where each story was enclosed within the larger narrative .
Additionally , Haring draws comparisons between Thousand and One Nights and the oral storytelling observed in parts of rural Ireland , islands of the Southwest Indian Ocean , and African cultures such as Madagascar .
"I'll
tell you what I 'll do , " said the smith .
" I 'll fix your sword for you tomorrow , if you tell me a story while I 'm doing it . "
The speaker was an Irish storyteller in 1935 , framing one story in another ( O'Sullivan 75 , 264 ) .
The moment recalls the Thousand and One Nights , where the story of " The Envier and the Envied " is enclosed in the larger story told by the Second Kalandar ( Burton 1 : 113 - 39 ) , and many stories are enclosed in others . "
AESTHETICS APPROACH Section::::Aesthetics approach .
Narrative is a highly aesthetic art .
Thoughtfully composed stories have a number of aesthetic elements .
Such elements include the idea of narrative structure , with identifiable beginnings , middles and ends , or exposition - development - climax - denouement , with coherent plot lines ; a strong focus on temporality including retention of the past , attention to present action and protention / future anticipation ; a substantial focus on character and characterization , " arguably the most important single component of the novel " ( David Lodge
The Art of Fiction 67 ) ; different voices interacting , " the sound of the human voice , or many voices , speaking in a variety of accents , rhythms and registers " ( Lodge
The Art of Fiction 97 ; see also the theory of Mikhail Bakhtin for expansion of this idea ) ; a narrator or narrator - like voice , which " addresses " and " interacts with " reading audiences ( see Reader Response theory ) ; communicates with a Wayne Booth - esque rhetorical thrust , a dialectic process of interpretation , which is at times beneath the surface , forming a plotted narrative , and at other times much more visible , " arguing " for and against various positions ; relies substantially on the use of literary tropes ( see Hayden White , Metahistory for expansion of this idea ) ; is often intertextual with other literatures ; and commonly demonstrates an effort toward bildungsroman , a description of identity development with an effort to evince becoming in character and community .
PSYCHOLOGICAL APPROACH Section::::Psychological approach .
Within philosophy of mind , the social sciences and various clinical fields including medicine , narrative can refer to aspects of human psychology .
A personal narrative process is involved in a person 's sense of personal or cultural identity , and in the creation and construction of memories ; it is thought by some to be the fundamental nature of the self .
The breakdown of a coherent or positive narrative has been implicated in the development of psychosis and mental disorder , and its repair said to play an important role in journeys of recovery .
Narrative Therapy is a school of ( family ) psychotherapy .
Illness narratives are a way for a person affected by an illness to make sense of his or her experiences .
They typically follow one of several set patterns : restitution , chaos , or quest narratives .
In the restitution narrative , the person sees the illness as a temporary detour .
The primary goal is to return permanently to normal life and normal health .
These may also be called cure narratives .
In the chaos narrative , the person sees the illness as a permanent state that will inexorably get worse , with no redeeming virtues .
This is typical of diseases like Alzheimer 's disease : the patient gets worse and worse , and there is no hope of returning to normal life .
The third major type , the quest narrative , positions the illness experience as an opportunity to transform oneself into a better person through overcoming adversity and re - learning what is most important in life ; the physical outcome of the illness is less important than the spiritual and psychological transformation .
This is typical of the triumphant view of cancer survivorship in the breast cancer culture .
Personality traits , more specifically the Big Five personality traits , appear to be associated with the type of language or patterns of word use found in an individual 's self - narrative .
In other words , language use in self - narratives accurately reflects human personality .
The linguistic correlates of each Big Five trait are as follows :
* Extraversion - positively correlated with words referring to humans , social processes and family ; * Agreeableness - positively correlated with family , inclusiveness and certainty ; negatively correlated with anger and body ( that is , few negative comments about health / body ) ;
* Conscientiousness - positively correlated with achievement and work ; negatively related to body , death , anger and exclusiveness ; * Neuroticism - positively correlated with sadness , negative emotion , body , anger , home and anxiety ; negatively correlated with work ; * Openness - positively correlated with perceptual processes , hearing and exclusiveness SOCIAL SCIENCES APPROACHES Section::::Social sciences approaches .
Human beings often claim to understand events when they manage to formulate a coherent story or narrative explaining how they believe the event was generated .
Narratives thus lie at foundations of our cognitive procedures and also provide an explanatory framework for the social sciences , particularly when it is difficult to assemble enough cases to permit statistical analysis .
Narrative is often used in case study research in the social sciences .
Here it has been found that the dense , contextual , and interpenetrating nature of social forces uncovered by detailed narratives is often more interesting and useful for both social theory and social policy than other forms of social inquiry .
Sociologists Jaber F. Gubrium and James A. Holstein have contributed to the formation of a constructionist approach to narrative in sociology .
From their book
The Self
We Live By : Narrative Identity in a Postmodern World ( 2000 ) , to more recent texts such as Analyzing Narrative Reality ( 2009)and Varieties of Narrative Analysis ( 2012 ) , they have developed an analytic framework for researching stories and storytelling that is centered on the interplay of institutional discourses ( big stories ) on the one hand , and everyday accounts ( little stories ) on the other .
The goal is the sociological understanding of formal and lived texts of experience , featuring the production , practices , and communication of accounts .
INQUIRY APPROACH Section::::Inquiry approach .
In order to avoid " hardened stories , " or " narratives that become context - free , portable and ready to be used anywhere and anytime for illustrative purposes " and are being used as conceptual metaphors as defined by linguist George Lakoff , an approach called narrative inquiry was proposed , resting on the epistemological assumption that human beings make sense of random or complex multicausal experience by the imposition of story structures .
" Human propensity to simplify data through a predilection for narratives over complex data sets typically leads to narrative fallacy .
It is easier for the human mind to remember and make decisions on the basis of stories with meaning , than to remember strings of data .
This is one reason why narratives are so powerful and why many of the classics in the humanities and social sciences are written in the narrative format .
But humans read meaning into data and compose stories , even where this is unwarranted .
In narrative inquiry , the way to avoid the narrative fallacy is no different from the way to avoid other error in scholarly research , that is , by applying the usual methodical checks for validity and reliability in how data are collected , analyzed , and presented .
Several criteria for assessing the validity of narrative research was proposed , including the objective aspect , the emotional aspect , the social / moral aspect , and the clarity of the story .
MATHEMATICAL SOCIOLOGY APPROACH Section::::Mathematical sociology approach .
In mathematical sociology , the theory of comparative narratives was devised in order to describe and compare the structures ( expressed as " and " in a directed graph where multiple causal links incident into a node are conjoined ) of action - driven sequential events .
Narratives so conceived comprise the following ingredients : * A finite set of state descriptions of the world S , the components of which are weakly ordered in time ; * A finite set of actors / agents ( individual or collective )
, P ; *
A finite set of actions
A ; * A mapping of P onto A ; The structure ( directed graph ) is generated by letting the nodes stand for the states and the directed edges represent how the states are changed by specified actions .
The action skeleton can then be abstracted , comprising a further digraph where the actions are depicted as
nodes and edges take the form " action a co - determined ( in context of other actions ) action b " .
Narratives can be both abstracted and generalised by imposing an algebra upon their structures and thence defining homomorphism between the algebras .
The insertion of action - driven causal links in a narrative can be achieved using the method of Bayesian narratives .
Bayesian narratives Developed by Peter Abell , the theory of Bayesian Narratives conceives a narrative as a directed graph comprising multiple causal links ( social interactions ) of the general form :
" action a causes action b in a specified context " .
In the absence of sufficient comparative cases to enable statistical treatment of the causal links , items of evidence in support and against a particular causal link are assembled and used to compute the Bayesian likelihood ratio of the link .
Subjective causal statements of the form "
I /
she did b because of a " and subjective counterfactuals " if it had not been for a
I /
she would not have done b
" are notable items of evidence .
IN
MUSIC Section::::In music .
Linearity is one of several narrative qualities that can be found in a musical composition .
As noted by American musicologist , Edward Cone , narrative terms are also present in the analytical language about music .
The different components of a fugue — subject , answer , exposition , discussion and summary — can be cited as an example .
However , there are several views on the concept of narrative in music and the role it plays .
One theory is that of Theodore Adorno , who has suggested that " music recites itself , is its own context , narrates without narrative " .
Another , is that of Carolyn Abbate , who has suggested that " certain gestures experienced in music constitute a narrating voice " .
Still others have argued that narrative is a semiotic enterprise that can enrich musical analysis .
The French musicologist Jean - Jacques Nattiez contends that " the narrative , strictly speaking , is not in the music , but in the plot imagined and constructed by the listeners " .
He argues that discussing music in terms of narrativity is simply metaphorical and that the " imagined plot " may be influenced by the work 's title or other programmatic information provided by the composer .
However , Abbate has revealed numerous examples of musical devices that function as narrative voices , by limiting music 's ability to narrate to rare " moments that can be identified by their bizarre and disruptive effect " .
Various theorists share this view of narrative appearing in disruptive rather than normative moments in music .
The final word is yet to be said , regarding narratives in music , as there is still much to be determined .
IN FILM Section::::In film .
Unlike most forms of narratives that are inherently language based ( whether that be narratives presented in literature or orally ) , film narratives face additional challenges in creating a cohesive narrative .
Whereas the general assumption in literary theory is that a narrator must be present in order to develop a narrative , as Schmid proposes ; the act of an author writing his or her words in text is what communicates to the audience ( in this case readers ) the narrative of the text , and the author represents an act of narrative communication between the textual narrator and the narratee .
This is in line with Fludernik 's perspective on what 's called cognitive narratology -- which states that a literary text has the ability to manifest itself into an imagined , representational illusion that the reader will create for themselves , and can vary greatly from reader to reader .
In other words , the scenarios of a literary text ( referring to settings , frames , schemes , etc . ) are going to be represented differently for each individual reader based on a multiplicity of factors , including the reader 's own personal life experiences that allow them to comprehend the literary text in a distinct manner from anyone else .
Film narrative does not have the luxury of having a textual narrator that guides its audience towards a formative narrative ; nor does it have the ability to allow its audience to visually manifest the contents of its narrative in a unique fashion like literature does .
Instead , film narratives utilize visual and auditory devices in substitution for a narrative subject ; these devices include cinematography , editing , sound design ( both diegetic and non - diegetic sound ) , as well as the arrangement and decisions on how and where the subjects are located onscreen -- known as mise - en - scène .
These cinematic devices , among others , contribute to the unique blend of visual and auditory storytelling that culminates to what Jose Landa refers to as a " visual narrative instance " .
And unlike narratives found in other performance arts such as plays and musicals , film narratives are not bound to a specific place and time , and are not limited by scene transitions in plays , which are restricted by set design and allotted time .
IN
MYTHOLOGY Section::::In mythology .
The nature or existence of a formative narrative in many of the world 's myths , , and legends has been a topic of debate for many modern scholars ; but the most common consensus among academics is that throughout most cultures , traditional mythologies and folklore tales are constructed and retold with a specific narrative purpose that serves to offer a society an understandable explanation of natural phenomenon -- oftentimes absent of a verifiable author .
These explanatory tales manifest themselves in various forms and serve different societal functions , including ; life lessons individuals to learn from ( for example , the Ancient Greek tale of Icarus refusing to listen to his elders and flying too close to the sun ) , explain forces of nature or other natural phenomenon ( for example , the flood myth that spans cultures all over the world ) , and lastly to provide an understanding of our own human nature , as exemplified by the myth of Cupid and Psyche .
Considering how mythologies have historically been transmitted and passed down through oral retellings , there is no qualitative or reliable method to precisely trace exactly where and when a tale originated ; and since myths are rooted in a remote past , and are viewed as a factual account of happenings within the culture it originated from , the worldview present in many oral mythologies is from a cosmological perspective -- one that is told from a voice that has no physical embodiment , and is passed down and modified from generation to generation .
This cosmological worldview in myth is what provides all mythological narratives credence , and since they are easily communicated and modified through oral tradition amongst various cultures , they help solidify the cultural identity of a civilization and contribute to the notion of a collective human consciousness that continues to help shape our own understanding of the world .
Myth is often used in an overarching sense to describe a multitude of folklore genres , but there is a significance in distinguishing the various forms of folklore in order to properly determine what narratives constitute as mythological , as esteemed anthropologist Sir James Frazer suggests .
Frazer contends that there are three primary categories of mythology ( now more broadly considered categories of folklore ) : Myths , legends , and folktales , and that by definition , each genre pulls its narrative from a different ontological source , and therefore have different implications within a civilization .
Frazer states : " If these definitions be accepted , we may say that myth has its source in reason , legend in memory , and folk - tale in imagination ; and that the three riper products of the human mind which correspond to these its crude creations are science , history , and romance . "
Janet Bacon expanded upon Frazer 's categorization in her 1921 publication -- The Voyage of The Argonauts .
* Myth --
According to Janet Bacon 's 1921 publication , she states that , " Myth has an explanatory intention .
It explains some natural phenomenon whose causes are not obvious , or some ritual practice whose origin has been forgotten . "
Bacon views myths as narratives that serve a practical societal function of providing a satisfactory explanation for many of humanity 's greatest questions .
Questions that address topics such as astronomical events , historical circumstances , environmental phenomena , and a range of human experiences including love , anger , greed , and isolation .
*
* Legend -- Bacon aptly describes as such , " Legend , on the other hand , is true tradition founded on the fortunes of real people or on adventures at real places .
Agamemnon , Lycurgus , Coriolanus , King Arthur , Saladin , are real people whose fame and the legends which spread it have become world - wide .
" Legends are mythical figures whose accomplishments and accolades live beyond their own mortality and transcend to the realm of myth by way of verbal communication through the ages .
Like myth , they are rooted in the past , but unlike the sacred ephemeral space in which myths occur , legends are often individuals of human flesh that lived here on earth long ago , and are believed as fact .
In American folklore , the tale of Davy Crocket or debatably Paul Bunyan can be considered legends -- as they were real people who lived in our world , but through the years of regional folktales -- have assumed a mythological quality .
* * -- Bacon classifies folktale as such , " Folk - tale , however , calls for no belief , being wholly the product of the imagination .
In far distant ages some inventive story - teller was pleased to pass an idle hour " with stories told of many - a - feat .
" What Bacon 's definition assumes is that folktales do not possess the same underlying factualness that myths and legends tend to have .
Folktales still hold a considerable cultural value , they are simply not regarded as true within a civilization .
Bacon says , like myths , folktales are imagined and created by someone at some point , but differ in that folktales ' primary purpose is to entertain ; and that like legends , folktales may possess some element of truth in their original conception , but lack any form of credibility found in legends .
* STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
In the absence of a known author or original narrator , myth narratives are oftentimes referred to as prose narratives .
Prose narratives tend to be relatively linear regarding the time period they occur in , and are traditionally marked by its natural flow of speech as opposed to the rhythmic structure found in various forms of literature such as poetry and Haikus .
The structure of prose narratives allows it to be easily understood by many -- as the narrative generally starts at the beginning of the story , and ends when the protagonist has resolved the conflict .
These kinds of narratives are generally accepted as true within society , and are told from a place of great reverence and sacredness .
Myths are believed to occur in a remote past -- one that is before the creation or establishment of the civilization they derive from , and are intended to provide an account for things such as our origins , natural phenomenon , as well as our own human nature .
Thematically , myths seek to provide information about ourselves , and many are viewed as among some of the oldest forms of prose narratives , which grants traditional myths their fascinating and life defining characteristics that continue to be communicated today .
Another theory regarding the purpose and function of mythological narratives derives from 20th Century philologist Georges Dumézil and his formative theory of the " trifunctionalism " found in Indo - European mythologies .
It should be noted that Dumèzil refers only to the myths found in Indo - European societies , but the primary assertion made by his theory is that Indo European life was structured around the notion of three distinct and necessary societal functions , and as a result , the various gods and goddesses in Indo European mythology assumed these functions as well .
The three functions were organized by cultural significance -- with the first function being the most grand and sacred .
For Dumèzil , these functions were so vital , they manifested themselves in every aspect of life and were at the center of everyday life .
These " functions " , as Dumèzil puts it , were an array of esoteric knowledge and wisdom that was reflected by the mythology .
The first function being sovereignty -- and was divided into two additional categories : magical and juridicial .
As each function in Dumèzil 's theory corresponded to a designated social class in the human realm ; the first function was the highest , and was reserved for the status of kings and other royalty .
In an interview with Alain Benoist , Dumèzil described magical sovereignty as such,"[Magical Sovereignty ] consists of the mysterious administration , the ' magic ' of the universe , the general ordering of the cosmos .
This is a ' disquieting ' aspect , terrifying from certain perspectives .
The other aspect is more reassuring , more oriented to the human world .
It is the ' juridical ' part of the sovereign function .
"This implies that gods of the first function are responsible for the overall structure and order of the universe , and those gods who possess juridicial sovereignty are more closely connected to the realm of humans and are responsible for the concept of justice and order .
Dumèzil uses the pantheon of Norse gods as examples of these functions in his 1981 essay -- he finds that the Norse gods Odin and Tyr reflect the different brands of sovereignty .
Odin is the author of the cosmos , and possessor of infinite esoteric knowledge -- going so far as to sacrifice his eye for the accumulation of more knowledge .
While Tyr -- seen as the " just god"--is more concerned with upholding justice , as illustrated by the epic myth of Tyr losing his hand in exchange for the monster Fenrir to cease his terrorization of the gods .
What this tells us is that through these myths , concepts of universal wisdom and justice were able to be communicated to the Nordic people in the form of a mythological narrative .
The second function as described by Dumèzil is that of the proverbial hero , or champion .
These myths functioned to convey the themes of heroism , strength , and bravery and were most often represented in both the human world and the mythological world by valiant warriors .
While the gods of the second function were still revered in society , they did not possess the same infinite knowledge found in the first category .
A Norse god that would fall under the second function would be Thor -- god of thunder .
Thor possessed great strength , and was often first into battle , as ordered by his father Odin .
This second function reflects Indo - European cultures ' high regard for the warrior class , and explains the belief in an afterlife that rewards a valiant death on the battlefield ; for the Norse mythology , this is represented by Valhalla .
Lastly , Dumèzil 's third function is composed of gods that reflect the nature and values of the most common people in Indo - European life .
These gods often presided over the realms of healing , prosperity , fertility , wealth , luxury , and youth -- any kind of function that was easily related to by the common peasant farmer in a society .
Just as a farmer would live and sustain themselves off their land , the gods of the third function were responsible for the prosperity of their crops , and were also in charge of other forms of everyday life that would never be observed by the status of kings and warriors , such as mischievousness and promiscuity .
An example found in Norse mythology could be seen through the god Freyr -- a god who was closely connected to acts of debauchery and overindulging .
Dumèzil viewed his theory of trifunctionalism as distinct from other mythological theories because of the way the narratives of Indo - European mythology permeated into every aspect of life within these societies , to the point that the societal view of death shifted away from our primal perception that tells us to fear death , and instead death became seen as the penultimate act of heroism -- by solidifying your position in the hall of the gods when you pass from this realm to the next .
More interestingly , however , Dumèzil proposed that his theory stood at the foundation of the modern understanding of the Christian Trinity , citing that the three key deities of Odin , Thor , and Freyr were often depicted together in a trio -- seen by many as an overarching representation of what would be known today as " divinity " .
IN CULTURAL STORYTELLING Section::::In cultural storytelling .
A narrative can take on the shape of a story , which gives listeners an entertaining and collaborative avenue for acquiring knowledge .
Many cultures use storytelling as a way to record histories , myths , and values .
These stories can be seen as living entities of narrative among cultural communities , as they carry the shared experience and history of the culture within them .
Stories are often used within indigenous cultures in order to share knowledge to the younger generation .
Due to indigenous narratives leaving room for open - ended interpretation , native stories often engage children in the storytelling process so that they can make their own meaning and explanations within the story .
This promotes holistic thinking among native children , which works towards merging an individual and world identity .
Such an identity upholds native epistemology and gives children a sense of belonging as their cultural identity develops through the sharing and passing on of stories .
For example , a number of indigenous stories are used to illustrate a value or lesson .
In the Western Apache tribe , stories can be used to warn of the misfortune that befalls people when they do not follow acceptable behavior .
One story speaks to the offense of a mother 's meddling in her married son 's life .
In the story , the Western Apache tribe is under attack from a neighboring tribe , the Pimas .
The Apache mother hears a scream .
Thinking it is her son 's wife screaming , she tries to intervene by yelling at him .
This alerts the Pima tribe to her location , and she is promptly killed due to intervening in her son 's life .
Indigenous American cultures use storytelling to teach children the values and lessons of life .
Although storytelling provides entertainment , its primary purpose is to educate .
Alaskan Indigenous Natives state that narratives teach children where they fit in , what their society expects of them , how to create a peaceful living environment , and to be responsible , worthy members of their communities .
In the Mexican culture , many adult figures tell their children stories in order to teach children values such as individuality , obedience , honesty , trust , and compassion .
For example , one of the versions of La Llorona is used to teach children to make safe decisions at night and to maintain the morals of the community .
Narratives are considered by the Canadian Métis community , to help children understand that the world around them is interconnected to their lives and communities .
For example , the Métis community share the " Humorous Horse Story " to children , which portrays that horses stumble throughout life just like humans do .
Navajo stories also use dead animals as metaphors by showing that all things have purpose .
Lastly , elders from Alaskan Native communities claim that the use of animals as metaphors allow children to form their own perspectives while at the same time self - reflecting on their own lives .
American Indian elders also state that storytelling invites the listeners , especially children , to draw their own conclusions and perspectives while self - reflecting upon their lives .
Furthermore , they insist that narratives help children grasp and obtain a wide range of perspectives that help them interpret their lives in the context of the story .
American Indian community members emphasize to children that the method of obtaining knowledge can be found in stories passed down through each generation .
Moreover , community members also let the children interpret and build a different perspective of each story .
HISTORIOGRAPHY Section::::Historiography .
In historiography , according to Lawrence Stone , narrative has traditionally been the main rhetorical device used by historians .
In 1979 , at a time when the new Social History was demanding a social - science model of analysis , Stone detected a move back toward the narrative .
Stone defined narrative as organized chronologically ; focused on a single coherent story ; descriptive rather than analytical ; concerned with people not abstract circumstances ; and dealing with the particular and specific rather than the collective and statistical .
He reported that , " More and more of the ' new historians ' are now trying to discover what was going on inside people 's heads in the past , and what it was like to live in the past , questions which inevitably lead back to the use of narrative . "
Some philosophers identify narratives with a type of explanation .
Mark Bevir argues , for example , that narratives explain actions by appealing to the beliefs and desires of actors and by locating webs of beliefs in the context of historical traditions .
Narrative is an alternative form of explanation to that associated with natural science .
Historians committed to a social science approach , however , have criticized the narrowness of narrative and its preference for anecdote over analysis , and clever examples rather than statistical regularities .
STORYTELLING RIGHTS
Section::::Storytelling rights .
Storytelling rights may be broadly defined as the ethics of sharing narratives ( including — but not limited to — firsthand , secondhand and imagined stories ) .
In Storytelling Rights : The uses of oral and written texts by urban adolescents , author Amy Shuman offers the following definition of storytelling rights : " the important and precarious relationship between narrative and event and , specifically , between the participants in an event and the reporters who claim the right to talk about what happened . "
The ethics of retelling other people 's stories may be explored through a number of questions : whose story is being told and how , what is the story 's purpose or aim ,
what does the story promise ( for instance : empathy , redemption , authenticity , clarification)--and at whose benefit ?
Storytelling rights also implicates questions of consent , empathy , and accurate representation .
While storytelling — and retelling — can function as a powerful tool for agency and advocacy , it can also lead to misunderstanding and exploitation .
Storytelling rights is notably important in the genre of personal experience narrative .
Academic disciplines such as performance , folklore , literature , anthropology , Cultural Studies and other social sciences may involve the study of storytelling rights , often hinging on ethics .
OTHER SPECIFIC APPLICATIONS
* Narrative environment is a contested term that has been used for techniques of architectural or exhibition design in which ' stories are told in space ' and also for the virtual environments in which computer games are played and which are invented by the computer game authors .
* Narrative film usually uses images and sounds on film ( or , more recently , on analogue or digital video media ) to convey a story .
Narrative film is usually thought of in terms of fiction but it may also assemble stories from filmed reality , as in some documentary film , but narrative film may also use animation .
* Narrative history is a genre of factual historical writing that uses chronology as its framework ( as opposed to a thematic treatment of a historical subject ) .
* Narrative poetry is poetry that tells a story .
* Metanarrative , sometimes also known as master- or grand narrative , is a higher - level cultural narrative schema which orders and explains knowledge and experience you 've had in life .
* Narrative photography is photography used to tell stories or in conjunction with stories .
SEE ALSO * Monogatari
* Narrative designer * Narrative thread * Narreme as the basic unit of narrative structure
* Organizational storytelling
REFERENCES
SOURCES
* Asimov , Nanette .
" Researchers help U.S. Military track , defuse rumors . "
San Francisco Chronicle .
October 14 , 2011 .
* Hardin , Jayson .
The Rumor Bomb :
Theorizing the convergence of New and Old Trends in Mediated U.S. Politics , Southern Review : Communication , Politics & Culture 39 , no .
I ( 2006 ) :
84–110
* Kelley , Stephanie R , Rumors in Iraq : A Guide to Winning Hearts and Minds .
Storming Media , 2004 .
FURTHER READING
* Abbott , H. Porter ( 2009 )
The Cambridge Introduction to Narrative Second Edition .
Cambridge :
Cambridge University Press .
* Bal , Mieke .
( 1985 ) .
Narratology .
Introduction to the Theory of Narrative .
Toronto :
Toronto University Press .
* Clandinin , D. J. & Connelly , F. M. ( 2000 ) .
Narrative inquiry :
Experience and story in qualitative research .
Jossey - Bass .
* Genette , Gérard .
( 1980 [ 1972 ] ) .
Narrative Discourse .
An Essay in Method .
( Translated by Jane E. Lewin ) .
Oxford : Blackwell .
* Goosseff , Kyrill A. ( 2014 ) .
Only narratives can reflect the experience of objectivity : effective persuasion Journal of Organizational Change Management , Vol .
27
Iss : 5 , pp .
703
– 709 * Gubrium , Jaber F. & James A. Holstein .
( 2009 ) .
Analyzing Narrative Reality .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
* Holstein , James A. & Jaber F. Gubrium .
( 2000 ) .
The Self We Live By : Narrative Identity in a Postmodern World .
New York :
Oxford University Press .
* Holstein , James A. & Jaber F. Gubrium , eds .
( 2012 ) .
Varieties of Narrative Analysis .
Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage .
* Hunter , Kathryn Montgomery ( 1991 ) .
Doctors ' Stories : The Narrative Structure of Medical Knowledge .
Princeton , NJ :
Princeton University Press .
* Jakobson , Roman .
( 1921 ) .
" On Realism in Art " in Readings in Russian Poetics : Formalist and Structuralist .
( Edited by Ladislav Matejka & Krystyna Pomorska ) .
The MIT Press .
* Labov , William .
( 1972 ) .
Chapter 9 :
The Transformation of Experience in Narrative Syntax .
In : " Language in the Inner City . "
Philadelphia , PA : University of Pennsylvania Press .
* Lévi - Strauss , Claude .
( 1958 [ 1963 ] ) .
Anthropologie Structurale / Structural Anthropology .
( Translated by Claire Jacobson & Brooke Grundfest Schoepf ) .
New York : Basic Books .
* Lévi - Strauss , Claude .
( 1962 [ 1966 ] ) .
La Pensée Sauvage/"The Savage Mind ( Nature of Human Society ) .
London : Weidenfeld & Nicolson .
* Lévi - Strauss , Claude .
Mythologiques I - IV
( Translated by John Weightman & Doreen Weightman )
* Linde , Charlotte ( 2001 ) .
Chapter 26 : Narrative in Institutions .
In : Deborah Schiffrin , Deborah Tannen & Heidi E. Hamilton ( ed.s )
" The Handbook of Discourse Analysis .
"
Oxford & Malden , MA :
Blackwell Publishing .
* Norrick , Neal R. ( 2000 ) .
"
Conversational Narrative :
Storytelling in Everyday Talk . "
Amsterdam & Philadelphia : John Benjamins Publishing Company .
* Ranjbar Vahid .
( 2011 )
The Narrator , Iran : Baqney * Polanyi , Livia .
( 1985 ) .
" Telling the American Story : A Structural and Cultural Analysis of Conversational Storytelling . " Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishers Corporation .
* Salmon , Christian .
( 2010 ) .
" Storytelling , bewitching the modern mind . "
London , Verso .
* Shklovsky , Viktor .
( 1925 [ 1990 ] ) .
Theory of Prose .
( Translated by Benjamin Sher ) .
Normal , IL : Dalkey Archive Press .
* Todorov , Tzvetan .
( 1969 ) .
Grammaire du Décameron .
The Hague : Mouton .
* Toolan , Michael ( 2001 ) .
" Narrative : a Critical Linguistic Introduction " * Turner , Mark ( 1996 ) . "
The Literary Mind " * Ranjbar Vahid .
The Narrator , Iran : Baqney 2011 ( summary in english )
* White , Hayden ( 2010 ) .
The Fiction of Narrative : Essays on History , Literature , and Theory , 1957–2007 .
Ed .
Robert Doran .
Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press .
EXTERNAL LINKS * International Society for the Study of Narrative
* Manfred Jahn .
Narratology :
A Guide to the Theory of Narrative
* Interdisciplinary Research Institute * Narrative and Referential Activity * Some Ideas about Narrative – notes on narrative from an academic perspective
* New cinema chair studies " narrative IEDs " SF State News . 09/29/11
* DOC Film Institute