INERT GAS
An inert gas / noble gas is a gas which does not undergo chemical reactions under a set of given conditions .
The noble gases often do not react with many substances , and were historically referred to as the inert gases .
Inert gases are used generally to avoid unwanted chemical reactions degrading a sample .
These undesirable chemical reactions are often oxidation and hydrolysis reactions with the oxygen and moisture in air .
The term inert gas is context - dependent because several of the noble gases can be made to react under certain conditions .
Purified argon and nitrogen gases are most commonly used as inert gases due to their high natural abundance ( 78.2 % N , 1 % Ar in air ) and low relative cost .
Unlike noble gases , an inert gas is not necessarily elemental and is often a compound gas .
Like the noble gases the tendency for non - reactivity is due to the valence , the outermost electron shell , being complete in all the inert gases .
This is a tendency , not a rule , as noble gases and other " inert " gases can react to form compounds .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The inert gases are obtained by fractional distillation of air , with the exception of helium which is separated from a few natural gas sources rich in this element , through cryogenic distillation or membrane separation .
For specialized applications , purified inert gas may be produced by specialized generators on - site .
They are often used aboard chemical tankers and product carriers ( smaller vessels ) .
Benchtop specialized generators are also available for laboratories .
APPLICATIONS Section::::Applications .
Because of the non - reactive properties of inert gases they are often useful to prevent undesirable chemical reactions from taking place .
Food is packed in inert gas to remove oxygen gas .
This prevents bacteria from growing .
It also prevents chemical oxidation by oxygen in normal air .
An example is the rancidification ( caused by oxidation ) of edible oils .
In food packaging , inert gases are used as a passive preservative , in contrast to active preservatives like sodium benzoate ( an antimicrobial ) or BHT ( an antioxidant ) .
Historical documents may also be stored under an inert gas to avoid degradation .
For example , the original documents of the U.S. Constitution is stored under humidified argon .
Helium was previously used , but it was less suitable because it diffuses out of the case more quickly than argon .
Inert gases are often used in the chemical industry .
In a chemical manufacturing plant , reactions can be conducted under inert gas to minimize fire hazards or unwanted reactions .
In such plants and in oil refineries , transfer lines and vessels can be purged with inert gas as a fire and explosion prevention measure .
At the bench scale , chemists perform experiments on air - sensitive compounds using air - free techniques developed to handle them under inert gas .
INERT GAS SYSTEMS ON SHIPS Section::::Inert gas systems on ships .
Inert gas is produced on board crude oil carriers ( above 8,000 tonnes)(from Jan 1 , 2016 ) by using either a flue gas system or by burning kerosene in a dedicated inert gas generator .
The inert gas system is used to prevent the atmosphere in cargo tanks or bunkers from coming into the explosive range .
IG keeps the oxygen content of the tank atmosphere below 5 % ( on crude carriers , less for product carriers and gas tankers ) , thus making any air / hydrocarbon gas mixture in the tank too rich ( too high a fuel to oxygen ratio ) to ignite .
IG is most important during discharging and during the ballast voyage when more hydrocarbon vapour is likely to be present in the tank atmosphere .
Inert gas can also be used to purge the tank of the volatile atmosphere in preparation for gas freeing - replacing the atmosphere with breathable air - or vice versa .
The flue gas system uses the boiler exhaust as its source , so it is important that the fuel / air ratio in the boiler burners is properly regulated to ensure that high quality inert gases is produced .
Too much air would result in an oxygen content exceeding 5 % , too much fuel oil would result in carryover of dangerous hydrocarbon gas .
The flue gas is cleaned and cooled by the scrubber tower .
Various safety devices prevent overpressure , return of hydrocarbon gas to the engine room , or supply of IG with too high oxygen content .
Gas tankers and product carriers can not rely on flue gas systems ( because they require IG with O content of 1 % or less ) and so use inert gas generators instead .
The inert gas generator consists of a combustion chamber and scrubber unit supplied by fans and a refrigeration unit which cools the gas .
A drier in series with the system removes moisture from the gas before it is supplied to the deck .
Cargo tanks on gas carriers are not inerted , but the hold space around them is .
This arrangement allows the tanks to be kept cool using a small heel of cargo while the vessel is in ballast while retaining the explosion protection provided by the inert gas .
WELDING
Section::::Welding .
In gas tungsten arc welding ( GTAW ) , inert gases are used to shield the tungsten from contamination .
It also shields the fluid metal ( created from the arc ) from the reactive gases in air which can cause porosity in the solidified weld puddle .
Inert gases are also used in gas metal arc welding ( GMAW ) for welding non - ferrous metals .
Some gases which are not usually considered inert but which behave like inert gases in all the circumstances likely to be encountered in some use can often be used as a substitute for an inert gas .
This is useful when an appropriate pseudo - inert gas can be found which is inexpensive and common .
For example , carbon dioxide is sometimes used in gas mixtures for GMAW because it is not reactive to the weld pool created by arc welding .
But it is reactive to the arc .
The more carbon dioxide that is added to the inert gas , such as argon , will increase your penetration .
The amount of carbon dioxide is often determined by what kind of transfer you will be using in GMAW .
The most common is spray arc transfer , and the most commonly used gas mixture for spray arc transfer is 90 % argon and 10 % carbon dioxide .
( Listed as many different names depending on the gas supplier ) .
DIVING Section::::Diving .
In underwater diving an inert gas is a component of the breathing mixture which is not metabolically active , and serves to dilute the gas mixture .
The inert gas may have effects on the diver , but these are thought to be mostly physical effects , such as tissue damage caused by bubbles in decompression sickness .
The most common inert gas used in breathing gas for commercial diving is helium .
SEE ALSO
* Breathing gases * Industrial gas * Inerting system for aircraft
* Tank blanketing
* Purging ( gas ) , a fire and explosion prevention procedure to avoid the formation of an ignitable atmosphere , accomplished by flushing a closed system with an inert gas
*
Inerting ( gas ) , a fire and explosion prevention procedure to make an ignitable atmosphere safe , accomplished by injecting an inert gas REFERENCES