SEARS Sears , Roebuck and Company , colloquially known as Sears , is an American chain of department stores founded by Richard Warren Sears and Alvah Curtis Roebuck in 1893 , reincorporated ( a formality for a history - making consumer sector initial public offering ) by Richard Sears and new partner Julius Rosenwald in 1906 .
Formerly based at the Sears Tower in Chicago and currently headquartered in Hoffman Estates , Illinois , the operation began as a mail ordering catalog company and began opening retail locations in 1925 .
The first location was in Evansville , Indiana .
In 2005 , the company was bought by the management of the American big box chain Kmart , which formed Sears Holdings upon completion of the merger .
Sears had the largest domestic revenue of any retailer in the United States until October 1989 , when Walmart surpassed it .
In 2018 , Sears was the 31st - largest retailer in the United States .
After several years of declining sales , its parent company filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy on October 15 , 2018 .
HISTORY MAIL ORDER
CATALOG Section::::History .
Section::::Mail order catalog .
In 1863 , Richard Warren Sears was born in Stewartville , Minnesota to a wealthy family , which moved to nearby Spring Valley .
In 1879 , Sears ' father died shortly after losing the family fortune in a speculative stock deal .
Sears moved across the state to work as a railroad station agent in North Redwood , as well as in Minneapolis .
While in North Redwood , a jeweler received an impressive shipment of watches which were unwanted .
Sears purchased them , then sold them at a low price to the station agents and made a considerable profit .
He started a mail order watch business in Minneapolis in 1886 , calling it " R.W. Sears Watch Company .
" Within the first year he met Alvah C. Roebuck , a watch repairman .
The next year Sears and Roebuck relocated the business to Chicago .
In 1887 , R.W. Sears Watch Company published Richard Sears ' first mail - order catalog , offering watches , diamonds , and jewelry .
In 1889 Sears sold his business for US$ 100,000 ( $ million today ) and relocated to Iowa , intending to be a rural banker .
Sears returned to Chicago in 1892 and established a new mail - order firm , again selling watches and jewelry , with Roebuck as his partner , operating as the A. C. Roebuck watch company .
In 1893 , they renamed the company to Sears , Roebuck & Company and began to diversify the product lines offered in their catalogs .
Before the Sears catalog , farmers near small rural towns usually purchased supplies – often at high prices and on credit – from local general stores with narrow selections of goods .
Prices were negotiated , and relied on the storekeeper 's estimate of a customer 's creditworthiness .
Sears took advantage of this by publishing catalogs offering customers a wider selection of products at clearly stated prices .
By 1894 , the Sears catalog had grown to 322 pages , including many new items such as sewing machines , bicycles , sporting goods , automobiles ( later produced , from 1905 to 1915 , by Lincoln Motor Car Works of Chicago , no relation to the current Ford line ) .
By 1895 , the company was producing a 532-page catalog .
Sales were greater than $ 400,000 ( $ million today ) in 1893 and more than $ 750,000 ( $ million today ) two years later .
By 1896 , dolls , stoves and groceries had been added to the catalog .
Despite the strong and growing sales , the national Panic of 1893 led to a full scale recession , causing a cash squeeze and large quantities of unsold merchandise by 1895 .
Roebuck decided to quit , returning later in a publicity role .
Sears offered Roebuck 's half of the company to Chicago businessman Aaron Nusbaum , who in turn brought in his brother - in - law Julius Rosenwald , to whom Sears owed money .
In August 1895 , they bought Roebuck 's half of the company for $ 75,000 ( $ million today ) .
The company was reincorporated in Illinois with a capital stock of $ 150,000 ( $ million today ) in August 1895 .
The 1895 transaction was handled by Albert Henry Loeb of Chicago law firm Loeb & Adler ( now Arnstein & Lehr , LLP ) .
Copies of the transaction documents are now displayed on the walls of the law firm .
Sears and Rosenwald got along well with each other , but not with Nusbaum ; they bought him out for $ 1.3 million in 1903 ( $ million today ) .
Rosenwald brought to the mail order firm a rational management philosophy and diversified product lines : dry goods , consumer durables , drugs , hardware , furniture , and nearly anything else a farm household could desire .
Sales continued to grow rapidly , and the prosperity of the company and their vision for greater expansion led Sears and Rosenwald to take the company public in 1906 , with a stock placement of $ 40 million ( $ billion today ) .
They had to incorporate a new company in order to bring the operation public ; Sears and Rosenwald established Sears , Roebuck and Company with the legal name Sears , Roebuck and Co. , in the state of New York , which effectively replaced the original company .
The current company inherits the history of the old company , celebrating the original 1892 incorporation , rather than the 1906 revision , as the start of the company .
Sears ' successful 1906 initial public offering ( IPO ) marks the first major retail IPO in American financial history and represented a coming of age , financially , of the consumer sector .
The company traded under the ticker symbol S , and was a component of the Dow Jones Industrial Average from 1924 to 1999 .
In 1906 , Sears opened its catalog plant and the Sears Merchandise Building Tower in Chicago 's West Side .
The building was the anchor of what would become the massive Sears , Roebuck and Company Complex of offices , laboratories and mail - order operations at Homan Avenue and Arthington Street .
The complex served as corporate headquarters until 1973 , when the Sears Tower was completed , and served as the base of the mail order catalog business until 1993 .
By 1907 , under Rosenwald 's leadership as Vice President and Treasurer , annual sales of the company climbed to roughly $ 50 million ( $ billion today ) .
Sears resigned the presidency in 1908 due to declining health , with Rosenwald named president and chairman of the board and taking on full control .
The company was badly hurt during 1919–21 as a severe depression hit the nation 's farms after farmers had overexpanded their holdings .
To bail out the company , Rosenwald pledged $ 21 million ( $ billion today ) of his personal wealth in 1921 .
By 1922 , Sears had regained financial stability .
Rosenwald oversaw the design and construction of the firm 's first department store , built on land within the Sears , Roebuck and Company Complex .
The store opened in 1925 .
In 1924 , Rosenwald resigned the presidency , but remained as chairman until his death in 1932 ; his goal was to devote more time to philanthropy .
In 1933 Sears issued the first of its Christmas catalogs known as the " Sears Wishbook " , a catalog featuring toys and gifts , separate from the annual Christmas Catalog .
From 1908 to 1940 , the catalog even included ready - to - assemble kit houses .
The Sears catalog became known in the industry as " the Consumers ' Bible " .
Novelists and story writers often portrayed the importance of the catalog in the emotional lives of rural folk .
The catalog also entered the language , particularly of rural dwellers , as a euphemism for toilet paper , as its pages could be torn out and used as such .
In addition , for many rural African - Americans , especially in areas dominated by Jim Crow racial segregation , the Sears Catalogue was a vital retail alternative to local white - population - dominated stores , bypassing the stores ' frequent intention to deny them fair access to their merchandise .
RETAIL STORES AND DIVERSIFICATION Section::::Retail stores and diversification .
The mail order market was based on rural America , with a slow - growing population and far less spending power than urban America .
Rosenwald decided to shift emphasis to urban America , and brought in Robert E. Wood to take charge .
The first Sears retail stores were opened in conjunction with the company 's mail order offices , typically in working - class neighborhoods far from the main shopping center .
Sears was a pioneer in creating department stores that catered to men as well as women , especially with lines of hardware and building materials .
It de - emphasized the latest fashions in favor of practicality and durability , and allowed customers to select goods without the aid of a clerk .
Its stores were oriented to motorists — set apart from existing business districts amid residential areas occupied by their target audience ; had ample , free , off - street parking ; and communicated a clear corporate identity .
In the 1930s , the company designed fully air - conditioned , " windowless " stores whose layout was driven wholly by merchandising concerns .
From the 1920s to the 1950s , Sears built many urban department stores in the US , Canada and Mexico ( apart from , but not far from , existing central business districts ) , and they overshadowed the mail - order business .
Starting in the 1950s , the company expanded into suburban markets , and malls in the 1960s and 1970s .
In 1959 , it had formed the Homart Development Company for developing malls .
Many of the company 's stores have undergone major renovations or replacement since the 1980s .
Sears began to diversify in the 1930s , creating Allstate Insurance Company in 1931 and placing Allstate representatives in its stores in 1934 .
Over the decades it established major national brands , such as Kenmore , Craftsman , DieHard , Silvertone , Supertone , and Toughskins .
The company became a conglomerate during the mid-20th century , adding Dean Witter and Coldwell Banker real estate in 1981 , starting Prodigy as a joint venture with IBM in 1984 , and introducing the Discover credit card in 1985 .
In 1974 , Sears completed the 110-story Sears Tower in Chicago , which became the world 's tallest building , a title it took from the former World Trade Center towers in New York .
Sears moved to the new Prairie Stone Business Park in Hoffman Estates , Illinois , between 1993 and 1995 .
The Sears Centre is a 10,001-seat multi - purpose arena located in Hoffman Estates adjacent to the Prairie Stone campus .
Even though its naming rights to the building expired in 2003 it remained the Sears Tower until early 2009 .
In March 2009 London - based insurer Willis Group Holdings , Ltd. , was given the building 's naming rights to encourage them to occupy the building .
The official renaming as the Willis Tower took place on Thursday , July 16 , 2009 , during a public ceremony hosted by Willis Group Holdings .
In the 1990s , the company began divesting itself of many non - retail entities , which were detrimental to the company 's bottom line .
Sears spun off its financial services arm which included brokerage business Dean Witter Reynolds and Discover Card .
It sold its mall building subsidiary Homart to General Growth Properties in 1995 .
Sears later acquired hardware chain Orchard Supply Hardware in 1996 and started home improvement store The Great Indoors in 1997 .
DECLINE AND KMART MERGER Section::::Decline and Kmart merger .
In 1993 , Sears terminated its general merchandise catalog because of sinking sales and profits , and in 1997 sold 85 % of its Mexico affiliate to Grupo Carso .
Sears Holdings continues to produce specialty catalogs and reintroduced a smaller version of the Holiday Wish Book in 2007 .
In 2003 , Sears sold its retail credit card operation to Citibank .
The remaining card operations were sold to JPMorgan Chase in August 2005 .
In 2003 , Sears opened a new concept store called Sears Grand .
Sears Grand stores carry everything that a regular Sears carries , and more .
Sears Grand stores are about .
On November 17 , 2004 , Kmart Holdings Corporation announced it was going to acquire Sears Roebuck & Co. for $ 11 billion after Kmart completed its bankruptcy ( USA Today Nov. 17 , 2004 ) .
As a part of the acquisition , Kmart Holding Corporation along with Sears Roebuck & Co. was transformed into the new Sears Holdings Corporation .
The new company started trading on the NASDAQ stock exchange as SHLD , Sears sold its single letter ticker symbol 'S ' in the New York Stock Exchange it had held since 1910 to Sprint Corporation .
The new corporation announced that it would continue to operate stores under both the Sears and Kmart brands .
In 2005 , the company began renovating some Kmart stores and converting them to the Sears Essentials format , only to change them later to Sears Grands .
The combined company 's profits peaked at $ 1.5 billion in 2006 .
By 2010 the company was no longer profitable ; from 2011 to 2016 the company lost $ 10.4 billion .
In 2014 its total debt ( $ 4.2 billion at the end of January 2017 ) exceeded its market capitalisation ( $ 974.1 million as of March 21 ) .
Sears spent much of 2014 and 2015 selling off portions of its balance sheet ; namely Lands ' End and its stake in Sears Canada , one of the biggest e - commerce players in Canada , with C$ 505 million in sales in 2015—more than Walmart and others who had begun pushing aggressively into online sales , such as Canadian Tire .
Sears stated that the company was looking to focus on becoming a more tech - driven retailer .
Sears ' CEO and top shareholder said the sell - off of key assets in the last year had given the retailer the money it needs to speed up its transformation .
Sears Holdings had lost a total of US$ 7 billion in the four years to 2015 .
In part , the retailer was trying to curb losses by using a loyalty program called Shop Your Way .
Sears believed the membership scheme would enhance repeat business and customer loyalty in the long term .
Seritage Growth Properties is the REIT spinoff of some of the holding company 's Sears and Kmart stores .
The REIT announced in October 2016 that it was terminating 17 store leases .
All of the locations are associated with Kmart locations .
Also in October 2016 , Moody 's Investor Services downgraded Sears to speculative grade liquidity rating , meaning that Sears was expected to have to rely on external financing and monetization of its alternative assets , according to Moody 's VP Christina Boni .
In late 2016 and early 2017 , some significant steps were taken by Edward Lampert , president , chief executive officer and top shareholder of Sears Holding Corp. Lampert , with personal assets estimated at US$ 2 billion , is also the founder and manager of
the hedge fund ESL Investments Inc. He provided an additional loan of US$ 500 million to the company and said he would provide letters of credit to Sears for additional amounts , reportedly totaling US$ 200 million and possibly increasing to a half billion dollars in the future .
Lampert also concluded an arrangement that sold the Craftsman brand to Stanley Black & Decker Inc. for approximately US$ 900 million .
During this period , the company also announced that it would close 150 stores ( 109 Kmart and 41 Sears outlets ) , in an attempt to cut its losses after a decline in sales of 12 to 13 percent during the holiday shopping season and the largest quarterly loss since 2013 .
Matt McGinley , an analyst at Evercore ISI , stated , " In the long run , the cash is n't likely to change the company 's course . ...
I do n't think there is any viable path to any sort of profitability . "
In February 2017 , Sears announced a restructuring plan that it hoped would cut costs by US$ 1 billion , via selling more stores , cutting jobs and selling brands .
During the second quarter of 2017 , 42 Sears stores in 40 states closed .
Sears later announced that it closed an additional 12 stores .
In May 2017 , Sears announced it would close 20 stores , including the last Sears store in Rhode Island , at Rhode Island Mall in Warwick .
In July 2017 , Sears announced it would close another 43 stores ( 8 Sears and 35 Kmart stores ) .
FURTHER DECLINE AND BANKRUPTCY Section::::Further decline and bankruptcy .
Sears declined from more than 3,500 physical stores to 695 US stores from 2010 to 2017 .
Sales at Sears stores dropped 10.3 percent in the final quarter of 2016 when compared to the same period in 2015 .
In October 2017 , Sears and appliance manufacturer Whirlpool Corporation ended their 101-year old association whereby Whirlpool appliances were sold at Sears , and later Kmart , stores .
The companies reportedly were unable to come to an agreement on pricing issues .
Whirlpool would continue supplying the Kenmore branded appliances they make for Sears .
Another wave of 63 store closures , including 18 Sears , was announced in November 2017 .
The retailer declined to run television advertisements for the 2017 holiday season , citing a desire to focus on online advertising .
The retailer announced several waves of store closures throughout 2018 : * 103 stores , including 39 Sears , in January .
* 63 stores , including 48 Sears , in May , incliding the last Sears store in Montana , in Billings , the last Sears store in North Dakota , in Grand Forks , and the last Sears store in South Dakota , in Sioux Falls .
* 15 stores , including 6 Sears , in July .
* 46 stores , including 33 Sears , in August .
* 142 stores , including 79 Sears in October , with the last Wyoming store , in Casper , Wyoming .
* 40 stores , including 29 Sears in November , with the last Idaho store , in Idaho Falls , and the last Mississippi stores , in Mediran and Tupelo .
The company also auctioned some real estate , including the buildings of several operating stores , online .
In May 2018 Sears announced it had formed a " special committee " to explore the sale of Kenmore .
In August 2018 , Lampert 's ESL Investments Inc submitted a bid of US$ 400 million for the brand .
As of October 14 , 2018 , with Sears filing for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection , leaving the future of both the Kenmore and DieHard brands undecided , it has been rumored online and elsewhere that Whirlpool Corporation could emerge as a possible top potential buyer for the Kenmore brand since they were the top major manufacturer of Kenmore appliances for well over a century .
On September 24 , 2018 , the retailer 's CEO warned that the company was " running out of time " to salvage its business .
Sears Holdings filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy on October 15 , 2018 , ahead of a $ 134 million debt payment due that day .
Liquidation sales at 142 stores , including 79 Sears locations , including the last Sears store in Wyoming , at Eastridge Mall in Casper , would begin later in the month , with 46 stores to be closed by November .
On November 8 , 2018 , Sears Holdings announced it would close an additional 40 stores , including 29 Sears stores , including the last Sears store in Idaho , at Grand Teton Mall in Idaho Falls , and the last two Sears stores in Mississippi , at Bonita Lakes Mall in Meridian , and at the Mall at Barnes Crossing in Tupelo .
On November 23 , 2018 , Sears Holdings released a list of 505 stores , including 266 Sears stores , that are for sale in the bankruptcy process while all others are currently holding liquidation sales .
SUBSIDIARIES CURRENT
* Sears ( Full - Line ) is a chain of department stores that are usually located in shopping malls , however , some freestanding stores exist ; they carry clothing , accessories , jewelry , home appliances , household hardware , lawn and garden supplies , lawn mowers , paint , sporting goods , automobile repair , and electronics , as well as a portrait studio ( in some locations ) , optical center , and dental center .
Sears stores are usually multi - level , averaging .
As of August 13 , 2018 , there were 482 full - size Sears stores in the United States .
There are also 94 in Mexico .
* Sears Grand stores are typically located away from shopping malls ( with the exception of Gurnee Mills , Gurnee , Illinois , which closed in September 2018 , and formerly Pittsburgh Mills , Tarentum , Pennsylvania , which closed in January 2015 ) .
Many Sears Grand locations are retrofit remodels of existing Kmart supercenter stores .
They carry everything a Sears department store carries , plus health and beauty products , a pharmacy ( in former Kmart locations ) , toys , baby care , cleaning supplies , home décor , pet food , cards and party supplies , books , magazines , music , Little Caesars Pizza Station ( in former Kmart locations ) , movies , and a selection of groceries which is limited mostly to dry goods .
Sears Grand stores range from .
The first Sears Grand opened at Jordan Landing in West Jordan , Utah in 2003 .
At , the Jordan Landing store was the largest in the chain until it was remodeled , downsized , and converted to a regular Sears in 2017 .
Some other Sears Grands have downsized and converted to regular Sears locations .
* Sears PartsDirect is a chain of lawn & garden equipment and appliance parts stores .
Some locations , branded as Sears Parts and Repair Centers , feature a carry - in point for customers to bring - in merchandise which needs to be repaired , either in or out of warranty .
* Sears Travel is a licensed business partner of Sears Holdings , founded in February 2012 in conjunction with International Cruise & Excursions ,
Inc. Sears Vacations functions as an online travel agency that provides online and telephone - based booking services for Sears customers through the SearsVacations.com website .
Sears Vacations offers cruises , resorts , hotels , tours , guided vacations , car rental , airline tickets , shore excursions , vacation rentals , and travel insurance .
FORMER
* Sears Optical is a chain of off - mall optical shops which carries all the same products and services as the optical center at regular Sears stores .
* Sears Outlet is an outlet version of Sears department stores located in various retail locations across the United States .
The stores carry new , one - of - a - kind , out of carton , discontinued , used , scratched and dented merchandise at 20–60 % off regular retail price .
While a wide variety of products are available , appliances make up a large majority of available merchandise .
Sears Outlet stores were once known as Sears Surplus .
Many former Kmarts have been converted to serve as Sears Outlets , though these often take up less than half the floorspace .
Each store , on average , is larger than 18,000 square feet in size .
Sears Outlet was part of a spin - off with Sears Hometown Stores and Sears Appliance and Hardware Stores to become Sears Hometown and Outlet Stores in September 2012 .
* Sears Portrait Studio was a full service portrait studio with locations in Sears stores and formerly standalone locations as well .
It was run by CPI Corporation until all Sears Portrait Studios ceased operations on April 6 , 2013 .
CPI Corporation , in a statement on its website , said it closed all of its U.S. studios " after many years of providing family portrait photography .
" The St. Louis - based company did n't explain the hasty closure , and calls to CPI went unanswered .
However , the company has struggled financially , hurt by the rise of digital photography .
Sears Portrait Studio was later revived in August 2016 in a few in - store locations through an affiliation with Picture People ; those locations would permanently close in early 2018 .
* Sears Appliance Outlet is an appliance - only version of Sears Outlet .
One exists at Arizona Mills in Tempe , Arizona ; a second Sears Appliance Outlet at Great Mall of the Bay Area in Milpitas , California is now a regular Sears Outlet .
* Sears Fashion Outlet was a fashion - only version of Sears Outlet .
One existed at Sugarloaf Mills in Lawrenceville , Georgia , that is now a regular Sears Outlet .
* Sears Appliance & Hardware is a chain of hardware stores that carry the whole line of Sears hardware and are usually free - standing .
At one point , there were more than 110 Sears Appliance & Hardware stores averaging serving customers nationwide ; there are now 19 of them .
Stores were expanded to include Sears ' full line of appliances in 2005 .
Sears Hometown and Outlet Stores took on Sears Appliance & Hardware in a Spin - off from Sears Holdings in 2012 .
* Sears Home Improvement Products ( SHIP ) was a division of Sears that specializes in home improvement solutions .
Sold to service.com in 2018 .
* Sears Hometown Stores ( formerly known as Sears Authorized Dealer Stores ) was formerly part of the retail operation of Sears Holdings and is a small - store ( averaging 8,500 square feet ) version of Sears full - line department stores .
Sears Hometown Stores , established in 1993 , is a franchise formula .
The stores are usually located away from shopping malls and serve local communities across the United States and Puerto Rico .
Sears Hometown Stores was part of a spin - off with Sears Outlet and Sears Appliance and Hardware in September 2012 .
* Sears Home Appliance Showrooms is a store that offers home appliances and related services in - store .
The stores have an internet kiosk where customers are able to view similar products , price match , and order products not available in the store .
primarily located in strip malls and centers of metropolitan areas .
Averaging 5,000 square feet with a primarily appliance showroom design .
These stores carry Kenmore and other national brands of home appliances .
* Lands ' End , Sears officially spun off Lands ' End in April 2014 amid Sears Holdings continuing financial distress , including a US$ 1.4 billion loss in 2013 .
Many Sears domestic full - line locations also include a Lands ' End " store within a store " inside .
Sears Holdings prior to the spin off , also operated Lands ' End stores that exclusively carry Lands ' End clothing and various fashion accessories , footwear and home goods .
These stores which average 9,300 square feet are located separate from Sears department stores , usually in outlet malls and regular malls .
Lands ' End continues to sell various types of clothing for men , women and children as well as various fashion accessories , footwear and home goods both through its web site and an increasing number of stand alone stores .
* Sears Essentials was a chain of discount stores that were common retrofit remodels of existing Kmart stores .
Their product lines were similar to that of Sears Grand stores .
In 2006 , Sears dropped the brand as it tried to turn Kmart stores into free standing Sears stores .
Most of 50 buildings bearing its name were turned into Sears Grand Stores or reverted to Kmarts .
* National Tire and Battery ( NTB ) & National Tire Warehouse ( NTW ) is an American brand of auto service centers .
It was formerly owned by Sears until it was spun off in 2003 .
Sears created the brand in 1997 by consolidating the Tire America ( TA ) and National Tire Warehouse ( NTW ) brands , adding the " B " to include its DieHard brand of batteries .
Sears sold the brand , which consisted mostly of stores set apart from its name brand stores , in 2003 to TBC Corporation .
A Sears spokesman said " Because of the separate branding and the lack of proximity to our retail operations , we were n't able to drive growth like a TBC could " .
The chain of 226 stores was reported to have brought in $ 425 million in revenue and $ 60 million in profit in 2002 .
* Sears Brand Central was an electronics store .
The appliances departments in Sears are now known and referred to internally as Brand Central , although they are not marketed to consumers as such , except for a few locations in Puerto Rico .
* Sears Catalog Sales Stores were located in small towns .
These stores were very small , even smaller than Sears ' current Hometown Dealer stores .
At catalog stores , some items could be ordered from the floor , such as appliances ; other items could be ordered from catalogs at the store .
These stores were often placed in rural markets which were far from full - line Sears stores , allowing for customers to purchase Sears products more easily .
These stores were closed in 1993 when Sears closed its catalog business .
* Sears Authorized Catalog Sales Merchant was an independent business person who provided many of the same services as the Sears Catalog Sales Store .
Similar operations were also found in Canada with Sears Canada as Sears Pickup Location or Sears Catalogue Sales Merchant .
* Sears Appliance Stores were small stores usually between 7,000 and 10,000 square feet .
Sears Appliance Stores displayed and sold ( at Retail Store prices ) appliances , carpeting , etc .
and , in addition , provided a catalog sales department through which catalog items could be ordered .
Sears Holdings has opened a Sears Appliances store in Colorado in 2016 with plans to add more throughout the country .
* Sears Rent - a - Car was a car and truck rental chain formed in a mid-1970s joint venture with Budget .
It was sold to Avis in 2002 .
* Sears HomeLife was a chain of furniture stores owned by Sears .
The concept was introduced at a mall in Fresno , California in 1989 , followed by a stand - alone store in Madison , Wisconsin .
Sears HomeLife averaged 20,000 to 40,000 square feet , featured dark ceilings , theatrical lighting and an expanded array of furniture and accessories .
These stores are designed to be much larger than the typical in - store Sears furniture department , which averages around 7,800 square feet .
Sears opened Homelife stores as stores - in - a - store to replace the existing furniture departments of their full - line Sears stores .
Other Sears HomeLife stores were opened as free - standing locations .
Sears sold the stores to Citicorp Venture in 1999 , which changed the chain 's name to " HomeLife " .
More locations opened , some inside large Sears stores or near the store depending on space available .
HomeLife closed its last stores in 2001 .
In Puerto Rico , a few HomeLife locations are still operating .
* A&E Factory Service ( Sears Home Services ) was the newest name for Sears ' longstanding on - site repair service , servicing larger items such as home appliances , electronics , and garden equipment .
The A&E brand name was purchased from Montgomery Ward , which used it for their home service unit , and is a joint venture held by Whirlpool and Sears Holdings .
A&E Factory Service is a network of mobile service vans with a long history of performing appliance repairs .
Sold to service.com in 2018 .
* Sears Neighborhood was a chain similar to Sears Hometown stores , except that Neighborhood stores were located in urban markets .
These stores were also independently owned and operated .
The concept was introduced in Atlanta in 1998 , and another similar store was located in Cincinnati .
The Neighborhood stores closed in the early 2000s .
*
The Great Indoors was a chain of free - standing home decor stores that carry high - end home appliances , bedding , and kitchen and bath fixtures .
The Great Indoors also offered custom kitchen and bathroom design services .
Stores were approximately 140,000 square feet each .
Nearly 300 employees were hired for each store .
While it was a success originally , it succumbed to the housing crash .
Sears Holdings announced the closing of all remaining stores in 2012 .
* Orchard Supply Hardware was a chain of free - standing hardware stores , spun off by Sears in 2012 .
The retailer declared bankruptcy was sold to competitor Lowe 's Home Improvement in June 2013 , less than two years after it separated from Sears .
On August 22 , 2018 , Lowe 's announced it would cease operations of all Orchard Supply Hardware stores in early 2019 .
* Sears World Trade ,
Inc. ( Arms and Military Equipment ) was Sears 's troubled import - export unit that catered to the international arms trade chaired by Dep .
Sec .
of Defense , Frank Carlucci .
It operated from 1982 to 1986 .
Sears admitted to the effort in December 1986 , initially stating they " only gave advice in the defense contracting area .
" When the operation ended , the 300-strong worker division folded back into the merchandise procurement division .
EXCLUSIVE BRANDS ( CURRENT ) * Canyon River Blues –
Men 's and women 's clothing .
A children 's sub - brand called CRB Kids also exists .
* Colormate – Bedding and bath accessories
* Covington – Men 's and women 's dresswear .
* Easy Living –
Painting equipment * Laura Scott – Women 's clothing
* Metaphor – Women 's clothing * Northwest Territory –
Men 's and women 's clothing and outerwear * Outdoor Life – More rugged men 's and women 's clothing .
* R1893 – Women 's clothing , primarily jeans * Roebuck & Co. –
Men 's , women 's , and children 's clothing and shoes * Roebucks – Formerly clothing , now used for men 's work shoes * Simply Emma – Women 's clothing and jewelry *
Simply Styled – Men 's , women 's , and children 's clothing and shoes .
* Structure – Men 's clothing and shoes .
Originally owned by Express , Inc. before Sears bought it in 2003 .
* Weatherbeater –
Painting equipment Section::::Subsidiaries .
Section::::Exclusive brands ( current ) .
Since the merger of Sears & Kmart in 2005 , many brands are now shared by both stores .
These include : * Adam Levine Collection – Men 's and women 's clothing * Athletech – Athletic clothing and shoes * Basic Editions –
Men 's , women 's and children 's clothing
* DieHard – Batteries , clothing , and work shoes *
Essential Home – Bed , bath , and kitchen supplies
* Everlast – Through a license deal .
Men 's , women 's , and children 's athletic apparel and footwear .
* Joe Boxer – Men 's and women 's underwear and sleepwear * Thom McAn –
Shoes
* Toughskins – Children 's clothing EXCLUSIVE BRANDS ( FORMER )
SPONSORSHIPS Section::::Sponsorships .
The company sponsors , through the Sears Auto Centers , the Formula Drift Darren McNamara Sears / Falken Saturn Sky drift car .
It sponsored the NASCAR Truck Series , using the Craftsman brand as the title sponsor , from the series ' inception in the 1995 NASCAR SuperTruck Series presented by Craftsman to the 2008 season , when the agreement ended .
Craftsman tools remain the official tools of NASCAR .
The company sponsored the television series .
It sponsors and currently has naming rights to the Sears Centre , an 11,000-seat multi - purpose family entertainment , cultural and sports center , constructed in 2006 in Hoffman Estates .
The company also underwrote the PBS television series Mister Rogers ' Neighborhood , under the name
The Sears - Roebuck Foundation from the show 's premiere in 1968 until 1992 .
It sponsored the # 10 Gillett Evernham Motorsports car of Scott Riggs for the September 2 , 2007 , running of the Sharp AQUOS 500 at California Speedway through its Sears Auto Center branch .
However , Riggs failed to qualify for the event .
In 2016 , Craftsman became the title sponsor of the World Racing Group , World of Outlaws Sprint car racing series .
EMPLOYEE RELATIONS Section::::Employee relations .
Sears has struggled with employee relations .
One notable example was the shift in 1992 from an hourly wage based on longevity to a base wage ( usually between US$ 3.50 and US$ 6 per hour ) and commissions ranging from 0.5 % to 11 % .
Sears claimed the new base wage , often constituting a substantial ( up to 40 % ) cut in pay , was done " to be successful in this highly competitive environment " .
In early October 2007 , Sears cut commission rates for employees in select departments to anywhere from 0.5 % to 4 % but equalized the base wage across all Home Improvement and Electronics departments .
In 2011 , commission rates on non - base items were cut by 2 % in the electronics department .
In late 2009 , the commission on sales of " base items " from the electronic department was cut to 1 % .
As of 2017 , appliances is the only remaining department where compensation is based entirely on commission .
Other departments give a base pay plus commission .
In many stores , jewelry department associates receive a low base salary with 1 % commission on their sales .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * Sears Canada – defunct Canadian unit
* Sears ( Mexico ) – Mexican unit held by Grupo Carso * Sears plc – former UK company unrelated to U.S. retailer REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Chang , Myong - Hun , and
Joseph E. Harrington Jr. " Organizational structure and firm innovation in a retail chain . "
Computational & Mathematical Organization Theory 3.4 ( 1998 ) : 267 - 288 . compares Sears ' Robert E. Wood with Montgomery Ward 's Sewell Avery online
* Emmet , Boris , and John E Jeuck .
Catalogs and Counters : A History of Sears , Roebuck and Company ( 1950 ) , the standard scholarly history
* Israel , Fred L. 1897 Sears , Roebuck and Co Catalogue 100th Anniversary Edition , Philadelphia :
Chelsea House Publishers , 1968 .
* Katz , Donald R.
The Big Store : Inside the Crisis & Revolution at Sears ( 1987 ) *
Worthy , James C. Shaping An American Institution : Robert E. Wood and Sears , Roebuck ( 1986 ) EXTERNAL LINKS