WEST EDMONTON MALL West Edmonton Mall ( WEM ) , located in Edmonton , Alberta , Canada , is the largest shopping mall in North America , followed by King of Prussia Mall , and the 23rd largest in the world ( along with The Dubai Mall ) by gross leasable area .
It was the world 's largest mall until 2004 .
The mall was founded by the Ghermezian brothers , who emigrated from Iran in 1959 .
Its anchors are Hudson 's Bay , London Drugs , La Maison Simons , The Brick , and Winners / HomeSense .
West Edmonton Mall covers a gross area of about .
There are over 800 stores and services including nine attractions , two hotels and over 100 dining venues in the complex , and parking for more than 20,000 vehicles .
More than 24,000 people are employed at the property .
The mall receives about 32 million visitors per year ; it attracts between 90,000 and 200,000 shoppers daily , depending on the day and season .
The mall was valued at $ 926 million ( CAD ) in January 2007 , and in 2016 , for tax purposes , it was valued at $ 1.3034 billion ( CAD ) , making it the most valuable property in Edmonton .
HISTORY Section::::History .
West Edmonton Mall first opened its doors to the public on 15 September 1981 .
The mall was developed in four phases , completed in 1981 , 1983 , 1985 and 1999 .
It was the largest indoor shopping centre in the world until 2004 , and was named such in the Guinness Book of Records .
The four phases of construction are used in a colour - coded system as a guideline for finding stores and attractions .
The Mindbender indoor roller coaster had a fatal accident on 14 June 1986 when one of the rear cars derailed from the track and slammed into a nearby concrete pillar .
Three people died and one was injured in the accident .
Former tenants
* Sears Canada ( closed January 8 , 2018 , now West 49 outlet on the Main level and Stitches Factory Outlet on the Upper level )
* Target Canada ( closed 2015 , now Winners / Homesense on the 1st floor and International Clothiers & buybuy Baby on the 2nd floor )
* Zellers ( closed 2012 , replaced with Target Canada in 2013 which closed in 2015 . )
* Red 's ( closed June 2006 , now Ed 's Bowling )
* Woodward 's ( closed 1993 , Now Hudson 's Bay )
* 1st Bay Store ( closed 1998 , now Multi Movie Screen and Sunrise Records )
* HMV ( Closed 2017 , now Sunrise Records ) * Eatons ( Closed 1999 , replaced with Zellers in 2000 )
On 11 July 2004 , the mall suffered millions of dollars in damage when a severe storm of hail and rain caused roofs to fail and drains to overflow .
The Ice Palace and surrounding sections were the most damaged , and the World Waterpark had a sewage overflow .
The damage was promptly repaired .
WORLD RECORDS Section::::World records .
Past and current West Edmonton Mall world records include ; * World 's largest mall ( 1985 - 2004 ) -
West Edmonton Mall itself
* World 's largest indoor amusement park - Galaxyland
* World 's largest indoor roller coaster - the Mindbender * World 's largest indoor lake - Deep Sea Adventure Lake
* Largest indoor waterpark in the Americas - World Waterpark
* World 's largest parking lot with 20,000 + spaces , and over 10,000 overflow spaces .
- WEM 's parking lot OTHER RECORDS * Most bungee jumps in 24 hours record while indoors was set by Peter Charney , on 6–7 November 2007 at the World Waterpark , completing 225 jumps .
MAJOR ATTRACTIONS GALAXYLAND Section::::Major attractions .
Section::::Galaxyland .
Galaxyland was originally known as " Fantasyland ; " however , during a court battle with the Walt Disney Company , West Edmonton Mall changed the park 's name to Galaxyland in July 1995 after completing some minor renovations .
It is an indoor amusement park located on the north side of the mall .
It is the second - largest indoor amusement park in the world , behind Ferrari World , and features 24 rides and attractions .
There are 8 beginner rides , 9 intermediate rides , 7 thrill rides , the triple loop Mindbender roller coaster , ( which derailed in 1986 causing 3 deaths ) .The
Mindbender is the world 's largest indoor triple loop roller coaster .
The latest attraction in Galaxyland , which opened in 2018 , named HAVOC .
The Drop of Doom was shut down in the early 2000s .
The tower area was replaced shortly after by a more modern launch ride , the Space Shot , a S&S Double Shot Tower Ride .
WORLD WATERPARK Section::::World Waterpark .
The World Waterpark is the world 's second largest indoor waterpark , built in 1985 , with a size of .
The park has the world 's largest indoor wave pool .
The highest slides in the park are the Twister and Cyclone , which are each high .
The wavepool has six wave bays , each with two panels with a total of generating waves up to two metres high .
MAYFIELD TOYOTA ICE PALACE Section::::Mayfield Toyota Ice Palace .
Ice Palace is a scaled down version of a National Hockey League ( NHL ) regulation - sized ice rink located in the centre of the mall .
The Edmonton Oilers occasionally practised at the Ice Palace during the 1980s .
The Oilers ' contract for using the rink has since expired .
The rink is used for various hockey and other sporting tournaments .
In 2015 , the Ice Palace was renamed Mayfield Toyota Ice Palace after the mall sold the naming rights to a local auto dealership .
During special events , such as Remembrance Day , the ice rink is covered with fabric for a ceremony to be held on it .
In 2017 , West Edmonton Mall announced that the Mayfield Toyota Ice Palace will get a $ 3 million renovation .
Due to this , it was closed for the summer and reopened in December 2017 .
PROFESSOR WEM 'S ADVENTURE GOLF
Section::::Professor WEM 's Adventure Golf .
Professor WEM 's Adventure Golf is an 18-hole miniature golf course .
The miniature golf course was originally known as Pebble Beach Mini Golf , and was designed to be a mini golf version of Pebble Beach Golf Links .
The course was refurbished and given the Professor WEM theme in the mid-1990s .
OTHER ATTRACTIONS
* Fantasyland Hotel , located within the mall ; WEM is also affiliated with a second hotel , the West Edmonton Mall Inn , located across the street from the shopping centre on 90th Avenue .
* An indoor shooting range ( named " Wild West Shooting Centre " )
* Large - scale replica of the Santa María , one of the ships sailed by Christopher Columbus in 1492 to San Salvador Island .
The deck can be booked for private functions .
* 24-hour Gym , Crunch Fitness
* Dinner Theatre :
Jubilations Dinner Theatre offers original Canadian three - act musical comedies along with a four - course dinner .
Full bar service is available and the theatre 's productions run Wednesday to Sunday .
This space was formerly a Famous Players theatre .
*
Previously , the mall has had a history of nightclubs and recreation spaces including the Empire Ballroom , Edmonton Events Centre ( now demolished ) , Ed 's Rec Room , The Joint and Ka'os Nightclub .
The former Edmonton Events Centre space has been purchased by Gateway Casinos & Entertainment for their expansion of the Palace Casino , which will be renamed to Starlight Casino .
* Envy Nightclub ( formerly SET Nightclub ) , a dance club featuring top 40 and electro music .
The space was formerly Whisky Jack 's , a country - themed nightclub .
*
West 49 skate shop , built in the 1st floor of the former Sears temporaily .
Stitches Factory Outlet takes the 2nd floor .
( Phase I )
* An Internet café
* West Edmonton Christian Assembly ( WECA ) , an inter - denominational chapel
* Three radio stations : 97.3 K - Rock ( classic rock ) , 790 CFCW ( classic country and news / sports programming ) , 96.3 Capital FM , are owned by Newcap Radio .
The Newcap - owned area features studios , offices , and a small free museum .
Newcap is located in the space formerly occupied by Playdium , with the broadcast studios visible from the mall ( illuminated " on air
" signs indicate when broadcasts are under way from those studios ) .
* Dragon 's Tale Black - lit Mini Golf is located nearby Galaxyland , along with the Crystal Labyrinth Mirror Maze .
* A bronze whale sculpture is located outside the former Sears entrance ( Phase I ) .
* A brass man sculpture is located in the Phase
I food court
* A statue of three oil workers is located outside of the Phase
I food court
THEMED STREETS
Section::::Other attractions .
Section::::Themed streets .
The mall also includes several " theme areas " including : * Bourbon Street ( BRBN st . ) :
Features clubs and restaurants in a New Orleans - influenced setting .
Several restaurants and clubs are located here including 1ST RND , Boston Pizza , Earl 's , Hudson 's Canadian Tap House , Jungle Jim 's Eatery , Marble Slab Creamery , Moxie 's Classic Grill , MR MIKES Steakhouse & Bar , Rick Bronson 's The Comic Strip , Sherlock Holmes Pub , Aussie Rules , Cajun Bistro and Dueling Piano Bar , and Tony Roma 's .
The lighting in this area is left intentionally dim to simulate a nighttime atmosphere .
The area is situated in such a way that it can be closed off from the rest of the mall , allowing for hosting of special events , and for its establishments to stay open past the closing time of the rest of the mall .
In the mid-2010s , this area was renovated and Bourbon Street was renamed
BRBN St. * Europa Boulevard :
Eclectic shops in an area designed to look like a European streetscape .
It is home to Europa Watch & Jewelry , Fleurs Flowers , Opulence , G - Star Raw , Plush Skateboard Shop , Dr. Martens , B3 , Cafe Levi , FYidoctors , Frank & Oak , Yasmin , Stitch It and several rentable conference rooms that look down on the Boulevard .
Also , Europa Boulevard is home to the first La Maison Simons to open outside Quebec .
* " Chinatown " : Asian - themed area anchored by a T & T Supermarket ( in the former Canadian Tire location ) .
It is located directly above Bourbon Street .
The " Chinatown " signage was removed in May 2012 and the section , though still maintaining an Asian decor , is no longer exclusive to such businesses .
* Video game console demos are located in random places around the mall .
Nintendo is located near Phase 4 and RAAS , PlayStation is located in the center court , and Xbox is in the Microsoft Store .
Besides video games there is also VR demos and a Lamborghini in the center court .
* RAAS : An area where small Edmonton businesses are located .
" RAAS " stands for " Retail As A Service " .
UPGRADES Section::::Upgrades .
Construction on a total retrofit of the mall shopping areas through all the phases began in spring 2011 with the " face lift " completed in 2014 .
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Future developments .
In 2002 , the City of Edmonton approved plans for the mall to expand with an additional of retail space , a facility for sports , trade shows and conventions , a 12-story office building , and a 600-unit apartment building , along with more parking .
However , none of these projects has begun construction except for the completed parking lot expansion located by the Rec Room .
A number of large shopping malls , all larger than the West Edmonton Mall , are under construction in China , and the retail centre in Beijing has already displaced the West Edmonton Mall as the world 's largest .
The SM Mall of Asia , located in Pasay City , Metro Manila , Philippines , has also surpassed the mall 's gross floor size by . , however , the mall remains the largest in North America .
CONTROVERSIES
Section::::Controversies .
West Edmonton Mall was the object of a controversy in 2011 when , after arresting a woman for trespassing , their security staff were caught on video allegedly assaulting her .
A judge had agreed to release the video after the charges against the woman were dismissed .
In February 2015 , the jihadist terrorist group al - Shabaab released a propaganda video calling for attacks on the West Edmonton Mall and other Western shopping centres .
Although the group had hitherto never launched attacks in North America , security at the mall was tightened in response .
The Royal Canadian Mounted Police also indicated that there was no evidence of any imminent threat .
A few mock / drill lockdowns occurred after the threat .
WEST EDMONTON
MALL TRANSIT
CENTRE Section::::West Edmonton Mall Transit Centre .
The West Edmonton Mall Transit Centre is a major transit centre on the south side of West Edmonton Mall , outside mall entrance 48 .
Buses using the transit centre enter and exit from 87 Avenue .
The large shelter building at the transit centre is accessible and equipped with power doors .
This transit centre has vending machines and a pay phone but no park & ride , public washrooms , or drop off area .
The transit centre is served by Edmonton Transit System ( ETS ) and St. Albert Transit ( StAT ) .
$ 3 million in upgrades to the transit centre were completed in June 2017 and included a new heated indoor shelter ( double the size of the previous shelter ) , new sidewalks , new lighting , and a new public art installation , among other changes .
SEE ALSO
* List of shopping malls in Canada
* List of largest enclosed shopping malls in Canada
* List of largest shopping malls in the world REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS