HALO :
COMBAT EVOLVED
Halo :
Combat Evolved is a 2001 military science fiction first - person shooter video game developed by Bungie and published by Microsoft Game Studios .
The first game of the Halo franchise , it was released as a launch title for the Xbox gaming system on November 15 , 2001 .
More than five million copies were sold worldwide by November 2005 .
Microsoft released versions of the game for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X in 2003 , and the surrounding storyline was adapted and elaborated into a series of novels , comic books , and live - action web series .
The game was later released as a downloadable Xbox Original for the Xbox 360 .
A high - definition remake , , was released for Xbox 360 on the 10th anniversary of the original game 's launch , and was rereleased as part of on November 11 , 2014 , for the Xbox One .
Halo is set in the twenty - sixth century , with the player assuming the role of the Master Chief , a cybernetically enhanced supersoldier .
The player is accompanied by Cortana , an artificial intelligence who occupies the Master Chief 's neural interface .
Players battle various aliens as they attempt to uncover the secrets of the eponymous Halo , a ring - shaped artificial world .
The game has been commended for elements such as its story , the variety of strategies players can employ , and its multiplayer mode ; however , the repetitive nature of its level design was criticized by some reviewers .
Halo has been praised as one of the greatest video games of all time , and was ranked by IGN as the fourth - best first - person shooter made .
The game 's popularity has led to labels such as " Halo clone " and " Halo killer " , applied respectively to games either similar to or anticipated to be better than it .
In addition , the game inspired and was used in the fan - created Red vs. Blue video series , which is credited as the " first big success " of machinima ( the technique of using real - time 3D engines , often from video games , to create animated films ) .
GAMEPLAY Section::::Gameplay .
As a first - person shooter ( FPS ) , the gameplay of Halo : Combat Evolved is similar to other games in the genre , focusing on combat in a 3D environment that is viewed almost entirely from a first - person view .
The player can move around and look up , down , left , or right .
The game features vehicles , ranging from armored jeeps and tanks to alien hovercraft and aircraft , many of which can be controlled by the player .
The game switches to a third - person perspective during vehicle use for pilots and mounted gun operators ; passengers maintain a first - person view .
The game 's heads - up display includes a " motion tracker " that registers moving allies , moving or firing enemies , and vehicles , in a certain radius of the player .
The player character is equipped with an energy shield which nullifies damage from weapons fire and forceful impacts .
The shield 's charge appears as a blue bar in the corner of the game 's heads - up display , and it automatically recharges if no damage is sustained for a brief period .
When the shield is fully depleted , the player becomes highly vulnerable , and further damage reduces the hit points of a secondary health meter .
When this health meter reaches zero , the character dies and the game reloads from a saved checkpoint .
Health can be replenished through the collection of health packs scattered around the game 's levels .
Halo 's arsenal consists of weapons from science fiction .
The game has been praised for giving each weapon a unique purpose , thus making each useful in different scenarios .
For example , plasma weapons need time to cool if fired too rapidly , but can not be reloaded and must be discarded upon depletion of their batteries , whereas conventional firearms can not overheat , but require reloading and ammunition .
In contrast to the large weapon inventories of contemporary FPS games , Halo players may carry only two weapons at once , calling for strategy when managing firearms .
Halo departs from traditional FPS conventions by not forcing the player character to holster its firearm before deploying grenades or melee - range blunt instruments
; instead , both attacks can be utilized while a gun is still equipped , supplanting or supplementing small - arms fire .
Like the game 's other weapons , the two types of grenades differ ; the fragmentation grenade bounces and detonates quickly , whereas the plasma grenade adheres to targets before exploding .
COMBATANTS Section::::Combatants .
The game 's main enemy force is the Covenant , a group of alien species allied by belief in a common religion .
Their forces include Elites , fierce warriors protected by recharging energy shields similar to the player 's own ; Grunts , which are short , cowardly creatures who are usually led by Elites in battle , and often flee in terror instead of fighting in the absence of a leading Elite ; Jackals , originally space pirates , who wear a highly durable energy shield on one arm and a form of handgun on the other ; and Hunters , large , powerful creatures composed of small worm - like colonies with thick armor plates that cover the majority of their bodies and a large assault cannon that fires explosive rounds of green plasma .
A secondary enemy is the Flood , a parasitic alien life form that appears in three main variants .
Spores , the true form of the Flood , are fragile beings and do little damage individually , but often travel in swarms of several dozen in order to infect their prey .
Flood warriors result from humans and Covenant Elites who have been infected by the spores , and have deformed bodies as a result .
Carriers serve as walking incubators for spores ; when wounded or near a potential victim , they explode to damage other nearby life - forms and to release their spores .
Another group of enemies are the Sentinels : robotic drones designed by an extinct race called the Forerunners to protect their structures and prevent Flood outbreaks .
Sentinels are able to hover around in enclosed spaces and produce an energy shield when under attack .
They lack durability , but use powerful laser beam weapons and are immune to infection by the Flood .
The artificial intelligence in Halo has been favorably received .
The player is often aided by United Nations Space Command ( UNSC ) Marines , who offer ground support , such as manning gun turrets or riding shotgun while the player is driving a vehicle .
MULTIPLAYER Section::::Multiplayer .
A split screen mode allows two players to cooperatively play through Halos campaign .
The game also includes five competitive multiplayer modes , which all can be customized , for between two and 16 players ; up to four players may play split - screen on one Xbox , and further players can join using a " System Link " feature that allows up to four Xbox consoles to be connected together into a local area network .
Halo lacks artificially intelligent game bots , and was released before the launch of the Xbox Live online multiplayer service ; therefore LAN parties are needed to reach the game 's 16-player limit , a setup that was a first for a console game , but was often deemed impractical by critics .
Aside from this limitation , Halo 's multiplayer components were generally well received by critics , and it is widely considered one of the best multiplayer games of all time .
Although the Xbox version of Halo lacks official support for online multiplayer play , third - party packet tunneling software provide unofficial ways around this limitation .
The Windows and Macintosh ports of Halo support online matches involving up to 16 players and include multiplayer maps not in the original Xbox release .
However , co - operative play was removed from the ports because it would have required large amounts of recoding to implement .
In April 2014 , it was announced that GameSpy 's servers and matchmaking , on which Halo PC relied , would be shut down by May 31 of the same year .
A team of fans and Bungie employees announced they would produce a patch for the game to keep its multiplayer servers online .
The patch was released on May 16 , 2014 .
HALO :
CUSTOM EDITION Section::::Halo : Custom Edition .
On March 15 , 2004 , Gearbox Software released Halo : Custom Edition for Windows , which enabled players to use custom - made maps and game modifications via the Halo Editing Kit developed by Bungie .
Halo : Custom Edition is multiplayer - only , and requires an original copy of Halo for PC to install .
SYNOPSIS SETTING
Section::::Synopsis . Section::::Setting .
Halo :
Combat Evolved takes place in a 26th century science fiction setting .
According to the backstory , faster - than - light travel called slipspace allowed the human race to colonize planets other than Earth .
A keystone of these efforts is the planet Reach , an interstellar naval yard and a hub of scientific and military activity .
A secret military endeavor , dubbed the SPARTAN Project , is established on Reach to create an army of biologically engineered , cyborg " supersoldiers . "
Twenty - seven years before the beginning of the game , a technologically advanced collective of alien races called the Covenant attack and destroy human worlds , declaring humanity an affront to their gods .
Humanity 's military experiences a series of crushing defeats ; although the supersoldiers of the SPARTAN - II Project are effective against the Covenant , they are too few in numbers to turn the tide of the war .
Two days before a mission to discover the location of the Covenant 's homeworld , Covenant forces attack Reach and destroy the colony .
The starship Pillar of Autumn escapes the planet with the SPARTAN - II Master Chief Petty Officer John-117 on board .
The ship initiates a jump to slipspace ( similar to hyperspace ) , hoping to lead the enemy away from Earth .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The game opens as the Pillar of Autumn exits slipspace , finding a large alien ringworld of unknown origin .
A Covenant fleet attacks and heavily damages the Pillar of Autumn .
Following protocol , Autumns captain Jacob Keyes entrusts the ship 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) Cortana to Master Chief to prevent the Covenant from discovering the location of Earth .
Cortana and the ship 's crew escape the Autumn via escape pods to the ringworld 's surface while Keyes attempts to land the ship on the ring .
On the ground , Master Chief and Cortana rescue other survivors .
Learning Keyes has been captured by the Covenant , Master Chief and a group of Marines infiltrate the Covenant cruiser Truth and Reconciliation to rescue him .
Keyes reveals the ringworld is called " Halo " by the Covenant , and that they believe it is a kind of weapon .
Intent on stopping the Covenant from using Halo , Master Chief and Cortana fight their way to the control room , where Cortana enters Halo 's computer systems .
She urgently sends Master Chief to find and stop Keyes , who was looking for a weapons cache elsewhere on the ring .
Reaching the captain 's location , Master Chief finds signs of a battle and encounters a new enemy — a parasite known as the Flood .
The release of the Flood prompts Halo 's caretaker , the AI 343 Guilty Spark , to contact Master Chief and enlist his help in accessing the ring 's Activation Index in order to activate the ring 's defenses .
After Master Chief retrieves the Index and prepares to use it , Cortana re - appears and warns him against the activation .
She has discovered that Halo does not kill the Flood , but their food — activating the ring would wipe the galaxy of the sentient life the Flood infests .
Defying 343 Guilty Spark , who sends his robotic Sentinels to stop them , Master Chief and Cortana decide to destroy Halo to prevent its activation .
Cortana decides the best way to destroy the ring is causing Pillar of Autumns fusion reactor to go critical , but she requires the command codes of Captain Keyes .
Master Chief returns to Truth and Reconciliation , fighting through Covenant and Flood , but discovers Captain Keyes has been assimilated by the Flood .
Retrieving the implants , Master Chief returns to Autumn , but his attempts to activate the destruct sequence is stopped by 343 Guilty Spark .
Instead , Master Chief manually destabilizes the ship 's reactors , before narrowly escaping the blast using a fighter , apparently the only survivors .
In a brief post - credits scene , 343 Guilty Spark is seen having survived Halo 's destruction .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
In 1997 , Bungie was a game development team of roughly 15 people working out of offices in south Chicago , Illinois .
While the studio worked on , a small group began work on a side project , originally envisioned as a science - fiction based real - time strategy game with a strong focus on realistic physics simulations and three - dimensional terrain .
The project was first called Monkey Nuts , then renamed Blam !
when project lead Jason Jones could not bring himself to tell his mother the original name .
On July 21 , 1999 , during the Macworld Conference & Expo , Steve Jobs announced that Halo would be released for classic Mac OS and Windows simultaneously .
Before this public announcement , game industry journalists under a non - disclosure agreement had previewed the game in a private showing during E3 1999 , and were reportedly amazed .
Bungie later stated an even earlier development build of the game centered on real - time strategy and was " basically Myth in a sci - fi universe . "
At E3 2000 , the first trailer of Halo was well received .
The version shown there differed greatly from the one exhibited previously , marking the first major overhaul in the game 's development .
At this point , Halo was a third - person action game , in which a transport starship crashlands on a mysterious ring world that orbits a star .
Early versions of Covenant aliens appear in great numbers and loot what they can , and war erupts between them and the humans .
Unable to match the technologically advanced alien race , the humans on the ring world resort to guerrilla warfare .
This version of the game featured Halo - specific fauna , which were later dropped because of design difficulties and the creatures ' " detract[ion ] from the surprise , drama and impact of the Flood . "
As rumors had predicted , Microsoft announced on June 19 , 2000 , that it had acquired Bungie .
Originally a key element , the game 's online multiplayer component was dropped because Xbox Live would be unfinished at the time of Halos release .
While a playable demonstration of the game at Gamestock 2001 was well - received , critics had mixed reactions to its exhibition at E3 2001 .
The game was released in North America simultaneously with the Xbox , on November 15 , 2001 ; the " Combat Evolved " subtitle was an addition by marketers at Microsoft , who felt that Halo alone was not a descriptive enough title to compete with other military - themed games .
On July 12 , 2002 , a Halo port for Windows was announced to be under development by Gearbox Software .
Its showing at E3 2003 was positively received by some critics , with skepticism by others .
It was released on September 30 , 2003 , and included support for online multiplayer play and featured sharper graphics , but had compatibility issues that caused poor performance .
Halo was later released for Mac OS X on December 11 , 2003 .
On December 4 , 2007 , the game became available for the Xbox 360 via download from the Xbox Live Marketplace .
AUDIO Section::::Audio .
Halo 's soundtrack was created by Bungie 's audio director , Martin O'Donnell , and received enthusiastic praise from many critics .
Bungie 's Director of cinematics , Joseph Staten , told O'Donnell that " the music should give a feeling of importance , weight , and sense of the ' ancient ' to the visuals of Halo " .
He designed the music so that it " could be dissembled and remixed in such a way that would give [ him ] multiple , interchangeable loops that could be randomly recombined in order to keep the piece interesting as well as a variable length . "
Development involved the creation of " alternative middle sections that could be transitioned to if the game called for such a change ( i.e. less or more intense ) . "
O'Donnell has remarked that he " sat with the level designers and ' spotted ' the level as though it was a movie , with the knowledge that the music would have to be malleable rather than static ...
[ T]he level designer would tell me what he hoped a player would feel at certain points or after accomplishing certain tasks . "
Based on this information , O'Donnell would " go back and develop appropriate music cues , then have the designer script the cues into the level , and then we 'd play through it to see if it worked as desired . "
He explained that the use of music in Halo is sparse because he believes that " [ music ] is best used in a game to quicken the emotional state of the player and it works best when used least , " and that " [ if ] music is constantly playing it tends to become sonic wallpaper and loses its impact when it is needed to truly enhance some dramatic component of game play . " RECEPTION CRITICAL RECEPTION Section::::Reception . Section::::Critical reception .
Halo received " Universal Acclaim " , according to video game aggregator Metacritc , based on reviews from 68 professional critics .
Ste Curran 's review for Edge praised the game as " the most important launch game for any console , ever " and commented , " GoldenEye was the standard for multiplayer console combat .
It has been surpassed .
" GameSpot claimed that " Halo 's single - player game is worth picking up an Xbox for alone , " concluding , " Not only is this easily the best of the Xbox launch games , but it 's easily one of the best shooters ever , on any platform . " IGN remarked similarly , calling Halo a " ca n't miss , no - brainer , sure thing , five star , triple A game . " AllGame editor Jonathan Licata praised Bungie for doing " a remarkable job with Halo , taking many successful elements from previous standouts in the genre to make one very playable game " .
Among the specific aspects that reviewers praised were the balance of weapons , the role of drivable vehicles , and the artificial intelligence of enemies .
The game received numerous Game of the Year awards , including those of the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences , Electronic Gaming Monthly , Edge , and IGN .
The British Academy of Film and Television Arts awarded Halo " Best Console Game , " and Rolling Stone presented it with their " Best Original Soundtrack " award .
According to Xbox.com , the game received a total of 48 awards .
Although Halos overall reception was largely positive , the game received criticism for its level design .
GameSpy commented , " you 'll trudge through countless hallways and control rooms that all look exactly the same , fighting identical - looking groups of enemies over and over and over ...
it is simply frustrating to see a game with such groundbreaking sequences too often degenerate [ into ] this kind of mindless , repetitive action . "
Similarly , an article on Game Studies.org remarked , " In the latter part of the game , the scenarios rely on repetition and quantity rather than innovativeness and quality . "
Eurogamer concluded , " Halo is very much a game of two halves .
The first half is fast , exciting , beautifully designed and constantly full of surprises .
The second half is festooned with gobsmacking plot twists and great cinematics but let down by repetitive paint by numbers level design .
" Halo was released prior to the launch of Xbox Live , and the lack of both online multiplayer and bots to simulate human players was criticised by GameSpy ; in 2003 GameSpy included Halo in a list of " Top 25 Most Overrated Games of All Time . "
Halo 's PC port garnered mixed reactions and received a score of 83 % on Metacritic .
GameSpot stated that it was " still an incredible action game ...
[ and ] a true classic , " awarding it 9.0 out of 10 .
It received a score of 8.2 out of 10 from IGN , who stated , " If you 've played the game on the Xbox , there 's not much for you here .
"
Eurogamer called the game " a missed opportunity , " but stated that the online multiplayer component was " a massive draw ... for Halo veterans . "
COMMERCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Commercial performance .
On its release Halo broke sales records ; by April 8 , 2002 , a little under five months after its release , one million units had been sold : this pace was faster than that of any previous sixth - generation console game .
During the two months following Halo 's release , the game sold alongside more than fifty percent of Xbox consoles .
By July 14 , 2003 , the game had sold three million copies worldwide , and by January 28 , 2004 , it had reached four million copies .
As of November 9 , 2005 , Halo has sold over five million copies worldwide .
By July 2006 , its Xbox version had sold 4.2 million copies and earned $ 170 million in the United States alone .
Next Generation ranked it as the second highest - selling game launched for the PlayStation 2 , Xbox or GameCube between January 2000 and July 2006 in that country .
Its computer version sold 670,000 copies and earned $ 22.2 million in the United States by August 2006 .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
According to GameSpot , Halos " numerous subtle innovations have been borrowed by countless other games since .
" The game is often cited as the main reason for the Xbox 's success , and it began what is commonly regarded as the system 's flagship franchise .
Game designer Vox Day credited the game with using science - fiction environments to follow Half - Life in eschewing static levels and a similarity to dungeon crawls , which the FPS genre inherited from Akalabeth .
Day further wrote that Halo spurred a sustained trend of many other FPS console games .
In July 2006 , Next - Gen.biz published an article estimating Halo as the second - highest revenue - generating 21st century console video game in the United States , behind .
The game 's popularity sparked the usage of terms like " Halo clone " and " Halo killer .
" The Halo engine has been used for the game Stubbs the Zombie in Rebel Without a Pulse .
Halo has been featured at both Major League Gaming and the World Cyber Games .
In machinima , the game was used as the basis for the popular web series Red vs. Blue .
The game 's sequel , Halo 2 , made US$ 125 million with unit sales of 2.38 million on the first day of its release , earning it the distinction of the fastest - selling United States media product in history .
Three years later , Halo 3 shattered that record with the biggest opening day in entertainment history , taking in US$ 170 million in its first 24 hours .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The story surrounding Halo : Combat Evolved has been adapted into novels , the first of which was Halo : The Fall of Reach , a prequel .
Published in October 2001 , this novel was written by Eric Nylund , who reportedly completed it in seven weeks .
The novel became a Publishers Weekly bestseller with almost two hundred thousand copies sold .
The following novel , entitled , is a tie - in to Halo :
Combat Evolved , describing not only the experiences of the Master Chief , but also those of other characters on Installation 04 .
Written by William C. Dietz , this novel appeared on the Publishers Weekly bestsellers list during May 2003 .
Nylund returned to write the third novel , , which takes place between the events of Halo :
Combat Evolved and those of Halo 2 .
Written in 16 weeks , it was published in December 2003 .
Later novels , ( written by Nylund and released on October 31 , 2006 ) and by Joseph Staten further extended the Halo storyline .
More recently , a collection of new stories in and Greg Bear 's first book of his Forerunner series was released continuing to flesh out the stories .
Two additional books :
Karen Traviss 's , the first in a new Post - Halo 3 series and Greg Bear 's Book 2 of his Forerunner series entitled will be released in the near future .
Another adaptation is The Halo Graphic Novel , a collection of four short stories released by Marvel Comics in July 2006 .
It was written and illustrated by Lee Hammock , Jay Faerber , Tsutomu Nihei , Brett Lewis , Simon Bisley , Ed Lee and Jean Giraud .
Bungie regards Halo 's adaptations as canon .
Marvel subsequently released the four - issue miniseries , which was written by Brian Michael Bendis and illustrated by Alex Maleev , which premiered in August 2007 .
, a supplemental graphic novel featuring art by Graeme Devine and Eric Nylund , was included with Halo Wars : Limited Edition in March 2009 .
Marvel then published , a five - issue miniseries written by Peter David and illustrated by Eric Nguyen , which premiered in July 2009 .
Additionally and were released , the latter being a comic retelling of the novel Halo : The Fall of Reach premiered in 2010 and 2011 respectively .
REMAKE Section::::Remake .
During the Microsoft press conference at the 2011 E3 Expo , it was revealed that Halo : Combat Evolved would be remade by 343 Industries with an in - house game engine and would include achievements , Terminals , and Skulls .
It was released for the Xbox 360 on November 15 , 2011 .
The release date marks the 10th anniversary of the original game 's release .
The remastered version of the original game includes online multiplayer and cooperative play functionality .
The remake is also the first Halo game to include Kinect support .
The game is a mix of two game engines — the original Halo engine created by Bungie which provides gameplay and a new engine created by 343 and Saber which is responsible for improved graphics — and the player is able to switch between the improved and classic modes of the game at any time .
The game 's multiplayer component uses the gameplay engine , tailored with a map playlist to mimic the original multiplayer , as opposed to including the original game 's multiplayer mode .
The Anniversary version of the game is the version contained in The Master Chief Collection for Xbox One .
The single - player game is identical to the Xbox 360 version , including the ability to swap between the updated " anniversary " graphics and the original game graphics .
However , unlike the Xbox 360 release , the multiplayer component is the original multiplayer engine from Combat Evolved as opposed to Halo : Reach and is playable over Xbox Live , something not possible until The Master Chief Collection .
NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS