MARTINGALE ( BETTING SYSTEM )
A martingale is any of a class of betting strategies that originated from and were popular in 18th century France .
The simplest of these strategies was designed for a game in which the gambler wins his stake if a coin comes up heads and loses it if the coin comes up tails .
The strategy had the gambler double his bet after every loss , so that the first win would recover all previous losses plus win a profit equal to the original stake .
The martingale strategy has been applied to roulette as well , as the probability of hitting either red or black is close to 50 % .
Since a gambler with infinite wealth will , almost surely , eventually flip heads , the martingale betting strategy was seen as a sure thing by those who advocated it .
None of the gamblers possessed infinite wealth , and the exponential growth of the bets would eventually bankrupt " unlucky " gamblers who chose to use the martingale .
The gambler usually wins a small net reward , thus appearing to have a sound strategy .
However , the gambler 's expected value does indeed remain zero ( or less than zero ) because the small probability that he will suffer a catastrophic loss exactly balances with his expected gain .
( In a casino , the expected value is negative , due to the house 's edge . )
The likelihood of catastrophic loss may not even be very small .
The bet size rises exponentially .
This , combined with the fact that strings of consecutive losses actually occur more often than common intuition suggests , can bankrupt a gambler quickly .
INTUITIVE ANALYSIS
Section::::Intuitive analysis .
The fundamental reason why all martingale - type betting systems fail is that no amount of information about the results of past bets can be used to predict the results of a future bet with accuracy better than chance .
In mathematical terminology , this corresponds to the assumption that the win - loss outcomes of each bet are independent and identically distributed random variables , an assumption which is valid in many realistic situations .
It follows from this assumption that the expected value of a series of bets is equal to the sum , over all bets that could potentially occur in the series , of the expected value of a potential bet times the probability that the player will make that bet .
In most casino games , the expected value of any individual bet is negative , so the sum of lots of negative numbers is also always going to be negative .
The martingale strategy fails even with unbounded stopping time , as long as there is a limit on earnings or on the bets ( which is also true in practice ) .
It is only with unbounded wealth , bets and time that it could be argued that the martingale becomes a winning strategy .
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS
Section::::Mathematical analysis .
The impossibility of winning over the long run , given a limit of the size of bets or a limit in the size of one 's bankroll or line of credit , is proven by the optional stopping theorem .
MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS OF A SINGLE ROUND Section::::Mathematical analysis of a single round .
Let one round be defined as a sequence of consecutive losses followed by either a win , or bankruptcy of the gambler .
After a win , the gambler " resets " and is considered to have started a new round .
A continuous sequence of martingale bets can thus be partitioned into a sequence of independent rounds .
Following is an analysis of the expected value of one round .
Let q be the probability of losing ( e.g. for American double - zero roulette , it is 10/19 for a bet on black or red ) .
Let B be the amount of the initial bet .
Let n be the finite number of bets the gambler can afford to lose .
The probability that the gambler will lose all n bets is q.
When all bets lose , the total loss is The probability the gambler does not lose all n bets is 1 − q.
In all other cases , the gambler wins the initial bet ( B. )
Thus , the expected profit per round is
Whenever q > 1/2 , the expression 1 − ( 2q ) 0 .
Thus , for all games where a gambler is more likely to lose than to win any given bet , that gambler is expected to lose money , on average , each round .
Increasing the size of wager for each round per the martingale system only serves to increase the average loss .
Suppose a gambler has a 63 unit gambling bankroll .
The gambler might bet 1 unit on the first spin .
On each loss , the bet is doubled .
Thus , taking k as the number of preceding consecutive losses , the player will always bet 2 units .
With a win on any given spin , the gambler will net 1 unit over the total amount wagered to that point .
Once this win is achieved , the gambler restarts the system with a 1 unit bet .
With losses on all of the first six spins , the gambler loses a total of 63 units .
This exhausts the bankroll and the martingale can not be continued .
In this example , the probability of losing the entire bankroll and being unable to continue the martingale is equal to the probability of 6 consecutive losses : ( 10/19 ) = 2.1256 % .
The probability of winning is equal to 1 minus the probability of losing 6 times : 1 − ( 10/19 ) = 97.8744 % .
The expected amount won is ( 1 × 0.978744 ) =
0.978744 .
The expected amount lost is ( 63 × 0.021256)= 1.339118 .
Thus , the total expected value for each application of the betting system is ( 0.978744 − 1.339118 ) = −0.360374 .
In a unique circumstance , this strategy can make sense .
Suppose the gambler possesses exactly 63 units but desperately needs a total of 64 .
Assuming q > 1/2 ( it is a real casino ) and he may only place bets at even odds , his best strategy is bold play : at each spin , he should bet the smallest amount such that if he wins he reaches his target immediately , and if he does n't have enough for this , he should simply bet everything .
Eventually he either goes bust or reaches his target .
This strategy gives him a probability of 97.8744 % of achieving the goal of winning one unit vs. a 2.1256 % chance of losing all 63 units , and that is the best probability possible in this circumstance .
However , bold play is not always the optimal strategy for having the biggest possible chance to increase an initial capital to some desired higher amount .
If the gambler can bet arbitrarily small amounts at arbitrarily long odds ( but still with the same expected loss of 1/19 of the stake at each bet ) , and can only place one bet at each spin , then there are strategies with above 98 % chance of attaining his goal , and these use very timid play unless the gambler is close to losing all his capital , in which case he does switch to extremely bold play .
ALTERNATIVE MATHEMATICAL ANALYSIS
Section::::Alternative mathematical analysis .
The previous analysis calculates expected value , but we can ask another question : what is the chance that one can play a casino game using the martingale strategy , and avoid the losing streak long enough to double one 's bankroll .
As before , this depends on the likelihood of losing 6 roulette spins in a row assuming we are betting red / black or even / odd .
Many gamblers believe that the chances of losing 6 in a row are remote , and that with a patient adherence to the strategy they will slowly increase their bankroll .
In reality , the odds of a streak of 6 losses in a row are much higher than many people intuitively believe .
Psychological studies have shown that since people know that the odds of losing 6 times in a row out of 6 plays are low , they incorrectly assume that in a longer string of plays the odds are also very low .
When people are asked to invent data representing 200 coin tosses , they often do not add streaks of more than 5 because they believe that these streaks are very unlikely .
This intuitive belief is sometimes referred to as the representativeness heuristic .
ANTI - MARTINGALE Section::::Anti - martingale .
This is also known as the reverse martingale .
In a classic martingale betting style , gamblers increase bets after each loss in hopes that an eventual win will recover all previous losses .
The anti - martingale approach instead increases bets after wins , while reducing them after a loss .
The perception is that the gambler will benefit from a winning streak or a " hot hand " , while reducing losses while " cold " or otherwise having a losing streak .
As the single bets are independent from each other ( and from the gambler 's expectations ) , the concept of winning " streaks " is merely an example of gambler 's fallacy , and the anti - martingale strategy fails to make any money .
If on the other hand , real - life stock returns are serially correlated ( for instance due to economic cycles and delayed reaction to news of larger market participants ) , " streaks " of wins or losses do happen more often and are longer than those under a purely random process , the anti - martingale strategy could theoretically apply and can be used in trading systems ( as trend - following or " doubling up " ) .
( But see also dollar cost averaging . )
SEE ALSO * Escalation of commitment * St. Petersburg paradox REFERENCES