SORRY !
( GAME )
Sorry ! is a board game that is based on the ancient cross and circle game Pachisi .
Players try to travel around the board with their pieces ( called pawns ) faster than any other player .
Originally manufactured by W.H. Storey & Co in England and now by Hasbro , Sorry ! is marketed for two to four players , ages 6
+ .
The game title comes from the many ways in which a player can negate the progress of another , while issuing an apologetic " Sorry ! "
OBJECTIVE
Section::::Objective .
The objective is to be the first player to get all four of their coloured pawns from their start space , around the board ( sometimes " backward " ; see below ) to their " home " space .
The pawns are normally moved in a clockwise direction but can be moved backward if directed .
Movement of pawns is directed by the drawing of a card .
The board game is laid out in a square with 16 spaces per side , with each player assigned his or her own coloured Start location and Home locations offset towards the centre , one per side .
Four five - square paths , one per colour , lead from the common outer path towards a player 's Home and are designated his or her " Safety Zone " .
On each side are two " Slides " , grouping four or five spaces each .
Older versions of Sorry !
contain a coloured " diamond space " directly one space back from each start square , with the rules stating that a pawn of the diamond 's colour may not move forward over this square .
Instead , a player of that colour must diverge from the outer space square towards his or her " Home " .
However the diamond and corresponding rule were removed from subsequent print .
If you happen to get a card and land on an opponent , that pawn goes back to start HISTORY Section::::History .
William Henry Story of Southend - on - Sea filed for a patent for the game in England , where it was registered as a trade mark on 21 May 1929 ( UK number 502898 ) .
It was subsequently sold in the United Kingdom by Waddingtons , the British games manufacturer who sold it from 1934 .
In the United States , was filed for Sorry !
on Aug 4 , 1930 by William Henry Storey .
A Canadian patent followed in 1932 .
The US patent was issued on April 11 , 1933 .
Sorry ! was adopted by Parker Brothers in 1934 .
Hasbro now continuously publishes it .
CLASSIC RULES Section::::Classic rules .
Rule 1
: Each player chooses four pawns of one colour and places them in his or her Start .
One player is selected to play first .
Rule 2 :
Each player in turn draws one card from the deck and follows its instructions .
To begin the game , all of a player 's four pawns are restricted to Start ; a player can only move them out onto the rest of the board if he or she draws a 1 or 2 card .
A 1 or a 2 places a pawn on the space directly outside of start ( a 2 does not entitle the pawn to move a second space ) .
Rule 3 :
The Relaxation Start : When a young player is playing , especially when learning the game of Sorry ! , a relaxation is offered in allowing one of their pawns to begin the game already on the board , on the space directly outside their Start , as the tedium of waiting for a 1 or a 2 can be wearisome even for experienced players .
Rule 4 :
A pawn can jump over any other pawn during its move .
However , two pawns can not occupy the same square ; a pawn that lands on a square occupied by another player 's pawn " bumps " that pawn back to its own Start .
Players can not bump their own pawns back to Start ; if the only way to complete a move would result in a player bumping his or her own pawn , the player 's pawns remain in place and the player loses his or her turn .
Rule 5 :
If a pawn lands at the start of a slide ( except those of its own colour ) , either by direct movement or as the result of a switch from an 11 card or a Sorry card , it immediately " slides " to the last square of the slide .
All pawns on all spaces of the slide ( including those belonging to the sliding player ) are sent back to their respective Starts .
Rule 6 :
The last five squares before each player 's Home are " Safety Zones " , and are specially coloured corresponding to the colours of the Homes they lead to .
Access is limited to pawns of the same colour .
Pawns inside the Safety Zones are immune to being bumped by opponents ' pawns or being switched with opponents ' pawns via 11 or Sorry !
cards .
However , if a pawn is forced via a 10 or 4 card to move backwards out of the Safety Zone , it is no longer considered " safe " and may be bumped by or switched with opponents ' pawns as usual until it re - enters the Safety Zone .
2013 EDITION RULE CHANGES Section::::2013 Edition rule changes .
In the 2013 Edition , several rules were changed .
Each player only has three pawns .
A pawn can be moved out from Start upon any positive number card .
A Sorry ! card gives the alternative option of moving forward 4 spaces .
The 2 card no longer allows one to pull another card .
Furthermore , two additional items known as Fire and Ice were added , and depending on which card is drawn , can be placed on certain pawns on the board , modifying the playing rules for those pawns .
In short , fire gives a pawn the ability to move ahead quickly before the player 's turn , and ice stops a pawn from being moved ( or removed from play ) at all .
There are some corner cases that are not well explained in the rules , such as " What happens to fire if one pawn removes the pawn with fire by landing on its square ? " .
Should the fire be set back to out of play , or should it transfer to the attacking pawn ?
CLASSIC CARDS AND FUNCTION STRATEGY Section::::Strategy .
Players who have a pawn that has not moved too far away from its start area , and draw a card that allows them to move a pawn backward , can ( and should ) elect to move this pawn backward .
Move a pawn in such a situation backward enough , and the pawn is suddenly almost home .
The 7 can be split ; it is often possible to do so such that one of the pieces ends up on a slide , thus increasing the value of this card .
It also provides an additional opportunity for pawns to get Home , so long as there 's another pawn on the board to use up the remaining spaces .
All other things being equal , moves that cause a pawn to end up in front of an opponent 's start square are poor choices , due to the high number of cards that allow that opponent to enter .
Some feel that leaving a pawn on one 's own square just outside " Start " ( also known as the " Dot " ) is a poor position to be in since new pawns are blocked from entering play .
There are numerous strategies and tactics employed by skilled players .
One such strategy is to leave the last pawn in the " Start " square and move the other pawns around the board while waiting for a " Sorry " card .
Another smart move requires two pawns in play :
While marching one pawn around the board , a player can leave a second pawn near " Start " ( within two squares of the dot ) and wait for the 4 card to be drawn and moving the second pawn into position to run quickly " Home " .
Due to the 11 ( switching places ) , 4 ( moving backwards , as noted above ) , and " Sorry " ( allowing the player to send virtually any pawn back to its start ) cards , the lead in the game can change dramatically in a short amount of time ; players are very rarely so far behind as to be completely out of the game .
This should be considered when playing a " Sorry " or an 11 .
Slowing the game down is a risky yet effective move when given the opportunity .
Essentially , when a player has the chance to switch with or hit the apparent leader , even though the move will not be to the player 's immediate advancement around the board , the move should be made to keep the leader out of " Safety " and more importantly , out of " Home " .
TEAMS Section::::Teams .
Players can elect to play the game in two teams of two .
The team pairings are always colours on opposite sides of the board ( i.e. Red and Yellow vs. Blue and Green ) .
The game is then played as if two players had eight pawns each : for example , the yellow player may move a red pawn for any legal move .
A 7 card could be split between a yellow pawn and a red one but can still be split between no more than two pieces .
However , a partner 's pawns are not " bump - proof " : if yellow were to draw a Sorry ! card with only red pawns on the board , or land on a red pawn 's occupied space , yellow would have to bump its teammate .
Once one of the partners has played all of his or her pieces into home , he continues to draw and play cards on his or her turn , if possible , for his or her partner .
The first partnership to play all eight pieces in its home wins .
VARIATIONS Section::::Variations .
A variation with more scope for strategy allows for each player to play the card of his or her choice from a hand of pre - dealt cards .
This variation is played by shuffling a full deck of Sorry !
cards , and selecting a dealer .
Five cards are dealt face - down to each player .
Starting player selection is decided by normal play rules .
For each turn , a player picks one card from his or her hand and plays it face up .
Normal rules apply .
If a 2 is played , he may play another card .
Being unable to play a card after playing a 2 card does not warrant the reshuffle rule , however ; if able to play another , he must .
At the end of the turn , that player picks up however many cards were played face - down .
End rules apply .
This variation is commonly coupled with point - play , noting that it usually produces faster and more aggressive play .
Similar to regular game rules , a player must play a card if able .
If a player is unable to play a card ( called a dead hand ) , that player must discard one card and draw another face - down .
If the player is able to play a card , the player must do so .
If the player is able to play multiple cards , the player may choose freely which one to play .
Another version , similar to the above , involves dealing out the entire deck of cards before play starts .
The same rules apply as the previous variation except with a very different strategy .
Namely , it forces players to think about when they play certain combinations of cards .
For example , if a player 's first move is to lay down a 2 followed by a 4 , allowing himself to finish on his or her following turn , his or her opponents would probably stop him or her with a Sorry card or an 11 , effectively wasting the first player 's 2 and 4 .
Rather than playing a combination like this early in the game , it is often wise to save them until the end , when all the Sorry cards and 11s have been played .
Note that players who have 2s in their hand will appear to have fewer cards at the end of each round than players who do not .
BUMP ' EM Section::::Bump ' Em .
Hoyle Table Games is a computer game consisting of 18 board / table games , one of which is Bump ' Em , a game similar to Sorry ! .
Pawns are represented as bumper cars , and the board follows a path akin to a freeway cloverleaf instead of a regular square .
There are no partnerships allowed .
A player takes a turn by taking a ticket from a ticket roll .
A roll of tickets consists of five 1s , five 12s , and four each of the other tickets .
When all the tickets on a roll have been taken a new roll is loaded .
Tickets are randomly ordered on each roll .
* 1 : Move one bumper car out of " pit row " ( start ) or advance one space
* 2 :
Advance two spaces * 3 : Advance three spaces and take another card * 4 :
Advance four spaces
* 5 :
Advance five spaces * 6 :
Advance six spaces or move nine spaces backwards * 7 : Advance seven spaces or switch places with an opponent * 8 : Advance eight spaces or split the move between two bumper cars * 9 : Advance nine spaces or move six spaces backwards * 10 : Advance ten spaces * 11 : Advance eleven spaces or move one space backwards * 12 : Advance twelve spaces or move one bumper car out of pit row
* Bump ' Em : Similar to the Sorry ! card in the traditional game .
Take one bumper car currently in pit row .
Choose an opponent 's car .
Take their place and send them back to the pit row .
If the player has no cars in the pit row , he must pass .
The board also comes with oil slicks , which act as the Slides !
and landing on a person 's bumper car will " bump " them back to pit row .
POINT PLAY Section::::Point play .
Variation rules apply ( five cards in hand style play , see " Variation " ) .
The winner is decided by achieving a certain number of points over a span of several games .
Point system goes as follows : !
Points Scenario !
5
To any player with X number of his or her own pieces in home
( X being the number of pieces in home at game 's end ) . !
5
To winner for each opponent 's piece not in home . !
25
To winner if no opponent has more than two pieces in home . !
50
To winner if no opponent has more than one piece in home . !
100
To winner if no opponent 's pieces have reached home .
The winner is decided when one player achieves a set number of points agreed upon by all players before play starts .
Variations for faster play include point penalties for certain cards in each player 's hand at the end of each set .
VIDEO GAME Section::::Video game .
A electronic gaming version of Sorry ! was released in 1998 as a Sorry ! computer game .
Also , a handheld version was released in 1996 .
VERSIONS PUBLISHED
* A 1996 board from Waddingtons had 5 of each card .
BASIC EDITION RE - RELEASES
*
Sorry !
Nostalgia :
First version with diamonds , a version with a different board , wood parts and in a collector 's box .
* Sorry ! :
Family Game Night Edition .
*
Sorry !
Fun on the Run !
Edition .
* Hasbro 's Classics :
Sorry !
Limited edition ; contained a new box and with diamonds .
* Hasbro Adventure !
:
The Action Pack – with Twister , Connect Four , and Trouble .
* Sorry !
The Greatest Hits : The FULL Pack ! –
Had 5 editions of the game , chosen randomly .
*
Sorry !
2013 Edition Game THEMED EDITIONS
*
Sorry ! :
The Disney Edition .
* Sorry !
The Simpsons Edition .
* Sorry ! : The Spider - Man 3 Edition ( featured elements based on all three films starring Tobey Maguire . )
* Pokémon Sorry !
( Several editions released based on different " colour editions " of the Pokémon games . )
*
Sorry !
Disney 's Splash Mountain Theme Park Collector 's Edition .
*
Sorry !
SpongeBob SquarePants Edition .
*
Sorry !
Phineas and Ferb
*
Sorry !
Madagascar
*
Sorry !
Star Wars
*
Sorry !
Moana OTHER SORRY!-THEMED GAMES
*
Sorry !
Card Revenge : A card game in the style of UNO , but featuring a large electronic pawn that directs certain elements of the game when its head is tapped ( via playing a SORRY ! card ) .
* Sorry Express !
: See description below .
*
Sorry !
Sliders : A board game where the pawns act as shuffleboard - like tokens using several " target boards " .
* Shakin ' Sorry ! Dice'n'Grab Edition : Dice - based game , where the object is to roll enough of your colour face to fill your HOME board .
* Shakin ' Sorry ! : Had a collectible Sorry Keychain .
*
Sorry !
Spin :
A twist or spin of the game .
Released July 2010 .
* U - Build
Sorry : Part of Hasbro 's U - BUILD series , which had a Lego - like board that allowed for custom paths , and a modified game goal of " escorting " pawns from the centre of the board to your HOME space .
SORRY !
EXPRESS
Section::::Sorry !
Express .
Parker Brothers has released a travel version of Sorry !
called Sorry !
Express .
The game consists of three dice , four home bases , a start base , and sixteen pawns , four in each colour .
Up to four players can play this game .
To play , each player takes a home base and sets it on a different colour and all of the pawns are put on the start base no matter how many people are playing .
The first person rolls all three dice and gets one of four possibilities for each die : *
Colour pawn – The player takes the corresponding colour pawn from the start base and , if it matches up with the colour of his or her home base , puts it in his or her home section .
If not , it is put in his or her waiting area .
When there are no more pawns of a particular colour in the Start base and a player rolls that same colour , he can take that colour pawn from another player 's waiting area , not his or her Home section .
*
*
Sorry !
– Take a pawn from the home section of one player 's home base and keep it .
*
* Wild Pawn – The player may take any colour pawn from the Start base or waiting areas ( not the Home section of another player ) and keep it .
*
* Slide – Change either one 's own Home section or someone else 's Home section to a different colour .
*
The first person to get four pawns of the same colour in their home section wins .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* 1972 rules
* 1992 rules
* 2003 rules * Rules in Spanish