JOE NAMATH
Joseph William Namath (; born May 31 , 1943 )
, nicknamed " Broadway Joe " , is a former American football quarterback and actor .
He played college football for the University of Alabama under coach Paul " Bear " Bryant from 1962 to 1964 , and professional football in the American Football League ( AFL ) and National Football League ( NFL )
during the 1960s and 1970s .
Namath was an AFL icon and played for that league 's New York Jets for most of his professional football career .
He finished his career with the Los Angeles Rams .
He was elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1985 .
Statistics belie Namath 's enduring influence on the game of professional football .
He retired after playing 143 games over 13 years in the AFL and NFL , including playoffs .
Due mainly to chronic injuries that undermined his career at its peak , his overall record is 68 wins , 71 losses , and four ties , 64–64–4 in 132 starts , and 4–7 in relief .
He completed 1,886 passes for 27,663 yards , threw 173 touchdowns , and had 220 interceptions .
He played for three division champions ( the 1968 and 1969 AFL East Champion Jets and the 1977 NFC West Champion Rams ) , earned one league championship ( 1968 AFL Championship ) , and one Super Bowl victory ( Super Bowl III ) .
In 1999 , he was ranked number 96 on The Sporting News list of the 100 Greatest Football Players , the only player on the list to have spent a majority of his career with the Jets .
In his 1975 autobiography , Bryant called Namath the most natural athlete he had ever coached .
Namath is known for boldly guaranteeing a Jets ' victory over Don Shula 's NFL Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III ( 1969 ) , then making good on his prediction with a 16–7 upset ( the win remains the Jets ' only Super Bowl appearance ) .
Already a celebrity , he was now established as a sports icon .
He subsequently parlayed his notoriety into success with endorsement deals and as a nightclub owner , talk show host , pioneering advertising spokesman , theater , motion picture , television actor , and sports broadcaster .
He remained a highly recognizable figure in the media and sports worlds nearly half a century after his brashness cemented his identity in the public mind .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Namath was born and raised in Beaver Falls , Pennsylvania ( 30 miles ( 50 km ) northwest of Pittsburgh ) , and grew up in its Lower End neighborhood .
He is the son of Catholic parents , Rose ( née Juhász ) and János " John " Andrew Namath , a steelworker .
His parents were of Hungarian descent .
His Hungarian - born grandfather , András " Andrew " Németh , known as " A.J. " to his family and friends , came to Ellis Island on the steamer Pannonia in 1911 , and worked in the coal and steel industries of the greater Pittsburgh area .
While growing up , Namath was close to both of his parents , who eventually divorced .
Following his parents ' divorce , he lived with his mother .
He was the youngest of four sons , with an older adopted sister .
Namath excelled in all sports at Beaver Falls High School and was a standout quarterback in football , guard in basketball , and outfielder in baseball .
In an age when dunks were uncommon in high school basketball , Namath regularly dunked in games .
Coached by Larry Bruno at Beaver Falls , Namath 's football team won the WPIAL Class AA championship with a 9–0 record in 1960 .
Coach Bruno later presented Namath to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton .
Upon graduation from high school in 1961 , he received offers from several Major League Baseball teams , including the Yankees , Indians , Reds , Pirates , and Phillies , but football prevailed .
Namath told interviewers that he wanted to sign with the Pirates and play baseball like his idol , Roberto Clemente , but elected to play football because his mother wanted him to get a college education .
He graduated from college at age 64 in 2007 , after he returned to the University of Alabama about forty years after he left early in order to pursue a career in professional football .
He successfully finished a 30-hour external program bachelor of arts degree in interdisciplinary studies .
Namath had many offers from Division I college football programs , including Penn State , Ohio State , Alabama , and Notre Dame , but initially decided upon the University of Maryland after being heavily recruited by Maryland assistant coach Roland Arrigoni .
He was rejected by Maryland because his college - board scores were just below the school 's requirements .
After ample recruiting by Bryant , Namath accepted a full scholarship to attend Alabama .
Bryant stated his decision to recruit Namath was " the best coaching decision I ever made . "
COLLEGE FOOTBALL CAREER Section::::College football career .
Between 1962 and 1964 , Namath quarterbacked the Alabama Crimson Tide program under Bryant and his offensive coordinator , Howard Schnellenberger .
A year after being suspended for the final two games of the season , Namath led the Tide to a national championship in 1964 .
During his time at the University of Alabama , Namath led the team to a 29–4 record over three seasons .
Bryant called Namath " the greatest athlete I ever coached " .
When Namath was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1985 , he broke down during his induction speech upon mentioning Bryant , who died from a heart attack in 1983 .
Namath 's time at Alabama was a culture shock for him , as he had grown up in a neighborhood in Pennsylvania that was predominantly black .
( He was the only white starter on his high school basketball team . )
He attended college at the height of the civil rights movement ( 1955–1968 ) in the Southern United States .
Namath later refuted the story about being the only white starter on his high school basketball team on The James Brown Show in 2018 , where he was the guest .
He stated that he was 1 of 3 white players on the team .
Namath was eleventh in the balloting for the 1964 Heisman Trophy , which was won by quarterback John Huarte of Notre Dame .
STATISTICS Section::::Statistics . !
rowspan=2Season ! !
colspan=6Passing ! !
colspan=4Rushing !
Comp ! !
Att ! !
Yards ! !
Comp% ! !
TD ! !
INT ! !
Carries ! !
Yards !
Career total ! 203 374 2713 54.3 25 19 190 655
PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL CAREER Section::::Professional football career .
Despite suffering a nagging knee injury in the fourth game of his senior year at Alabama , Namath limped through the undefeated regular season to the Orange Bowl .
He was a first - round draft selection by both the NFL and the upstart AFL .
The two competing leagues were at the height of their bidding war , and held their respective drafts on the same day : November 28 , 1964 .
The cartilage damage to Namath 's right knee later designated him class 4-F for the military draft , a deferment from service during the Vietnam War .
The St. Louis Cardinals selected Namath 12th overall in the NFL Draft , while the Jets selected him with the first overall pick of the AFL draft .
When meeting with executives of the Cardinals , Namath 's salary request was $ 200,000 and a new Lincoln Continental .
While initially appalled at Namath 's requests , the Cardinals told Namath they would agree to his requests , but only if he would sign before the Orange Bowl , which would 've made Namath ineligible to play in the game .
The day after the Orange Bowl , Namath elected to sign with the Jets , which were under the direction of owner Sonny Werblin , for a salary of US$ 427,000 over three years ( a pro football record at the time ) .
Offensive tackle Sherman Plunkett came up with the nickname " Broadway Joe " in 1965 , following Namath 's appearance on the cover of Sports Illustrated in July .
In Namath 's rookie season the 1965 Jets were winless in their first six games with him splitting time with second - year quarterback Mike Taliaferro .
With Namath starting full - time they won five of the last eight of a fourteen - game season and Namath was named the AFL Rookie of the year .
He became the first professional quarterback to pass for 4,000 yards in a season when he threw for 4,007 yards in ( 1967 ) , a record broken by Dan Fouts in a 16-game season in 1979 ( 4,082 ) .
Although Namath was plagued with knee injuries through much of his career and underwent four pioneering knee operations by Dr. James A. Nicholas , he was an AFL All - Star in 1965 , 1967 , 1968 , and 1969 .
On some occasions , Namath had to have his knee drained at halftime so he could finish a game .
Later in life , long after he left football , he underwent knee replacement surgery on both legs .
In the 1968 AFL title game , Namath threw three touchdown passes to lead New York to a 27–23 win over the defending AFL champion Oakland Raiders .
His performance in the 1968 season earned him the Hickok Belt as top professional athlete of the year .
He was an AFC - NFC Pro Bowler in 1972 , is a member of the Jets ' and the American Football League 's All - Time Team , and was elected to the Hall of Fame in 1985 .
SUPER BOWL
III Section::::Super Bowl III .
The high point of Namath 's career was his performance in the Jets ' 16–7 win over the Baltimore Colts in Super Bowl III in January 1969 , shortly before the AFL – NFL merger .
The first two interleague championship games had resulted in blowout victories for the NFL 's Green Bay Packers , and sports writers from NFL cities insisted the AFL would take several more years to be truly competitive .
The 1968 Colts were touted as " the greatest football team in history " , and former NFL star and Atlanta Falcons head coach Norm Van Brocklin ridiculed the AFL before the game , saying " This will be Namath 's first professional football game .
" Three days before the game , Namath was tired of addressing the issue in the press , and he responded to a heckler at a sports banquet in Miami with the line : " We 're going to win the game .
I guarantee it . "
Namath backed up his boast , which became legendary .
The Colts ' vaunted defense ( highlighted by Bubba Smith ) was unable to contain either the Jets ' running or passing game , while the ineffective offense gave up four interceptions to the Jets .
Namath was the Super Bowl MVP , completing eight passes to George Sauer alone for 133 yards .
The win made him the first quarterback to start and win a national championship game in college , a major professional league championship , and a Super Bowl .
The Jets ' win gave the AFL instant legitimacy even to skeptics .
When he was asked by reporters after the game whether the Colts ' defense was the " toughest he had ever faced " , Namath responded , " That would be the Buffalo Bills ' defense . "
The AFL - worst Bills had intercepted Namath five times , three for touchdowns , in their only win in 1968 in late September .
BACHELORS III Section::::Bachelors III .
After the Super Bowl victory , Namath opened a popular Upper East Side nightclub called Bachelors III , which not only drew big names in sports , entertainment , and politics , but organized crime .
To protect the league 's reputation , NFL Commissioner Pete Rozelle ordered Namath to divest himself of his interest in the venture .
Namath refused , apparently retiring from football during a teary news conference , but he eventually recanted and agreed to sell the tavern .
He reported to the Jets in time for the 1969–70 season .
Namath again threatened to retire before the 1970 and 1971 seasons ; New York stated in 1971 that " his retirement act had become shallow and predictable " .
The magazine wrote that Namath did not want to attend training camp because of the risk of injury , but could not afford to retire permanently because of poor investments ..
MONDAY NIGHT FOOTBALL 'S INAUGURAL GAME
Section::::Monday Night Football 's inaugural game .
The head of ABC 's televised sports , Roone Arledge , made sure that Monday Night Football 's inaugural game on September 21 , 1970 featured Namath .
The Jets met the Cleveland Browns in Cleveland Municipal Stadium in front of both a record crowd of 85,703 and a huge television audience .
The Jets set a team record for penalties and lost on a late Namath interception .
LATER CAREER WITH THE JETS Section::::Later career with the Jets .
After not missing a single game because of injury in his first five years in the league , Namath played in just 28 of 58 possible games between 1970 and 1973 because of various injuries .
After winning division championships in 1968 and 1969 , the Jets struggled to records of 4–10 , 6–8 , 7–7 , and 4–10 .
His most memorable moment in those four seasons came on September 24 , 1972 , when he and his boyhood idol Johnny Unitas combined for 872 passing yards in Baltimore .
Namath threw for 496 yards and six touchdowns and Unitas 376 yards and three in a 44–34 New York victory over the Colts , its first against Baltimore since Super Bowl III .
The game is considered by many NFL experts to be the finest display of passing in a single game in league history .
The Chicago Winds of the World Football League famously made a large overture to Namath prior to the start of the 1975 season .
They designed their uniforms identically to that of the Jets and offered Namath $ 600,000 a year for three years , $ 100,000 for the next 17 , a $ 500,000 signing bonus , and the eventual arrangement for him to revive the WFL 's Charlotte Hornets franchise in New York as the new team 's owner .
The WFL 's television provider , TVS Television Network , insisted on the Winds signing Namath to continue broadcasts ; Namath , in turn , requested a percentage of the league 's television revenue .
The league refused , and Namath stayed with the Jets .
The Winds folded five weeks into the 1975 WFL season .
Without a national television contract , the struggling WFL collapsed altogether a month later .
LOS ANGELES RAMS Section::::Los Angeles Rams .
In the twilight of his career , Namath was waived by the Jets to facilitate a move to the Los Angeles Rams when a trade could not be worked out .
Signing on May 12 , 1977 , Namath hoped to revitalize his career , but knee injuries , a bad hamstring , and the general ravages of thirteen years as a quarterback in professional football had taken their toll .
After playing well in a 2–1 start , Namath took a beating in a one - point loss on a cold , windy , and rainy Monday Night Football game against the Chicago Bears , throwing four interceptions and having a fifth nullified by a penalty .
He was benched as a starter for the rest of the season and retired at its end .
ACTING CAREER
Section::::Acting career .
Building on his brief success as a host on 1969 's The Joe Namath Show , Namath transitioned into an acting career .
Appearing on stage , starring in several movies , including C.C. and Company with Ann - Margret and William Smith in 1970 , on stage in Picnic with Donna Mills in 1971 and in a brief 1978 television series , The Waverly Wonders , he guest - starred on numerous television shows , often as himself , including The Love Boat , Married ... with Children , Here 's Lucy , The Brady Bunch , The Flip Wilson Show , Rowan and Martin 's Laugh - In , The Dean Martin Show , The Simpsons , The A - Team , ALF , Kate & Allie , and The John Larroquette Show .
Namath appeared in summer stock productions of Damn Yankees , Fiddler on the Roof , and Lil ' Abner , and finally legitimized his " Broadway Joe " nickname as a cast replacement in a New York revival of The Caine Mutiny Court Martial .
He guest hosted The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson several times and also served as a color commentator on NFL broadcasts , including the 1985 season of Monday Night Football .
He currently hosts The Competitive Edge , In September 2012 , Namath was honored by the Ride of Fame and a double - decker tour bus was dedicated to him in New York City .
He appeared as himself in the 2013 sports film Underdogs and the 2015 comedy film The Wedding Ringer .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
While taking a voice class in 1983 , Namath met Deborah Mays ( who later changed her first name to May and then changed it again to Tatiana ) , an aspiring actress ; he was 41 and she was 22 .
They married in 1984 , with Namath claiming , " She caught my last pass .
" The longtime bachelor became a dedicated family man when the couple had two children , Jessica ( b. 1986 ) and Olivia ( b.1991 ) .
The couple divorced in 2000 , with the children living in Florida with their father .
In May 2007 , sixteen - year - old Olivia gave birth to her first child , a daughter , Natalia .
For the early years of his marriage , Namath continued to struggle with his alcoholism until his wife warned him that he could break up his family if he continued .
By 1987 , Namath was able to stop his drinking , though he would relapse after his divorce in 2000 .
On December 20 , 2003 , Namath garnered unfavorable publicity after he consumed too much alcohol during a day that was dedicated to the Jets ' announcement of their All - Time team .
During live ESPN coverage of the team 's game , Namath was asked about then - Jets quarterback Chad Pennington and his thoughts on the difficulties of that year 's team .
Namath expressed confidence in Pennington , but then stated to interviewer Suzy Kolber , " I want to kiss you .
I could n't care less about the team struggling . "
He subsequently apologized , and several weeks later entered into an outpatient alcoholism treatment program .
Namath chronicled the episode , including his battle with liquor , in his book , Namath .
In July 2015 , Namath joined the search for two boys who went missing during a fishing trip off the coast of Florida , and offered a $ 100,000 reward for the safe return of the boys .
The boat was found six days later , and the search has been suspended , with the two boys presumed dead .
On June 6 , 2018 , Namath threw out the first pitch at a Chicago Cubs Game at Wrigley field .
The pitch was caught by Joe Maddon , the Cubs manager .
Maddon idolized Namath as a child .
This was Namath 's first time at Wrigley Field .
LEGACY MEDIA AND ADVERTISING
ICON Section::::Legacy .
Section::::Media and advertising icon .
Namath 's nickname " Broadway Joe " was given to him by Sherman Plunkett , a Jets teammate . "
Joe Willie Namath " was Namath 's moniker based on his full given name and was popularized by sportscaster Howard Cosell .
On the field , Namath stood out from other AFL and NFL players in low - cut white shoes rather than traditional black high - tops .
The white shoes had started when Namath was at Alabama , where he kept having his worn - out cleats taped up as a superstition , especially when he had his first major knee injury in a game where he had forgotten to have them taped .
When he joined the Jets , Namath continued to have his shoes taped until Jets coach Weeb Ewbank noticed that the excess tape usage was costing the team money , so he ordered white cleats for Namath .
He originated the fad of wearing a full - length fur coat on the sidelines ( since banned by the NFL ) , which requires all players , coaches , athletic trainers , et al . , to wear league - approved team apparel .
Namath also appeared in television advertisements both during and after his playing career , most notably for Ovaltine milk flavoring , Noxzema shaving cream ( in which he was shaved by a then - unknown Farrah Fawcett ) , and Hanes Beautymist pantyhose .
All of these commercials contributed to his becoming a pop - culture icon .
He has appeared in advertising as recently as 2014 , in a DirectTV commercial starring the Manning brothers making stew with one 's mother .
Namath continues to serve as an unofficial spokesman and goodwill ambassador for the Jets .
In 2011 , Namath was representing Topps and promoting a " Super Bowl Legends " contest , appearing on its behalf on the Late Show with David Letterman .
On June 2 , 2013 , Namath was the guest speaker at the Pro Football Hall of Fame , unveiling the Canton , Ohio museum 's $ 27 million expansion and renovation plan .
, Namath is the official spokesperson of the Medicare Coverage Helpline .
BIOGRAPHIES Section::::Biographies .
In November 2006 , the biography Namath by Mark Kriegel appeared , reaching the New York Times extended bestseller list ( number 23 ) .
In conjunction with its release , Namath was interviewed for the November 19 , 2006 , edition of CBS ' 60 Minutes .
A recent documentary about Namath 's hometown of Beaver Falls , Pennsylvania , includes a segment on Namath and why the city has celebrated its ties to him .
In 2009 , 40 years after winning Super Bowl III , he presented the Vince Lombardi Trophy to the Pittsburgh Steelers who won Super Bowl XLIII .
NFL Productions also produced a two - hour long television biography in its A Football Life series .
SEE ALSO
* List of NFL quarterbacks who have passed for 400 or more yards in a game * List of American Football League players *
Gunslinger BOOKS
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Joe Namath article , Encyclopedia of Alabama