BRIDESMAID
The bridesmaids are members of the bride 's party in a wedding .
A bridesmaid is typically a young woman , and often a close friend or relative .
She attends to the bride on the day of a wedding or marriage ceremony .
Traditionally , bridesmaids were chosen from unwed young women of marriageable age .
The principal bridesmaid , if one is so designated , may be called the chief bridesmaid or maid of honor if she is unmarried , or the matron of honor if she is married .
A junior bridesmaid is a girl who is clearly too young to be married , but who is included as an honorary bridesmaid .
In the United States , typically only the maid / matron of honor and the best man are the official witnesses for the wedding license .
Often there is more than one bridesmaid : in modern times the bride chooses how many to ask .
Historically , no person of status went out unattended , and the size of the retinue was closely calculated to be appropriate to the family 's social status .
A large group of bridesmaids provided an opportunity for showing off the family 's social status and wealth .
Today , the number of bridesmaids in a wedding party is dependent on many variables , including a bride 's preferences , the size of her family , and the number of attendants her partner would like to have as well .
The male equivalent is the groomsman , also known in British English as an usher ; in the United States , the role of attending to the groom has diverged from that of escorting guests to their seats , and the two positions are no longer synonymous and are often if not usually filled by different persons .
In some cultures , such as in Norway , the Netherlands and Victorian Britain , it has been customary for bridesmaids to be small girls rather than grown women .
They may carry flowers during the wedding procession and pose with the married couple in bridal photos .
In modern English - speaking countries , this role is separate from that of the bridesmaid , and the small child performing it is known as a flower girl .
DUTIES Section::::Duties .
Although many exceed the minimum , the bridesmaids ' required duties are very limited .
They are required to attend the wedding ceremony and to assist the bride on the day of the wedding .
Bridesmaids in Europe and North America are often asked to assist the bride with planning the wedding and a wedding reception .
In modern times , a bridesmaid often participates in planning wedding - related events , such as a bridal shower or bachelorette party , if there are any .
These , however , are optional activities ; according to etiquette expert Judith Martin , " Contrary to rumor , bridesmaids are not obliged to entertain in honor of the bride , nor to wear dresses they can not afford .
" If it is customary in the bride 's area to have a bridesmaids luncheon , then it is hosted , and therefore organized and paid for , by the bride .
A junior bridesmaid has no responsibilities beyond attending the wedding .
The duties and costs of being a bridesmaid are parsed out between a bride and her attendants in a variety of ways .
Since modern bridesmaids , unlike their historical counterparts , can no longer rely on having their clothes and travel expenses paid for by the bride 's family , and are sometimes even told they must pay for parties that the bride wants to have before the wedding , it has become customary for the bride to present the bridesmaids with gifts as a sign of gratitude for the support and financial commitment that comes with their roles .
It has become equally customary for women who are invited to serve as bridesmaids to first ask about the amount of time , energy , and money that the bride expects from them before accepting this position , and to decline or resign if this is more than they will be able to give .
In some American weddings , each bridesmaid may be asked to spend US $ 1,700 or more , with travel to destination weddings and pre - wedding parties usually being the biggest expense .
MAID OF HONOR Section::::Maid of honor .
In the United Kingdom , the term " maid of honour " originally referred to the female attendant of a queen .
The term bridesmaid is normally used for all bridal attendants in the UK .
However , when the attendant is married , or is a mature woman , the term matron of honour is often used .
The influence of American English has led to the chief bridesmaid sometimes being called the maid of honour .
In North America , a wedding party might include several bridesmaids , but the maid of honor is the title and position held by the bride 's chief attendant , typically her closest friend or sister .
In modern - day weddings some brides opt to choose a long - time male friend or brother as their head attendant , using the title best man or man of honor .
The activities of the principal bridesmaid may be as many or as varied as she allows the bride to impose upon her .
Her only required duty is to participate in the wedding ceremony .
Typically , however , she is asked for help with the logistics of the wedding as an event , such as addressing invitations , and for her help as a friend , such as attending the bride as she shops for her wedding dress .
On the day of the wedding , her principal duty is to provide practical and emotional support .
She might assist the bride with dressing and , if needed , help the bride manage her veil , a bouquet , a prayer book , or the train of her wedding dress during the day .
In a double - ring wedding , the chief bridesmaid is often entrusted with the groom 's wedding ring until it is needed during the ceremony .
Many brides ask bridesmaids if they are adults , to be legal witnesses who sign the marriage license after the ceremony .
If there is a reception after the wedding , the maid of honor may be asked to offer a toast to the newlywed .
ORIGIN AND HISTORY Section::::Origin and history .
The origin of the Western bridesmaid tradition likely arose from a combination of many factors .
The most - likely factors include , but are n't limited to , socioeconomic class and status , family size , socialization standards of the day , and religion .
Others cite the Biblical story of Jacob , and his two wives Leah and Rachel , who both literally came with their own maids as detailed in the Book of Genesis ( 29:24 , 46:18 ) as the origin of bridesmaids .
These women were handmaidens ( servants or slaves ) instead of social peers .
Some sources state that , in ancient times , originally the bride and all the bridesmaids wore exactly the same dress and veiled their faces heavily , for the purpose of confusing jealous suitors and evil spirits .
In China during the feudal era , the female womb was seen as precious for the production of an heir .
Brides were susceptible to kidnapping at weddings by rival clans and hooligans .
Shouldering the responsibility to protect the bride , bridesmaids were dressed up like the bride to lower the risk that she might be identified and robbed .
As legal protections for marriage were established , this was no longer necessary , and the role of bridesmaid took a more symbolic turn .
In the Victorian era , white was the official color for both male groomsmen and female bridesmaids .
This trend originated with Queen Victoria when she married Prince Albert wearing a long white wedding dress , and her bridesmaids matched the color of her gown .
SEE ALSO
* Bridesman * Groomsman REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * A Salute to Bridesmaids-
slideshow by Life magazine