SALLIE MAE SLM Corporation ( commonly known as Sallie Mae ; originally the Student Loan Marketing Association ) is a publicly traded U.S. corporation that provides consumer banking .
Its nature has changed dramatically since it was set up in 1973 .
At first , it was a government entity that serviced federal education loans .
It then became private and started offering private student loans , although at one point it had a contract to service federal loans .
The company 's primary business is originating , servicing , and collecting private education loans .
The company also provides college savings tools such as its Upromise Rewards business and online planning for college tools and resources .
Sallie Mae previously originated federally guaranteed student loans originated under the Federal Family Education Loan Program ( FFELP ) .
and worked as a servicer and collector of federal student loans on behalf of the Department of Education .
The company now offers private education loans and manages more than $ 12.97 billion in assets .
Sallie Mae employs 1,400 individuals at offices across the U.S.
On April 30 , 2014 , Sallie Mae spun off its loan servicing operation and most of its loan portfolio into a separate , publicly traded entity called Navient Corporation .
Navient is the largest servicer of federal student loans and acts as a collector on behalf of the Department of Education .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Student Loan Marketing Association was originally created in 1972 as a government - sponsored enterprise ( GSE ) and began privatizing its operations in 1997 , a process it completed at the end of 2004 when Congress terminated its federal charter , ending its ties to the government .
The company remains the country 's largest originator of federally insured student loans .
Through its specialized subsidiaries and divisions , Sallie Mae also provides debt management services as well as business and technical products to a range of business clients , including colleges , universities and loan guarantors .
In 2005 , Sallie Mae was among 53 entities that contributed the maximum of $ 250,000 to the second inauguration of President George W. Bush .
In August 2006 , Sallie Mae acquired Upromise , a company that provides rebates to buyers of certain brands , which can be applied to college savings accounts .
Sallie Mae and Upromise plan to market comprehensive financial packages to parents and students , including investment plans , financial aid information , and student loans .
On April 16 , 2007 , Sallie Mae announced that an investor group led by J.C. Flowers & Co. signed an agreement to purchase Sallie Mae for approximately $ 25 billion .
Had the transaction completed , J.C. Flowers along with private - equity firm Friedman Fleischer & Lowe would have owned 50.2 % of Sallie Mae , and Bank of America and JPMorgan Chase would each have owned 24.9 % .
Sallie Mae would have ceased to be a publicly traded company .
The deal fell through in September 2007 , with the buyers blaming adverse changes to the business 's outlook as a result of the College Cost Reduction and Access Act of 2007 and the tightening of global credit markets following the 2007 subprime mortgage financial crisis .
Sallie Mae subsequently began legal action , only to drop it in January 2008 upon completion of a $ 31 billion funding round , including funding from Bank of America .
On April 6 , 2009 , Sallie Mae announced that it will move 2,000 jobs back to the U.S. within the next 18 months as it shifts call center and other operations from overseas .
On March 31 , 2010 , Sallie Mae announced the impending layoff of 2,500 employees in response to the signing of new legislation calling for the federal government to lend directly to students , bypassing institutions like Sallie Mae .
On July 1 , 2010 , Sallie Mae announced that it will be moving its headquarters from Reston , Virginia , to its existing facility in Newark , Delaware , in 2011 .
On September 17 , 2010 , it was announced that Sallie Mae will acquire federally insured loans from Citigroup - owned Student Loan Corporation worth $ 28 billion .
On Feb 25 , 2014 , Sallie Mae announced the new name for the student loan side which will be called " Navient " .
CORPORATE INFORMATION Section::::Corporate information .
The Sallie Mae corporate headquarters is in Newark , Delaware .
Sallie Mae has offices in Newton , Massachusetts ; Indianapolis , Indiana ; Salt Lake City , Utah ; and Reston , Virginia .
CORPORATE BOARD Section::::Corporate board .
Raymond J. Quinlan is chairman of the Board of Directors .
He joined the board in 2014 replacing previous chairman Anthony P. Terracciano — formerly president of First Union Corporation ( now Wells Fargo ) .
Quinlan is also the chief executive office of Sallie Mae .
He took over as CEO when the company announced its strategic separation in May 2014 .
Albert Lord held the positions of vice chairman and CEO until his retirement 2013 .
Lord joined Sallie Mae in 1981 , took over as CEO in 1995 , and led the company 's privatization .
On May 29 , 2013 , the board announced Jack Remondi as Lord 's successor .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
Corporate Responsibility Officer has named Sallie Mae one of America 's " 100 Best Corporate Citizens " five times .
Corporations ( over 1,100 are evaluated ) are selected according to community , governance , diversity , and environmental best business practices .
Sallie Mae sponsors The Sallie Mae Fund , a charitable organization with a mission to increase access to higher education for America 's students by supporting and starting programs and initiatives that help open doors to higher education .
The Sallie Mae Fund prepares families and students for college and provides scholarship funding that focuses on minority , low - income , and " first in the family " students .
Since 2001 , The Sallie Mae Fund has awarded $ 10 million in scholarships to help 4,000 students enroll in college .
Through The Fund 's work , Sallie Mae was named among BusinessWeek 's Top 15 Corporate Philanthropists in 2004 .
The Washington Business Journal identified the company as the top local corporate philanthropist in 2005 .
Sallie Mae won the Ron Brown Award for Corporate Leadership in 2006 .
It was honored for three college - access programs developed by The Sallie Mae Fund : Latino College Access Campaign , Project Access : DC , and The Sallie Mae Fund Scholarship Programs .
The Sallie Mae Fund earned the 2007 Insight Award for Customer Advocacy in Financial Services ( from Insight Forums , LLC ) .
The award recognizes financial communications initiatives that proactively enable customers to make fully informed choices .
In December 2010 , Kiplinger 's Personal Finance recognized Sallie Mae Bank as the Best Online Savings Account .
In December 2011 , Kiplinger 's Personal Finance recognized Sallie Mae Bank as the Best Money Market Account .
In December 2012 , Kiplinger 's Personal Finance recognized Sallie Mae Bank as " the best place to stash cash . "
In December 2013 , Kiplinger 's Personal Finance recognized Sallie Mae Bank as the Best Savings Account .
CONTROVERSIES Section::::Controversies .
A 60 Minutes segment ( originally aired May 7 , 2006 ) examined Sallie Mae , including its business practices .
Elizabeth Warren , then a professor at Harvard Law School and sharp critic of what she characterizes as unfair lending practices and later a US Senator , questioned Sallie Mae 's dual role as lender and collector of student loans .
In February 2007 , New York Attorney General Andrew Cuomo launched an investigation into alleged deceptive lending practices by student loan providers , including The College Board , EduCap , Nelnet , Citibank , and Sallie Mae .
On April 11 , 2007 , Cuomo ended his investigation of Sallie Mae and announced that Sallie Mae had voluntarily agreed to change its lending standards to satisfy a new code of conduct for student loan practices established by Cuomo , and to donate $ 2 million ( USD ) to a fund devoted to educating college - bound students about their loan options .
On October 10 , 2007 , documents surfaced showing that Sallie Mae was attempting to use the Freedom of Information Act to force colleges to turn over students ' personal information .
The university involved , the State University of New York system , is expected to decline the request and be forced to defend its position in court .
In December 2007 , a class action lawsuit was brought against Sallie Mae in a Connecticut federal court alleging that the company discriminated against African American and Hispanic private student loan applicants by charging them high interest rates and fees .
The lawsuit also alleged that Sallie Mae failed to properly disclose private student loan terms to unsuspecting students .
New York Attorney General , Andrew Cuomo , raised similar concerns about possible student loan redlining in June 2007 .
The lawsuit was settled and dismissed in 2011 .
Under the terms of the settlement , Sallie Mae agreed to make a $ 500,000 donation to the United Negro College Fund and the attorneys for the plaintiffs received $ 1.8 million in attorneys ' fees .
On January 31 , 2008 , SLM Corporation had a lawsuit for failing to adequately reserve for losses in Sallie Mae 's non - traditional portfolio and paid $ 35,000,000 for settlement .
A False Claims suit was filed against Sallie Mae by former U.S. Department of Education researcher , Dr. Oberg .
The suit alleges that Sallie Mae and other lenders deliberately overcharged the U.S. government .
The findings by Oberg were labeled among higher education policy analysts as the 9.5 scandal .
On February 20 , 2014 Illinois Attorney General Lisa Madigan 's office announced that an investigation into Sallie Mae 's debt collection practices and loan servicing practices had been opened .
On November 9 , 2005 , former Sallie Mae employee Michael Zahara filed a federal lawsuit against the company , alleging that it had a pattern and practice of granting forbearance in a purposeful effort to increase total student loan debt .
On October 29 , 2008 , permission was granted to his legal counsel to withdraw from the case , citing " From counsel 's perspective , a breakdown in trust has resulted from the discovery that Relator has been arrested for extortion , the circumstances surrounding that arrest , and Relator 's failure to disclose the arrest to counsel . "
On March 12 , 2009 the court ruled " dismissal without prejudice " because " the plaintiff has failed to obtain substitute counsel by the deadline . "
Zahara was seeking new counsel .
SUBSIDIARIES
*
Sallie Mae Bank * SLM Financial Corporation
* Upromise ( Acquired August 23 , 2006 ) SEE ALSO * Erudio Student Loans
* Navient * USA Funds
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* SallieMae Careers
* SallieMae.com *
The Sallie Mae Fund * CollegeAnswer.com
* Be
Debt Savvy * 2Futuro