SQUASH ( DRINK ) Squash ( also known as cordial ) , in British English , is a non - alcoholic concentrated syrup used in beverage making .
It is usually fruit - flavoured , made from fruit juice , water , and sugar or a sugar substitute .
Modern squashes may also contain food colouring and additional flavouring .
Some traditional squashes contain herbal extracts , most notably elderflower and ginger .
DRINKS Section::::Drinks .
Squash is mixed with a certain amount of water or carbonated water before drinking .
The amount of water added is to taste , with the squash becoming less strong the more it is diluted .
As a drink mixer , it may be combined with an alcoholic beverage to prepare a cocktail .
Citrus fruits ( particularly orange , lime and lemon ) or a blend of fruits and berries are commonly used as the base of squash .
Traditional squashes are usually flavoured with ginger , chokeberries ( often with spices added ) , elderflower , and sometimes orange or lemon .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
Squash is prepared by combining one part concentrate with four or five parts water ( carbonated or still ) .
Double - strength squash and traditional cordials , which are thicker , are made with two parts concentrate .
Some squash concentrates are quite weak , and these are sometimes mixed with one part concentrate and two or three parts water .
STORAGE
Section::::Storage .
Most cordials and squashes contain preservatives such as potassium sorbate or ( in traditional cordials ) sulphites , as they are designed to be stored on shelves .
They keep well because of the preservatives and their high sugar content .
Nonetheless , some choose to store their squash in refrigerators .
INGREDIENTS Section::::Ingredients .
Ingredients in squashes and cordials have evolved over the years .
A traditional cordial contains three ingredients : sugar , juice or plant extract and some water .
Usually it can contain an acidifier such as citric acid or in very old - fashioned cordials lemon juice , or even spices such as cinnamon or cloves .
Recreations of these traditional preparations often contain a preservative especially sulphur dioxide , although sugar alone will keep it fresh for quite a long time .
Modern squash drinks are generally more complex and sugar free squash even more so ; the ingredients are usually water , sweetener such as aspartame or sodium saccharin , juice in a low quantity ( typically 5 - 10 percent ) , large quantities of flavouring , preservatives and sometimes a colour such as anthocyanin .
In the middle are ordinary squashes , which contain sugar , water , a larger amount of juice , preservatives , colouring such as anthocyanin and often a small amount of flavouring .
Although colours such as Allura Red AC and Sunset Yellow FCF are occasionally used in squash , most modern British companies are gradually aiming to use natural colours such as beta carotene or anthocyanins , and natural flavourings .
FLAVOURINGS Section::::Flavourings .
Traditional squashes may be flavoured with elderflowers , lemon , pomegranate , apple , strawberry , chokeberry ( often with spices such as cinnamon or cloves added ) , orange , pear , or raspberry .
Modern squashes usually have simpler flavours , such as orange , apple , summer fruit ( mixed berries ) , blackcurrant , apple and blackcurrant , peach , pineapple , mango , lime , or lemon .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
" Cordial " , " diluted juice " , and " squash " are similar products , although the products known as cordials tend to be thicker and stronger , requiring less syrup and more water to be blended .
In British English , " cordial " refers to a sweet fruit - flavoured drink ( as different from a syrup ) .
" High juice " is not a brand of squash but rather a type that contains a larger amount of juice , around 45 % .
Squash is often colloquially known as " juice " .
However this term is a misnomer ; no squash is pure juice .
Squashes are commonly called according to the fruit from which they are made .
More rarely , they may be called " fruit drink " , especially if they are ready - diluted in a plastic bottle or paper carton ( e.g. , Fruit Shoot ) .
Some small areas in the North East refer to squash as " dilutey juice " .
FRUIT JUICE CONTENT Section::::Fruit juice content .
Squashes are measured by their juice content , the average being 30 % .
A variety of squash that contains a larger amount of fruit juice , up to half or more of the volume in juice , is sold in markets as " high juice " , and squashes are quite often called " juice " when talking to children , especially these high - juice beverages , although this may be confusing .
However , many squashes contain less than 20 % juice , and some as little as 5 - 10 % .
The latter are typically low in nutritional value , and the high juice versions are reasonably higher in nutrients , although one downside is that it is high in sugar and does not contain fibre or minor nutrients .
That goes with almost all squashes .
A low juice squash may state " with real fruit juice " on the label .
LOW - SUGAR SQUASHES Section::::Low - sugar squashes .
Squashes labelled " no added sugar " are artificially sweetened , usually with aspartame , acesulfame K , saccharin or sucralose , which is much cheaper for the manufacturers than both HFCS and natural sugar .
They are very low in calories , sometimes having as few as 4 per 100ml diluted , and they are marketed towards families seeking low calorie alternatives .
They tend to be very low in fruit juice , as fruit juice contains natural sugars , so they usually also contain natural or artificial flavourings ( isoamyl acetate for pear or banana , or mixed with malic acid to make an apple - like flavour , ethyl methylphenylglycidate for strawberry , octyl acetate for orange , allyl hexanoate for pineapple etc . ) to make up for the lack of fruit juice taste .
WORLD MARKETS
Section::::World markets .
Britvic ( under the Robinsons , MiWadi and Teisseire brands ) , Hamdard ( under the Rooh Afza brand in India , Pakistan and Bangladesh ) , Nichols ( under the Vimto brand ) , Suntory ( under the Ribena brand ) and Coca - Cola ( under the Kia - Ora brand ) .
Australian brands include Cottee 's , Bickford 's , P&N Beverages and Golden Circle cordials .
Indian brands include Kissan and Rasna .
In Israel , fruit squashes are produced by such companies as Prigat .
ANIMAL CONSUMPTION
Section::::Animal consumption .
The gorillas at London Zoo are given both squash and cold fruit tea to drink .
When a silverback called Kumbuka escaped from his enclosure in 2016 , he drank of undiluted blackcurrant squash that was in the keepers ' area .
SEE ALSO
* Cordial ( medicine ) * Drink mix
* Elderflower cordial * Fruit syrup * Nectar ( drink ) * Shrub ( drink ) * Temperance bar * Lemonade REFERENCES