JUMPING SPIDER Jumping spiders are a group of spiders that constitute the family Salticidae .
This family contains roughly 635 described genera and about 6080 described species , making it the largest family of spiders with about 13 % of all species .
Jumping spiders have some of the best vision among arthropods and use it in courtship , hunting , and navigation .
Although they normally move unobtrusively and fairly slowly , most species are capable of very agile jumps , notably when hunting , but sometimes in response to sudden threats or crossing long gaps .
Both their book lungs and tracheal system are well - developed , and they use both systems ( bimodal breathing ) .
Jumping spiders are generally recognized by their eye pattern .
All jumping spiders have four pairs of eyes , with the anterior median pair being particularly large .
DISTINGUISHING CHARACTERISTICS
Section::::Distinguishing characteristics .
Jumping spiders are among the easiest to distinguish from similar spider families because of the shape of the cephalothorax and their eye patterns .
The families closest to Salticidae in general appearance are the Corinnidae ( distinguished also by prominent spines on the back four legs ) , the Oxyopidae ( the lynx spiders , distinguished by very prominent spines on all legs ) , and the Thomisidae ( the crab spiders , distinguished by their front four legs , which are very long and powerful ) .
None of these families however , has eyes that resemble those of the Salticidae .
Conversely , the legs of jumping spiders are not covered with any very prominent spines .
Their front four legs generally are larger than the hind four , but not as dramatically so as those of the crab spiders , nor are they held in the outstretched - arms attitude characteristic of the Thomisidae .
In spite of the length of their front legs , Salticidae depend on their rear legs for jumping .
The generally larger front legs are used partly to assist in grasping prey , and in some species , the front legs and pedipalps are used in species - recognition signalling .
The jumping spiders , unlike the other families , have faces that are roughly rectangular surfaces perpendicular to their direction of motion .
In effect this means that their forward - looking , anterior eyes are on " flat faces " , as shown in the photographs .
Their eye pattern is the clearest single identifying characteristic .
They have eight eyes , as illustrated .
Most diagnostic are the front row of four eyes , in which the anterior median pair are more dramatically prominent than any other spider eyes apart from the posterior median eyes of the Deinopidae .
There is , however , a radical functional difference between the major ( AME ) eyes of Salticidae and the major ( PME ) eyes of the Deinopidae ; the large posterior eyes of Deinopidae are adapted mainly to vision in dim light , whereas the large anterior eyes of Salticidae are adapted to detailed , three - dimensional vision for purposes of estimating the range , direction , and nature of potential prey , permitting the spider to direct its attacking leaps with great precision .
The anterior lateral eyes , though large , are smaller than the AME and provide a wider forward field of vision .
The rear row of four eyes may be described as strongly bent , or as being rearranged into two rows , with two large posterior lateral eyes furthest back .
They serve for lateral vision .
The posterior median eyes also have been shifted out laterally , almost as far as the posterior lateral eyes .
They are usually much smaller than the posterior lateral eyes and there is doubt about whether they are at all functional in many species .
The body length of jumping spiders generally range from .
The largest is Hyllus giganteus , while other genera with relatively large species include Phidippus , Philaeus and Plexippus .
In addition to using their silk for safety lines while jumping , they also build silken " pup tents " , where they shelter from bad weather and sleep at night .
They molt within these shelters , build and store egg cases within them , and also spend the winter in them .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
Jumping spiders live in a variety of habitats .
Tropical forests harbor the most species , but they are also found in temperate forests , scrub lands , deserts , intertidal zones , and mountainous regions .
Euophrys omnisuperstes is the species reported to have been collected at the highest elevation , on the slopes of Mount Everest .
VISION Section::::Vision .
Jumping spiders have four pairs of eyes ; three secondary pairs that are fixed and a principal pair that is movable .
The posterior median eyes ( PME ) are vestigial in many species , but in some primitive sub - families they are comparable in size with the other secondary eyes and help to detect motion .
While unable to form images , it is suspected that the reduced pair of eyes has a role similar to that of insect ocelli by receiving light from the sky .
The photoreceptors in the other secondary pairs are almost exclusively greensensitive , but the PME have two visual pigments different from that in all the other eyes , sensitive to blue and UV - light .
The posterior lateral eyes ( PLE ) are wide - angle motion detectors which sense motions from the side and behind .
Combined with the other eyes , it gives the spider a near 360-degree view of the world .
The anterior lateral eyes ( ALE ) have the best visual acuity of the secondary eyes .
It has been shown that they are able to distinguish some details as well , and without them no " looming response " will be triggered by motion .
Even with all the other pairs covered , jumping spiders in a study could still detect , stalk and attack flies , using the anterior lateral eyes only , which are also sufficiently widely spaced to provide stereoscopic vision .
The anterior median eyes ( AME ) have very good vision .
This pair of eyes is built like a telescopic tube with a corneal lens in the front and a second lens in the back that focus images onto a four - layered retina , a narrow boomerang - shaped strip oriented vertically .
Physiological experiments have shown they may have up to four different kinds of receptor cells , with different absorption spectra , giving them the possibility of tetrachromatic color vision , with sensitivity extending into the ultraviolet range .
As the eyes are too close together to allow depth perception , and the animals do not make use of motion parallax , they have evolved a method called image defocus instead .
Of the four photoreceptor layers in the retina , the first two closest to the surface contain ultraviolet - sensitive pigments while the two deepest contain green - sensitive pigments .
The incoming green light is only focused on the deepest layer , while the other one receives defocused or fuzzy images .
By measuring the amount of defocus from the fuzzy layer , it is possible to calculate the distance to the objects in front of them .
In addition to receptor cells , also red filters have been detected , located in front of the cells that normally register green light .
It seems that all salticids , regardless of whether they have two , three , or four kinds of color receptors , are highly sensitive to UV light .
Some species ( for example , Cosmophasis umbratica ) are highly dimorphic in the UV spectrum , suggesting a role in sexual signaling ( Lim & Li , 2005 ) .
Color discrimination has been demonstrated in behavioral experiments .
The principal , anterior median , eyes have high resolution ( 11 min visual angle ) , but the field of vision is narrow , from 2 to 5 ° .
The central region of the retina , where acuity is highest , is no more than six or seven receptor rows wide .
However , the eye can scan objects off the direct axis of vision .
As the lens is attached to the carapace , the eye 's scanning movements are restricted to its retina through a complicated pattern of translations and rotations .
This dynamic adjustment is a means of compensation for the narrowness of the static field of vision .
It is analogous to the way most primates move their eyes to focus images of interest onto the fovea centralis .
Such movements within the jumping spider 's eyes are visible from outside when the attention of the spider is directed to various targets .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
Jumping spiders are generally diurnal , active hunters .
Their well - developed internal hydraulic system extends their limbs by altering the pressure of body fluid ( hemolymph ) within them .
This enables the spiders to jump without having large muscular legs like a grasshopper .
Most jumping spiders can jump several times the length of their bodies .
When a jumping spider is moving from place to place , and especially just before it jumps , it tethers a filament of silk ( or ' dragline ' ) to whatever it is standing on to protect itself if the jump should fail .
Should it fall , for example if the prey shakes it off , it climbs back up the silk tether .
Some species , such as Portia , will actually let themselves down to attack prey such as a web spider apparently secure in the middle of its web .
Like many other spiders that leave practically continuous silk trails , jumping spiders impregnate the silk line with pheromones that play a role in social and reproductive communication , and possibly in navigation .
Certain species of jumping spiders have been shown by experiment to be capable of learning , recognizing , and remembering colors , and adapting their hunting behavior accordingly .
HUNTING
Section::::Hunting .
The hunting behaviour of the Salticidae is confusingly varied compared to that of most spiders in other families .
Salticids hunt diurnally as a rule , which is consistent with their highly developed visual system .
When it detects potential prey , a jumping spider typically begins orienting itself by swivelling its cephalothorax to bring the anterior median eyes to bear .
It then moves its abdomen into line with its cephalothorax .
After that , it might spend some time inspecting the object of its attention and determining whether a camouflaged or doubtful item of prey is promising , before it starts to stalk slowly forward .
When close enough , the spider pauses to attach a dragline , then springs onto the prey .
There are , though , many variations on the theme and many surprising aspects .
For one thing , salticids do not necessarily follow a straight path in approaching prey .
They may follow a circuitous course , sometimes even a course that takes the hunter through regions from which the prey is not visible .
Such complex adaptive behaviour is hard to reconcile with an organism that has such a tiny brain , but some jumping spiders , in particular some species of Portia , can negotiate long detours from one bush down to the ground , then up the stem of another bush to capture a prey item on a particular leaf .
Such behaviour still is the subject of research .
Some salticid species are continually on the move , stopping periodically to look around for prey , which they then stalk immediately .
Others spend more time scanning their surroundings from one position , actively stalking any prey they detect .
Members of the genus Phaeacius take that strategy to extremes ; they sit on a tree trunk , facing downwards and rarely do any stalking , but simply lunge down on any prey items that pass close before them .
Some Salticidae specialise in particular classes of prey .
Ants comprise one such class .
Most spiders , including most salticids , avoid worker ants , but several species not only eat them as a primary item in their diets , but also employ specialised attack techniques — Corythalia canosa for example , circles round to the front of the ant and grabs it over the back of its head .
Such myrmecophagous species , however , will not necessarily refuse other prey items , and will routinely catch flies and similar prey in the usual salticid fashion , without the special precautions they apply in hunting dangerous prey such as ants .
Ants offer the advantages of being plentiful prey items for which there is little competition from other predators , but it remains profitable to catch less hazardous prey when it presents itself .
Some of the most surprising hunting behaviour occurs among the araneophagous Salticidae , and it varies greatly in method .
Many of the spider - hunting species quite commonly will attack other spiders , whether fellow salticids or not , in the same way as any other prey , but some kinds resort to web invasion ; nonspecialists such as Phidippus audax sometimes attack prey ensnared in webs , basically in acts of kleptoparasitism — sometimes they leap onto and eat the web occupant itself , or simply walk over the web for that purpose .
Salticidae in the genera Brettus , Cyrba , Gelotia , and Portia display more advanced web - invasion behavior .
They slowly advance onto the web and vibrate the silk with their pedipalps and legs .
In this respect , their behaviour resembles that of the Mimetidae , probably the most specialised of the araneophagous spider families .
If the web occupant approaches in the manner appropriate to dealing with ensnared prey , the predator attacks .
The foregoing examples present the Salticidae as textbook examples of active hunters ; they would hardly seem likely to build webs other than those used in reproductive activities , and in fact , most species really do not build webs to catch prey .
However , exceptions occur , though even those that do build capture webs generally also go hunting like other salticids .
Some Portia species , for example , spin capture webs that are functional , though not as impressive as some orb webs of the Araneidae ; Portia webs are of an unusual funnel shape and apparently adapted to the capture of other spiders .
Spartaeus species , on the other hand , largely capture moths in their webs .
In their review of the ethology of Salticidae , Richman and Jackson speculate on whether such web building is a relic of the evolution of this family from web - building ancestors .
In hunting , Salticidae also use their silk for a tether to enable them to reach prey that otherwise would be inaccessible .
For example , by advancing towards the prey to less than the jumping distance , then retreating and leaping in an arc at the end of the tether line , many species can leap onto prey on vertical or even on inverted surfaces , which of course in a gravitational field would not be possible without such a tether .
Having made contact with the prey , hunting Salticidae administer a bite to inject rapidly acting venom that gives the victim little time to react .
In this respect , they resemble the Mimetidae and Thomisidae , families that ambush prey that often are larger than the predator , and they do so without securing the victim with silk ; they accordingly must immobilise it immediately and their venom is adapted accordingly .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Although jumping spiders are generally carnivorous , many species have been known to include nectar in their diets , and one species , Bagheera kiplingi , feeds primarily on plant matter .
None are known to feed on seeds or fruit .
Extrafloral nectaries on plants , such as Chamaecrista fasciculata ( partridge pea ) , provide jumping spiders with nectar ; the plant benefits accordingly when the spiders prey on whatever pests they find .
REPRODUCTION GENERAL MATING BEHAVIOR
Section::::Reproduction .
Section::::General mating behavior .
Jumping spiders conduct complex , visual courtship displays using both movements and physical bodily attributes .
Unlike females , males possess plumose hairs , colored or iridescent hairs ( particularly pronounced in the peacock spiders ) , front leg fringes , structures on other legs , and other , often bizarre , modifications .
These characteristics are used in a courtship " dance " in which the colored or iridescent parts of the body are displayed .
In addition to the display of hairs , jumping spiders perform complex sideling , vibrational , or zigzag movements to attract females .
If receptive to the male , the female will assume a passive , crouching position .
It has also recently been discovered that many males have auditory signals as well .
These amplified sounds presented to the females resemble buzzes or drum rolls .
In some species , the female may also vibrate her palps or abdomen .
The male will then extend his front legs towards the female to touch her .
If the female remains receptive , the male will climb on the female 's back and inseminate her with his palps .
VISUAL AND NON - VISUAL COURTSHIP
DISPLAYS Section::::Visual and
non - visual courtship displays .
Species vary greatly in visual and vibratory components of courtship .
Many species have patches of UV reflectance , which are exhibited in mature males .
This visual component is used by some female jumping spiders for mate choice .
Body size dimorphism seems to play a role in male - male competition , where the larger bodied males will have a fitness advantage to hook the competitor and push down its legs into a vulnerable state , thus impairing the competitor 's ability to fight back .
Since larger spiders have a better chance of winning the fight , they also have a greater chance to successfully mate and will be favored by sexual selection .
CONSEQUENCES OF SEXUAL DIMORPHISM Section::::Consequences of sexual dimorphism .
Maintaining UV ornamentation and size dimorphism of some jumping spiders may seem strictly beneficial to sexual selection , yet there are costs to maintain such distinguishing characteristics .
While UV reflecting individuals may attract more female spiders , it can also increase the risk of predation .
Similarly , larger body size can be costly , as it may also increase the risk of predation .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The monophyly of the family Salticidae is well established through both phylogenetic and morphological analyses , but no consensus exists on what other group of spiders are most closely related to the jumping spiders .
Suggested sister groups have included the oxyopids ( lynx spiders ) , thomisids ( crab spiders ) , clubionoids ( sac spiders ) , and web - building spiders .
A 2017 phylogenetic analysis suggests that the sister group may be the family Miturgidae .
The taxonomy within the jumping spider family was significantly revised in 2015 .
The family is now divided into seven subfamilies : * Onomastinae – 1 genus , 12 species * Asemoneinae – 5 genera , 38 species * Lyssomaninae – 2 genera , 92 species * Spartaeinae – 29 genera , 165 species * Eupoinae – 3 genera , 34 species * Hisponinae – 9 genera , 53 species
* Salticinae – 538 genera , 5379 species Of these subfamilies , Salticinae is by far the largest , comprising over 90 % of the known species of jumping spiders .
MODELS FOR MIMICRY Section::::Models for mimicry .
Some small insects are thought to have evolved an appearance or behavioural traits that resemble those of jumping spiders and this is suspected to prevent their predation , specifically from jumping spiders .
Some examples appear to be provided by patterns on the wings of some tephritid flies , nymph of a fulgorid and possibly some moths .
FOSSILS Section::::Fossils .
Very few jumping spider fossils have been found .
Of those known , all are from Cenozoic era amber .
The oldest fossils are from Baltic amber dating to the Eocene epoch , specifically , 54 to 42 million years ago .
Other fossil jumping spiders have been found in Chiapan amber and Dominican amber .
SEE ALSO
* List of Salticidae genera – List of Salticidae species * Peckhamia ( journal )
* Spider taxonomy
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Asian jumping spiders and photo references
* Comprehensive resource on the morphology and taxonomy of jumping spiders ( Salticidae ) :
www.jumping-spiders.com * Global Species Database of Salticidae
* Video of a jumping spider 's mating behavior
* World Spider Catalog * Jumping Spiders of NW - Europe
* Jumping spiders of Australia * American Jumping Spiders – 70 Species Videos ( includes introduction to salticids , predation , mating , and other behaviors )
* Movies of Habronattus courtship behavior
* Male jumping spider courtship dance with contact microphone picking up and amplifying sounds
*
The Australian Faunal Directory taxonomic classification of Australian salticids