RUBBING ALCOHOL
Rubbing alcohol refers to either isopropyl alcohol ( propan-2-ol ) or ethanol based liquids , or
the comparable British Pharmacopoeia defined surgical spirit , with isopropyl alcohol products being the most widely available .
Rubbing alcohol is undrinkable even if it is ethanol based , due to the bitterants added .
They are liquids used primarily as a topical antiseptic .
They also have many industrial and household uses .
The term " rubbing alcohol " has become a general non - specific term for either isopropyl alcohol ( isopropanol ) or ethyl alcohol ( ethanol ) rubbing - alcohol products .
The United States Pharmacopeia defines ' isopropyl rubbing alcohol USP ' as containing approximately 70 percent by volume of pure isopropyl alcohol and defines ' rubbing alcohol USP ' as containing approximately 70 percent by volume of denatured alcohol .
In Ireland and the UK , the comparable preparation is surgical spirit B.P. , which the British Pharmacopoeia defines as 95 % methylated spirit , 2.5 % castor oil , 2 % diethyl phthalate , and 0.5 % methyl salicylate .
Under its alternative name of " wintergreen oil " , methyl salicylate is a common additive to North American rubbing alcohol products .
Individual manufacturers are permitted to use their own formulation standards in which the ethanol content for retail bottles of rubbing alcohol is labeled as and ranges from 70 - 99 % v / v .
All rubbing alcohols are unsafe for human consumption : isopropyl rubbing alcohols do not contain the ethyl alcohol of alcoholic beverages ; ethyl rubbing alcohols are based on denatured alcohol , which is a combination of ethyl alcohol and one or more bitter poisons that make the substance toxic .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The term " rubbing alcohol " came into prominence in North America in the mid-1920s .
The original rubbing alcohol was literally used as a liniment for massage ; hence the name .
This original rubbing alcohol was rather different from today 's precisely formulated surgical spirit ; in some formulations it was perfumed and included different additives , notably a higher concentration of methyl salicylate .
The name " rubbing " also emphasized that the alcohol was not intended for consumption , a significant distinction in Prohibition - era America ; nonetheless it had become a well - documented surrogate alcohol as early as 1925 .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
All rubbing alcohols are volatile and flammable .
They have an extremely bitter taste from additives .
The specific gravity of Formula 23-H is between 0.8691 and 0.8771 at .
Isopropyl rubbing alcohols contain from 50 % to 99 % by volume of isopropyl alcohol , the remainder consisting of water .
Boiling points vary with the proportion of isopropyl alcohol from to ; likewise freezing point vary from to .
Surgical spirit BP boils at .
Naturally colorless , products may contain color additives .
They may also contain medically - inactive additives for fragrance , such as wintergreen oil ( methyl salicylate ) , or for other purposes .
US LEGISLATION Section::::US legislation .
To prevent against alcohol abuse in the United States , all preparations classified as Rubbing Alcohols ( defined as those containing ethanol ) must have poisonous additives to limit human consumption in accordance with the requirements of the US Treasury Department , Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , and Firearms , using Formula 23-H ( 8 parts by volume of acetone , 1.5 parts by volume of methyl isobutyl ketone , and 100 parts by volume of ethyl alcohol ) .
It contains 87.5–91 % by volume of absolute ethyl alcohol .
The rest consists of water and the denaturants , with or without color additives , and perfume oils .
Rubbing alcohol contains in each 100 ml more than 355 mg of sucrose octaacetate or more than 1.40 mg of denatonium benzoate .
The preparation may be colored with one or more color additives .
A suitable stabilizer may also be added .
WARNINGS Section::::Warnings .
Product labels for rubbing alcohol include a number of warnings about the chemical , including the flammability hazards and its intended use only as a topical antiseptic and not for internal wounds or consumption .
It should be used in a well - ventilated area due to inhalation hazards .
Poisoning can occur from ingestion , inhalation , absorption , or consumption of rubbing alcohol .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Why Is Drinking Rubbing Alcohol Bad ?