FRAPPUCCINO Frappuccino is a trademarked brand of the Starbucks Corporation for a line of iced , blended coffee drinks .
It consists of coffee or crème base , blended with ice and other various ingredients , usually topped with whipped cream and sauces .
Frappuccinos are also sold as bottled coffee beverages in grocery stores and from vending machines .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Frappuccino is a portmanteau of " frappe " , the New England name for a milkshake with ice cream , and cappuccino , an espresso coffee with frothed milk .
The word was coined and trademarked in Boston , Massachusetts .
In the Boston area , a " frappe " ( pronounced " frap " and spelled without the accent ) is a thick milkshake with ice cream , derived from the French word frappé .
The original Frappuccino drink was developed , named , trademarked and sold by George Howell 's Eastern Massachusetts coffee shop chain , The Coffee Connection and created by then employee , Andrew Frank .
When Starbucks purchased The Coffee Connection in 1994 , they also gained the rights to use , make , market , and sell the Frappuccino drink .
The drink , with a different recipe , was introduced under the Starbucks name in 1995 and as of 2012 , Starbucks had annual Frappuccino sales of over $ 2 billion .
The recipe is derived from a fusion of various cold drinks , including the coffee frap ( similar to iced coffee ) and the frappe ( blended ice cream , syrup , and milk ) , with the Italian cappuccino .
The recipe today consists of brewed coffee , ice , and other additives such as milk , sugar , flavored syrups , and whipped cream .
AVAILABLE VERSIONS Section::::Available versions .
The following is a list of the typical versions available of each type of Frappuccino .
DECAFFEINATED Section::::Decaffeinated .
Upon consumer request , Starbucks baristas can create Frappuccinos with decaffeinated shots of espresso , rather than using caffeinated Frappuccino Roast instant coffee .
CRÈME Section::::Crème .
A coffee - free base was created to make a drink called a Frappuccino Blended Crème .
Menu examples include the Mocha Crème , Caramel Crème , Vanilla Bean Crème , and Serious Strawberry Frappuccino .
Any syrup or sauce can be used to make a custom Frappuccino Blended Crème .
Crème Frappuccinos contain very little or no caffeine .
NON - DAIRY ALTERNATIVES Section::::Non - dairy alternatives .
Frappuccinos made with soy milk
became available in stores in the United States and Canada in 2010 .
In January 2011 Starbucks introduced this option to Australian stores , and the option has since been made available in other countries .
Starbucks has since also introduced coconut and almond milk options .
JUICE BLENDS Section::::Juice blends .
In the summer of 2006 , Starbucks introduced the Frappuccino Juice Blend , which were described as being " real fruit juices combined with Tazo Tea , blended with ice " .
Juice Blends were gradually discontinued throughout 2007 and 2008 and are no longer offered by Starbucks .
MODIFICATIONS Section::::Modifications .
Frappuccinos may include additional ingredients , which can include espresso shots , flavored syrups , chocolate chips , and flavored powders .
Consumers may also customize the consistency of Frappuccinos by ordering light or extra ice .
Any Frappuccino can have additional syrups , shots of espresso , or various other modifications at a possible surcharge .
BOTTLED " FRAPPUCCINO " Section::::Bottled " Frappuccino " .
A bottled Frappuccino is sold in retail stores and vending machines .
The U.S.
9.5-oz .
bottled version was originally manufactured in 1996 by PepsiCo in Springfield , Missouri , but has since then expanded and is also being produced in Ventura , California ; Mechanicsburg , Pennsylvania ; and Cabool , Missouri .
The Springfield plant produces 186 million glass bottles of Frappuccino annually .
In Europe this product is made by Arla Foods in Denmark .
While bearing the Frappuccino trademark , these bottled versions bear no discernible resemblance to the product made in Starbucks stores ; they are simply coffee , milk , sweetener , and sometimes , flavoring , which can be confusing for customers .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Frappucino 's have been criticised for their high sugar content .
NORTH AMERICAN COFFEE PARTNERSHIP Section::::North American Coffee Partnership .
In 1994 , PepsiCo and Starbucks formed an entity called the North American Coffee Partnership .
The joint venture was created so that ready - to - drink products using the Starbucks name could be distributed using Pepsi 's global network .
The Frappuccino was the joint venture 's first product .
Since 1996 , the NACP has expanded to include a diverse portfolio of Starbucks branded coffee and energy drinks .
The NACP has approximately 97 % market share in RTD ( ready - to - drink ) coffee and has grown to more than a $ 1.5 billion retail business .
SEE ALSO
*
The Coffee Connection
* Starbucks REFERENCES