MCCARRAN INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT McCarran International Airport is the primary commercial airport serving the Las Vegas Valley , a major metropolitan area in the U.S. state of Nevada .
It is in Paradise , about south of Downtown Las Vegas .
The airport is owned by Clark County and operated by the Clark County Department of Aviation .
It is named after the late U.S. Senator Pat McCarran , a member of the Democratic Party who contributed to the development of aviation both in Las Vegas and on a national scale .
LAS covers 2,800 acres ( 11.3 km ) of land .
The airport was built in 1942 and opened to commercial flights in 1948 .
It has undergone significant expansion since then and has employed various innovative technologies , such as common - use facilities .
The airport consists of four runways and two passenger terminals : Terminal 1 and Terminal 3 .
Terminal 1 is composed of four concourses , namely the A , B , C , and D Gates ; Terminal 3 contains the E Gates .
A people mover system is in place between the post - security area of Terminal 1 and the C and D Gates , as well as between the D Gates and Terminal 3 .
East of the passenger terminals is the Marnell Air Cargo Center , and on the west side of the airports are facilities for fixed - base operators and helicopter companies .
McCarran received over 45,300,000 passengers in 2015 , a 5.8 % increase over the previous year but still below pre - recession levels .
It is the 27th busiest airport in the world by passenger traffic and the 8th busiest by aircraft movements .
The airport has nonstop air service to destinations in North America , Europe , and Asia .
It is an operating base for Allegiant Air , as well as a crew and maintenance base for Frontier Airlines , Southwest Airlines , and Spirit Airlines .
HISTORY ORIGINS ( 1920–1948 ) Section::::History .
Section::::Origins ( 1920–1948 ) .
Prior to McCarran Airport , the first airport to serve Las Vegas was Anderson Field , opened in November 1920 southeast of present - day Sahara Ave and Paradise Rd .
Purchased by the Rockwell brothers in 1925 , the airfield was renamed Rockwell Field , and Western Air Express ( WAE ) introduced commercial air service in April 1926 .
When the brothers sold Rockwell Field and the new owner canceled WAE 's lease , the airline had to look for another airport .
Local businessman P. A. Simon had built an airfield northeast of the city , now known as Nellis Air Force Base , to which WAE relocated in November 1929 .
Despite rising traffic to Las Vegas , WAE reduced service to the city amid the Great Depression .
Once its financial situation improved , the airline bought the airfield and established a monopoly on flights .
When the city attempted to purchase the field and build a more modern terminal , WAE refused .
With the advent of World War II , however , WAE was pressured to sell the airfield .
Nevada Senator Pat McCarran helped obtain federal funding for the city to buy the field and construct a new terminal .
He also helped establish a gunnery school by the United States Army Air Corps at the field .
For the senator 's contributions , the airport was named McCarran Field in 1941 .
A third airfield , Alamo Field , was established in 1942 by aviator George Crockett south of the city of Las Vegas , at the present location of McCarran Airport .
As the Army sought to open a local base at the site of McCarran Field , Clark County purchased Alamo Field from Crockett in order to relocate commercial air traffic .
Alamo Field became the new McCarran Field on December 19 , 1948 .
The opening of this new airfield broke Western Air Express ' monopoly on flights to Las Vegas , allowing other airlines to serve the market .
Meanwhile , the Army reopened its base at the original McCarran Field in 1949 and named it Nellis Air Force Base in 1950 .
EARLY EXPANSION ( 1949–1996 )
Section::::Early expansion ( 1949–1996 ) .
In its first year of operation , McCarran Field served over 35,000 passengers .
As Las Vegas ' casino industry grew and air travel became more popular during the 1950s , passenger traffic to the airfield rose significantly , with 959,603 passengers transiting through it in 1959 .
To cope with the increase , airport officials began planning a new passenger terminal .
While the original terminal was located on Las Vegas Boulevard , the new terminal was built on Paradise Road .
The terminal , whose design was inspired by the TWA Flight Center in New York City , opened on March 15 , 1963 .
The airport was officially renamed McCarran International Airport in September 1968 .
Further expansion took place between 1970 and 1974 with the construction of the A and B gates .
Prior to deregulation , the airport had four dominant carriers :
United and TWA served both coasts nonstop from Las Vegas , while Western and Hughes Airwest provided service to destinations in the western US .
After the airline industry was deregulated in 1978 , the number of airlines serving McCarran doubled from seven to fourteen in only two years .
New entrants by 1979 included American , Braniff and Continental .
In response , the county launched an expansion plan named McCarran 2000 , detailing expansion projects to be undertaken into the year 2000 .
Expanded baggage claim facilities , an esplanade , and a parking garage were inaugurated in 1985 .
The C Gates and the first line of the people mover system followed in 1987 .
Further expansion took place during the 1990s .
The Charter / International Terminal , later renamed Terminal 2 , was opened in December 1991 to handle rising international traffic to Las Vegas .
An additional , nine - story parking garage and an underground tunnel linking the Las Vegas Beltway to the airport were constructed as well .
In June 1998 , the southwest and southeast wings of the D Gates were opened .
During the late 1990s , the airport focused on attracting foreign airlines .
In 1994 , Condor Flugdienst began charter flights from Germany , launching scheduled service from Cologne and Frankfurt in 1997 .
Northwest Airlines and Japan Airlines introduced flights from Tokyo in 1998 , and Virgin Atlantic began flying from London – Gatwick in 2000 .
INNOVATION AND D GATES COMPLETION ( 1997–2011 ) Section::::Innovation and D Gates completion ( 1997–2011 ) .
In 1997 , the airport introduced Common Use Terminal Equipment ( CUTE ) , becoming the first airport in the country to do so .
With multiple airlines serving McCarran , it became inefficient to have separate facilities for each airline .
CUTE allows for shared use of ticket counters and gates ; an airline can overflow to inactive facilities during peak times .
McCarran furthered its common use strategy in 2003 with the SpeedCheck system , introducing Common - Use Self - Service ( CUSS ) kiosks .
The kiosks allow passengers to check - in and print boarding passes for any one of multiple airlines .
Previously , airlines had been installing their own check - in kiosks , defeating the use of CUTE and increasing congestion at the ticket counters .
SpeedCheck kiosks have been installed at the Las Vegas Convention Center as well .
In January 2005 , McCarran began offering complimentary Wi - Fi throughout its passenger terminals .
The service initially covered , making it the largest free Wi - Fi zone among U.S. airports at the time .
The northeast wing of the D Gates opened in April 2005 , along with a air traffic control tower at the center of the concourse .
The expansion had been postponed following the September 11 attacks but resumed amid high growth in passenger traffic .
Later in the year , the airport started a baggage - tracking system using radio - frequency identification ( RFID ) tags .
Small RFID transmitters are inserted into baggage tags to improve bag identification , thereby lowering the risk for lost or misplaced luggage .
McCarran became one of the first airports worldwide to conduct RFID tagging on a large scale .
On August 19 , 2008 , US Airways closed its night - flight hub at McCarran Airport , which had been established by predecessor America West Airlines in the 1990s .
In order to maximize the use of its fleet , US Airways had been operating two banks of flights to and from McCarran in the middle of the night .
The operation had made US Airways the second - busiest carrier at McCarran , providing over 100 daily round - trip flights .
However , amid rising oil prices and continued demand for low fares , the airline decided to close the hub .
In 2011 , US Airways reduced flights to Las Vegas by an additional 40 % .
In September 2008 , the northwest wing of the D Gates was completed .
This marked the completion of the concourse , which has a total of 44 gates .
In May 2011 , construction began on a new air traffic control tower for McCarran Airport .
The tower stands high and replaces a shorter tower that opened in 1983 .
However , in January 2014 , it was discovered that a chemical coating to prevent the growth of a toxic fungus was added improperly .
The problem was corrected by the following June , and the tower opened on August 28 , 2016 .
The shorter tower will be closed and demolished .
TERMINAL 3 AND LATER DEVELOPMENTS ( 2012–PRESENT )
Section::::Terminal 3 and later developments ( 2012–present ) .
Terminal 3 opened on June 27 , 2012 .
The project was announced in January 2001 as a way to accommodate rapid growth in passenger traffic , including international traffic .
It came into question amid the 2008 recession and decreased tourism to Las Vegas , but the county decided to proceed with the project , anticipating eventual economic recovery and a rebound in passenger numbers .
Terminal 3 cost $ 2.4 billion to build and is one of the largest public works projects in Nevada .
It replaced Terminal 2 , providing more international gates and a larger U.S. Customs and Border Protection facility .
With its seven domestic gates , the terminal also eases congestion at Terminal 1 .
In a $ 51 million project , eight domestic gates in the D Gates are being converted to seven " swing " gates , capable of receiving both domestic and international flights .
The gates will be connected to the customs facility in Terminal 3 by an underground pedestrian passageway .
The project was completed in June 2017 .
In addition , a $ 30 million renovation of Terminal 1 's ticketing and baggage claim areas is underway as of December 2016 .
Improvements include refurbished bathrooms , new ticket counters , and terrazzo flooring .
FACILITIES RUNWAYS Section::::Facilities .
Section::::Runways .
McCarran Airport has four runways : ! scope="col " data - sort - type="text " Runway ! scope="col " data - sort - type="number " Length ! scope="col " data - sort - type="number " Width ! scope="col " data - sort - type="text "
ILS !
scope="col " class="unsortable " Notes ! scope="row " 1L/19R ! scope="row " 1R/19L ! scope="row " 8L/26R ! scope="row " 8R/26L
All runways have been resurfaced with concrete , a more durable material than the previous asphalt .
In April 2016 , 8L/26R became the last runway to be resurfaced .
This runway is also the longest at McCarran and typically serves one - third of the airport 's annual traffic .
Parallel to it is runway 8R/26L , which opened in 1991 .
On the western side of the airport are runways 1L/19R and 1R/19L. 1L/19R was originally a short runway suited for light aircraft before it was significantly widened and lengthened in 1997 .
Between the two sets of parallel runways was runway 14/32 , which has been decommissioned .
Runways 8L/26R and 8R/26L were previously 7L/25R and 7R/25L respectively .
The runways were renumbered 8L/26R and 8R/26L in August 2017 , following a geographical shift in the planet 's magnetic poles by more than 3 degrees , the threshold for renumbering set by the FAA .
The typical dry weather at McCarran allows operations under visual flying rules 99 % of the time ; visibility falls to marginal and instrument - only conditions less than 1 % of the time .
During most of the year ( approximately 56 % of the time ) , due to prevailing winds , the airport operates in Visual Configuration 1 , which favors 19R and 26L for arrivals and 19L and 26R for departures .
Airfield capacity in Configuration 1 is constrained by bordering military airspace , high terrain to the west of McCarran , and an uphill departure from 26R. Because of the heat , 26R is favored over 19L for departures .
When the winds shift in the winter ( approximately 13 % of the year ) , the airfield adopts Visual Configuration 3 , which favors 01L and 26L for arrivals and 01L and 01R for departures .
Marginal flying conditions adopt the same Configuration 1 / Configuration 3 split based on the prevailing winds .
Under instrument flying conditions , arrivals are preferred on 26L , and departures take off from 19L and 26R. TERMINALS Section::::Terminals .
There are two terminals at McCarran and 5 concourses with a total of 92 gates .
Terminal 1 was completed in 1963 , Terminal 2 was completed in 1986 , and Terminal 3 was completed in 2012 .
Prior to the completion of Terminal 3 , Terminal 2 handled international flights .
After Terminal 3 was completed , Terminal 2 became redundant and it was demolished in 2016 .
Terminal 1 opened on March 15 , 1963 , and was expanded between 1970 and 1974 with the current A and B Gates buildings .
Currently , Terminal 1 has four concourses , each of which is connected to a central pre - security area .
Ticketing and baggage claim are located on Level 1 of this area .
Level 2 houses the three security checkpoints , an esplanade with several retail outlets , and a USO lounge for military service members .
West of the pre - security area are the A Gates and the B Gates , two Y - shaped concourses with circular ends .
To the south are the C Gates , which can be accessed by the Green Line of the tram system .
The satellite D Gates concourse , which opened in 1998 , lies to the east and contains three lounges : the Centurion lounge for American Express card holders ; the Club at LAS , which is available to all passengers at a fee ; and the United Club .
The Blue Line of the tram system links the D Gates with the pre - security area .
Terminal 3 handles all international and some domestic flights to McCarran Airport .
Level 0 of the terminal contains customs , baggage claim , and another USO lounge .
Check - in , security , a second Club at LAS , and all gates are located on Level 2 .
The terminal has a total of fourteen gates , seven of which are domestic ( E8–E12 , E14–E15 ) and the other seven international ( E1–E7 ) .
Four of the international gates have two jetways each to allow for quicker handling of wide - body aircraft .
AUTOMATED PEOPLE MOVER Section::::Automated people mover .
McCarran has three separate tram lines : * Green line , connecting Terminal 1 with C Gates * Blue line , connecting Terminal 1 with D Gates * Red line , connecting Terminal 3 with D Gates AIRLINES AND DESTINATIONS PASSENGER CARGO Section::::Airlines and destinations .
Section::::Cargo .
The following cargo airlines serve McCarran Airport :
*
Aloha Air Cargo * FedEx Express * UPS Airlines
STATISTICS
ANNUAL PASSENGER TRAFFIC Section::::Statistics .
Section::::Annual passenger traffic .
+ Annual passenger traffic at McCarran Airport , 1996–2017 !
Year !
Passengers !
Change ! class="unsortable
" 2016 47,435,640 2017 48,500,194
TOP AIRLINES BY INTERNATIONAL PASSENGERS Section::::Top airlines by international passengers .
+ Top airlines by international passengers carried at McCarran Airport ( 2015–17 ) !
Rank !
Airline !
Passengers ( 2015 ) !
Passengers ( 2016 ) !
Passengers ( 2017 )
TOP DOMESTIC
DESTINATIONS Section::::Top domestic destinations .
+
Busiest domestic routes from LAS(October 2017 – September 2018 ) !
Rank !
City !
Passengers !
Carriers OTHER FACILITIES AIRCRAFT WATCHING
Section::::Other facilities .
Section::::Aircraft Watching .
A small parking lot on the south side of the airport , on E. Sunset Road , between Las Vegas Blvd .
, and S. Eastern Ave , allows the public to watch aircraft take off , land , and listen to the aircraft radios .
This is the only " official " watching area .
There are several unofficial areas , mainly off the ends of the runways , however they are heavily patrolled by Las Vegas Metro Police and spectators are commonly asked to leave FIXED - BASE OPERATORS Section::::Fixed - base operators .
Atlantic Aviation and Signature Flight Support are the two fixed - base operators ( FBOs ) at the airport , providing various services to private aircraft .
HELICOPTER TERMINALS
Section::::Helicopter terminals .
Maverick Helicopters , Sundance Helicopters , and Papillon Grand Canyon Helicopters each operate their own terminal at McCarran Airport .
The Maverick terminal covers , while the Sundance terminal occupies .
The Papillon terminal was established in 1997 .
The companies provide helicopter tours over the Las Vegas Strip , Grand Canyon , and other tourist attractions .
JANET TERMINAL Section::::Janet terminal .
Janet flights depart from a private terminal located on the west side of the airport .
The airline , which is owned by the U.S. Air Force and operated by AECOM , transports employees and contractors to airports within the Nevada National Security Site .
MARNELL AIR CARGO CENTER
Section::::Marnell Air Cargo Center .
The Marnell Air Cargo Center covers and can handle of cargo .
The $ 29 million facility opened in October 2010 , replacing a smaller facility that existed at the site of Terminal 3 .
The center consists of two buildings , one of which is leased by FedEx and the other by multiple other companies , including UPS and Southwest Airlines .
HOWARD W. CANNON AVIATION MUSEUM Section::::Howard W. Cannon Aviation Museum .
The main exhibits of the Howard W. Cannon Aviation Museum on Level 2 of Terminal 1 , above baggage claim .
There are additional exhibits throughout the airport and at other airports in the city .
Display items chronicle the early history of aviation in Southern Nevada .
The museum is named after former Nevada Senator Howard Cannon , who contributed to the development of aviation in the county .
Its administrator is Mark Hall - Patton , who has appeared on the reality television show Pawn Stars .
ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS
*
On September 8 , 2015 , British Airways Flight 2276 aborted takeoff from McCarran due to engine failure .
While preparing to takeoff from runway 7L for London Gatwick Airport , the Boeing 777 - 200ER suffered failure of its left ( # 1 ) engine , and a fire erupted .
14 passengers suffered injuries during the evacuation , and the runway was closed for eight hours .
The aircraft suffered major damage , but it was repaired and returned to service in March 2016 .
*
In the wake of the Las Vegas shooting on the evening of October 1 , 2017 , approximately 300 people fleeing from the concert venue entered the airfield after breaking down the security fence surrounding McCarran while seeking shelter from the gunfire .
Since they had entered an active airfield , airport officials suspended operations on 01L/19R and 01R/19L at 10:15 p.m. local time , and then shut down 08L/26R and 08R/26L one hour later .
Airfield operations resumed at 12:40 a.m. on October 2 , and the security fence was repaired by 1:10 a.m.
During the suspension of operations , 25 flights were diverted to other airports in the region , primarily to Phoenix but also to Los Angeles , Ontario , Bullhead City , Salt Lake City , and Denver .
Two bullets struck and damaged , but did not ignite , a large fuel tank on the grounds of the airport .
ACCESS CAR Section::::Access . Section::::Car .
Road access to McCarran Airport is provided by Paradise Road to the north and by the McCarran Airport Connector to the south , which connects to the Las Vegas Beltway .
Terminal 1 and Terminal 3 have their own parking garages .
Each also has its own economy lot , which provides lower parking rates , and a separate lot for oversize vehicles .
Complimentary shuttle transportation is provided between the terminals and the remote Terminal 1 economy and oversize vehicle lots .
In March 2016 , the airport opened a cellphone lot , which provides free parking to people waiting for passengers .
A consolidated rental car facility opened in April 2007 , located about from the airport .
The facility , which sits on of land , houses multiple rental car companies with 5,000 parking spaces on multiple levels .
Courtesy shuttles transport passengers between the airport and the facility .
For transportation between Terminal 1 and Terminal 3 , McCarran Airport provides a free shuttle service , which leaves from Level 0 of both terminals .
BUS Section::::Bus .
RTC Transit provides bus transportation to and from various parts of the Las Vegas Valley .
Route 108 , Route 109 , the Westcliff Airport Express and the Centennial Express provide direct access to the airport .
Buses depart from Level 0 of Terminal 1 and Level 2 of Terminal 3 .
FUTURE PLANS ELEVATED EXPRESSWAY
Section::::Future plans .
Section::::Elevated expressway .
In January 2016 , the county announced plans to build a four - lane , largely elevated expressway to McCarran Airport , passing over Paradise Road , Koval Lane , and Tropicana Avenue .
The estimated $ 200 million project is expected to reduce travel time between the Strip and the Las Vegas Convention Center .
However , critics have called the plan a " 20th - century solution to 21st - century traffic issues .
" They propose the construction of a light rail system , which the county disapproves of given its higher cost and longer completion time .
The expressway plan was cancelled December 2017 , with businesses and residential property owners worried about lower property values , and the University of Nevada , Las Vegas expressing concern about the visual impact .
MONORAIL Section::::Monorail .
Previously , there had been plans to extend the monorail system which connects many of the major area hotels and the Las Vegas Convention Center to the airport .
In December 2006 , Clark County approved plans for the extension , although funding was not specified .
In its presentation to the Southern Nevada Tourism Infrastructure Committee in early 2016 , Las Vegas Monorail expressed its continued interest in the extension .
However , the project is largely no longer under consideration due to its high cost .
IVANPAH VALLEY
AIRPORT Section::::Ivanpah Valley Airport .
In the late 1990s , the county decided to build a second airport for Las Vegas , to be located from the city in the Ivanpah Valley .
Passenger traffic at McCarran had been rising steadily , and the county predicted that the airport would reach its capacity of 55 million passengers per year by 2008 .
The county began the process of acquiring federal land for the airport , and it started funding an EIS .
However , the advent of an economic recession in 2007 and the resulting decline in passenger numbers called the Ivanpah Valley Airport project into question .
In June 2010 , the project was indefinitely suspended .
However , the county continues to monitor the site of the planned airport , and it will reconsider the project once McCarran Airport reaches its capacity .
NOTES
REFERENCES
Bibliography
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Howard W. Cannon Aviation Museum Official site * Jeppesen airport diagrams for 1955 and 1966