CHEF
A chef is a trained professional cook who is proficient in all aspects of food preparation , often focusing on a particular cuisine .
The word " chef " is derived from the term chef de cuisine ( ) , the director or head of a kitchen .
Chefs can receive formal training from an institution , as well as by apprenticing with an experienced chef .
There are different terms that use the word chef in their titles , and deal with specific areas of food preparation , such as the sous - chef , who acts as the second - in - command in a kitchen , or the chef de partie , who handles a specific area of production .
The kitchen brigade system is a hierarchy found in restaurants and hotels employing extensive staff , many of which use the word " chef " in their titles .
Underneath the chefs are the kitchen assistants .
A chef 's standard uniform includes a hat ( called a toque ) , neckerchief , double - breasted jacket , apron and sturdy shoes ( that may include steel or plastic toe - caps ) .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word " chef " is derived ( and shortened ) from the term chef de cuisine ( ) , the director or head of a kitchen .
( The French word comes from Latin caput ( head ) and is a doublet with English " chief " ) .
In English , the title " chef " in the culinary profession originated in the haute cuisine of the 19th century .
The culinary arts , among other aspects of the French language introduced French loan - words into the English language .
TITLES Section::::Titles .
Various titles , detailed below , are given to those working in a professional kitchen and each can be considered a title for a type of chef .
Many of the titles are based on the brigade de cuisine ( or brigade system ) documented by Auguste Escoffier , while others have a more general meaning depending on the individual kitchen .
CHEF DE CUISINE Section::::Chef de cuisine .
Other names include executive chef , chef manager , head chef , and master chef .
This person is in charge of all activities related to the kitchen , which usually includes menu creation , management of kitchen staff , ordering and purchasing of inventory , controlling raw material costs and plating design .
Chef de cuisine is the traditional French term from which the English word chef is derived .
Head chef is often used to designate someone with the same duties as an executive chef , but there is usually someone in charge of a head chef , possibly making the larger executive decisions such as direction of menu , final authority in staff management decisions , and so on .
This is often the case for executive chefs with multiple restaurants .
Involved in checking the sensory evaluation of dishes after preparation and they are well aware of each sensory property of those specific dishes .
In the UK , the title executive chef normally applies to hotels with multi outlets in the same hotel .
Other establishments in the UK tend to use the title head chef .
SOUS - CHEF Section::::Sous - chef .
The Sous - Chef de Cuisine ( under - chef of the kitchen ) is the second - in - command and direct assistant of the Chef de Cuisine .
Sous chef works under executive chef or head chef .
This person may be responsible for scheduling the kitchen staff , or substituting when the head chef is off - duty .
Also , he or she will fill in for or assist the Chef de Partie ( line cook ) when needed .
This person is accountable for the kitchen 's inventory , cleanliness , organization , and the continuing training of its entire staff .
A sous - chef 's duties can also include carrying out the head chef 's directives , conducting line checks , and overseeing the timely rotation of all food products .
Smaller operations may not have a sous - chef , while larger operations may have more than one .
The sous chef is also responsible when the Executive Chef is absent .
CHEF DE PARTIE Section::::Chef de partie .
A chef de partie , also known as a " station chef " or " line cook " , is in charge of a particular area of production .
In large kitchens , each chef de partie might have several cooks or assistants .
In most kitchens , however , the chef de partie is the only worker in that department .
Line cooks are often divided into a hierarchy of their own , starting with " first cook " , then " second cook " , and so on as needed .
COMMIS ( CHEF )
/ RANGE CHEF Section::::Commis ( Chef )
/ Range chef .
A commis is a basic chef in larger kitchens who works under a chef de partie to learn the station 's or range 's responsibilities and operation .
This may be a chef who has recently completed formal culinary training or is still undergoing training .
BRIGADE SYSTEM TITLES Section::::Brigade system titles .
Station - chef titles which are part of the brigade system include : !
English !
French !
Description Sauté chef saucier Responsible for all sautéed items and their sauce .
This is usually the highest stratified position of all the stations .
Fish chef
poissonnier Prepares fish dishes and often does all fish butchering as well as appropriate sauces .
This station may be combined with the saucier position .
Roast chef rôtisseur Prepares roasted and braised meats and their appropriate sauce .
Grill chef grillardin Prepares all grilled foods ; this position may be combined with the rotisseur .
Fry chef friturier Prepares all fried items ; this position may be combined with the rotisseur position .
Entrée preparer entremetier Prepares hot appetizers and often prepares the soups , vegetables , pastas and starches .
In smaller establishments , this station may also cover those tasks performed by the potager and légumier .
Soup chef Potager Prepares soups in a full brigade system .
In smaller establishments , this station may be handled by the entremetier .
Vegetable chef
Légumier Prepares vegetables in a full brigade system .
In smaller establishments , this station may be handled by the entremetier .
Roundsman tournant Also referred to as a swing cook , fills in as needed on stations in the kitchen .
Pantry chef
garde manger Responsible for preparing cold foods including salads , cold appetizers , pâtés and other charcuterie items .
Butcher boucher Butchers meats , poultry , and sometimes fish .
May also be responsible for breading meats and fish .
Pastry chef pâtissier Makes baked goods such as pastries , cakes , breads and desserts .
In larger establishments , the pastry chef often supervises a separate team in their own kitchen .
KITCHEN ASSISTANT Section::::Kitchen assistant .
Kitchen assistants are of two types , kitchen - hands and stewards/ kitchen porters .
Kitchen - hands assist with basic food preparation tasks under the chef 's direction .
They carry out relatively unskilled tasks such as peeling potatoes and washing salad .
Stewards/ kitchen porters are involved in the scullery , washing up and general cleaning duties .
In a smaller kitchen , these duties may be incorporated .
A communard is in charge of preparing the meal for the staff during a shift .
This meal is often referred to as the staff or family meal .
The escuelerie ( from 15th century French and a cognate of the English " scullery " ) , or the more modern plongeur or dishwasher , is the keeper of dishes , having charge of dishes and keeping the kitchen clean .
A common humorous title for this role in some modern kitchens is " chef de plonge " or " head dishwasher " .
CULINARY EDUCATION Section::::Culinary education .
Culinary education is available from many institutions offering diploma , associate , and bachelor 's degree programs in culinary arts .
Depending on the level of education , this can take one to four years .
An internship is often part of the curriculum .
Regardless of the education received , most professional kitchens follow the apprenticeship system , and most new cooks will start at a lower - level 2nd or 1st cook position and work their way up .
The training period for a chef is generally four years as an apprentice .
A newly qualified chef is advanced or more commonly a torquecommis - chef , consisting of first - year commis , second - year commis , and so on .
The rate of pay is usually in accordance with the chefs .
Like all other chefs except the executive - chef , trainees are placed in sections of the kitchen ( e.g. , the starter ( appetizer ) or entrée sections ) under the guidance of a demi - chef de partie and are given relatively basic tasks .
Ideally , over time , a commis will spend a certain period in each section of the kitchen to learn the basics .
Unaided , a commis may work on the vegetable station of a kitchen .
The usual formal training period for a chef is two to four years in catering college .
They often spend the summer in work placements .
In some cases this is modified to ' day - release ' courses ; a chef will work full - time in a kitchen as an apprentice and then would have allocated days off to attend catering college .
These courses can last between one and three years .
In the UK , most Chefs are trained in the work place , with most doing a formal NVQ level 2 or 3 in the work place .
UNIFORM Section::::Uniform .
The standard uniform for a chef includes a hat called a toque , necktie , double - breasted jacket , apron and shoes with steel or plastic toe - caps .
A chef 's hat was originally designed as a tall rippled hat called a Dodin Bouffant or more commonly a toque .
The Dodin Bouffant had 101 ripples that represent the 101 ways that the chef could prepare eggs .
The modern chef 's hat is tall to allow for the circulation of air above the head and also provides an outlet for heat .
The hat helps to prevent sweat from dripping down the face and hair shedding on food .
Neckties were originally worn to allow for the mopping of sweat from the face , but as this is now against health regulations , they are largely decorative .
The chef 's neck tie was originally worn on the inside of the jacket to stop sweat running from the face and neck down the body .
The jacket is usually white to show off the chef 's cleanliness and repel heat , and is double - breasted to prevent serious injuries from burns and scalds .
The double breast also serves to conceal stains on the jacket as one side can be rebuttoned over the other , which is common practice .
An apron is worn to just below knee - length , also to assist in the prevention of burns because of spillage .
If hot liquid is spilled onto it , the apron can be quickly removed to minimize burns and scalds .
Shoes and clogs are hard - wearing and with a steel - top cap to prevent injury from falling objects or knives .
According to some hygiene regulations , jewelry is not allowed apart from wedding bands and religious jewelry .
If wound dressings are required they should be blue — an unusual colour for foodstuffs — so that they are noticeable if they fall into food .
Facial hair and longer hair are often required to be netted , or trimmed , for food safety .
Bandages on the hands are usually covered with nylon gloves .
Latex is not typically used for food preparation due to latex allergy .
SEE ALSO
* American Culinary Federation * Auguste Escoffier * Brigade de cuisine * Culinary art
* Celebrity chef * Development chef
* List of chefs * List of pastry chefs
* List of restaurant terminology * Personal chef * World Association of Chefs Societies NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official certification levels of the American Culinary Federation
* Chef training and career progression in New Zealand