YUM CHA
Yum cha (; lit .
" drink tea " ) , also known as going for dim sum , is the Cantonese tradition of brunch involving Chinese tea and dim sum .
The practice is popular in Cantonese - speaking regions , including Guangdong , Guangxi , Hong Kong and Macau .
It is also carried out in other regions worldwide where there are overseas Chinese communities .
Yum cha generally involves small portions of steamed , pan - fried , and deep - fried dim sum dishes served in bamboo steamers , which are designed to be eaten communally and washed down with tea .
People often go to yum cha in large groups for family get - togethers or celebrations .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
Yum cha in Cantonese Chinese literally means " drink tea " .
The phrase dim sum is sometimes used in place of yum cha ; in Cantonese , dim sum ( ) refers to the range of small dishes , whereas yum cha refers to the entire meal .
SERVING Section::::Serving .
Traditionally , yum cha is practiced in the morning or early afternoon , hence the terms chow cha ( , " morning tea " ) or ha ng cha ( , " afternoon tea " ) when appropriate .
The former is also known as yum chow cha ( ) , which literally means " drinking morning tea " .
There has been a recent trend for restaurants to offer dim sum during dinner hours and even late at night , though most venues still generally reserve the serving of dim sum for breakfast and lunch periods .
The combination of morning tea , afternoon tea , evening tea , lunch and dinner is known as sam cha leung fan ( , " three tea , two meal " ) .
The history of the tradition can be traced back to the period of Xianfeng Emperor , who first referred to establishments serving tea as yi li guan ( , " 1 cent house " ) .
These offered a place for people to gossip , which became known as cha waa ( , " tea talk " ) .
These tea houses grew to become their own type of restaurant , and the action of going there as yum cha .
The ways in which dim sum is served has varied over the years .
The traditional method , known as teoi ce
( , " push - cart " ) , dates back to the early 1960s , when dim sum items were pre - cooked in advance in the kitchen and brought out into the dining area in baskets by the restaurant employees .
These people are generally called fo gai ( , " staff " ) ; however , customers commonly address staff using the slang terms leng zai ( , " handsome guy " ) or leng leui / leng jie ( , " pretty girl " or " pretty lady " ) .
Later on , pushable trolleys with a heating function ( often using gas ) were used , allowing more items to be brought out at once .
Employees would call out the items they were carrying , and a customer who want to order items would then notify the server , who would place the desired items on the table .
This allows the customers receive hot , fresh items quickly and is efficient during periods of high patronage .
Nowadays , many dim sum restaurants have instead adopted a paper - based à la carte ordering system .
This method allows only those items which have been ordered to be prepared in the kitchen , reducing the need for leftovers as well as minimizing waste food or ingredients .
A few restaurants use both approaches to serving , making use of push - trolleys during peak hours and switching to on - demand ordering in less busier periods .
The cost of a meal was traditionally calculated by the number and size of dishes left on the patron 's table at the end .
In modern yum cha restaurants , dim sum servers sometimes mark orders by stamping a card on the table .
Servers in some restaurants use different stamps so that sales statistics for each server can be recorded .
CUSTOMS AND ETIQUETTE Section::::Customs and etiquette .
It is customary to pour tea for others before filling one 's own tea cup .
It is considered good manners to be the first to pour tea .
Tea drinkers may tap the table with two ( occasionally one ) fingers of the same hand in a gesture known as ' finger kowtow ' , symbolising thanks .
According to a just - so story , this gesture recreates a tale of imperial obeisance and can be traced to the Qianlong Emperor of the Qing dynasty , who used to travel incognito .
While visiting the Jiangnan region , he once went into a teahouse with his companions .
In order to maintain his anonymity , he took his turn at pouring tea .
His companions wanted to kowtow , but to do so would have revealed the identity of the emperor .
Finally , one of them tapped three fingers on the table ( one finger representing their bowed head and the other two representing their prostrate arms ) .
It is considered rude to have a tea cup full of tea ; it is preferred that tea is poured until the cup is about 80 % full .
The Chinese proverb " " , that literally means , it is fraud for the guest if the tea cup is full , but it is a sign of respect when it is alcohol .
SEE ALSO
* Dim sum * Table sharing
* Dai pai dong
* Cha chaan teng
* Tea ( meal ) NOTES REFERENCES AND FURTHER READING
*
Everything You Want to Know about Chinese Cooking by Pearl Kong Chen , Tien Chi Chen , and Rose Tseng .
Woodbury , New York :
Barron 's , 1983 .
* How to Cook and Eat in Chinese by Buwei Yang Chao .
New York : The John Day Company , 1945 .
* Dim Sum : The Delicious Secrets of Home - Cooked Chinese Tea Lunch by Rhoda Yee .
San Francisco :
Taylor & Ng , 1977 .
* Classic Deem Sum by Henry Chan , Yukiko , and Bob Haydock .
New York :
Holt , Rinehart , and Winston , 1985 .
* Chinese Dessert , Dim Sum and Snack Cookbook edited by Wonona Chong .
New York : Sterling , 1986 .
* Tiny Delights : Companion to the TV series by Elizabeth Chong .
Melbourne : Forte Communications , 2002 .