YONGE STREET Yonge Street (; " young " ) is a major arterial route connecting the shores of Lake Ontario in Toronto to Lake Simcoe , a gateway to the Upper Great Lakes .
Until 1999 , the Guinness Book of World Records repeated the popular misconception it was long , and thus the longest street in the world ; this was due to a conflation of Yonge Street with the rest of Ontario 's Highway 11 .
Yonge Street ( including the Bradford - to - Barrie extension ) is actually long .
The construction of Yonge Street is designated an Event of National Historic Significance in Canada .
Yonge Street was fundamental in the original planning and settlement of western Upper Canada in the 1790s , forming the basis of the concession roads in Ontario today .
Once the southernmost leg of Highway 11 , linking the capital with northern Ontario , Yonge Street has been referred to as " Main Street Ontario " .
Today , no section of Yonge Street is a provincial highway .
The street was named by Ontario 's first colonial administrator , John Graves Simcoe , for his friend Sir George Yonge , an expert on ancient Roman roads .
Yonge Street is a commercial main thoroughfare rather than a ceremonial one , with landmarks such as the Eaton Centre , Yonge - Dundas Square and the Hockey Hall of Fame along its length — and lends its name to the Downtown Yonge shopping and entertainment district .
In Toronto and York Region , Yonge Street is the north - south baseline from which street numbering is reckoned east and west .
The eastern branch of Line 1 Yonge – University serves nearly the entire length of the street in Toronto and acts as the spine of the Toronto subway system , linking to suburban commuter systems such as the Viva Blue BRT .
See the ' Public Transit ' section below .
ROUTE DESCRIPTION Section::::Route description .
Yonge Street originates on the northern shore of Toronto Bay at Queens Quay as a four - lane arterial road ( speed limit 40 km / h ) proceeding north by north - west .
Toronto 's Harbourfront is built on landfill extended into the bay , with the former industrial area now converted from port , rail and industrial uses to a dense residential high - rise community .
The street passes under the elevated Gardiner Expressway and the congested rail lines of the Toronto viaduct on their approach to Union Station .
The road rises slightly near Front Street , marking the pre - landfill shoreline .
Here , at the southern edge of the central business district , is the Dominion Public Building , the Sony Centre for the Performing Arts and the Hockey Hall of Fame , the latter housed in an imposing former Bank of Montreal office , once Canada 's largest bank branch .
Beyond Front Street the road passes through the east side of the Financial District , within sight of many of Canada 's tallest buildings , fronting an entrance to the Allen Lambert Galleria .
Between Front Street and Queen Street , Yonge Street is bounded by historic and commercial buildings , many serving the large weekday workforce concentrated here .
Yonge Street 's entire west side , from Queen Street to Dundas Street , is occupied by the Eaton Centre , an indoor mall featuring shops along its Yonge Street frontage and a Nordstrom anchor store at the corner of Dundas Street .
The east side has two historic performance venues , the Ed Mirvish Theatre ( formerly the Canon Theatre and before that , the Pantages ) and the Elgin and Winter Garden Theatres .
In addition , Massey Hall is just to the east on Shuter Street .
Opposite the Eaton Centre lies Yonge - Dundas Square .
The area now comprising the square was cleared of several small commercial buildings and redeveloped in the late 1990s and early 2000s , with large video screens , retail shopping arcades , fountains and seating in a bid to become " Toronto 's Times Square " .
It is used for numerous public events .
Another stretch of busy retail lines both sides of Yonge Street north of Dundas Street , including Sam the Record Man until its closure on June 30 , 2007 .
The density of businesses diminishes north of Gerrard Street ; residential towers flank this section .
The Art Deco College Park building , a former shopping complex of the T. Eaton Company , occupies most of the west side of Yonge Street from Gerrard Street north to College Street .
It was converted into a residential and commercial complex after the building of the Eaton Centre .
From College Street north to Bloor Street , Yonge Street serves smaller street - level retail , mostly in two- to three - storey buildings of a hundred years ' vintage .
The businesses here , unlike the large chains which dominate south of Gerrard Street , are mostly small independent shops and serve a dense residential community on either side of Yonge Street with amenities such as convenience stores .
The intersection of Yonge and Bloor Streets is a major crossroads of Toronto , informally considered the northern edge of the downtown core .
Subway Line 2 Bloor –
Danforth intersects the Yonge line here , with the resulting transfers between lines making Bloor - Yonge Station the busiest in the city .
The Hudson 's Bay Centre and Two Bloor West office towers dominate the corner , visible both from downtown and beyond , with the south - east corner earmarked for a major condominium development .
The Mink Mile 's borders extend from Yonge to Avenue Road along Bloor .
The intersection of Yonge and Bloor Streets is itself a " scramble"-type intersection allowing pedestrians to cross from any corner to any other corner .
Immediately north of Bloor , the street is part of the old town of Yorkville , today a major shopping district extending west of Yonge Street along Cumberland and Bloor Streets .
North of Yorkville , densities and traffic decrease somewhat and the speed limit increases slightly ( to 50 km / h , which it remains for most of its urban length ) as Yonge Street forms the main street of Summerhill , which together with Rosedale to the east is noted for its opulent residences .
The area is marked by the historic North Toronto railway station , formerly served by the Canadian Pacific Railway .
The CPR route parallels the foot of the Iroquois shoreline escarpment , which Yonge Street ascends here toward Midtown .
From approximately St. Clair Avenue to Yonge Boulevard , Yonge Street is central to the former suburb of North Toronto and features mixed low - scale residential , retail and commercial buildings .
Major intersections in Midtown , served by some of the city 's busiest TTC stations , dot the skyline with dense clusters of high - rises in an otherwise leafy residential setting .
The intersection at Eglinton Avenue has become a focal point , serving as a high - density residential , commercial and transit hub .
The site of Montgomery 's Tavern is nearby , scene of a significant clash in the Upper Canada Rebellion and a National Historic Site .
North of Yonge Boulevard , Yonge Street traverses the deep forested ravine of the West Don Valley at Hoggs Hollow , a formidable obstacle in pioneer days and the site of one of the last of the former toll gates .
The lower - density residential community and park - like setting here represent an interlude between North Toronto and the newer high - rise district beyond , towering over the valley .
Canada 's busiest section of highway ( Highway 401 ) spans the valley via the Hogg 's Hollow Bridge ( exit 369 ) .
Leaving the valley , densities and traffic both significantly increase on entering the downtown core of the former suburban city of North York .
The street widens to a six - lane urban arterial road through North York , passing inner - suburb transit hubs at Sheppard and Finch Avenues .
From Finch Avenue to Stouffville Road ( acquiring the York Regional Road 1 designation north of the Toronto city limits at Steeles Avenue in York Region ) , Yonge Street is a suburban commercial strip , passing Highway 407 ( exit 77 )
two kilometres north of Steeles .
This segment is a busy suburban arterial , interrupted by the original town centres of suburban communities such as Thornhill ( where the route crosses the East Don Valley in the upper part of its watershed ) and Richmond Hill .
Continuous urbanization ends just south of Stouffville Road , and the street passes through brief semi - rural exurban stretches between Richmond Hill , Aurora , Newmarket , and Holland Landing , passing a number of kettle lakes and traversing the crest of the Oak Ridges Moraine , thence leaving the Lake Ontario basin .
Yonge passes through the core of Aurora , and in the regional seat of Newmarket , Yonge serves as the town 's main suburban artery , passing through low - density residential and commercial areas , bypassing its core to the west .
North of Green Lane , Regional Road 1 deviates from the original baseline north of Lake Ontario , bypassing the centre of Holland Landing with a northwest heading and thereby circumnavigating Cook 's Bay and the lower Holland Marsh , through exurban areas en route to Bradford .
The bypass was constructed in 1959 .
YORK REGIONAL ROAD 51 Section::::York Regional Road 51 .
Regional Road 51 , is the original route of the main section .
Yonge Street branches off Regional Road 1 at the foot of the bypass to continue north through Holland Landing .
This short section , known locally as the Yonge Street Extension , is co - signed with Regional Road 13 .
Past Queensville Side Road , the road breaks .
The road resumes again for before it for .
After that it begins for another before it ends in the upper Holland Marsh .
SIMCOE ROAD 4 Section::::Simcoe Road 4 .
To the west of Holland Landing the main route crosses the Holland River and its polders in the town of Bradford , where the name changes to Bridge Street and again to Holland Street .
Resuming its northward heading with a right turn at an intersection in the centre of Bradford , where the road briefly becomes Barrie Street before the name Yonge resumes , Yonge Street roughly parallels Lake Simcoe 's western shore , finally entering true rural countryside , traversing the rolling hills of southeast Simcoe County , and is signed Simcoe Road 4 .
The street officially ends in Barrie at a rail spur , where its name changes to Burton Avenue , which itself ends less than a kilometre from Kempenfelt Bay , at a T - intersection with Essa Road .
PUBLIC TRANSIT
Section::::Public transit .
In Toronto , Yonge St. is served by the eastern half of the Line 1 Yonge – University subway , which runs north from Union Station at Front Street to Finch Avenue .
There is also a supplementary bus route running along the street , as well as an overnight Blue Night route which operates after the subway closes .
In York Region , it is served by Viva Blue , a bus rapid transit route which connects with Finch station at the northern terminus of the subway .
The subway is proposed to be extended north to Highway 7 in Richmond Hill , and the construction of dedicated bus lanes called rapidways for the Viva buses is underway as of 2017 from Highway 7 to Major Mackenzie Drive .
Viva Blue is also supplemented by two local - service routes .
In Holland Landing , there are transit services as well .
In Simcoe County , GO Transit runs a bus route along Yonge from Newmarket to Barrie .
Barrie Transit operates a circular route with directional branches that serve Yonge for a portion of their respective routes .
The trunk routes serving the street are : Toronto ( TTCY - U Subway !
SB
To Union Station ( Front Street )
Line continues northwest to Vaughan Metropolitan Centre station !
NB
To Finch AvenueDavisville station !
NB To York Mills stationQueens QuaySteeles AvenueBlue Night ) !
SB
To Queens Quay !
NB
To Steeles Avenue York Region ( YRTViva Blue !
SB
To Finch GO Bus Terminal !
NB
To Newmarket Terminal ( Davis DriveBernard Terminal ( north of Elgin Mills RoadLoops back south via other streets in Holland Landing to terminate back at the Newmarket Terminal Simcoe County
( GO TransitBarrie Transit Terminal via Toll Gate Road Barrie
( Barrie Transit Clockwise branch serves Yonge between Essa Rd .
and Mapleview Dr. !
NB
To Royal Victoria Hospital
via off - Yonge St. routing !
NB
To
Royal Victoria Hospital Counterclockwise branch serves Yonge between Mapleview Dr. and Essa Rd .
HISTORY ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ROUTE Section::::History .
Section::::Establishment of the route .
With the outbreak of hostilities between France and Great Britain in 1793 , part of the War of the First Coalition , the Lieutenant - Governor of Upper Canada ( now Ontario ) , John Graves Simcoe , was concerned about the possibility of the United States entering British North America in support of their French allies .
In particular , the location of Newark ( now Niagara - on - the - Lake ) , the first and former capital of Upper Canada , was in danger of being attacked by the Americans from the nearby border .
Additionally , US forces could easily sever British access to the upper lakes at Lake St. Clair or the Detroit River , cutting the colony off from the important trading post at Michilimackinac .
Simcoe planned to move the capital to a better - protected location and build overland routes to the upper lakes as soon as possible .
Simcoe established York , as Toronto was originally called , with its naturally enclosed harbour , as a defensible site for a new capital .
To provide communications between the site and the upper lakes , he planned two connected roads , the first running north from York to Lake Simcoe , ( then named Lake aux Claies ) , the second joining Lake Simcoe with Georgian Bay .
This would allow overland transport to the upper lakes , bypassing U.S. strongholds .
The route from Lake Ontario to Lake Simcoe is still known as Yonge Street , and the second leg to Georgian Bay was long known as the Penetanguishene Road .
Before the construction of Yonge Street , a portage route , the Toronto Carrying - Place Trail , had already linked Lakes Ontario and Simcoe .
On September 25 , 1793 , Simcoe and a small party of soldiers and native guides started northward along the trail , establishing the Pine Fort on the western branch of the Holland River , near the modern location of Bradford .
Stopping only to rename Lake aux Claies to " Lake Simcoe " in memory of his father , the party continued north to Lake Couchiching , and then down the Severn River to Georgian Bay .
Here he selected the site of Penetanguishene as the location for a new naval base and port .
On his return , he met with an Ojibway named ' Old Sail ' and was shown a new route along another arm of the trail , this one starting on the eastern branch of the Holland River and thereby avoiding the marshes of the western branch ( today 's Holland Marsh ) .
They left Pine Fort on October 11 and reached York on the 15th .
Simcoe selected this eastern route for his new road , moving the southern end from the Rouge River to the western outskirts of the settled area in York , and the northern end to a proposed new town on the Holland River , St. Albans .
Bears were known to wander onto Yonge Street in the early days of Toronto .
In 1809 Lieutenant Fawcett , of the 100th Regiment , came across a large bear on Yonge Street and cut its head open with his sword .
The road was actually called Concession 1 at first with Concessions 2 etc .
on either side .
For instance Concession 1 Whitchurch Township faces Yonge St. and goes east to Concession 2 , which starts at Bayview Ave .
Concession 1 King Township faces Yonge St. and goes west to Concession 2 , which starts at
Bathurst St. There are 10 concessions in York County going east and west from Concession 1 ,
Yonge St. The east side ending at then Ontario County ,
now Durham Region , and the west side ending at Peel County ( now Peel Region ) .
CONSTRUCTION OF YONGE STREET Section::::Construction of Yonge Street .
The following spring , Simcoe instructed Deputy Surveyor General Augustus Jones to blaze a small trail marking the route .
Simcoe initiated construction of the road by granting land to settlers , who in exchange were required to clear 33 feet of frontage on the road passing their lot .
Certain seasons saw the muddy sidewalks of York in deplorable condition , and Yonge Street was renowned as being particularly bad , making it difficult to transport loads along it .
The first Toronto resident known to have introduced sidewalks was Jesse Ketchum , who used tanned bark .
In the summer of 1794 , William Berczy was the first to take up the offer , leading a group of 64 families north - east of Toronto to found the town of German Mills , in modern Markham .
By the end of 1794 , Berczy 's settlers had cleared the route around Thornhill .
However , the settlement was hit by a series of setbacks and road construction stalled .
Work on the road started again in 1795 when the Queen 's Rangers took over .
They began their work at Eglinton Avenue and proceeded north , reaching the site of St. Albans on 16 February 1796 .
Expansion of the trail into a road was a condition of settlement for farmers along the route , who were required to spend 12 days a year to clear the road of logs , subsequently removed by convicted drunks as part of their sentence .
The southern end of the road was in use in the first decade of the 19th century , and became passable all the way to the northern end in 1816 .
The road was extended south from Eglinton to Bloor Street in 1796 by Berczy , who needed a route to his warehouse on the Toronto lakeshore .
The area south of Bloor Street proved too swampy for a major road .
A path did exist between Queen and Bloor Streets , but was called the " road to Yonge Street " , rather than being considered part of the street itself due to its poor condition .
Over time the creeks were rerouted and the swamps drained .
In 1812 the route was extended from Queen Street to the harbour , and in 1828 the entire southern portion was solidified with gravel .
St. Albans never developed as Simcoe had hoped , but the town of Holland Landing eventually grew up on the site , a somewhat more descriptive name .
Holland Landing was settled by Quakers who moved into the area after having left the United States in the aftermath of the American Revolution .
The settlers were branching out from their initial town of " Upper Yonge Street " , which later became Newmarket .
The road almost served its original military purpose during the War of 1812 , when construction of a new fleet of first - rate ships began on the Lakes , necessitating the shipment of a large anchor from England for use on a frigate under construction on Lake Huron .
The war ended while the anchor was still being moved , and now lies just outside Holland Landing in a park named in its honour .
EVOLUTION OF YONGE
STREET Section::::Evolution of Yonge Street .
In 1824 , work began to extend Yonge Street to Kempenfelt Bay near Barrie .
A north - western extension was branched off the original Yonge Street in Holland Landing and ran into the new settlement of Bradford before turning north towards Barrie .
Work was completed by 1827 , making connections with the Penetanguishene Road .
The decision was made to withdraw the military garrison in Penetanguishene in 1852 .
A year later , the Northern Railway of Canada was built along this established route , between Toronto and Kempenfelt Bay and extended to Collingwood by 1855 .
Settlement along the Penetanguishene Road pre - dated the road itself .
Subsequent extensions of Yonge Street ( though never named as such )
which later became the more northerly parts of Highway 11 , built in the 1830s ( some with military strategy in mind ) , pushed settlement northeast along the shores of Lake Simcoe .
By 1860 the Muskoka Road penetrated the southern skirts of the Canadian Shield , advancing towards Lake Nipissing .
A horse - drawn streetcar line was completed on Yonge Street in Toronto in September 1861 and operated by the Toronto Street Railway .
The line went from Scollard Street to King Street .
Streetcar service would be electrified in Toronto by 1892 .
Confederation and the construction of the Canadian Pacific Railway further diminished the importance of Yonge Street , as the new Dominion of Canada heralded the construction of east - west trade routes spanning the continent .
By the 1870s , Dr. Scadding , historian of Toronto of Old , declared that Penetanguishene did not have the importance to need an approach such as the " extension of the Yonge Street Road " .
During the late 1800s , the Toronto and York Radial Railway used the Yonge Street right - of - way , originally to the town of North Toronto , but expanding over the years all the way to Sutton , on southern Lake Simcoe .
The Radial Railway ran along the eastern side of the street , allowing the prevailing westerly winds to remove snow from the slightly raised rails .
The arrival of the Canadian Northern Railway in 1906 lessened traffic on the Radial , but it was not until Yonge became a major route for automobiles that the Radial truly fell into disuse .
The last TYRR train north from Toronto ran on March 16 , 1930 .
The line was then purchased by the townships north of the city and re - incorporated as North Yonge Railways , running service for another eighteen years before operations ended , along with service on numerous other portions of the Radial lines , in 1948 .
The space it formerly occupied was used to expand the road between Aurora and Newmarket .
YONGE STREET
AS THE " LONGEST STREET IN THE WORLD " Section::::Yonge Street as the " longest street in the world " .
Yonge Street was formerly a part of Highway 11 , which led to claims that Yonge Street was the longest street in the world .
Running ( mostly ) concurrent with Yonge as far north as Barrie , then continuing beyond through central and northern Ontario to the Ontario - Minnesota border at Rainy River , the highway was over long .
But Yonge Street could only be called the longest street in the world if were fully synonymous with Highway 11 , which has never been the case .
The original Yonge Street continues along its original alignment , ending in Holland Landing .
This alignment was extended over the years , and today ends just south of Lake Simcoe .
The original extension running from Holland Landing to Bradford was named for the towns , known as Bradford Street in Holland Landing , and Holland Landing Road in Bradford .
The latter was later extended as a bypass was added , curving off the original alignment .
A second bypass was later constructed , bypassing the entirety of Holland Landing Road and joining Bradford at Bridge Street .
Likewise , the road between Bradford and Barrie is known as Barrie Street in Bradford and Bradford Street ( along with Yonge St. ) in Barrie , although Bradford St. is a physically distinct street today .
The entire route of Highway 11 has incorrectly become synonymous with Yonge Street .
No segment of the highway anywhere north of Barrie ever actually bore the name .
However , the Guinness Book of World Records recognized this claim as late as 1999 .
Provincial downloading separated Yonge Street from Highway 11 during the 1990s .
As a result , Highway 11 does not start until Crown Hill just outside Barrie , several kilometres north of where the name " Yonge Street " ends .
The Guinness Book of World Records no longer lists Yonge Street as the longest street in the world and has not chosen a replacement street , but cites the Pan - American Highway as the world 's longest " motorable road " .
Although current tourist campaigns do not make much of Yonge Street 's length , its status as an urban myth was bolstered by an art installation at the foot of Yonge Street and a map of its purported length laid out into the sidewalk in bronze at the southwest corner of Yonge and Dundas Streets .
However , possibly due to wider recognition of the street 's actual length , the map inlay has now been removed .
2018 VAN ATTACK Section::::2018 van attack .
On April 23 , 2018 , the driver of a rented Ryder van intentionally struck numerous pedestrians , killing 10 and injuring 16 others on Yonge Street between Finch and Sheppard Avenues .
CULTURAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Cultural significance .
Yonge is Toronto 's main street , hosting parades , street performances and demonstrations .
When the Toronto Blue Jays won the World Series in 1992 and 1993 it was estimated that 1,000,000 people gathered in the vicinity of Yonge and Dundas Streets .
Similar gatherings occurred during the Winter Olympics in 2002 and 2010 , when the Canadian men 's hockey team defeated the United States for the gold medal .
During lesser celebrations motorists drive up and down the street honking their horns and flying flags .
Sections of the street are often closed for other events , such as an annual street festival .
In 1999 Ricky Martin held an autograph session at Sunrise Records and had a large section of Yonge Street closed for the day .
The intersection of Yonge and Dundas Streets , centred on the plaza at Yonge - Dundas Square , has been closed on occasion to host free concerts , including performances by R.E.M. on 17 May 2001 , by Beyoncé on 15 September 2006 and by John Mayer on 16 September of the same year .
In 2008 , Toronto 's first pedestrian scramble was opened at the intersection of Yonge and Dundas Streets .
Five - pin bowling was invented and first played at the Toronto Bowling Club at Yonge and Temperance Streets .
Ken Westerfield and Jim Kenner are credited with introducing ultimate and other disc sports ( Frisbee ) to Canada .
They did nightly Frisbee shows on the Yonge Street Mall between Gerrard and Dundas 1971 - 1974 .
Toronto 's annual Gay Pride , Orange Order , and Santa Claus parades also use Yonge Street for a significant portion of their routes .
The early works of Canadian singer - songwriters such as Joni Mitchell and Gordon Lightfoot were featured at the Yonge Street location of Sam the Record Man , just north of Dundas Street , at a time when records by Canadian musicians were not widely available .
Lightfoot has a song about Yonge Street , titled " On Yonge Street " , on his album A Painter Passing Through .
The Canadian singer - songwriter Bruce Cockburn makes this reference in his song " Coldest Night of the Year , " from his album Inner City Front : " I took in Yonge Street at a glance /
Heard the punkers playing / Watched the bikers dance
/ Everybody wishing they could go to the south of France /
And you 're not here /
On the coldest night of the year . "
Singer and rapper K - os also references the street in the lyrics to his 2004 single " Crabbuckit " : " Walking down Yonge Street on a Friday / Ca n't follow them , got ta do it my way /
No fast lane , still on a highway " .
PICTURES Section::::Pictures .
SEE ALSO
* Penetanguishene Road
REFERENCES
Bibliography REFERENCES TO OLD TORONTO
Section::::References .
Section::::References to old Toronto .
( a ) Berczy 's Draft letter in the Public Archives of Canada .
Among the William Berczy Papers ( M.G.23 , H ii , Vol.2 , p. 419 and Vol .
3 , p. 527 ) .
As well as agreement of the German Company reproduced in The Simcoe correspondence , I , p. 191 , 192
( b )
Baby collection , University of Montreal .
Salso Berczy Papers National Archive .
( c )
John Andre the Berczy Study Infant Toronto as Simcoe 's Folly
p. 137 .
Also see Table II that shows comparison by yearly averaged growth from 1802 to 1825 p. 138
( d )
Firth , p. 10
p.
10 P.Russell to Elizabeth Russell , Sep. 1 , 1793 Also in Eric ArthurToronto
No Mean City " Toronto , 1964
p. 138
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A page which argues against Yonge Street 's claim as the world 's longest street
* Portrait of Sir George Yonge * A Yahoo !
page that claims Yonge Street is the longest street in the world
* Ontarioplaques.com
* Blog series on the southern section of Yonge Street * Google Maps of Yonge Street