STILTON CHEESE
Stilton is an English cheese , produced in two varieties : Blue , known for its characteristic strong smell and taste , and the lesser - known White .
Both have been granted the status of a protected designation of origin by the European Commission , which requires that only cheese produced in the three counties of Derbyshire , Leicestershire , and Nottinghamshire and made according to a strict code may be called " Stilton " .
Thus cheese made in the village of Stilton which is now in Cambridgeshire ( from where its name was derived in the 18th century ) could not be sold as " Stilton " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Frances Pawlett ( or Paulet ) , a " skilled cheese maker " of Wymondham , has traditionally been credited as the person who set modern Stilton cheese 's shape and style characteristics in the 1720s , but others have also been named .
A recipe for a Stilton cheese was published by Richard Bradley , first Professor of Botany at Cambridge University in his 1726 book A General Treatise of Husbandry and Gardening .
Bradley records a letter from a correspondent , John Warner , which states the cheese is made in Stilton and that the Bell Inn produced " the best cheese in town " .
The first known written reference to Stilton cheese appeared in William Stukeley 's Itinerarium Curiosum , Letter V , dated October 1722 .
Daniel Defoe in his 1724 work
A tour thro ' the whole island of Great Britain notes , " We pass'd Stilton , a town famous for cheese , which is call'd our English Parmesan , and is brought to table with the mites , or maggots round it , so thick , that they bring a spoon with them for you to eat the mites with , as you do the cheese . "
According to the Stilton Cheesemaker 's Association , the first person to market Blue Stilton cheese was Cooper Thornhill , owner of the Bell Inn on the Great North Road , in the village of Stilton , Huntingdonshire , ( now an administrative district of Cambridgeshire ) .
Traditional legend has it that in 1730 , Thornhill discovered a distinctive blue cheese while visiting a small farm near Melton Mowbray in rural Leicestershire – possibly in Wymondham .
He fell in love with the cheese and made a business arrangement that granted the Bell Inn exclusive marketing rights to Blue Stilton .
Soon thereafter , wagon - loads of cheese were being delivered to the inn .
Since a main stagecoach route from London to Northern England , the Great North Road passed through the village of Stilton he was able to promote the sale of this cheese and the fame of Stilton rapidly spread .
In 1936 the Stilton Cheesemakers ' Association ( SCMA ) was formed to lobby for regulation to protect the quality and origin of the cheese , and in 1966 Stilton was granted legal protection via a certification trade mark , the only British cheese to have received this status .
MANUFACTURE AND PDO
STATUS Section::::Manufacture and PDO status .
Blue Stilton 's distinctive blue veins are created by piercing the crust of the cheese with stainless steel needles , allowing air into the core .
The manufacturing and ripening process takes approximately nine to twelve weeks .
For cheese to use the name " Stilton " , it must be made in one of the three counties of Derbyshire , Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire , and must use pasteurised local milk .
The manufacturers of Stilton cheese in these counties applied for and received Protected Geographical Status ( PDO ) in 1996 .
Stilton cheese can not be produced in the village that gave the cheese its name .
Stilton village is not in the three permitted counties ; it is in the administrative county of Cambridgeshire , and in the historic county of Huntingdonshire .
The Original Cheese Company applied to Defra to amend the Stilton PDO to include the village but the application was rejected in 2013 .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
To be called " Blue Stilton " , a cheese must : * Be made only in the three counties of Derbyshire , Leicestershire and Nottinghamshire from local milk , which is pasteurised before use ( at peak times the milk may also be drawn from the whole of England and Wales ) .
* Have the traditional cylindrical shape .
* Form its own crust or coat .
* Be unpressed .
* Contain delicate blue veins radiating from the centre .
* Have a " taste profile typical of Stilton " .
* Minimum 48 % milk fat in the dry matter
Stilton has a typical fat content of approximately 35 % , and protein content of approximately 23 % .
SIMILAR
CHEESES Section::::Similar cheeses .
A number of blue cheeses are made in a similar way to Blue Stilton .
These cheeses get their blue veins and distinct flavour from the use of one or more saprotrophic fungi such as Penicillium roqueforti and Penicillium glaucum .
Stichelton is made in the same way as Stilton cheese and uses cows ' milk from a permitted county ( Nottinghamshire ) , but the milk is unpasteurised and so under the PDO it can not be designated as true Stilton .
Since the PDO came into effect , some British supermarkets have stocked a generic " British Blue cheese " .
Other makers have adopted their own names and styles .
Other examples of blue cheeses include Gorgonzola cheese of Italy , which is made from cows ' milk ; and the French cheeses Fourme d'Ambert from Auvergne and made with cows ' milk and Roquefort , which is made with ewes ' milk .
CONSUMPTION Section::::Consumption .
Blue Stilton is often eaten with celery or pears .
It is also commonly added as a flavouring to vegetable soup , most notably to cream of celery or broccoli .
Alternatively it is eaten with various crackers , biscuits and bread .
It can also be used to make a blue cheese sauce to be served drizzled over a steak , or can be crumbled over a salad .
Traditionally , a barley wine or port are paired with Blue Stilton , but it also goes well with sweet sherry or Madeira wine .
The " uncouth " practice of scooping a hollow into the centre of a Stilton cheese and pouring the port wine into it is deprecated ; nonetheless this combination has been marketed in screw - topped tubes , " like toothpaste " .
The cheese is traditionally eaten at Christmas .
The rind of the cheese forms naturally during the aging process , and is perfectly edible , unlike the rind of some other cheeses such as Edam or Port - Salut .
" White Stilton " has not had the Penicillium roqueforti mould introduced into it which would otherwise lead to the blue veining normally associated with Stilton .
It is a crumbly , creamy , open textured cheese and is now extensively used as a base for blending with apricot , ginger and citrus or vine fruits to create unique dessert cheeses and has even been used as a flavouring for chocolate .
Huntsman cheese is made with both Blue Stilton and Double Gloucester .
DREAMS Section::::Dreams .
A 2005 survey by the British Cheese Board reported that Stilton seemed to cause unusual dreams , with 75 % of men and 85 % of women experiencing " odd and vivid " dreams after eating a 20-gram serving of the cheese half an hour prior to sleeping .
CULTURAL INFLUENCE
Section::::Cultural influence .
British author G. K. Chesterton wrote a couple of essays on cheese , specifically on the absence of cheese in art .
In one of his essays he recalls a time when he , by chance , visited a small town in the fenlands of England , which turned out to be Stilton .
His experience in Stilton left a deep impression on him , which he expressed through poetry in his " Sonnet to a Stilton Cheese " :
This is in part a parody of William Wordsworth 's sonnet " London , 1802 " , the opening line of which was " Milton !
thou shouldst be living at this hour . "
George Orwell wrote an essay , " In Defence of English Cooking " , first published in the Evening Standard on 15 December 1945 .
While enumerating the high points of British cuisine , he touches on Stilton : " Then there are the English cheeses .
There are not many of them
but I fancy that Stilton is the best cheese of its type in the world , with Wensleydale not far behind . "
The Stilton Cheese Makers Association has produced a fragrance called " Eau de Stilton " which " is very different to the very sweet perfumes you smell wafting down the street as someone walks past you . " .
The search for an unpasteurised Stilton cheese was a plot element of a Chef !
episode entitled " The Big Cheese " , aired on the BBC One television station on 25 February 1993 .
A character named G. D'Arcy " Stilton " Cheesewright appears in several of the Jeeves novels of P. G. Wodehouse .
SEE ALSO
* List of British cheeses * Oxford Blue ( cheese )
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Has information about White Stilton Gold cheese , one of the most expensive cheeses in the world EXTERNAL LINKS * Stilton Cheesemakers ' Association