TABLE OF CONTENTS
A table of contents , usually headed simply Contents and abbreviated informally as TOC , is a list , usually found on a page before the start of a written work , of its chapter or section titles or brief descriptions with their commencing page numbers .
EARLIEST USE Section::::Earliest use .
Pliny the Elder credits Quintus Valerius Soranus ( d. 82 B.C. )
as the first author to provide a table of contents to help readers navigate a lengthy work .
Pliny 's own table of contents for his encyclopedic Historia naturalis ( " Natural History " ) may be viewed online in Latin and in English ( following dedication ) .
FORM Section::::Form .
A table of contents usually includes the titles or descriptions of first - level headings ( chapters in longer works ) , and often includes second - level headings ( sections or A - heads ) within the chapters as well , and occasionally even includes third - level headings ( subsections or B - heads ) within the sections as well .
The depth of detail in tables of contents depends on the length of the work , with longer works having less .
Formal reports ( ten or more pages and being too long to put into a memo or letter ) also have a table of contents .
Within an English - language book , the table of contents usually appears after the title page , copyright notices , and , in technical journals , the abstract ; and before any lists of tables or figures , the foreword , and the preface .
Printed tables of contents indicate page numbers where each part starts , while digital ones offer links to go to each part .
The format and location of the page numbers is a matter of style for the publisher .
If the page numbers appear after the heading text , they might be preceded by characters called leaders , usually dots or periods , that run from the chapter or section titles on the opposite side of the page , or the page numbers might remain closer to the titles .
In some cases , the page number appears before the text .
If a book or document contains chapters , articles , or stories by different authors , their names usually appear in the table of contents .
Matter preceding the table of contents is generally not listed there .
However , all pages except the outside cover are counted , and the table of contents is often numbered with a lowercase Roman numeral page number .
Many popular word processors , such as Microsoft Word , WordPerfect , and StarWriter are capable of automatically generating a table of contents if the author of the text uses specific styles for chapters , sections , subsections , etc .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Example with leaders : Example without leaders : Example with authors : Example with descriptive text :
REFERENCES
* The Chicago Manual of Style ( 15th Edition ) NOTES