TURBAN
A turban ( from Persian دولبند‌ , dulband ; via Middle French turbant ) is a type of headwear based on cloth winding .
Featuring many variations , it is worn as customary headwear by men of various countries .
Communities with prominent turban - wearing traditions can be found in the Indian subcontinent , Southeast Asia , the Arabian Peninsula , the Middle East , Central Asia , North Africa and the Horn of Africa .
Wearing turbans is common among Sikhs , including women .
The headgear also serves as a religious observance , including among Shia Muslims , who regard turban - wearing as Sunnah Mu'akkadah ( confirmed tradition ) .
The turban is also the traditional headdress of Sufi scholars .
Additionally , turbans have often been worn by nobility , regardless of religious background .
They are also sometimes donned to protect hair or as a headwrap for women following cancer treatments .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The origins of turbans are uncertain .
Some of the ancient civilizations such as those of Ancient India , Mesopotamia , Sumerian and Babylonian evidently used turbans .
A style of turban called a phakeolis continued to be worn in that region by soldiers of the Byzantine army in the period 400–600 , as well as by Byzantine civilians as depicted in Greek frescoes from the 10th century in the province of Cappadocia in modern Turkey , where it was still worn by their Greek - speaking descendants in the early 20th century .
The Islamic prophet , Muhammad , who lived 570–632 , is believed to have worn a turban in white , the most holy colour .
Shiah clergies today wear white turbans unless they are descendants of prophet Muhammad or Sayyid , in which case they wear a black turban .
Many Muslim men choose to wear green , because it represents paradise , especially among followers of Sufism .
In parts of North Africa , where blue is common , the shade of a turban can signify the tribe of the wearer .
NATIONAL STYLES Section::::National styles .
Contemporary turbans come in many shapes , sizes and colours .
Turban wearers in North Africa , the Horn of Africa , the Middle East , Central Asia , South Asia , and Philippines ( Sulu ) usually wind it anew for each wearing , using long strips of cloth .
The cloth is usually under five meters in length .
Some elaborate South Asian turbans may also be permanently formed and sewn to a foundation .
Turbans can be very large or quite modest depending upon region , culture , and religion .
Traditionally , turban has been the name of a type of headwear worn by women in Western countries .
The wearing of such turbans by women in Western societies is less common than it was earlier in the 20th century .
They are usually sewn to a foundation , so that they can be donned or removed easily .
HORN OF AFRICA Section::::Horn of Africa .
Turbans are commonly worn in the Horn of Africa by Muslim clerics , as well as Ethiopian Orthodox Christian priests .
The headwrap has a long presence in the region , where it was frequently sported by Sultans , Wazirs , and other artistocratic and court officials .
Among these nobles are the Somali Sultans Mohamoud Ali Shire of the Warsangali Sultanate , Osman Mahamuud of the Majeerteen Sultanate , and Yusuf Ali Kenadid and Ali Yusuf Kenadid of the Sultanate of Hobyo .
Prominent historical Islamic leaders in the region that are known to have worn turbans include Sheikh Abadir Umar Ar - Rida .
ARABIAN PENINSULA Section::::Arabian Peninsula .
In most countries of the Arabian peninsula , a plain or checkered scarf ( called keffiyeh , ghutrah , shumagh or ghabanah ) , not usually described as a turban is often worn , though the Arabic Emamah tradition remains strong in Oman ( see Sultan Qaboos of Oman ) , Sudan and some parts of the Arabian peninsula .
The colored turban , Ghabanah , is a common inherited cultural turban in the regions of Hijaz , and it still the inhabitants costume of Mecca , Madinah and Jeddah in particular .
Ghabanah is the heritage uniforms for traders and the general community categories of the prestigious and middle - class , with the exception of religious scholars who have had their special turbans distinctiveness predominately white .
The Hijazi turbans with different shapes are the extension of the turban of Islamic prophet Muhammad who lived in Mecca and Madinah .
There are several types of Ghabanah , perhaps the most famous is the yellow ( Halabi ) , that made in Aleppo , that characterized by different inscriptions , and wrapped on a dome - like hollow taqiyah somewhat .
colorful turbans are the national costume in Oman , and also are common in some regions in south of Yemen and Hadhramaut .
Moreover , the white ghutrah or shumagh are commonly wrapped in Hamdaniyah style , which is the shape of turbans in the United Arab Emirates .
AFGHANISTAN Section::::Afghanistan .
Turbans are part of the national dress in Afghanistan .
They are used more widely here than elsewhere in the Muslim world , and are worn in a wide range of styles and colours .
In the country 's south - east , turbans are wrapped loosely and largely , whereas in Kabul the garment tends to be smaller and tighter .
In traditional Afghan society , a related piece of extra cloth called a patu serves practical purposes , such as for wrapping oneself against the cold , to sit on , to tie up an animal or to carry water in the cap .
Different ethnic groups in Afghanistan wear different lungees with different patterns , way of styling it , fabric , stripes , lengths and colouration .
Males of all ethnic backgrounds generally avoid wearing bright - coloured turbans that draw attention to oneself and prefer wearing simple colors that are white , off white , gray , dark blue and black .
BANGLADESH Section::::Bangladesh .
In Bangladesh , the turban is known as pagri , or fagri in Chittagong and Sylhet .
The pagri is worn by religious leaders and preachers of Islam .
The most common colour worn is white , and generally it is the Sufis that wear green turbans .
It is also worn by elders in rural areas as a symbol of honour and respect .
MYANMAR Section::::Myanmar .
In Myanmar , the turban is referred to as a gaung baung .
There are several regional styles worn .
MALAYSIA Section::::Malaysia .
In Malaysia , Sikhs wear turbans .
Turbans are holy items to them .
INDIA Section::::India .
In India , the turban is referred to as a pagri , meaning the headdress that is worn by men and is manually tied .
There are several styles , which are specific to the wearer 's region or religion , and they vary in shape , size and colour .
For example , the Mysore Peta , the Marathi pheta , Puneri Pagadi and the Sikh Dastar ( see below ) .
The pagri is a symbol of honour and respect everywhere it is worn .
It is a common practice to honour important guests by offering them one to wear .
Colours are often chosen to suit the occasion or circumstance : for example saffron , associated with valour or sacrifice ( martyrdom ) , is worn during rallies ; white , associated with peace , is worn by elders ; and pink , associated with spring , is worn during that season or for marriage ceremonies .
Navy blue is a color common more to the Sikh Nihangs , it signifies war and service , while black is associated with resistance , orange with martyrdom and white with old age , death , or peace ; however during times of peace or rallies for peace people will usually be in war gear
( i.e. blue ) white only has the association .
INDONESIA
Section::::Indonesia .
In Java , the turban - styled headdress for men is traditionally called iket .
It literally means to tie , the main way to attach the fabric over the head of the wearer .
It is made of a square or rectangular batik cloth that is folded diagonally to form a triangle .
Although there are different ways of folding and tying the fabric over the head , and therefore different shapes of iket , they can in general show the social level of the wearer and the area of origin .
Its origin is not yet clearly identified , however many sources seemed to conclude that the Javanese might be influenced by turban - wearing Gujarati traders who came to Indonesia more than 500 years ago .
In East Java , the headdress is still made in traditional way and it is called udeng .
In other parts of Java , for practicality the iket has developed into fixed - form headdresses , called blangkon in Central Java and bendo in West Java .
The batik cloth is made stiff through a process of molding , attaching to stiff paper , and sewing .
Similar to iket , blangkon and bendo come with some variations of shapes based on the areas of origin and the wearer 's social rank .
LEBANON
Section::::Lebanon .
While turbans are frequently worn in the Muslim Middle East , they are also worn in Lebanon by both Muslims and Christians alike .
Ordinary citizens mostly wear them on special occasions , whereas religious leaders wear them almost daily .
NEPAL Section::::Nepal .
The turban in Nepal is commonly worn in the rural areas by males .
The rural turban is called either a Pagdi or Pheta .
It is common among farmers .
All types of coloured clothes were used for Pheta .
Historically , Gorkhali nobleman used to wear white turban called Shirpau awarded by the King of Nepal .
For example ; Sardar Ram Krishna Kunwar was awarded with 22 pairs of headgear called Shirpau by the Gorkhali monarch Maharajadhiraj Prithvi
Narayan Shah .
It was common among aristocrats in other contemporary kingdoms .
Rulers and vassal lords also adapted a crest to the white turban .
PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
In Pakistan , the turban is in widespread use , especially among the rural population .
It is worn in different styles and colours across the country , varying by region , e.g. in the north of the country , black and white turbans are preferred .
The turban most commonly found in Pakistan is white and crestless , and worn commonly in the Pashtun belt , while in rural Punjab and Sindh , it is mostly worn by elders or in rural areas .
The turban is called either a Pagri or Pag , while it 's called Lungee by Pashtuns .
The Baloch people are famous for their large turbans that are worn with both ends hanging from the sides or as a loop that rests above the chest .
These turbans are made with many feet of cloth that are wrapped around a cap and are mostly made with white cloth .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , turbans have been worn by men and women since the sixth century without ever becoming very common .
Poet Alexander Pope is sometimes depicted wearing a turban , as were other notable men seen in contemporary paintings and illustrations .
The common use of turbans on less formal occasions , among gentlemen at the time , reflects that their heads were closely cropped , or shaved , to allow the wearing of the elaborate wigs that were the fashion in Europe in the century from about 1650 to 1750 , and when wigs were off , some kind of head cover was useful .
Hence , the turban .
Now that hats are infrequently worn , turbans too are relatively uncommon .
They are worn primarily by women of West Indian descent , Karinas .
Some women wear them to make a statement of individuality , such as the British social entrepreneur Camila Batmanghelidjh , who usually wears a colourful matching turban and robe .
GREECE Section::::Greece .
In Greece , specifically the island of Crete , the men traditionally wear a turban known as a sariki .
The headwrap 's name is borrowed from sarık , the Turkish word for turban .
Today , it may be more commonly known as a kritiko mandili ( Cretan kerchief ) .
It is not found commonly amongst the younger generation , but mostly worn by older men in remoter , mountainous villages .
FIJI Section::::Fiji .
iTaukei indigenous chiefs and priests were known to have worn masi ( barkcloth ) coverings around their head similar to a turban , called an i - sala .
However , most of the bulk and shape of the i - sala came from the bushy hair under the cloth .
BABUYAN ISLANDS Section::::Babuyan Islands .
On some Babuyan islands ( Philippines ) the head of the household wears a white turban , the younger males wear a red turban after their 13th birthday .
The three chiefs all wear yellow turbans .
It no longer has religious significance and the origin dates back to the end of the Tondo era ( cira 900s – 1589 )
Most Babuyan settlers fled the Philippines in 1589 when Spain began to invade the Philippines .
The turban was made from a type of bark cloth but now is made from cotton or silk brought over from the Philippines mainland .
The turban style head dress is then cut and wrapped around the head , then tucked in front .
ARMENIA
Section::::Armenia .
Much of Armenia 's traditions and cultures reflect Middle Eastern origins .
Though not common in daily apparel , turbans are sometimes worn by men ceremonially ( often with beards ) , as a symbol of national identity during celebrations and festivals .
However , before Armenia became a Christian nation , turbans were a common part of the daily apparel , just as in other Middle Eastern countries .
OTHER Section::::Other .
On the Swahili Coast , turbans were frequently worn by the ruling Omani Sultans of Zanzibar and their retinue .
Tuareg Berbers , and some northern Berbers , Sahrawi , Songhai , Wodaabe , Fulani , and Hausa peoples of North and West Africa wear varieties of turbans .
Tuareg Berbers often veil the face to block dust .
This Tuareg - Berber turban is known as a tagelmust , and is often blue .
The Bedouin tribes in North Africa sometimes wear brown - beige , white or orange turbans .
Colombian politician Piedad Cordoba is known to wear turbans ( or a similar headgear ) .
Her use of turbans has made her so distinguishable to the point of having earned the nickname " the lady with the turban " in Colombian popular culture .
Kurdish people wear a turban , which they call a jamadani .
It is worn in many different ways across Iraqi Kurdistan depending on the style of the locality ; e.g. the Barzani Kurds are a tribe which wears the turban in a colour ( red and white ) and style which is typical of their clan .
In most parts of South Kurdistan a black - white pattern is used for Jamadani .
Mostly , Kurdish turbans consist of a length of striped cloth known as kolāḡī which is wound around a conical hat ; the tassels that border the kolāḡī are allowed to hang down over the face .
In modern times , many Kurds use black and white Ghutra and roll them into turbans .
IN
RELIGION
CHRISTIANITY Section::::In religion .
Section::::Christianity .
In Kenya , the Akurinu , a Christian denomination , wear turbans as religious headgear .
The official name of the denomination is The Kenya Foundation Of The Prophets Church or else Holy Ghost Church .
Both men and women wear white turbans ; children wear tunics .
ISLAM Section::::Islam .
In Islamic cultures , some men wear a turban - style headdress in emulation of Muhammad who is believed to have worn a black or white turban .
In Islam , the turban is a Sunnah Mu'akkadah ( Confirmed Tradition ) .
The head wraps are worn in different ways and called by different names depending on the region and culture .
Examples include ( ` emãmah ) in Arabic , ( ) in Persian .
In Shi'a Islam , a black head wrap around a small white cap is worn by descendants of Muhammad called Sayyids , and white turbans by other well - educated persons and scholars .
Sufi Muslims often wear a green head wrap around a small cap or the green head wrap alone .
In Sudan , large white headdresses connote high social status .
In Pakistan the cap is called a topi .
Women of Islam do not wear turbans , as it is considered part of a man 's dress , while women do cover their hair as part of hijab .
JUDAISM Section::::Judaism .
When the Jewish High Priest served in the Tabernacle and the Temple in Jerusalem , he wore a head covering called mitznefet מִצְנֶפֶת .
This word has been translated as mitre ( KJV ) or headdress .
It was most likely a turban , as the word comes from a root meaning ' to wrap ' .
In the Hebrew Bible , the turban worn by the High Priest was much larger than the head coverings of the priests and wound to make a broad , flat - topped shape resembling the blossom of a flower .
The head covering of the priests was different , being wound to form a cone , called a migbahat .
The priestly crown ( Hebrew tzitz צִיץ " blossom " , " flower " ) was attached to the turban by means of two sets of blue cords : one going over the top of the head and the other around the sides of the head at the level of the ears ( Exodus 39:31 ) .
According to the Talmud , the wearing of the turban atoned for the sin of haughtiness on the part of the Children of Israel ( B. Zevachim 88b ) .
The Jews who lived under Arab rule during the Middle Ages , notably in Islamic Spain , wore turbans and headwear not too different from their Muslim counterparts .
RASTAFARI Section::::Rastafari .
Members of the Bobo Shanti mansion of the Rastafari movement keep their hair and beards , mainly with their hair in dreadlocks , and they have been wearing turbans over their dreadlocks , which are not to be removed publicly or even not at all , so as to protect and keep their dreadlocks clean .
Along with the turban , they have also been wearing robes since their founding in the 1950s , Since they are a relatively small population , it makes them more distinctive in appearance in Jamaica and elsewhere .
SIKHISM Section::::Sikhism .
The Sikh turban , known as the Dastar or a Dumalla or a " Pagg " ( cultural name ) , is used to show others that they represent the embodiment of Sikh teachings , the love of the Guru and dogma to do good deeds .
The main reason Sikhs wear the turban is that it is a way for anyone in society , regardless of religion , race , caste etc to easily identify a Sikh , man or woman , so that if an individual were in danger or needing help , they could easily spot a fellow Sikh in a crowd , whose duty it would be to help save and protect them .
The Gurus ensured that both men and women are able to wear a turban , which shows another action of equality .
Other Purposes of the turban include protecting Sikhs ' long unshorn hair and keeping it clean .
The wearing of the turban is mandatory for all members of Khalsa ( Initiated Sikhs ) .
The Rajastani turban is also commonly called the pagari ( in the West , many Sikhs who wear pagri are sometimes mistaken for Muslims or Arabs . ) .
All Sikh Gurus since Guru Nanak have worn turbans .
However , covering one 's hair with a turban was made an official policy by Guru Gobind Singh , the tenth Guru of the Sikhs .
Some other reasons Sikhs wear the turban are to take care of the hair , promote equality , and preserve the Sikh identity .
Sikh women may wear a turban if they wish .
Sikhs do not cut their hair , as a religious observance .
The turban protects the hair and keeps it clean .
As Sikhs only form 2 % of India 's population , their turbans help identify them .
When he institutionalized the turban as a part of the Sikh identity , Guru Gobind Singh said , " My Sikh will be recognized among millions . "
Turbans were formerly associated with the upper class , and many men in the cultural elite still wear turbans .
This distinction between the turban - wearing upper class ( Sardars ) and commoners promoted segregation and elitism .
In order to eliminate the class system associated with turbans , Guru Gobind Singh Ji declared each and every Sikh a Sardar .
He also rejected the caste system by giving all Sikhs the last names Singh ( Lion ) or Kaur ( Princess ) .
Modern Sikh men mainly wear four kinds of Turban .
Morni Turban , Patiala Shahi Turban , Vattan Wali Turban and Amritsar Shahi Turban .
The Dumalla style is more traditional and can be recognized by its horizontal wraps , versus the peaked wraps as seen in the aforementioned styles .
The Dumalla is becoming more popular among Sikh youth ( men and women ) .
The Dastar Bunga is the style of turban generally worn by Akali Singhs in battle .
The " Chand Tora " is a metal symbol consisting of a crescent and a double edged sword , held in place at the front of the turban by a woven chainmail cord tied in a pattern within the turban to protect the head from slashing weapons .
The purpose of the Tora is to keep the dastaar together .
It goes over the bunga ( inner turban ) to protect it .
It is also used for keeping shastars ( small weapons ) in place .
The most common turban colors worn by Sikhs are blue , white and black , although other colors are very popular as well .
Orange and yellow are particularly prestigious and tend to be worn on religious events such as Vaisakhi .
Meanings of the turbans are that the white turban means a saintly person leading an exemplary life , and an off - shade color of white means someone is learning in the Sikh religion .
The blue turban signifies a mind as broad as the sky with no place for prejudice .
The black turban is a reminder of the British persecution of the Sikhs in 1919 , and represents humility .
The orange turban is representative of courage , and wisdom .
Royal blue is usually worn by those who are learned in the Sikh religion .
Akali Nihang Sikhs decorate their turbans or Dumalla by wearing small weapons known as shastars in them .
The turban 's color may reflect association with a particular group of Sikhs , although none of the popular turban colors are exclusive to any particular group .
Turban colors are generally a matter of personal choice in Sikhism , with many Sikh men choosing colors based on fashion or taste , sometimes to match clothes .
There are traditions associated with some colours , for instance orange and black are often worn at political protest rallies whilst red and pink turbans are worn at weddings and other celebratory events .
SEE ALSO * Turban training centre REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Why Sikhs wear a turban *
Sikh Fortress Turban
* Tutorial on how to make a Turban ( Pagri ) * Information on why Sikhs wear Turbans
* Understanding Turbans
* Largest Turbon of Shivaji Maharaj World Records India