OCTET RULE
The octet rule is a chemical rule of thumb that reflects observation that atoms of main - group elements tend to combine in such a way that each atom has eight electrons in its valence shell , giving it the same electron configuration as a noble gas .
The rule is especially applicable to carbon , nitrogen , oxygen , and the halogens , but also to metals such as sodium or magnesium .
The valence electrons can be counted using a Lewis electron dot diagram as shown at the right for carbon dioxide .
The electrons shared by the two atoms in a covalent bond are counted twice , once for each atom .
In carbon dioxide each oxygen shares four electrons with the central carbon , two ( shown in red ) from the oxygen itself and two ( shown in black ) from the carbon .
All four of these electrons are counted in both the carbon octet and the oxygen octet .
EXAMPLE :
SODIUM CHLORIDE
Section::::Example : sodium chloride .
Ionic bonding is common between pairs of atoms , where one of the pair is a metal of low electronegativity ( such as sodium ) and the second a nonmetal of high electronegativity ( such as chlorine ) .
A chlorine atom has seven electrons in its outer electron shell , the first and second shells being filled with two and eight electrons respectively .
The first electron affinity of chlorine ( the energy release when chlorine gains an electron ) is +328.8 kJ per mole of chlorine atoms .
Adding a second electron to chlorine requires energy , energy that can not be recovered by formation of a chemical bond .
The result is that chlorine will very often form a compound in which it has eight electrons in its outer shell ( a complete octet ) .
A sodium atom has a single electron in its outermost electron shell , the first and second shells again being full with two and eight electrons respectively .
To remove this outer electron requires only the first ionization energy , which is +495.8 kJ per mole of sodium atoms , a small amount of energy .
By contrast , the second electron resides in the deeper second electron shell , and the second ionization energy required for its removal is much larger :
+4562.4 kJ per mole .
Thus sodium will , in most cases , form a compound in which it has lost a single electron and have a full outer shell of eight electrons , or octet .
The energy required to transfer an electron from a sodium atom to a chlorine atom ( the difference of the 1st ionization energy of sodium and the electron affinity of chlorine ) is small :
+495.8 − 328.8 =
+167 kJ mol .
This energy is easily offset by the lattice energy of sodium chloride : −787.3 kJ mol .
This completes the explanation of the octet rule in this case .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the late 19th century it was known that coordination compounds ( formerly called " molecular compounds " ) were formed by the combination of atoms or molecules in such a manner that the valencies of the atoms involved apparently became satisfied .
In 1893 , Alfred Werner showed that the number of atoms or groups associated with a central atom ( the " coordination number " ) is often 4 or 6 ; other coordination numbers up to a maximum of 8 were known , but less frequent .
In 1904 Richard Abegg was one of the first to extend the concept of coordination number to a concept of valence in which he distinguished atoms as electron donors or acceptors , leading to positive and negative valence states that greatly resemble the modern concept of oxidation states .
Abegg noted that the difference between the maximum positive and negative valences of an element under his model is frequently eight .
In 1916 , Gilbert N. Lewis referred to this insight as Abegg 's rule and used it to help formulate his cubical atom model and the " rule of eight " , which began to distinguish between valence and valence electrons .
In 1919 Irving Langmuir refined these concepts further and renamed them the " cubical octet atom " and " octet theory " .
The " octet theory " evolved into what is now known as the " octet rule " .
EXPLANATION IN QUANTUM THEORY Section::::Explanation in quantum theory .
The quantum theory of the atom explains the eight electrons as a closed shell with an sp electron configuration .
A closed - shell configuration is one in which low - lying energy levels are
full and higher energy levels are empty .
For example , the neon atom ground state has a full shell ( 2s 2p ) and an empty shell .
According to the octet rule , the atoms immediately before and after neon in the periodic table ( i.e. C , N , O , F , Na , Mg and Al ) , tend to attain a similar configuration by gaining , losing , or sharing electrons .
The argon atom has an analogous 3s 3p configuration .
There is also an empty 3d level , but it is at considerably higher energy than 3s and 3p ( unlike in the hydrogen atom ) , so that 3s 3p is still considered a closed shell for chemical purposes .
The atoms immediately before and after argon tend to attain this configuration in compounds .
There are , however , some hypervalent molecules in which the 3d level may play a part in the bonding , although this is controversial ( see below ) .
For helium there is no 1p level according to the quantum theory , so that 1s is a closed shell with no p electrons .
The atoms before and after helium ( H and Li ) follow a duet rule and tend to have the same 1s configuration as helium .
EXCEPTIONS
*
Incomplete valence shell : *
Seven - electron species are free radicals with unpaired electrons .
For example , the methyl radical ( CH ) has an unpaired electron in a non - bonding orbital on the carbon atom , and no electron of opposite spin in the same orbital .
Another example is the chlorine radical produced by CFCs , known to be harmful to the ozone layer .
* Six - electron species are highly reactive and short lived .
An example is the carbenes , which have two unshared valence electrons on the same carbon atom in a triplet or singlet state .
Another example is BH , which dimerizes into diborane ( BH ) to achieve stability .
* Other rules : *
The duet rule of the first shell — the noble gas helium has two electrons in its outer shell , which is very stable .
( Since there is no 1p subshell , 1s is followed immediately by 2s , and thus shell 1 can only have at most 2 valence electrons ) .
Hydrogen only needs one additional electron to attain this stable configuration , while lithium needs to lose one .
* For transition metals , some classes of molecule tend to obey the 18-electron rule which corresponds to the utilization of valence - shell s , p and d orbitals to form bonding and non - bonding orbitals .
However newer theoretical treatments support a model with the duodectet rule ( 12 electrons ) using mainly the d and s valence orbitals .
The exclusion of p orbitals for transition metal atoms is analogous to the exclusion of d orbitals for hypervalent molecules of main group atoms .
( See hypervalent molecules below ) .
THREE - ELECTRON BONDS Section::::Three - electron bonds .
Some stable molecular radicals ( e.g. nitric oxide , NO ) obtain octet configurations by means of a three - electron bond which contributes one shared and one unshared electron to the octet of each bonded atom .
In NO , the octet on each atom is completed by four electrons from two two - electron bonds , plus a lone pair of non - bonding electrons on that atom alone .
The bond order is 2.5 , since each two - electron bond counts as one bond while the three - electron bond has only one shared electron and therefore corresponds to a half - bond .
Dioxygen is sometimes represented as obeying the octet rule with a double bond ( O = O ) containing two pairs of shared electrons .
However the ground state of this molecule is paramagnetic , indicating the presence of unpaired electrons .
Pauling proposed that this molecule actually contains two three - electron bonds and one normal covalent ( two - electron ) bond .
The octet on each atom then consists of two electrons from each three - electron bond , plus the two electrons of the covalent bond , plus one lone pair of non - bonding electrons .
HYPERVALENT MOLECULES Section::::Hypervalent molecules .
Main - group elements in the third and later rows of the periodic table can form hypercoordinate or hypervalent molecules in which the central main - group atom is bonded to more than four other atoms , such as phosphorus pentachloride , PCl , and sulfur hexafluoride , SF .
For example , in PCl , if it is supposed that there are five true covalent bonds in which five distinct electron pairs are shared , then the phosphorus would be surrounded by 10 valence electrons in violation of the octet rule .
In the early days of quantum mechanics , Pauling proposed that third - row atoms can form five bonds by using one s , three p and one d orbitals , or six bonds by using one s , three p and two d orbitals .
To form five bonds , the one s , three p and one d orbitals combine to form five spd hybrid orbitals which each share an electron pair with a halogen atom , for a total of 10 shared electrons , two more than the octet rule predicts .
Similarly to form six bonds , the six spd hybrid orbitals form six bonds with 12 shared electrons .
In this model the availability of empty d orbitals is used to explain the fact that third - row atoms such as phosphorus and sulfur can form more than four covalent bonds , whereas second - row atoms such as nitrogen and oxygen are strictly limited by the octet rule .
However other models describe the bonding using only s and p orbitals in agreement with the octet rule .
A valence bond description of PF uses resonance between different PF F structures , so that each F is bonded by a covalent bond in four structures and an ionic bond in one structure .
Each resonance structure has eight valence electrons on
P. A molecular orbital theory description considers the highest occupied molecular orbital to be a non - bonding orbital localized on the five fluorine atoms , in addition to four occupied bonding orbitals , so again there are only eight valence electrons on the phosphorus .
The validity of the octet rule for hypervalent molecules is further supported by ab initio molecular orbital calculations , which show that the contribution of d functions to the bonding orbitals is small .
SEE ALSO
* Lewis structure
* Electron counting
* 18-Electron rule REFERENCES