THE LAST TYCOON
The Last Tycoon is an unfinished novel by F. Scott Fitzgerald .
In 1941 , it was published posthumously under this title , as prepared by his friend Edmund Wilson , a critic and writer .
According to Publishers Weekly , the novel is " [ g]enerally considered a roman a clef , " with its lead character , Monroe Stahr , modeled after historic film producer Irving Thalberg .
The story follows Stahr 's rise to power in Hollywood , and his conflicts with rival Pat Brady , a character based on prominent studio head Louis B. Mayer .
It was adapted as a TV play in 1957 and a film in 1976 of the same name , with a screenplay for the latter by British playwright Harold Pinter .
Elia Kazan directed the 1976 film adaptation ; Robert De Niro and Theresa Russell starred .
In 1993 , a new version of the novel was published under the title The Love of the Last Tycoon , edited by Matthew Bruccoli , a Fitzgerald scholar .
This version was adapted for a stage production that premiered in Los Angeles , California in 1998 .
In 2013 , HBO announced plans to produce an adaptation .
HBO cancelled the project and gave the rights to Sony Pictures , which produced and released the television series on Amazon Studios in 2016 .
PUBLICATION HISTORY Section::::Publication history .
The novel was unfinished and in rough form at the time of Fitzgerald 's death at age 44 .
The literary critic and writer Edmund Wilson , a close friend of Fitzgerald , collected the notes for the novel and edited it for publication .
The unfinished novel was published in 1941 as The Last Tycoon , by which name it is best known .
In 1993 , another version of the novel was published under the title The Love of the Last Tycoon , as part of the Cambridge edition of the Works of F. Scott Fitzgerald , edited by Matthew J. Bruccoli , a Fitzgerald scholar .
Bruccoli reworked the extant seventeen chapters of the thirty - one planned according to his interpretation of the author 's notes .
PLOT SUMMARY Section::::Plot summary .
Set in the 1930s , The Last Tycoon traces the life of Hollywood studio manager Monroe Stahr , clearly based on Irving Thalberg ( head of the film company Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer ) , whom Fitzgerald had encountered several times .
The novel begins with young NYC college student Cecelia Brady ( first - person narrator ) , the daughter of influential Hollywood producer Pat Brady , preparing to fly home to Los Angeles .
At the airport , she is surprised to meet an old friend of her father , author Wylie White .
White is accompanied by a failed producer introduced as Mr. Schwartz .
Due to complications during the flight , they make a forced landing in Nashville , Tennessee .
The threesome decide for a spontaneous trip to the historic estate of former President Andrew Jackson , but on arrival the attraction is closed .
Wylie then proceeds to flirt shamelessly with Cecelia while Mr. Schwartz is fast asleep .
When Schwartz awakens , he informs them that he has changed his mind and will not travel to Los Angeles with them .
He asks Wylie to deliver a message to a friend , which he gladly accepts .
The next day , Wylie and Cecelia learn that Schwartz committed suicide right after they left Nashville .
Cecelia realises that the message Schwarz gave to Wylie was in fact for Monroe Stahr , her father 's business partner .
She has had a crush on Monroe for many years .
Cecelia arrives at her father 's film studio to pick him up for a birthday party .
Due to an unexpected minor earthquake , Cecelia , her father , and his companions all end up in Stahr 's office .
A water pipe bursts and floods the set .
Stahr beholds two women desperately clinging to the head of a statue – finding one of them to be the spitting image of his late wife .
The day after , Stahr asks his secretary to identify the girls for him .
She presents him with a phone number which he immediately uses to arrange a meeting with one of the girls .
Unfortunately , it is not the girl he wished to see , she does not resemble his wife at all .
Stahr gives her a ride home , where she insists that he 'd come in and meet her friend ( the young Irish - born Kathleen Moore ) .
As soon as Moore opens the front door , Stahr recognises her to be the woman he had seen the other night .
Kathleen withstands his advances to her and even refuses to tell him her name .
It is only when Stahr happens to meet her again at a party that he can convince her to go out and have a cup of coffee with him .
He drives her to the building site of his new house in Santa Monica .
Kathleen seems reluctant to be with Stahr , but she still ends up having sex with him .
A short time afterwards , Stahr receives a letter in which Kathleen confesses to have been engaged to another man for quite some time .
She has now decided to marry him despite having fallen in love with Stahr .
Stahr asks Cecelia to arrange for a meeting with a suspected communist who wants to organise a labour union within the film studio .
Stahr and Cecelia meet the man over supper where Stahr gets drunk and gets involved in a violent confrontation .
Cecelia takes care of him and they grow closer .
Cecelia 's father , however , becomes more and more unhappy with Stahr as a business partner and has wanted to get rid of him for a long while .
He could not approve less of his daughter 's fancying him .
Brady knows of Stahr 's continued affair with the now - married Kathleen and tries to blackmail him into leaving the company .
As he fails to achieve his goal via blackmail , he does not even shy away from hiring a professional killer .
Stahr survives , and , in retaliation , also appoints a man to have Brady killed .
Unlike Brady 's , Stahr 's conscience starts to trouble in .
But , just as he contemplates calling the execution off , his plane crashes on its way back to New York City .
The contract killer finishes his job unhindered and leaves Cecelia both without a father and without a lover – the two men who meant the world to her .
MAIN CHARACTERS
* Monroe Stahr , Hollywood film producer
* Pat Brady , Stahr 's associate , also a film producer
* Cecelia Brady , Brady 's daughter * Kathleen Moore , Stahr 's love interest POINT OF VIEW Section::::Point of view .
Fitzgerald wrote the novel in a blend of first person and third person narrations .
While the story is ostensibly told by Cecelia , many scenes are narrated in which she is not present .
Occasionally a scene will be presented twice , once through Cecelia and once through a third party .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The revised edition of The Love of The Last Tycoon won the Choice Outstanding Academic Books award of 1995 .
ADAPTATIONS
* 1957 : John Frankenheimer directed a TV version for Playhouse 90 , with Jack Palance as Monroe Stahr .
* 1976 : A film version was adapted for the screen by British playwright Harold Pinter , directed by Elia Kazan ( his last film ) .
It was produced by Sam Spiegel and released as The Last Tycoon .
It starred Robert De Niro as Monroe Stahr and Theresa Russell as Cecelia Brady , and featured appearances by Robert Mitchum and Jack Nicholson .
Pinter later won the Nobel Prize for his dramatic plays .
* 1998 :
A stage adaptation of the 1993 edition , by Simon Levy and authorized by the Fitzgerald Estate , opened at The Fountain Theatre in Los Angeles .
It received high praise and numerous awards .
* 2013 : a 90-minute audio adaptation by Feelgood Fiction for BBC Radio 4 , adapted and directed by Bill Bryden , starring Aidan Gillen and Jack Shepherd .
* 2014 : Japan 's all - female theatre company Takarazuka Revue staged a musical adaptation of The Love of The Last Tycoon for then Flower Troupe top star Tomu Ranju 's farewell performance .
* 2016 : On November 19 , 2013 , HBO announced that it planned to adapt The Last Tycoon with Billy Ray writing the script .
On November 7 , 2014 , Amazon Studios picked up Billy Ray 's adaptation after HBO passed it off and announced it would be produced by Sony Pictures Television .
On November 23 , 2015 , actor Matt Bomer was cast as Monroe Stahr , Lily Collins as Cecelia Brady , and it was announced that Ray would write and direct the pilot .
The pilot was released June 17 , 2016 .
The first season was released on July 28 , 2017 .
Plans for the second season were cancelled in September 2017 .
* 2016 : Simon Levy 's stage adaptation , authorized by the Fitzgerald Estate , will have its European premiere , opening at the Arts Theatre in London on August 17 , 2016 .
Produced by Ruby In The Dust Theatre with the permission of the author .
Directed by Linnie Reedman .
PUBLICATION HISTORY
* 1941 , as The Last Tycoon , F. Scott Fitzgerald and Edmund Wilson .
current * 1993 , The Love of the Last Tycoon , Cambridge University Press , , hardcover * 2003 , The Love of the Last Tycoon , Charles Scribner 's Sons , , paperback REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * F. Scott Fitzgerald .
The Last Tycoon An Unfinished Novel .
New York : Charles Scribner 's Sons , 1941 .
Full text online in Internet Archive .