BALL PYTHON
The ball python ( Python regius ) , also known as the royal python , is a python species found in sub - Saharan Africa .
Like all other pythons , it is a nonvenomous constrictor .
This is the smallest of the African pythons and is popular in the pet trade , largely due to its small size and typically docile temperament .
No subspecies are currently recognized .
The name " ball python " refers to the animal 's tendency to curl into a ball when stressed or frightened .
The name " royal python " ( from the Latin regius ) comes from the fact that rulers in Africa would wear the python as jewelry .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Maximum adult length of this species is .
Females tend to be slightly bigger than males , maturing around .
Males typically grow to around .
Their build is stocky , while the head is relatively small .
The scales are smooth and both sexes have anal spurs on either side of the vent .
Although males tend to have larger spurs , this is not definitive , and sex is best determined by manual eversion of the male hemipenes or inserting a probe into the cloaca to check the presence of an inverted hemipenis ( if male ) .
When probing to determine sex , males typically measure eight to 10 subcaudal scales , and females typically measure two to four subcaudal scales .
The color pattern is typically black or dark brown with light brown or gold sides and dorsal blotches .
The belly is a white or cream that may include scattered black markings .
However , those in the pet industries have , through selective breeding , developed many morphs ( genetic mutations ) with altered colors and patterns .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
They are found in west Sub Saharan Africa from Senegal , Mali , Guinea - Bissau , Guinea , Sierra Leone , Liberia , Ivory Coast , Ghana , Benin , and Nigeria through Cameroon , Chad , and the Central African Republic to Sudan and Uganda .
No type locality was given in the original description .
The ball python bears a strong physical resemblance to the Burmese python , whose adaptive abilities have caused it to become classified as an invasive species in places such as the Florida Everglades .
The ball python , however , has not been known to reproduce in the wild outside of its native range and no reproducing wild populations are known in Florida .
Ball pythons prefer grasslands , savannas , and sparsely wooded areas , but have been shown to adapt to all types of environments .
Males tend to display more semi - arboreal behaviours , whilst females tend towards terrestrial behaviours .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
This terrestrial species is known for its defense strategy that involves coiling into a tight ball when threatened , with its head and neck tucked away in the middle .
In this state , it can literally be rolled around .
Favored retreats include mammal burrows and other underground hiding places , where they also aestivate .
In captivity , they are considered good pets , with their relatively small size and placid nature making them easy to handle .
DIET Section::::Diet .
In the wild , their diet consists mostly of small mammals , such as African soft - furred rats , shrews , and striped mice and birds .
Younger pythons , under 70 cm total length , and males prey almost exclusively on small birds ( nestlings and immature young )
whilst pythons greater than 70 cm total length , and females prey almost exclusively on small mammals .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Females are oviparous , with 3 to 11 rather large , leathery eggs being laid ( four to six are most common ) .
These are incubated by the female under the ground ( via a shivering motion ) , and hatch after 55 to 60 days .
Sexual maturity is reached at 11–18 months for males , and 20–36 months for females .
Age is only one factor in determining sexual maturity and ability to breed ; weight is the second factor .
Males breed at 600 g or more , but in captivity are often not bred until they are 800 g ( 1.7 lb ) , although in captivity , some males have been known to begin breeding at 300–400 g. Females breed in the wild at weights as low as 800 g though 1200 g or more in weight is most common ; in captivity , breeders generally wait until they are no less than 1500 g ( 3.3 lb ) .
Parental care of the eggs ends once they hatch , and the female leaves the offspring to fend for themselves .
CAPTIVITY Section::::Captivity .
Wild - caught specimens have greater difficulty adapting to a captive environment , which can result in refusal to feed , and they generally carry internal or external parasites .
Specimens have survived for over 40 years in captivity , with the oldest recorded ball python being kept in captivity 47 years and 6 months until its death in 1992 at the Philadelphia Zoo .
Hundreds of different color patterns are available in captive snakes .
Some of the most common are spider , pastel , albino , Mojave , and lesser .
Breeders are continuously creating new designer morphs , and over 5,300 different morphs currently exist .
BREEDING Section::::Breeding .
Ball Pythons are one of the most common reptiles bred in captivity .
They usually are able to produce a clutch of six eggs on average , but clutch sizes also range from one to eleven .
Ball pythons reach sexual maturity at the age of two to two and a half years and a weight of 1500 grams .
These snakes usually lay one clutch per year and the eggs hatch around sixty days later .
Usually these eggs are artificially incubated in a captive environment at temperatures between 88 - 90 degrees Fahrenheit .
Some captive breeders use ultra - sounding technology to verify the progress of reproductive development .
This can help to increase chances of successful fertilization as the ultra - sound can help predict best times to introduce males and females during breeding season .
BELIEFS AND FOLKLORE Section::::Beliefs and folklore .
This species is particularly revered in the traditional religion of the Igbo people of southeastern Nigeria .
It is considered symbolic of the earth , being an animal that travels so close to the ground .
Even among many Christian Igbos , these pythons are treated with great care whenever they happen to wander into a village or onto someone 's property ; they are allowed to roam freely or are very gently picked up and placed out in a forest or field away from any homes .
If one is accidentally killed , many communities in Igboland still build a coffin for the snake 's remains and give it a short funeral .
SEE ALSO
* List of pythonid species and subspecies REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Ball Python Articles and Care Sheets at RC Reptiles.com .
Accessed 12 September 2007 .
* Ball Python Care and Husbandry at Ball Python Care .
* Ball Python Care Sheet at Herphangout .
Accessed 12 September 2007 .
* Troubleshooting Guide for Ball Pythons at kingsnake.com .
Accessed 12 September 2007 .
* Ball Pythons as Pets at About.com : Exotic Pets .
Accessed 12 September 2007 .
* Ball Python , Python regius Care at ReptileExpert.org .
Accessed 4 April 2011 .
* Royal Python , Python regius Care at The Royal Python .
Accessed 17 December 2012 .
* Exposure to Salmonella at CDC MMWR .
Accessed 21 May 2018 .