WHALE SHARK
The whale shark ( Rhincodon typus ) is a slow - moving , filter - feeding carpet shark and the largest known extant fish species .
The largest confirmed individual had a length of and a weight of about .
The whale shark holds many records for size in the animal kingdom , most notably being by far the largest living nonmammalian vertebrate .
It is the sole member of the genus Rhincodon and the only extant member of the family Rhincodontidae which belongs to the subclass Elasmobranchii in the class Chondrichthyes .
Before 1984 it was classified as Rhiniodon into Rhinodontidae .
The whale shark is found in open waters of the tropical oceans and is rarely found in the water below .
Modeling suggests a lifespan of about 70 years , but measurements have proven difficult .
Whale sharks have very large mouths and are filter feeders , which is a feeding mode that occurs in only two other sharks , the megamouth shark and the basking shark .
They feed almost exclusively on plankton and small fishes , and pose no threat to humans .
The species was distinguished in April 1828 after the harpooning of a specimen in Table Bay , South Africa .
Andrew Smith , a military doctor associated with British troops stationed in Cape Town , described it the following year .
The name " whale shark " refers to the fish 's size , being as large as some species of whales , and also to its being a filter feeder like baleen whales .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Whale sharks have a mouth that can be wide , containing 300 to 350 rows of tiny teeth and 10 filter pads which it uses to filter feed .
Unlike many other sharks , whale sharks ' mouths are located at the front of the head rather than on the underside of the head .
Whale sharks have five large pairs of gills .
The head is wide and flat with two small eyes at the front .
Whale sharks are grey with a white belly .
Their skin is marked with pale yellow spots and stripes which are unique to each individual .
The whale shark has three prominent ridges along its sides .
Its skin can be up to thick .
The shark has a pair of dorsal fins and pectoral fins .
Juveniles ' tails have a larger upper fin than the lower fin , while the adult tail becomes semilunate .
The whale shark 's spiracles are just behind its eyes .
The whale shark is the largest non - cetacean animal in the world .
The average size of adult whale sharks is estimated at and .
Several specimens over in length have been reported .
The largest verified specimen was caught on 11 November 1949 , near Baba Island , in Karachi , Pakistan .
It was long , weighed about , and had a girth of .
Stories exist of vastly larger specimens – quoted lengths of and are common in the popular literature , but no scientific records support their existence .
In 1868 , the Irish natural scientist Edward Perceval Wright obtained several small whale shark specimens in the Seychelles , but claimed to have observed specimens in excess of , and tells of shark specimens surpassing .
In a 1925 publication , Hugh M. Smith described a huge animal caught in a bamboo fish trap in Thailand in 1919 .
The shark was too heavy to pull ashore , but Smith estimated the shark was at least long , and weighed around 37 t.
These measurements have been exaggerated to and a more precise in recent years .
A shark caught in 1994 off Tainan County , southern Taiwan , reportedly weighed .
There have even been unverified claims of whale sharks of up to and .
In 1934 , a ship named the Maurguani came across a whale shark in the southern Pacific Ocean , rammed it , and the shark became stuck on the prow of the ship , supposedly with on one side and on the other .
No reliable documentation exists for these claims and they remain " fish stories " .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
The whale shark inhabits all tropical and warm - temperate seas .
The fish is primarily pelagic , living in the open sea but not in the greater depths of the ocean , although it is known to occasionally dive to depths of as much as .
Seasonal feeding aggregations occur at several coastal sites such as the southern and eastern parts of South Africa ; Saint Helena Island in the South Atlantic Ocean ; Gulf of Tadjoura in Djibouti , Gladden Spit in Belize ; Ningaloo Reef in Western Australia ; Kerala , Lakshadweep , Gulf of Kutch and Saurashtra coast of Gujarat in India ; Útila in Honduras ; Southern Leyte ; Donsol , Pasacao and Batangas in the Philippines ;
off Isla Mujeres and Isla Holbox in Yucatan and Bahía de los Ángeles in Baja California , México ; Maamigili island , Maldives ; Ujung Kulon National Park in Indonesia ; Cenderawasih Bay National Park in Nabire , Papua , Indonesia ; Flores Island , Indonesia ;
Nosy Be in Madagascar ; off Tofo Beach near Inhambane in Mozambique ; the Tanzanian islands of Mafia , Pemba , Zanzibar ; Gulf of Tadjoura in Djibouti , the Ad Dimaniyat Islands in the Gulf of Oman and Al Hallaniyat islands in the Arabian Sea ; and , very rarely , Eilat , Israel and Aqaba , Jordan .
Although typically seen offshore , it has been found closer to land , entering lagoons or coral atolls , and near the mouths of estuaries and rivers .
Its range is generally restricted to about 30 ° latitude .
It is capable of diving to depths of at least , and is migratory .
On 7 February 2012 , a large whale shark was found floating off the coast of Karachi , Pakistan .
The length of the specimen was said to be between , with a weight of around .
In 2011 , more than 400 whale sharks gathered off the Yucatan Coast .
It was one of the largest gatherings of whale sharks recorded .
Aggregations in that area are among the most reliable seasonal gatherings known for whale sharks , with large numbers occurring in most years between May and September .
Associated ecotourism has grown rapidly to unsustainable levels .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
Neither mating nor pupping of whale sharks has been observed .
The capture of a female in July 1996 that was pregnant with 300 pups indicated whale sharks are ovoviviparous .
The eggs remain in the body and the females give birth to live young which are long .
Evidence indicates the pups are not all born at once , but rather the female retains sperm from one mating and produces a steady stream of pups over a prolonged period .
They reach sexual maturity at around 30 years and their lifespan is an estimated 70 to 100 years .
On 7 March 2009 , marine scientists in the Philippines discovered what is believed to be the smallest living specimen of the whale shark .
The young shark , measuring only , was found with its tail tied to a stake at a beach in Pilar , Sorsogon , Philippines , and was released into the wild .
Based on this discovery , some scientists no longer believe this area is just a feeding ground ; this site may be a birthing ground , as well .
Both young whale sharks and pregnant females have been seen in the waters of Saint Helena in the South Atlantic Ocean , where numerous whale sharks can be spotted during the summer .
DIET Section::::Diet .
The whale shark is a filter feeder – one of only three known filter - feeding shark species ( along with the basking shark and the megamouth shark ) .
It feeds on plankton including copepods , krill , fish eggs , Christmas Island red crab larvae and small nektonic life , such as small squid or fish .
It also feeds on clouds of eggs during mass spawning of fish and corals .
The many rows of vestigial teeth play no role in feeding .
Feeding occurs either by ram filtration , in which the animal opens its mouth and swims forward , pushing water and food into the mouth , or by active suction feeding , in which the animal opens and closes its mouth , sucking in volumes of water that are then expelled through the gills .
In both cases , the filter pads serve to separate food from water .
These unique , black sieve - like structures are presumed to be modified gill rakers .
Food separation in whale sharks is by cross - flow filtration , in which the water travels nearly parallel to the filter pad surface , not perpendicularly through it , before passing to the outside , while denser food particles continue to the back of the throat .
This is an extremely efficient filtration method that minimizes fouling of the filter pad surface .
Whale sharks have been observed " coughing " , presumably to clear a build - up of particles from the filter pads .
Whale sharks migrate to feed and possibly to breed .
The whale shark is an active feeder , targeting concentrations of plankton or fish .
It is able to ram filter feed or can gulp in a stationary position .
This is in contrast to the passive feeding basking shark , which does not pump water .
Instead , it swims to force water across its gills .
A juvenile whale shark is estimated to eat 21 kg ( 46 pounds ) of plankton per day .
The BBC program Planet Earth filmed a whale shark feeding on a school of small fish .
The same documentary showed footage of a whale shark timing its arrival to coincide with the mass spawning of fish shoals and feeding on the resultant clouds of eggs and sperm .
Whale sharks are known to prey on a range of planktonic and small nektonic organisms that are spatiotemporally patchy .
These include krill , crab larvae , jellyfish , sardines , anchovies , mackerels , small tunas , and squid .
In ram filter feeding , the fish swims forward at constant speed with its mouth fully open , straining prey particles from the water by forward propulsion .
This is also called ' passive feeding ' , which usually occurs when prey is present at low density .
RELATIONSHIP WITH HUMANS BEHAVIOR
TOWARD DIVERS Section::::Relationship with humans .
Section::::Behavior toward divers .
Despite its size , the whale shark does not pose any danger to humans .
Whale sharks are docile fish and sometimes allow swimmers to catch a ride , although this practice is discouraged by shark scientists and conservationists because of the disturbance to the sharks .
Younger whale sharks are gentle and can play with divers .
Underwater photographers such as Fiona Ayerst have photographed them swimming close to humans without any danger .
The shark is seen by divers in many places , including the Bay Islands in Honduras , Thailand , Indonesia , the Philippines , the Maldives close to Maamigili ( South Ari Atoll ) , the Red Sea , Western Australia ( Ningaloo Reef , Christmas Island ) , Taiwan , Panama ( Coiba Island ) , Belize , Tofo Beach in Mozambique , Sodwana Bay ( Greater St. Lucia Wetland Park ) in South Africa , the Galapagos Islands , Saint Helena , Isla Mujeres ( Caribbean Sea ) , La Paz , Baja California Sur and Bahía de los Ángeles in Mexico , the Seychelles , West Malaysia , islands off eastern peninsular Malaysia , India , Sri Lanka , Oman , Fujairah , Puerto Rico , and other parts of the Caribbean .
Juveniles can be found near the shore in the Gulf of Tadjoura , near Djibouti , in the Horn of Africa .
CONSERVATION STATUS Section::::Conservation status .
There is currently no robust estimate of the global whale shark population .
The species is considered endangered by the IUCN due to the impacts of fisheries , bycatch losses , and vessel strikes , combined with its long lifespan and late maturation .
It is listed , along with six other species of sharks , under the CMS Memorandum of Understanding on the Conservation of Migratory Sharks .
In 1998 , the Philippines banned all fishing , selling , importing , and exporting of whale sharks for commercial purposes , followed by India in May 2001 , and Taiwan in May 2007 .
In 2010 , the Gulf of Mexico oil spill resulted in of oil flowing into an area south of the Mississippi River Delta , where one - third of all whale shark sightings in the northern part of the gulf have occurred in recent years .
Sightings confirmed that the whale sharks were unable to avoid the oil slick , which was situated on the surface of the sea where the whale sharks feed for several hours at a time .
No dead whale sharks were found .
This species was also added to Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora ( CITES ) in 2003 to regulate the international trade of live specimens and its parts .
Hundreds of whale sharks are illegally killed every year in China for their fins , skins , and oil .
IN CAPTIVITY Section::::In captivity .
The whale shark is popular in the few public aquariums that keep it , but its large size means that a very large tank is required and it has specialized feeding requirements .
Their large size and iconic status have also fuelled an opposition to keeping the species in captivity , especially after the early death of some whale sharks in captivity and certain Chinese aquariums keeping the species in relatively small tanks .
The first attempt at keeping whale sharks in captivity was in 1934 when an individual was kept for about four months in a netted - off natural bay in Izu , Japan .
The first attempt of keeping whale sharks in an aquarium was initiated in 1980 by the Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium ( then known as Ocean Expo Park ) in Japan .
Since 1980 , several have been kept at Okinawa , mostly obtained from incidental catches in coastal nets set by fishers ( none after 2009 ) , but two were strandings .
Several of these were already weak from the capture / stranding and some were released , but initial captive survival rates were low .
After the initial difficulties in maintaining the species had been resolved , some have survived long - term in captivity .
The record for a whale shark in captivity is an individual that , as of 2017 , has lived for more than 18 years in the Okinawa Churaumi Aquarium .
Following Okinawa , Osaka Aquarium started keeping whale sharks and most of the basic research on the keeping of the species was made at these two institutions .
Since the mid-1990s , several other aquariums have kept the species in Japan ( Kagoshima City Aquarium , Kinosaki Marine World , Notojima Aquarium , Oita Ecological Aquarium , and Yokohama Hakkeijima Sea Paradise ) , South Korea ( Aquaplanet Jeju ) , China ( Chimelong Ocean Kingdom , Dalian Aquarium , Guangzhou Aquarium in Guangzhou Zoo , Qingdao Polar Ocean World and Yantai Aquarium ) , Taiwan ( National Museum of Marine Biology and Aquarium ) , India ( Thiruvananthapuram Aquarium ) and Dubai ( Atlantis , The Palm ) , with some maintaining whale sharks for years and others only for a very short period .
The whale shark kept at Dubai 's Atlantis , The Palm was rescued from shallow waters in 2008 with extensive abrasions to the fins and after rehabilitation it was released in 2010 , having lived 19 months in captivity .
Marine Life Park in Singapore had planned on keeping whale sharks , but scrapped this idea in 2009 .
Outside Asia , the first and so far only place to keep whale sharks is Georgia Aquarium in Atlanta , United States .
This is unusual because of the comparatively long transport time and complex logistics required to bring the sharks to the aquarium , ranging between 28 and 36 hours .
Georgia keeps four whale sharks : two females , Alice and Trixie , that arrived in 2006 , and two males , Taroko and Yushan , that arrived in 2007 .
Two earlier males at Georgia Aquarium , Ralph and Norton , both died in 2007 .
Georgia 's whale sharks were all imported from Taiwan and were taken from the commercial fishing quota for the species , usually used locally for food .
Taiwan closed this fishery entirely in 2008 .
HUMAN CULTURE Section::::Human culture .
In Vietnamese culture , the whale shark is referred to as " sir fish " .
In Malagasy , the whale shark is named " marokintana " , meaning ' many stars ' , after the appearance of the markings on the shark 's back .
In the Philippines , it is called butanding and balilan .
The whale shark is featured on the reverse of the Philippine 100-peso bill .
By law snorkelers must maintain a distance of four feet from the sharks and there is a fine and possible prison sentence for anyone who touches the animals .
The whale shark is also featured on the latest 2015–2017 edition of the Maldivian 1000 rufiyaa banknote , along with the green turtle .
SEE ALSO
* List of sharks
* List of threatened sharks REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* FAO web page on Whale shark EXTERNAL LINKS *
Whale Shark Photograph - identification Library * Whale Shark And Oceanic Research Center
* Maldives Whale Shark Research Program
* Whale Sharks : Gentle Giants of the Seas * Foundation for the Protection of Marine Megafauna
*
Whale Shark Fact Sheet , Fisheries Western Australia *
Albino whale shark photographed in Galapagos *
Photographs National Geographic
* A whale shark recorded defecating