AUSTRALIAN FUNNEL - WEB SPIDER
The Atracidae , commonly known as Australian funnel - web spiders , are a family of mygalomorph spiders .
They have been included as a subfamily of Hexathelidae , but are now recognized as a separate family .
All members of the family are native to Australia .
Atracidae consists of three genera :
Atrax , Hadronyche , and Illawarra , comprising 35 species .
Some members of the species produce venom which is dangerous to humans and bites by spiders of six of the species have caused severe injuries to victims .
The bite of the Sydney funnel - web spider ( Atrax robustus ) is potentially deadly , but no fatalities have occurred since the introduction of modern first - aid techniques and antivenom .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
These spiders are medium to large in size , with body lengths ranging from 1 to 5 cm ( 0.4 to 2.0 in ) .
They have a hairless carapace covering the front part of the body .
Like the related diplurid spiders , some hexathelids have relatively long spinnerets ; this is especially true of A. robustus .
Males have a large mating spur projecting from the middle of their second pair of legs .
Like other Mygalomorphae ( also incorrectly called " Orthognatha " ) — an infraorder of spiders that includes the tropical tarantulas — these spiders have fangs which point straight down the body and do not point towards each other ( cf Araneomorphae ) .
They have ample venom glands that lie entirely within their chelicerae .
Their fangs are large and powerful , capable of penetrating fingernails and soft shoes .
Funnel - webs make their burrows in moist , cool , sheltered habitats — under rocks , in and under rotting logs , some in rough - barked trees ( occasionally metres above ground ) .
They are commonly found in suburban rockeries and shrubberies , rarely in lawns or other open terrain .
A funnel - web 's burrow characteristically has irregular silk trip - lines radiating from the entrance .
Unlike some related trapdoor spiders , funnel - webs do not build lids to their burrows .
The primary range of the Australian funnel - web spiders is the eastern coast of Australia , with specimens found in New South Wales , South Australia , Victoria , and Queensland .
The only Australian states or territories without funnel - webs are Western Australia and the Northern Territory .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The first atracide spider , Hadronyche cerberea , was described by Carl Ludwig Koch in 1873 .
Octavius Pickard - Cambridge described another atracide species , A. robustus , four years later .
For a considerable time , confusion existed as to the limits of the genera Hadronyche and Atrax , not helped by the destruction of type specimens of Hadronyche cerberea during World War II .
In 1980 , Robert J. Raven merged the two genera under Atrax .
In 1988 , Michael R. Gray separated them again , and in 2010 added a further genus , Illawarra .
The family placement of the group has varied .
In 1892 , Eugène Simon placed Atrax and Hadronyche in the family Dipluridae .
In 1901 , Henry R. Hogg considered them to be sufficiently distinctive to form a separate group , which he called " Atraceae " – the basis of the modern family name Atracidae .
When in the 1980s , Raven elevated part of Simon 's Dipluridae to the family Hexathelidae , he included the atracine group .
Molecular phylogenetic studies consistently threw doubt on the monophyly of the Hexathelidae .
In 2018 , the group was restored to a full family as Atracidae .
The following cladogram shows the relationship found between Atracidae and related taxa .
Its sister is Actinopodidae .
GENERA Section::::Genera .
The family includes the following genera .
* Atrax
* Hadronyche * Illawarra MEDICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Medical significance .
Australian funnel - webs are one of the most dangerous groups of spiders in the world and are regarded by some to be the most deadly , both in terms of clinical cases and venom toxicity .
Six species have caused severe injuries to human victims , including the Sydney funnel - web ( Atrax robustus ) , northern tree funnel - web ( Hadronyche formidabilis ) , southern tree funnel - web ( H. cerberea ) , Blue Mountains funnel - web ( H. versuta ) , Darling Downs funnel - web ( H. infensa ) , and the Port Macquarie funnel - web ( H. macquariensis ) .
Examination of bite records has implicated wandering males in most if not all fatal funnel - web bites to humans .
Adult males , recognised by the modified terminal segment of the palp , tend to wander during the warmer months of the year looking for receptive females for mating .
They are attracted to water , hence are often found in swimming pools , into which they often fall while wandering .
The spiders can survive immersion in water for several hours and can deliver a bite when removed from the water .
They also show up in garages and yards in suburban Sydney .
Contrary to commonly held belief , funnel - web spiders are not able to jump , although they can run quickly .
While some very venomous spiders do not always inject venom when they bite , these spiders most often do .
The volume of venom delivered to large animals is often small , possibly due to the angle of the fangs , which are not horizontally opposed , and the fact that contact is often brief before the spider is brushed off .
About 10 % to 25 % of bites are claimed to produce significant toxicity , but the likelihood can not be predicted and all bites should be treated as potentially life - threatening .
Bites from Sydney funnel - web spiders have caused 13 documented deaths ( seven in children ) .
In all cases where the sex of the biting spider could be determined , it was found to be the male of the species .
One member of the genus Hadronyche , the northern tree funnel - web , has also been claimed to cause fatal envenomation , but to date , this lacks the support of a specific medical report .
Assays of venom from several Hadronyche species have shown it to be similar to Atrax venom .
TOXINS Section::::Toxins .
Many different toxins are found in the venom of Atrax and Hadronyche spiders .
Collectively , these spider toxins are given the name atracotoxins ( ACTX ) , as all these spiders belong to the family Atracidae .
The first toxins isolated were the δ - ACTX toxins present in the venom of both A. robustus ( δ - ACTX - Ar1 , formerly known as robustoxin or atracotoxin ) and H. versuta ( δ - ACTX - Hv1a , formerly known as versutotoxin ) .
Both these toxins produce the same effects in monkeys as those seen in humans , suggesting that they are responsible for the physiological effects seen with crude venom .
These toxins are thought to operate by opening sodium channels .
They are presynaptic neurotoxins that , via sodium channels , induce spontaneous , repetitive firing of action potentials in autonomic and motor neurons and inhibit neurally mediated transmitted release resulting in a surge of endogenous acetylcholine , noradrenaline , and adrenaline .
Although extremely toxic to primates , the venom appears to be fairly harmless to many other animals .
These animals may be resistant to the venom 's effects due to the presence of IgG , and possibly cross - linked IgG and IgM inactivating factors in their blood plasma that bind to the toxins responsible and neutralise them .
The female venom was thought to be only about a sixth as potent to humans as that of the male .
The bite of a female or juvenile may still be serious ; however , considerable variability occurs in venom toxicity between species , together with assumed degrees of inefficiency in the method of venom delivery .
SYMPTOMS Section::::Symptoms .
Envenomation symptoms observed following bites by these spiders are very similar .
The bite is initially very painful , due to the size of the fangs penetrating the skin .
Puncture marks and local bleeding are also usually visible .
If substantial envenomation occurs , symptoms generally occur within minutes and progress rapidly .
Early symptoms of systemic envenomation include goose bumps , sweating , tingling around the mouth and tongue , twitching ( initially facial and intercostal ) , salivation , watery eyes , elevated heart rate , and elevated blood pressure .
As systemic envenomation progresses , symptoms include nausea , vomiting , shortness of breath ( caused by airway obstruction ) , agitation , confusion , writhing , grimacing , muscle spasms , pulmonary oedema ( of neurogenic or hypertensive origin ) , metabolic acidosis , and extreme hypertension .
The final stages of severe envenomation include dilation of the pupils ( often fixed ) , uncontrolled generalised muscle twitching , unconsciousness , elevated intracranial pressure , and death .
Death generally is a result of progressive hypotension or possibly elevated intracranial pressure consequent on cerebral oedema .
The onset of severe envenomation can be rapid .
In one prospective study , the median time to onset of envenomation was 28 minutes , with only two cases having onset after 2 hours ( both had pressure immobilisation bandages applied ) .
Death may occur within a period ranging from 15 minutes ( this occurred when a small child was bitten ) to three days .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
Owing to the severity of symptoms , and the speed with which they progress , in areas where these spiders are known to live , all bites from large , black spiders should be treated as though they were caused by a funnel - web spider .
First - aid treatment for a suspected funnel - web spider bite consists of immediately applying a pressure immobilization bandage ; a technique which consists of wrapping the bitten limb with a crepe bandage , as well as applying a splint to limit movement of the limb .
This technique was originally developed for snakebites , but has also been shown to be effective at slowing venom movement and preventing systemic envenomation in case of a funnel - web spider bite .
Some evidence suggests that periods of prolonged localisation may slowly inactivate the venom .
Further supportive care may be necessary , but the mainstay of treatment is antivenom .
Venom from the male A. robustus is used in producing the antivenom , but it appears to be effective against the venom of all species of funnel - web spiders .
Funnel - web antivenom has also been shown , in vitro , to reverse the effects of Eastern mouse spider ( Missulena bradleyi ) venom .
Prior to the introduction of antivenom , envenomation resulted in significant morbidity and mortality .
The purified rabbit IgG antivenom was developed in 1981 through a team effort led by Dr Struan Sutherland , head of immunology at the Australian Commonwealth Serum Laboratories in Melbourne .
The antivenom is fast - acting and highly and globally effective .
Antivenom therapy has shortened the course of envenomation effects ; prior to antivenom availability , the average length of hospital treatment for severe bites was about 14 days .
Today , antivenom - treated patients are commonly discharged from hospital within 1 to 3 days .
No deaths are known since it became available .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Arachnology Home Pages : Araneae * Arachnology Home Pages : Atrax * Platnick , N.I. 2003 .
World Spider Catalog * Funnel - web spider info
* Information , distribution and pictures of A. robustus * Australian Mygalomorphae or primitive spiders