FORD CROWN VICTORIA
The Ford Crown Victoria ( colloquially called the " Crown Vic " ) is a full - size sedan that was marketed and manufactured by Ford from the 1992 to the 2011 model years .
The successor to the Ford LTD Crown Victoria , the Ford Crown Victoria served as the flagship sedan of the Ford model line , slotted above the Ford Taurus and as the Ford counterpart of the Mercury Grand Marquis .
Produced across two generations , the Crown Victoria was sold exclusively as a four - door sedan .
Ford marketed the purpose - built Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor police car variant to law - enforcement agencies ; a long - wheelbase sedan for commercial ( taxi ) use was introduced in 2002 .
The Ford Crown Victoria was produced on the rear - wheel drive Ford Panther platform , shared with the Grand Marquis and Lincoln Town Car .
From 1997 to their 2011 withdrawal , the three sedans were the final full - frame rear - wheel - drive passenger sedans produced in North America and the only non - luxury sedans offered with a standard V8 engine ; the 4.6L Modular V8 introduced in 1992 was the first overhead - cam engine .
The Ford Crown Victoria ( and Crown Victoria Police Interceptor ) were produced at the now - closed St. Thomas Assembly in Southwold , Ontario , Canada .
The final vehicle produced at the facility was a 2012 Ford Crown Victoria , as part of a small group of vehicles intended for export to the Middle East .
In total , over 1.5 million examples of the Ford Crown Victoria ( including Police Interceptors ) were manufactured by St. Thomas Assembly from 1991 to 2011 .
Within the Ford model line , the Crown Victoria was not directly replaced , with the front / all - wheel drive Ford Taurus most closely matching it in interior and trunk dimensions .
ORIGINAL USE OF THE NAME 1955–1956 Section::::Original use of the name .
Section::::1955–1956 .
The first use of the Crown Victoria nameplate by Ford was in 1955 .
To showcase its premium Ford Fairlane model range , above the Fairlane Victoria two - door hardtop , the Fairlane Crown Victoria received its own B - pillared roofline .
While Ford had last used the Victoria nameplate in 1932 ( in reference to the style of carriage ) , the Crown Victoria name derived from the wide stainless - steel band " crowning " the roof .
While the B - pillar replaced the hardtop roofline ( as on the base Ford Mainline ) , the design allowed for a sleeker appearance .
The Crown Victoria Skyliner was a variant of the Crown Victoria with a fixed roof panel of acrylic glass .
For the 1956 model year , along with the rest of the Ford model line , the Fairlane Crown Victoria was offered with the Lifeguard option package as an option .
As the Ford model line was redesigned for 1957 , the Ford Fairlane Crown Victoria was withdrawn with no replacement .
The Skyliner name was revived , becoming used for the Ford Fairlane 500 Skyliner retractable hardtop convertible .
1980–1991
Section::::1980–1991 .
For the 1980 model year , the Ford Crown Victoria nameplate was revived after a 23-year hiatus .
As part of the then - recent downsizing of the full - size Ford model lines , the LTD Crown Victoria replaced the 1975 - 1979 LTD Landau .
Sold as a two - door and four - door sedan , the LTD Crown Victoria shared its interior trim with the LTD Country Squire station wagon .
To distinguish itself from its Mercury Marquis counterpart , the vinyl roof of the LTD Crown Victoria was fitted with a stainless - steel band to trim the B - pillars ( with the standard vinyl roof not extending past the B - pillar ) For 1983 , as part of an extensive revision of the midsize and full - size model lines of all three Ford divisions , the LTD Crown Victoria became a stand - alone model line ( along its Mercury Grand Marquis counterpart ) ; the base - trim Ford LTD was shifted to the mid - size segment , replacing the Ford Granada .
After its withdrawal after the 1991 model year , the LTD Crown Victoria ( and LTD Country Squire station wagon ) marked the final usage of the Ford LTD nameplate in North America .
Ford of Australia would continue the nameplate on its flagship through the 2007 model year .
FIRST GENERATION
( 1992–1997 ) Section::::First generation ( 1992–1997 ) .
The Ford Crown Victoria began production in 1991 as a 1992 model .
In an effort to optimize its availability for buyers , at the launch , fleet sales of the vehicle were postponed for 14 months .
To better distinguish the generation for buyers , the long - running LTD prefix was dropped .
In line with the redesign of the 1991 Chevrolet Caprice ( its chief competitor ) , the 1992 Crown Victoria featured a major exterior redesign on the previous - generation chassis .
Focused on aerodynamics and fuel efficiency , Ford reduced the coefficient of drag of the exterior from 0.42 to 0.34 ( nearly matching the 0.32 of the Ford Taurus ) .
Due to a market shift in family - oriented vehicles , the Crown Victoria was offered exclusively as a four - door sedan , with the wood - trim LTD Country Squire station wagon discontinued .
While the Ford Taurus and Mercury Sable continued in production with optional three - row seating , the role of the Country Squire was effectively superseded by the Ford Aerostar and Ford Econoline /
Ford Club Wagon vans , and the Ford Explorer SUVs .
During their launch , the Ford Crown Victoria ( and Mercury Grand Marquis ) were involved in a unique loophole involving CAFE .
Though produced in Southwold , Ontario ( which otherwise made them domestic automobiles ) , to avoid gas - guzzler taxes , Ford modified its supplier network in order for the two vehicles to be classified as imported vehicles , effectively removing the full - size sedans from the Ford domestic CAFE fleet ( alongside the Ford Mustang V8 ) and placing them in its imported fleet ( alongside the Ford Festiva ) .
CHASSIS Section::::Chassis .
In lieu of developing an all - new platform architecture from the ground up , the Crown Victoria retained the Panther platform of its LTD Crown Victoria predecessor as its chassis .
Although launched in 1979 , the Panther chassis underwent extensive upgrades to improve its road manners and handling ; major updates were made to the steering and suspension tuning .
To improve braking performance , the Crown Victoria gained four - wheel disc brakes ( only seen on the Lincoln Mark VII and Ford Taurus SHO ) ; anti - lock brakes and low - speed traction control were available as an option , which became a popular feature .
For 1997 , several updates were made to improve handling response and steering control Showcased in the redesign was the Modular V8 .
First introduced in the 1991 Lincoln Town Car , the 4.6L SOHC V8 was the replacement for the 5.0L ( 302 CID ) Windsor V8 and the first engine of a family of overhead - cam engines that would be introduced in a number of Ford and Lincoln - Mercury cars and trucks .
Lighter than its predecessor , the 4.6L V8 produced nearly identical torque output while producing 40 additional horsepower in its standard single - exhaust configuration .
As with its predecessor and the Lincoln Town Car , the 4.6L V8 was paired with a 4-speed overdrive automatic transmission .
In 1993 , the Ford AOD transmission was replaced by the electronically - controlled AOD - E version .
For 1995 , the AOD - E was replaced by the 4R70W , a heavier - duty version introduced in the Lincoln Mark VIII .
BODY
Section::::Body .
Ford based much of the Crown Victoria 's appearance on the first - generation Ford Taurus , a look pioneered by Jack Telnack , Ford VP of Design .
Though the Taurus became wildly popular in its market segment , Telnack 's " Aero " look proved to be either a love or hate proposition with potential buyers of the full - size , wedge - shaped Crown Victoria .
Along with its distinctive no - grille front fascia , the Crown Victoria would share a similar roofline with the Taurus , similar body and bumper moldings , similar door handles , aircraft - style doors , and similarly shaped headlamp and taillamp clusters .
To reduce aesthetic commonality with the Mercury Grand Marquis , only the front doors , windshield , and alloy wheels were shared between them .
For the interior , the two vehicles also were given different seats , door trim and dashboards ; the Crown Victoria featured an instrument panel with round dials while the Grand Marquis featured a horizontal speedometer .
An electronic instrument panel was introduced as an option .
Though better received than the 1990 redesign of the Chevrolet Caprice , the 1992 Crown Victoria was met with disapproval from some critics and buyers , leading Ford to revise the exterior .
In late 1992 for model year 1993 , a grille was added to the front fascia ( though it retained its " bottom - breather " configuration ) ; for 1994 , a red reflector strip was added to the trunk lid to visually connect the taillamps .
In 1994 for MY 1995 , a mid - cycle redesign saw more extensive changes to the Crown Victoria ; a 6-slit grille replaced the egg crate grille and wider taillamps were added to the rear ( the license plate was moved to the trunk lid ) .
For the interior , the Crown Victoria and Grand Marquis adopted the same dashboard , using round dials for the instrument panel and larger controls and switches .
In addition , the seats were redesigned .
In late 1995 , the first - generation Ford " brick " airbag steering wheel was replaced by a version with a smaller hub ( moving the horn back to the steering wheel hub ) .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
As with its LTD Crown Victoria predecessor , the Crown Victoria was a six - passenger automobile ; the front seat was a 50/50 split bench seat .
The Crown Victoria was sold in two trim levels : base - trim and Crown Victoria LX , with the latter forming the majority of non - fleet sales .
In addition , the Crown Victoria P71 replaced the fleet - market " S " designation in 1993 ; the P71 was marketed exclusively for law - enforcement sales .
As with the Mercury Grand Marquis , a driver airbag was standard equipment and a passenger airbag was added as an option during later 1991 production .
It later became standard in 1993 for the 1994 model year .
A popular feature were the anti - lock brakes and low - speed traction control .
For 1996 , a single - key entry system became standard , along with a hidden audio antenna , rear window defroster and tinted glass .
Automatic climate control and a JBL audio system became available on the LX .
TOURING SEDAN
Section::::Touring Sedan .
For 1992 , Ford introduced the Crown Victoria Touring Sedan as a performance - oriented flagship trim .
The Touring Sedan featured a number of suspension and handling improvements over the Crown Victoria LX , featuring the heavier - duty suspension components of the police - package version , also including wider tires , rear air suspension , the removal of the speed limiter , and a 210 hp dual - exhaust 4.6L V8 .
Optional features included speed - sensitive steering and larger - diameter sway bars .
Distinguished by its standard two - tone exterior paint scheme ( with painted alloy wheels ) , the Crown Victoria Touring Sedan featured a model - unique leather interior with every feature available on a Crown Victoria at the time .
For a lower price , Ford offered the performance upgrades of the Touring Sedan on the LX as the Handling and Performance Package alongside a separate towing package .
The Touring Sedan became a one year - only model , as it was discontinued after 1992 .
However , in various forms , the Handling and Performance Package remained an option until 2007 .
SECOND GENERATION ( 1998–2012 )
Section::::Second generation ( 1998–2012 ) .
The second generation of the 1998 Ford Crown Victoria commenced sales on December 26 , 1997 .
Although the 1992 - 1997 Ford Crown Victoria saw better critical and marketplace acceptance than the controversial styling of the 1991 Chevrolet Caprice , its sales struggled to match those of its Mercury Grand Marquis counterpart .
In an effort to gain acceptance among buyers ( and increase parts commonality ) , for the 1998 model year , the Crown Victoria adopted much of the exterior design of the Mercury Grand Marquis .
Following its 1998 introduction , the second - generation Crown Victoria underwent an extensive revision for the 2003 model year .
Introduced in April 2002 , while the exterior saw no change , nearly the entire chassis was redesigned , with major updates to the suspension and steering .
CHASSIS Section::::Chassis .
The second - generation Ford Crown Victoria continued the use of the Ford Panther platform , shared with the Mercury Grand Marquis and Lincoln Town Car .
Under the 1998 redesign , several changes were made to the rear suspension to improve general road manners ( at the expense of reduced towing capacity ) .
The original three - link coil - spring configuration was replaced with a four - link configuration with a Watt 's linkage .
Continuing the use of four - wheel disc brakes , for 1998 , enlarged brake rotors necessitated a shift to 16-inch wheels for all Crown Victoria models .
For 1999 , ABS became standard on all Crown Victorias ( except Police Interceptors ) .
For the 2003 model year , the suspension and steering underwent an extensive update , paired with the chassis redesign .
For the first time , the Crown Victoria adopted rack and pinion steering ( replacing the long - running recirculating ball system ) , with the adoption of aluminum front control arms .
In the rear , twin - tube shocks ( in use since the mid-1960s ) , were replaced by monotube shocks ; to improve maintenance and on - road handling , the shocks were moved outside of the frame rails .
As part of the suspension upgrades , the Panther - chassis vehicles were fitted with wheels with high positive offset ( flat - face ) .
For 2006 , the steel wheels of the Crown Victoria shifted to a 17-inch diameter .
The second - generation is powered by a single engine , the 4.6L SOHC 16-valve Modular V8 .
Carried over from 1992 - 1997 , output for 1998 was raised to 200 hp ( dual - exhaust examples produced 215 hp ) .
For 1999 , spark plug wires were replaced by coil - on - plug ignition ( a feature first used on the DOHC 4.6L V8 ) .
For 2001 , the 4.6L V8 received new cylinder heads ( from the Mustang GT ) , raising output to 220 hp ( 235 hp in dual - exhaust configuration ) .
For 2003 , the engine output was increased further , to 224 hp and 239 hp ( depending on exhaust configuration ) ; the increase resulted from a knock sensor fitted to the engine .
For 2004 , engine output was increased for the last time , as the Police Interceptor raised output to 250 hp ( as its engine received the air intake of the Mercury Marauder ) .
For 2005 , the engine underwent a minor revision , as it adopted electronic " drive - by - wire " throttle control .
From 1998 to 2004 , the 4R70W 4-speed automatic was paired with the 4.6L V8 , replaced by the 4R70E after 2005 ( the latter designed to accommodate electronic throttle controls ) ; the 4R75W was exclusive to the 2004 Police Interceptor .
BODY
Section::::Body .
Following the poor critical and sales acceptance of the 1991 - 1996 Chevrolet Caprice and Buick Roadmaster , for the second - generation Crown Victoria , Ford sought a more conservative exterior design , choosing design commonality with the Mercury Grand Marquis over the Ford Taurus .
In doing so , the Crown Victoria adopted the formal notchback roofline of its Mercury counterpart , sharing all four doors ( previously , the front doors were shared ) .
On the front fascia , both the grille and headlamps were enlarged .
The rear fascia underwent a redesign , as large taillamp units were mounted at the corners of the body , replacing the previous full - width design .
In contrast to its Mercury counterpart , the Crown Victoria was nearly devoid of chrome trim , largely restricted to the grille , window trim , and trunklid .
In contrast to the exterior , relatively few changes were made to the interior , updated for the 1995 model year .
Offered with nearly the same features as the Grand Marquis , the Crown Victoria was largely differentiated by its ( optional ) wood trim and seating materials .
To comply with US federal regulations , for 2000 , the Crown Victoria adopted an emergency trunk release system , alongside other safety features , including LATCH anchors and " Belt Minder " ( seat belt reminder chime that sounds for an unbelted front seat occupant ) .
For 2001 , the dual airbags were redesigned , replaced by dual - stage airbags ; power - adjustable pedals became an option .
For 2003 , seat - mounted side airbags became an option .
For the 2007 model year , the optional side airbags underwent revision to better protect passengers in side - impact collisions .
For the 2002 model year , heated exterior side mirrors became available , along with standard floor mats , improved cloth upholstery ; for LX - trim vehicles , a trunk storage organizer became an option .
In contrast to the extensive mechanical changes for the 2003 model year ( and redesigns of the Mercury Grand Marquis and Lincoln Town Car ) , the Ford Crown Victoria saw no exterior changes since the 1998 model year ( grille changes were limited to Police Interceptors ) .
For the interior , a minor update saw redesigned front and rear seats ( distinguished by taller head restraints ) and redesigned door panels .
During the 2003 model year ( after December 2002 production ) , Ford began to de - content the Crown Victoria , removing the amber - color turn signal lenses , body - color sideview mirrors , front - seat map pouches , locking fuel cap , automatic - release parking brake , and engine compartment light .
For 2004 , in one of the first American cars to do so , the Crown Victoria adopted laminated door glass as an option ; along with providing additional security , the feature filtered UV light and heat from the interior .
In another revision , the overhead console was redesigned .
For 2005 , the Crown Victoria received a new non - locking steering column , which gave the model its first new steering wheel since 1998 .
For the first time , the Crown Victoria offered a moonroof as an option ; in line with other Ford vehicles , a 6-disc CD changer became an option .
For 2006 , the dashboard of the Crown Victoria saw a revision , as Ford introduced a new instrument panel ( for the first time since 1992 ) .
Along with becoming the final Ford Motor Company fitted with a tachometer in North America , the 2006 Crown Victoria became the final Ford vehicle to adopt a digital odometer ( as the digital instrument panel option was discontinued ) ; Police Interceptors were given an engine hour meter .
TRIM Section::::Trim .
Carried over from the 1992 - 1997 Crown Victoria , the second - generation Crown Victoria was marketed in two trim levels : Ford Crown Victoria and Ford Crown Victoria LX ( internally designated P73 and P74 , respectively ) .
The Crown Victoria P71 was carried over , with Ford creating the Crown Victoria Police Interceptor as a stand - alone model for 1999 .
For 2000 , Ford offered a " Special Edition " option package for the LX ; along with namesake exterior badging , the interior was fitted with two - tone leather seating .
For 2001 , Ford offered a counterpart to the Mercury Grand Marquis LSE , named the Sport Appearance Package .
Alongside the standard Handling and Performance Package , the Sport Appearance Package offered 5-passenger seating with a floor - mounted shifter , 5-spoke aluminum wheels , and monochromatic exterior trim .
For 2002 , the Sport Appearance Package was renamed Crown Victoria LX Sport ; with the Handling and Performance Package , it was fitted with rear air suspension , a 3.27:1 rear - axle ratio , and a larger rear stabilizer bar .
Sharing many of the performance upgrades of the Mercury Marauder ( with the exception of the engine ) , the LX Sport was produced through 2006 .
For 2007 , most features of the LX Sport returned as the Handling and Performance Package became a stand - alone option .
2008–2011 :
FLEET SALES
Section::::2008–2011 :
Fleet sales .
In 2006 , after factoring out fleet / Police Interceptor sales ( 95 % of production ) , retail sales of the Crown Victoria dwindled to 3,000 ( coming within 1,100 units of the Ford GT supercar ) , outsold by its Mercury Grand Marquis counterpart by an 18-to-1 margin .
For 2008 , Ford ended retail sale of the Crown Victoria in the United States , removing the model from its website ( later replacing it with the newly revived 2008 Ford Taurus ) ; through Ford Fleet , sales continued of the Police Interceptor and commercial ( taxi / fleet / LWB ) variants .
Subsequently , the only retail market selling the Ford Crown Victoria was the GCC / Middle East , with the Crown Victoria sold alongside the Mercury Grand Marquis .
For 2009 , the Crown Victoria model line underwent a consolidation , as the LX became the sole version of the standard - wheelbase Crown Victoria ( alongside the Police Interceptor ) .
In line with its Mercury and Lincoln counterparts , 17-inch wheels became standard , with the LX adopting the 5-spoke alloy wheels of the LX Sport / Handling and Performance Package .
To streamline manufacturing , several features were standardized , including power - adjustable pedals and side airbags .
To comply with federal regulations , recessed power window switches were added ( replacing a design used since 1995 ) .
The Ford Crown Victoria is the only Panther vehicle which was produced for the 2012 model year , as the Mercury Grand Marquis , Lincoln Town Car , and Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor were discontinued during the 2011 model year .
As 2012 production was illegal for sale in the United States ( due to lack of stability control ) , the entire 2012 production was exported to the Middle East .
DISCONTINUATION Section::::Discontinuation .
From the 1992 introduction of the Crown Victoria to the 2005 introduction of the Ford Five Hundred , the layout of American full - size sedans underwent an extensive transition .
By 1996 , as General Motors ended production of the Chevrolet Caprice , Buick Roadmaster , and Cadillac Fleetwood , virtually all competitors of the Crown Victoria had adopted front - wheel drive , with a five - passenger configuration largely replacing six - passenger seating ( with the first two generations of the Toyota Avalon becoming the sole Japanese - brand sedan marketed in North America with a front bench seat ) .
As an unintended consequence of the 1996 discontinuation of the Chevrolet Caprice , in the late 1990s , the Crown Victoria secured a near - monopoly of police car sales and significant market share of taxi vehicles ; both segments viewed body - on - frame construction with rear - wheel drive as advantageous attributes .
As the sole remaining competitor of Crown Victoria was its Mercury Grand Marquis counterpart , to decrease internal competition , marketing for the Crown Victoria was de - emphasized , shifting buyers interested in Ford vehicles to the Taurus ; buyers seeking full - size vehicles were shifted towards the Mercury Grand Marquis and Lincoln Town Car .
For 2005 , Ford introduced the Five Hundred sedan , deriving its chassis components from the Volvo S80 .
The larger of the two cars intended to replace the Ford Taurus ( alongside the Ford Fusion ) , the front - wheel drive Five Hundred was the first completely new full - size Ford sedan since 1979 .
While nearly a foot shorter than the Crown Victoria , the Five Hundred offered comparable interior dimensions ; in a major shift , the Five Hundred adopted a five - passenger configuration as standard .
The 2006 Ford restructuring plan
The Way Forward ultimately sealed the fate of the Ford Crown Victoria .
Coinciding with the 2008 withdrawal of the Crown Victoria from retail sale ( see above ) , in 2009 , Ford announced the 2011 closure of St. Thomas Assembly in Southwold , Ontario , Canada .
At the time , production of the Ford Panther platform was to cease , as the architecture was unable to support electronic stability control , required for 2012 vehicles sold in the United States and Canada .
In line with the announcement , the Mercury Grand Marquis and Lincoln Town Car were discontinued without replacement ( the former , as part of the closure of the Mercury brand ) .
From August 31 , 2011 , St. Thomas Assembly produced a short run of 2012 model year Ford Crown Victorias ; all vehicles were produced for GCC export , as they were illegal for sale in the United States and Canada .
On September 15 , 2011 , the final Ford Crown Victoria rolled off the assembly line , destined for export to Saudi Arabia ; the vehicle was the final Panther - platform vehicle produced and the final vehicle produced at St. Thomas Assembly .
As with the Mercury Grand Marquis and Lincoln Town Car , the Ford Crown Victoria was discontinued with no direct successor .
The Crown Victoria Police Interceptor is the only Panther - platform vehicle that was directly replaced , as Ford introduced Ford Police Interceptor sedan ( based on the Taurus ) and the Police Interceptor Utility ( based on the Ford Explorer ) ; both vehicles are derived from each other and are redesigned versions of the chassis introduced by the Ford Five Hundred .
In 2010 , a variant of the Ford Transit Connect was developed specifically for taxicab usage .
While not the winner of the New York City Taxi of Tomorrow competition , the Transit Connect has been adopted for use elsewhere in the United States .
VARIANTS POLICE INTERCEPTOR ( 1998–2012 ) Section::::Variants .
Section::::Police Interceptor ( 1998–2012 ) .
Starting with the 1998 model year , the police version of the Crown Victoria , previously named Crown Victoria P71 , was changed to Police Interceptor , and new rear badging was assigned instead of the civilian Crown Victoria badge .
Though the Crown Victoria badge is still affixed to Police Interceptors equipped with the Street Appearance package for vehicles that require civilian styling ( undercover cars , office / city motor pool , fire departments , etc . ) , Police Interceptor models come with a black front grille , a black rear fascia on the trunk lid , with chrome trim under the tail lights through 1999 models and black trim under the tail lights on 2000 and later models .
1999 through 2000 models have a blacked out version of the standard chrome bar grille , while 2001 and up models have a black honeycomb type grille .
They also have several " heavier - duty " mechanical upgrades , and newer models have additional safety features to deal with fuel - tank safety concerns .
Ford has replaced the Crown Victoria Police Interceptor with upgraded and heavy - duty versions of the Ford Explorer and Ford Taurus .
In response , many police departments like that of Austin , Texas , are buying reserve supplies of the last Crown Victorias to allow them to maintain a fleet of reliable police cars into the future .
LONG - WHEELBASE COMMERCIAL VERSION ( 2002–2012 ) Section::::Long - wheelbase commercial version ( 2002–2012 ) .
In 2002 , Ford introduced a long - wheelbase version of the Crown Victoria , available only to commercial fleets ( mostly used by taxi companies ) in North American markets .
This version gives extra of wheelbase length , made possible by a new frame and extended body .
This version is not available to the general public , nor is there a stretched version of the Police Interceptor .
However , there was a special service version available for the police market from 2002 to 2006 , with an available street - appearance trim option from 2002 to 2004 , due to its targeted use mostly in the taxi and livery market .
In the Middle East , long - wheelbase versions of both the Mercury Grand Marquis and Crown Victoria were available to the general public .
EXPORT CANADA Section::::Export .
Section::::Canada .
Ford of Canada
( the official manufacturer of the Crown Victoria , Police Interceptor , and Mercury Grand Marquis ) marketed the Ford Crown Victoria in Canada through the 1999 model year .
Coinciding with the withdrawal of the Mercury brand from Canada , for the 2000 model year , Ford of Canada continued sale of the Grand Marquis in Ford dealerships through the 2009 model year , replaced by the 2010 Ford Taurus .
For fleets , sales of the Crown Victoria ( consisting largely of the Police Interceptor ) continued through the 2011 model year ; as in the United States , its lack of stability control precluded further legal sale in Canada .
MIDDLE EAST ( GCC )
Section::::Middle East ( GCC ) .
Through its production , the Ford Crown Victoria was exported to two Gulf Cooperation Council nations ( Kuwait and Saudi Arabia ) alongside its Lincoln - Mercury counterparts .
In a region favoring full - size sedans ( among other vehicles ) the Crown Victoria became popular , as buyers of the region favored its durability , reliability , and ease of use ( in comparison to German and Japanese luxury vehicles ) , along with its lower price .
As American nameplates shifted to newer vehicles ( with the introduction of the Chrysler 300C , Dodge Charger , and the Chevrolet Caprice becoming a variant of the Holden Caprice ) , during the 2000s , the Crown Victoria , Grand Marquis , and Lincoln Town Car , while still popular , began to lose market share , primarily due to their age .
Panther - chassis sedans destined for Middle East export were referred to as " GCC - Spec " vehicles .
Five versions of the Crown Victoria were available : Standard , Sport , Long - wheelbase , LX , and LX Sport .
Unlike the United States and Canada , the long - wheelbase Crown Victoria was available for retail sale .
In Kuwait , where the Crown Victoria was outsold by the higher - trim Mercury Grand Marquis , only the Standard and Long - wheelbase versions were sold after 2000 ( the LX was discontinued in 1999 ) .
MODIFICATIONS FROM AMERICAN VEHICLES Section::::Modifications from American vehicles .
Along with the fitment of a metric instrument panel , several modifications are made to GCC - Spec Crown Victorias .
In place of the 50/50 bench seat of the standard Crown Victoria , GCC - Spec vehicles use a 40/20/40 bench seat .
Derived from the Lincoln Town Car , the front seat has air conditioning vents for the rear seats ( except for LX Sport models ) , an 8-way driver 's seat , a 4-way manual passenger seat ( an 8-way power seat as an option ) ; seat upholstery is either cloth or leather .
On all standard - wheelbase models , a true dual - exhaust system was fitted ( not available on an American Crown Victoria ) .
On Standard and Standard Long - Wheelbase models , a driver 's side spotlight assembly was optional .
A DVD entertainment system ( marketed as " Export DVD Entertainment System " ) was added for the 2007 model year ; it was optional on Sport , LX and LX Sport models .
Differing from its American / Canadian counterpart , the warranty offered for a GCC - spec Crown Victoria was 5 years/200,000 kilometers ( 125,000 miles ) – whichever came first .
Derived from the Mercury Marauder , a trunklid spoiler was either standard or an option on all standard - wheelbase models .
For GCC - spec vehicles , the optional Handling and Performance Package ( HPP ) offered in the United States was rebranded the Export Handling Package ( EHP ) .
The EHP differed from the HPP largely by its retention of the 2.73:1 rear axle ratio ( the standard - equipment " taller " axle ) and the use of a true dual exhaust system ( standard equipment on all standard - wheelbase export Crown Victorias ) .
Included as part of the Sport and LX Sport trims ( optional on the LX ) , the package includes tuned rear air suspension , revised coil springs , handling shock absorbers and a larger rear stabilizer bar .
On GCC - Spec Crown Victorias , the EHP option is externally distinguished by a monochromatic paint scheme , with Ford offering Dark Toreador Red , Silver Birch , Tungsten , and Black as color choices .
2008 SPECIAL EDITION Section::::2008 Special Edition .
With no major redesign of the Crown Victoria since 1998 , to keep the model line competitive , the GCC importer of Ford vehicles designed a commemorative trim package for the Ford Crown Victoria for the 2008 model year .
Exclusive to GCC - Spec Standard models , the cosmetic package adds several cosmetic features , including : Everything else on the Special Edition package is identical to the Standard - trim model .
Not listed in any sales literature , in Saudi Arabia , it was available with a choice of different colors .
In Kuwait , the Special Edition was only available in black ( due to market size ) ; the price was approximately KWD 6,000 ( approximately $ 22,000 USD ) .
For 2009 , the Special Edition was withdrawn .
SAFETY CONCERNS
FUEL TANK Section::::Safety concerns .
Section::::Fuel tank .
While the car has been highly rated for safety , there was some controversy and lawsuits in the 1990s and 2000s over Ford Crown Victoria gas tank leaks after certain types of high speed impacts , specifically when being hit in the rear end at high speeds .
These impacts caused fuel tank failures in the Crown Victoria .
The leaking fuel in combination with friction between the vehicle and the road was found to be the cause of fires .
The reports that the cars were more prone to fires during a rear collision were a simple combination of three things .
First , most law enforcement agencies relied heavily on the Crown Victoria as their primary vehicle , meaning that any police - related auto accident was very likely to involve a Crown Victoria .
Second , the accidents occurred as the result of the officers intentionally parking their vehicles close to active traffic to shield a stopped motorist — something most civilians would never do .
Third , the impacting vehicle was often traveling at , or above , the posted legal limit ( in most jurisdictions ) .
The condition was exacerbated by police equipment installers drilling over the package tray in the luggage compartment .
Due to the gas tank 's orientation , drilling through the package tray may result in drilling into the gas tank .
Installers also used screws set directly into the bulkhead and facing the fuel tank .
In the event of a high - energy collision , these screws could be forced into the tank , both rupturing the tank and possibly acting as a spark source .
Long bolts for mounting heavier equipment were also directly suspect .
The manufacturer provided an aftermarket shield to help prevent these items from puncturing the tank during impact .
Further , many investigations , both performed by federal / state agencies , and the police department themselves , have found that removable items in the trunk were improperly stowed .
These items became tank - piercing projectiles during the rear - collision scenarios .
Ford 's second solution came in the form of a recall kit including patterns to mark unsafe areas ( to drill ) in the luggage compartment .
Also included were rubberized kevlar and hard ballistic nylon shields for the differential cover lower shock bolts .
They also included a kevlar - based trunk liner .
Ford used similar kits on early-1980s model passenger vehicles .
For 2005 and newer models , Ford offers an optional on - board fire - suppression system for the Crown Victoria Police Interceptor units .
The system itself is integrated with the anti - lock braking system as part of the activation , and can be activated manually .
However , Ford does cite several system limitations regarding fuel loss and impact speeds .
Despite numerous court cases charging Ford with partial liability for fires caused in accidents , the company has never been found liable in a Crown Victoria accident .
Notably , only the Ford Crown Victoria and new Ford police car have been certified for high speed rear impact collisions , adding credibility to Ford 's statement that fiery crashes are a result of extreme and unfortunate situations .
INTAKE MANIFOLD
DEFECT
Section::::Intake manifold defect .
Model years 1996 to 2001 inclusive , using an all - composite intake manifold , are subject to coolant leaks .
Late in 2005 Ford settled a class action lawsuit .
See Intake Manifold Defect for details .
This problem can be remedied by upgrading the intake manifold to the 2002 and up version .
SALES Section::::Sales . !
Calendar year !
American sales
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ford Crown Victoria ( U.S. ) :
Civilian Police Interceptor Commercial Version ( includes long - wheelbase version )