ANGEL FALLS
Angel Falls (; Pemon language :
Kerepakupai Meru meaning " waterfall of the deepest place " , or Parakupá Vená , meaning " the fall from the highest point " ) is a waterfall in Venezuela .
It is the world 's highest uninterrupted waterfall , with a height of 979 metres ( 3,211 feet ) and a plunge of 807 metres ( 2,368 feet ) .
The waterfall drops over the edge of the Auyán - tepui mountain in the Canaima National Park ( Spanish : Parque Nacional Canaima ) , a UNESCO World Heritage site in the Gran Sabana region of Bolívar State .
The height figure 979 metres ( 3,211 feet ) mostly consists of the main plunge but also includes about of sloped cascade and rapids below the drop and a high plunge downstream of the talus rapids .
The falls are along a fork of the Rio Kerepacupai Meru which flows into the Churun River , a tributary of the Carrao River , itself a tributary of the Orinoco River .
HISTORY OF ANGEL FALLS
ETYMOLOGY Section::::History of Angel Falls .
Section::::Etymology .
The waterfall has been known as the Angel Falls since the mid-20th century ; they are named after Jimmie Angel , a US aviator , who was the first person to fly over the falls .
Angel 's ashes were scattered over the falls on 2 July 1960 .
The common Spanish name Salto del Ángel derives from his surname .
In 2009 , President Hugo Chávez announced his intention to change the name to the purported original indigenous Pemon term ( " Kerepakupai Vená " , meaning " waterfall of the deepest place " ) , on the grounds that the nation 's most famous landmark should bear an indigenous name .
Explaining the name change , Chávez was reported to have said , " This is ours , long before Angel ever arrived there ...
this is indigenous property . "
However , he later said that he would not decree the change of name , but only was defending the use of Kerepakupai Vená .
EXPLORATION Section::::Exploration .
Sir Walter Raleigh in his expedition to find the fabled city of El Dorado described what was possibly a tepuy ( table top mountain ) , and he is said to have been the first European to view Angel Falls , although these claims are considered far - fetched .
Some historians state that the first European to visit the waterfall was , a Spanish explorer and governor from the 16th and 17th centuries .
Other sources state that the first westerner to see the waterfall was the Spanish explorer Fèlix Cardona in 1927 .
According to accounts of Venezuelan explorer Ernesto Sánchez La Cruz , he spotted the falls in 1912 , but he did not publicize his discovery .
Cruz possibly saw the Montoya Falls in the Sierra Pacaraima region , which are more than tall .
They were not known to the outside world until American aviator Jimmie Angel , following directions given by the explorer Fèlix Cardona , who had seen the waterfall six years before , flew over them on 16 November 1933 on a flight while he was searching for a valuable ore bed .
Returning on 9 October 1937 , Angel tried to land his Flamingo monoplane El Río Caroní atop Auyán - tepui , but the plane was damaged when the wheels sank into the marshy ground .
Angel and his three companions , including his wife Marie , were forced to descend the tepui on foot .
It took them 11 days to make their way back to civilization by the gradually sloping back side , but news of their adventure spread and the waterfall was named Angel Falls in his honor .
The name of the waterfall—"Salto del Ángel"—was first published on a Venezuelan government map in December 1939 .
Angel 's plane remained on top of the tepui for 33 years before being lifted out by helicopter .
It was restored at the Aviation Museum in Maracay and now sits outdoors on the front of the airport at Ciudad Bolívar .
The first recorded person of European descent to reach the base of the falls was the Latvian explorer Aleksandrs Laime , also known as Alejandro Laime to the native Pemon tribe .
He reached the falls alone in 1946 .
He was the first to reach the upper side of falls in the late 1950s , by climbing on the back side where the slope is not vertical .
He also reached Angel 's plane 18 years after the crash landing .
On 18 November 1955 , Latvian independence day , he announced to the Venezuelan newspaper El Nacional that this stream without any known local name should be called after a Latvian river , Gauja .
The same year , this name was registered in the National Cartographic Institution of Venezuela .
There are no convincing proofs that the indigenous Pemon people had named the local streams , as Auyán - tepui was considered to be a dangerous place and was not visited by the indigenous people .
However , lately the Pemon name Kerep is used as well .
Laime was also the first to clear a trail that leads from the Churun River to the base of the falls .
On the way is a viewpoint commonly used to capture the falls in photographs .
It is named Mirador Laime ( " Laime 's Viewpoint " in Spanish ) in his honor .
This trail is used now mostly for tourists , to lead them from the Isla Ratón camp to the small clearing .
The official height of the falls was determined by a survey carried out by an expedition organized and financed by American journalist Ruth Robertson on 13 May 1949 .
Robertson 's expedition , which began on April 23 , 1949 , was also the first to reach the foot of the falls .
The first known attempt to climb the face of the cliff was made in 1968 during the wet season .
It failed because of slippery rock .
In 1969 , a second attempt was made during the dry season .
This attempt was thwarted by lack of water and an overhang from the top .
The first climb to the top of the cliff was completed on 13 January 1971 .
The climbers required nine and a half days to ascend and one and a half days to rappel down .
TOURISM Section::::Tourism .
Angel Falls is one of Venezuela 's top tourist attractions , though a trip to the falls is a complicated affair .
The falls are located in an isolated jungle .
A flight from Puerto Ordaz or Ciudad Bolívar is required to reach Canaima camp , the starting point for river trips to the base of the falls .
River trips generally take place from June to December , when the rivers are deep enough for use by the Pemon guides .
During the dry season ( December to March ) , there is less water seen than in the other months .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*