PETROLEUM JELLY Petroleum jelly , petrolatum , white petrolatum , soft paraffin / paraffin wax or multi - hydrocarbon , CAS number 8009 - 03 - 8 , is a semi - solid mixture of hydrocarbons ( with carbon numbers mainly higher than 25 ) , originally promoted as a topical ointment for its healing properties .
After petroleum jelly became a medicine chest staple , consumers began to use it for many ailments , as well as cosmetic purposes , including toenail fungus , genital rashes ( non - STD ) , nosebleeds , diaper rash , and chest colds .
Its folkloric medicinal value as a " cure - all " has since been limited by better scientific understanding of appropriate and inappropriate uses .
It is recognized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) as an approved over - the - counter ( OTC ) skin protectant and remains widely used in cosmetic skin care .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The raw material for petroleum jelly was discovered in 1859 in Titusville , Pennsylvania , United States , on some of the country 's first oil rigs .
Workers disliked the paraffin - like material forming on rigs because it caused them to malfunction , but they used it on cuts and burns because they believed that it hastened healing .
Robert Chesebrough , a young chemist whose previous work of distilling fuel from the oil of sperm whales had been rendered obsolete by petroleum , went to Titusville to see what new materials had commercial potential .
Chesebrough took the unrefined black " rod wax " , as the drillers called it , back to his laboratory to refine it and explore potential uses .
Chesebrough discovered that by distilling the lighter , thinner oil products from the rod wax , he could create a light - colored gel .
Chesebrough patented the process of making petroleum jelly by in 1872 .
The process involved vacuum distillation of the crude material followed by filtration of the still residue through bone char .
Chesebrough traveled around New York demonstrating the product to encourage sales by burning his skin with acid or an open flame , then spreading the ointment on his injuries and showing his past injuries healed , he claimed , by his miracle product .
He opened his first factory in 1870 in Brooklyn using the name Vaseline .
PHYSICAL PROPERTIES Section::::Physical properties .
Petroleum jelly is a mixture of hydrocarbons , having a melting point usually close to human body temperature , approximately .
It is flammable only when heated to liquid ; then the fumes will light , not the liquid itself , so a wick material like leaves , bark , or small twigs is needed to ignite petroleum jelly .
It is colorless or has a pale yellow color ( when not highly distilled ) , translucent , and devoid of taste and smell when pure .
It does not oxidize on exposure to the air and is not readily acted on by chemical reagents .
It is insoluble in water .
It is soluble in dichloromethane , chloroform , benzene , diethyl ether , carbon disulfide and oil of turpentine .
Depending on the specific application of petroleum jelly , it may be USP , B.P. , or Ph .
Eur . grade .
This pertains to the processing and handling of the petroleum jelly so it is suitable for medicinal and personal - care applications .
COMPARISON WITH GLYCEROL Section::::Comparison with glycerol .
Because they feel similar when applied to human skin , there is a common misconception that petroleum jelly and glycerol ( glycerine ) are physically similar .
Petroleum jelly is a non - polar hydrophobic ( water - repelling ) hydrocarbon and insoluble in water .
Glycerol is an alcohol that is strongly hydrophilic ( water - attracting ) : by continuously absorbing moisture from the air ( hygroscopic ) , it produces the feeling of wetness on the skin .
This feeling of wetness is similar to the feeling of greasiness produced by petroleum jelly .
USES Section::::Uses .
Most uses of petroleum jelly exploit its lubricating and coating properties .
MEDICAL TREATMENT Section::::Medical treatment .
Vaseline brand
First Aid Petroleum Jelly , or carbolated petroleum jelly containing phenol to give the jelly additional antibacterial effect , has been discontinued .
During World War II , a variety of petroleum jelly called red veterinary petrolatum , or Red Vet Pet for short , was often included in life raft survival kits .
Acting as a sunscreen , it provides protection against ultraviolet rays .
The American Academy of Dermatology recommends keeping skin injuries moist with petroleum jelly to reduce scarring .
A verified medicinal use is to protect and prevent moisture loss of the skin of a patient in the initial post - operative period following laser skin resurfacing .
There is one case report published in 1994 indicating petroleum jelly should not be applied to the inside of the nose due to the risk of lipid pneumonia , but this was only ever reported in one patient .
However , petroleum jelly is used extensively by otolaryngologists — ear , nose , and throat surgeons — for nasal moisture and epistaxis treatment , and to combat nasal crusting .
Large studies have assessed petroleum jelly applied to the nose for short durations to have no significant side effects .
Historically , it was also consumed for internal use and even promoted as " Vaseline confection " .
SKIN AND HAIR CARE Section::::Skin and hair care .
Most petroleum jelly today is used as an ingredient in skin lotions and cosmetics , providing various types of skin care and protection by minimizing friction or reducing moisture loss , or by functioning as a grooming aid , e. g. pomade .
PREVENTING MOISTURE LOSS
Section::::Preventing moisture loss .
By reducing moisture loss , petroleum jelly can prevent chapped hands and lips , and soften nail cuticles .
This property is exploited to provide heat insulation : petroleum jelly can be used to keep swimmers warm in water when training or during channel crossings or long ocean swims .
It can prevent chilling of the face due to evaporation of skin moisture during cold weather outdoor sports .
HAIR GROOMING
Section::::Hair grooming .
In the first part of the twentieth century , petroleum jelly , either pure or as an ingredient , was also popular as a hair pomade .
When used in a 50/50 mixture with pure beeswax , it makes an effective moustache wax .
SKIN LUBRICATION Section::::Skin lubrication .
Petroleum jelly can be used to reduce the friction between skin and clothing during various sport activities , for example to prevent chafing of the seat region of cyclists , the nipples of long distance runners wearing loose T - shirts , and is commonly used in the crotch area of wrestlers and footballers .
Petroleum jelly is commonly used as a personal lubricant because it does not dry out like water - based lubricants , and has a distinctive " feel " , different from that of K - Y and related methylcellulose products .
However , it is not recommended for use with condoms during sexual activity because it swells latex and thus increases the chance of rupture .
It is also not recommended for vaginal intercourse because it may increase the risk of yeast infection and bacterial vaginosis in women .
PRODUCT CARE AND PROTECTION
COATING
Section::::Product care and protection .
Section::::Coating .
Petroleum jelly can be used to coat corrosion - prone items such as metallic trinkets , non - stainless steel blades , and gun barrels prior to storage as it serves as an excellent and inexpensive water repellent .
It is used as an environmentally friendly underwater antifouling coating for motor boats and sailing yachts .
It was recommended in the Porsche owner 's manual as a preservative for light alloy
( alleny ) anodized Fuchs wheels to protect them against corrosion from road salts and brake dust .
" Every three months ( after regular cleaning )
the wheels should be coated with petroleum jelly . "
FINISHING
Section::::Finishing .
It can be used to finish and protect wood , much like a mineral oil finish .
It is used to condition and protect smooth leather products like bicycle saddles , boots , motorcycle clothing , and used to put a shine on patent leather shoes ( when applied in a thin coat and then gently buffed off ) .
LUBRICATION Section::::Lubrication .
Petroleum jelly can be used to lubricate zippers and slide rules .
It was also recommended by Porsche in maintenance training documentation for lubrication ( after cleaning ) of " Weatherstrips on Doors , Hood , Tailgate , Sun Roof " .
The publication states " … before applying a new coat of lubricant … " " Only acid - free lubricants may be used , for example : glycerine , Vaseline , tire mounting paste , etc .
These lubricants should be rubbed in , and excessive lubricant wiped off with a soft cloth .
" It is used in bullet lubricant compounds .
INDUSTRIAL PRODUCTION PROCESSES
Section::::Industrial production processes .
Petroleum jelly is a useful material when incorporated into candle wax formulas .
The petroleum jelly softens the overall blend , allows the candle to incorporate additional fragrance oil , and facilitates adhesion to the sidewall of the glass .
Petroleum jelly is used to moisten nondrying modelling clay such as plasticine , as part of a mix of hydrocarbons including those with greater ( paraffin wax ) and lesser ( mineral oil ) molecular weights .
It is used as a tack reducer additive to printing inks to reduce paper lint " picking " from uncalendered paper stocks .
It can be used as a release agent for plaster molds and castings .
It is used in the leather industry as a waterproofing cream .
OTHER EXPLOSIVES Section::::Other .
Section::::Explosives .
Petroleum jelly is mixed with a high proportion of strong inorganic chlorates due to it acting as a plasticizer and a fuel source .
An example of this is Cheddite C which consists of a ratio of 9:1 , KClO3 to petroleum jelly .
This mixture is unable to detonate without the use of a blasting cap .
It was used as a stabiliser in the manufacture of the propellant Cordite .
MECHANICAL , BARRIER FUNCTIONS Section::::Mechanical , barrier functions .
Petroleum jelly can be used to coat the inner walls of terrariums to prevent animals crawling out and escaping .
A stripe of petroleum jelly can be used to prevent the spread of a liquid .
For example , it can be applied close to the hairline when using a home hair dye kit to prevent the hair dye from irritating or staining the skin .
It is also used to prevent diaper rash .
SURFACE CLEANSING
Section::::Surface cleansing .
Petroleum jelly is used to gently clean a variety of surfaces , ranging from makeup removal from faces to tar stain removal from leather .
PET CARE Section::::Pet care .
Petroleum jelly is used to moisturize the paws of dogs , and to inhibit fungal growth on aquatic turtles ' shells .
It is a common ingredient in hairball remedies for domestic cats .
CLEAN - UP Section::::Clean - up .
Petroleum jelly is very sticky and hard to remove from non - biological surfaces with the usual and customary cleaning agents typically found in the home .
It may be dissolved with paint thinner or other petroleum solvents such as acetone , which dissolves many plastics .
Petroleum jelly is slightly soluble in alcohol .
To avoid damage to plastics and minimize ventilation issues , isopropyl ( rubbing ) alcohol can be used to remove petroleum jelly from most surfaces .
Isopropyl alcohol is inert to most household surfaces , including almost every plastic , and removes petroleum jelly efficiently .
While alcohol causes fewer ventilation problems than petroleum solvents , ventilation is still recommended , especially if large surface areas are involved .
Petroleum jelly is also soluble in lower - molecular - weight oils .
Using an oil to dissolve the petroleum jelly first can render it more soluble to solvents and soaps that would not dissolve pure petroleum jelly .
Vegetable oils such as canola and olive oil are commonly used to aid in the removal of petroleum jelly from hair and skin .
HEALTH Section::::Health .
In 2015 German consumer watchdog Stiftung Warentest analyzed cosmetics containing mineral oils .
After developing a new detection method they found high concentrations of Mineral Oil Aromatic Hydrocarbons ( MOHA ) and even polyaromatics in products containing mineral oils with Vaseline products containing the most MOHA of all tested cosmetics ( up to 9 % ) .
The European Food Safety Authority sees MOHA and polyaromatics as possibly carcinogenic .
Based on the results , Stiftung Warentest warns not to use Vaseline for lip care or any product that is based on mineral oils .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Test methods for petroleum jelly
* Typical specifications of petroleum jelly when blended with vegetable based oils
* Specific in vitro toxicity of crude and refined petroleum products : II .
Estrogen ( alpha and beta ) and androgen receptor - mediated responses in yeast assays .