RYNE SANDBERG
Ryne Dee Sandberg ( born September 18 , 1959 ) , nicknamed " Ryno " , is an American former professional baseball player , coach , and manager .
He played in Major League Baseball as a second baseman for the Philadelphia Phillies and Chicago Cubs for sixteen years ( 1981–1994 and 1996–97 ) .
Sandberg established himself as a perennial All - Star and Gold Glove candidate , making 10 consecutive All - Star appearances and winning nine consecutive Gold Gloves from to .
His career .989
fielding percentage was a major - league record at second base when he retired in 1997 .
Sandberg was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in January 2005 ; he was formally inducted in ceremonies on July 31 , 2005 .
He resigned from his managerial duties for the Phillies on June 26 , 2015 , and was succeeded by Pete Mackanin .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Born in Spokane , Washington , Sandberg 's parents were Elizabeth , a nurse , and Derwent D. " Sandy " Sandberg , a mortician .
He was named for relief pitcher Ryne Duren .
Sandberg was a three - sport star in high school at North Central and graduated in 1978 .
The previous fall he was named to Parade Magazine 's High School All - America football team , one of the eight quarterbacks , and one of two players from the state of Washington .
The school 's baseball field was named in his honor in 1985 as " Ryne Sandberg Field " , and his varsity number was retired in both football and baseball .
Sandberg was recruited to play quarterback at NCAA Division
I colleges , and eventually signed a letter of intent with Washington State University in Pullman .
He opted not to attend after being selected in the 20th round of the 1978 baseball amateur draft by the Philadelphia Phillies .
PHILADELPHIA
PHILLIES Section::::Philadelphia Phillies .
Sandberg made his major - league debut as a shortstop for the Phillies in .
Playing in 13 games , Sandberg had one hit in six at - bats for a .167 batting average during his brief playing stint with the team .
The one hit occurred at Wrigley Field using a bat borrowed from starting shortstop Larry Bowa .
However , the Phillies did not have a role for him in the starting lineup , and did not project him as a successor at shortstop to Bowa .
While Sandberg had played both second and third base in the minor leagues , he was blocked from those positions by Manny Trillo and Mike Schmidt .
He was traded along with Bowa to the Cubs for shortstop Iván DeJesús prior to the season .
The trade , now reckoned as one of the most lopsided deals in baseball history , came about after negotiations for a new contract between Bowa and the Phillies broke down .
Cubs general manager Dallas Green wanted a young prospect to go along with the aging Bowa ( as it turned out , Bowa was out of baseball by 1985 ) .
Green had been instrumental in the drafting of Sandberg in 1978 , while working in the Phillies front office .
The two remained close over the years .
Years later , Phillies general manager Paul Owens said that he had n't wanted to trade Sandberg , but Green and the Cubs were n't interested in any of the other prospects he offered , so he had gone back to his scouts , who said Sandberg would n't be any more than a utility infielder .
However , Sandberg had hit over .290 in the minors two years in a row .
The trade is now considered one of the best ( if not the best ) in recent Cubs history .
At the same time , it is considered one of the worst trades in Phillies , if not MLB history ; DeJesus , despite helping anchor the Phillies infield on their way to the 1983 World Series , lasted only three years in Philadelphia , and was out of baseball by 1988 .
Sandberg is one of two Hall of Famers who came up through the Phillies farm system and earned their Hall of Fame credentials primarily as Cubs , the other being Ferguson Jenkins .
Similarly , Jenkins , then age 23 , was traded to the Cubs in another trade that worked out better in the Cub 's favor , a multi - player trade for 1960s workhorse pitcher Larry Jackson , then age 35 , and Bob Buhl , then age 37 , whose best days were behind him .
CHICAGO CUBS Section::::Chicago Cubs .
The Cubs , who initially wanted Sandberg to play center field , installed him as their third baseman , and he went on to be one of the top - rated rookies of 1982 .
After the Cubs acquired veteran Ron Cey following the 1982 season , they moved Sandberg to second base , where he became a star .
1984
Section::::1984 .
After winning a Gold Glove Award in his first season at the new position , Sandberg emerged with a breakout season in , in which he batted .314 with 200 hits , 114 runs , 36 doubles , 19 triples , 19 homers , and 84 RBIs .
He nearly became only the third player to collect 20 doubles , triples , home runs , and stolen bases in the same season , led the Cubs to the National League 's Eastern Division title ( their first championship of any kind since 1945 ) , and won the National League Most Valuable Player Award , the first by a Cub since Ernie Banks ' back - to - back honors in and .
After his great season in which he garnered national attention , he wrote an autobiography Ryno with Fred Mitchell .
" THE SANDBERG GAME " Section::::"The Sandberg Game " .
One game in particular was cited for putting Sandberg ( as well as the 1984 Cubs in general ) " on the map " , an NBC national telecast of a Cardinals – Cubs game on June 23 , .
The Cubs had been playing well throughout the season 's first few months , but as a team unaccustomed to winning , they had not yet become a serious contender in the eyes of most baseball fans .
As for Sandberg , he had played two full seasons in the major leagues , and while he had shown himself to be a top - fielding second baseman and fast on the basepaths ( over 30 stolen bases both seasons ) , his .260-ish batting average and single - digit home run production were respectable for his position but not especially noteworthy , and Sandberg was not talked about outside Chicago .
The Game of the Week , however , put the sleeper Cubs on the national stage against their regional rival , the St. Louis Cardinals .
Both teams were well - established franchises with strong fan bases outside the Chicago and St. Louis areas .
In the ninth inning , the Cubs trailed 9–8 , and faced the premier relief pitcher of the time , Bruce Sutter .
Sutter was at the forefront of the emergence of the closer in the late 1970s and early 1980s and was especially dominant in 1984 , saving 45 games .
However , in the ninth inning , Sandberg , not yet known for his power , slugged a solo home run to left field against the Cardinals ' ace closer , tying the game .
Answering this dramatic act , the Cardinals scored two runs in the top of the tenth .
Sandberg came up again in the tenth inning , facing a determined Sutter with one man on base .
As Cubs ' radio announcer Harry Caray described it :
The Cubs went on to win in the 11th inning , with the winning run being driven in by a single off the bat of Dave Owen .
The Cardinals ' Willie McGee , who hit for the cycle during the game , had already been named NBC 's Player of the Game before Sandberg 's first home run ; Sandberg later shared that distinction with McGee .
As NBC play - by - play announcer Bob Costas , who called the game with Tony Kubek ) , said when Sandberg hit the second home run , " Do you believe it ? !
" The game is known as " The Sandberg Game " .
1990 Section::::1990 .
In , Sandberg led the National League in home runs – a rarity for a second baseman – with 40 .
Sandberg was only the third second baseman to hit 40 home runs ; Rogers Hornsby and Davey Johnson hit 42 , and no American League second baseman had reached forty until Brian Dozier in 2016 .
Sandberg also batted in 100 runs , despite batting second in the order .
His batting average did not suffer from his new level of power , as he finished at .306 for the season .
Sandberg , Brady Anderson and Barry Bonds are the only players to have both a 40-homer ( 1990 ) and 50-steal ( ) season during their careers .
Sandberg played a then major league - record 123 straight games at second base without an error .
This record was later broken in 2007 by Plácido Polanco , then of the Detroit Tigers .
Sandberg played in front of his hometown fans in the 1990 MLB All - Star Game which was held in Wrigley Field , home of the Cubs .
Sandberg won the Home Run Derby with three home runs over the left - field bleachers .
Not until the Cincinnati Reds ' Todd Frazier in did another player win the Home Run Derby in his home stadium .
1991 Section::::1991 .
In , Sandberg batted .291 with 26 home runs and batted in 100 runs for the second consecutive season .
He also won his ninth consecutive Gold Glove at second base , breaking a tie he had shared with Bill Mazeroski for most Gold Gloves at that position ( Roberto Alomar has since broken this record ) .
1992
Section::::1992 .
On March 2 , , Sandberg became the highest paid player in baseball at the time , signing a $ 28.4 million ( $ today ) four - year extension worth $ 7.1 million ( $ today ) a season .
He earned a spot on the NL All - Star roster and an NL Silver Slugger Award at second base with a .304 batting average , 26 home runs , 100 runs , and 87 runs batted in . 1994 Section::::1994 . Sandberg , a notoriously slow early season starter , found himself struggling even more so than usual early in the 1994 season .
With his average at a career low .238 and having recorded only fifty - three hits in fifty - seven games , Sandberg decided to step away from baseball and on June 13 , 1994 , he announced his retirement .
In his book , Second to Home , Sandberg said , 1996–1997 Section::::1996–1997 .
Sandberg returned to the Chicago Cubs for the and seasons , then retired with a career batting average of .285 , and a record 277 home runs as a second baseman ; this record was surpassed in by Jeff Kent .
POST - PLAYING CAREER Section::::Post - playing career .
Initially , Sandberg kept a low profile after retiring .
However , in , Sandberg accepted his first marketing deal since his retirement , agreeing to be spokesman for National City Bank .
He also appeared on ESPN Radio 1000 as an analyst during the baseball season .
He is also a former baseball columnist for Yahoo !
Sports .
HALL OF FAME INDUCTION Section::::Hall of Fame induction .
Sandberg delivered what many traditionalist fans considered a stirring speech at his Hall of Fame induction ceremony in 2005 .
He thanked the writers who voted for him because it meant that he played the game the way he had been taught it should be played .
He spoke several times of respect for the game , and chided a subset of current players who , in his opinion , lack that respect .
Specifically , he spoke of how the game needs more than home run hitters , citing that turning a double - play and laying down a sacrifice bunt are weapons many of today 's greats do n't value .
He also made a strong pitch for induction of his former teammate , Andre Dawson , who was ultimately elected to join the Hall in 2010 , and famously promoted the election of a long - snubbed former Cub to the Hall by saying , " For what it 's worth , Ron Santo just earned one more vote on the Veterans Committee .
" NUMBER RETIREMENT Section::::Number retirement .
Following his Hall of Fame induction , Sandberg had his number 23 retired in a ceremony at Wrigley Field on August 28 , , before a Cubs game against the Florida Marlins .
He became only the fourth Chicago Cub to have his number retired , following respectively Ernie Banks ( # 14 ) , Billy Williams ( # 26 ) , and Ron Santo ( # 10 ) .
Since then , Ferguson Jenkins ( # 31 ) and Greg Maddux ( also # 31 ) have been retired .
Sandberg has worn his uniform number 23 in past jobs as a Cubs spring training instructor and Peoria Chiefs manager .
He also wore that number during his time with the Iowa Cubs as their manager and as the manager of the Lehigh Valley IronPigs .
MANAGERIAL CAREER Section::::Managerial career .
Sandberg formerly served as a spring training instructor for the Cubs in Mesa , Arizona .
2007–2010
Section::::2007–2010 .
On December 5 , 2006 , Sandberg was named manager of the Cubs ' Class - A Peoria Chiefs in the Midwest League .
In his first season as a manager , he took his team to the Midwest League championship game .
In December 2008 , Sandberg was promoted to manager of the Class Double - A Team Tennessee Smokies in the Southern League .
In December 2009 , he was again promoted , to manager of the Triple - A Iowa Cubs .
Upon leading Iowa to an 82–62 record , the Pacific Coast League named him its 2010 Manager of the Year .
Sandberg has said that his ideal job was to manage the Chicago Cubs .
Former manager Lou Piniella suggested that Sandberg , as manager of the Cubs ' top minor - league affiliate , would be in the mix to replace him when he retired after the 2010 season .
However , the position was given to interim manager Mike Quade .
2011–2015
Section::::2011–2015 .
On November 15 , 2010 , Sandberg left the Cubs organization and returned to his original organization as manager of the Phillies ' top minor - league affiliate , the Lehigh Valley IronPigs .
He led the IronPigs to their first - ever playoff appearance and the International League championship series .
Baseball America named him its 2011 Minor League Manager of the Year .
After the 2012 season , Sandberg was promoted to third base coach and infield instructor of the Philadelphia Phillies .
He was promoted to interim manager of the Phillies after they fired Charlie Manuel on August 16 , 2013 .
Sandberg earned his first win as a manager against the Los Angeles Dodgers on Sunday August 18 , 2013 .
PHILLIES MANAGER Section::::Phillies manager .
On September 22 , 2013 , Sandberg was named permanent manager , with a three - year contract , with an option for 2017 .
He became the first Hall - of - Fame player to manage a team full - time since Frank Robinson managed the Montreal Expos / Washington Nationals from 2002–2006 .
On April 26 , 2015 , Sandberg earned his 100th win as a major league manager on a 5–4 win against the Atlanta Braves .
Two months later , on June 26 , 2015 , Sandberg resigned from the position of Phillies manager with his team in last place in the National League East Division at a record of 26–48 , the worst record in Major League Baseball .
CUBS AMBASSADOR Section::::Cubs ambassador .
In 2016 , Sandberg joined the Cubs organization as a goodwill ambassador .
In this position , he makes public appearances at Cubs - related events , and attends Cubs games to meet and greet fans .
MANAGERIAL RECORD
Section::::Managerial record .
!
rowspan="2
" Team !
rowspan="2 " From !
rowspan="2 " To !
colspan="3
" Regular season record !
colspan="3
" Post – season record ! ! ! !
colspan="3
" Total ! !
colspan="9 " Reference : PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Sandberg married his high school sweetheart , Cindy , and the couple had two children , Justin and Lindsey .
They divorced in July 1995 .
Sandberg married Margaret in August 1995 .
She has three children from her former marriage , BR , Adriane and Steven .
He also has eight grandchildren .
Ryne 's nephew , Jared Sandberg , was a third baseman for the Tampa Bay Rays from 2001–2003 .
CHARITY FOUNDATIONS Section::::Charity foundations .
Sandberg and his wife , Margaret , founded Ryno Kid Care to assist in the lives of children with serious illnesses .
The organization provided anything from " big brothers " ( mentors and older companions ) to a home - cooked meal .
Ryno Kid Care also provided massage therapists and clowns dressed up as doctors and nurses to brighten the children 's day .
Ryno Kid Care 's mission was " dedicated to enhancing the lives of children with serious medical conditions and their families , by providing supportive , compassionate and meaningful programming . "
Ryno Kid Care is no longer in operation .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
Sandberg was inducted as a Laureate of The Lincoln Academy of Illinois and awarded the Order of Lincoln ( the State 's highest honor ) by the Governor of Illinois in 2017 .
SEE ALSO
* List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual runs scored leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual triples leaders * List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders * List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career stolen bases leaders
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links . , or Baseball Almanac , or BaseballLibrary , or Pura Pelota ( Venezuelan Winter League )