JUMP START ( VEHICLE )
A jump start , also called a boost , is a method of starting a vehicle with a discharged or dead battery .
A temporary connection is made to the battery of another vehicle , or to some other external power source .
The external supply of electricity recharges the disabled vehicle 's battery and provides some of the power needed to crank the engine .
Once the vehicle has been started , its normal charging system will recharge , so the auxiliary source can be removed .
If the vehicle charging system is functional , normal operation of the vehicle will restore the charge of the battery .
Motorists may carry jumper cables in case of accidental discharge of the vehicle battery ( for example , by headlights or ignition switch left on while the engine is not running ) .
Safe procedures for connecting and disconnecting cables are given in the vehicle manual .
JUMPER CABLES Section::::Jumper cables .
Jumper cables , also known as booster cables or jump leads , are a pair of insulated wires of sufficient capacity with alligator clips at each end to interconnect the disabled equipment / vehicle with an auxiliary source , such as another vehicle or equipment with the same system voltage or to another battery .
The alligator clips may be covered in insulation to prevent inadvertent shorting .
Clips may be made of copper or steel .
Alligator clips are generally marked by black ( − ) and red ( + ) to indicate the polarity .
LIMITATIONS Section::::Limitations .
Operation of a lead - acid battery
may , in case of overcharge , produce flammable hydrogen gas by electrolysis of water inside the battery .
Jump start procedures are usually found in the vehicle owner 's manual .
The recommended sequence of connections is intended to reduce the chance of accidentally shorting the good battery or igniting hydrogen gas .
Owner 's manuals will show the preferred locations for connection of jumper cables ; for example , some vehicles have the battery mounted under a seat , or may have a jumper terminal in the engine compartment .
Jumper cables should not be used to interconnect between different voltage systems .
Connecting 6 V and 12 V systems together may cause damage .
If the dead battery is physically damaged , has a low electrolyte level , is decayed or frozen , a jump start will not repair the battery .
A vehicle with a frozen battery should not be jump started , as the battery may explode .
OTHER METHODS
Section::::Other methods .
A hand - portable battery , equipped with attached cables and charger , can be used similarly to another vehicle 's battery .
A self - contained jump box contains a battery and connects directly to the battery of the engine that needs a boost .
Portable boosters may automatically sense the battery 's polarity prior to sending power to the vehicle , eliminating the damage that can result from reversing the connection .
There are various portable jump starters that are multi - functional and can be used to charge other electronic devices as well .
CIGARETTE LIGHTER
OUTLET Section::::Cigarette lighter outlet .
An alternative to jumper cables is a cable used to interconnect the 12 volt power outlets ( cigarette lighter outlets ) of two vehicles .
While this eliminates concerns with incorrect connections and generation of arcs near battery terminals , the amount of current available through such a connection is small .
This method works by slowly recharging the battery , not by providing the current needed for cranking .
The engine cranking motor current draw will exceed the fuse rating in a cigarette lighter outlet .
Many vehicles turn off the cigarette lighter outlets when the key is turned off , making the technique unusable unless the ignition key is turned to the accessory or on position to connect the cigarette lighter outlet to the battery .
BATTERY CHARGER Section::::Battery charger .
Motorists and service garages often have portable battery chargers operated from AC power .
Very small " trickle " chargers are intended only to maintain a charge on a parked or stored vehicle , but larger chargers can put enough charge into a battery to allow a start within a few minutes .
Battery chargers may be strictly manual , or may include controls for time and charging voltage .
Battery chargers that apply high voltage ( for example , more than 14.4 volts on a 12 volt nominal system ) will result in emission of hydrogen gas from the battery , which may damage it or create an explosion risk .
A battery may be recharged without removal from the vehicle , although in a typical roadside situation no convenient source of power may be nearby .
BATTERY BOOSTER AND JUMP STARTER Section::::Battery booster and jump starter .
Some AC battery chargers have a boost , engine start , or engine assist feature .
Despite being able to assist in jump starting a dead vehicle battery , these types of battery chargers perform their task over a longer period of time , rather than an instantaneous boost .
Boosting a dead battery through a battery charger can take anywhere from five to twenty minutes depending on the depth - of - discharge ( DOD ) , health of the vehicle battery , and type of engine ( engine displacement ) .
AC power is not usually available for a roadside boost .
Jump starters are portable battery devices that allow for jump starting of vehicles .
These devices operate similar to jumper cables but do not require an additional vehicle to provide the power needed to boost the dead vehicle battery .
Jump starters come in various sizes ( typically rated in Amps ) .
Most jump starters on the market today use lead - acid batteries and claim 400 to 1700 Amps ratings .
The main disadvantage of lead - acid jump starters is weight , size and battery chemistry .
Lead - acid jump starters can be extremely heavy and large , making them less than convenient when transporting between vehicles .
Lead - acid batteries may self - discharge develop a condition called sulfating , which permanently loses battery capacity .
It is entirely possible to destroy a new lead - acid battery within months that will require a replacement .
Jump starters using lithium - ion batteries began appearing in the marketplace in 2013 .
Most lithium jump starter brands use a high discharge lithium polymer or lithium - ion battery .
Lithium jump starters are extremely compact and lightweight ( as much as 90 % smaller than its lead - acid equivalents ) .
PUSH STARTING Section::::Push starting .
A vehicle with a manual transmission may be push started .
This requires caution while pushing the vehicle and may require the assistance of several persons or another vehicle .
If the vehicle battery can not provide power to the ignition system , push starting may be ineffective .
Most vehicles with automatic transmissions can not be started this way because the hydraulic torque converter in the transmission will not allow the engine to be driven by the wheels .
MILITARY VEHICLES Section::::Military vehicles .
Generally referred to as " slave starting " in military parlance , the jump starting procedure has been simplified for military vehicles .
Tactical vehicles used by NATO militaries possess 24-volt electrical systems and , in accordance with STANAG 4074 , have standard slave receptacles for easy connection .
A slave cable is plugged into the receptacle on each vehicle , and the dead vehicle is started with the live vehicle 's engine running .
HAZARDS
Section::::Hazards .
Motorists can be severely injured by a battery explosion .
In the United States in 1994 , a research note by the National Highway Traffic Safety Association estimated that about 442 persons were injured by exploding batteries while attempting a jump - start .
The effects of accidentally reversing the cables will depend on the charge state of the depleted vehicle and the current carrying capacity of the cables .
A partially depleted battery will result in more power flow through the reversed cables than if the battery were simply dead .
Jumper cables typically do not have overload protection , so when reversed they may begin to function as resistive heaters and become hot enough that the wire insulation begins to melt .
If this continues without the problem being detected , the insulation may melt until the wires inside make contact , resulting in an unfused direct short of the supply battery .
A fully depleted battery will not draw more power if the cables are reversed , but reverse - charging a dead battery can damage its chemistry so that it loses charge capacity , and reverse voltage applied to the vehicle electronics may also damage them , resulting in expensive repairs .
VOLTAGE PROBLEM Section::::Voltage problem .
Heavy vehicles such as large trucks , excavation equipment , or vehicles with diesel engines may use 24-volt electrical systems .
Trucks usually have a 24 V supply using two 12 V automotive batteries in series : it is therefore possible to jump - start a vehicle with a 12 V electrical system using only one of the two batteries .
Vintage cars may have 6-volt electrical systems , or may connect the positive terminal of the battery to the chassis .
The methods intended for boosting 12-volt , negative - ground vehicles can not be used in such cases .
Hybrid vehicles may have a very small 12 volt battery system unsuitable for sourcing the large amount of current required to boost a conventional vehicle .
However , as the 12-volt system of a hybrid vehicle is only required to start up the control system of the vehicle , a very small portable battery may successfully boost a hybrid that has accidentally discharged its 12-volt system ; the main propulsion battery is unlikely to also have been discharged .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Simple directions for jump - starting a car - Interstate Chaveirim * Breakdown Advice :
Using Jump Leads Safely -
The AA ( United Kingdom )
* How to Jump Start A Car Using Jumper Cables by Matthew Wright , About.com
* Official Car Talk Guide to Jump Starting Your Car by Car Talk 's Tom and Ray Magliozzi , " Click and Clack , the Tappet Brothers " *
Quick & Easy Directions to Jump Start by Car Care Council