ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND GROUP
The Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc ( also known as RBS Group ) is a private , but partly taxpayer - owned and subsidized , British banking and insurance holding company , based in Edinburgh , Scotland .
The group operates a wide variety of banking brands offering personal and business banking , private banking , insurance and corporate finance through its offices located in Europe , North America and Asia .
In the UK , its main subsidiary companies are The Royal Bank of Scotland , NatWest , Ulster Bank and Coutts .
The group issues banknotes in Scotland and Northern Ireland and , as of 2014 , The Royal Bank of Scotland is the only bank in the UK to still print £ 1 notes .
Outside the UK , from 1988 to 2015 it owned Citizens Financial Group , the 13th largest bank in the United States , and from 2004 to 2009 it was the second largest shareholder in the Bank of China , itself the world 's fifth largest bank by market capitalisation in February 2008 .
Before the 2008 collapse and the general financial crisis , RBS was very briefly the largest bank in the world and for a period was the second largest bank in the UK and Europe ( fifth in stock market value ) , and the fifth largest in the world by market capitalisation .
Subsequently , with a slumping share price and major loss of confidence , the bank fell sharply in the rankings , although in 2009 it was briefly the world 's largest company by both assets ( £ 1.9 trillion ) and liabilities ( £ 1.8 trillion ) .
It had to be bailed out by UK taxpayers through the 2008 United Kingdom bank rescue package .
Taxpayers as of June 2018 , hold and manage a 62.4 % stake through UK Government Investments .
The government sold its shares in that year at a huge loss to taxpayers , and a subsidy to private shareholders in the bank , of £ 2 billion .
In addition to its primary share listing on the LSE , the company is also listed on the New York Stock Exchange .
HISTORY Section::::History .
By 1969 , economic conditions were becoming more difficult for the banking sector .
In response , the National Commercial Bank of Scotland merged with the Royal Bank of Scotland .
The resulting company had 662 branches .
The merger resulted in a new holding company ,
National and Commercial Banking Group Ltd. The English and Welsh branches were reorganised , until 1985 , as Williams & Glyn 's Bank , while the Scottish branches all transferred to the Royal Bank name .
The holding company was renamed The Royal Bank of Scotland Group in 1979 .
TAKEOVER BIDS Section::::Takeover bids .
During the late 1970s and early 1980s the Royal Bank was the subject of three separate takeover approaches .
In 1979 , Lloyds Bank , which had previously built up a 16.4 % stake in the Royal Bank , made a takeover approach for the remaining shares it did not own .
The offer was rejected by the board of directors on the basis that it was detrimental to the bank 's operations .
However , when the Standard Chartered Bank proposed a merger with the Royal Bank in 1980 , the board responded favourably .
Standard Chartered Bank was headquartered in London , although most of its operations were in the Far East , and the Royal Bank saw advantages in creating a truly international banking group .
Approval was received from the Bank of England , and the two banks agreed a merger plan that would have seen the Standard Chartered acquire the Royal Bank and keep the UK operations based in Edinburgh .
However , the bid was scuppered by the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corporation ( HSBC ) which tabled a rival offer .
The bid by HSBC was not backed by the Bank of England and was subsequently rejected by the Royal Bank 's board .
However the British government referred both bids to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission ; both were subsequently rejected as being against the public interest .
The Bank did obtain an international partnership with Banco Santander Central Hispano of Spain , each bank taking a 5 % stake in the other .
However this arrangement ended in 2005 , when Banco Santander Central Hispano acquired UK bank Abbey Nationaland
both banks sold their respective shareholdings .
INTERNATIONAL EXPANSION
Section::::International expansion .
The first international office of the bank was opened in New York in 1960 .
Subsequent international banks were opened in Chicago , Los Angeles , Houston and Hong Kong .
In 1988 the bank acquired Citizens Financial Group , a bank based in Rhode Island , United States .
Since then , Citizens has acquired several other American banks and in 2004 acquired Charter One Bank .
The bank has since announced it would scale back its international presence . "
Let me spell it out very clearly : the days when RBS sought to be the biggest bank in the world , those days are well and truly over , " Chief Executive Ross McEwan , who had been in charge of the bank for four months , said in unveiling plans to reduce costs by £ 5bn over four years .
" Our ambition is to be a bank for U.K. customers , " he added .
NATIONAL WESTMINSTER BANK Section::::National Westminster Bank .
The late 1990s saw a new wave of consolidation in the financial services sector .
In 1997 , RBS formed a joint venture to set up Tesco Bank .
In 1999 , the Bank of Scotland launched a hostile takeover bid for English rival NatWest .
The Bank of Scotland intended to fund the deal by selling off many of the NatWest 's subsidiary companies , including Ulster Bank and Coutts .
However , the Royal Bank of Scotland subsequently tabled a counter - offer , sparking off the largest hostile takeover battle in UK corporate history .
A key differentiation from the Bank of Scotland 's bid was the Royal Bank of Scotland 's plan to retain all of NatWest 's subsidiaries .
Although NatWest , one of the " Big 4 " English clearing banks , was significantly larger than either Scottish bank , it had a recent history of poor financial performance and plans to merge with insurance company Legal & General were not well received , prompting a 26 % fall in share price .
On 11 February 2000 , The Royal Bank of Scotland was declared the winner in the takeover battle , becoming the second largest banking group in the UK after HSBC Holdings .
NatWest and the Royal Bank of Scotland became subsidiaries of the holding company ; The Royal Bank of Scotland Group .
NatWest as a distinct banking brand was retained , although many back office functions of the bank were merged with the Royal Bank 's leading to over 18,000 job losses throughout the UK .
FURTHER EXPANSION Section::::Further expansion .
In August 2005 , the bank expanded into China , acquiring a 10 % stake in the Bank of China for £ 1.7 billion .
A new international headquarters was built at Gogarburn on the outskirts of Edinburgh , and was opened by Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh in 2005 .
The Group was part of a consortium with Belgian bank Fortis and Spanish bank Banco Santander that acquired Dutch bank ABN AMRO on 10 October 2007 .
Rivals speculated that RBS had overpaid for the Dutch bank although the bank pointed out that of the £ 49bn paid for ABN AMRO , RBS 's share was only £ 10bn ( equivalent to £ 167 per citizen of the UK ) .
Coutts Bank 's international businesses were renamed RBS Coutts on 1 January 2008 and remained as such until 2011 , when they were rebranded Coutts & Co. Limited . 2008–2009 FINANCIAL CRISIS Section::::2008–2009 financial crisis .
On 22 April 2008 RBS announced a rights issue which aimed to raise £ 12bn in new capital to offset a writedown of £ 5.9bn resulting from credit market positions and to shore up its reserves following the purchase of ABN AMRO .
This was , at the time , the largest rights issue in British corporate history .
The bank also announced that it would review the possibility of divesting some of its subsidiaries to raise further funds , notably its insurance divisions Direct Line and Churchill .
Additionally , the bank 's stake in Tesco Bank was bought by Tesco for £ 950 million in 2008 .
On 13 October 2008 , in a move aimed at recapitalising the bank , it was announced that the British Government would take a stake of up to 58 % in the Group .
The aim was to " make available new tier 1 capital to UK banks and building societies to strengthen their resources permitting them to restructure their finances , while maintaining their support for the real economy , through the recapitalisation scheme which has been made available to eligible institutions " .
HM Treasury injected £ 37 billion ( $ 64 billion , € 47 billion , equivalent to £ 617 per citizen of the UK ) of new capital into Royal Bank of Scotland Group plc , Lloyds TSB and HBOS plc , to avert financial sector collapse .
The government stressed , however , that it was not " standard public ownership " and that the banks would return to private investors " at the right time " .
Alistair Darling , the Chancellor of the Exchequer , stated that UK taxpayers would benefit from the government 's rescue plan , as it will have some control over RBS in exchange for £ 5 billion in preference shares and underwriting the issuance of a further £ 15 billion in ordinary shares .
If shareholder take - up of the share issue was 0 % , then total government ownership in RBS would be 58 % ; and , if shareholder take - up was 100 % , then total government ownership in RBS would be 0 % .
Less than 56 million new shares were taken up by investors , or 0.24pc of the total offered by RBS in October 2008 .
As a consequence of this rescue , the Chief Executive of the group , Fred Goodwin , offered his resignation and it was duly accepted .
Sir Tom McKillop confirmed that he would stand down from his role as chairman when his contract expired in March 2009 .
Goodwin was replaced by Stephen Hester , previously the Chief Executive of British Land , who commenced work at the Royal Bank of Scotland in November 2008 .
On 19 January 2009 , the British Government announced a further injection of funds into the UK banking system in an attempt to restart personal and business lending .
This would involve the creation of a state - backed insurance scheme which would allow banks to insure against existing loans going into default , in an attempt to restore the banks ' confidence .
At the same time the government announced its intention to convert the preference shares in RBS that it had acquired in October 2008 to ordinary shares .
This would remove the 12 % coupon payment ( £ 600 m p.a ) on the shares but would increase the state 's holding in the bank from 58 % to 70 % .
On the same day RBS released a trading statement in which it expected to post full - year trading losses ( before writedowns ) of between £ 7bn and £ 8bn .
The group also announced writedowns on goodwills ( primarily related to the takeover of Dutch bank ABN - AMRO ) of around £ 20bn .
The combined total of £ 28bn would be the biggest ever annual loss in UK corporate history ( the actual figure was £ 24.1bn ) .
As a result , during the Blue Monday Crash , the group 's share price fell over 66 % in one day to 10.9p per share , from a 52-week high of 354p per share , itself a drop of 97 % .
MID-2008
ONWARDS Section::::Mid-2008 onwards .
RBS ' contractual commitment to retain the 4.26 % Bank of China ( BoC ) stake ended on 31 December 2008 , and the shares were sold on 14 January 2009 .
Exchange rate fluctuations meant that RBS made no profit on the deal .
The Scottish press suggested two reasons for the move : the need for a bank mainly owned by HM Treasury to focus scarce capital on British markets , and the growth possibility of RBS 's own China operations .
Also in March 2009 , RBS revealed that its traders had been involved in the purchase and sale of sub - prime securities under the supervision of Fred Goodwin .
In September 2009 , RBS and NatWest announced dramatic cuts in their overdraft fees including the unpaid item fee ( from £ 38 to £ 5 ) , the card misuse fee ( from £ 35 to £ 15 ) and the monthly maintenance charge for going overdrawn without consent ( from £ 28 to £ 20 ) .
The cuts came at a time when the row over the legality of unauthorised borrowing reached the House of Lords .
The fees were estimated to earn current account providers about £ 2.6bn a year .
The Consumers ' Association chief executive , Peter Vicary - Smith , said : " This is a step in the right direction and a victory for consumer pressure . "
In November 2009 , RBS announced plans to cut 3,700 jobs in addition to 16,000 already planned , while the government increased its stake in the company from 70 % to 84 % .
In December 2009 , the RBS board revolted against the main shareholder , the British government .
They threatened to resign unless they were permitted to pay bonuses of £ 1.5bn to staff in its investment arm .
More than 100 senior bank executives at the Royal Bank of Scotland were paid more than £ 1 million in late 2010 and total bonus payouts reached nearly £ 1 billion – even though the bailed - out bank reported losses of £ 1.1 billion for 2010 .
The 2010 figure was an improvement on the loss of £ 3.6 billion in 2009 and the record - breaking £ 24bn loss in 2008 .
The bonuses for staff in 2010 topped £ 950 million .
The CEO Stephen Hester got £ 8 million in payments for the year .
Len McCluskey , the general secretary of Unite the Union , said : " Taxpayers will be baffled as to how it is possible that while we own 84 % of this bank it continues to so handsomely reward its investment bankers . "
In October 2011 , Moody 's downgraded the credit rating of 12 UK financial firms including RBS blaming financial weakness .
In January 2012 , there was press controversy about Hester 's bonus —
Hester was offered share options with a total value of £ 963,000 that would be held in long - term plans , and only paid out if he met strict and tough targets .
If he failed to do this , it would be clawed - back .
The Treasury permitted the payment because they feared the resignation of Hester and much of the board if the payment was vetoed by the government as the majority shareholder .
After a large amount of criticism in the press , news emerged of Chairman Sir Philip Hampton turning down his own bonus of £ 1.4 million several weeks before the controversy .
Hester , who had been on holiday in Switzerland at the time , turned down his own bonus shortly after .
In June 2012 a failure of an upgrade to payment processing software meant that a substantial proportion of customers could not transfer money to or from their accounts .
This meant that RBS had to open a number of branches on a Sunday – the first time that they had had to do this .
RBS released a statement on 12 June 2013 that announced a transition in which CEO Stephen Hester would stand down in December 2013 for the financial institution " to return to private ownership by the end of 2014 " .
For his part in the procession of the transition , Hester would receive 12 months ' pay and benefits worth £ 1.6 million , as well as the potential for £ 4 million in shares .
The RBS stated that , as of the announcement , the search for Hester 's successor would commence .
Ross McEwan , the head of retail banking at RBS , was selected to replace Hester in July 2013 .
On 4 August 2015 the UK government began the process of selling shares back to the private sector , reducing its ownership of ordinary shares from 61.3 % to 51.5 % and its total economic ownership ( including B shares ) from 78.3 % to 72.9 % .
On 5 June 2018
the government reduced its ownership through UK Government Investments to 62.4 % at a loss to taxpayers , representing a subsidy to private shareholders in the bank , of £ 2 billion .
RESTRUCTURING
Section::::Restructuring .
In June 2008 RBS sold the subsidiary Angel Trains for £ 3.6bn as part of an assets sale to raise cash .
In March 2009 , RBS announced the closure of its tax avoidance department , which had helped it avoid £ 500 m of tax by channelling billions of pounds through securitised assets in tax havens such as the Cayman Islands .
The closure was partly due to a lack of funds to continue the measures , and partly due to the 84 % taxpayer stake in the bank .
On 29 March 2010 , GE Capital acquired Royal Bank of Scotland 's factoring business in Germany .
GE Capital signed an agreement with the Royal Bank of Scotland plc ( RBS ) to acquire 100 % of RBS Factoring GmbH , RBS 's factoring and invoice financing business in Germany , for an undisclosed amount .
The transaction is subject to a number of conditions , including regulatory approval .
Due to pressure from the UK government to shut down risky operations and prepare for tougher international regulations , in January 2012 the bank announced it would cut another 4,450 jobs and close its loss - making cash equities , corporate broking , equity capital markets , and mergers and acquisitions businesses .
The move brought the total number of jobs cut since the bank was bailed out in 2008 to 34,000 .
During 2012 , RBS separated its insurance business from the main group to form the Direct Line Group , made up of several well - known brands including Direct Line and Churchill .
RBS sold a 30 % holding in the group through an initial public offering in October 2012 .
Further shares sales in 2013 reduced RBS ' holding to 28.5 % by September 2013 , and RBS sold its remaining shares in February 2014 .
RBS sold its remaining stake in Citizens Financial Group in October 2015 , having progressively reduced its stake through an initial public offering ( IPO ) started in 2014 .
WILLIAMS & GLYN DIVESTMENT Section::::Williams & Glyn divestment .
As a condition of the British Government purchasing an 81 % shareholding in the group , the European Commission ruled that the group sell a portion of its business , as the purchase was categorised as state aid .
In August 2010 , the group reached an agreement to sell 318 branches to Santander UK , made up of the RBS branches in England and Wales and the NatWest branches in Scotland .
Santander withdrew from the sale on 12 October 2012 .
In September 2013 , the group confirmed it had reached an agreement to sell 314 branches to the Corsair consortium , made up of private equity firms and a number of institutional investors , including the Church Commissioners , which controls the property and investment assets of the Church of England .
The branches , incorporating 250,000 small business customers , 1,200 medium business customers and 1.8 million personal banking customers , were due to be separated from the group in 2016 as a standalone business .
The planned company would have traded as an ethical bank , using the dormant Williams & Glyn 's brand .
In August 2016 , RBS cancelled its plan to spin off Williams & Glyn as a separate business , stating that the new bank could not survive independently .
It revealed it would instead seek to sell the operation to another bank .
In February 2017 , HM Treasury suggested that the bank should abandon the plan to sell the operation , and instead focus on initiatives to boost competition within business banking in the United Kingdom .
This plan was formally approved by the European Commission in September 2017 .
CORPORATE STRUCTURE
Section::::Corporate structure .
RBS is split into three main customer - facing franchises , each with several subsidiary businesses , and it also has a number of support functions .
PERSONAL & BUSINESS BANKING Section::::Personal & Business Banking .
The franchise comprises retail and business banking .
In the United Kingdom , the group trades under both the NatWest and Royal Bank of Scotland names .
Key subsidiaries include : *
NatWest * Royal Bank of Scotland
* Ulster Bank COMMERCIAL & PRIVATE BANKING Section::::Commercial & Private Banking .
This franchise serves UK corporate and commercial customers , from SMEs to UK based multi nationals , and is the largest provider of banking , finance and risk management services to UK corporate and commercial customers .
Key private banking subsidiaries and brands of RBS include : * Coutts & Co * Adam and Company * Drummonds Bank * Child & Co. * RBS
International
*
Lombard NATWEST MARKETS Section::::NatWest Markets .
This franchise , commonly referred to as the investment banking arm of RBS , provides investment banking services and integrated financial solutions to major corporations and financial institutions around the world .
NWMs areas of strength are debt financing , risk management , and investment and advisory services .
RBS Securities is a key subsidiary , operating under the NatWest Markets brand in the United States .
SUPPORT FUNCTIONS Section::::Support Functions .
The group is supported by a number of functions and services departments – procurement , technology , payments , anti - money laundering , property , etc .
– and support and control functions : the areas which provide core services across the bank – human resources , corporate governance , internal audit , legal , risk , etc .
BRANDING
Section::::Branding .
RBS uses branding developed for the Bank on its merger with the National Commercial Bank of Scotland in 1969 .
The banks logo takes the form of an abstract symbol of four inward - pointing arrows known as the " Daisy Wheel " and is based on an arrangement of 36 piles of coins in a 6 by 6 square , representing " the accumulation and concentration of wealth by the Group " .
CONTROVERSIES MEDIA COMMENTARY AND CRITICISM Section::::Controversies .
Section::::Media commentary and criticism .
During Goodwin 's tenure as CEO he attracted some criticism for lavish spending , including on the construction of a £ 350 m headquarters in Edinburgh opened by the Queen in 2005 and $ 500 m headquarters in the US begun in 2006 , and the use of a Dassault Falcon 900 jet owned by leasing subsidiary Lombard for occasional corporate travel .
Revelations that RBS had spent £ 200 m on celebrity endorsements also went down badly .
In February 2009 RBS reported that while Fred Goodwin was at the helm it had posted a loss of £ 24.1bn , the biggest loss in UK corporate history .
His responsibility for the expansion of RBS , which led to the losses , has drawn widespread criticism .
His image was not enhanced by the news that emerged in questioning by the Treasury Select Committee of the House of Commons on 10 February 2009 , that Goodwin has no technical bank training , and has no formal banking qualifications .
In January 2009 The Guardian 's City editor Julia Finch identified him as one of twenty - five people who were at the heart of the financial meltdown .
Nick Cohen described Goodwin in The Guardian as " the characteristic villain of our day " , who made £ 20 m from RBS and left the taxpayer " with an unlimited liability for the cost of cleaning up the mess " .
An online column by Daniel Gross labelled Goodwin " The World 's Worst Banker " , a phrase echoed elsewhere in the media .
Gordon Prentice MP argued that his knighthood should be revoked as it is " wholly inappropriate and anomalous for someone to retain such a reward in these circumstances . "
Other members have also frequently been criticised as " fat cats " over their salary , expenses , bonuses and pensions .
FOSSIL FUEL FINANCING Section::::Fossil fuel financing .
RBS was challenged over its financing of oil and coal mining by charities such as Platform London and Friends of the Earth .
In 2007 , RBS was promoting itself as " The Oil & Gas Bank " , although the website www.oilandgasbank.com was later taken down .
A Platform London report criticised the bank 's lending to oil and gas companies , estimating that the carbon emissions embedded within RBS ' project finance reached 36.9 million tonnes in 2005 , comparable to Scotland 's carbon emissions .
RBS provides the financial means for companies to build coal - fired power stations and dig new coal mines at sites throughout the world .
RBS helped to provide an estimated £ 8 billion from 2006 to 2008 to energy corporation E.ON and other coal - utilising companies .
In 2012 , 2.8 % of RBS ' total lending was provided to the power , oil and gas sectors combined .
According to RBS ' own figures , half of its deals to the energy sector were to wind power projects ; although , this only included project finance and not general commercial loans .
HUNTINGDON
LIFE SCIENCES Section::::Huntingdon Life Sciences .
In 2000 and 2001 , staff of the bank were threatened over its provision of banking facilities for the animal testing company Huntingdon Life Sciences .
The intimidation resulted in RBS withdrawing the company 's overdraft facility , requiring the company to obtain alternative funding within a tight deadline .
CANADIAN OIL SANDS Section::::Canadian oil sands .
Climate Camp activists criticise RBS for funding firms which extract oil from Canadian oil sands .
The Cree aboriginal group describe RBS as being complicit in " the biggest environmental crime on the planet " .
In 2012 , 7.2 % of RBS ' total oil and gas lending was to companies who derived more than 10 % of their income from oil sands operations .
SEE ALSO
* List of banks in the United Kingdom * List of systemically important banks
* Systemically important financial institution
* Too big to fail
* European Financial Services Roundtable * High - yield debt
* Inter - Alpha Group of Banks REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS