BARCODE READER
A bar code reader ( or bar code scanner ) is an electronic device that can read and output printed barcodes to a computer .
Like a flatbed scanner , it consists of a light source , a lens and a light sensor translating optical impulses into electrical ones .
Additionally , nearly all barcode readers contain decoder circuitry analyzing the bar code 's image data provided by the sensor and sending the barcode 's content to the scanner 's output port .
TYPES OF BARCODE SCANNERS
TECHNOLOGY Section::::Types of barcode scanners .
Section::::Technology .
Barcode readers can be differentiated by technologies as follows:- PEN - TYPE SCANNERS Section::::Pen - type Scanners .
Pen - type readers consist of a light source and photodiode that are placed next to each other in the tip of a pen or wand .
To read a bar code , the person holding the pen must move the tip of it across the bars at a relatively uniform speed .
The photodiode measures the intensity of the light reflected back from the light source as the tip crosses each bar and space in the printed code .
The photodiode generates a waveform that is used to measure the widths of the bars and spaces in the bar code .
Dark bars in the bar code absorb light and white spaces reflect light so that the voltage waveform generated by the photodiode is a representation of the bar and space pattern in the bar code .
This waveform is decoded by the scanner in a manner similar to the way Morse code dots and dashes are decoded .
LASER SCANNERS Section::::Laser scanners .
Laser scanners work the same way as pen type readers except that they use a laser beam as the light source and typically employ either a reciprocating mirror or a rotating prism to scan the laser beam back and forth across the bar code .
As with the pen type reader , a photo - diode is used to measure the intensity of the light reflected back from the bar code .
In both pen readers and laser scanners , the light emitted by the reader is rapidly varied in brightness with a data pattern and the photo - diode receive circuitry is designed to detect only signals with the same modulated pattern .
CCD READERS
( ALSO KNOWN AS LED SCANNERS )
Section::::CCD readers ( also known as LED scanners ) .
CCD readers use an array of hundreds of tiny light sensors lined up in a row in the head of the reader .
Each sensor measures the intensity of the light immediately in front of it .
Each individual light sensor in the CCD reader is extremely small and because there are hundreds of sensors lined up in a row , a voltage pattern identical to the pattern in a bar code is generated in the reader by sequentially measuring the voltages across each sensor in the row .
The important difference between a CCD reader and a pen or laser scanner is that the CCD reader is measuring emitted ambient light from the bar code whereas pen or laser scanners are measuring reflected light of a specific frequency originating from the scanner itself .
CAMERA - BASED READERS Section::::Camera - based readers .
Two - dimensional imaging scanners are a newer type of bar code reader .
They use a camera and image processing techniques to decode the bar code .
Video camera readers use small video cameras with the same CCD technology as in a CCD bar code reader except that instead of having a single row of sensors , a video camera has hundreds of rows of sensors arranged in a two dimensional array so that they can generate an image .
Large field - of - view readers use high resolution industrial cameras to capture multiple bar codes simultaneously .
All the bar codes appearing in the photo are decoded instantly ( ImageID patents and code creation tools ) or by use of plugins ( e.g. the Barcodepedia used a flash application and some web cam for querying a database ) , have been realized options for resolving the given tasks .
OMNIDIRECTIONAL BARCODE SCANNERS
Section::::Omnidirectional barcode scanners .
Omnidirectional scanning uses " series of straight or curved scanning lines of varying directions in the form of a starburst , a Lissajous curve , or other multiangle arrangement are projected at the symbol and one or more of them will be able to cross all of the symbol 's bars and spaces , no matter what the orientation .
Almost all of them use a laser .
Unlike the simpler single - line laser scanners , they produce a pattern of beams in varying orientations allowing them to read barcodes presented to it at different angles .
Most of them use a single rotating polygonal mirror and an arrangement of several fixed mirrors to generate their complex scan patterns .
Omnidirectional scanners are most familiar through the horizontal scanners in supermarkets , where packages are slid over a glass or sapphire window .
There are a range of different omnidirectional units available which can be used for differing scanning applications , ranging from retail type applications with the barcodes read only a few centimetres away from the scanner to industrial conveyor scanning where the unit can be a couple of metres away or more from the code .
Omnidirectional scanners are also better at reading poorly printed , wrinkled , or even torn barcodes .
CELL PHONE CAMERAS Section::::Cell phone cameras .
While cell phone cameras without auto - focus are not ideal for reading some common barcode formats , there are 2D barcodes which are optimized for cell phones , as well as QR Codes ( Quick Response ) codes and Data Matrix codes which can be read quickly and accurately with or without auto - focus .
Cell phone cameras open up a number of applications for consumers .
For example , - * Movies : DVD / VHS movie catalogs .
* Music : CD catalogs – play MP3 when scanned .
*
Book catalogs and device .
* Groceries , nutrition information , making shopping lists when the last of an item is used , etc .
* Personal Property inventory ( for insurance and other purposes)code scanned into personal finance software when entering .
Later , scanned receipt images can then be automatically associated with the appropriate entries .
Later , the barcodes can be used to rapidly weed out paper copies not required to be retained for tax or asset inventory purposes .
*
If retailers put barcodes on receipts that allowed downloading an electronic copy or encoded the entire receipt in a 2D barcode , consumers could easily import data into personal finance , property inventory , and grocery management software .
Receipts scanned on a scanner could be automatically identified and associated with the appropriate entries in finance and property inventory software .
* Consumer tracking from the retailer perspective ( for example , loyalty card programs that track consumers purchases at the point of sale by having them scan a QR code ) .
A number of enterprise applications using cell phones are appearing :
* Access control ( for example , ticket validation at venues ) , inventory reporting ( for example , tracking deliveries ) , asset tracking ( for example , anti - counterfeiting ) .
SMARTPHONES
*
Smartphones can be used in Google 's mobile Android operating system via both their own Google Goggles application .
Nokia 's Symbian operating system features a barcode scanner which can scan barcodes , while mbarcode is a barcode reader for the Maemo operating system .
In the Apple iOS , a barcode reader is not automatically included , but there are more than fifty free or paid apps available with both scanning capabilities and hard - linking to URI .
With BlackBerry devices , the App World application can natively scan barcodes .
Windows Phone 8 is able to scan barcodes through the Bing search app .
HOUSING
Section::::Housing .
Barcode readers can be distinguished based on housing design as follows :
Handheld scanner : with a handle and typically a trigger button for switching on the light source .
Pen scanner ( or wand scanner ) : a pen - shaped scanner that is swiped .
Stationary scanner :
wall- or table - mounted scanners that the barcode is passed under or beside .
These are commonly found at the checkout counters of supermarkets and other retailers .
Fixed - position scanner : an industrial barcode reader , used to identify products during manufacture or logistics .
Often used on conveyor tracks to identify cartons or pallets which need to be routed to another process or shipping location .
Another application joins holographic scanners with a checkweigher to read bar codes of any orientation or placement , and weighs the package .
Systems like this are used in factory and farm automation for quality management and shipping .
PDA scanner ( or Auto - ID PDA ) : a PDA with a built - in barcode reader or
attached barcode scanner .
Automatic reader : a back office equipment to read barcoded documents at high speed ( 50,000 / hour ) .
Cordless scanner ( or Wireless scanner )
: a cordless barcode scanner is operated by a battery fit inside it and is not connected to the electricity mains and transfer data to the connected device like PC .
METHODS OF CONNECTION
EARLY SERIAL INTERFACES Section::::Methods of connection .
Section::::Early serial interfaces .
Early barcode scanners , of all formats , almost universally used the then - common RS-232 serial interface .
This was an electrically simple means of connection and the software to access it is also relatively simple , although needing to be written for specific computers and their serial ports .
PROPRIETARY INTERFACES Section::::Proprietary interfaces .
There are a few other less common interfaces .
These were used in large EPOS systems with dedicated hardware , rather than attaching to existing commodity computers .
In some of these interfaces , the scanning device returned a " raw " signal proportional to the intensities seen while scanning the barcode .
This was then decoded by the host device .
In some cases the scanning device would convert the symbology of the barcode to one that could be recognized by the host device , such as Code 39 .
KEYBOARD WEDGE ( E.G. PS/2 )
Section::::Keyboard wedge ( e.g. PS/2 ) .
With the popularity of the PC and its standard keyboard interface , it became ever easier to connect physical hardware to a PC and so there was commercial demand similarly to reduce the complexity of the associated software . "
Keyboard wedge " hardware plugged between the PS/2 port and the keyboard , with characters from the barcode scanner appearing exactly as if they had been typed at the keyboard .
This made the addition of simple barcode reading abilities to existing programs very easy , without any need to change them , although it did require some care by the user and could be restrictive in the content of the barcodes that could be handled .
USB Section::::USB .
Later barcode readers began to use USB connectors rather than the keyboard port , as this became a more convenient hardware option .
To retain the easy integration with existing programs , a device driver called a " software wedge " could be used , to emulate the keyboard - impersonating behavior of the old " keyboard wedge " hardware .
In many cases , a choice of USB interface types ( HID , CDC ) are provided .
Some have PoweredUSB .
WIRELESS NETWORKING
Section::::Wireless networking .
Some modern handheld barcode readers can be operated in wireless networks according to IEEE 802.11 g ( WLAN ) or IEEE 802.15.1 ( Bluetooth ) .
Some barcode readers also support radio frequencies viz .
433 MHz or 910 MHz .
Readers without external power sources require their batteries be recharged occasionally , which may make them unsuitable for some uses .
RESOLUTION Section::::Resolution .
The scanner resolution is measured by the size of the dot of light emitted by the reader .
If this dot of light is wider than any bar or space in the bar code , then it will overlap two elements ( two spaces or two bars ) and it may produce wrong output .
On the other hand , if a too small dot of light is used , then it can misinterpret any spot on the bar code making the final output wrong .
The most commonly used dimension is 13 thou ( 0.013 in or 0.33 mm ) , although some scanners can read codes with dimensions as small as 3 thou ( 0.003 in or 0.075 mm ) .
Most manufacturers advertise bar code resolution in mil , which is interchangeable with thou .
Smaller bar codes must be printed at high resolution to be read accurately .
SEE ALSO
* CueCat , a cat - shaped handheld barcode reader * Barcode Battler , a portable game console which scans barcodes as part of the gameplay
* Barcode for more details about the Barcode technology * Casenamics Barcode Router for more details about Barcode Reader and Routing Software .
REFERENCES