CUBE ROOT
In mathematics , a cube root of a number x is a number y
such that y = x.
All real numbers ( except zero ) have exactly one real cube root and a pair of complex conjugate cube roots , and all nonzero complex numbers have three distinct complex cube roots .
For example , the real cube root of 8 , denoted , is 2 , because 2 = 8 , while the other cube roots of 8 are −1 + i and −1 − i.
The three cube roots of −27i are
The cube root operation is not distributive with addition or subtraction .
In some contexts , particularly when the number whose cube root is to be taken is a real number , one of the cube roots ( in this particular case the real one ) is referred to as the principal cube root , denoted with the radical sign .
The cube root operation is associative with exponentiation and distributive with multiplication and division if considering only real numbers , but not always if considering complex numbers : for example , the cube of any cube root of 8 is 8 , but the three cube roots of 8 are 8 , −4 + 4i , and −4 − 4i .
FORMAL DEFINITION
Section::::Formal definition .
The cube roots of a number
x are the numbers y which satisfy the equation
PROPERTIES
REAL NUMBERS Section::::Properties .
Section::::Real numbers .
For any real number x , there is one real number y such that y = x.
The cube function is increasing , so does not give the same result for two different inputs , plus it covers all real numbers .
In other words , it is a bijection , or one - to - one .
Then we can define an inverse function that is also one - to - one .
For real numbers , we can define a unique cube root of all real numbers .
If this definition is used , the cube root of a negative number is a negative number .
If x and y are allowed to be complex , then there are three solutions ( if x is non - zero ) and so x has three cube roots .
A real number has one real cube root and two further cube roots which form a complex conjugate pair .
For instance , the cube roots of 1 are : The last two of these roots lead to a relationship between all roots of any real or complex number .
If a number is one cube root of a particular real or complex number , the other two cube roots can be found by multiplying that cube root by one or the other of the two complex cube roots of 1 .
COMPLEX NUMBERS Section::::Complex numbers .
For complex numbers , the principal cube root is usually defined as the cube root that has the greatest real part , or , equivalently , the cube root whose argument has the least absolute value .
It is related to the principal value of the natural logarithm by the formula
If we write x as where r is a non - negative real number and θ lies in the range then the principal complex cube root is
This means that in polar coordinates , we are taking the cube root of the radius and dividing the polar angle by three in order to define a cube root .
With this definition , the principal cube root of a negative number is a complex number , and for instance will not be −2 , but rather .
This difficulty can also be solved by considering the cube root as a multivalued function : if we write the original complex number x in three equivalent forms , namely The principal complex cube roots of these three forms are then respectively Unless , these three complex numbers are distinct , even though the three representations of x were equivalent .
For example , may then be calculated to be −2 , , or .
This is related with the concept of monodromy : if one follows by continuity the function cube root along a closed path around zero , after a turn the value of the cube root is multiplied ( or divided ) by formula_10 IMPOSSIBILITY OF COMPASS - AND - STRAIGHTEDGE CONSTRUCTION Section::::Impossibility of compass - and - straightedge construction .
Cube roots arise in the problem of finding an angle whose measure is one third that of a given angle ( angle trisection ) and in the problem of finding the edge of a cube whose volume is twice that of a cube with a given edge ( doubling the cube ) .
In 1837 Pierre Wantzel proved that neither of these can be done with a compass - and - straightedge construction .
NUMERICAL METHODS Section::::Numerical methods .
Newton 's method is an iterative method that can be used to calculate the cube root .
For real floating - point numbers this method reduces to the following iterative algorithm to produce successively better approximations of the cube root of a :
The method is simply averaging three factors chosen such that at each iteration .
Halley 's method improves upon this with an algorithm that converges more quickly with each step , albeit consuming more multiplication operations :
With either method a poor initial approximation of x can give very poor algorithm performance , and coming up with a good initial approximation is somewhat of a black art .
Some implementations manipulate the exponent bits of the floating - point number ; i.e. they arrive at an initial approximation by dividing the exponent by 3 .
APPEARANCE IN SOLUTIONS OF THIRD AND FOURTH DEGREE EQUATIONS Section::::Appearance in solutions of third and fourth degree equations .
Cubic equations , which are polynomial equations of the third degree ( meaning the highest power of the unknown is 3 ) can always be solved for their three solutions in terms of cube roots and square roots ( although simpler expressions only in terms of square roots exist for all three solutions , if at least one of them is a rational number ) .
If two of the solutions are complex numbers , then all three solution expressions involve the real cube root of a real number , while if all three solutions are real numbers then they may be expressed in terms of the complex cube root of a complex number .
Quartic equations can also be solved in terms of cube roots and square roots .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The calculation of cube roots can be to traced back to Babylonian mathematicians from as early as 1800 BCE .
In the fourth century BCE Plato posed the problem of doubling the cube , which required a compass - and - straightedge construction of the edge of a cube with twice the volume of a given cube ; this required the construction , now known to be impossible , of the length .
A method for extracting cube roots appears in The Nine Chapters on the Mathematical Art , a Chinese mathematical text compiled around the 2nd century BCE and commented on by Liu Hui in the 3rd century CE .
The Greek mathematician Hero of Alexandria devised a method for calculating cube roots in the 1st century CE .
His formula is again mentioned by Eutokios in a commentary on Archimedes .
In 499 CE Aryabhata , a mathematician - astronomer from the classical age of Indian mathematics and Indian astronomy , gave a method for finding the cube root of numbers having many digits in the Aryabhatiya ( section 2.5 ) .
SEE ALSO
* Methods of computing square roots
* List of polynomial topics
* Nth root * Square root *
Nested radical * Root of unity
* Shifting nth - root algorithm REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Cube root calculator reduces any number to simplest radical form * Computing the Cube Root , K. Turkowski , Apple Technical Report # KT-32 , 1998 .
Includes C source code .