CHICKEN FRIED STEAK Chicken fried steak ( similar to country fried steak ) is an American breaded cutlet dish consisting of a piece of beefsteak ( tenderized cube steak ) coated with seasoned flour and pan - fried .
It is sometimes associated with the Southern cuisine of the United States .
Despite the name , the dish contains no chicken , but is so - named because the cooking method is similar to that of pan - fried chicken breast cutlets .
Chicken fried steak resembles the Austrian dish wiener schnitzel and the Italian – South American dish milanesa , which is a tenderized veal or pork cutlet , coated with flour , eggs , chicken stock cube , and bread crumbs , and then fried .
It is also similar to the recipe for Scottish collops .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The precise origins of the dish are unclear , but many sources attribute its development to German and Austrian immigrants to Texas in the 19th century , who brought recipes for wiener schnitzel from Europe to the USA .
Lamesa , the seat of Dawson County on the Texas South Plains , claims to be the birthplace of chicken fried steak , and hosts an annual celebration accordingly .
The Virginia Housewife , published in 1838 by Mary Randolph , has a recipe for veal cutlets that is one of the earliest recipes for a food like chicken fried steak .
The recipe for what we now know as chicken fried steak was included in many regional cookbooks by the late 19th century .
The Oxford English Dictionary 's earliest attestation of the term " chicken - fried steak " is from a restaurant advertisement in the 19 June 1914 edition of the Colorado Springs Gazette newspaper .
A 1943 American cookbook recipe for wiener schnitzel includes a white salt and pepper cream gravy .
Chicken fried steak is among numerous popular dishes which make up the official state meal of Oklahoma , added to the list in 1988 .
PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
Chicken fried steak is prepared by taking a thin cut of beefsteak and tenderizing it by pounding , cubing , or forking .
It is then immersed in egg batter and dredged in flour to which salt , pepper , and often other seasonings have been added ( called breading ) .
Chicken fried steak is typically deep - fried and served with a cream gravy , while country fried steak is typically fried in a skillet and served with a brown gravy .
The frying medium has traditionally been shortening , but butter and lard have sometimes been used instead .
Health concerns have led many cooks to replace the shortening with vegetable oil .
When there are problems with the breading separating from the meat while cooking , it can be very useful to first dredge the meat in the flour mixture , then the egg , and then the flour mixture again , and then let it sit for a half hour or more before cooking .
The cuts of steak used for chicken fried steak are usually the less expensive , less desirable ones , such as cube steak , chuck , round steak , and occasionally flank steak .
The method may be used for chopped or ground beef , but it is not called chicken fried steak .
Chicken fried steak is usually served for lunch or dinner topped with cream gravy and with mashed potatoes , vegetables , and biscuits or Texas toast served on the side .
In the Midwest , it is also common to serve chicken fried steak for breakfast , along with toast and hash browns .
The steak can be served on a hamburger bun with cream gravy as a " chicken fried steak sandwich " .
It can also be cubed and stuffed in a baked potato with the gravy and cheese .
Alternatively , the tenderized steak may be cut into strips , breaded , deep fried , and served for breakfast with eggs and toast or for other meals in a basket with fries and cream gravy .
Either is then known as " finger steaks " .
VARIANTS Section::::Variants .
Typically , in Texas and surrounding states , chicken fried steak is fried in a thick layer of oil in a pan and served with traditional peppered milk gravy .
OTHER SIMILAR DISHES Section::::Other similar dishes .
A similar dish is sometimes known as " country fried steak " in other parts of the United States , where it is subject to some regional variations .
On rare occasions there is a brown gravy , and occasionally the meat is either pan - fried with little oil , or simmered in the gravy .
In some areas , " country steak " may refer to Salisbury steak , a chopped or minced beef patty in brown gravy .
There are also dishes similar to chicken fried steak that are made with other meats .
One is " chicken - fried chicken " which has appeared on many menus , substituting a boneless chicken breast for the steak .
Chicken fried chicken differs from the dish known as " fried chicken " because the meat is removed from the bones , and cooked in the fashion of chicken fried steak , and served with cream gravy .
Another dish similar to chicken fried steak is " chicken fried hamburger " which is made with a ground beef patty and served with cream gravy .
Boneless pork chops , usually center cut , can be served in this manner , as well as chicken fried buffalo steak .
Chicken fried catfish may also be found on occasion .
SEE ALSO
*
Chicken fried bacon *
City chicken
* Cotoletta * List of regional dishes of the United States
* Parmo * Parmigiana * Schnitzel * Tonkatsu REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Country Fried Steak at The Food Timeline * Chicken Fried Steak in Texas Cooking Magazine