FRIED EGG
A fried egg is a cooked dish made from one or more eggs which are removed from their shells and placed into a pan , usually without breaking the yolk , and fried with minimal accompaniment .
Fried eggs are traditionally eaten for breakfast in many countries but may also be served at other times of the day .
In various cultures a fried egg may be referred to as a bull 's eye , including in India , Italy ( uovo all'occhio di bue ) , the Czech Republic ( buličí oko ) , Slovakia ( volské oko ) , Indonesia ( telur mata sapi ) and German - speaking countries ( Stierenauge , Ochsenauge ) .
In Nigeria a " fried egg " would be a " scrambled egg " in the United Kingdom or United States .
REGIONAL ADAPTATIONS AND SPECIALITIES AUSTRIA , GERMANY , AND SWITZERLAND Section::::Regional adaptations and specialities .
Section::::Austria , Germany , and Switzerland .
Fried eggs
( ' ) are a crucial part of such traditional German dishes as ' ( the egg is fried on one side with an unbroken yolk , and served " sunny side up " atop an open ham sandwich ) or ' / ' / Fernfahrerschnitzel ( " trucker 's schnitzel " ) – a similarly prepared fried egg served on a .
Fried eggs over ( or side - by - side with ) pan - fried potatoes is another common dish , sometimes served with spinach as a third component of the meal .
Some German cooks break the yolk and distribute it across the surface of the white during the frying .
All of the above are typically lunch , rather than breakfast , dishes , although eggs themselves ( like boiled or scrambled eggs ) are a common part of a German breakfast .
CZECH REPUBLIC Section::::Czech Republic .
Fried egg prepared sunny side up is known as " volské oko " or " buličí oko " ( bull 's eye ) in Czech cuisine
and they are served either alone as part of breakfast , or for lunch with side of spinach and boiled potatoes .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Americans use different terms to describe the degree and method to which fried eggs are cooked , including : over easy or over light over medium over hard or over well sunny side up EGYPT Section::::Egypt .
In Egypt , fried eggs are a common breakfast food .
They are fried in fat such as vegetable oil , butter or ghee and served either plain or with other foodstuffs such as tomatoes , cheese , sausage or minced meat with onions and spices ; they may also be served with ful medames ( slow - cooked fava beans ) .
INDIA Section::::India .
In India , fried eggs are most commonly called as " bulls eye " as a reference to " bullseye " target .
Some restaurants also refer to them as " egg fry " ( over hard ) or " egg half fry " ( sunny side up ) .
Bullseyes are a common street vendor dish in South India .
They are commonly served alone or as an accompaniment to bread .
It may also occasionally be served with dosa , paratha , or roti .
During or after the frying stage , they are sometimes sprinkled lightly with condiments such as black pepper , chili powder , green chili , and salt .
In central and northern India 's English - speaking middle classes and mid - level restaurants , " single - fried " refers to sunny side up and " double - fried " to over hard .
Street food parlance uses " half - fry " as a base term with " half fry bina palti " ( un - flipped ) meaning sunny side up and " half fry palti maarke " or " alti palti " ( flipped ) meaning over easy / medium / hard where the customer oversees the flip and says when .
INDONESIA
Section::::Indonesia .
In Indonesia , fried eggs are served either as telur ceplok or telur mata sapi ( Indonesian for " bull 's eye egg " ) which refer to sunny side up eggs , as telur dadar ( omelette ) or as telur orak - arik ( scrambled eggs ) .
The fried eggs are either setengah matang which is half cooked with still runny yolk or matang which is well done .
Fried eggs , especially as bull 's eye egg , is a popular toppings for Indonesian fried rice ( nasi goreng ) and fried noodle ( mie goreng ) , either freshly prepared noodle or cooked from instant noodle Indomie Mi goreng .
A simple dish of fried sunny side up egg , served on top of steamed rice drizzled with kecap manis sweet soy sauce , is a favourite dish among Indonesian children .
Other than served with rice , fried eggs might be served with bread as sandwich for breakfast .
Seasoning include salt and pepper , sweet soy sauce , sometimes hot and spicy sambal chili paste .
IRELAND AND THE UNITED KINGDOM Section::::Ireland and the United Kingdom .
Fried eggs can be served on toast , or in a sandwich , with bacon , sausages , and a variety of condiments .
Eggs are often part of the full breakfast commonly eaten in Britain and Ireland .
Fried eggs are often served with ham or gammon steak as a popular pub meal .
The egg is cooked on a high heat and hot fat , oil or water may be splashed onto the top of the egg to baste it and cook the white .
They are usually cooked without turning over .
Sometimes the egg is turned to ensure the white is thoroughly cooked ( " over easy " , though this is more an American phrase ) , but the egg is almost always served with the yolk runny .
LATIN AMERICA , PORTUGAL , AND SPAIN Section::::Latin America , Portugal , and Spain .
In Portugal and Brazil , a runny egg placed over a steak with a side dish of rice and black beans is called a , literally " horse - riding steak " .
A similar dish , with the name in Spanish , is also common in Argentina , Ecuador , and Uruguay ( called churrasco ) ; fried potatoes and salad replace the beans and rice .
In Chile and Peru , a fried egg is included in ' , ' , , and several other dishes .
In Ecuador , llapingachos include a sunny side up egg served over pan - seared cheesy mashed potatoes and fried sausage .
In northern Mexico , ' ( riding eggs ) are served with refried beans and fried potatoes ( or french fries ) .
Another common method of serving eggs in Mexico is ' , which blends fried eggs with diced tomato , onion and green chili pepper ; the amount of pepper added is often to order .
There are several other egg dishes in Mexico which combine different ingredients : Huevos motuleños ( in Yucatán ) , ' ( mixed with refried beans ) , and ' ( sunny side up eggs served over a corn tortilla , covered with spicy salsa ) .
Also , in some parts of Mexico , fried eggs are served with a fresh tomato , onions , and cilantro salsa .
Red chili is optional , as is a blended sauce .
In Spain fried eggs ( huevos fritos ) are a common dish .
They are eaten alone , with meat , or with sausages .
In this country , a fried egg served with boiled rice covered in tomato sauce is called arroz a la cubana in Spanish and the same dish is served in parts of Latin America , Italy ( so - called occhio di bue , transl : ox 's eye ) , the Philippines , and Portugal as well .
Poet Nazım Hikmet says , in an interview , that he stayed with a Spanish friend for a month and ate fried eggs almost every day .
Spanish painter Diego Velázquez painted a portrait of an elderly lady frying eggs in 1618 .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
Called " medama yaki " ( 目玉焼き , lit . :
cooked eyeball ) , fried eggs are usually made sunny side up .
They may be served with salt and pepper , or soy sauce .
KOREA
Section::::Korea .
Called 계란부침 ( gyeranbuchim , ' egg pancake ' ) or more commonly 계란후라이 ( gyeran hurai , ' egg fry ' ) .
Eggs are fried in cooking oil , sometimes with a sprinkle of salt .
It is common to put a fried egg on top of ' or ' .
Sometimes , rice dishes , such as ' , are simply made by applying a fried egg on a top of a bowl of hot rice , drizzled with a spoonful of ' and sesame oil .
Occasionally , salt is added to fried eggs , and served as , which refers to small dishes of food served along with bap .
In Busan area , fried eggs are often served with Jjajangmyeon .
NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
In the Netherlands , a fried egg ( ) is normally served on top of a slice of bread ( white or whole wheat ) , often with fried bacon , for breakfast or lunch .
An ' is a dish consisting of two or three fried eggs , sunny side up .
One version is fried together with ham and cheese ( ' ) , or bacon and cheese ( ' ) .
Another version is placed on buttered bread over a generous slice of cold meat , e.g. , cooked beef or ham , and usually garnished with a dill pickle .
It is a common lunch dish served in many cafes , canteens , and lunch rooms in the Netherlands . '
literally means " out - thrower " , and it is also a Dutch word for a " bouncer " .
NIGERIA
Section::::Nigeria .
What is known as " scrambled eggs " in the U.S. and U.K. is called " fried eggs " in Nigeria , while what is known as " fried eggs " in the U.S. and U.K. would be known as " half - fried eggs " in Nigeria .
The mai shai stalls cook scrambled eggs to the point of being heavily crisp .
RUSSIA Section::::Russia .
The two most popular fried egg dishes commonly eaten in Russia are ( Russian : ) , a generic term for pure fried eggs , and omlet ( Russian : ) , an omelet distinguished from simple eggs by addition of milk or other liquids .
Yaichnitsa has two main varieties , a ' ( Russian : ) , usually referring to the sunny - side up but generally meaning any variant with the unbroken yolk , and a scramble called ' ( Russian : ) , which may have various toppings such as fried bacon , ham , salt pork or other cold cuts , fried bread or onion , or other vegetables added .
A common way of preparing both types is to have multiple eggs cracked into a saucepan or frying pan and cooked without flipping .
The whites flow together and individual portions are divided up after the whole pan - full has cooked .
SOUTHEAST ASIA Section::::Southeast Asia .
Nasi goreng , one of the most popular dishes in Brunei , Indonesia , Malaysia , and Singapore is often served with a fried egg .
In the Philippines , fried eggs are often cooked like a sunny - side egg but
the yolk is half cooked by sprinkling it with salt and oil while being fried , giving it a distinctive pink - colored membrane .
It is served in the morning with garlic rice and a choice of breakfast meat such as beef tapa , longaniza , fried milkfish , dried fish , tocino ( caramelised pork ) , Spam , or corned beef , such as in tapsilog and its variants .
In addition , fried eggs are eaten in a dish called Arroz a la cubana , which is seasoned ground beef with raisins , cubed potatoes , tomato sauce , and olives , along with white rice and fried ripe plantains .
Fried eggs are also a main ingredient in the noodle dish Pancit Batil Patong , where a fried egg is topped over stir - fried noodles .
In Thai cuisine , when the words ' ( lit . " star egg " ) are placed after the name of a dish , it means that one wants that dish accompanied by a fried egg .
The very popular ' for instance , translates to " basil fried pork on top of rice with a fried egg " .
Sometimes this is referred to as a " top egg " .
Fried rice is also popularly accompanied with a fried egg , such as with khao phat Amerikan and khao phat ( standard Thai style fried rice ) .
Another popular way of eating fried eggs in Thailand is to use it as the main ingredient of the Thai salad called yam khai dao .
In Cambodia , a common dish is called loc lok , is a fried egg served on top of a ring of spinach , onion finely shaven and tomoto with either a portion of deer or beef and gravy topped with a fried egg either duck or chicken .
A fried egg served over white rice , topped with a dab of oyster or hoisin sauce , is also popular in east Asia .
Fried eggs are also sometimes used in a Vietnamese breakfast roll .
EGG IN THE BASKET Section::::Egg in the basket .
This American dish is usually made by cutting a circle or other shape out of a slice of bread , often using a drinking glass or biscuit cutter .
The bread is fried until brown on one side and then flipped , and an egg is broken into the center and seasoned , usually with salt and pepper , and sometimes herbs .
The pan is then covered , and the egg is cooked until the white is just set .
The cutout center of the bread is often fried as well , and served alongside or on top of the finished egg .
SEE ALSO
* Egg sandwich
* List of egg dishes * Green Eggs and Ham REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS