.ORG
The domain name org is a generic top - level domain ( gTLD ) of the Domain Name System ( DNS ) used in the Internet .
The name is truncated from organization .
It was one of the original domains established in 1985 , and has been operated by the Public Interest Registry since 2003 .
The domain was originally intended for non - profit entities , but this restriction was not enforced and has been removed .
The domain is commonly used by schools , open - source projects , and communities , but also by some for - profit entities .
The number of registered domains in org has increased from fewer than one million in the 1990s , to ten million as of June 2013 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The domain " .org " was one of the original top - level domains , with com , us , edu , gov , mil and net , established in January 1985 .
It was originally intended for non - profit organizations or organizations of a non - commercial character that did not meet the requirements for other gTLDs .
The MITRE Corporation was the first group to register an org domain with mitre.org in July 1985 .
The TLD has been operated since January 1 , 2003 by Public Interest Registry , who assumed the task from VeriSign Global Registry Services , a division of Verisign .
REGISTRATIONS Section::::Registrations .
Registrations of subdomains are processed via accredited registrars worldwide .
Anyone can register a second - level domain within org , without restrictions .
In some instances subdomains are being used also by commercial sites , such as craigslist.org .
According to the ICANN Dashboard ( Domain Name ) report , the composition of the TLD is diverse , including cultural institutions , associations , sports teams , religious , and civic organizations , open - source software projects , schools , environmental initiatives , social , and fraternal organizations , health organizations , legal services , as well as clubs , and community - volunteer groups .
In some cases subdomains have been created for crisis management .
Some cities , among them Rybnitsa in Transnistria ) also have org domain names .
Although organizations anywhere in the world may register subdomains , many countries , such as Australia ( au ) , Japan ( jp ) , Argentina ( ar ) , Bolivia ( bo ) , Uruguay ( uy ) , Turkey ( tr ) , Somalia ( so ) , Sierra Leone ( sl ) , Russia ( ru ) , Bangladesh ( bd ) , India ( in ) and the United Kingdom ( uk ) , have established a second - level domain with a similar purpose under their ccTLD .
Such second - level domains are usually named org or or .
In 2009 , the org domain consisted of more than 8 million registered domain names , 8.8 million in 2010 , and 9.6 million in 2011 .
The Public Interest Registry registered the ten millionth .ORG domain in June , 2012 .
When the 9.5 millionth .org was registered in December 2011 , .org , became the third largest gTLD .
INTERNATIONALIZED DOMAIN NAMES
Section::::Internationalized domain names .
The org domain registry allows the registration of selected internationalized domain names ( IDNs ) as second - level domains .
For German , Danish , Hungarian , Icelandic , Korean , Latvian , Lithuanian , Polish , and Swedish IDNs this has been possible since 2005 .
Spanish IDN registrations have been possible since 2007 .
DOMAIN NAME SECURITY Section::::Domain name security .
On June 2 , 2009 , The Public Interest Registry announced that the domain is the first open generic top - level domain and the largest registry overall that has signed its DNS zone with Domain Name System Security Extensions ( DNSSEC ) .
This allows the verification of the origin authenticity and integrity of DNS data by conforming DNS clients .
As of June 23 , 2010 , DNSSEC was enabled for individual second - level domains , starting with 13 registrars .
COST OF REGISTRATION Section::::Cost of registration .
The Public Interest Registry ( PIR ) charges its accredited registrars US $ 9.05 per year for each domain name .
The registrars may set their charges to end users without restrictions .
REFERENCES