FIELDER 'S CHOICE
In baseball , fielder 's choice ( abbreviated FC ) refers to a variety of plays involving an offensive player reaching a base due to the defense 's attempt to put out another baserunner , or the defensive team 's indifference to his advance .
Fielder 's choice is not called by the umpires on the field of play ; rather , it is recorded by the official scorer to account for the offensive player 's advance without crediting him with an offensive statistic such as a hit or stolen base .
Though there are several definitions of fielder 's choice , the most common ( and the only one commonly referred to as FC ) involves a fielder fielding a fair ball and choosing to try to put out another baserunner , thereby allowing the batter - runner to safely reach first base .
The defensive player may or may not have an opportunity to retire the batter runner .
If a preceding runner is retired on a force out , the batter will not be rewarded with a hit and will be scored a Fielder 's Choice ( FC ) .
Other plays that fall under the definition of FC are usually referred to using other terms such as " defensive indifference " or " on the throw . "
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
Fielder 's choice is defined in MLB Rule 2 , " Definitions " , as " the act of a fielder who handles a fair grounder and , instead of throwing to first base to put out the batter - runner , throws to another base in an attempt to put out a preceding runner .
" FC is recorded for the batter - runner if he reaches first base safely regardless of whether the attempt to put out the other runner(s ) is successful .
If the other runner is successfully put out for the third out , FC is recorded for the batter - runner regardless of whether he had already reached first base ( if the other runner was forced out , the batter is described as grounding into a force play ) .
Rule 2 also defines FC as any of the following circumstances :
* When a batter accomplishes a hit but is able to safely reach an extra base because of the defense 's attempt to put out another baserunner ( e.g. , one running towards home plate ) .
Often called on the throw .
*
When a runner already on base safely reaches another base due to a fielder 's attempt to put out another runner , unless his advance can be categorized as a stolen base .
Also referred to as on the throw .
In many situations fielder 's choice requires the official scorer to make judgment calls , such as what the outcome of the play would have been had there been no runners on base after taking into account ordinary effort by the defensive team , as well as what effect any errors committed by the defensive team might have had on the play .
IMPACT ON STATISTICS Section::::Impact on statistics .
A batter who reaches first base safely as the result of a fielder 's choice is not credited with a hit or a time on base ; however , his turn at the plate is recorded as an at bat and plate appearance .
Therefore , a player 's batting average and on - base percentage decrease as a result of reaching first base via fielder 's choice .
A batter who reaches first base safely but advances on the same play as the result of fielder 's choice is credited with a hit for the number of bases he would have reached safely with no other runners on base , and is said to have taken the additional base(s ) on the throw .
A baserunner who makes an undefended steal is not credited with a stolen base , but his advance is accounted for as defensive indifference .
EXAMPLES OF FIELDER 'S CHOICE SITUATIONS
* With a runner on first base , the batter hits a ground ball directly to the shortstop .
Although he could easily throw the batter - runner out at first base , the shortstop chooses to throw to the second baseman who is covering second base , in an attempt to force out the runner advancing from first .
Meanwhile , the batter - runner reaches first base safely .
*
This play is commonly referred to as " grounding into a force out " .
Fielder 's choice is recorded for the batter - runner ( 6 - 4 or 6 - 4 - 3 , depending on whether an attempt was made to put him out ) , and he is not credited with a hit .
* A 6 - 4 FC would be recorded if the preceding runner is put out for the third out , regardless of where the batter - runner is on the basepaths when this occurs .
* With a runner on second base , the batter sends a base hit to the outfield .
The outfielder , playing shallow in anticipation of such a hit , throws to home plate in an attempt to put out the runner trying to score .
The batter - runner may decide to advance to second base since he can see that there will not be a play there .
This play is scored as a single for the batter - runner regardless of the outcome of the attempt to put out the runner trying to score .
The term on the throw is often used to describe the outcome of any plays in this situation .
*
If the batter - runner safely reaches second base regardless of the outcome at home plate , his single still stands , but he is said to have taken second on the throw , or on fielder 's choice .
*
If the batter - runner is thrown out at second base regardless of the outcome at home plate , he is still credited with a single , since the put out was a consequence of his attempt to take second on the throw .
*
If the runner attempting to score is put out , he is said to be out at home plate on the throw .
If he is put out for the third out , no advance on the throw is recorded for the batter - runner , and the batter - runner is left on base since he is credited with a single .
* With a runner on first base , the batter hits a ground ball back up the middle .
The shortstop dives for the ball and saves it from going into center field .
Realizing he has no time to throw out the batter - runner at first base , the shortstop tosses the ball to the second baseman covering second base in an attempt to force out the runner coming from first .
However , the throw is not in time , and both runners are safe .
Assuming the official scorer agrees the shortstop could not have thrown the batter - runner out at first with ordinary effort , this play will be scored as a base hit and not FC .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* MLB rule 2 - Definition of fielder 's choice
* MLB rule
10.06 - Base hit not scored when ...