PRESS RELEASE
A press release , news release , media release , press statement or video release is a written or recorded communication directed at members of the news media for the purpose of announcing something ostensibly newsworthy .
Typically , they are mailed , faxed , or e - mailed to assignment editors and journalists at newspapers , magazines , radio stations , online media , television stations or television networks .
ELEMENTS Section::::Elements .
Technically , anything deliberately sent to a reporter or media source is considered a press release : it is information released by the act of being sent to the media .
However , public relations professionals often follow a standard format that they believe is efficient and increases their odds of getting the publicity they desire .
The format is supposed to help journalists separate press releases from other PR communication methods , such as pitch letters or media advisories .
Generally , a PR body consists of 4 to 5 paragraphs with word limit ranging from 400 to 500 .
However , press releases can be anywhere from 300 to 800 words As the internet has gained prevalence , the way journalists like to be approached has also changed .
A format suggested by Kristen Nicole , a former Mashable writer who is now the Senior Managing Editor of SiliconANGLE.com .
is sending one sentence as to why this story works for my publication , and 5 bullet points for context .
Kristen also recommends pitching writers directly over pitching editors saying : " I 'd recommend pitching the writer first , with an angle specific to their beat .
If a case needs to be made to the editor , it can fare better coming from the writer , who 's already had an opportunity to work out an angle with the PR rep .
As an editor , I 'm more likely to prioritize emails coming from those I have personal relationships with .
These have been built over the years from the days when I was the writer presenting to my editors .
Starting a new relationship with me as an editor , the most successful pitches have been those offering high profile interviews ( editors that still write columns will want to take these for themselves before passing them off to junior writers ) or highly specific content , like an original guest contribution . "
Some of these common structural elements include : * Headline – used to grab the attention of journalists and briefly summarize the news .
* Dateline – contains the release date and usually the originating city of the press release .
If the date listed is after the date that the information was actually sent to the media , then the sender is requesting a news embargo , which journalists are under no obligation to honor .
* Introduction – first paragraph in a press release , that generally gives basic answers to the questions of who , what , when , where and why .
* Body – further explanation , statistics , background , or other details relevant to the news .
* Boilerplate – generally a short " about " section , providing independent background on the issuing company , organization , or individual .
* Close – in North America , traditionally the symbol " -30- " appears after the boilerplate or body and before the media contact information , indicating to media that the release has ended .
A more modern equivalent has been the " # # # " symbol .
In other countries , other means of indicating the end of the release may be used , such as the text " ends " .
* Media contact information – name , phone number , email address , mailing address , or other contact information for the PR or other media relations contact person .
As the Internet has assumed growing prominence in the news cycle , press release writing styles have necessarily evolved .
Editors of online newsletters , for instance , often lack the staff to convert traditional press release prose into more readable , print - ready copy .
DISTRIBUTION MODELS Section::::Distribution models .
In the traditional distribution model , the business , political campaign , or other entity releasing information to the media hires a publicity agency to write and distribute written information to the newswires .
The newswire then disseminates the information as it is received or as investigated by a journalist .
An alternative is the self - published press release .
In this approach , press releases are either sent directly to local newspapers or to free and paid distribution services .
The distribution service then provides the content , as - is , to their media outlets for publication which is usually online .
VIDEO NEWS RELEASES Section::::Video news releases .
Some public relations firms send out video news releases ( VNRs ) which are pre - taped video programs that can be aired intact by TV stations .
Often , the VNRs are aired without the stations ' identifying or attributing them as such .
TV news viewers can often detect the use of VNRs within television newscasts ; for example , many movie - star " interviews " are actually VNRs , taped on a set which is located at the movie studio and decorated with the movie 's logo .
Another frequent example of VNRs masquerading as news footage is videotapes of particular medical " breakthroughs , " that are really produced and distributed by pharmaceutical companies for the purpose of selling new medicines .
Video news releases can be in the form of full blown productions costing tens of thousands or even hundreds of thousands .
They can also be in the TV news format , or even produced for the web .
Recently , many broadcast news outlets have discouraged the use of VNRs .
Many stations , citing an already poor public perception , want to increase their credibility .
Public relations companies are having a tougher time getting their pre - edited video aired .
VNRs can be turned into podcasts then posted onto newswires .
Further to this , a story can be kept running longer by engaging " community websites " , which are monitored and commented on by many journalists and features writers .
EMBARGOING Section::::Embargoing .
Sometimes a press release is distributed early and embargoed – that is , news organizations are requested not to report the story until a specified time .
For instance , news organizations usually receive a copy of presidential speeches several hours in advance .
Product or media reviewers are commonly given a sample or preview of a product ahead of its release date .
Unless the journalist has voluntarily agreed to honor the embargo in advance , usually via a legally binding non - disclosure agreement , the journalist is under no obligation to it .
However , even in the absence of any obligation , news organizations generally do not break the embargo for sources that they wish to cultivate .
If they do , then the agency or client that sent the release may blacklist them .
POSITIVES Section::::Positives .
Press release material can be beneficial towards media corporations because releases help decrease costs and improve the amount of material a firm can output in a certain amount of time .
Due to the material being pre - packaged , this saves journalists time , not only in writing a story , but also the time and money it would have taken to capture the news firsthand .
NEGATIVES Section::::Negatives .
Although the utilization of press release material can save a company time and money , it makes the distributed media boring and similar to the output of other firms .
In the digital age , consumers want to get their information instantly and this puts pressure on media companies to output as much material as possible .
This often causes them to heavily rely on the use of press releases in order to create their stories .
EFFECTS OF PRESS RELEASES Section::::Effects of press releases .
Press releases are crucial from the point of view of public companies .
SEE ALSO * Electronic press kit ( EPK )
* List of press release agencies * Mat release * News conference
* Spokesman * Press service * Submission software REFERENCES