PAN - AMERICAN HIGHWAY
The Pan - American Highway is a network of roads stretching across the American continents and measuring about in total length .
Except for a rainforest break of approximately , called the Darién Gap , the roads link almost all of the Pacific coastal countries of the Americas in a connected highway system .
According to Guinness World Records , the Pan - American Highway is the world 's longest " motorable road " .
However , because of the Darién Gap , it is not possible to cross between South America and Central America with conventional highway vehicles .
Without an all - terrain vehicle , it is necessary to circumnavigate this terrestrial stretch by sea .
The Pan - American Highway passes through many diverse climates and ecological types , from dense jungles , to arid deserts , to barren tundra , some of which are passable only during the dry season , and in many regions driving is occasionally hazardous .
The Pan - American Highway system is physically mostly complete and extends in de facto terms from Prudhoe Bay , Alaska , in North America to the lower reaches of South America .
Several southern highway termini are claimed to exist , including the cities of Puerto Montt and Quellón in Chile and Ushuaia in Argentina .
West and north of the Darién Gap , it is also known as the Inter - American Highway through Central America and Mexico where it splits into several spurs leading to the Mexico – US border .
DEVELOPMENT AND CONSTRUCTION Section::::Development and construction .
The concept of an overland route from one tip of the Americas to the other was originally proposed at the First Pan - American Conference in 1889 as a railroad ; however , this proposal was never realized .
The idea of building a highway emerged at the Fifth International Conference of American States in 1923 .
The first conference regarding construction of the highway occurred on October 5 , 1925 .
Finally , on July 29 , 1937 , Argentina , Bolivia , Chile , Colombia , Costa Rica , El Salvador , Guatemala , Honduras , Mexico , Nicaragua , Panama , Peru , Canada , and the United States signed the Convention on the Pan - American Highway , whereby they agreed to speedy construction , by all adequate means .
In 1950 , Mexico became the first Latin American country to complete its portion of the highway .
In practice the concept of the Pan - American Highway is more publicly embraced in Latin American countries than in North America .
Much of the road system in Latin America is explicitly marked as Pan - American ( commonly Vía Panam ) .
COUNTRIES SERVED Section::::Countries served .
The Northern Pan - American Highway travels through 9 countries : * Canada ( unofficial ) * United States ( interstate highway system official ) *
Mexico * Guatemala
* El Salvador * Honduras *
Nicaragua * Costa Rica * Panama
The Southern Pan - American Highway travels through 8 countries :
* Colombia
* Ecuador * Peru
* Chile
*
Argentina Important spurs also lead into 4 countries :
* Bolivia * Brazil * Paraguay * Uruguay NORTHERN SECTION ALASKA AND CANADA Section::::Northern section .
Section::::Alaska and Canada .
The Alaska Highway through Alaska , Yukon and British Columbia is commonly considered a de facto northerly extension of the Pan - American Highway , as well as the Dalton Highway in Alaska .
In Canada , no particular road has been officially designated as the Pan - American Highway .
The National Highway System , which includes but is not limited to the Trans - Canada Highway , is the country 's only official interprovincial highway system .
However , there are several Canadian routes that are a natural extension of several key American highways that reach the Canada – US border .
British Columbia Highway 97 and Highway 2 to Alberta both pick up where the southern end of the Alaska highway leaves off .
Highway 97 becomes U.S. Route 97 at the Canada – US border .
British Columbia Highway 99 provides an alternate route from Highway 97 just north of Cache Creek that runs through Whistler and Vancouver before ending at the Canada – US border at the north end of Interstate 5 in Washington State , the beginning of the official Pan - American route south of British Columbia .
Meanwhile , Alberta Highway 2 runs south and east to Alberta Highway 3 leading into Lethbridge , then south on Alberta Highway 4 to the Canada – US border where it becomes Interstate 15 in Montana , the first official stretch of the Pan - American Highway south of the Alberta route .
CONTIGUOUS 48 STATES OF THE UNITED STATES
Section::::Contiguous 48 states of the United States .
In 1966 , the Federal Highway Administration designated the entire Interstate Highway System part of the Pan - American Highway System , although this has never been reflected in any of the official interstate signage .
Of the many freeways that make up this very comprehensive system , there are several that stand out because of their mainly north - south orientation and their links to the main Mexican route and its spurs as well as to key routes in Canada that link to the Alaska Highway .
These include the following :
* I-5 Runs north from San Diego to Seattle then links indirectly with British Columbia Highway
97 north of the Canada – US border .
A technically direct link between the same interstate and the highway 97 system can be found near Weed , California .
US route 97 runs northeast then north from this junction and becomes BC highway 97 at the border with Canada .
* I-15 links San Diego with Alberta Highway 2 that eventually crosses into British Columbia and ends at the southern terminus of the Alaska Highway .
Interstate 8 provides an east - west link from San Diego to Interstate 10 near Phoenix , Arizona .
The latter continues to Tuscon and links with Interstate 19 that becomes a spur of the Pan - American highway through Mexico at the Nogales border crossing .
*
Interstate 25 runs north from Interstate 10 at Las Cruces , New Mexico to Interstate 90 in Wyoming .
This route has no direct extension into Canada , but links indirectly to Interstate 15 .
Interstate 25 in Albuquerque , New Mexico , was named the Pan - American Freeway , as an extension of highway 45 , the Mexican spur linking El Paso to the original route along highway 85 north of Mexico City .
This portion of I-25 largely follows the historic Camino Real , and thus serves a culturally significant portion of the Pan American system .
Like I-15 , the complete route of Interstate 25 is an official northerly continuation towards Alberta , where Highway 2 provides a direct but unofficial Canadian link to the Alaska Highway .
*
Interstate 35 is a northerly continuation of the original Pan - American highway following Mexican Federal Highway 85 .
It extends from Laredo , Texas to the Canada – United States border north of Duluth , Minnesota with a spur , Interstate 29 , that leads farther west towards Winnipeg , Manitoba .
The section of Interstate 35 in San Antonio , Texas is referred to as the Pan Am Expressway by locals .
I-35 is a northerly continuation of Mexico Highway 85 , the original official Mexican route , ending in Duluth , Minnesota , where Minnesota State Highway 61 continues to the Canada – US border near Thunder Bay , Ontario .
The Trans - Canada Highway provides a link from Winnipeg and Thunder Bay to Alberta and the Alaska Highway , but is not officially part of the Pan - American Highway .
* An additional route only partially complete is Interstate 69 which will eventually run northeasterly from the same Laredo border crossing to the Windsor - Quebec City Corridor in Canada where the route becomes unofficial .
RELATED NORTH AMERICAN HIGHWAYS
Section::::Related North American Highways .
Several North American routes have names that make no direct reference to the Pan - American Highway , in part because some sections follow highways that are not up to full freeway standard
*
The CANAMEX Corridor is designated from Mexico City to the western United States from Arizona to Montana , and continues north into western Canada .
With the lack of any official status for the Pan American Highway in Canada , this is the only official North American highway that runs through Canada , the U.S. , and Mexico to link the Alaska Highway with the Pan - American Highway at Mexico City .
Unlike corresponding Pan American routes in the American southwest , The Canamex Highway bypasses San Diego by using several non - interstate highways to provide a shortcut from I-15 at Las Vegas , Nevada to I-10 at Phoenix Arizona for traffic accessing I-15 from the Nogales border crossing .
*
The CanAm Highway follows Interstate 25 from El Paso to U.S. Route 85 north of Denver , Colorado , then continues into the Canadian province of Saskatchewan , following parts of provincial highways 35 , 39 , 6 , 3 , and 2 in succession before terminating at La Ronge .
This route was first proposed during the 1920s but was never properly promoted nor developed .
A section of the CanAm in southern Saskatchewan has regressed to the point where it is no longer a paved highway .
* The NAFTA Superhighway tag has been unofficially used in connection with Interstate 35 from Laredo , Texas to the Canadian border that downgrades to a non - freeway route ending at Thunder Bay , Ontario .
A spur follows Interstate 29 to the border that also downgrades to a regular highway that extends to Winnipeg , Manitoba .
The NAFTA highway also sometimes unofficially includes Interstate 69 which is mostly complete from the Canada – US border at Port Huron , Michigan , to western Kentucky .
In Canada , Ontario Highway 402 and other freeways in the Windsor - Quebec City Corridor can be considered a northeastward extension of this version of the NAFTA superhighway .
To the southwest , from western Kentucky to the Mexican border , there is currently no single superhighway yet completed .
Pending completion of I-69 , the main highway links to Mexico follow parts of US routes 45 and 51 from Kentucky to western Tennessee , I-155 into Missouri , parts of Interstates 55 and 40 from Missouri to Arkansas , and I-30 to the Texas stretch of
I-35 that continues to the Mexican border at Laredo , Texas .
The incompleted section of I-69 south of Kentucky is expected to eventually continue southwestward to the Texas Gulf Coast .
It will have a spur linking to the original Pan - American route through Mexico to Laredo , and additional branches extending to the Mexican spurs that cross the border at Pharr , Texas , and Brownsville , Texas . MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
The official route of the Pan - American Highway through Mexico ( where it is known as the Inter - American Highway ) starts at Nuevo Laredo , Tamaulipas ( opposite Laredo , Texas ) and goes south to Mexico City along Mexican Federal Highway 85 .
Later branches were built to the border as follows : * Nogales spur – Mexican Federal Highway 15 from Mexico City * El Paso spur – Mexican Federal Highway 45 from Highway 85 north of Mexico City to Ciudad Juárez , Chihuahua )
* Eagle Pass spur – unknown , possibly Mexican Federal Highway 57 from Mexico City to Piedras Negras ,
Coahuila * Pharr spur – Mexican Federal Highway 40 from Monterrey to Reynosa , Tamaulipas * Brownsville spur – Mexican Federal Highway 101 from Ciudad Victoria to Matamoros ,
Tamaulipas From Mexico City to the border with Guatemala , the highway follows Mexican Federal Highway 190 .
CENTRAL AMERICA Section::::Central America .
The Pan - American ( or Inter - American ) highway passes through the Central American countries with the highway designation of
CA-1 ( Central American Highway 1 ) .
In Guatemala , it passes through 10 departments , including The Department Of Guatemala , where it passes through Guatemala City .
In El Salvador , it passes through the cities of Santa Ana , Santa Tecla , Antiguo Cuscatlán , San Salvador , San Martín , San Miguel , and crosses the border into Honduras at Amatillo .
From Honduras , it passes into Nicaragua , passing through the Nicaraguan cities of Somoto , Estelí , Sebaco , Managua , Jinotepe , and Rivas before entering Costa Rica at Peñas Blancas .
In Costa Rica , it passes through Liberia , San José , Cartago , Pérez Zeledón , Palmares , Neily , before crossing into Panama at Paso Canoas .
In Panama , it crosses the Panama Canal via the Centennial Bridge , and ends at Yaviza , at the edge of the Darién Gap .
The road had formerly ended at Cañita , Panama , north of its current end .
United States government funding was particularly significant to complete the high - level Bridge of the Americas over the Panama Canal , during the years when the canal was administered by the United States .
Belize was supposedly included in the route at one time , after it switched to driving on the right .
Prior to independence , as British Honduras , it was the only Central American country to drive on the left side of the road .
DARIÉN GAP Section::::Darién Gap .
The Pan - American Highway is interrupted between Panama and Colombia by a stretch of marshland known as the Darién Gap .
The highway terminates at Turbo , Colombia and Yaviza , Panama .
Because of swamps , marshes , and rivers , construction would be very expensive .
Efforts have been made for decades to eliminate the gap in the Pan - American highway , but have been controversial .
Planning began in 1971 with the help of United States funding , but this was halted in 1974 after concerns raised by environmentalists .
Another effort to build the road began in 1992 , but by 1994 a United Nations agency reported that the road , and the subsequent development , would cause extensive environmental damage .
There is evidence that the Darién Gap has prevented the spread of diseased cattle into Central and Northern America , which have not seen foot - and - mouth disease since 1954 , and since at least the 1970s this has been a substantial factor in preventing a road link through the Darién Gap .
The Embera - Wounaan and Kuna have also expressed concern that the road could bring about the potential erosion of their cultures .
The Darién Gap has challenged adventurers for many years .
A 1962 expedition with Chevrolet Corvair rear - engine cars failed .
A 1971 - 72 British expedition from Alaska to Argentina attempted to transit the Gap with two standard production Range Rovers , supported by a team of Land Rovers .
They barely succeeded in thrashing a passage through the extreme terrain .
In 1979 a team led by Mark Smith drove standard production CJ7-model Jeeps from South to North , traversing the Gap - with difficulty .
In June 1984 , Loren and Patty Upton took 741 days slogging , winching , chopping and digging their way through the inhospitable jungles of the Darién Gap .
One proposed option to bridge the gap is a short ferry link from Colombia to a new ferry port in Panama , with an extension of the existing Panama highway that would complete the highway without violating these environmental concerns .
SOUTHERN SECTION COLOMBIA AND VENEZUELA
Section::::Southern section .
Section::::Colombia and Venezuela .
The southern part of the highway begins in northwestern Colombia , from where it follows Colombia Highway 62 to Medellín .
At Medellín , Colombia Highway 56 leads to Bogotá , but Colombia Highway 25 turns south for a more direct route .
Colombia Highway 72 is routed southwest from Bogotá to join Highway 25 at Murillo .
Highway 25 continues all the way to the border with Ecuador .
Another route , known as the Simón Bolívar Highway , runs from Bogotá ( Colombia ) to Guiria ( Venezuela ) .
It begins by using Colombia Highway 71 all the way to the border with Venezuela .
From there it uses Venezuela Highway 1 to Caracas and Venezuela Highway 9 to its end at Guiria .
ECUADOR , PERU , CHILE , ARGENTINA AND PARAGUAY Section::::Ecuador , Peru , Chile , Argentina and Paraguay .
Ecuador Highway 35 runs the whole length of that country .
Peru Highway 1 carries the Pan - American Highway all the way through Peru to the border with Chile .
In Chile , the highway follows Chile Route 5 south to a point north of Santiago ( Llaillay ) , where the highway splits into two parts , one of which goes through Chilean territory to Puerto Montt , where it splits again , to Quellón on Chiloé Island , and to its continuation as the Carretera Austral .
The other part goes east along Chile Route 60 , which becomes Argentina National Route 7 at the Argentinian border and continues to Buenos Aires , the end of the main highway .
The highway network also continues south of Buenos Aires along Argentina National Route 3 towards the city of Ushuaia in Tierra del Fuego .
Another branch , from Buenos Aires to Asunción in Paraguay , heads out of Buenos Aires on Argentina National Route 9 .
It switches to Argentina National Route 11 at Rosario , which crosses the border with Paraguay right at Asunción .
Other branches probably exist across the center of South America .
BRAZIL AND URUGUAY Section::::Brazil and Uruguay .
A continuation of the Pan - American Highway to the Brazilian cities of São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro uses a ferry from Buenos Aires to Colonia in Uruguay and Uruguay Highway 1 to Montevideo .
Uruguay Highway 9 and Brazil Highway
471 route to near Pelotas , from where Brazil Highway 116 leads to Brazilian main cities .
GUYANA , SURINAME AND FRENCH
GUYANA
Section::::Guyana , Suriname and French Guyana .
The highway does not have official segments to Belize , Guyana , Suriname and French Guiana , nor to any of the island nations in the Americas .
However , highways from Venezuela link to Brazilian Trans - Amazonian highway that provides a southwest entrance to Guyana , route to the coast , and follow a coastal route through Suriname to French Guiana .
WEST INDIES SECTION Section::::West Indies section .
Plans have been discussed for including the West Indies in the Pan American Highway system .
According to these , a system of ferries would be established to connect terminal points of the highway .
Travelers would then be able to ferry from Key West to Havana , drive to the eastern tip of Cuba , ferry to Haiti , drive through Haiti and the Dominican Republic , and ferry again to Puerto Rico .
Included in this system would also be a ferry from the western tip of Cuba to the Yucatán Peninsula .
Mexico has already surveyed a route which will run across the Yucatán , Campeche , and Chiapas to San Cristobal de Las Casas , on the Pan American Highway .
ART AND CULTURE Section::::Art and culture .
Travel writer Tim Cahill wrote a book , Road Fever , about his record - setting 24-day drive from Ushuaia in the Argentine province of Tierra del Fuego to Prudhoe Bay in the U.S. state of Alaska with professional long - distance driver Garry Sowerby , much of their route following the Pan - American Highway .
In the British motoring show Top Gear , the presenters drove on a section of the road in their off - road vehicles in the Bolivian Special .
In 2003 , Kevin Sanders , a long - distance rider , broke the Guinness World Record for the fastest traversal of the highway by motorcycle in 34 days .
In 2018 , a British cyclist named Dean Stott who had planned on riding the length of the Americas in 110 days to set a new Guinness World Record ended up completing the 14,000-mile journey in just under 100 days after learning that he and his wife had been invited to the royal wedding , revealing that he would have missed the event
had he stuck to his original schedule .
YouTuber Ben Jamin ( and later with his girlfriend Leah Airey ) documented their five year journey ( 2011 - 2016 ) while traveling from Chile to Alaska on their YouTube channel Kombi Life .
Born and raised in the British Isle of Jersey , Jamin bought and converted a 1992 Volkswagen Kombi in Southern Chile for the trip .
Series highlights include mechanical issues , their dog named Alaska , relationships with fellow travelers , and travel vlogs of the various countries .
Jamin made international news when he was denied a visa to reenter Alaska to finish their multi - year journey .
He was eventually allowed back into the United States on a B visa , and the couple finished their trip .
PHOTO GALLERY
SEE ALSO * CANAMEX Corridor * NAFTA superhighway
* Continental 1 * Trans - Siberian Highway
* Buenos Aires REFERENCES
SOURCES
* Plan Federal Highway System , New York Times
May 15 , 1932 page
XX7
* Reported from the Motor World , New York Times January 26 , 1936 page XX6
*
Hemisphere Road is Nearer Reality , New York Times January 7 , 1953 page
58 * 1997–98 AAA Caribbean , Central America and South America map * Popular Mechanics , March 1943 , Longest Road
In The World EXTERNAL LINKS