MINOR ( LAW )
In law , a minor is a person under a certain age , usually the age of majority , which legally demarcates childhood from adulthood .
The age of majority depends upon jurisdiction and application , but it is generally 18 .
Minor may also be used in contexts that are unconnected to the overall age of majority .
For example , the drinking age in the United States is usually 21 , and younger people are sometimes called minors in the context of alcohol law , even if they are at least 18 .
The term underage often refers to those under the age of majority , but it may also refer to persons under a certain age limit , such as the drinking age , smoking age , age of consent , marriageable age , driving age , voting age , etc .
Such age limits are often different from the age of majority .
The concept of minor is not sharply defined in most jurisdictions .
The ages of criminal responsibility and consent , the age at which school attendance is no longer compulsory , the age at which legally binding contracts can be entered into , and so on may be different from one another .
In many countries , including Australia , India , Brazil , Croatia , and Colombia , a minor is defined as a person under the age of 18 .
In the United States , where the age of majority is set by the individual states , minor usually refers to someone under the age of 18 but can , in some states , be used in certain areas ( such as casino gambling , handgun ownership and the consuming of alcohol ) to define someone under the age of 21 .
In the criminal justice system in some places , " minor " is not entirely consistent , as a minor may be tried and punished for a crime either as a " juvenile " or , usually only for " extremely serious crimes " such as murder , as an " adult " .
In Japan , Taiwan , and Thailand , a minor is a person under 20 years of age .
In New Zealand law , the age of majority is 20 years of age as well , but most of the rights of adulthood are assumed at lower ages : for example , entering contracts and having a will are allowed at 15 .
INTERNATIONAL
CANADA Section::::International .
Section::::Canada .
For all provincial laws ( such as alcohol and tobacco regulation ) , the provincial and territorial governments have the power to set the age of majority in their respective province or territory , and the age varies across Canada .
Alberta , Manitoba , Ontario , Quebec , Saskatchewan , and Prince Edward Island have the age of majority set at 18 , while in British Columbia , Yukon , Northwest Territories , Nunavut , Newfoundland , Nova Scotia , and New Brunswick the age of majority is 19 .
In Saskatchewan , the legal gaming age and the legal drinking age are both 19 .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
In Italy , law nr .
39 of March 8 , 1975 , states that a minor is a person under the age of 18 .
Citizens under the age of 18 may not vote ( to vote for senators , 25 ) , be elected , obtain a driving license for automobiles or issue or sign legal instruments .
Crimes committed in Italy by minors are tried in a juvenile court .
MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
In all 31 states , a minor is referred to as someone under the age of 18 .
Minors aged 16 or 17 who are charged with crimes could sometimes be treated as an adult .
INDIA Section::::India .
In all 29 states and 7 union territories , a minor is referred to as someone under the age of 18 .
In rare cases minors aged 16 or 17 who are .. charged with extremely heinous crimes could sometimes be treated as an adult .
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
The Civil and Commercial Code of the Kingdom of Thailand does not define the term " minor " ; however , sections 19 and 20 read as follows : * Section 19 – A person , on completion of 20 years of age ceases to be a minor and become sui juris
* Section 20 – A minor becomes sui juris upon marriage , provided that the marriage is made in accordance with the provisions of Section 1448 Hence , a minor in Thailand refers to any person under the age of 20 , unless they are married .
A minor is restricted from doing juristic acts — for example , sign contracts .
When a minor wishes to do a juristic act , he has to obtain the consent from his legal representative , usually ( but not always ) the parents and otherwise the act is voidable .
The exceptions are acts by which a minor merely acquires a right or is freed from a duty , acts that are strictly personal , and acts that are suitable to the person 's condition in life and are required for their reasonable needs .
A minor can make a will at the age of fifteen .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In England and Wales and in Northern Ireland a minor is a person under the age of 18 ; this is also true for Scotland .
The age of criminal responsibility in England and Wales and in Northern Ireland is 10 ; and 12 in Scotland , formerly 8 , which was the lowest age in Europe .
In England and Wales , cases of minors breaking the law are often dealt with by the Youth Offending Team .
If they are incarcerated , they are sent to a Young Offender Institution .
Things that persons under 18 are prohibited from doing include sitting on a jury , voting , standing as a candidate , buying or renting films with an 18 certificate or R18 certificate or seeing them in a cinema , being depicted in pornographic materials , suing without a litigant friend , being civilly liable , accessing adoption records and purchasing alcohol , tobacco products , knives and fireworks .
The rules on minimum age for sale of these products are frequently broken so in practice drinking and smoking takes place before the age of majority ; however many UK shops are tightening restrictions on them by asking for identifying documentation from potentially underage customers .
Driving certain large vehicles , acting as personal license holder for licensed premises , and adopting a child are only permitted after the age of 21 .
The minimum age to drive a HGV1 vehicle was reduced to 18 .
However , certain vehicles , e.g. , steamrollers , require that someone be 21 years of age to obtain an operating license .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States as of 1995 , minor is generally legally defined as a person under the age of 18 .
Although in the context of alcohol or gambling laws , people under the age of 21 may also sometimes be referred to as " minors " .
However , not all minors are considered " juveniles " in terms of criminal responsibility .
As is frequently the case in the United States , the laws vary widely by state .
Under this distinction , those considered juveniles are usually ( but not always ) tried in juvenile court , and they may be afforded other special protections .
For example , in some states a parent or guardian must be present during police questioning , or their names may be kept confidential when they are accused of a crime .
For many crimes ( especially more violent crimes ) , the age at which a minor may be tried as an adult is variable below the age of 18 or ( less often ) below 16 .
For example , in Kentucky , the lowest age at which a juvenile may be tried as an adult , no matter how heinous the crime , is 14 .
The death penalty for those who have committed a crime while under the age of 18 was discontinued by the U.S. Supreme Court case Roper v. Simmons in 2005 .
The court 's 5–4 decision was written by Justice Kennedy and joined by Justices Ginsburg , Stevens , Breyer , and Souter , and cited international law , child developmental science , and many other factors in reaching its conclusion .
The twenty - sixth amendment to the U.S. Constitution , ratified in 1971 , granted all citizens the right to vote in every state , in every election , from the age of 18 .
The U.S. Department of Defense took the position that they would not consider " enemy combatants " held in extrajudicial detention in the Guantanamo Bay detainment camps minors unless they were less than sixteen years old .
In any event , they only separated three of more than a dozen detainees under 16 from the adult prison population .
Several dozen detainees between sixteen and eighteen were detained with the adult prison population .
Now those under 18 are kept separate , in line with the age of majority and world expectations .
Some states , including Florida , have passed laws that allow a person accused of an extremely heinous crime , such as murder , to be tried as an adult , regardless of age .
These laws have been challenged by the American Civil Liberties Union .
An estimated 250,000 youth are tried , sentenced , or incarcerated as adults every year across the United States .
EMANCIPATION OF MINORS Section::::Emancipation of minors .
Emancipation of minors is a legal mechanism by which a minor is no longer under the control of their parents or guardians , and is given the legal rights associated with adults .
Depending on country , emancipation may happen in different manners : through marriage , attaining economic self - sufficiency , obtaining an educational degree or diploma , or participating in a form of military service .
In the United States , all states have some form of emancipation of minors .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Legal Definition of Juvenile - Australia