HAZELNUT
The hazelnut is the nut of the hazel and therefore includes any of the nuts deriving from species of the genus Corylus , especially the nuts of the species Corylus avellana .
It also is known as cobnut or filbert nut according to species .
A cob is roughly spherical to oval , about long and in diameter , with an outer fibrous husk surrounding a smooth shell .
A filbert is more elongated , being about twice as long as its diameter .
The nut falls out of the husk when ripe , about 7 to 8 months after pollination .
The kernel of the seed is edible and used raw or roasted , or ground into a paste .
The seed has a thin , dark brown skin , which sometimes is removed before cooking .
Hazelnuts are used in confectionery to make praline , and also used in combination with chocolate for chocolate truffles and products such as Nutella and Frangelico liqueur .
Hazelnut oil , pressed from hazelnuts , is strongly flavoured and used as a cooking oil .
Turkey is the world 's largest producer of hazelnuts .
Hazelnuts are rich in protein , monounsaturated fat , vitamin E , manganese , and numerous other essential nutrients ( nutrition table below ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1995 , evidence of large - scale Mesolithic nut processing , some 8,000 years old , was found in a midden pit on the island of Colonsay in Scotland .
The evidence consists of a large , shallow pit full of the remains of hundreds of thousands of burned hazelnut shells .
Hazelnuts have been found on other Mesolithic sites , but rarely in such quantities or concentrated in one pit .
The nuts were radiocarbon dated to 7720+/-110BP , which calibrates to circa 6000 BC .
Similar sites in Britain are known only at Farnham in Surrey and Cass ny Hawin on the Isle of Man .
This discovery gives an insight into communal activity and planning in the period .
The nuts were harvested in a single year , and pollen analysis suggests the hazel trees were all cut down at the same time .
The scale of the activity and the lack of large game on the island , suggest the possibility that Colonsay contained a community with a largely vegetarian diet for the time they spent on the island .
The pit was originally on a beach close to the shore , and was associated with two smaller , stone - lined pits whose function remains obscure , a hearth , and a second cluster of pits .
The traditional method to increase nut production is called ' brutting ' , which involves prompting more of the trees ' energy to go into flower bud production , by snapping , but not breaking off , the tips of the new year shoots ' six or seven leaf groups from where they join with the trunk or branch , at the end of the growing season .
The traditional term for an area of cultivated hazelnuts is a plat .
EDIBLE USES Section::::Edible uses .
Ferrero SpA , the maker of Nutella and Ferrero Rocher , uses 25 % of the global supply of hazelnuts .
Hazelnuts are used in confections to make pralines , chocolate truffles , and hazelnut paste products .
In Austria , hazelnut paste is an ingredient for making tortes , such as Viennese hazelnut torte .
In Kiev cake , hazelnut flour is used to flavor its meringue body , and crushed hazelnuts are sprinkled over its sides .
Dacquoise , a French dessert cake , often contains a layer of hazelnut meringue .
Hazelnuts are used in Turkish cuisine and Georgian cuisine ; the snack churchkhela and sauce satsivi are used , often with walnuts .
The nuts may be eaten fresh or dried , having different flavors . !
colspan=2 Production of hazelnuts in 2016 !
CountryProduction
thousands of tonnes align = center 420.0 align = center
120.6 align = center 34.5 align = center
33.9 align = center 29.5 World 743.5 CULTIVARS Section::::Cultivars .
The many cultivars of the hazel include ' Atababa ' , ' Barcelona ' , ' Butler ' , ' Casina ' , ' Clark ' , ' Cosford ' , ' Daviana ' , ' Delle Langhe ' , ' England ' , ' Ennis ' , ' Fillbert ' , ' Halls Giant ' , ' Jemtegaard ' , ' Kent Cob ' , ' Lewis ' , ' Tokolyi ' , ' Tonda Gentile ' , ' Tonda di Giffoni ' , ' Tonda Romana ' , ' Wanliss Pride ' , and ' Willamette ' .
Some of these are grown for specific qualities of the nut , including large nut size , or early or late fruiting , whereas others are grown as pollinators .
The majority of commercial hazelnuts are propagated from root sprouts .
Some cultivars are of hybrid origin between common hazel and filbert .
HARVESTING
Section::::Harvesting .
Hazelnuts are harvested annually in mid - autumn .
As autumn comes to a close , the trees drop their nuts and leaves .
Most commercial growers wait for the nuts to drop on their own , rather than using equipment to shake them from the tree .
The harvesting of hazelnuts is performed either by hand or , by manual or mechanical raking of fallen nuts .
Four primary pieces of equipment are used in commercial harvesting : the sweeper , the harvester , the nut cart , and the forklift .
The sweeper moves the nuts into the center of the rows , the harvester lifts and separates the nuts from any debris ( i.e. twigs and leaves ) , the nut cart holds the nuts picked up by the harvester , and the forklift brings a tote to offload the nuts from the nut cart and then , stacks the totes to be shipped to the processor ( nut dryer ) .
The sweeper is a low - to - the - ground machine that makes two passes in each tree row .
It has a belt attached to the front that rotates to sweep leaves , nuts , and small twigs from left to right , depositing the material in the center of the row as it drives forward .
On the rear of the sweeper is a powerful blower to blow material left into the adjacent row with air speeds up to .
Careful grooming during the year and patient blowing at harvest may eliminate the need for hand raking around the trunk of the tree , where nuts may accumulate .
The sweeper prepares a single center row of nuts narrow enough for the harvesting tractor to drive over without driving on the center row .
It is best to sweep only a few rows ahead of the harvesters at any given time , to prevent the tractor that drives the harvester from crushing the nuts that may still be falling from the trees .
Hazelnut orchards may be harvested up to three times during the harvest season , depending on the quantity of nuts in the trees and the rate of nut drop as a result of weather .
The harvester is a slow - moving machine pushed by a tractor , which lifts the material off the ground and separates the nuts from the leaves , empty husks , and twigs .
As the harvester drives over the rows , a rotating cylinder with hundreds of tines , rakes the material onto a belt .
The belt takes the material over a blower and under a powerful vacuum that sucks any lightweight soil and leaves from the nuts , and discharges them into the orchard .
The remaining nuts are conveyed into a nut cart that is pulled behind the harvester .
Once a tote is filled with nuts , the forklift hauls away the full totes and bring empty ones back to the harvester to maximize the harvester 's time .
Two different timing strategies are used for collecting the fallen nuts .
The first is to harvest early , when about half of the nuts have fallen .
With less material on the ground , the harvester can work faster with less chance of a breakdown .
The second option is to wait for all the nuts to fall before harvesting .
Although the first option is considered the better of the two , two or three passes do take more time to complete than one .
Weather also must be a consideration .
Rain inhibits harvest and should a farmer wait for all the nuts to fall after a rainy season , it becomes much more difficult to harvest .
Pickup also varies with how many acres are being farmed as well as the number of sweepers , harvesters , nut carts , and forklifts available .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In 2016 , world production of hazelnuts ( in shells ) was 743,455 tonnes , a 20 % decrease from 2015 .
Turkey produced 57 % of the world total , followed by Italy , the United States , Azerbaijan and Georgia ( table ) .
In the United States , Oregon accounted for 99 % of the nation 's production in 2014 , having a crop value of $ 129 million that is purchased mainly by the snack food industry .
NUTRIENTS
Section::::Nutrients .
In a 100-gram reference amount , raw hazelnuts supply and are a rich source ( 20 % or more of the Daily Value , DV ) of numerous essential nutrients ( see table ) .
Particularly in high amounts are protein , dietary fiber , vitamin E , thiamin , phosphorus , manganese , and magnesium , all exceeding 30 % DV ( table ) .
Several B vitamins have appreciable content .
In lesser , but still significant amounts ( moderate content , 10 - 19 % DV ) , are vitamin K , calcium , zinc , and potassium ( table ) .
Hazelnuts are a significant source of total fat , accounting for 93 % DV in a 100-gram amount .
The fat components are monounsaturated fat as oleic acid ( 75 % of total ) , polyunsaturated fat mainly as linoleic acid ( 13 % of total ) , and saturated fat , mainly as palmitic acid and stearic acid ( together , 7 % of total ) .
SEE ALSO
* Filbertone , the principal flavor compound of hazelnuts
* Nutella * List of hazelnut diseases
*
The Hazel - nut Child * Frangelico REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS