KING LOUIE King Louie is a fictional character introduced in Walt Disney 's 1967 animated musical film , The Jungle Book .
Unlike the majority of the adapted characters in the film , Louie was not featured in Rudyard Kipling 's original works .
King Louie was portrayed as an orangutan who was the leader of the other jungle primates , and who attempted to gain knowledge of fire from Mowgli , in order to become more human .
King Louie was voiced by Louis Prima in the original 1967 film .
Initially , the filmmakers considered Louis Armstrong for the role , but to avoid the likely controversy that would result from casting a black person to voice an ape , they instead chose Prima , a white singer .
Christopher Walken voiced King Louie in the 2016 live - action / CGI The Jungle Book film .
CONCEPTION AND CREATION Section::::Conception and creation .
Although the Disney adaptation is based on the Kipling stories , the character King Louie does not appear in Rudyard Kipling 's original book , as orangutans , the species as which he is portrayed , are not native to India in real life .
It is also stated by Kipling in the original that the Bandar - log , or monkeys over which King Louie rules , have no effective leadership , let alone a king .
In the book , Mowgli is abducted by a band of nameless and leaderless bandar - log monkeys , but the rest of the scene plays out very differently from Disney 's version .
While no orangutans ever appeared in the Kipling 's original Jungle Book , he did mention an orangutan in his unrelated short story .
Bill Peet 's original story for the film did not feature King Louie , but did feature a larger monkey without a tail , who was perhaps meant to be their king .
Peet left the Disney company due to a dispute he had with Walt Disney regarding the contents of his script , so his ultimate vision for the king of the Bandar - log remains unknown .
Development of the story continued following Peet 's departure , with his darker story giving way to a new emphasis on lightheartedness and jazzy tunes .
It was in this company milieu that King Louie eventually came into being , given life through the voice and personality of popular performer Louis Prima .
Personality was also given to Louie by Milt Kahl , Frank Thomas , and John Lounsbery , three of Disney 's Nine Old Men who animated the character .
Kahl animated Louie 's interaction with Mowgli , Thomas his solo song and dance portions , while Lounsbery animated his memorable scat duet with a disguised Baloo .
OTHER APPEARANCES
Section::::Other appearances .
Famed Italian - American and New Orleans native Louis Prima portrayed King Louie in the film .
Louis Prima considered playing King Louie as one of the highlights of his career and felt he had become " immortal " thanks to Walt Disney and the entire studio .
TALESPIN
Section::::TaleSpin .
In the Disney animated television series TaleSpin , Louie ( voiced by Jim Cummings ) is a fun - loving orangutan who wears a Hawaiian shirt , a straw hat , and a lei .
He owns an island nightclub , restaurant and hotel called " Louie 's Place " , located near but outside the protection of the city of Cape Suzette .
It also serves as a refueling station / pit stop area for pilots .
Louie is Baloo 's best friend ( unlike in The Jungle Book , but like in the later Jungle Cubs ) but sometimes can be competitive with him when it comes to women , treasure - hunting and , on occasion , in business and monetary matters .
His hold on the island is somewhat tenuous , though through his own ingenuity and the aid of his friends he has managed to avoid losing it ( in the episode " Louie 's Last Stand " ) .
JUNGLE CUBS Section::::Jungle Cubs .
In the Disney animated television series Jungle Cubs , Louie ( voiced by Jason Marsden in Season 1 , and Cree Summer in Season 2 ) is a juvenile orangutan and Baloo 's best friend .
He is very physically active , spending a great deal of his time in trees and eating bananas .
Prince Louie ( as he is referred to in the show ) wants to become king of the jungle one day , and when any man - made objects turn up he immediately shows great interest .
1994 LIVE - ACTION FILM Section::::1994 live - action film .
A slightly different version of the character appeared in Disney 's 1994 live - action film .
Once again , he is an orangutan ( portrayed by a trained Bornean orangutan named Lowell ) , and is the ' leader ' of a group of monkeys that make their home in an abandoned human city .
His name arises in this version from the vast wealth that humans left behind in the city , and in particular to his habit of wearing a crown similar in appearance to that worn by the King of France , Louis XIV .
Kaa appeared to serve him , being summoned with a clap of his hands , Louie using Kaa to ward off or even kill intruders , the latter for his own amusement .
At first , he acts a rival to Mowgli , but later warms up to him after seeing him defeat Kaa .
Louie would later on appear during the battle between Mowgli and Captain William Boone ( Cary Elwes ) , as he is seen cheering for Mowgli .
After Mowgli defeats Boone , Louie happily applauds Mowgli for a job well done before summoning Kaa , who then kills Boone in the moat .
2016
LIVE - ACTION FILM Section::::2016 live - action film .
Christopher Walken voiced King Louie in Disney 's 2016 live - action film .
He is portrayed as a Gigantopithecus , an extinct species of great ape , because orangutans themselves are not native to India .
In an interview regarding the character , Christopher Walken described King Louie as standing around 12 feet tall , and " as charming as he is intimidating when he wants to be " .
In the film , Louie offers Mowgli protection from Shere Khan in exchange for the secret of making fire , which he and his fellow Bandar Log plan to use to take over the jungle .
While accommodating and friendly at first , Louie quickly becomes spiteful and impatient , refusing to believe Mowgli 's protests that he does not know how to make fire .
He is briefly distracted by the appearance of Baloo , allowing Mowgli to be rescued by Bagheera .
However , they are spotted by one of Louie 's pig - tailed macaque servants , and Louie orders the trio to be captured .
Emerging from the temple , Louie finds his Bandar Log too preoccupied fighting Bagheera and Baloo to capture Mowgli , so he goes after the Man - Cub himself .
Blocking Mowgli 's escape , Louie tries to coerce him into staying whilst antagonizing him with the revelation of Akela 's death .
Mowgli refuses to believe this , infuriating Louie into chasing him through the temple .
During his rampage , he destroys several of the pillars supporting the temple , causing it to collapse over him .
During the credits , Louie is shown emerging from the rubble , and performs " I Wan'na
Be like You " with slightly modified lyrics .
OTHER DISNEY MEDIA * Q.T. , an orangutan who looks very similar to King Louie , is one of the main characters in Dumbo 's Circus .
* King Louie does not appear in The Jungle Book 2 because of a legal dispute with Louis Prima 's widow Gia Maione ( though a shadow puppet of him can be seen at the very beginning of the movie , and Baloo implies that he left the jungle ) .
* Louie 's very identical twin brother Larry appeared in an episode of House of Mouse .
Like in The Jungle Book 2 , a dispute with Gia Maione at the last minute stopped the crew from using Louie as they thought to , leading to the last - minute creation of Larry instead .
* Louie appears as a meetable character at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts .
NON - DISNEY WORKS Section::::Non - Disney works .
King Louie appears in the Fables comic series published by Vertigo Comics and he is only referred to as King .
He is one of the revolutionaries who wish to overthrow the Fabletown government out of resentment at the apparent second - class status of Fables .
Due to his peripheral involvement , he is given a sentence of hard labor --- twenty years , reduced to five years conditional on good behavior .
In Fables , Louie is wrongly described as a " Kipling " character ; on his official forums , Fables author Bill Willingham cited Louie 's appearance in Fables as " a very good example on why it 's best to go back to the source material before one embarks on a major story , rather than rely on often faulty memory of which characters were original canon and which were n't . " RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The characterization of King Louie has frequently been cited as an example of racial stereotyping in Disney films .
However , in his 2004 book The Gospel
According to Disney , Mark Pinsky asserts that a child in the current environment ( as opposed to in the late 1960s ) would not discern any racial dimension to the portrayal .
Pinsky also relates Orlando Sentinel 's film critic Jay Bogar 's assertion that " the primates could be perceived as representing African Americans in a time of turmoil , but [ that Bogar ] saw no racism in the portrayal . " REFERENCES