DAUCUS CAROTA Daucus carota , whose common names include wild carrot , bird 's nest , bishop 's lace , and Queen Anne 's lace ( North America ) , is a white , flowering plant in the family Apiaceae , native to temperate regions of Europe and southwest Asia , and naturalized to North America and Australia .
Domesticated carrots are cultivars of a subspecies , Daucus carota subsp .
sativus .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The wild carrot is a herbaceous , somewhat variable biennial plant that grows between tall , and is roughly hairy , with a stiff , solid stem .
The leaves are tripinnate , finely divided and lacy , and overall triangular in shape .
The leaves are bristly and alternate in a pinnate pattern that separates into thin segments .
The flowers are small and dull white , clustered in flat , dense umbels .
The umbels are terminal and approximately wide .
They may be pink in bud and may have a reddish or purple flower in the centre of the umbel .
The lower bracts are three - forked or pinnate , which distinguishes the plant from other white - flowered umbellifers .
As the seeds develop , the umbel curls up at the edges , becomes more congested , and develops a concave surface .
The fruits are oval and flattened , with short styles and hooked spines .
The fruit is small , dry and bumpy with protective hairs surrounding it .
The fruit of Daucus carota has two mericarp , or bicarpellate .
The endosperm of the fruit grows before the embryo .
The dried umbels detach from the plant , becoming tumbleweeds .
The function of the tiny red flower , coloured by anthocyanin , is to attract insects .
Wild carrot blooms in summer and fall .
It thrives best in sun to partial shade .
Daucus carota is commonly found along roadsides and in unused fields .
Similar in appearance to the deadly poison hemlock , D.carota is distinguished by a mix of tripinnate leaves , fine hairs on its solid green stems and on its leaves , a root that smells like carrots , and occasionally a single dark red flower in the center of the umbel .
USES Section::::Uses .
Like the cultivated carrot , the D. carota root is edible while young , but it quickly becomes too woody to consume .
The flowers are sometimes battered and fried .
The leaves are also edible except in large quantities .
Extra caution should be used when collecting D. carota because it bears a close resemblance to poison hemlock .
In addition , the leaves of the wild carrot may cause phytophotodermatitis , so caution should also be used when handling the plant .
It has been used as a method of contraception and an abortifacient for centuries .
If used as a dyestuff , the flowers give a creamy , off - white color .
D. carota , when freshly cut , will draw or change color depending on the color of the water in which it is held .
This effect is only visible on the " head " or flower of the plant .
Carnations also exhibit this effect .
This occurrence is a popular science demonstration in primary grade school .
BENEFICIAL WEED
Section::::Beneficial weed .
This beneficial weed can be used as a companion plant to crops .
Like most members of the umbellifer family , it attracts wasps to its small flowers in its native land ; however , where it has been introduced , it attracts very few wasps .
In northeast Wisconsin , when introduced with blueberries it did succeed in attracting butterflies and wasps .
This species is also documented to boost tomato plant production when kept nearby , and it can provide a microclimate of cooler , moister air for lettuce , when intercropped with it .
However , the states of Iowa , Ohio , Michigan and Washington have listed it as a noxious weed , and it is considered a serious pest in pastures .
It persists in the soil seed bank for two to five years .
TASTE Section::::Taste .
Several different factors can cause the root of a carrot to have abnormal metabolites ( notably 6-methoxymellin )
that can cause a bitter taste in the roots .
For example , carrots have a more bitter taste when grown in the presence of apples .
Also , ethylene can easily produce stress , causing an abnormal , bitter taste .
QUEEN ANNE 'S
LACE
Section::::Queen Anne 's lace .
D. carota was introduced and naturalized in North America , where it is often known as Queen Anne 's lace .
Both Anne , Queen of Great Britain , and her great grandmother , Anne of Denmark , are taken to be the Queen Anne for which the plant is named .
It is so called because the flower resembles lace , prominent in fine clothing of the day ; the red flower in the center is thought to represent a blood droplet where Queen Anne pricked herself with a needle when she was making the lace .
HISTORY THROUGH ARTWORK Section::::History through artwork .
The history of Daucus carota and its cultivation in different parts of the world can be traced back through historical texts and artwork .
Paintings from the 16th and 17th century , for example , that are of maids in a market or farmers ' most recent crops can provide information on carrots ' history .
Studying such paintings shows that yellow or red roots were cultivated in Turkey , North Africa , and Spain .
Orange roots were cultivated in 17th century Netherlands .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The carrot was first officially described by Carl Linnaeus in his 1753 work Species Plantarum .
In 2016 an international team has sequenced the full genome of Daucus carota .
SUBSPECIES Section::::Subspecies .
" As far as known cultivated forms have only been derived from the species Daucus carota L. Classification of the wild forms of this species is difficult because of a more or less continuous variation in the material .
But THELLUNG ( 20 ) classifies them in two groups , eucarota and gummiferi , each consisting of five main types ( subspecies ) .
Plants of the group eucarota are mostly annuals or biennials ; this group comprises the subspecies maritimus , carota , maior , sativus ( cultivated carrot ) , and maximus .
Plants of the group gummiferi are often perennials , but they die after flowering once ; this group includes the subspecies commutatis , hispanicus , fontanesii , bocconei and gummifer .
Daucus carota subsp .
carota is the most common wild carrot of Europe and S. W. Asia . "
Both domestic and wild carrot are from the same species , Daucus carota
L. There are several subspecies of Daucus carota that have evolved to different climates and atmospheres .
Two examples of these subspecies are specifically from the Netherlands .
D. carota subsp .
sativus has roots that can be a wide range of colors .
It has a thicker root and sweeter taste .
The whorl of barbs above the spine on the vallecular ridges of the mericarp of D. carota subsp .
sativus mature very well .
D. carota subsp .
carota has white roots that do not vary in color and , unlike D. carota subsp .
sativus , have a thin root , bitter taste and are not edible .
The middle umbellet of D. carota subsp .
carota is not well developed ( unlike in D. carota subsp .
sativus ) and the color of the flower can vary from red to deep purple .
TOXICITY Section::::Toxicity .
" Daucus [ carota ] has been reported to contain acetone , asarone , choline , ethanol , formic acid , HCN , isobutyric acid , limonene , malic acid , maltose , oxalic acid , palmitic acid , pyrrolidine , and quinic acid .
" The amount of toxin overall is small , though it has been known to cause a slight intoxication to grazing large mammals , like cattle and horses , when ingested .
Skin contact with the foliage of Daucus carota , especially wet foliage , can cause skin irritation .
" Sensitized photosensitive persons may get an exact reproduction of the leaf on the skin by placing the leaf on the skin for a while , followed by exposure to sunshine . "
Contact with the cell sap of Queen Anne 's lace ( Daucus carota ) can cause skin irritation and blistering .
CAROTOXIN Section::::Carotoxin .
The compound carotoxin is naturally found in Daucus carota .
Lab tests show the compound to be toxic to mice and the water flea Daphnia magna .
DISEASES BLACK ROOT
ROT Section::::Diseases .
Section::::Black root rot .
Black root rot of carrot is caused by a pathogenic fungus Chalara elegans ( Thielaviopsis basicola ) .
The fungus infects several types of crops including carrots .
C. elegans can infect carrots in all stages of growth , thriving in humidity and warm temperatures .
When infected , the carrot starts to develop black markings on the root .
The fungus can remain in infected soil for years through chlamydospores .
C. elegans thrives in highly acidic , organic soil , especially with large amounts of vitamin C. Damaged carrots in areas of high temperatures are more susceptible to accelerated growth of black root rot .
CROWN ROT
Section::::Crown rot .
Crown rot , or Rhizoctonia solani , is a soilborne fungus .
It attacks roots nearing maturity in carrots and may result in the death or severe weakening of seeds before or after germination .
Crown rot is most prevalent in wet areas in warm climates .
Symptoms on the roots of carrot are typically brown - black deep lesions or cankers near the crown or other root parts .
Overall the rotting process is dry , unlike other carrot fungus ' .
R. solani can survive through winter or longer on the debris of plants .
Greatest risk to infection occurs at high humidity with temperatures greater than .
Easily spreadable in closely planted fields .
The rotation of fields , removing of plant debris after harvest and enhanced soil drainage and air circulation are highly recommended to reduce R. solani survival and infection .
FUSARIUM DRY ROT Section::::Fusarium dry rot .
Fusarium dry rot of carrot is caused by Fusarium spp .
The soilborne fungi can grow wherever carrots are found .
Fusarium dry rot is also called a carrot root disease , but it can also attack the seeds .
The fungus develops after full maturity and/or in storage .
Fusarium spp , can survive in many ways including plant debris / residue or in mycelia .
Wet , warm temperatures as well as wounds on the root can result in the growth of Fusarium spp .
Symptoms include brown , leathery lesions , side cankers and the decay of the crown of the carrot .
Dry , cold storage of carrots after cultivation can stop Fusarium
dry rot from continuing to develop .
SEE ALSO
* List of beneficial weeds * List of companion plants
* Daucus pusillus , American wild carrot * Plant Profile of Daucus carota
L.
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Connecticut Botanical Society