SACRIFICE BUNT
In baseball , a sacrifice bunt ( also called a sacrifice hit ) is a batter 's act of deliberately bunting the ball , before there are two outs , in a manner that allows a runner on base to advance to another base .
The batter is almost always sacrificed ( and to a certain degree that is the intent of the batter ) but sometimes reaches base due to an error or fielder 's choice .
In that situation , if runners still advance bases , it is still scored a sacrifice bunt instead of the error or the fielder 's choice .
Sometimes the batter may safely reach base by simply outrunning the throw to first ; this is not scored as a sacrifice bunt but rather a single .
In the Major Leagues , sacrifice bunts reduce the average runs scored but increase the likelihood of scoring once .
However , they can increase the average runs scored in an inning if the batter is a weak hitter .
A successful sacrifice bunt does not count as an at bat , does not impact a player 's batting average , and counts as a plate appearance .
However , unlike a sacrifice fly , a sacrifice bunt does not count against a player in determining on - base percentage .
If the official scorer believes that the batter was attempting to bunt for a base hit , and not solely to advance the runners , the batter is charged an at bat and is not credited with a sacrifice bunt .
In leagues without a designated hitter , sacrifice bunts are most commonly attempted by pitchers , who are typically not productive hitters .
Managers consider that if a pitcher 's at bat will probably result in an out , they might as well go out in a way most likely to advance the runners .
The play also obviates the need for the pitcher to run the base paths , and hence avoids the risk of injury .
Some leadoff hitters also bunt frequently in similar situations and may be credited with a sacrifice , but as they are often highly skilled bunters and faster runners , they are often trying to get on base as well as advance runners .
A sacrifice bunt attempted while a runner is on third is called a squeeze play .
A sacrifice bunt attempted while a runner on third is attempting to steal home is called a suicide squeeze .
Although a sacrifice bunt is not the same as a sacrifice fly , both fell under the same statistical category until 1954 .
In scoring , a sacrifice bunt may be denoted by SH , S , or occasionally , SAC . NOTABLE PLAYERS WITH 300 OR MORE SACRIFICE BUNTS Section::::Notable players with 300 or more sacrifice bunts .
The following players have accumulated 300 or more sacrifice bunts in their playing careers : Major League Baseball ( MLB ) * 512 : Eddie Collins ( 2B ) ( major league record ) * 392 : Jake Daubert ( 1B ) * 383 : John " Stuffy " McInnis ( 1B ) * 366 : " Wee " Willie Keeler ( OF )
* 337 : Owen " Donie " Bush ( SS ) * 334 : Ray Chapman ( SS ) * 323 : Bill Wambsganss ( 2B ) * 314 : Roger Peckinpaugh ( SS ) * 311 : Larry Gardner ( 3B ) * 309 : Tris Speaker ( OF ) * 300 : Walter " Rabbit " Maranville ( SS )
Active MLB leaders ( as of end of 2017 season )
* 100 : Elvis Andrus ( SS ) * * 89 : Clayton Kershaw ( P )
*
* 84 :
Johnny Cueto ( P )
* * 77 : Alcides Escobar ( SS ) * * 75 : Erick Aybar ( INF ) *
Nippon Professional Baseball
* 533 : Masahiro Kawai ( SS ) ( world record )
Since the beginning of the live - ball era ( 1920 ) , the career leader in sacrifice bunts is Joe Sewell with 275 .
He was first called up by the Cleveland Indians late in the 1920 season shortly after the death of Indians star shortstop Ray Chapman after being hit in the head by a pitch , the event which is generally regarded as the start of the live - ball era .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
Though touted as good strategy by traditionalists , the sacrifice bunt has received significant criticism by modern sabermetrics .
Simply , sabremetics argue that the value of moving a runner to another base is offset by the team 's sacrificing one of its limited and valuable 27 outs .
An out - conceded is an out - wasted , in other words .
The following stats illustrate the argument .
From 1993 - 2010 , if a team had a runner on first base with no outs , on average it would score .941 runs from that point until the end of the inning .
If a team had a runner on second base with one out , however , the average was .721 runs from that point forward .
Thus , if a batter walks to lead off an inning and his team bats , that team will , on average , score almost one run in the inning .
On the other hand , that team decreases its run expectancy by 23 percent if it successfully bunts and moves the runner to second with one out .
Complicating affairs are the many difficulties and risks associated with bunting .
The runner or runners on base must have speed , or the defense may get an easy force out .
A manager could feasibly pinch - run , but then his bench becomes smaller .
The player at the plate must also lay down a quality bunt .
That is , the player must lay down a bunt that does not pop up , go foul , or go straight to a fielder .
Even if all goes well , if the sacrifice bunt is successful , the team must still get a hit to score the runner , and they now have 2 outs remaining instead of three .
REFERENCES