ONYX Onyx primarily refers to the parallel banded variety of the silicate mineral chalcedony .
Agate and onyx are both varieties of layered chalcedony that differ only in the form of the bands : agate has curved bands and onyx has parallel bands .
The colors of its bands range from white to almost every color .
Commonly , specimens of onyx contain bands of black and/or white .
Onyx , as a descriptive term , has also been applied to parallel banded varieties of alabaster , marble , obsidian and opal , and misleadingly to materials with contorted banding , such as " Cave Onyx " and " Mexican Onyx " .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Onyx comes through Latin ( of the same spelling ) , from the Greek ὄνυξ , meaning " claw " or " fingernail " .
Onyx with flesh - colored and white bands can sometimes resemble a fingernail .
The English word " nail " is cognate with the Greek word .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Onyx is formed of bands of chalcedony in alternating colors .
It is cryptocrystalline , consisting of fine intergrowths of the silica minerals quartz and moganite .
Its bands are parallel to one another , as opposed to the more chaotic banding that often occurs in agates .
Sardonyx is a variant in which the colored bands are sard ( shades of red ) rather than black .
Black onyx is perhaps the most famous variety , but is not as common as onyx with colored bands .
Artificial treatments have been used since ancient times to produce both the black color in " black onyx " and the reds and yellows in sardonyx .
Most " black onyx " on the market is artificially colored .
IMITATIONS AND TREATMENTS Section::::Imitations and treatments .
The name has also commonly been used to label other banded materials , such as banded calcite found in Mexico , India , and other places , and often carved , polished and sold .
This material is much softer than true onyx , and much more readily available .
The majority of carved items sold as " onyx " today are this carbonate material .
Artificial onyx types have also been produced from common chalcedony and plain agates .
The first - century naturalist Pliny the Elder described these techniques being used in Roman times .
Treatments for producing black and other colors include soaking or boiling chalcedony in sugar solutions , then treating with sulfuric or hydrochloric acid to carbonize sugars which had been absorbed into the top layers of the stone .
These techniques are still used , as well as other dyeing treatments , and most so - called " black onyx " sold is artificially treated .
In addition to dye treatments , heating and treatment with nitric acid have been used to lighten or eliminate undesirable colors .
GEOGRAPHIC OCCURRENCE Section::::Geographic occurrence .
Onyx is a gemstone found in various regions of the world including Yemen , Uruguay , Argentina , Australia , Brazil , Canada , China , Czech Republic , Germany , India , Indonesia , Madagascar , Latin America , the UK , and various states in the US .
HISTORIC USE Section::::Historic use .
It has a long history of use for hardstone carving and jewelry , where it is usually cut as a cabochon or into beads .
It has also been used for intaglio and hardstone cameo engraved gems , where the bands make the image contrast with the ground .
Some onyx is natural but much of the material in commerce is produced by the staining of agate .
Onyx was used in Egypt as early as the Second Dynasty to make bowls and other pottery items .
Use of sardonyx appears in the art of Minoan Crete , notably from the archaeological recoveries at Knossos .
Brazilian green onyx was often used as plinths for art deco sculptures created in the 1920s and 1930s .
The German sculptor Ferdinand Preiss used Brazilian green onyx for the base on the majority of his chryselephantine sculptures .
Green onyx was also used for trays and pin dishes – produced mainly in Austria – often with small bronze animals or figures attached .
Onyx is mentioned in the Bible many times .
Sardonyx ( onyx in which white layers alternate with sard ) is mentioned in the Bible as well .
Onyx was known to the Ancient Greeks and Romans .
The first - century naturalist Pliny the Elder described both type of onyx and various artificial treatment techniques in his Naturalis Historia .
Slabs of onyx ( from the Atlas Mountains ) were famously used by Mies van der Rohe in Villa
Tugendhat at Brno ( completed 1930 ) to create a shimmering semi - translucent interior wall .
The Hôtel de la Païva in Paris is noted for its yellow onyx décor , and the new Mariinsky Theatre Second Stage in St .
Petersburg uses yellow onyx in the lobby .
SUPERSTITIONS Section::::Superstitions .
The ancient Romans entered battle carrying amulets of sardonyx engraved with Mars , the god of war .
This was believed to bestow courage in battle .
In Renaissance Europe , wearing sardonyx was believed to bestow eloquence .
A traditional Persian belief is that it helped with epilepsy .
Sardonyx was traditionally used by English midwives to ease childbirth by laying it between the breasts of the mother .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS