ST MICHAEL 'S MOUNT
St Michael 's Mount ( , meaning " hoar rock in woodland " ) is a small tidal island in Mount 's Bay , Cornwall , England , United Kingdom .
The island is a civil parish and is linked to the town of Marazion by a man - made causeway of granite setts , passable between mid - tide and low water .
The population of this parish in 2011 was 35 .
It is managed by the National Trust , and the castle and chapel have been the home of the St Aubyn family since approximately 1650 .
The earliest buildings , on the summit , date to the 12th century .
Its Cornish language name — literally , " the grey rock in a wood"—may represent a folk memory of a time before Mount 's Bay was flooded , indicating a description of the mount set in woodland .
Remains of trees have been seen at low tides following storms on the beach at Perranuthnoe .
Radiocarbon dating established the submerging of the hazel wood at about 1700 BC .
Historically , St Michael 's Mount was a Cornish counterpart of Mont Saint - Michel in Normandy , France ( with which it shares the same tidal island characteristics and the same conical shape , in spite of being much smaller , at 57 acres , than Mont St Michel which covers 247 acres ) , when it was given to the Benedictine religious order of Mont Saint - Michel by Edward the Confessor in the 11th century .
St Michael 's Mount is one of forty - three ( unbridged ) tidal islands that one can walk to from mainland Britain .
Part of the island was designated as a Site of Special Scientific Interest in 1995 for its geology .
PREHISTORY Section::::Prehistory .
There is evidence of people living in the area during the Neolithic ( from circa 4000 to 2500 BCE years ) .
The key discovery was of a leaf - shaped flint arrowhead , which was found within a shallow pit on the lower eastern slope , now part of the modern gardens .
Other pieces of flint have been found , and at least two could be Mesolithic ( circa 8000 to 3500 BCE ) .
During the Mesolithic , Britain was still attached to mainland Europe via Doggerland , and archaeologist and prehistorian Caroline Malone noted that during the Late Mesolithic , the British Isles were something of a " technological backwater " in European terms , still living as a hunter - gatherer society whilst most of southern Europe had already taken up agriculture and sedentary living .
At this time the mount would likely to have been an area of dry ground surrounded by a marshy forest .
Any Neolithic or Mesolithic camps are likely to have been destroyed by the later extensive building operations , but it is reasonable to expect the mount to have supported either a seasonal or short - term camp for Mesolithic people .
None of the flints , so far recovered , can be positively dated to the Bronze Age ( c. 2500 to 800 BCE ) although any summit cairns would have most likely been destroyed when building the castle .
A hoard of copper weapons , once thought to have been found on the mount , are now thought to have been found on nearby Marazion Marsh .
Defensive stony banks on the north - eastern slopes are likely to date to the early 1st millennium BC , and are considered to be a cliff castle .
The mount is one of several candidates for the island of Ictis , described as a tin trading centre in the Bibliotheca historica of the Sicilian - Greek historian Diodorus Siculus , writing in the first century BC .
HISTORY Section::::History .
It may have been the site of a monastery in the 8th – early 11th centuries , and Edward the Confessor gave it to the Norman Abbey of Mont Saint - Michel .
It was a priory of that abbey until the dissolution of the alien houses as a side - effect of the by Henry V , when it was given to the Abbess and Convent of Syon at Isleworth , Middlesex in 1424 .
Thus ended its association with Mont St Michel , and any connection with Looe Island ( dedicated to the Archangel Michael ) .
It was a destination for pilgrims , whose devotions were encouraged by an indulgence granted by Pope Gregory in the 11th century .
SIEGE , OCCUPATION AND OWNERSHIP Section::::Siege , occupation and ownership .
Sir Henry de la Pomeroy captured the Mount in 1193 , on behalf of Prince John , in the reign of King Richard I.
The monastic buildings were built during the 12th century and in 1275 an earthquake destroyed the original Priory Church , which was rebuilt in the late 14th century , remaining in use .
Syon Abbey , a monastery of the Bridgettine Order acquired the Mount in 1424 .
Some twenty years later the mount was granted by Henry VI to King 's College , Cambridge on its foundation .
However when Edward IV took the throne during the Wars of the Roses the mount was returned to the Syon Abbey in 1462 .
John de Vere , 13th Earl of Oxford , seized and held it during a siege of twenty - three weeks against 6,000 of Edward IV 's troops in 1473–74 , Perkin Warbeck , a pretender to the English throne .
occupied the Mount in 1497 .
Sir Humphrey Arundell , Governor of St Michael 's Mount , led the Prayer Book Rebellion of 1549 .
During the reign of Queen Elizabeth I , it was given to Robert Cecil , Earl of Salisbury , by whose son it was sold to Sir Francis Bassett .
During the Civil War , Sir Arthur Bassett , brother of Sir Francis , held the Mount against the Parliament until July 1646 .
18TH CENTURY Section::::18th century .
Little is known about the village before the beginning of the 18th century , save that there were a few fishermen 's cottages and monastic cottages .
After improvements to the harbour in 1727 , St Michael 's Mount became a flourishing seaport .
In 1755 the Lisbon earthquake caused a tsunami to strike the Cornish coast over away .
The sea rose in ten minutes at St Michael 's Mount , ebbed at the same rate , and continued to rise and fall for five hours .
The 19th - century French writer Arnold Boscowitz claimed that " great loss of life and property occurred upon the coasts of Cornwall . "
19TH CENTURY Section::::19th century .
By 1811 there were fifty - three houses and four streets .
The pier was extended in 1821 and the population peaked in the same year , when the island had 221 people .
There were three schools , a Wesleyan chapel , and three public houses , mostly used by visiting sailors .
The village went into decline following major improvements to nearby Penzance harbour and the extension of the railway to Penzance in 1852 , and many of the houses and buildings were demolished .
A short underground , funicular narrow gauge railway was built in Victorian times .
It was used to bring luggage up to the house .
It occasionally operates , but only for demonstration reasons and is not open to the general public , although a small stretch is visible at the harbour .
It is Britain 's last functionally operational railway .
In the late 19th century an anchorite 's remains were discovered in a tomb within the domestic chapel .
The Mount was sold in 1659 to Colonel John St Aubyn .
his descendants , the Lords St Levan , remain seated at St Michael 's Mount .
SECOND WORLD
WAR Section::::Second World War .
The Mount was fortified during the Second World War during the invasion crisis of 1940–41 .
Three pillboxes can be seen to this day .
Sixty - five years after the Second World War , it was suggested based on interviews with contemporaries that the former Nazi Foreign Minister and onetime Ambassador to London , Joachim von Ribbentrop , had intended to live at the Mount after the planned German conquest .
Archived documents revealed that during his time in Britain in the 1930s , when he had proposed an alliance with Nazi Germany , General von Ribbentrop frequently visited Cornwall .
NATIONAL TRUST Section::::National Trust .
In 1954 , Francis Cecil St Aubyn , 3rd Baron St Levan gave most of St Michael 's Mount to the National Trust , together with a large endowment fund .
The St Aubyn family retained a 999-year lease to inhabit the castle and a licence to manage the public viewing of its historic rooms .
This is managed in conjunction with the National Trust .
PRIORS AND OWNERS OF ST MICHAEL 'S MOUNT THE ISLAND TODAY Section::::The island today .
The chapel of St Michael , a fifteenth - century building , has an embattled tower , one angle of which is a small turret , which served for the guidance of ships .
The chapel is extra - diocesan and continues to serve the Order of St John by permission of Lord St Levan .
Chapel Rock , on the beach , marks the site of a shrine dedicated to the Virgin Mary , where pilgrims paused to worship before ascending the mount .
Many antiquities , comprising plate armour , paintings and furniture , are preserved at the castle .
Several houses are built on the hillside facing Marazion , and a spring provides a natural flow of water .
There is a row of eight houses at the back of the present village ; built in 1885 they are known as Elizabeth Terrace .
Some of the houses are occupied by staff working in the castle and elsewhere on the island .
The mount 's cemetery ( currently no public access ) contains the graves of former residents of the island and several drowned sailors .
There are also buildings that were formerly the steward 's house , a changing - room for bathers , the stables , the laundry , a barge house , a sail loft ( now a restaurant ) , and two former inns .
A former bowling green adjoins one of the buildings .
The harbour , enlarged in 1823 to accommodate vessels of up to 500 tonnes deadweight , has a pier dating back to the 15th century which has also been renovated .
Queen Victoria disembarked from the royal yacht at St Michael 's Mount in 1846 , and a brass inlay of her footstep can be seen at the top of the landing stage .
King Edward VII 's footstep is also visible near the bowling green .
In 1967 the Queen Mother entered the harbour in a pinnace from the royal yacht Britannia .
Another noteworthy point of interest on the island is its underground railway , which is still used to transport goods from the harbour up to the castle .
It was built by miners around 1900 , replacing the pack horses which had previously been used .
Its steep gradient renders it unsafe for passenger - use , thus The National Trust has made it out - of - bounds for public access .
The causeway between the mount and Marazion was improved in 1879 by raising it by with sand and stones from the surrounding area .
Repairs were completed in March 2016 following damage from the 2014 winter storms .
Some studies indicate that any rise in ocean waters as well as existing natural erosion would put some of the Cornwall coast at risk , including St. Michael 's Mount .
LOCAL GOVERNMENT Section::::Local government .
Until recent times both the mount and the town of Marazion formed part of the parish of St Hilary .
St Michael 's Mount forms its own civil parish for local government purposes .
Currently , this takes the form of a parish meeting as opposed to a parish council ( that is , a yearly meeting of electors that does not elect councillors ) .
Lord St Levan currently chairs the St Michael 's Mount Parish Meeting .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
The rock exposures around St Michael 's Mount provide an opportunity to see many features of the geology of Cornwall in a single locality .
The mount is made of the uppermost part of a granite intrusion into metamorphosed Devonian mudstones or pelites .
The granite is itself mineralised with a well - developed sheeted greisen vein system .
Due to its geology the island 's seaward has been designated a Site of Special Scientific Interest since 1995 .
GRANITES Section::::Granites .
There are two types of granite visible on the mount .
Most of the intrusion is a tourmaline muscovite granite which is variably porphyritic .
This is separated from a biotite muscovite granite by pegmatites .
DEVONIAN PELITES Section::::Devonian Pelites .
Originally laid down as mudstones these pelites were regionally metamorphosed and deformed ( mainly folded here ) by the Variscan orogeny .
They were then affected by the intrusion of the granite , which caused further contact metamorphism , locally forming a hornfels , and mineralisation .
MINERALISATION Section::::Mineralisation .
The best developed mineralisation is found within the uppermost part of the granite itself in the form of sheeted greisen veins .
These steep W - E trending veins are thought to have formed by hydraulic fracturing when the fluid pressure at the top of the granite reached a critical level .
The granite was fractured and the fluids altered the granite by replacing feldspars with quartz and muscovite .
The fluids were also rich in boron , tin and tungsten and tourmaline , wolframite and cassiterite are common in the greisen veins .
As the area cooled the veins became open to fluids from the surrounding country rock and these deposited sulphides e.g. chalcopyrite and stannite .
Greisen veins are also locally developed within the pelites .
FOLKLORE Section::::Folklore .
In prehistoric times , St Michael 's Mount may have been a port for the tin trade , and Gavin de Beer made a case for it to be identified with the " tin port " Ictis / Ictin mentioned by Posidonius .
It is claimed that the Archangel Michael appeared before local fishermen on the mount in the 5th century AD , with the version by John Mirk copying details from the Golden Legend .
The chronicler John of Worcester relates under the year 1099 that St Michael 's Mount was located five or six miles ( 10 km ) from the sea , enclosed in a thick wood , but that on the third day of November the sea overflowed the land , destroying many towns and drowning many people as well as innumerable oxen and sheep ; the Anglo - Saxon Chronicle records under the date 11 November 1099 , "
The sea - flood sprung up to such a height , and did so much harm , as no man remembered that it ever did before " .
The Cornish legend of Lyonesse , an ancient kingdom said to have extended from Penwith toward the Isles of Scilly , also talks of land being inundated by the sea .
One of the earliest references to the mount ( originally named " Dynsol " or " Dinsul " ) , was in the mid 11th century when it was " Sanctus Michael beside the sea " .
In the 1600s John Milton used the Mount as the setting for the finale of what was once one of the most famous poems in English literature , his " Lycidas " , which drew on the traditional sea - lore that had it that the archangel Michael sat in a great stone chair at the top of the Mount , seeing far over the sea and thus protecting England .
In the mid 1850s the poem 's scenes of the drowning of Lycidas , in the seas below the Mount , were illustrated in engravings and paintings by J. M. W. Turner .
The poem drew together various traditions from the Bible , classical mythology and local folkore to offer an elegy for the pagan world that had faded away .
LEGEND Section::::Legend .
During the 6th century , before a castle was built , according to legend , the island St. Michael 's Mount sits upon was once home to an 18-foot giant named Cormoran , who lived in a cave with his ill - gotten treasures obtained by terrorizing local towns and villages .
That is , until a young farmer 's son named Jack took on this gigantic menace , who had an appetite for cattle and children , and killed him by trapping him in a concealed pit , bringing down his axe upon his head .
When he returned home , the elders in the village gave him a hero 's welcome , and henceforth , called him " Jack the Giant Killer " .
IN
MODERN POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In modern popular culture .
The mount has featured in a number of films , including the 1979 film Dracula , where it was prominently featured as the exterior of Castle Dracula .
It appeared in the 1983 James Bond film
Never Say Never Again , as two guided missiles armed with nuclear warheads fly over the English countryside and out to sea , passing directly over St Michael 's Mount .
In the 2003 film Johnny English it was used as the exterior of the character Pascal Sauvage 's French chateau and in 2012 , it was a filming location for the fantasy adventure movie Mariah Mundi and the Midas Box .
" Mt Saint Michel + Saint Michaels Mount " is the title of an experimental electronic track by musician Aphex Twin , who grew up in Cornwall and in Michael Moorcock 's series of Fantasy novels about Prince Corum , a fictionalised version of St Michael 's Mount appears as Moidel 's Mount .
It was one of the locations used on BBC One " Balloon " Idents which were used on the channel from 4 October 1997 to 29 March 2002 .
IMAGES SEE ALSO * St Aubyn family * Mont Saint - Michel , France
* List of monastic houses in Cornwall
*
Cormoran *
Skellig Michael REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* John Taylor , " Albion : the earliest history " ( Dublin , 2016 )
EXTERNAL LINKS
* St Michael 's Mount information at the National Trust
* St Michael 's Mount website
* Pliny : Naturalis Historia ( IV : XVI.102 - 4 ) * Cornwall Record Office Online Catalogue for St Michael 's Mount * St. Michaels Mount ( photo by Chris Hasenbichler )