LINSEED OIL Linseed oil , also known as flaxseed oil or flax oil , is a colourless to yellowish oil obtained from the dried , ripened seeds of the flax plant ( Linum usitatissimum ) .
The oil is obtained by pressing , sometimes followed by solvent extraction .
Linseed oil is a drying oil , meaning it can polymerize into a solid form .
Owing to its polymer - forming properties , linseed oil can be used on its own or blended with combinations of other oils , resins or solvents as an impregnator , drying oil finish or varnish in wood finishing , as a pigment binder in oil paints , as a plasticizer and hardener in putty , and in the manufacture of linoleum .
Linseed oil use has declined over the past several decades with increased availability of synthetic alkyd resins — which function similarly but resist yellowing .
Linseed oil is an edible oil in demand as a nutritional supplement , as a source of α - Linolenic acid , ( an omega-3 fatty acid ) .
In parts of Europe , it is traditionally eaten with potatoes and quark .
It is regarded as a delicacy due to its hearty taste , that enhances the flavour of quark , which is otherwise bland .
CHEMICAL ASPECTS
Section::::Chemical aspects .
Linseed oil is a triglyceride , like other fats .
Linseed oil is distinctive for its unusually large amount of α - linolenic acid , which has a distinctive reaction with oxygen in air .
Specifically , the fatty acids in a typical linseed oil are of the following types :
* The triply unsaturated α - linolenic acid ( 51.9–55.2 % ) , * The saturated acids palmitic acid ( about 7 % ) and stearic acid ( 3.4–4.6 % ) , * The monounsaturated oleic acid ( 18.5–22.6 % ) , * The doubly unsaturated linoleic acid ( 14.2–17 % ) .
Having a high content of di- and tri - unsaturated esters , linseed oil is particularly susceptible to polymerization reactions upon exposure to oxygen in air .
This polymerization , which is called ' drying ' , results in the rigidification of the material .
The drying process can be so exothermic as to pose a fire hazard under certain circumstances .
To prevent premature drying , linseed oil - based products ( oil paints , putty ) should be stored in airtight containers .
Like some other drying oils , linseed oil exhibits fluorescence under UV light after degradation .
USES Section::::Uses .
Most applications of linseed oil exploit its drying properties , i.e. , the initial material is liquid or at least pliable and the aged material is rigid but not brittle .
The water - repelling ( hydrophobic ) nature of the resulting hydrocarbon - based material is advantageous .
PAINT BINDER Section::::Paint binder .
Linseed oil is a common carrier used in oil paint .
It can also be used as a painting medium , making oil paints more fluid , transparent and glossy .
It is available in varieties such as cold - pressed , alkali - refined , sun - bleached , sun - thickened , and polymerised ( stand oil ) .
The introduction of linseed oil was a significant advance in the technology of oil painting .
PUTTY Section::::Putty .
Traditional glazing putty , consisting of a paste of chalk powder and linseed oil , is a sealant for glass windows that hardens within a few weeks of application and can then be painted over .
The durability of putty is owed to the drying properties of linseed oil .
WOOD FINISH Section::::Wood finish .
When used as a wood finish , linseed oil dries slowly and shrinks little upon hardening .
Linseed oil does not cover the surface as varnish does , but soaks into the ( visible and microscopic ) pores , leaving a shiny but not glossy surface that shows off the grain of the wood .
A linseed oil finish is easily scratched , and easily repaired .
Only wax finishes are less protective .
Liquid water penetrates a linseed oil finish in mere minutes , and water vapour bypasses it almost completely .
Garden furniture treated with linseed oil may develop mildew .
Oiled wood may be yellowish and is likely to darken with age .
Because it fills the pores , linseed oil partially protects wood from denting by compression .
Linseed oil is a traditional finish for gun stocks , though very fine finish may require months to obtain .
Several coats of linseed oil is the traditional protective coating for the raw willow wood of cricket bats ; it is used so that the wood retains some moisture .
New cricket bats are coated with linseed oil and knocked - in to perfection so that they last longer .
Linseed oil is also often used by billiards or pool cue - makers for cue shafts , as a lubricant / protectant for wooden recorders , and used in place of epoxy to seal modern wooden surfboards .
Additionally , a luthier may use linseed oil when reconditioning a guitar , mandolin , or other stringed instrument 's fret board ; lemon - scented mineral oil is commonly used for cleaning , then a light amount of linseed oil ( or other drying oil ) is applied to protect it from grime that might otherwise result in accelerated deterioration of the wood .
GILDING Section::::Gilding .
Boiled linseed oil is used as sizing in traditional oil gilding to adhere sheets of gold leaf to a substrate ( parchment , canvas , Armenian bole , etc . )
It has a much longer working time than water - based size and gives a firm smooth surface which is adhesive enough in the first 12–24 hours after application to cause the gold to attach firmly to the intended surface .
LINOLEUM Section::::Linoleum .
Linseed oil is used to bind wood dust , cork particles , and related materials in the manufacture of the floor covering linoleum .
After its invention in 1860 by Frederick Walton , linoleum , or ' lino ' for short , was a common form of domestic and industrial floor covering from the 1870s until the 1970s when it was largely replaced by PVC ( ' vinyl ' ) floor coverings .
However , since the 1990s , linoleum is on the rise again , being considered more environmentally sound than PVC .
Linoleum has given its name to the printmaking technique linocut , in which a relief design is cut into the smooth surface and then inked and used to print an image .
The results are similar to those obtained by woodcut printing .
NUTRITIONAL SUPPLEMENT AND FOOD
Section::::Nutritional supplement and food .
Raw cold - pressed linseed oil – commonly known as flax seed oil in nutritional contexts – is easily oxidized , and rapidly becomes rancid , with an unpleasant odour , unless refrigerated .
Even when kept under cool conditions , it has a shelf life of only a few weeks .
Oil with an unpleasant or rancid odor should be discarded .
Oxidation of flax seed oil is a major commercial concern , and antioxidants may be added to prevent rancidification .
Linseed oil is not generally recommended for use in cooking , yet one study does show that the alpha linolenic acid ( ALA ) while bound in flaxseed was found to be stable for cooking .
When bound to flaxseed ALA can withstand temperatures up to 350 degrees F ( 176.67 C ) for two hours .
Food - grade flaxseed oil is cold - pressed , obtained without solvent extraction , in the absence of oxygen , and marketed as edible flaxseed oil .
Fresh , refrigerated and unprocessed , linseed oil is used as a nutritional supplement and is a traditional European ethnic food , highly regarded for its hearty taste .
It contains the highest level of the omega-3 fatty acid ALA among vegetable oils .
Regular flaxseed oil contains between 52 % and 63 % ALA ( C18:3 n-3 ) .
Plant breeders have developed flaxseed with both higher ALA ( 70 % ) and very low ALA content ( < 3 % ) .
The USFDA granted generally recognized as safe ( GRAS ) status for high alpha linolenic flaxseed oil .
NUTRIENT CONTENT Section::::Nutrient content . !
Typical fatty acid content !
% European Nutrition information from the Flax Council of Canada .
Per 1 tbsp ( 14 g )
* Calories : 126 * Total fat : 14 g * Omega-3 : 8 g
* Omega-6 : 2 g * Omega-9 : 3 g
Flax seed oil contains no significant amounts of protein , carbohydrates or fibre .
ADDITIONAL USES
* Animal care products
* Bicycle maintenance as a thread fixative , rust inhibitor and lubricant * Composition ornament for moulded decoration
*
Earthen floors * Animal feeds * Industrial lubricant
* Leather treatment * Oilcloth * Particle detectors * Textiles * Wood preservation ( including as an active ingredient of Danish Oil ) * Cookware seasoning MODIFIED LINSEED OILS STAND OIL Section::::Modified linseed oils .
Section::::Stand oil .
Stand oil is generated by heating linseed oil near 300 ° C for a few days in the complete absence of air .
Under these conditions , the polyunsaturated fatty esters convert to conjugated dienes , which then undergo Diels - Alder reactions , leading to crosslinking .
The product , which is highly viscous , gives highly uniform coatings that " dry " to more elastic coatings than linseed oil itself .
Soybean oil can be treated similarly , but converts more slowly .
On the other hand , tung oil converts very quickly , being complete in minutes at 260 ° C .
Coatings prepared from stand oils are less prone to yellowing than are coatings derived from the parent oils .
BOILED LINSEED OIL
Section::::Boiled linseed oil .
Boiled linseed oil is a combination of raw linseed oil , stand oil ( see above ) , and metallic dryers ( catalysts to accelerate drying ) .
In the Medieval era , linseed oil was boiled with lead oxide ( litharge ) to give a product called boiled linseed oil .
The lead oxide forms lead " soaps " ( lead oxide is alkaline ) which promotes hardening ( polymerisation ) of linseed oil by reaction with atmospheric oxygen .
Heating shortens its drying time .
RAW LINSEED OIL Section::::Raw linseed oil .
Raw linseed oil is the base oil , unprocessed and without driers or thinners .
It is mostly used as a feedstock for making a boiled oil .
It does not cure sufficiently well or quickly to be regarded as a drying oil .
Raw linseed is sometimes used for oiling cricket bats to increase surface friction for better ball control .
It was also used to treat leather flat belt drives to reduce slipping .
SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION
Section::::Spontaneous combustion .
Rags soaked with linseed oil stored in a pile are considered a fire hazard because they provide a large surface area for oxidation of the oil , which oxidises quickly .
The oxidation of linseed oil is an exothermic reaction , which accelerates as the temperature of the rags increases .
When heat accumulation exceeds the rate of heat dissipation into the environment , the temperature increases and may eventually become hot enough to make the rags spontaneously combust .
In 1991 , One Meridian Plaza , a high rise in Philadelphia , was severely damaged and three firefighters perished in a fire thought to be caused by linseed oil - soaked rags .
SEE ALSO
* Danish oil * Flax seed * National Linseed Oil Trust * Smoke point NOTES
FURTHER READING
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS