UNSUCCESSFUL NOMINATIONS TO THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES The Supreme Court of the United States is the highest ranking judicial body in the United States .
Established by Article III of the Constitution , the detailed structure of the Court was laid down by the 1st United States Congress in 1789 .
Congress specified the Court 's original and appellate jurisdiction , created 13 judicial districts , and fixed the initial size of the Supreme Court .
The number of justices on the Supreme Court changed six times before settling at the present total of nine in 1869 .
A total of 114 justices have served on the Supreme Court since 1789 .
Justices have life tenure , and so they serve until they die in office , resign or retire , or are impeached and removed from office .
Justices are nominated by the president and then confirmed by the U.S. Senate .
A nomination to the Court is considered to be official when the Senate receives a signed nomination letter from the president naming the nominee , which is then entered in the Senate 's record .
There have been 37 unsuccessful nominations to the Supreme Court of the United States .
Of these , 11 nominees were rejected in Senate roll - call votes , 11 were withdrawn by the president , and 15 lapsed at the end of a session of Congress .
Six of these unsuccessful nominees were subsequently nominated and confirmed to other seats on the Court .
Additionally , although confirmed , seven nominees either declined office or ( in one instance ) died before assuming office .
GEORGE WASHINGTON
Section::::George Washington .
Among the six original nominees to the Supreme Court , George Washington nominated Robert H. Harrison , who declined to serve .
The seat remained empty until the confirmation of James Iredell in 1790 .
Washington nominated William Paterson for the Supreme Court on February 27 , 1793 .
The nomination was withdrawn by the President the following day .
Washington had realized that since the law establishing the positions within the Supreme Court had been passed during Paterson 's term as a Senator ( a post he had resigned in November 1790 after being elected Governor of New Jersey )
the nomination was a violation of Article I , Section 6 of the Constitution .
Washington re - nominated Paterson to the Court on March 4 , 1793 , after Paterson 's term as Senator had expired , and Paterson was confirmed by the Senate .
John Jay resigned as Chief Justice on June 29 , 1795 , after being elected Governor of New York .
The subsequent nomination of John Rutledge as Chief Justice was rejected by a vote of 10–14 on December 15 , 1795 .
Rutledge 's strident and vocal opposition to the Jay Treaty may have been the main reason for his rejection .
Because he had been a recess appointment , Rutledge served as Chief Justice for one term .
Washington nominated Associate Justice William Cushing to replace him as Chief Justice , but Cushing declined the role .
Washington then successfully appointed Oliver Ellsworth to serve as the next Chief Justice .
JOHN ADAMS Section::::John Adams .
After Oliver Ellsworth decided to resign from the position of Chief Justice , President John Adams sought to replace Ellsworth with John Jay , who had been the first Chief Justice .
Jay was formally nominated , but turned down the position .
Adams then successfully nominated his Secretary of State , John Marshall .
JAMES MADISON
Section::::James Madison .
When William Cushing died , James Madison nominated Levi Lincoln Sr . on January 2 , 1811 .
Lincoln declined the nomination .
Alexander Wolcott was then nominated , but was rejected by a vote of 9–24 on February 13 , 1811 .
After John Quincy Adams declined a nomination , Madison was finally successful in filling the seat with his appointment of Joseph Story .
JOHN QUINCY ADAMS Section::::John Quincy Adams .
John Quincy Adams nominated John J. Crittenden on December 18 , 1828 .
The Senate postponed the vote on his confirmation , by a vote of 23–17 , on February 12 , 1829 .
The Senate did not explicitly vote to " postpone indefinitely " , but the resolution did have that effect .
President Andrew Jackson instead filled the position with John McLean .
ANDREW JACKSON Section::::Andrew Jackson .
Andrew Jackson nominated Roger B. Taney on January 15 , 1835 , to be an Associate Justice .
A resolution was passed by a Senate vote of 24–21 on March 3 , 1835 , to postpone the nomination indefinitely .
Jackson nominated Taney again on December 28 , 1835 .
After the political composition of the Senate changed the next year , Taney was confirmed as Chief Justice March 15 , 1836 .
In 1837 , Jackson nominated William Smith and John Catron to newly created seats .
Both were confirmed , but Smith declined to serve .
Later that year , President Van Buren appointed John McKinley to fill the vacancy .
JOHN TYLER Section::::John Tyler .
John Tyler experienced extreme difficulty in obtaining approval of his nominees due to his lack of political support in the Senate .
Tyler took office in 1841 after the death of Whig President William Henry Harrison .
Tyler had been Harrison 's running mate in the 1840 election , but Tyler clashed with the Congressional Whigs over issues such as the national bank , and these clashes extended to judicial nominees .
John C. Spencer was nominated on January 9 , 1844 , and his nomination was defeated by a vote of 21–26 on January 31 , 1844 .
Reuben H. Walworth was nominated on March 13 , 1844 , and a resolution to table the nomination passed on a 27–20 vote on June 15 , 1844 .
The nomination was withdrawn from the Senate on June 17 , 1844 .
Edward King was nominated on June 5 , 1844 .
A resolution to table the nomination passed by a vote of 29–18 on June 15 , 1844 .
No other action was taken on this nomination .
The same day that Walworth 's nomination was withdrawn , Spencer was re - submitted , but there is no record of debate and a letter from the President withdrawing the nomination was received on the same day .
Walworth was then re - nominated later that same day , but the motion to act on the nomination in the Senate was objected to , and no further action was taken .
Walworth and King were re - nominated on December 10 , 1844 , but both nominations were tabled on January 21 , 1845 .
Walworth 's nomination was withdrawn on February 6 , 1845 , and King 's two days later .
John M. Read was nominated on February 8 , 1845 , and there was a motion to consider the nomination in the Senate on January 21 , 1845 , but the motion was unsuccessful and no other action was taken .
On February 14 , 1845 , the Senate voted to confirm Samuel Nelson .
JAMES K. POLK
Section::::James K. Polk .
After Henry Baldwin 's death in 1844 , James K. Polk nominated James Buchanan , who declined the nomination .
Polk then nominated George W. Woodward , but the Senate rejected him by a vote of 20–29 .
Baldwin was finally replaced by Robert Cooper Grier in 1846 .
MILLARD FILLMORE Section::::Millard Fillmore .
Millard Fillmore made three nominations to replace John McKinley , nominating Edward A. Bradford , George Edmund Badger , and William C. Micou , but the Senate did not take action on any of the nominees .
President Franklin Pierce filled the vacancy with John Archibald Campbell .
JAMES BUCHANAN
Section::::James Buchanan .
James Buchanan nominated Jeremiah S. Black to the court in 1861 to replace Peter Vivian Daniel .
The Senate voted 25–26 against confirming him .
President Lincoln filled the seat with Samuel Freeman Miller in 1862 .
ANDREW JOHNSON Section::::Andrew Johnson .
Andrew Johnson took office after the death of Republican President Abraham Lincoln in 1865 .
Johnson , a former Democrat , had been Lincoln 's running mate on the National Union ticket of 1864 , but Johnson disagreed with Congressional Republicans on several issues , including judicial nominees .
Two justices died in office during Johnson 's administration , James Moore Wayne and John Catron .
Congress , however , passed the Judicial Circuits Act of 1866 , which provided for a gradual elimination of seats until only seven were left .
Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase had urged for this reduction in the hopes that it would result in an increase of the justices ' salaries , which , ironically , did not happen until Congress restored the size of the court to nine members in 1871 .
Johnson had nominated Henry Stanbery to be an Associate Justice , but due to the reduction of seats , this nomination was nullified .
ULYSSES
S. GRANT Section::::Ulysses S. Grant .
Ulysses S. Grant nominated Ebenezer R. Hoar to a new seat on the court .
The Senate rejected this nomination by a vote of 24–33 .
Grant successfully nominated Joseph Bradley for the seat .
Grant also nominated Edwin M. Stanton , former Attorney General and Secretary of War to the court .
The nomination was eventually confirmed , but Stanton died before he was commissioned .
Grant then successfully nominated William Strong .
Grant nominated George Henry Williams to be Chief Justice of the United States in 1873 , but he later withdrew from consideration .
Prior to withdrawal of consideration , the Senate Judiciary Committee declined to recommend confirmation to the entire Senate .
Grant then nominated Caleb Cushing for Chief Justice on January 9 , 1874 , but despite Cushing 's great learning and eminence at the bar , his anti - war record and the feeling of distrust experienced by many members of the U.S. Senate on account of his inconsistency , aroused such vigorous opposition that his nomination was withdrawn on January 13 , 1874 .
Grant was successful with his third nomination of Morrison Waite .
RUTHERFORD B. HAYES Section::::Rutherford B. Hayes .
Early in 1881 , President Rutherford B. Hayes nominated Thomas Stanley Matthews for the position of Associate Justice .
Matthews was a controversial nominee due to his close ties to the railroad industry , and as the nomination came near the end of Hayes 's term , the Senate did not act on it .
However , upon succeeding Hayes , incoming President James A. Garfield ( who , like Hayes , was a Republican ) renominated Matthews , and the Senate confirmed him by a vote of 24 to 23 , the narrowest confirmation for a successful U.S. Supreme Court nominee in history .
He served on the Court until his death in 1889 .
CHESTER
A.
ARTHUR Section::::Chester A. Arthur .
In 1882 , Chester A. Arthur nominated Roscoe Conkling to serve as an Associate Justice after Ward Hunt resigned .
Conkling was confirmed , and then declined the position .
After Conkling declined , Arthur nominated George F. Edmunds , who twice declined to serve .
Arthur then nominated Samuel Blatchford , who was confirmed and accepted .
GROVER CLEVELAND Section::::Grover Cleveland .
Associate Justice Samuel Blatchford died in 1893 , during the second term of Grover Cleveland .
This seat was traditionally held by a New Yorker .
Cleveland 's first two nominees were not confirmed by the Senate ; the nomination of William Hornblower was rejected by the Senate by a vote of 24–30 on January 15 , 1894 .
Cleveland 's follow - up nominee Wheeler Hazard Peckham was also rejected by the Senate , 32–41 , on February 16 , 1894 .
By the tradition of Senatorial courtesy , other Senators generally deferred to a nominee 's home state senators when evaluating a presidential nomination .
The Senators from New York were Edward Murphy , Jr. and David B. Hill ; Hill objected to Cleveland 's nominations , and most other Senators supported Hill .
Hill was a rival of Cleveland 's who had lost the Democratic nomination for President to him in 1892 .
Cleveland finally overcame Hill 's opposition by nominating Edward Douglass White of Louisiana .
White was a sitting Senator , and Senatorial courtesy dictated that the Senate not reject one of its own .
White 's nomination was approved ; he served as an Associate Justice until 1910 , and as Chief Justice until his death in 1921 .
WARREN HARDING
Section::::Warren Harding .
President Warren G. Harding nominated Pierce Butler to the Supreme Court in 1922 , but the Senate refused to consider his nomination , in part due to Butler 's advocacy for railroad interests .
However , Harding re - submitted the nomination later in the year , and Butler was confirmed in a 61–8 vote .
HERBERT HOOVER Section::::Herbert Hoover .
On May 7 , 1930 , Herbert Hoover 's nomination of Appellate Judge John J. Parker for the Supreme Court was rejected by a vote of 39–41 .
Parker was nominated to replace Edward Terry Sanford .
The American Federation of Labor opposed Parker for his rulings that were favorable towards yellow dog contracts and the NAACP opposed Parker due to concerns about Parker 's racial views .
Hoover attempted to appeal to Southern Democratic Senators to vote for Parker , who was from North Carolina , but Hoover was unable to win enough Democratic votes to make up for Republican defections .
Hoover 's second nominee , Owen J. Roberts , was confirmed by the Senate .
DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER Section::::Dwight D. Eisenhower .
President Dwight D. Eisenhower nominated John Marshall Harlan II in 1954 , but his nomination was not reported out of the judiciary committee , in part due to opposition to his purported " ultra - liberal " views .
Eisenhower re - nominated Harlan in 1955 , and the Senate confirmed him in a 71–11 vote .
LYNDON B. JOHNSON Section::::Lyndon B. Johnson .
Lyndon B. Johnson nominated Abe Fortas , then an associate justice , for Chief Justice .
Fortas would have succeeded Earl Warren , who had decided to retire .
Controversy ensued regarding Fortas 's extrajudicial activities , and at Fortas 's request , Johnson withdrew the nomination prior to a vote of the full Senate .
Fortas 's nomination was also opposed by many senators who opposed the rulings of the Warren Court .
President Nixon instead filled the vacancy caused by Warren 's retirement with Warren Burger .
When Johnson nominated Fortas , he also nominated Homer Thornberry to fill Fortas ' seat .
Since Fortas withdrew his name from the Chief Justice nomination , but maintained his seat as an Associate Justice ( with Earl Warren continuing as Chief Justice ) , the nomination of Thornberry was void .
He was never voted on by the Senate .
RICHARD NIXON Section::::Richard Nixon .
When Abe Fortas resigned in 1969 because of a scandal separate from his Chief Justice bid , Richard Nixon nominated Clement Haynsworth , a Southern jurist .
His nomination was rejected by the Senate by a vote of 45–55 on November 21 , 1969 , due to concerns about Haynsworth 's civil rights record and perceived ethical lapses .
In response , Nixon nominated G. Harrold Carswell , a Southerner with a history of supporting segregation and opposing women 's rights .
The Senate rejected his nomination 45 to 51 on April 8 , 1970 , following much pressure from the Civil Rights and Feminist movements .
Nixon 's third nominee for the Fortas vacancy was Harry Blackmun , who was confirmed by the Senate with no opposition on May 17 , 1970 .
Nixon was soon faced with two more Supreme Court vacancies when John Harlan and Hugo Black retired in the fall of 1971 .
Nixon considered nominating Arkansas lawyer Hershel Friday and California intermediate appellate judge Mildred Lillie to the high court .
By tradition at the time , potential Supreme Court nominees were first disclosed to the American Bar Association 's standing committee on the federal judiciary .
When it became apparent that this 12-member committee would find that both were unqualified , Nixon passed over Friday and Lillie , and nominated Lewis Powell and William Rehnquist .
Powell was confirmed by an 89–1 vote , and Rehnquist was confirmed 68–22 .
RONALD REAGAN Section::::Ronald Reagan .
When Lewis Powell retired in July 1987 , Ronald Reagan nominated Robert Bork .
Bork was a member of the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia at the time and known as a proponent of constitutional originalism .
Bork lost confirmation by a Senate vote of 42 to 58 , largely due to Bork 's extreme conservative opinions on constitutional issues and his role in the Nixon Saturday Night Massacre .
Reagan then announced his intention to nominate Douglas H. Ginsburg to the court .
Before Ginsburg could be officially nominated , he withdrew himself from consideration under heavy pressure after revealing that he had smoked marijuana with his students while a professor at Harvard Law School .
Reagan then nominated Anthony Kennedy , who was confirmed by a Senate vote of 97–0 .
GEORGE W. BUSH Section::::George W. Bush .
In October 2005 , George W. Bush nominated Harriet Miers , a corporate attorney from Texas who had served as Bush 's private attorney and as White House Counsel , as an Associate Justice to replace retiring Justice Sandra Day O'Connor .
Miers was widely perceived as unqualified for the position , and it later emerged that she had allowed her law license to lapse for a time .
The nomination was immediately attacked by politicians and commentators from across the political spectrum .
At Miers 's request , Bush withdrew the nomination on October 27 , ostensibly to avoid violating executive privilege by disclosing details of her work at the White House .
Four days later , Bush nominated Samuel Alito to the seat .
Alito was confirmed by a vote of 58–42 on January 31 , 2006 .
BARACK OBAMA Section::::Barack Obama .
In February 2016 , Associate Justice Antonin Scalia died .
The following month , President Barack Obama nominated D.C. Circuit Judge Merrick Garland to replace Scalia .
However , the Senate was controlled by the Republican Party , which argued that the next president should instead appoint Scalia 's successor .
Senate Republicans refused to hold hearings on Garland , and Garland 's nomination remained before the Senate longer than any other Supreme Court nomination .
Garland 's nomination expired with the end of the 114th United States Congress .
The vacancy caused by Scalia 's death remained unfilled for 422 days , making it just the second Supreme Court vacancy since the end of the Civil War to remain unfilled for more than one year .
On January 31 , 2017 , President Donald Trump nominated federal appeals court Judge Neil Gorsuch to replace Justice Scalia .
Justice Gorsuch was sworn in on April 10 , 2017 , after being confirmed by a vote of 54–45 .
LIST OF UNSUCCESSFUL NOMINATIONS Section::::List of unsuccessful nominations .
Following is a complete list of the 30 persons officially nominated to the Supreme Court , who for various reasons never served on the Court . !
colspan=4 !
Nominee ! !
Year ! !
Nominated by ! !
Outcome SEE ALSO * Unsuccessful nominations to the Cabinet of the United States REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Supreme Court Nominations Not Confirmed , 1789–2004 * Beth , Richard S ,
Supreme Court Nominations : Senate Floor Procedure and Practice , 1789–2009 .
DIANE Publishing , 2009 .