LIGER
The liger is a hybrid offspring of a male lion ( Panthera leo ) and a female tiger ( Panthera tigris ) .
The liger has parents in the same genus but of different species .
The liger is distinct from the similar hybrid tigon , and is the largest of all known extant felines .
They enjoy swimming , which is a characteristic of tigers , and are very sociable like lions .
Notably , ligers typically grow larger than either parent species , unlike tigons .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The history of lion - tiger hybrids dates to at least the early 19th century in India .
In 1798 , Étienne Geoffroy Saint - Hilaire ( 1772–1844 ) made a colour plate of the offspring of a lion and a tiger .
The portmanteau " liger " was coined by the 1930s .
In 1825 , G. B. Whittaker made an engraving of liger cubs born in 1824 .
The parents and their three liger offspring are also depicted with their trainer in a 19th - century painting in the naïve style .
Two liger cubs born in 1837 were exhibited to King William IV and to his successor Queen Victoria .
On 14 December 1900 and on 31 May 1901 , Carl Hagenbeck wrote to zoologist James Cossar Ewart with details and photographs of ligers born at the Hagenbeck 's Tierpark in Hamburg in 1897 .
In Animal Life and the World of Nature ( 1902–1903 ) , A.H. Bryden described Hagenbeck 's " lion - tiger " hybrids : It has remained for one of the most enterprising collectors and naturalists of our time , Mr. Carl Hagenbeck , not only to breed but to bring successfully to a healthy maturity , specimens of this rare alliance between those two great and formidable Felidae , the lion and tiger .
The illustrations will indicate sufficiently how fortunate Mr. Hagenbeck has been in his efforts to produce these hybrids .
The oldest and biggest of the animals shown is a hybrid born on the 11th May 1897 .
This fine beast , now more than five years old , equals and even excels in his proportions a well - grown lion , measuring as he does from nose tip to tail 10 ft 2 inches in length , and standing only three inches less than 4 ft at the shoulder .
A good big lion will weigh about 400 lb [ ... ]
the hybrid in question , weighing as it does no less than 467 lb , is certainly the superior of the most well - grown lions , whether wild - bred or born in a menagerie .
This animal shows faint striping and mottling , and , in its characteristics , exhibits strong traces of both its parents .
It has a somewhat lion - like head , and the tail is more like that of a lion than of a tiger .
On the other hand , it has no trace of mane .
It is a huge and very powerful beast .
In 1935 , four ligers from two litters were reared in the Zoological Gardens of Bloemfontein , South Africa .
Three of them , a male and two females , were still living in 1953 .
The male weighed and stood a foot and a half ( 45 cm )
taller than a full grown male lion at the shoulder .
Although ligers are more commonly found than tigons today , in At Home
In The Zoo ( 1961 ) , Gerald Iles wrote " For the record I must say that I have never seen a liger , a hybrid obtained by crossing a lion with a tigress .
They seem to be even rarer than tigons . "
SIZE AND GROWTH Section::::Size and growth .
The liger is often believed to represent the largest known cat in the world .
Males reach a total length of , which means that they rival even large male lions and tigers in length .
Imprinted genes may be a factor contributing to the large size of ligers .
These are genes that may or may not be expressed on the parent they are inherited from , and that occasionally play a role in issues of hybrid growth .
For example , in some dog breed crosses , genes that are expressed only when maternally - inherited cause the young to grow larger than is typical for either parent breed .
This growth is not seen in the paternal breeds , as such genes are normally " counteracted " by genes inherited from the female of the appropriate breed .
Other big cat hybrids can reach similar sizes ; the litigon , a rare hybrid of a male lion and a female tigon , is roughly the same size as the liger , with a male named Cubanacan ( at the Alipore Zoo in India ) reaching .
The extreme rarity of these second - generation hybrids may make it difficult to ascertain whether they are larger or smaller , on average than the liger .
It is wrongly believed that ligers continue to grow throughout their lives due to hormonal issues .
It may be that they simply grow far more during their growing years and take longer to reach their full adult size .
Further growth in shoulder height and body length is not seen in ligers over 6 years old , as in both lions and tigers .
Male ligers also have the same levels of testosterone on average as an adult male lion , yet are azoospermic in accordance with Haldane 's rule .
In addition , female ligers may also attain great size , weighing approximately and reaching long on average , and are often fertile .
In contrast , pumapards ( hybrids between pumas and leopards ) tend to exhibit dwarfism .
Ligers are about the same size as the prehistoric Smilodon populator and American lion .
RECORDS Section::::Records .
Hercules , the largest non - obese liger , is recognised by the Guinness Book of World Records as the largest living cat on Earth , weighing .
Hercules was featured on the Today Show , Good Morning America , Anderson Cooper 360 , Inside Edition , and in a Maxim article in 2005 , when he was only three years old and already weighed .
Valley of the Kings animal sanctuary in Wisconsin had a male liger named Nook who weighed over .
To compare , the records for the lion and tiger in captivity are under .
LONGEVITY Section::::Longevity .
Shasta , a ligress ( female liger ) was born at the Hogle Zoo in Salt Lake City on 14 May 1948 and died in 1972 at age 24 .
Nook died in 2007 , at 21 years old .
Hobbs , a male liger at the Sierra Safari Zoo in Reno , Nevada , lived to almost 15 years of age before succumbing to liver failure and weighed in at .
This liger was born in 1943 and died in 1960 .
South Africa still has two ligers at its one zoo at Bloemfontein .
FERTILITY Section::::Fertility .
The fertility of hybrid big cat females is well documented across a number of different hybrids .
This is in accordance with Haldane 's rule : in hybrids of animals whose sex is determined by sex chromosomes , if one sex is absent , rare or sterile , it is the heterogametic sex ( the one with two different sex chromosomes e.g. X and Y ) .
According to Wild Cats of the World ( 1975 ) by C. A. W. Guggisberg , ligers and tigons were long thought to be sterile ; however , in 1943 , a fifteen - year - old hybrid between a lion and an ' Island ' tiger was successfully mated with a lion at the Munich Hellabrunn Zoo .
The female cub , though of delicate health , was raised to adulthood .
In September 2012 , the Russian Novosibirsk Zoo announced the birth of a " liliger " , which is the offspring of a liger mother and a lion father .
The cub was named Kiara .
APPEARANCE Section::::Appearance .
Ligers have a tiger - like striped pattern that is very faint upon a lionesque tawny background .
In addition , they may inherit rosettes from the lion parent ( lion cubs are rosetted and some adults retain faint markings ) .
These markings may be black , dark brown or sandy .
The background colour may be correspondingly tawny , sandy or golden .
In common with tigers , their underparts are pale .
The actual pattern and colour depend on which subspecies the parents were and on how the genes interact in the offspring .
White tigers have been crossed with lions to produce " white " ( actually pale golden ) ligers .
In theory , white tigers could be crossed with white lions to produce white , very pale or even stripeless ligers .
There are no black ligers .
Very few melanistic tigers have ever been recorded , most being due to excessive markings ( pseudo - melanism or abundism ) rather than true melanism ; no reports of black lions have ever been substantiated .
As blue or Maltese tigers probably no longer exist , grey or blue ligers are exceedingly improbable .
It is not impossible for a liger to be white , but it is very rare .
ZOO POLICIES Section::::Zoo policies .
Keeping the two species separate has been standard procedure .
However , ligers have occurred and do occur by accident in captivity .
Several AZA zoos are reported to have ligers .
CO - OCCURRENCE OF PARENTAL SPECIES Section::::Co - occurrence of parental species .
As with the tigon , the liger exists only in captivity .
Historically , the Asiatic lion and Bengal tiger co - occurred in some Asian countries , and there are legends of male lions mating with tigresses in the wilderness , or of ligers existing there .
The Caspian tiger co - occurred with the lion in places like northern Iran and eastern Anatolia ( Turkey ) .
SEE ALSO
* Felid hybrid
* Leopon * Heterosis * List of portmanteaus
* Panthera hybrid REFERENCES
*
This article incorporates text from messybeast.com , which is released under the GFDL .
FURTHER READING
* Peters , G. " Comparative Investigation of Vocalisation in Several Felids " published in German in Spixiana - Supplement , 1978 ; ( 1 ) : 1–206 . * Courtney , N. The Tiger , Symbol of Freedom .
Quartet Books , London , 1980 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Richmond palladium and sun - telegram : The Theater Theatrical Calendar