TIMOTHY - GRASS Timothy - grass ( Phleum pratense ) is an abundant perennial grass native to most of Europe except for the Mediterranean region .
It is also known simply as timothy , meadow cat's - tail or common cat 's tail .
It is a member of the genus Phleum , consisting of about 15 species of annual and perennial grasses .
It is probably named after Timothy Hanson , an American farmer and agriculturalist said to have introduced it from New England to the southern states in the early 18th century .
Upon his recommendation it became a major source of hay and cattle fodder to British farmers in the mid-18th century .
Timothy - grass can be confused with meadow foxtail ( Alopecurus pratensis ) and purple - stem cat's - tail ( Phleum phleoides ) .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
It grows to tall , with leaves up to long and broad .
The leaves are hairless , rolled rather than folded , and the lower sheaths turn dark brown .
It has no stolons or rhizomes , and no auricles .
The flowerhead is long and broad , with densely packed spikelets .
It flowers from June until September .
The stamen are pink .
The ligule is short and blunt .
It grows well in heavy soil , and is noted for its resistance to cold and drought , and thus ability to grow in dry upland or poor sandy soils .
In pasture it tends to be overwhelmed by more competitive grasses .
After cutting it grows slowly .
SUBSPECIES Section::::Subspecies .
There are two subspecies : *
Phleum pratense subsp .
pratense .
Larger , to tall .
Widespread .
* Phleum pratense subsp .
bertolonii .
Smaller , to tall .
Calcareous grassland .
CULTIVATION AND USES Section::::Cultivation and uses .
Timothy - grass was unintentionally introduced to North America by early settlers , and was first described in 1711 by John Hurd from plants growing in New Hampshire .
Hurd named the grass " hurd grass " but a farmer named
Timothy Hanson began to promote cultivation of it as a hay about 1720 , and the grass has been known by its present name since then .
Timothy has now become naturalized throughout most of the US and Canada .
It is commonly grown for cattle feed and , in particular , as hay for horses .
It is relatively high in fibre , especially when cut late .
It is considered a harsh , coarse grass little relished by livestock if cut earlier .
It is considered part of the standard mix for grass hay and provides quality nutrition for horses .
Timothy hay is a staple food for domestic pet rabbits , guinea pigs , chinchillas , and degus , often making up the bulk of their diet .
Timothy hay is rich in long fibre and its abrasive texture helps to grind down the teeth , keeping both the teeth and jaw in good order .
The caterpillars of some Lepidoptera use it as a food plant , e.g. the Essex skipper ( Thymelicus lineola ) and the marbled white ( Melanargia galathea ) .
It also grows in roadsides and abandoned fields but generally requires nutrient - rich soils .
Its pollen is a common allergen ; it has recently been used in small amounts as part of a new hay fever vaccine Grazax , which is designed to recondition the body 's immune system so it no longer responds to pollen .
Plants persist through the winter .
Dead , straw - colored flowering stems may persist , but only for a short time , and are recognized by the distinctive spike - like inflorescence .
CONFUSION WITH OTHER SPECIES Section::::Confusion with other species .
It is often confused with meadow foxtail ( Alopecurus pratensis ) .
Timothy flowers later , from June until August , whereas meadow foxtail flowers from April until June .
The spikelets of timothy are twin hornlike projections arranged in cylindrical panicles , whereas foxtail has a soft , single awn .
Purple - stem cat's - tail
( Phleum phleoides ) prefers lighter soils and grows on chalk downland .
Mountain timothy ( Phleum alpinum ) grows above 6,000 feet .
A " wild Timothy " was found to grow in Yosemite at the time of its discovery but may have been a foxtail .
Timothy canary grass ( Phalaris angusta ) , another species with a similar cylindrical panicle , is toxic to livestock .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Flora Europaea :
Phleum pratense * Timothy - US Department of Agriculture