NOLAN CHART
The Nolan Chart is a political spectrum diagram created by American libertarian activist David Nolan in 1969 .
The chart divides human political views into two vectors — economic opinion and personal opinion — to produce a type of Cartesian chart .
It expands political view analysis beyond the traditional left – right line , which measures politics along a one - dimensional line , into a graph with two dimensions : degrees of economic freedom and personal freedom .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The claim that political positions can be located on a chart with two axes : left - right ( economics ) and tough - tender ( authoritarian - libertarian ) was put forward by the British psychologist Hans Eysenck in his 1954 book The Psychology of Politics with statistical evidence based on survey data .
This leads to a loose classification of political positions into four quadrants , with further detail based on exact position within the quadrant .
A similar two - dimensional chart appeared in 1970 in the publication The Floodgates of Anarchy by Stuart Christie and Albert Meltzer , but that work distinguished between the axes collectivism – capitalism on the one hand , individualism – totalitarianism on the other , with anarchism , fascism , " state communism " and " capitalist individualism " in the corners .
In Radicals for Capitalism ( p. 321 ) , Brian Doherty attributes the idea for the chart to an article by Maurice Bryson and William McDill in The Rampart Journal of Individualist Thought ( Summer 1968 ) entitled " The Political Spectrum : A Bi - Dimensional Approach " .
David Nolan first published his version of the chart in an article named " Classifying and Analyzing Politico - Economic Systems " in the January 1971 issue of The Individualist , the monthly magazine of the Society for Individual Liberty ( SIL ) .
In December 1971 , he helped to start the group that would become the Libertarian Party .
Frustrated by the " left - right " line analysis that leaves no room for other ideologies , Nolan devised a chart with two axes which would come to be known as the Nolan Chart , and later became the centerpiece of the World 's Smallest Political Quiz .
Nolan 's argument was that the major difference between various political philosophies , the real defining element in what a person believes politically , is the amount of government control over human action that is advocated .
Nolan further reasoned that virtually all human political action can be divided into two broad categories : economic and personal .
The " economic " category includes what people do as producers and consumers – what they can buy , sell and produce , where they work , who they hire and what they do with their money .
Examples of economic activity include starting or operating a business , buying a home , constructing a building and working in an office .
The " personal " category includes what people do in relationships , in self - expression and what they do with their own bodies and minds .
Examples of personal activities include whom they marry ; choosing what books they read and movies they watch ; what foods , medicines and drugs they choose to consume ; recreational activities ; religious choices ; organizations they join ; and with whom they choose to associate .
According to Nolan , since most government activity ( or government control ) occurs in these two major areas , political positions can be defined by how much government control a person or political party favors in these two areas .
The extremes are no government at all in either area ( anarchism ) or total or near - total government control of everything ( various forms of totalitarianism ) .
Most political philosophies fall somewhere in between .
In broad terms : * Those on the right , including American conservatives , tend to favor more freedom in economic matters ( example : a free market ) , but more government intervention in personal matters ( example : drug laws ) .
* Those on the left , including American liberals , tend to favor more freedom in personal matters ( example : no military draft ) , but more government activism or control in economics ( example : a government - mandated minimum wage ) .
* Libertarians favor both personal and economic freedom and oppose most ( or all ) government intervention in both areas .
Like conservatives , libertarians believe in free markets .
Like liberals , libertarians believe in personal freedom .
* Authoritarians favor a lot of government control in both the personal and economic areas .
Different versions of the chart as well as Nolan 's original chart use terms such as " totalitarian " , " statist " , " communitarian " or " populist " to label this corner of the chart .
In order to visually express this argument , Nolan came up with a two - axis graph .
One axis was for economic freedom and the other was for personal freedom , with the scale on each of the two axes ranging from zero ( total state control ) to 100 % ( no state control ) .
100 % freedom in economics would mean an entirely free market ( laissez - faire ) ; 100 % freedom in personal issues would mean no government control of private , personal life .
By using the scale on each of the two axes , it was possible to graph the intersection of the amount of personal liberty and economic liberty a person , political organization , or political philosophy advocates .
Therefore , instead of classifying all political opinion on a one - dimensional range from left to right , Nolan 's chart allowed two - dimensional measurement : how much ( or little ) government control a person favored in personal and economic matters .
Nolan said that one of the impacts of his chart is that when someone views it , it causes an irreversible change as viewers henceforth view the included orientations in two dimensions instead of one .
In 1987 , Marshall Fritz , founder of Advocates for Self - Government , tweaked the chart and added ten questions – which he called the World 's Smallest Political Quiz – which enabled people to plot their political beliefs on the chart .
POSITIONS Section::::Positions .
Differing from the traditional left –
right distinction and other political taxonomies
, the Nolan Chart in its original form has two dimensions , with a horizontal x - axis labeled " economic freedom " and a vertical y - axis labeled " personal freedom " .
It resembles a square divided into five sections , with a label assigned to each of the following sections :
* Bottom left – Statism .
The opposite of libertarianism , corresponding with those supporting low economic and personal freedom .
*
Top left – Left - wing political philosophies .
Those supporting low economic freedom and high personal freedom .
* Bottom right –
Right - wing political philosophies .
Those supporting high economic freedom and low personal freedom .
*
Top right – Libertarians .
David Nolan 's own philosophy , corresponding with those supporting high economic and personal freedom .
* Center – Centrism .
The center area defines the political middle , for those who favor a mixed system balancing both economic and personal freedom with the need for some market regulation and personal sacrifice .
POLLING
Section::::Polling .
In August 2011 , the libertarian Reason magazine worked with the Rupe organization to survey 1,200 Americans by telephone and place their views within the Nolan chart categories .
The Reason - Rupe poll found that " Americans can not easily be bundled into either the ' liberal ' or ' conservative ' groups " .
Specifically , 28 % expressed conservative views , 24 % expressed libertarian views , 20 % expressed communitarian views and 28 % expressed liberal views .
The margin of error was ±3 .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
The Nolan chart is problematic to those who equate economic regulation with personal freedom and because the libertarian definition of freedom is different from the leftist definition .
In his book Eight Ways to Run the Country : A New and Revealing Look at the Left and the Right , Brian Patrick Mitchell gives three reasons for the perception that the chart has a libertarian bias .
First , the chart shows no division between the personal and the economic .
Second , personal freedoms are defined from different perspectives by the right and the left .
Third , " the chart is based on a Libertarian definition of freedom not accepted by most Liberals " .
SEE ALSO
* Political compass * Political spectrum REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A modern version of the Nolan Chart * Nolan Chart website * The Nolan Chart and its variations
* Positive & Negative Liberties in Three Dimensions
*
The Enhanced Precision Political Quiz ...
IN 2D * Political Profile Test * Political Spectrum Quiz * A voting index of the U.S. Congress ( prepared by Prof. Clifford F. Thies for the Republican Liberty Caucus )