DUKE OF SUSSEX
The Duke of Sussex is a substantive title , one of several royal dukedoms , that has been created twice in the Peerage of the United Kingdom .
It takes its name from the county of Sussex in England .
The dukedom was first conferred on 24 November 1801 upon Prince Augustus Frederick , the sixth son of King George III .
He was made Baron Arklow and Earl of Inverness at the same time , also in the Peerage of the United Kingdom .
The title became extinct upon Prince Augustus Frederick 's death in 1843 .
Although he was survived by a son and daughter by Lady Augusta Murray , their marriage had been annulled for lack of royal permission under the Royal Marriages Act 1772 , rendering the children illegitimate under English law and unable to inherit titles from their father .
Both children by the annulled marriage died childless , rendering the issue of their inheritance moot .
In 2018 , the title was recreated and granted to Prince Harry to mark the occasion of his wedding to Meghan Markle .
Prince Harry was granted the subsidiary titles Earl of Dumbarton in Scotland and Baron Kilkeel in Northern Ireland at the same time .
HISTORY Section::::History .
A title associated with Sussex first appeared with the Kingdom of Sussex , an Anglo - Saxon kingdom that was annexed by the Kingdom of Wessex about 827 and that later became part of the Kingdom of England .
In charters , Sussex 's monarchs were sometimes referred to as ealdormen , or duces in Latin , which is sometimes translated as " dukes " .
The title of Duke of Sussex was conferred upon Prince Augustus Frederick , the sixth son of King George III , on 24 November 1801 .
Prince Augustus Frederick married Lady Augusta Murray at St George 's Hanover Square Church , Westminster in 1793 , and secondly Lady Cecilia Gore at Great Cumberland Place , London , on 2 May 1831 .
Both marriages were in contravention of the Royal Marriages Act 1772 ; thus the couple 's children were illegitimate .
Not being the Prince 's legitimate wife , Lady Cecilia could not be received at court .
On 30 March 1840 , she was given the title of Duchess of Inverness in her own right by Queen Victoria .
Since Augustus Frederick had no legitimate issue , his titles became extinct on his death in 1843 .
In 1999 , before the wedding of Prince Edward , the youngest son of Elizabeth II , some had suggested the Dukedoms of Sussex or Cambridge as the most likely title to be granted to him .
Instead , Prince Edward was created Earl of Wessex , and it was announced that he would eventually be created Duke of Edinburgh , a title currently held by his father , Prince Philip .
There was again speculation that Prince William might be given the Sussex title on his wedding to Catherine Middleton in April 2011 , but he was instead created Duke of Cambridge .
On 19 May 2018 Prince Harry was created Duke of Sussex in England , Earl of Dumbarton in Scotland , and Baron Kilkeel in Northern Ireland to mark the occasion of his wedding to Meghan Markle , the first Duchess of Sussex .
DUKES OF SUSSEX FIRST CREATION , 1801 Section::::Dukes of Sussex .
Section::::First creation , 1801 .
Prince Augustus
FrederickHouse of Hanover1801–1843 SECOND CREATION , 2018
Section::::Second creation , 2018 .
Prince HarryHouse of Windsor2018–present FAMILY TREE
SEE ALSO * Earl of Sussex REFERENCES