ARCTIC HARE
The Arctic hare ( Lepus arcticus ) is a species of hare which is highly adapted to living in the Arctic tundra , and other icy biomes .
The Arctic hare survives with shortened ears and limbs , a small nose , fat that makes up 20 % of its body , and a thick coat of fur .
It usually digs holes in the ground or under snow to keep warm and sleep .
Arctic hares look like rabbits but have shorter ears , are taller when standing , and , unlike rabbits , can thrive in extreme cold .
They can travel together with many other hares , sometimes huddling with dozens or more , but are usually found alone , sometimes taking more than one partner .
The Arctic hare can run up to .
PREDATORS Section::::Predators .
Known predators of the Arctic hare are the Arctic fox ( Vulpes lagopus ) , red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) , gray wolf ( Canis lupus ) , Canada lynx ( Lynx canadensis ) ,
ermine ( Mustela erminea ) , snowy owl ( Bubo scandiacus ) , gyrfalcon ( Falco rusticolus ) , rough - legged hawk ( Buteo lagopus ) , and humans ( Homo sapiens ) .
The Arctic wolf is probably the most successful predator of the Arctic hare , and even young wolves in their first autumn can catch adult hares .
Arctic foxes and ermines , which are smaller , typically prey on young hares .
Gyrfalcon carry hares to their nests , cutting them in half first ; gyrfalcons use hare bones and feet in the structure of their nests on Ellesmere Island , Nunavut .
Peregrine falcons ( Falco peregrinus ) also prey on Arctic hares in the southern end of the hares ' range .
The Snowy owls mainly targets young hare ; the French common name of the species derives from Anglo - Saxon harfang ( " hare - catcher " ) .
Four groups of parasites have been known to use Arctic hares as a host : protozoans ( Eimeria exigua , E. magna , E. perforans , and E. sculpta ) ; nematodes ( including Filaria and Oxyuris ambigua ) ; lice ( including Haemodipsus lyriocephalus and H. setoni ) and fleas ( including Hoplopsyllus glacialis , Euhoplopsyllus glacialis , and Megabothris groenlandicus .
Fleas are more common than parasitic worms .
RANGE AND HABITAT Section::::Range and habitat .
The Arctic hare is distributed over the northernmost regions of Greenland , the Canadian Arctic islands and Northern Canada , including Ellesmere Island , and further south in Labrador and Newfoundland .
The Arctic hare is well - adapted to the conditions found in the tundras , plateaus and treeless coasts of this region , including cold weather and frozen precipitation .
The Arctic hare may be found at elevations between 0 ( sea level ) and 900 m. In Newfoundland and southern Labrador , the Arctic hare changes its coat color , moulting and growing new fur , from brown or grey in the summer to white in the winter , like some other Arctic animals including ermine and ptarmigan , enabling it to remain camouflaged as their environments change .
However , the Arctic hares in the far north of Canada , where summer is very short , remain white all year round .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
The Arctic hare is one of the largest living lagomorphs .
On average , this species measures from long , not counting a tail length of .
The body mass of this species is typically between , though large individuals can weigh up to .
The Arctic hare is a herbivore , and specifically a folivore .
Arctic hares feed primarily on woody plants , and willow constitutes 95 percent of their diet year - round .
Arctic hares predominantly consume such as saxifrage , crowberry , and dwarf willow , but can also eat a variety of other foods , including lichens and mosses , blooms , other species ' leaves , twigs and roots , mountain sorrel and macroalgae ( seaweed ) .
Arctic hare diets are more diverse in summer , but still primarily consists of willow , dryas and grasses .
Arctic hare have been reported to occasionally eat meat , including fish and the stomach contents of eviscerated caribou .
They eat snow to get water .
Female hares can have up to eight baby hares called leverets .
The leverets stay within the mother 's home range until they are old enough to survive on their own .
There is little information on the lifespan of Arctic hare .
Some anecdotal evidence suggests they live three to five years in the wild .
Arctic hare do not survive well in captivity , living only a year and a half at most .
SUBSPECIES Section::::Subspecies .
There are four subspecies of this hare : *
Lepus arcticus arcticus
* Lepus arcticus banksii
* Lepus arcticus groenlandicus
* Lepus arcticus monstrabilis REFERENCES