TASTE BUD Taste buds contain the taste receptor cells , which are also known as gustatory cells .
The taste receptors are located around the small structures known as papillae found on the upper surface of the tongue , soft palate , upper esophagus , the cheek , and epiglottis .
These structures are involved in detecting the five elements of taste perception : salty , sour , bitter , sweet and umami .
A popular myth assigns these different tastes to different regions of the tongue ; in reality these tastes can be detected by any area of the tongue .
Via small openings in the tongue epithelium , called taste pores
, parts of the food dissolved in saliva come into contact with the taste receptors .
These are located on top of the taste receptor cells that constitute the taste buds .
The taste receptor cells send information detected by clusters of various receptors and ion channels to the gustatory areas of the brain via the seventh , ninth and tenth cranial nerves .
On average , the human tongue has 2,000–8,000 taste buds .
TYPES OF PAPILLAE Section::::Types of papillae .
The taste buds on the tongue sit on raised protrusions of the tongue surface called papillae .
There are three types of lingual papillae that contain taste buds present on the human tongue : *
Fungiform papillae - as the name suggests , these are slightly mushroom - shaped if looked at in longitudinal section .
These are present mostly at the dorsal surface of the tongue , as well as at the sides .
Innervated by facial nerve .
*
Foliate papillae - these are ridges and grooves towards the posterior part of the tongue found at the lateral borders .
Innervated by facial nerve ( anterior papillae ) and glossopharyngeal nerve ( posterior papillae ) .
*
Circumvallate papillae - there are only about 10 to 14 of these papillae on most people , and they are present at the back of the oral part of the tongue .
They are arranged in a circular - shaped row just in front of the sulcus terminalis of the tongue .
They are associated with ducts of Von Ebner 's glands , and are innervated by the glossopharyngeal nerve .
The fourth type of papillae the filiform papillae are the most numerous but do not contain taste buds .
They are characterized by increased keratinisation and are involved in the mechanical aspect of providing abrasion .
Salt , sweet , sour and umami tastes causes depolarization of the taste cells , although different mechanisms are applied .
Bitter causes an internal release of Ca , no external Ca is required .
The bud is formed by two kinds of cells : supporting cells and gustatory cells .
The supporting ( sustentacular cells ) are mostly arranged like the staves of a cask , and form an outer envelope for the bud .
Some , however , are found in the interior of the bud between the gustatory cells .
The gustatory ( taste ) cells , which are chemoreceptors , occupy the central portion of the bud ; they are spindle - shaped , and each possesses a large spherical nucleus near the middle of the cell .
The peripheral end of the cell terminates at the gustatory pore in a fine hair filament , the gustatory hair .
The central process passes toward the deep extremity of the bud , and there ends in single or bifurcated varicosities .
The nerve fibrils after losing their medullary sheaths enter the taste bud , and end in fine extremities between the gustatory cells ; other nerve fibrils ramify between the supporting cells and terminate in fine extremities ; these , however , are believed to be nerves of ordinary sensation and not gustatory .
The average life of a taste bud is 10 days .
SEE ALSO
*
Tongue map REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Taste Perception : Cracking the Code
* Scientists Explore the Workings of Taste Buds from National Public Radio 's Talk of the Nation , July 22 , 2005
* http://kidshealth.org/kid/talk/qa/taste_buds.html
For kids about taste buds !
* http://www.newser.com/story/103744/your-lungs-have-their-own-taste-buds.html