RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD ( FILM SERIES )
Return of the Living Dead is a zombie film series of five films beginning with the 1985 film The Return of the Living Dead .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The series came about as a dispute between John A. Russo and George A. Romero over how to handle sequels to their 1968 film , Night of the Living Dead .
The two reached a settlement wherein Romero 's sequels would be referred to as the Dead movies , and Russo 's sequels would bear the suffix Living Dead .
Thus , each man was able to do what he pleased with the series , while still having one another 's work distinct and be considered canon .
Following this decision , Russo wrote a horror novel , Return of the Living Dead , which he planned on adapting into a film script .
Although the film rights were initially sold in 1979 , they were passed along by several different studios and directors before finally being obtained by Tobe Hooper , for whom Russo wrote a script .
Hooper dropped out of the project , though , and the script never came to fruition .
Following Hooper 's departure from the project , Russo , along with his new partner , Dan O'Bannon , wrote a new script ( with Russo adapting it into an accompanying novel ) , also titled The Return of the Living Dead .
This project alleviated confusion by including a scene in which a character acknowledges the George Romero films and explains that while they are based on true events , the events of the Return series are the " true story " .
In addition to this separation of the storylines , the films in the Return series are markedly more comedic than Romero 's films , with slapstick humor .
Although Russo and O'Bannon were only directly involved with the first film in the series , the rest of the films , to varying degrees , stick to their outline and " rules " established in the first film .
The fourth and fifth films in the series were filmed simultaneously near the Chernobyl nuclear power plant station in Ukraine .
Despite being intended for a theatrical release , edited versions of both films made their debut on the SciFi Channel on October 15 , 2005 and were later released on DVD .
A documentary about The Return of the Living Dead , The Return of the Living Dead Part II and The Return of the Living Dead 3 titled More Brains !
A Return to the Living Dead Retrospective was released on October 18 , 2011 .
THE RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD ( 1985 )
Section::::The Return of the Living Dead ( 1985 ) .
Medical supply warehouse foreman Frank ( James Karen ) informs his new protege , Freddy ( Thom Mathews ) that Night of the Living Dead was a true story , based on events that occurred when a gas ( 2 - 4 - 5 Trioxin ) was released into the morgue in the basement of a VA hospital .
The warehouse was the inadvertent recipient of several canisters , one of them containing a corpse – dubbed " Tarman " ( Allan Trautman ) due to his rotten appearance in thick black tar – sealed inside .
Due to the canister 's less than stellar durability , a light tap causes it to burst open , releasing Trioxin .
The gas leaks out of control , which poisons Frank and Freddy and releases " Tarman " from his imprisonment but he goes into hiding , and remains unseen until late in the movie .
Frank and Freddy awaken to discover that various body parts ( and bodies ) in the warehouse are now alive , as well as the cadaver locked in the freezer and even a split dissected dog .
Unaware that they are slowly turning into zombies due to the effects of the gas , Frank and Freddy enlist the help of the warehouse owner , Burt ( Clu Gulager ) , and his mortician friend , Ernie ( Don Calfa ) , to cremate the cadaver 's body parts .
They had tried to chop it up to kill it .
Unfortunately , the resulting smoke carries the evaporated trioxin with it , which then mixes with an overhead raincloud .
It rains on a nearby cemetery , resulting in the reanimation of the buried corpses .
The zombies differ in this movie , in that they are as fast , strong and intelligent as they were in their previous lives , and can form words even when they are merely very degraded bodies .
Instead of hunting humans for their flesh , they hunt for the humans ' brains , stating that brains can ease the pain of their decomposition .
It appears that injuries to their brains do not have any effect , and the only way to fully destroy them is to cremate their bodies , although the ensuing smoke also spreads the contagious gas .
It also seems that their bites are not contagious , as Suicide , who was killed by Tarman never reanimated , while Trash , killed by several zombies in the graveyard later did reanimate ( probably due to the contaminated rain falling on her corpse ) .
RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD PART II ( 1988 )
Section::::Return of the Living Dead Part II ( 1988 ) .
The second film was written and directed by Ken Wiederhorn .
The plot follows seven people as they attempt to escape their town after a mass of undead are awoken due to a barrel full of Trioxin gas that was left over from the first film .
In this film it is revealed that powerful electric discharges are the only secure way of destroying the zombies without the risk of reanimating more corpses ( it seems the electric energy completely annihilates the reanimative effect of the trioxin ) .
The film was released on January 15 , 1988 , and made $ 9 m at the box office in the USA .
RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD 3 ( 1993 )
Section::::Return of the Living Dead 3 ( 1993 ) .
The third film was produced and directed by Brian Yuzna , noted for making the Re - Animator series .
This film switches gears from the first two films ' comedy / horror formula , instead being a romantic drama / teen romance / horror film .
The story involves Curt , whose father , a Colonel in the US Army , is overseeing experiments being performed with Trioxin .
After Curt 's girlfriend , Julie , is killed in a motorcycle accident , he exposes her corpse to the gas , bringing her back to life as a zombie .
Throughout the film , Julie , now one of the living dead , grows hungrier and hungrier for human brains .
She discovers , though , that by causing herself pain via a series of more and more extreme body piercings with springs , nails , glass , basically whatever sharp objects she can find , that she can stave off , although only temporarily , the ghastly hunger growing within her .
The two begin a trek to escape the US Army that ends in the city sewers when Curt , after witnessing Julie kill and eat Riverman , a friendly homeless man who gives them shelter , steps aside to let his father finally put Julie down .
The film ends with Curt rescuing Julie from a fate worse than living death as a biomechanical killer for the military .
In the end , after himself being bitten by a zombie , Curt and Julie step into an incinerator and embrace in a final kiss as the flames engulf them .
This film is currently available in its uncut form on the UK Region 2 DVD .
The film received a limited theatrical release on October 29 , 1993 , where it was a financial failure , making back only $ 54,000 of its $ 2,000,000 budget at the boxoffice in the USA .
RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD :
NECROPOLIS ( 2005 )
Section::::Return of the Living Dead :
Necropolis ( 2005 ) .
Return of the Living Dead : Necropolis , the fourth film in the series , was filmed in Romania and Ukraine .
The film stars Peter Coyote and Aimee Lynn Chadwick .
The plot revolves around a group of teenagers attempting to rescue their friend from an evil corporation .
In doing so , they wind up releasing a horde of blood - thirsty zombies .
An edited version of the film aired on the SciFi Channel on October 15 , 2005 .
The R - rated version of the film was released on DVD on April 18 , 2006 .
The film was originally advertised as Return of the Living Dead 4 :
Necropolis
but once it was finally released , the number 4 was removed from the title .
Both Necropolis ( 4 ) and Rave ( 5 ) are criticized for straying from the series ' rules .
Most notable of these changes is that Trioxin ( spelled Tryoxin in these particular films )
zombies are no longer the indestructible juggernauts of the first movie , but instead much weaker than even " Romero zombies . "
Several times throughout the movie they are seen to be dispatched with no more than a few body shots , sometimes as few as two hits will end their undead life .
Prior to this film nothing short of incineration or electrocution with extreme high voltage would terminate a Tryoxin zombie .
However , this may be a different form of Trioxin ; here , it is referred to as " Tryoxin-5 , " , in lieu of " 2 - 4 - 5 Trioxin " which may explain why the zombies are weaker .
RETURN OF THE LIVING DEAD : RAVE TO THE GRAVE ( 2005 )
Section::::Return of the Living Dead :
Rave to the Grave ( 2005 ) .
Return of the Living Dead :
Rave to the Grave was filmed immediately after Necropolis using the same locations of Romania and Ukraine .
Cory Hardrict , John Keefe , Peter Coyote and Aimee Lynn Chadwick returned from the previous installment .
The film takes place one year after Necropolis and the returning teenage characters , from the previous film , are now college freshmen .
They discover that Tryoxin-5 can be used as a recreational drug named ' Z ' , but the drug will eventually turn the user into a zombie .
The speed of " zombification " depends on the dose of Tryoxin consumed .
An edited version of the film aired along with Return of the Living Dead : Necropolis on the SciFi Channel on October 15 , 2005 .
As was the case with Return of the Living Dead 4 : Necropolis switching to Return of the Living Dead : Necropolis , Return of the Living Dead : Rave to the Grave was advertised as Return of the Living Dead 5 :
Rave to the Grave before removing the number 5 from the title .
The R - rated version of the film was released on DVD on March 20 , 2007 by Lionsgate .
The film also features a humorous cameo appearance by Tarman from the original movie and its first sequel .
However , as opposed to being a major threat like he initially was , the character is mostly used for comedy .
Though when he first appears in the film , he tries to attack the protagonists but later gives up and desperately tries to hitchhike a ride to the party but to no avail .
After scaring away a woman who almost gave him a ride , he has no choice but to walk to the party , yelling his trademark " Brains ! " as he goes .
DOCUMENTARY FILM
Section::::Documentary film .
A documentary titled More Brains !
A Return to the Living Dead , was released in 2011 .
The film is an account of the tongue - in - cheek , stylish and apocalyptic zombie movie , and features contributions from all the main cast as well as clips , photographs , storyboards , conceptual art , publicity materials , archival documents and behind - the - scenes footage .
The documentary includes interviews with over thirty cast and crew from the first three Return of the Living Dead films , including Thom Mathews , Beverly Randolph , Jewel Shepard , John Philbin , Brian Peck , Linnea Quigley , Miguel A. Nunez , Jr. , James Karen , Clu Gulager , Don Calfa , Allan Trautman , Stacey Q , William Stout , Suzanne Snyder , Michael Kenworthy , J. Trevor Edmond , Brian Yuzna and more .
The documentary is directed by Bill Philputt , written by the authors of The Complete History of The Return of the Living Dead , Christian Sellers and Gary Smart , produced by Thommy Hutson and executive produced by Beverly Randolph and Michael Perez for Michael Perez Entertainment and was released on October 18 , 2011 .
The documentary is included on the UK special edition DVD and Blu - ray Disc of Return of the Living Dead , which was released on 4 June 2012 .
CAST Section::::Cast .
List indicator(s ) * A dark grey cell indicates that the character was not in the film or that the character 's presence in the film has yet to be announced .
*
A indicates a role as a younger version of the character .
*
An indicates a role as an older version of the character .
*
A indicates an uncredited role .
*
A indicates a cameo role .
*
A indicates a voice - only role .
*
An indicates an appearance through archival footage or stills . !
rowspan="2 " score="col " width="11 % " Character !
colspan="5 " Film ! score="col
" width="11 % " Living Dead(1985 ) ! score="col " width="11 % " Living DeadPart II(1988 ) ! score="col " width="11 % " Living Dead3(1993 ) ! score="col " width="11 % " ( 2005 ) ! score="col " width="11 % " ( 2005 ) !
Tarman !
Colonel Glover !
Becky Carlton !
Cody !
Julian Garrison !
Uncle Charles !
Zeke Borden !
Jake Garrison !
Burt Wilson !
Frank Johnson !
Ernie Kaltenbrunner !
Freddy Hanscom !
Tina !
Chuck !
Casey !
Spider !
Scuz !
Trash !
Suicide !
Ed Mathews !
Joey Hazel !
Lucy Wilson !
Tom Essex !
Brenda Herzog !
Jesse Wilson !
Doc Mandel !
Billy Crowley !
Pussface ' Zombie'Thriller ' Zombie'Jaw ' Zombie'Eye - Pop ' ZombieZombie on Car Roof !
Julie Walker !
Curt Reynolds !
Col . John Reynolds !
Jenny REFERENCES Section::::References .
6.2nd song from the album
" The war inside " by Alchemy of Death EXTERNAL LINKS *
Halloween Madness :
A Return of the Living Dead Breakdown * Uneeda Return of the Living Dead Site
* Return of the Living Dead 1 site with sample frames – from the Cinematographer