CHAMBER OF COMMERCE
A chamber of commerce ( or board of trade ) is a form of business network , for example , a local organization of businesses whose goal is to further the interests of businesses .
Business owners in towns and cities form these local societies to advocate on behalf of the business community .
Local businesses are members , and they elect a board of directors or executive council to set policy for the chamber .
The board or council then hires a President , CEO or Executive Director , plus staffing appropriate to size , to run the organization .
The first chamber of commerce was founded in 1599 in Marseille , France .
Another official chamber of commerce would follow 65 years later , probably in Bruges , then part of the Spanish Netherlands .
The world 's oldest English - speaking chamber of commerce is the Jersey Chamber founded in February 1768 , the same year the New York City Chamber was founded , The oldest known existing chamber in the English - speaking world with continuous records , the Glasgow Chamber of Commerce , was founded in 1783 .
However , Hull Chamber of Commerce is the UK 's oldest , followed by those of Leeds and of Belfast in present day Northern Ireland .
As a non - governmental institution , a chamber of commerce has no direct role in the writing and passage of laws and regulations that affect businesses .
It may however , lobby in an attempt to get laws passed that are favorable to businesses .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Membership in an individual chamber can range from a few dozen to well over 800,000 , as is the case with the Paris Île - de - France Regional Chamber of Commerce and Industry .
Some chamber organizations in China report even larger membership numbers .
Chambers of commerce can range in scope from individual neighborhoods within a city or town up to an international chamber of commerce .
In the United States , chambers do not operate in the same manner as the Better Business Bureau in that , while the BBB has the authority to bind its members under a formal operation doctrine ( and , thus , can remove them if complaints arise regarding their services ) , the local chamber membership is either voluntary or required by law .
In addition , Chambers represent the interests of businesses , while the BBB represents both the interests of businesses and the general public .
Some Chambers are partially funded by local government , others are non - profit , and some are a combination of the two .
Chambers of commerce also can include economic development corporations or groups ( though the latter can sometimes be a formal branch of a local government , the groups work together and may in some cases share office facilities ) as well as tourism and visitor bureaus .
Some chambers have joined state , national ( such as the United States Chamber of Commerce and the British Chambers of Commerce ) and even international bodies ( such as Eurochambres , the International Chamber of Commerce ( ICC ) , Worldchambers ) .
Currently , there are about 13,000 chambers registered in the official Worldchambers Network registry , and the chamber of commerce network is the largest business network globally .
This network is informal , with each local chamber incorporated and operating separately , rather than as a chapter of a national or state chamber .
CHAMBER MODELS
COMMUNITY , CITY AND REGIONAL CHAMBERS Section::::Chamber models .
Section::::Community , city and regional chambers .
Chambers of commerce in the United States can be considered community , city , regional , state , or nationwide ( United States Chamber of Commerce ) .
City Chambers work on the local level to bring the business community together to develop strong local networks , which can result in a business - to - business exchange .
In most cases , city Chambers work with their local government , such as their mayor , their city council and local representatives to develop pro - business initiatives .
There are also bilateral chambers of commerce that link the business environments of two countries ( e.g. Romanian - American Chamber of Commerce , Moldovan – American Chamber of Commerce ) .
COMMUNITY CHAMBERS Section::::Community chambers .
Community chambers of commerce started in the UK and later spread to in the US , becoming city chambers of commerce as communities developed and became larger .
Community chambers of commerce are smaller and most have a limit on numbers of members .
CITY CHAMBERS Section::::City chambers .
City chambers of commerce have a long history in the US .
The Charleston Chamber of Commerce is one of the oldest , dating back to colonial 1773 .
That same year , Boston 's Chamber of Commerce organized a seminal tax protest : The Boston Tea Party .
In 2005 there were 2,800 chambers of commerce in the United States and 102 chambers representing U.S. businesses overseas .
According to the Association for Chamber of Commerce Executives ( ACCE ) , there are approximately 3,000 chambers of commerce with at least one staff person and " thousands more established as strictly volunteer entities " .
STATE CHAMBERS Section::::State chambers .
State chambers of commerce are much different from local and regional chambers of commerce , as they work on state and sometimes federal issues impacting the business community .
Just as the local chamber is critical to the local business community , state chambers serve a unique function , serving as a third party voice on important business legislation that impact the business community and are critical in shaping legislation in their respective state .
State Chambers work with their Governor , state representatives , state senators , US congressional leaders and US Senators .
In comparison with state trade associations , which serve as a voice and resource to a particular industry , state chambers are looked to as a respected voice , representing the entire business community to enhance and advocate for a better business environment .
NATIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL CHAMBERS Section::::National and international chambers .
Understanding the National or International need for understanding and information is the key service that these level of chambers of commerce provide .
These services are in most cases are at no fee or cost to their members , some of the resources offer personal and/or business services that may have a very low fee ( Memberships to other association like the NRA etc . ) .
COMPULSORY OR PUBLIC - LAW CHAMBERS Section::::Compulsory or
public - law chambers .
Under the compulsory or public law model , enterprises of certain sizes , types , or sectors are obliged to become members of the chamber .
This model is common in European Union countries ( e.g. France , Germany , Italy , Spain , Austria ) , as well as Japan .
Main tasks of the chambers are foreign trade promotion , vocational training , regional economic development , and general services to their members .
The chambers were given responsibilities of public administration in various fields by the state which they exercise in order management .
The chambers also have a consultative function ; this means the chambers must be consulted whenever a new law related to industry or commerce is proposed .
In Germany , the chambers of commerce and industry ( IHK - Industrie- und Handelskammer ) and the chambers of skilled crafts ( HwK - Handwerkskammer ) are public statutory bodies with self - administration under the inspectorate of the state ministry of economy .
Enterprises are members by law according to the chamber act ( IHK - Gesetz ) of 1956 .
Because of this , such chambers are much bigger than chambers under private law .
IHK Munich , the biggest German chamber of commerce , has 350,000 member companies .
Germany also has compulsory chambers for " free occupations " such as architects , dentists , engineers , lawyers , notaries , physicians and pharmacists .
CONTINENTAL /
PRIVATE LAW CHAMBERS Section::::Continental / private law chambers .
Under the private model , which exists in English - speaking countries like USA , Canada or the UK , but as well in Sweden , Finland , Norway and Denmark , companies are not obligated to become chamber members .
However , companies often become members to develop their business contacts and , regarding the local chambers ( the most common level of organization ) , to demonstrate a commitment to the local economy .
Though governments are not required to consult chambers on proposed laws , the chambers are often contacted given their local influence and membership numbers .
MULTILATERAL CHAMBERS Section::::Multilateral chambers .
A multilateral chamber is formed of companies ( and sometimes individuals ) from different countries with a common business interest towards or in a specific country .
It can further be active in representing the interests of local and foreign investors in that specific country , achieved through promotion and proactivity regarding the general business environment .
Multilateral chambers of commerce are independent entities strengthening business relations and interactions between all economic players , and their members may benefit from a broad range of activities that enhance the visibility and reputation of their business .
SURVEYS Section::::Surveys .
In many countries Chambers of Commerce are a source of private sector information .
The information is usually gathered by surveying Chamber members .
The British Chambers of Commerce Quarterly Economic Survey is an example of a Chambers of Commerce survey that is used by official governmental departments as a guide to the performance of the economy .
SEE ALSO
* Lobbying * Non - governmental organization
* Trade group * Trade union * British Chambers of Commerce
* United States Chamber of Commerce * Federation of Pakistan Chambers of Commerce & Industry * Camera di Commercio , Industria , Agricoltura e Artigianato - Italy * European Federation of Bilateral Chambers of Commerce REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* International Chamber of Commerce / World Chambers Federation * Chamber Search