STONE MOUNTAIN Stone Mountain is a quartz monzonite dome monadnock and the site of Stone Mountain Park near Stone Mountain , Georgia .
At its summit , the elevation is above sea level and above the surrounding area .
Stone Mountain is well known for not only its geology , but also the enormous rock relief on its north face , the largest bas - relief in the world .
The carving depicts three Confederate figures , Jefferson Davis , Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson , and has been the subject of widespread controversy .
Stone Mountain was once owned by the Venable Brothers and was the site of the founding of the second Ku Klux Klan in 1915 .
It was purchased by the State of Georgia in 1958 " as a memorial to the Confederacy . "
Stone Mountain Park officially opened on April 14 , 1965 – 100 years to the day after Lincoln 's assassination .
It is the most visited destination in the state of Georgia .
Stone Mountain is more than in circumference at its base .
The summit of the mountain can be reached by a walk - up trail on the west side of the mountain or by the Skyride aerial tram .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
Stone Mountain is a pluton , a type of igneous intrusion .
Primarily composed of quartz monzonite , the dome of Stone Mountain was formed during the formation of the Blue Ridge Mountains around 300–350 million years ago ( during the Carboniferous period ) , part of the Appalachian Mountains .
It formed as a result of the upwelling of magma from within the Earth 's crust .
This magma solidified to form granite within the crust five to ten miles below the surface .
The Stone Mountain pluton continues underground at its longest point into Gwinnett County .
Numerous reference books and Georgia literature have dubbed Stone Mountain as " the largest exposed piece of granite in the world " .
This misconception is most likely a result of misrepresentation by granite companies and early park administration .
Stone Mountain , though often called a pink granite dome , actually ranges in composition from quartz monzonite to granite and granodiorite .
The minerals within the rock include quartz , plagioclase feldspar , microcline and muscovite , with smaller amounts of biotite and tourmaline .
The tourmaline is mostly black in color , and the majority of it exists as optically continuous skeletal crystals , but much larger , euhedral pegmatitic tourmaline crystals can also be found in the mountain 's numerous , cross - cutting felsic dikes .
Embedded in the granite are xenoliths or pieces of foreign rocks entrained in the magma .
The granite intruded into the metamorphic rocks of the Piedmont region during the last stages of the Alleghenian Orogeny , which was the time when North America and North Africa collided .
Over time , erosion eventually exposed the present mountain of more resistant igneous rock .
This intrusion of granite also gave rise to Panola Mountain and Arabia Mountain , both in DeKalb County , smaller outcroppings farther south of Stone Mountain .
NATURAL HISTORY Section::::Natural history .
The top of the mountain is a landscape of bare rock and rock pools , and it provides views of the surrounding area including the skyline of downtown Atlanta , often Kennesaw Mountain , and on very clear days even the Appalachian Mountains .
On some days , the top of the mountain is shrouded in a heavy fog , and visibility may be limited to only a few feet .
The clear freshwater pools on the summit form by rainwater gathering in eroded depressions , and are home to unusual clam shrimp and fairy shrimp .
The tiny shrimp appear only during the rainy season .
Through the process of cryptobiosis , the tiny shrimp eggs ( or cysts ) can remain dormant for years in the dried out depressions , awaiting favorable conditions .
The mountain 's lower slopes are wooded .
The rare Georgia oak was first discovered at the summit , and several specimens can easily be found along the walk - up trail and in the woods around the base of the mountain .
In the fall , the extremely rare Confederate yellow daisy ( Helianthus porteri ) flowers appear on the mountain , growing in rock crevices and in the large wooded areas .
CONFEDERATE MEMORIAL Section::::Confederate Memorial .
The largest bas - relief sculpture in the world , the Confederate Memorial Carving depicts three Confederate leaders of the Civil War : President Jefferson Davis and Generals Robert E. Lee and Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson ( and their favorite horses , " Blackjack " , " Traveller " , and " Little Sorrel " , respectively ) .
The entire carved surface measures .
The carving of the three men towers above the ground , measures , and is recessed into the mountain .
The deepest point of the carving is at Lee 's right elbow , which is to the mountain 's surface .
The carving was conceived by Mrs. C. Helen Plane , a charter member of the United Daughters of the Confederacy ( UDC ) .
Sam Venable , active in the Ku Klux Klan and owner of the mountain , deeded the north face of the mountain to the UDC in 1916 .
The UDC was given 12 years to complete a sizable Civil War monument .
Gutzon Borglum , also heavily involved with the Klan , was commissioned to do the carving .
Borglum abandoned the project in 1925 ( and later went on to begin Mount Rushmore ) .
The US Mint issued a 1925 Commemorative silver US half dollar , bearing the words " Stone Mountain " , as part of a fundraiser for the monument .
This was the largest issue of commemorative coins by the U.S. government up to that time .
American sculptor Augustus Lukeman continued until 1928 , when further work stopped for thirty years .
In 1941 segregationist Governor Eugene Talmadge formed the Stone Mountain Memorial Association ( SMMA ) to continue work on the memorial , but the project was delayed once again by the U.S. entry into World War II ( 1941–45 ) .
In response to Brown v. Board of Education of 1954 , and the birth of the Civil Rights Movement , in 1958 , at the urging of segregationist Governor Marvin Griffin , the Georgia legislature approved a measure to purchase Stone Mountain at a price of $ 1,125,000 .
In 1963 , Walker Hancock was selected to complete the carving , and work began in 1964 .
The carving was completed by Roy Faulkner , who in 1985 opened the Stone Mountain Carving Museum ( now closed ) on nearby Memorial Drive commemorating the carving 's history .
The carving was completed on March 3 , 1972 .
An extensive archival collection related to the project is now at Emory University , with the bulk of the materials dating from 1915 to 1930 ; the finding aid provides a history of the project , and an index of the papers contained in the collection .
Stone Mountain Park officially opened on April 14 , 1965 – 100 years to the day after Lincoln 's assassination .
Four flags of the Confederacy are flown .
The Stone Mountain Memorial Lawn " contains ...
thirteen terraces — one for each Confederate state ...
Each terrace flies the flag that the state flew as member of the Confederacy . "
INVOLVEMENT OF THE KU KLUX KLAN Section::::Involvement of the Ku Klux Klan .
The rebirth of the Ku Klux Klan – the second Klan — was inspired by D. W. Griffith 's 1915 Klan - glorifying film , The Birth of a Nation .
It was followed in August by the highly publicized lynching of Leo Frank in nearby Marietta , Georgia .
On November 25 of the same year , Thanksgiving Day , a small group , including fifteen robed and hooded " charter members " of the new organization , met at the summit of Stone Mountain to create a new iteration of the Klan .
They were led by William J. Simmons , and included two elderly members of the original Klan .
As part of their ceremony , they set up on the summit an altar covered with a flag , opened a Bible , and burned a 16-foot cross .
Stone Mountain was the location of an annual Labor Day cross - burning ceremony for the next 50 years .
Fundraising for the monument resumed in 1923 .
In October of that year , Venable granted the Klan easement with perpetual right to hold celebrations as they desired .
The influence of the UDC continued , in support of Mrs. Plane 's vision of a carving explicitly for the purpose of creating a Confederate memorial .
She suggested in a letter to the first sculptor , Gutzon Borglum :
The UDC established the Stone Mountain Confederate Memorial Association ( SMCMA ) for fundraising and on - site supervision of the project .
Venable and Borglum , who were both closely associated with the Klan , arranged to pack the SMCMA with Klan members .
The SMCMA , along with the United Daughters of the Confederacy , continued fundraising efforts .
Of the $ 250,000 raised , part came from the federal government , which in 1925 issued special fifty - cent coins with the soldiers Robert E. Lee and Stonewall Jackson on them .
The image on the verso of the coin was based upon ' The Last Meeting of Lee and Jackson ' executed in 1869 by Everett B. D. Fabrino Julio ( American , b. St. Helena 1843 – 1879 , emigrated to US 1860 ) itself an icon of ' Lost Cause ' mythology , now in the American Civil War Museum ( until 2012 the Museum of the Confederacy ) , Richmond VA .
When the state completed the purchase in 1960 , it condemned the property to remove Venable 's agreement to allow the Klan perpetual right to hold meetings on the premises .
CONFEDERATE MEMORIAL CONTROVERSY
Section::::Confederate Memorial controversy .
After the Charleston church shooting in the summer of 2015 , Stone Mountain was the subject of a political debate related to the removal of symbols of the Confederacy .
This controversy was stimulated by a movement in other states to remove the Confederate battle flag and statues of Confederate leaders from public areas .
A proposal was made to remove the Confederate carving from Stone Mountain Park .
However , according to Georgia state law , no one is allowed to alter the figures carved upon the stone face .
Any changes within the state park would require approval by the state legislature .
On October 11 , 2015 , The Atlanta Journal - Constitution reported the park is considering a proposal of a permanent " Freedom Bell " honoring Martin Luther King , Jr. and the line " Let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia " as part of King 's " I Have A Dream " speech of 1963 .
The proposed monument is inspired by a bell - ringing ceremony held in 2013 honoring the 50th anniversary of King 's speech .
It is not supported by the NAACP or King - founded Southern Christian Leadership Conference ( SCLC ) , who want the Confederate symbols removed .
In August 2017 , after the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville , Virginia – a white nationalist protest against the removal of the statues of Robert E. Lee and General Stonewall Jackson – turned violent , many people across the country again demanded the removal of many Confederate monuments and memorials as a part of a national political debate .
Georgia State Representative and Democratic gubernatorial candidate Stacey Abrams called for the removal , by sandblasting , of Stone Mountain 's carving .
She called it " a blight upon our state " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Human habitation of Stone Mountain and its surroundings date back into prehistory .
When the mountain was first encountered by European explorers , its summit was encircled by a rock wall , similar to that still to be found on Georgia 's Fort Mountain .
The wall is believed to have been built by early Native American inhabitants of the area , although its purpose remains unclear .
By the beginning of the 20th century , the wall had disappeared , the rocks having been taken away by early visitors as souvenirs , rolled down the rockface , or removed by the commercial quarrying operation .
The mountain was the eastern end of the Campbellton Trail , a Native American path that ran through what is now the Atlanta area .
Europeans first learned of the mountain in 1567 , when Spanish explorers were told of a mountain farther inland which was " very high , shining when the sun set like a fire .
" By this time , the Stone Mountain area was inhabited by the Creek and ( to a lesser extent )
Cherokee peoples .
In the early 19th century , the area was known as Rock Mountain .
After the founding of DeKalb County and the county seat of Decatur in 1822 , Stone Mountain was a natural recreation area ; it was common for young couples on dates to ride to the mountain on horseback .
The mountain is easy to climb and there has been a path since the nineteenth century .
Entrepreneur Aaron Cloud built a wooden observation tower at the summit of the mountain in 1838 , but it was destroyed by a storm and replaced by a much smaller tower in 1851 .
Visitors to the mountain would travel to the area by rail and road , and then walk up the mountaintop trail to the top , where Cloud also had a restaurant and club .
Granite quarrying started at Stone Mountain in the 1830s , but became a major industry following the completion of a railroad spur to the quarry site in 1847 .
This line was rebuilt by the Georgia Railroad in 1869 .
Over the years , Stone Mountain granite was used in many buildings and structures , including the locks of the Panama Canal , the steps to the East Wing of the United States Capitol and the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo .
In recent years , granite suppliers in Georgia sent stone samples cut from Stone Mountain to the Martin Luther King ,
Jr. Memorial Foundation to be considered for use in a planned monument in King 's honor ; the foundation later chose to use granite imported from China .
Quarrying during earlier periods also destroyed several spectacular geological features on Stone Mountain , such as the Devil 's Crossroads , which was located on top of the mountain .
In 1887 Stone Mountain was purchased for $ 45,000 by the Venable Brothers of Atlanta , who quarried the mountain for 24 more years , and descendants of the Venable family would retain ownership of the mountain until it was purchased by the State of Georgia in the 1950s .
Martin Luther King , Jr. mentioned the monument in his 1963 " I Have a Dream " speech in Washington , D.C. , when he said " let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia ! "
During the 1996 Summer Olympics , Stone Mountain Park provided venues for Olympic events in tennis , archery and track cycling .
The venues for archery and cycling were temporary and are now part of the songbird and habitat trail .
Some of the outdoor scenes for the Netflix series
Stranger Things were filmed in the park .
AVIATION INCIDENTS Section::::Aviation incidents .
According to George Weiblen 's annotated calendar for Monday , May 7 , 1928 : " Mail plane crashed on mountain at
8:00 P.M. " The pilot , Johnny S. Kytle ( 1905–1931 ) , not only survived the crash , but managed to grab the mail and walk down the mountain .
Around dusk on September 16 , 2003 , in clear weather , a small airplane circled the mountain five times , then crashed headlong into the south side , burst into flames and killed the pilot .
A witness testifying at the NTSB investigation stated that the pilot , a 69-year - old accountant , had threatened on multiple occasions to commit suicide by flying into the mountain .
The official NTSB accident report lists the probable cause as " The pilot 's intentional flight into the ground for the purpose of suicide while impaired by alcohol . "
GOVERNANCE
Section::::Governance .
Stone Mountain Park , which surrounds the Confederate Memorial , is owned by the state of Georgia and managed by the Stone Mountain Memorial Association , a Georgia state authority .
The Herschend Family Entertainment Corporation currently has a long - term contract to operate park attractions while the Stone Mountain Memorial Association retains ownership and the right to reject any project deemed unfit .
PLACES OF INTEREST Section::::Places of interest .
Confederate Hall , operated directly by the Stone Mountain Memorial Association ( SMMA ) , is a museum that educates students and park guests on the geology and ecology of Stone Mountain as well as historical aspects of the area .
A small theater shows a historical documentary about the Civil War in Georgia called The Battle for Georgia .
The education department is host to thousands of students each school year , teaching the subjects of geology , ecology , and history .
Classes are designed to meet the Georgia Performance Standards and the North American Association for Environmental Education guidelines .
The Antebellum Plantation and Farmyard is an open - air museum composed of 19 historic buildings , built between 1790 and 1875 , which have been re - erected on the site to represent a pre - Civil War Georgia plantation .
The historic houses have been furnished with an extensive collection of period furniture and decorations .
The farm features a petting zoo .
A 732-bell carillon that originated at the 1964 New York World 's Fair provides a daily concert .
A covered bridge , dating from 1892 , which originally spanned the Oconee River in Athens , Georgia .
A grist mill , dating from 1869 and moved to the park in 1965 .
BROADCAST TOWER Section::::Broadcast tower .
The short broadcast tower on the top of the mountain transmits two non - commercial stations : television station WGTV TV 8 , and weather radio station KEC80 on 162.55 MHz .
FM radio station
WABE FM
90.1 was located on this tower from 1984 until 2005 , when it was required to relocate to accommodate WGTV 's digital conversion .
W266BW
FM 101.1 now has a permit as well .
Atop the tower also sits the W4BOC amateur radio repeater , which operates on a frequency of 146.760 mhz .
The tower is also used for the park 's Project 25 two - way radio systems .
SCENIC RAILROAD STONE MOUNTAIN
TRAILS Section::::Stone Mountain trails .
Walk Up
Trail :
A trail to the top of Stone Mountain ascending in elevation to a height of .
The trail is steep , but spectacular panoramic views and cool winds await hikers at the top .
Cherokee Trail :
A National Recreation Trail , the Cherokee Trail loops around the mountain base , with a mile section going up and over the west side of the mountain
( crosses Walk Up Trail ) .
It passes primarily through an oak - hickory forest , but views of the lakes , streams , and mountain are common .
Nature Garden Trail :
A scenic loop trail through a mature oak - hickory forest community , it is excellent for viewing shade - loving native plants .
A small garden with interpretive native plant signs is at the entrance to the trail .
Songbird Habitat Trails :
Comprising two loop trails each running , the field trail is an excellent birding spot and the woodland trail provides shade and numerous native plants .
Dogs are not allowed .
ATTRACTIONS Section::::Attractions . The park features several attractions that are operated by Herschend Family Entertainment Corporation .
On summer evenings the mountain hosts the Stone Mountain Laser Show Spectacular , a fireworks and laser light display .
The laser lightshow projects moving images of the Deep South as well as Georgia history onto the Confederate Memorial carving on the side of the mountain .
During Memorial Day Weekend of 2011 , Stone Mountain unveiled its overhaul of the laser show , dubbed Mountainvision .
This incorporates digital projectors , lasers , special effects , and pyrotechnics .
The Skyride , a Swiss - built cable car to the summit of the mountain , passes by the carving on the way up .
The Riverboat offered a scenic cruise aboard a reproduction of a Mississippi riverboat on 363-acre ( 147 ha )
Stone Mountain Lake .
It has been retired .
The Antebellum Plantation is a collection of historic buildings relocated from around the state of Georgia , including three plantation manor - houses dating from 1794 , 1850 , and 1845 ; two slave cabins ; a barn ; and other outbuildings .
The Plantation Farmyard features historic breeds of sheep , goats , and pigs .
Crossroads is a recreation of an 1872 southern town with several attractions that include a modern 4-D movie theater , an adventure mini - golf course , a duck tour ride , stores and restaurants .
Craft demonstrators include glass blowing and candy - making .
The Great Barn is a children 's activity area that features 65 interactive games , climbing structures , trampoline floors , and slides .
Sky Hike is a family ropes adventure course .
Geyser Towers is a playground featuring a large fountain at the entrance .
SEE ALSO
* List of colossal sculpture in situ REFERENCES FURTHER READING * Atlanta 's Stone Mountain : A Multicultural History ( 2011 )
Written by :
Paul Stephen Hudson and Laura Pond Mirza .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Atlanta , Georgia , a National Park Service Discover Our Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary * City of Stone Mountain , Georgia , from the City of Stone Mountain * Main Street Stone Mountain * Stone Mountain article , from the New Georgia Encyclopedia * Stone Mountain Park and City Information
* Stone Mountain Park Photos
* Stone Mountain Park website * Stone Mountain Park guide , with current and historical photos * View from the top of Stone Mountain looking Northeast ( 1934 ) and Granite Quarry at Stone Mountain ( 1913 ) from the Georgia Geological Survey photographs in the collection of the Georgia Archives .
* Stone Mountain Granite Corporation – Producers and Manufacturers Stone Mountain Light Gray Granite For Building Work – Dorian Gray For Mausoleums and Monuments & Stone
Mountain Granite Corporation Granite Price List , circa 1914 ( Office , quarries , and finishing plant located at Stone Mountain , Georgia ) * Southeast Granite Company – Stone Mountain Granite Memorial / Monumental Stones Catalog ( 1920s )
* Shades of Gray : The Changing Focus of Stone Mountain Park