HOUSTON LIVESTOCK SHOW AND RODEO
The Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo , also called RodeoHouston or abbreviated HLSR , is the largest livestock exhibitions and rodeo in the world .
It includes one of the richest regular - season professional rodeo events .
It has been held at NRG Stadium in Houston , Texas , since 2003 .
It was previously held in the Astrodome .
It is considered to be the city 's " signature event " , much like New Orleans 's Mardi Gras , Dallas 's Texas State Fair , San Diego 's Comic - Con and New York City 's New Year 's Eve at Times Square .
In 2017 , attendance reached a record high of 2,611,176 people and 33,000 volunteers .
In 2007 , the rodeo was deemed " the year of the volunteer . "
The event is 20 days long .
It is kicked off by the Downtown Rodeo Roundup held near Houston City Hall , the Downtown Rodeo parade , and the ConocoPhillips Rodeo Run – a 10k and 5k walk & run and the World 's Championship Bar - B - Que Contest .
The show features championship rodeo action , livestock competitions , concerts , a carnival , pig racing , barbecue and the Rodeo Uncorked !
International Wine Competition , shopping , sales and livestock auctions .
Traditional trail rides , which start in different areas of Texas and end in Houston , precede the Rodeo events .
The City of Houston celebrates this event with Go Texan Day , where residents are encouraged to dress in western wear the Friday before the rodeo begins .
The rodeo has drawn some of the world 's biggest recording artists , including Beyoncé , Selena Gomez , Fifth Harmony , Demi Lovato , Ariana Grande , Selena , Kiss , Dixie Chicks , Elvis Presley , Bob Dylan , Justin Bieber , Big Time Rush , Brooks & Dunn , George Strait , Janet Jackson , Garth Brooks , Willie Nelson , Kenny Chesney , Bon Jovi , ZZ Top , John Legend , Taylor Swift and Lynyrd Skynyrd , among others .
HISTORY EARLY YEARS Section::::History .
Section::::Early years .
In the early part of the 20th century , Houston - area ranchers developed a new breed of cattle , the American Brahman , which was a blend of four breeds of cattle from India .
The cattle were well - adapted to the hot , swampy conditions of the Texas Gulf Coast .
In the early 1920s , James W. Sartwelle , a stockyard manager from Sealy , Texas , founded the American Brahman Breeders Association .
Ranchers had no opportunities to show their cattle and raise awareness of the breed .
Some attempted to show at the Southwestern Exposition and Livestock Show in Fort Worth , Texas , but they were n't allowed into the main arena .
In January 1931 , Sartwelle invited six other businessmen to a lunch at the Texas State Hotel .
They decided to host a livestock exposition in Houston .
Sartwelle was named the first president of the new Houston Fat Stock Show and Livestock Exposition .
Their inaugural event was held in late April 1932 at Sam Houston Hall in downtown Houston .
It was primarily a regional event , designed to showcase the agriculture and livestock , including Brahmans , in the area around Houston .
The show lasted one week and ran a deficit of $ 2,800 .
Approximately 2,000 people attended the exposition , where they were also entertained by the Future Farmers Band , comprising 68 high school students from around the state .
The Grand Champion Steer was purchased by a local restaurant owner for $ 504 .
The Fat Stock show was held annually for the next four years .
Realizing they had outgrown the space , organizers began looking for a larger venue .
Shortly after the 1936 show ended , Sam Houston Hall was torn down .
Sam Houston Coliseum , a 10,000-seat arena , would take its place .
To allow for construction time , the 1937 exposition was cancelled .
The year off allowed Fat Stock show organizers to solidify plans for a larger event .
When the show resumed in 1938 , it included a parade through downtown Houston , a carnival and midway , and a rodeo with a total purse of $ 640.50 .
In the 1940s , organizers added musical entertainment .
Local talent was invited to perform after the rodeo on some evenings .
In 1942 , singing cowboy Gene Autry became the first nationally recognized entertainer to perform at the show .
Attendance flagged in the early 1950s .
To attract more attention to the event , organizers decided to hold a cattle drive .
In 1952 , the media were invited to join cowboys on a trek from Brenham , Texas to the Fat Stock show .
The publicity stunt was well received .
The following year , the Salt Grass Trail Association again held the cattle drive .
Other areas of the state organized their own trail rides to the show .
This began the transition from a smaller regional event to larger , statewide notice .
Archer Romero , one of the key proponents of the trail ride , took over as president of the Fat Stock Show in 1954 .
That year , he founded the Go Texan Committee to further publicize the show .
The committee would designate a day shortly before the show commenced as Go Texan Day .
They encouraged Houston residents to dress in Western wear .
The day had the dual purpose of celebrating Texas culture and advertising the show .
In 1957 , Myrtis Dightman organized the first trail ride for African - Americans .
He led 10 other cowboys in a ride from Prairie View , Texas to Houston .
Because of their color , they were not welcomed in Memorial Park , where trail riders typically spent the night .
Armed guards were there to ensure that the men could enter safely .
That same year , the show granted its first major scholarship .
Ben Dickerson was given $ 2,000 ( $ 16,000 in 2016 ) towards his education .
This was the first step a major shift in the show 's purpose .
Over the next few decades , the show placed an increasing emphasis on education and scholarships .
ASTRODOME ERA Section::::Astrodome era .
Throughout the 1950s , influential local leaders had been advocating that the city acquire a professional sports team .
In 1957 , the Texas State Legislature granted Harris County the ability to issue bonds to finance a new stadium , so that the city could attract a team .
The county put together a commission to formulate a plan .
Romero stepped down as Fat Stock Show president to join the commission .
They visited stadiums in several large cities , as well as a fairgrounds in Oklahoma .
After several years of research , the commission recommended that the county build both a stadium and a connected , air - conditioned coliseum .
The presentation to the county commissioners listed four main uses for the new facility : 1 ) Major league baseball , 2 ) football , 3 )
the Fat Stock Show , and 4 ) various other activities .
County commissioners approved the project , sending it to a vote of Harris County residents .
Just before the election , Fat Stock Show organizers announced that the show would donate near South Main for the project , provided the show have input into the design .
Voters approved the new stadium , and the Fat Stock Show became one of the focal residents of the new Astrodome .
The show was renamed the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo in 1961 .
The show had continued to grow , and organizers realized that Sam Houston Coliseum would not be a viable alternative for much longer .
The number of exhibitors had declined because many activities were held outside in tents .
The chicken , rabbit , and hog shows were cancelled because organizers could not find space for them .
Construction began on the Astrohall , next to the Astrodome , in 1965 .
The following year , the Livestock Show and Rodeo officially moved to the Astrodome .
To mark their new location , the organizing committee introduced a new logo , the Bowlegged H.
The first night of the rodeo featured entertainment by the stars of the television series Gunsmoke .
Some locals scoffed at the idea that the rodeo and concert could fill a 45,000-seat stadium , but more than 40,000 fans attended the rodeo the night Jimmy Dean performed that year .
Louis Pearce Jr served sixty years as a board member of the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo .
He served on the executive committee as president and CEO , and remained an active executive committee member until his death in 2012 .
As a result of his dedication and significant contributions to the event , Pearce became known as " Mr. Houston Livestock Show " .
The first Hispanic trail ride commenced in 1973 .
Calling themselves Los Vaqueros Rio Grande Trail Ride , the group journeyed from the border crossing at Reynosa , Mexico to Houston .
The Go Texan committee launched the World 's Championship Bar - B - Que Contest in 1974 .
Seventeen teams entered the competition , which was held in the Astrodome parking lot .
Teams were asked to barbecue a minimum of on a wood fire .
The inaugural judges included actor Ben Johnson .
The competition grew in popularity ; by 1981 it had grown to over 200 teams , with 45,000 people visiting .
In 1988 , the show added a 5k run and 10k fun run through downtown Houston .
Participants would pay an entry fee , with proceeds going to the scholarship fund .
1990S Section::::1990s .
By the 1990s , the show had been expanded to 20 days .
Each evening featured a rodeo , sanctioned by the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association ( PRCA ) .
The rodeo offered hundreds of thousands of dollars in prize money , second only to the National Finals Rodeo .
After the rodeo , attendees would see a concert , usually by a famous entertainer .
Tickets were relatively inexpensive .
For $ 10 or a little more , a person could buy a ticket to see the livestock shows , wild west shows , the rodeo and concert , and enjoy the carnival .
The livestock show was billed as the largest of its kind , with more animals shown by adolescents than anywhere else in the country .
Winning livestock were auctioned at the end of the judging , and , in the 1990s , the combined auction take was usually over $ 7 million .
This was far beyond market value .
The rodeo was generally limited to the top PRCA contestants , based on prize money earned throughout the year .
It was popular with cowboys ; Houston won the inaugural Indoor Rodeo Committee of the Year award from the PRCA in 1992 , and then won each of the next four years as well .
The facility had huge screens hanging from the ceiling .
Attendees could watch the competition live , then see an instant replay on the screens .
In 1996 , the rodeo was halted one evening .
The crew on the space shuttle Columbia appeared live on the big screens to address the crowd .
Later that year , country singer George Strait set a record , having played to more than 1 million Houston rodeo attendees .
The 1996 rodeo earned a net profit of $ 16.8 million and gave more than $ 7.9 million away in scholarships , assistantships , and research grants .
The Hideout was created in 1997 to give attendees more entertainment options after the rodeo and concert had ended .
It is a nightclub for adults over 21 to dance and drink .
21ST CENTURY Section::::21st century .
A new venue , Reliant Stadium ( now NRG Stadium ) , was built on the Astrodome grounds in 2002 .
The rodeo marked its last night in the Astrodome on March 3 , 2002 , with a performance by country legend George Strait .
The show was recorded and became Strait 's first official live album , .
Following the show , the Astrohall was torn down .
A new exhibition space , Reliant Center , was constructed on the grounds , expanding exhibition capacity to 1.4 million square feet .
Rodeo executives moved their offices into the second floor of the center .
When the rodeo opened in 2003 in its new homes , Strait performed on opening night .
In the first two seasons at Reliant , the Hideout was cancelled , but it resumed in 2005 , now located within the Astrodome .
In 2004 , show organizers added a new event , Rodeo Uncorked !
International .
Vintners from around the world entered their wines into a competition .
These were then auctioned , raising $ 313,700 .
The following year , the wine auction raised more than $ 500,000 .
To give livestock show attendees the opportunity to taste the wines , the show launched the Wine Garden in 2008 .
Attendance at the rodeo began falling .
Attendees would purchase a ticket and arrive just before the concert , leaving a largely empty stadium for the rodeo itself .
Joe Bruce Hancock , then the general manager of the rodeo , theorized that the audience was more urban and less familiar with rodeo events .
The current show structure moved slowly and made it difficult for this type of audience to follow what was happening .
As one of the PRCA - sanctioned rodeos , show organizers had little ability to make changes .
The PRCA required that certain events be held , dictated the general structure of the rodeo , and insisted that each organizing committee use the PRCA national registration system .
This meant that rodeos did not know which contestants were going to be appearing , or on which days .
The Houston rodeo committee requested a waiver from the PRCA in 2008 .
Houston would still remit 6 % of the rodeo purse to the PRCA , but they would change the format and the registration system .
Now , the rodeo knew who would be competing on which days and could market those individual appearances .
The rodeo was restructured into a playoff format .
Attendance at the rodeo skyrocketed .
Champion bareback rider Bobby Mote said competitors appreciated the changes : "
It was exciting to be a part of because people were really getting into it .
Finally we were performing for a real crowd in Houston .
" The finale of the 2008 rodeo was the PRCA 's Xtreme Bulls tour .
The same year , HLSR was inducted into the ProRodeo Hall of Fame along with 15 other PRCA rodeos that had previously been granted special recognition .
During the 2009 state legislative session , local state senator Mario Gallegos filed a bill that would require the livestock show organizing committee to comply with the state open records rules .
The bill would also encourage the rodeo to contract with more minority - owned business and to add minorities to the livestock show 's executive committee .
At the time , the 19-member executive committee composed entirely of men , without a single Hispanic or African - American representative .
Livestock show president Leroy Shafer insisted that the legislation was unprecedented , and that non - profits should not be held to the same standards as public entities .
Shafer maintained that the executive committee membership was determined in large part by length of volunteer service , with the members having served , on average , for 37.5 years .
According to Shafer , in time minorities and women would accumulate the years of service required to be on the committee .
Minority leaders in Houston advocated a boycott .
The controversy caused new Harris County sheriff Adrian Garcia to decline an invitation to be co - grand marshal of the rodeo parade , although Garcia still marched in the parade as part of the sheriff 's office mounted patrol .
When the Astrodome was permanently closed in 2009 , the Hideout moved to a giant tent on the grounds of the facility .
The rodeo 's waiver from the PRCA expired in 2011 .
Houston applied for a renewal but were denied .
The PRCA was under new management , who insisted that all of their rodeos should abide by the same rules .
The show ended its contract with the organization , making the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo an independent rodeo .
As an unsanctioned rodeo , none of the prize money would count towards competitors ' world standings , and thus qualification for the National Finals Rodeo .
Some competitors were upset with the change , as winning the RodeoHouston $ 50,000 prize had generally been enough to qualify a cowboy for the National Finals Rodeo .
However , because the $ 1.75 million purse was the largest one in rodeo at that time , there was little difficulty in attracting cowboys .
Because they were now independent , the show could now invite specific competitors who might not otherwise have qualified to appear , such as local cowboy , 8-time world champion calf roper Fred Whitfield .
Of the 280 competitors invited to attend in 2012 , all but one accepted .
In an additional change , the rodeo dropped the PRCA 's Xtreme Bulls tour from its last evening .
As a replacement , they offered the Cinch RodeoHouston Super Shootout , inviting the champions from the top 10 rodeos in North America to compete in bull riding , saddle - bronc and bareback riding , and barrel racing .
Two of the rodeos represented , the Calgary Stampede and the Ponoka Stampede , were also non - PRCA sanctioned invitiational rodeos .
Total attendance in 2011 topped 2.26 million , an increase of almost 119,000 people over 2010 .
EVENTS RODEO UNCORKED !
ROUNDUP AND BEST BITES COMPETITION Section::::Events .
Section::::Rodeo Uncorked !
RoundUp and Best Bites Competition .
Almost 3,000 bottles of wine are submitted each year for judging in the Rodeo International Wine Competition .
High scoring wines are served to the public at the Rodeo Uncorked !
RoundUp and Best Bites Competition before the HLSR begins .
More than 5,000 people purchase tickets to attend the event .
There , they can sample food from more than 100 local restaurants and vote on their pick for tastiest food .
During the livestock show , attendees can purchase glasses of these wine entries at the Wine Garden , an outdoor area comprising six tents that shelter 30,000 square feet of space .
Live music is offered in the Wine Garden area each evening .
GO TEXAN DAY
Section::::Go
Texan Day .
The unofficial kickoff of the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo is Go Texan Day .
Traditionally held the Friday before the rodeo begins , the day is meant to encourage the Houston community to celebrate Western culture .
Houston - area residents are encouraged to wear Western attire , such as jeans , cowboy boots , and cowboy hats .
The day is an unofficial holiday , and local school districts and many businesses encourage their students and employees to participate .
Writing in The New York Times , journalist Manny Fernandez described Go Texan Day as " " the one day of the year on which people in Houston dress the way people outside Houston think people in Houston dress " .
TRAIL RIDES Section::::Trail rides .
Since 1952 , traditional trail rides have been a part of the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo .
As of 2017 , there were 13 official trail rides , totaling over 3,000 riders .
The trail rides range in size from a dozen to over one thousand people who ride on horseback or in horse - drawn wagons from various areas of the state to Houston .
They make their way at about per hour , covering up to each day .
Many of the routes take place in part along major highways and busy city streets , making safety a major concern .
The trail rides last from a few days to three weeks , depending on the distance they cover .
Some of the participants are able to join only on weekends or at the end of the trip .
The days start very early , and often end with live music or a small celebration .
Many riders choose to camp in recreational vehicles rather than in the open .
Each morning , they drive their vehicles and horse trailers to the next camping spot , then have a bus or convoy take them back so they can retrace their path on horseback .
Participants can bring their own provisions , or , in some cases , purchase meals at a chuck wagon that is also following the trail .
The rides converge at Memorial Park in Houston on Go Texan Day , the Friday before the livestock show and rodeo begins .
The city closes some roads downtown to allow the riders to reach their destination safely .
The resulting traffic interruption cause annual complaints from those who work downtown .
The following day , all of the trail riders participate in the parade .
RODEO PARADE AND RODEO
RUN Section::::Rodeo parade and Rodeo Run .
The official kickoff of the show is the annual Rodeo Parade .
It is held the Saturday before the show begins and runs through downtown Houston .
The parade features members of the 13 trail rides , influential Houstonians , bands , and floats .
Preceding the parade is the annual Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo Run .
More than 10,000 people compete annually in 5k and 10k fun runs .
All proceeds go to the show 's scholarship fund .
The run generally begins near Bagby Street and ends at Eleanor Tinsley Park .
WORLD 'S CHAMPIONSHIP BAR - B - QUE CONTEST Section::::World 's Championship Bar - B - Que Contest .
The Thursday , Friday , and Saturday before the livestock show begins , the World 's Championship Bar - B - Que Contest is held on the grounds of NRG Park .
It is one of the largest barbecue cookoffs in the United States , but it is not sanctioned by the Kansas City Barbecue Society .
More than 250 teams , including a handful from outside of the United States , compete to be named best entry in several categories , including brisket , chicken , and ribs .
The barbecue must be cooked on a wood fire ; electric or gas fires are prohibited .
Entries are judged on a 50-point scale , with the most points gained for taste and tenderness , and lesser amounts available for smell and the look and feel of the entry .
Winners are named in each category , and then an overall Grand Champion is named .
Teams can also compete for non - food - related awards , such as cleanest area , most unique pit , and most colorful team .
Each barbecue team has their own tent on the grounds .
Many offer their own entertainment , generally cover bands or djs .
Entrance into each tents is by invitation only .
Many teams sell sponsorships that provide access to their tent , with the money often going to charity .
Attendees without an invitation to a specific tent can congregate in one of the three general admission areas , each with its own live entertainment .
A record 264,132 people attended the World 's Championship Barbecue Contest in 2013 .
RODEO AND CONCERT Section::::Rodeo and concert .
One of the largest draws for the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo is the 20 consecutive evenings of rodeo and concert , held in NRG Stadium .
Tickets are relatively inexpensive , averaging about $ 29 in 2016 , and also grant admission to the livestock show and fairgrounds .
More than 43,000 season tickets are sold every year , with the remaining seats 30,000 seats available for individual - show sale .
Members of the HLSR are given an opportunity to buy individual tickets before the general public .
RodeoHouston is run independently of the Professional Rodeo Cowboys Association ( PRCA ) .
It offers one of the largest prize purses in North America , over $ 2 million , but the winnings do not count towards the competitors ' qualification for the PRCA National Finals Rodeo .
RodeoHouston is an invitational , featuring 280 of the top professional cowboys .
They compete in a playoff format , with the ultimate champion in each event earning $ 50,000 .
On the final evening , the rodeo hosts the Cinch SuperShootout .
Champions from each of the top 10 rodeos in North America are invited to compete as teams in a subset of rodeo events .
The finals and the SuperShoot are televised on Fox Sports .
After the professional rodeo concludes , children are given an opportunity to compete .
Each evening , 30 high school students from across the state compete in the calf scramble .
They are given the opportunity to chase down ( on foot ) and catch one of 15 calves , put a halter on them , and drag them back to the center of the stadium .
Winners are given money to purchase their own heifer or steer to show the following year .
Immediately following the calf scramble is mutton busting .
Five- and six - year - olds wearing protective gear try to ride a sheep across a portion of the arena .
On the last night of the rodeo , the winners from each of the previous evenings compete again to see who will become grand champion .
A rotating stage is then brought into the arena for the nightly concert .
The majority of evenings are performances by country music singers , although several nights are dedicated to pop or rock music .
The annual Tejano music night generally draws the largest crowds .
The winner of the annual Mariachi Invitational competition is invited to perform onstage with the Tejano acts .
GROUNDS Section::::Grounds .
Visitors who are not attending the rodeo and concert can purchase a lower - cost general admission ticket to gain access to all of NRG Park except the stadium .
According to livestock show CEO Joel Cowley , " if we can draw people here for a concert or a carnival or a rodeo and teach them something about agriculture , it 's a win in regard to our mission .
"
NRG Center contains AgVenture , which provides educational displays about agriculture and the origins of the food for sale at grocery stores .
More than 61,000 schoolchildren visited AgVenture in 2015 on official tours .
Displays include an area where attendees can see cows , pigs , and sheep give birth or see chickens hatch .
There are also displays with live rabbits and honeybees .
NRG Center also hosts a large vendor area .
The grounds feature an area where children can do pretend farm chores and compete in races using pedal - driven tractors .
There is also a petting zoo , pony and camel rides , and a full carnival and midway .
Over the course of the 20-day event in 2015 , visitors purchased over $ 23 million of food outside of the stadium .
Other competitions are held throughout the three weeks at NRG Center and NRG Arena .
These include open cattle shows and a paint horse competition .
Children with mental and physical disabilities are invited to compete in the Lil ' Rustlers Rodeo , which offers imitation rodeo events , such as riding a stick horse .
Free educational seminars are available throughout the three weeks of the livestock show .
They are open to the public and cover topic related to wildlife , agricultural in general , and farming and hunting .
Adults can visit The Hideout , a temporary dance hall located in a large tent near NRG Arena .
After the show in NRG Stadium concludes , The Hideout features live music from new artists .
Several past performers at The Hideout , including the Dixie Chicks , Blake Shelton , Keith Urban , and the Eli Young Band , later became headliners at the main rodeo show .
Approximately 2,000 - 3,000 people visit The Hideout each evening .
LIVESTOCK SHOW Section::::Livestock show .
HLSR is the largest indoor livestock show in the world .
For a full week , cattle auctions are held in NRG Arena for professional breeders to sell their stock .
The livestock show has a larger international presence than any other .
In 2017 , the Ministers of Agriculture from Russia and Colombia made official visits to HLSR , joining more than 2,600 other international businessmen representing 88 countries .
The HLSR International Committee estimated that they facilitated more than $ 2.6 million in agriculture sales between livestock show participants and international visitors in 2016 .
Junior market auctions are also held .
Children from around the state show the livestock that they have raised , including cows , pigs , goats , sheep , rabbits , and chicken .
The livestock are judged , with the winners auctioned off .
It is the largest set of animals to be shown and judged of any livestock show .
Most champion animals sell for well over market value .
Winning children are guaranteed a certain amount of scholarship money ; if the bid is larger than that amount , the excess funds are directed to the general scholarship fund .
More than 4,368 cattle were shown in 2017 , with Brahmans the largest category .
IMPACT
Section::::Impact .
HLSR is a 501(c)(3 ) charitable organization and ranks as the 7th - largest Better Business Bureau accredited charity in Houston .
Its primary source of revenue is an annual livestock show and rodeo and the events leading up to it .
HLSR has 85 full - time employees and over 31,000 volunteers , divided into 108 committees .
The volunteers contribute an estimated 2.1 million hours of work per year , averaging almost 68 hours per person .
All of them are required to pay a minimum fee of $ 50 , and some committees require a larger donation .
The most popular committees have a wait list .
More than 2.5 million people , including visitors from around the world , attended in 2016 .
It is the largest cultural event in Houston , and its attendance numbers dwarf those of annual attendance for most professional sports teams and most major cultural events in other cities .
In comparison , New Orleans ' Mardi Gras generally draws about 1.4 million visitors .
In 2015 , the organization reported operating revenue of $ 133.35 million .
The Corral Club , which covers the sale of much of the alcohol on the grounds , but not that within the stadium , sold more alcohol in the three weeks of the HLSR than any other mixed - beverage permit holder in the state for the month of March 2016 , and in the year prior was only outsold by the stadium where the Dallas Cowboys play .
A 2010 economic impact analysis estimate that the HLSR funneled $ 220 million into the Houston economy , with almost half of that coming from visitors outside of the Houston metro region .
HLSR and its suppliers and vendors paid over $ 27 million in taxes to local entities .
The study 's author estimates that by 2017 , the HLSR would be contributing almost $ 500 million to the local economy each year , the equivalent of hosting the Super Bowl every year .
HLSR awarded $ 26.07 million in scholarships , grants , and graduate assistantships in 2017 .
More than 750 students received scholarships , many of them worth $ 20,000 over four years .
Recipients can pursue any field of study but are required to attend a university or college in Texas .
Eleven different colleges were awarded funds to pay for graduate assistants .
The remainder of the money was allocated for grants to other nonprofits or educational facilities to provide programs to help educate youth about agriculture or pioneer heritage .
Since 1932 , HLSR boasts that it has given away over $ 430 million .
MILESTONES NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS * Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo Homepage
* Houston Livestock Show - Pro Rodeo Online