CLOSED COMMUNION Closed communion is the practice of restricting the serving of the elements of Holy Communion ( also called Eucharist , The Lord 's Supper ) to those who are members in good standing of a particular church , denomination , sect , or congregation .
Though the meaning of the term varies slightly in different Christian theological traditions , it generally means that a church or denomination limits participation either to members of their own church , members of their own denomination , or members of some specific class ( e.g. , baptized members of evangelical churches ) .
See also intercommunion .
A closed - communion church is one that ( perhaps with exceptions in unusual circumstances ) excludes non - members from receiving communion .
This is the practice of all churches dating from before the Protestant Reformation and also of some Protestant church such as some Lutherans and Baptists .
Non ELCA Lutherans in the U.S. require catechetical instruction for all people , even members from other Lutheran Churches , before receiving the Eucharist while some Baptist churches require part membership while others even require full membership before participating in the communion service .
Churches which practice open communion allow all Christians to partake in the Lord 's Supper , with membership in a particular Christian community not required to receive bread and wine , in contrast to pre - Reformation churches , which hold that what is received in their celebrations ceases to be bread and wine .
PRACTICE ROMAN
CATHOLIC CHURCH Section::::Practice .
Section::::Roman Catholic Church .
The Roman Catholic Church practices closed communion .
However , provided that " necessity requires it or true spiritual advantage suggests it " and that the danger of error or indifferentism is avoided , canon 844 of the 1983 Code of Canon Law of the Latin Church and the parallel canon 671 allow , in particular exceptional circumstances that are regulated by the diocesan bishop or conference of bishops , members who can not approach a Catholic minister to receive the Eucharist from ministers of churches that have a valid Eucharist .
It also permits properly disposed members of the Eastern churches who are not in full communion with the Roman Church ( Eastern Orthodox Church , Oriental Orthodoxy and Assyrian Church of the East ) , and of churches judged to be in the same situation with regard to the sacraments to receive the Eucharist from Catholic ministers , if they seek it of their own accord .
The Catholic Church distinguishes between Churches whose celebration of the Eucharist , as well as holy orders , it recognizes as valid and those of other Christian communities .
In the case that it is impossible to approach a Catholic minister , that it is a case of real need or spiritual benefit , and that the danger of error or indifferentism is avoided , the Catholic Church permits its faithful to receive Communion in Orthodox Churches , although Orthodox Churches do not honour this and only permit Orthodox Christians to receive Communion in Orthodox Churches .
The Catholic Church does not ordinarily allow a Catholic to receive communion in a Protestant church , since it does not consider Protestant ministers to be priests ordained by bishops in a line of valid succession from the apostles , although Lutherans , Moravians , and Anglicans teach that they ordain their clergy in lines of apostolic succession .
It applies this rule also to the Anglican Communion , pursuant to Apostolicae curae , a position that the Church of England disputed in Saepius officio .
The Directory for the Application of Principles and Norms on Ecumenism warns that " due consideration should be given to the discipline of the Eastern Churches for their own faithful and any suggestion of proselytism should be avoided . "
Recognizing that " that everyone in a marriage that binds denominations , " the Catholic Church in Germany has produced a pastoral handout allowing Lutheran and Reformed spouses of Roman Catholics to receive Communion from Roman Catholic ministers in certain cases , ' provided they " affirm the Catholic faith in the Eucharist .
" ' Other Western Christians are limited by stricter conditions .
Those who do personally share Catholic belief in the Eucharist ( as the body and blood of the risen Christ , accompanied by his soul and divinity , under the appearances of bread and wine ) are permitted to receive the sacrament when there is danger of death or , in the judgment of the diocesan bishop or of the episcopal conference , some other grave necessity urges it and on condition that " the person be unable to have recourse for the sacrament to a minister of his or her own Church or ecclesial Community , ask for the sacrament of his or her own initiative , manifest Catholic faith in the sacrament and be properly disposed " .
Exceptions do occur , however .
Notably , Pope John Paul II gave Holy Communion to Brother Roger , a Reformed pastor and founder of the Taizé Community , several times ; in addition Cardinal Ratzinger ( later Pope Benedict XVI ) also gave Brother Roger the Eucharist .
Moreover , after Brother Roger 's death , at the Mass celebrated for him in France , " communion wafers were given to the faithful indiscriminately , regardless of denomination " .
EASTERN ORTHODOX CHURCH Section::::Eastern Orthodox Church .
The Eastern Orthodox Church , comprising 14 or 15 autocephalous Orthodox hierarchical churches , is even more strictly a closed - communion Church .
Thus , a member of the Russian Orthodox Church attending the Divine Liturgy in a Greek Orthodox Church will be allowed to receive communion and vice versa
but , although Protestants , non - Trinitarian Christians , or Catholics may otherwise fully participate in an Orthodox Divine Liturgy , they will be excluded from communion .
In the strictest sense , non - Orthodox may be present at the Divine Liturgy only up to the exclamation " The doors !
The doors ! "
and ought to leave the church after that .
However , this attitude has been relaxed in most Orthodox churches ; a non - communicant may stay and participate in the Divine Liturgy but may not partake of the Eucharist .
Thus , while in certain circumstances the Catholic Church allows its faithful who can not approach a Catholic minister to receive the Eucharist from an Eastern Orthodox priest , the Eastern Orthodox Church does not admit them to receive the Eucharist from its ministers .
At the very end of the Divine Liturgy , all people are invited to come up to receive a little piece of bread , called antidoron , which is blessed but not consecrated , being taken from the same loaf as the bread used in the consecration .
Non - Orthodox present at the Liturgy are not only permitted but even encouraged to receive the blessed bread as an expression of Christian fellowship and love .
The Eastern Orthodox Church is not in Communion with the Roman Church , nor is it in Communion with any Protestant denominational church .
Eastern Orthodox Christians are forbidden from receiving Communion in any church other than Eastern Orthodox .
Eastern Orthodox Churches accept to Holy Communion only baptized Eastern Orthodox Christians ( such as Greek Orthodox , Russian Orthodox , Albanian Orthodox etc ) , and then only when they have prepared themselves by prayer , by appropriate fasting , and by confession of sins ( although the frequency of confession varies between traditions ) .
In addition , Orthodox bishops and other teachers make clear to their faithful that they can only properly receive communion from a canonically ordained priest or bishop within the context of the traditional Orthodox Divine Liturgy ( which includes communion taken to the sick ) .
LUTHERANISM Section::::Lutheranism .
Confessional Lutheran churches , including the Lutheran Church – Missouri Synod and the Wisconsin Evangelical Lutheran Synod , practice closed communion and require catechetical instruction for all people before receiving the Eucharist .
Failing to do so is condemned by these Lutherans as the sin of unionism .
This teaching comes from 1 Corinthians 10:16 - 17 which says , " Is not the cup of thanksgiving for which we give thanks a participation in the blood of Christ ?
And is not the bread that we break a participation in the body of Christ ?
Because there is one loaf , we , who are many , are one body , for we all share the one loaf " and
Paul 's teaching of fellowship in 1 Corinthians 1:10 , " I appeal to you , brothers and sisters , in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ , that all of you agree with one another in what you say and that there be no divisions among you , but that you be perfectly united in mind and thought .
" These Lutherans also take seriously God 's threat in 1 Corinthians 11:27,29 that " Whoever eats the bread or drinks the cup of the Lord in an unworthy manner will be guilty of sinning against the body and blood of the Lord .
A man ought to examine himself before he eats of the bread and drinks of this cup .
For anyone who eats and drinks without recognizing the body of the Lord eats and drinks judgment on himself . "
Therefore , the belief is that , inviting those forward who have not been first instructed would be unloving on the church 's part , because they would be inviting people forward to sin .
This is described as akin to letting someone drink poison without stopping him .
The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America ( ELCA ) , the largest Lutheran Church in America , however , does not practice closed communion , but rather " eucharistic hospitality .
"
In terms of guests receiving the Sacrament , according to this practice , the burden of decision of admittance to the Sacrament is not on the host congregation , but on its guests .
The invitation to the Sacrament is extended to " all baptized persons , " along with " a brief written or oral statement in worship which teaches Christ 's presence in the sacrament .
"
In terms of members receiving the Sacrament , reception of the Sacrament is always to include " continuing catechesis [ which ] include[s ] instruction for Holy Communion , " but this is not a prerequisite for first communion , and even infants may be permitted to receive the Sacrament at or after the service of their baptism .
BAPTISTS Section::::Baptists .
Some Baptists and all American Baptist Association congregations practice closed communion even more strictly than do the Catholic , Lutheran , and Eastern Orthodox churches .
They restrict the partaking of communion ( or the Lord 's Supper ) to members of the local church observing the ordinance .
Thus members from other churches , even members of other local churches of the same denomination , are excluded from participation .
The Strict Baptists in the United Kingdom derive their name from this practice .
In the United States the custom is usually , but not exclusively , associated with Landmark ecclesiology .
The closed communion practiced by Primitive Baptists admits participation by Primitive Baptists who do not belong to the local church .
OTHER GROUPS
Section::::Other groups .
The Orthodox Presbyterian Church , the Reformed Presbyterian Church , the American Presbyterian Church the Reformed Seventh - day Adventist Church , Exclusive Brethren , the Apostolic Christian Church , the Church of the Brethren , Mennonites , Amish , some Anglicans , the Church of God in Christ , the Church of God of Prophecy , and some other churches in the Reformed tradition such as Calvinists also practice closed communion .
Jehovah 's Witnesses hold that only the 144,000 should receive communion .
Other nontrinitarian Christians that practice closed communion include the Church of God ( Seventh Day ) , Christadelphians , and Oneness Pentecostals such as the True Jesus Church .
Churches of Christ , though doctrinally holding to a closed communion view , in practice do not prohibit visitors from taking communion , on the view that per 1 Corinthians 11:28 the visitor must " examine himself " and decide to partake or decline ( i.e. it is not for the minister , elders / deacons , or members to decide who may or may not partake ) ; thus , it is more a form of open communion .
LATTER DAY SAINTS Section::::Latter Day Saints .
The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter - day Saints ( LDS Church ) practices closed communion , but does not take any measures to prevent others from participating .
The Community of Christ ( formerly the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints ) practices open communion .
" CLOSE COMMUNION " Section::::"Close Communion " .
Among the modern descendants of the Anabaptists , the Amish , Old Order Mennonites and Conservative Mennonites
all practice what they term close communion , restricting communion to members of a local congregation only .
The term close communion normally means the same thing as closed communion .
However , some make a distinction , so the terms can be a source of confusion .
The most prominent distinction ( which in some circles may be called " cracked communion " ) is one where a member of a congregation holding the " same faith and practice " as the hosting congregation ( generally meaning being a member of a congregation in the same or a similar denomination ) may participate in the service , but a member of another denomination may not .
For example , a Southern Baptist congregation practicing close communion : * might allow a member of another Southern Baptist congregation to participate , on the premise that both congregations are of the " same faith and practice " as they are both in the same denomination , and
* might also allow a member of an Independent Baptist congregation to participate ; though the congregations are of different denominations the differences between them are mainly in the area of church organization and not in doctrinal issues , thus falling under the " same faith and practice " rule , but * would thus exclude a Lutheran or Catholic , on the basis that Baptists and Catholics are not of the " same faith and practice " .
The Reformed Presbyterian Church of Australia allows communion to those who can assent to the first three terms of its church covenants , and discuss this with the elders ahead of time .
They do n't appear to distinguish the term " close communion " from " closed communion " , though .
The earliest use of close communion comes from a mistranslation of the Lutheran theologian Franz August Otto Pieper 's Christian Dogmatics .
The term has since spread , although both the first edition and later translations corrected the error to " closed communion . " SUPPORTING BELIEF Section::::Supporting belief .
Complex reasons underlie the belief .
In 1 Corinthians 10 , it is written : " The chalice of benediction which we bless , is it not the communion of the blood of Christ ?
And the bread which we break , is it not the partaking of the body of the Lord ?
For we , being many , are one bread , one body :
all that partake of one bread .
" Since all Christians are now no longer of a unity that would allow common celebration of the Eucharist between them all , the bread being a visible sign of union , communion is not taken together between separated Churches and communities .
Additionally as described in 1Co 11:29 : " For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily , eateth and drinketh damnation to himself , not discerning the Lord 's body .
" It is deemed better to prevent outsiders from taking communion than to risk them taking communion " unworthily " .
Catholics thus see the communion as sinful for those who do not recognise the Real Presence or who are otherwise ' unworthy ' , i.e. who are not in the ' right place ' to accept the Eucharist ( free of mortal sin ) .
Christian communities that keep close communion often also have accountability within those members that partake of the communion , so that they do not run afoul of this problem .
Such communities will also delay taking communion until the members ( the church body ) can take communion in Christian unity , as required by 1Co 11:33 " Wherefore , my brethren , when ye come together to eat , tarry one for another . "
Justin Martyr indicated that the second - century Christian Church had three requirements for sharing in the Eucharist : identity of belief , Christian baptism , and moral life . "
No one may share in the eucharist except those who believe in the truth of our teachings and have been washed in the bath which confers forgiveness of sins and rebirth , and who live according to Christ 's commands " ( First Apology , 66 ) .
Corporate responsibility is another argument often used in favour of closed communion .
The Heidelberg Catechism , for example , says that those who " by confession and life , declare themselves unbelieving and ungodly " are not to be admitted to the Lord 's Supper , for then " the covenant of God would be profaned , and his wrath kindled against the whole congregation .
" Church leaders are obliged to do all they can to ensure that this does not happen , and hence " exclude such persons ... till they show amendment of life , " ( Q & A 82 ) .
FENCED TABLE Section::::Fenced table .
In Protestant theology , a fenced table is a communion table which is open only to accredited members of the Christian community .
Fencing the table is thus the opposite of open communion , where the invitation to the sacrament is extended to " all who love the Lord " and members of any denomination are welcome at their own discretion .
The phrase goes back to early Scottish Calvinism , where the communion table literally had a fence around it , with a gate at each end .
The members of the congregation were allowed to pass the gate on showing their communion token , a specially minted coin which served as an admission ticket and was given only to those who were in good standing with the local congregation and could pass a test of the catechism .
Examples of this kind of church furnishing are still to be seen in a very few highland churches .
The phrase " fencing the table " is also used metaphorically for other kinds of group demarcation and restrictive practices .
COMMUNION TOKENS Section::::Communion tokens .
Many Scottish Protestant churches used to give tokens to members passing a religious test prior to the day of communion , then required the token for entry .
Some US and other churches also used communion tokens .
SEE ALSO * Open communion * Sister Churches ( ecclesiology )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS LUTHERAN PERSPECTIVE
* A closer look at close communion - Confessional Lutheran perspective
* Close Communion : Its Basis and Practice , a Confessional Lutheran view , by Wisconsin Lutheran Seminary Library
* What about Fellowship Official Lutheran Church - Missouri Synod statement regarding closed / close communion * The Biblical Practice of Closed Communion ( PDF ) - a Lutheran church - Missouri Synod view
APOSTOLIC CHRISTIAN CHURCH PERSPECTIVE
* Closed Communion EASTERN ORTHODOX PERSPECTIVE
* Ecclesiology and Communion BAPTIST PERSPECTIVE
*
The Case for Closed Communion * Covenant Communion - a variation of the Closed Communion emphasis ANABAPTIST PERSPECTIVE
* The Lord 's Supper REFORMED PERSPECTIVE
* Close Communion - American Presbyterian view
* Terms of Communion - Reformed Presbyterian / Associate Presbyterian / United Presbyterian views ROMAN CATHOLIC PERSPECTIVE
* Why does the Catholic Church have a closed Communion ?
and Who can receive Communion ?
* Relative part of the Roman Catholic Directory for the Application of Principles and Norms on Ecumenism