GIRL SCOUT
COOKIES
Girl Scout Cookies are cookies sold by Girl Scouts of the United States of America ( GSUSA ) as one of its major fundraisers for local Scout units .
The Girls Scout Cookie Program is the largest girl - run and girl - led financial literacy program in the world , and the largest annual fundraiser in the world dedicated to girls
The program is designed to be led and conducted by girls and not led by adult troop leaders , volunteers or parents .
The girls get to decide how to spend the money they make , as 100 percent of revenue from cookie sales goes toward local community projects or is donated to worthy causes decided by each troop .
During each cookie season running ( from January through April )
the all - girl - led entrepreneurial educational program have estimated at approximately sales were about 200 million packages of cookies per year , worth nearly $ 800 million .
Members of the GSUSA have been selling cookies since 1917 to raise funds .
Girls who participate can earn prizes for their efforts .
There are also troop incentives if the troop as a whole does well .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first cookie sales by an individual Scout unit was by the Mistletoe Troop in Muskogee , Oklahoma , in December 1917 at their local high school .
In 1922 , the Girl Scout magazine The American Girl suggested cookie sales as a fundraiser and provided a simple cookie recipe from a regional director for the Girl Scouts of Chicago .
From 1933 to 1935 , organized cookie sales grew , with troops in Philadelphia and New York City using the cookie selling model to develop the marketing and sales skills of their local troops .
In 1933 , Girl Scouts in Philadelphia organized the first official sale , selling homemade cookies at the windows of the Philadelphia Gas and Electric Company ( PGE ) .
In 1936 the national organization began licensing commercial bakers to produce cookies , in order to increase availability and reduce lead time , starting with Keebler - Weyl Bakery .
Southern Biscuit Company and Burry Biscuit , both later acquired by the Interbake Foods division of George Weston Limited , were added in 1937 .
One hundred twenty five troops launched cookie sales that first year .
During World War II the Girl Scouts sold calendars in addition to cookies , because of shortages of flour , sugar , and butter .
In 1943 there were 48 cookies per box .
By 1943 Girl Scouts also collected fat in cans to aid the war effort and sold war bonds at no profit .
In the 1950s , three more cookie recipes were added : " Shortbreads"/"Scot - Teas " , " Savannahs " ( today called " Peanut Butter Sandwich " ) , and " Thin Mints " .
Six types of cookies were being sold nationwide by 1956 .
Greater cookie sales occurred due to the Baby Boomer generation entering Girl Scouts in the 1960s .
The " Samoa " was added in 1975 .
In 1978 , the National Council reduced the number of bakeries providing cookies to four and standardized the packaging and pricing of the cookies .
In the 1990s , the National Council limited the bakeries providing cookies to just ABC Bakers ( a division of Interbake Foods ) and Little Brownie Bakers ( a division of the Keebler Company ) .
In 1998 , cookie sale awards were instituted .
In 2005 , the Girl Scouts moved to eliminate trans fat from their cookies to be healthier , and started providing nutritional information on the cookie box .
In 2009 the number of Thin Mints , Do - si - dos , and Tagalongs in each box was reduced and Lemon Chalet Cremes became smaller because of the increasing costs of ingredients and transportation .
In January 2015 , Girl Scouts began to offer the ability to purchase their cookies with credit or debit cards via an online portal and a " Digital Cookie " app .
The purchasing app can only be used by Girl Scouts themselves with parents of girl scouts only able to share a link to the purchasing page .
SALES Section::::Sales .
Each Girl Scout regional council decides which licensed baking company to use for cookie sales in that council , thus determining which varieties are available in the area covered by the council .
Girl Scouts sell cookies to relatives , friends , neighbors , and others in their town or city .
In recent years , because of safety concerns , an increased emphasis has been placed on cookie booths , where girls sell from tables in public areas under the supervision of adult troop leaders , rather than door - to - door .
Many councils offer the option for customers to sponsor boxes of cookies to be sent to U.S. servicemen and women .
Cookies are also available online .
As an incentive to sell , Girl Scouts are offered recognitions , such as stuffed animals , trinkets , coupons , credits toward Girl Scout camp , activities , or uniforms .
These recognitions vary from Girl Scout council to council .
The recognitions are usually cumulative , so that a girl who earns the recognition for selling 50 boxes of cookies will also get the 25- and 20-box items .
In some councils , girls may choose to earn more money for their troop instead of recognitions if they are working toward a troop goal such as a trip or other expensive activity .
This type of fund raising is intended to teach Girl Scouts valuable skills in planning , teamwork , finance , organization , communication , and goal setting .
Also , award badges exist for sales :
Cookie Count , Smart Cookie , The Cookie Connection , Cookie Biz , and Cookies & Dough .
Traditionally each regional Girl Scout council set the prices for cookies sold in that council .
A 2006 article in The Boston Globe noted that price " is hardly ever a factor , until buyers find out that the same box of cookies is selling for less in the next town over .
"
The Globe found that a box of Thin Mints sold for $ 3.50 in Rockland , Massachusetts and $ 4.00 in neighboring Norwell .
Elizabeth Brinton , also known as the " Cookie Queen " , sold a record 18,000 boxes of cookies in a single sales season , and more than 100,000 boxes in her time as a girl scout .
She is known for selling cookies to sitting president Ronald Reagan .
Her record held for more than twenty - nine years , until Katie Francis , 12 , sold 18,107 boxes in 2014 .
In 2017 , Charlotte McCourt , a girl scout from New Jersey , sold over 25,000 boxes of cookies , breaking the record .
PROFITS Section::::Profits .
Each Girl Scout council operates its own cookie sale .
Approximately 70 % of the proceeds stay in the local Girl Scout council to support Girl Scouting in that area , including a portion , approximately 15 % , that goes directly to the group selling the cookies .
The profits are divided by a formula , with local troops receiving about 10 - 15 % of the retail price , the council more than 50 % , and the manufacturer the remainder .
In 1992 Girl Scouts sold 175 million boxes of cookies nationwide .
Revenues at all levels are used to pay for events and activities for the Girl Scouts , maintenance of the councils ' Girl Scout camps and other properties , cookie sale incentives , and Council administrative costs .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Girl Scout cookies are made by large national commercial bakeries under license from Girl Scouts of the USA .
The bakers licensed by the organization may change from year to year , though this is not common .
In 2008 the licensed companies were Little Brownie Bakers ( LBB ) , a subsidiary of Keebler , which is owned by Kellogg 's ; and ABC Bakers , a subsidiary of Interbake Foods , which is owned by George Weston Limited .
VARIETIES Section::::Varieties .
Up to 28 varieties of Girl Scout cookies are offered .
The same cookies may be sold under different names by different bakeries , with the choice of bakery determining the name .
There has been no move to standardize names .
The merger of many councils ( from 312 to 109 ) following the August 2006 reorganization resulted in many councils changing bakeries , thus causing some confusion at that time .
The national Girl Scout organization reviews and approves all varieties proposed by the baking companies , but requires only three types :
Thin Mints , Peanut Butter Sandwiches ( ABC)/Do - Si - Dos ( LBB ) and Shortbreads ( ABC)/Trefoils ( LBB ) .
The other kinds can be changed every year , though several popular favorites , such as Caramel DeLites ( ABC)/Samoas ( LBB ) and Peanut Butter Patties ( ABC)/Tagalongs ( LBB ) , are consistently available .
Girl Scout cookie varieties include : !
ABC ! !
LBB ! !
Sales ! !
Flavor Thin Mints Thin Mints 25 %
Thin , mint - flavored chocolate wafers dipped in a chocolatey coating .
THIN MINTS Section::::Thin Mints .
Thin Mints are a type of cookie sold by the Girl Scouts of the USA .
Thin Mints are the most popular Girl Scout Cookies .
, the second in popularity being Samoas .
About 50 million boxes of Thin Mints were sold in 2013 compared with 38 million boxes of Samoas .
Thin Mints averages about 38 cookies per box and Samoas 15 cookies per box .
Operation Thin Mint is a program by the Girl Scouts of the USA to provide military members with donated cookies .
Keebler manufactures a similar cookie known as a Grasshopper , which is produced in the same factory as Little Brownie Bakers 's Thin Mints .
DISCONTINUED
*
All Abouts : The LBB version of Thanks - A - Lot .
Shortbread cookie dipped in chocolate with a message proclaiming values that Girl Scouts are " all about " , such as Respect , Friendship , etc .
*
Aloha Chips : Included white chocolate chips and macadamia nuts .
* Animal Treasures : Replaced by Thanks - A - Lot .
* Apple Cinnamons : Apple shaped sugar cookies with cinnamon sugar .
* Cafe Cookies : Shortbread with a cinnamon topping .
* Cartwheels : Reduced fat oatmeal and cinnamon .
* Chalet Creme :
Shortbread cookie with embossed chalet picture with lemon or vanilla filling .
* Chocolate Chip Shortbread ( ABC ) : Chocolate chips nestled in a bite - size , gluten free shortbread cookie .
* Cinna - Spins ( LBB ) : Cinnamon - flavored cookies shaped like miniature cinnamon rolls that came in 100-calorie packs .
Replaced by Daisy Go Rounds .
* Cinnamon Oatmeal Raisin Bar : * Cranberry Citrus Crisps ( ABC ) :
Whole grain cookie with cranberry bits and citrus flavoring .
*
Daisy Go Rounds ( ABC ) :
Cinnamon - flavored cookies shaped like daisies ; replaced Cinna - spins for the 2009 sale ; replaced with Shout Outs !
in 2011 .
* Double Dutch : Chocolate cookies with chocolate chips .
* Dulce Daisies : Milk chocolate with liquid caramel center .
* Dulce de Leche : Cookies with milk caramel chips .
* Five World Cinnamon :
Savory cinnamon sugar cookies featuring Girl Scouting 's Five Worlds of Interest .
Sold from 1996 to 2001 .
* Forget - Me - Nots :
Granola cookie .
* Friendship Circles : " friend " embossed on vanilla cookie sandwich with chocolate filling , in 18 languages * Golden Yangles : Triangular cheddar crackers ; sold in the 1980s .
* Hoedowns ( Burry ) : Burry - LU 's version of peanut butter patties / Tagalongs .
* Iced Berry Pinatas :
Sugar cookies with a berry jam center and icing .
* Iced Ginger Daisies :
Reduced fat cookie
* Juliettes / Golden Nut Clusters : Milk chocolate , caramel , and pecans .
* Kookaburras : Layers of crispy rice wafers and caramel coated in milk chocolate .
* Lemon Chalet Cremes : Rectangular cinnamon sandwich cookies with lemon creme filling ; changed to round cookies in 2010 ; replaced by Savannah Smiles in 2012 .
* Lemon Coolers : Vanilla wafers with lemon zest , dusted with powdered sugar ; similar to Savannah Smiles .
* Lemon Drops :
Sugar cookie with lemon - flavored chips .
* Lemon Pastry Cremes :
Light pastry cookie sandwich with lemon creme filling .
* Mango Cremes with NutriFusion : Vanilla and coconut cookies filled with a tangy mango - flavored creme with nutrients derived from fruits ; replaced by Cranberry Citrus Crisps in 2013 .
* Medallions : Introduced for 1983 - 1984 and celebrating 50 years of Girl Scout Cookies ,
2 flavors : shortbread with cocoa coating on the bottom " Colonial Shortbread Supremes " , pecan shortbread with brown sugar coating ( " Southern Pecan Praline " ) .
Also listed at the Little Brownie Bakers ' website under " cookie - history " .
* Olé Olés : Powdered sugar cookies with pecans and coconut ; sold from 2001 to 2003 .
*
Oxfords :
Chocolate cookies with vanilla cream filling .
* Pinatas : Oatmeal cookie with fruit filling and topped with cinnamon and sugar glaze ; introduced in 2004 .
*
Praline Royale : Soft vanilla cookie with a praline filling and striped with chocolate ; introduced by ABC for the 1992 - 93 season .
* Rah - Rah Raisins ( LBB ) :
Oatmeal cookies with raisins and Greek yogurt - flavored chunks .
* Savannahs : A peanut butter sandwich cookie ( not to be confused with " Savannah Smiles " , a lemon - flavored , powdered sugar coated replacement for " Lemon Chalets " brought out in 2012 ) .
* Scot - Teas ( Burry ) :
Shortbread cookies with sprinkled sugar .
* Shout Outs ! :
Belgian - style caramelized cookie .
* Snaps : Iced oatmeal raisin .
Sold from 1993 to 1997 .
* Strawberries & Creme :
Sandwich cookie from ABC with a vanilla creme and a strawberry jam ; available in mid-1990s .
* Striped Chocolate Chips :
Chocolate chip cookies with fudge stripes .
* Sugar - Free Chocolate Chips : Small sugar- free cookies ; discontinued in 2011 .
*
Sugar Free Chalet Cremes : Lemon pastry cream sweetened with aspartame .
* Sugar - Free Little Brownies : Brownie - shaped cookies with sugar - free chocolate chips .
* Thank You Berry Munch : Cookies with cranberries , rice crispies , and white fudge chips .
*
Upside Down Frosted Oatmeal : Oatmeal cookies with frosting on the bottom .
* Van'chos :
Vanilla and chocolate cremes .
These cookies came in an assorted box and were sold from 1974 to 1983 .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
Federal guidelines issued in early 2005 called for people to minimize their consumption of trans fat .
Concerned parents urged the Girl Scouts to address this and other health concerns about the cookies , suggesting that the cookie program was at odds with the Girl Scouts ' healthy living initiative .
The Girl Scout organization replied that the cookies were a treat which " should n't be a big part of somebody 's diet " , and said that they are " encouraging " the companies that bake the cookies to find alternative oils .
In 2007 , following reformulation of the recipes for a number of varieties , Girl Scouts of the USA announced that all their cookies had less than 0.5 grams of trans fat per serving , allowing them to meet the Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) requirements for " zero trans fat " labeling .
High - fructose corn syrup ( HFCS ) is used in some cookies .
The bakers claim that it is a necessary ingredient in ensuring the quality of the cookie .
PALM OIL Section::::Palm oil .
In September 2011 , GSUSA released a new policy on palm oil in Girl Scout cookies to take effect from the 2012 - 13 cookie season .
Amongst the pledges made , the GSUSA announced it will purchase GreenPalm certificates to support the sustainable production of palm oil .
The certificates offer a premium price to palm oil producers who are operating within the guidelines for social and environmental responsibility set by the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil .
The 2011 policy was formed in response to a prolonged campaign by two Girl Scouts , Madison Vorva and Rhiannon Tomtishen .
In 2007 , as 11-year - olds , Vorva and Tomtishen earned their Girl Scout Bronze Award by raising awareness about the endangered orangutan and their rapid diminishing rainforest habitat in Indonesia and Malaysia .
When they discovered that the Girl Scout Cookies contained palm oil , an ingredient that results in rainforest destruction and human rights abuses , the two girls launched a variety of campaigns in order to convince the GSUSA to remove this ingredient from their cookies .
Vorva and Tomtishen were awarded the UN Forest Heroes Award in 2011 .
SEE ALSO * Girl Guide Cookies , sold by Girl Guides of Canada
* Trail 's End popcorn , sold by the Boy Scouts of America and Scouts
Canada REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS