THE GREATEST STORY
EVER TOLD
The Greatest Story
Ever Told is a 1965 American epic film produced and directed by George Stevens .
It is a retelling of the Biblical account about Jesus of Nazareth , from the Nativity through to the Ascension .
Along with the ensemble cast , it marked Claude Rains 's final film role .
CAST Section::::Cast .
The major roles in the movie were following :
* Max von Sydow as Jesus * Dorothy McGuire as the Virgin Mary * Charlton Heston as John the Baptist * Claude Rains as Herod
the Great * José Ferrer as Herod Antipas * Telly Savalas as Pontius Pilate * Martin Landau as Caiaphas * David McCallum as Judas Iscariot * Donald Pleasence as " The Dark Hermit " ( a personification of Satan ) * Michael Anderson Jr. as James the Just * Roddy McDowall as Matthew * Joanna Dunham as Mary Magdalene * Joseph Schildkraut as Nicodemus
* Ed Wynn as " Old Aram " Smaller roles ( some only a few seconds ) were played by Michael Ansara , Ina Balin , Carroll Baker , Robert Blake , Pat Boone , Victor Buono , John Considine , Richard Conte , John Crawford , Jamie Farr , David Hedison , Van Heflin , Russell Johnson , Angela Lansbury , Mark Lenard , Robert Loggia , John Lupton , Janet Margolin , Sal Mineo , Nehemiah Persoff , Sidney Poitier , Gary Raymond , Marian Seldes , David Sheiner , Abraham Sofaer , Paul Stewart , John Wayne , Shelley Winters , Cyril Delevanti , Michael Tolan , Richard Bakalyan , Marc Cavell , and Peter Mann . , Max von Sydow , David McCallum , Angela Lansbury , Sidney Poitier , Gary Raymond , John Considine , David Hedison , Pat Boone , Jamie Farr , Robert Blake , David Sheiner , Carroll Baker , Nehemiah Persoff , Peter Mann , Burt Brinckerhoff , Joseph Sirola , and Michael Anderson Jr.
are the only surviving main cast members .
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
The Greatest Story
Ever Told originated as a U.S. radio series in 1947 , half - hour episodes inspired by the Gospels .
The series was adapted into a 1949 novel by Fulton Oursler , a senior editor at Reader 's Digest .
Darryl F. Zanuck , the head of 20th Century Fox , acquired the film rights to the Oursler novel shortly after publication , but never brought it to pre - production .
In 1958 , when George Stevens was producing and directing The Diary of Anne Frank at 20th Century Fox , he became aware that the studio owned the rights to the Oursler property .
Stevens created a company , " The Greatest Story Productions " , to film the novel .
The screenplay took two years to write .
Stevens collaborated with Ivan Moffat and then with James Lee Barrett .
It was the only time Stevens received screenplay credit for a film he directed .
Ray Bradbury and Reginald Rose were considered but neither participated .
The poet Carl Sandburg was solicited , though it is not certain if any of his contributions were included .
Sandburg , however , did receive screen credit for " creative association . "
Financial excesses began to grow during pre - production .
Stevens commissioned French artist André Girard to prepare 352 oil paintings of Biblical scenes to use as storyboards .
Stevens also traveled to the Vatican to see Pope John XXIII for advice .
In August 1961 , 20th Century Fox withdrew from the project , noting that $ 2.3 million had been spent without any footage being shot .
Stevens was given two years to find another studio or 20th Century Fox would reclaim its rights .
Stevens moved the film to United Artists .
Meanwhile , MGM proceeded with their own 1961 Technicolor epic about the life of Christ , King of Kings , starring Jeffrey Hunter as Jesus , which was filmed in Spain , and when released was nearly an hour shorter than The Greatest Story Ever Told .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
For The Greatest Story
Ever Told , Stevens cast Swedish actor Max von Sydow as Jesus .
Von Sydow had never appeared in an English - language film and was best known for his performances in Ingmar Bergman 's dramatic films .
Stevens wanted an actor unknown to international audiences , free of secular and unseemly associations in the mind of the public .
The Greatest Story
Ever Told featured an ensemble of well - known actors , many of them in brief , even cameo , appearances .
Some critics would later complain that the large cast distracted from the solemnity , notably in the appearance of John Wayne as the Roman centurion who comments on the Crucifixion , in his well - known voice , by stating : " Truly this man was the Son of God . "
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Stevens shot The Greatest Story Ever Told in the U.S. southwest , in Arizona , California , Nevada and Utah .
Pyramid Lake in Nevada represented the Sea of Galilee , Lake Moab in Utah was used to film the Sermon on the Mount , and California 's Death Valley was the setting of Jesus ' 40-day journey into the wilderness .
Parts of the film were also shot at Lake Powell , Canyonlands and Dead Horse Point in Utah .
Stevens explained his decision to use the U.S. rather than in the Middle East or Europe in 1962 .
" I wanted to get an effect of grandeur as a background to Christ , and none of the Holy Land areas shape up with the excitement of the American southwest , " he said .
" I know that Colorado is not the Jordan , nor is Southern Utah Palestine .
But our intention is to romanticize the area , and it can be done better here . "
Forty - seven sets were constructed , on location and in Hollywood studios , to accommodate Stevens ' vision .
The Jerusalem city set was built near the northwest corner of RKO Forty Acres by early 1963 , and was demolished soon after filming was completed that summer .
To fill location scenes with extras , Stevens turned to local sources – R.O.T.C. cadets from an Arizona high school played Roman soldiers ( after 550 Navajo Indians from a nearby reservation allegedly did not give a convincing performance ; other sources claim they were n't on set long enough and left early to take part in a tribal election ) and Arizona Department of Welfare provided disabled state aid recipients to play the afflicted who sought Jesus ' healing .
Principal photography was scheduled to run three months but ran nine months or more due to numerous delays and setbacks ( most of which were due to Stevens ' insistence on shooting dozens of retakes in every scene ) .
Joseph Schildkraut died before completing his performance as Nicodemus , requiring scenes to be rewritten around his absence .
Cinematographer William C. Mellor had a fatal heart attack during production ; Loyal Griggs , who won an Academy Award for his cinematography on Stevens ' 1953 Western classic Shane , was brought in to replace him .
Joanna Dunham became pregnant , which required costume redesigns and carefully chosen camera angles .
Much of the production was shot during the winter of 1962 - 1963 , when Arizona had heavy snow .
Actor David Sheiner , who played James the Elder , quipped in an interview about the snowdrifts : " I thought we were shooting Nanook of the North . "
Stevens was also under pressure to hurry the John the Baptist sequence , which was shot at the Glen Canyon area – it was scheduled to become Lake Powell with the completion of the Glen Canyon Dam , and the production held up the project .
Stevens brought in two veteran filmmakers .
Jean Negulesco filmed sequences in the Jerusalem streets and the Nativity scenes , while David Lean shot the prologue featuring Herod the Great .
Lean cast Claude Rains as Herod .
By the time shooting was completed in August 1963 , Stevens had amassed six million feet of Ultra Panavision 70 film ( about 1829 km or 1136 miles , roughly the radius of the Moon ) .
The budget ran to $ 20 million ( equivalent to $ 142 million in 2010 ) plus additional editing and promotion charges , making it the most expensive film shot in the U.S.
The film was advertised on its first run as being shown in Cinerama .
While it was shown on an ultra - curved screen , it was with one projector .
True Cinerama required three projectors running simultaneously .
A dozen other films were presented this way in the 1960s .
RELEASE AND RECEPTION Section::::Release and reception .
The Greatest Story
Ever Told premiered 15 February 1965 , 18 months after filming wrapped , at the Warner Cinerama Theatre in New York City .
Critical reaction toward the movie was divided once it premiered .
In its favor , Variety called the film " a big , powerful moving picture demonstrating vast cinematic resource . "
The Hollywood Reporter stated : " George Stevens has created a novel , reverent and important film with his view of this crucial event in the history of mankind . "
However , Bosley Crowther in The New York Times wrote : " The most distracting nonsense is the pop - up of familiar faces in so - called cameo roles , jarring the illusion . "
Shana Alexander in Life stated : " The pace was so stupefying that I felt not uplifted – but sandbagged ! "
And John Simon – later notorious as the frequently scathing theater and film critic of New York – wrote : " God is unlucky in The Greatest Story Ever Told .
His only begotten son turns out to be a bore . "
Bruce Williamson , in Playboy , likewise called the movie " a big windy bore . "
Brendan Gill wrote in The New Yorker : If the subject matter were n't sacred in the original , we would be responding to the picture in the most charitable way possible by laughing at it from start to finish ; this Christian mercy being denied us , we can only sit and sullenly marvel at the energy for which , for more than four hours , the note of serene vulgarity is triumphantly sustained .
Stevens told a New York Times interviewer : " I have tremendous satisfaction that the job has been done – to its completion – the way I wanted it done ; the way I know it should have been done .
It belongs to the audiences now … and I prefer to let them judge .
" Reviews to the film continue to be mixed , as it currently holds a 37 % rating on Rotten TomatoesAmerican Film Institute in these lists : * 2005 : AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated * 2006 : AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers – Nominated * 2008 : AFI 's 10 Top 10 :
* Nominated Epic Film SEE ALSO * List of American films of 1965 * Cultural depictions of Jesus * King of Kings – an earlier film about the life of Jesus , released in 1961 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS