YELLOWJACKET Yellowjacket or Yellowjacket is the common name in North America for predatory social wasps of the genera Vespula and Dolichovespula .
Members of these genera are known simply as " wasps " in other English - speaking countries .
Most of these are black and yellow like the eastern yellowjacket Vespula maculifrons and the aerial yellowjacket Dolichovespula arenaria ; some are black and white like the bald - faced hornet , Dolichovespula maculata .
Others may have the abdomen background color red instead of black .
They can be identified by their distinctive markings , their occurrence only in colonies , and a characteristic , rapid , side - to - side flight pattern prior to landing .
All females are capable of stinging .
Yellowjackets are important predators of pest insects .
IDENTIFICATION Section::::Identification .
Yellowjackets are sometimes mistakenly called " bees " ( as in " meat bees " ) , given that they are similar in size and sting , but yellowjackets are actually wasps .
They may be confused with other wasps , such as hornets and paper wasps .
Polistes dominula , a species of paper wasp , is very frequently misidentified as a yellowjacket .
A typical yellowjacket worker is about 12 mm ( 0.5 in ) long , with alternating bands on the abdomen ; the queen is larger , about 19 mm ( 0.75 in ) long ( the different patterns on their abdomens help separate various species ) .
Workers are sometimes confused with honey bees , especially when flying in and out of their nests .
Yellowjackets , in contrast to honey bees , have yellow or white markings , are not covered with tan - brown dense hair on their bodies , do not carry pollen , and do not have the flattened hairy hind legs used to carry it .
These species have lance - like stingers with small barbs , and typically sting repeatedly , though occasionally a stinger becomes lodged and pulls free of the wasp 's body ; the venom , like most bee and wasp venoms , is primarily only dangerous to humans who are allergic or are stung many times .
All species have yellow or white on their faces .
Their mouthparts are well - developed with strong mandibles for capturing and chewing insects , with probosces for sucking nectar , fruit , and other juices .
Yellowjackets build nests in trees , shrubs , or in protected places such as inside man - made structures , or in soil cavities , tree stumps , mouse burrows , etc .
They build them from wood fiber they chew into a paper - like pulp .
Many other insects exhibit protective mimicry of aggressive , stinging yellowjackets ; in addition to numerous bees and wasps ( Müllerian mimicry ) , the list includes some flies , moths , and beetles ( Batesian mimicry ) .
Yellowjackets ' closest relatives , the hornets , closely resemble them , but have larger heads , seen especially in the large distance from the eyes to the back of the head .
LIFE CYCLE AND HABITS Section::::Life cycle and habits .
Yellowjackets are social hunters living in colonies containing workers , queens , and males ( drones ) .
Colonies are annual with only inseminated queens overwintering .
Fertilized queens are found in protected places such as in hollow logs , in stumps , under bark , in leaf litter , in soil cavities , and in man - made structures .
Queens emerge during the warm days of late spring or early summer , select a nest site , and build a small paper nest in which they lay eggs .
After eggs hatch from the 30 to 50 brood cells , the queen feeds the young larvae for about 18 to 20 days .
Larvae pupate , then emerge later as small , infertile females called workers .
Workers in the colony take over caring for the larvae , feeding them with chewed up meat or fruit .
By midsummer , the first adult workers emerge and assume the tasks of nest expansion , foraging for food , care of the queen and larvae , and colony defense .
From this time until her death in the autumn , the queen remains inside the nest , laying eggs .
The colony then expands rapidly , reaching a maximum size of 4000 to 5000 workers and a nest of 10,000 to 15,000 cells in late summer .
( This is true of most species in most areas ; however , Vespula squamata , in the southern part of its range , may build much larger perennial colonies populated by scores of queens , tens of thousands of workers , and hundreds of thousands of cells . )
At peak size , reproductive cells are built with new males and queens produced .
Adult reproductives remain in the nest fed by the workers .
New queens build up fat reserves to overwinter .
Adult reproductives leave the parent colony to mate .
After mating , males quickly die , while fertilized queens seek protected places to overwinter .
Parent colony workers dwindle , usually leaving the nest to die , as does the foundress queen .
Abandoned nests rapidly decompose and disintegrate during the winter .
They can persist as long as they are kept dry , but are rarely used again .
In the spring , the cycle is repeated ; weather in the spring is the most important factor in colony establishment .
The diet of the adult yellowjacket consists primarily of items rich in sugars and carbohydrates , such as fruits , flower nectar , and tree sap .
Larvae feed on proteins derived from insects , meats , and fish , which are collected by the adults , which chew and condition them before feeding them to the larvae .
Many of the insects collected by the adults are considered pest species , making the yellowjacket beneficial to agriculture .
Larvae , in return , secrete a sugar material to be eaten by the adults ; this exchange is a form of trophallaxis .
In late summer , foraging workers pursue other food sources from meats to ripe fruits , or scavenge human garbage , sodas , picnics , etc . , as additional sugar is needed to foster the next generation 's queens .
NOTABLE SPECIES
* European yellowjackets , the German wasp ( Vespula germanica ) , and the common wasp ( Vespula vulgaris ) were originally native to Europe , but are now established in southern Africa , New Zealand , and eastern Australia * The North American yellowjacket ( Vespula alascensis ) , eastern yellowjacket ( Vespula maculifrons ) , western yellowjacket ( Vespula pensylvanica ) , and prairie yellowjacket ( Vespula atropilosa ) are native to North America .
* Southern yellowjacket
( Vespula squamosa ) * Bald - faced hornets ( Dolichovespula maculata ) belong among the yellowjackets rather than the true hornets .
They are not usually called " yellowjackets " because of their ivory - on - black coloration .
* Aerial yellowjacket ( Dolichovespula arenaria )
* Tree wasp ( Dolichovespula sylvestris ) NEST Section::::Nest .
Dolichovespula species such as the aerial yellowjacket , D. arenaria , and the bald - faced hornet , tend to create exposed aerial nests .
This feature is shared with some true hornets , which has led to some naming confusion .
Vespula species , in contrast , build concealed nests , usually underground .
Yellowjacket nests usually last for only one season , dying off in winter .
The nest is started by a single queen , called the " foundress " .
Typically , a nest can reach the size of a basketball by the end of a season .
In parts of Australia , New Zealand , the Pacific Islands , and southwestern coastal areas of the United States , the winters are mild enough to allow nest overwintering .
Nests that survive multiple seasons become massive and often possess multiple egg - laying queens .
IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::In the United States .
The German yellowjacket ( V. germanica ) first appeared in Ohio in 1975 , and has now become the dominant species over the eastern yellowjacket .
It is bold and aggressive , and can sting repeatedly and painfully .
It will mark aggressors and pursue them .
It is often confused with Polistes dominula , an invasive species in the United States , due to their very similar pattern .
The German yellowjacket builds its nests in cavities — not necessarily underground — with the peak worker population in temperate areas between 1000 and 3000 individuals between May and August .
Each colony produces several thousand new reproductives after this point through November .
The eastern yellowjacket builds its nests underground , also with the peak worker population between 1000 and 3000 individuals , similar to the German yellowjacket .
Nests are built entirely of wood fiber and are completely enclosed except for a small entrance at the bottom .
The color of the paper is highly dependent on the source of the wood fibers used .
The nests contain multiple , horizontal tiers of combs within .
Larvae hang within the combs .
In the southeastern United States , where southern yellowjacket ( Vespula squamosa ) nests may persist through the winter , colony sizes of this species may reach 100,000 adult wasps .
The same kind of nest expansion has occurred in Hawaii with the invasive western yellowjacket ( V. pensylvanica ) .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The yellowjacket 's most visible place in American popular culture is as a mascot , most famously with the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets , represented by the mascot Buzz .
Other college and university examples include the American International College , Baldwin - Wallace University , Black Hills State University , Cedarville University , Defiance College , Graceland University , Howard Payne University , LeTourneau University , Montana State University Billings , Randolph - Macon College , University of Rochester , University of Wisconsin – Superior , West Virginia State University , and Waynesburg University .
Though not specified by the team , the mascot of the Columbus Blue Jackets , named " Stinger , " closely resembles a yellowjacket .
In the years since its original yellow incarnation , the mascot 's color has been changed to a light green , seemingly combining the real insect 's yellow and the team 's blue .
Note that yellowjacket is often spelled as two words ( yellow jacket ) in popular culture and even in some dictionaries .
The proper entomological spelling , according to the Entomological Society of America , is as a single word ( yellowjacket ) .
SEE ALSO
* Common wasp ( V. vulgaris )
* Biological pest control *
Volucella pellucens
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Yellowjackets and Hornets of Florida " on the UF / IFAS Featured Creatures Web site
* Successful Removal of German Yellow Jackets by Toxic Baiting