DIFFERENTIABLE FUNCTION
In calculus ( a branch of mathematics ) , a differentiable function of one real variable is a function whose derivative exists at each point in its domain .
As a result , the graph of a differentiable function must have a ( non - vertical ) tangent line at each point in its domain , be relatively smooth , and can not contain any breaks , bends , or cusps .
More generally , if x is a point in the domain of a function f , then f is said to be differentiable at x
if the derivative f ′(x ) exists .
This means that the graph of f has a non - vertical tangent line at the point ( x , f(x ) ) .
The function f may also be called locally linear at x , as it can be well approximated by a linear function near this point .
DIFFERENTIABILITY OF REAL FUNCTIONS OF ONE VARIABLE Section::::Differentiability of real functions of one variable .
A function formula_1 , defined on an open set
formula_2 , is said to be differentiable at formula_3
if any of the following equivalent conditions is satisfied : *
The derivative formula_4 exists .
*
There exists a real number
formula_5
such that formula_6 .
The number formula_5 , when it exists , is equal to formula_8 .
*
There exists a function formula_9 such that formula_10 and formula_11 .
DIFFERENTIABILITY AND CONTINUITY Section::::Differentiability and continuity .
If is differentiable at a point , then must also be continuous at .
In particular , any differentiable function must be continuous at every point in its domain .
The converse does not hold : a continuous function need not be differentiable .
For example , a function with a bend , cusp , or vertical tangent may be continuous , but fails to be differentiable at the location of the anomaly .
Most functions that occur in practice have derivatives at all points or at almost every point .
However , a result of Stefan Banach states that the set of functions that have a derivative at some point is a meager set in the space of all continuous functions .
Informally , this means that differentiable functions are very atypical among continuous functions .
The first known example of a function that is continuous everywhere but differentiable nowhere is the Weierstrass function .
DIFFERENTIABILITY CLASSES Section::::Differentiability classes .
A function f is said to be continuously differentiable if the derivative ( x ) exists and is itself a continuous function .
Although the derivative of a differentiable function never has a jump discontinuity , it is possible for the derivative to have an essential discontinuity .
For example , the function is differentiable at 0 , since exists .
However , for x ≠ 0 , differentiation rules imply which has no limit as x → 0 .
Nevertheless , Darboux 's theorem implies that the derivative of any function satisfies the conclusion of the intermediate value theorem .
Continuously differentiable functions are sometimes said to be of class
C. A function is of class C if the first and second derivative of the function both exist and are continuous .
More generally , a function is said to be of class C if the first k derivatives ' ( x ) , ' ( x ) , ... , f(x ) all exist and are continuous .
If derivatives f exist for all positive integers n , the function is smooth or equivalently , of class C. DIFFERENTIABILITY IN HIGHER DIMENSIONS Section::::Differentiability in higher dimensions .
A function of several real variables is said to be differentiable at a point if there exists a linear map such that If a function is differentiable at , then all of the partial derivatives exist at , and the linear map is given by the Jacobian matrix .
A similar formulation of the higher - dimensional derivative is provided by the fundamental increment lemma found in single - variable calculus .
If all the partial derivatives of a function exist in a neighborhood of a point and are continuous at the point , then the function is differentiable at that point .
However , the existence of the partial derivatives ( or even of all the directional derivatives ) does not in general guarantee that a function is differentiable at a point .
For example , the function defined by is not differentiable at , but all of the partial derivatives and directional derivatives exist at this point .
For a continuous example , the function is not differentiable at , but again all of the partial derivatives and directional derivatives exist .
DIFFERENTIABILITY IN COMPLEX ANALYSIS Section::::Differentiability in complex analysis .
In complex analysis , complex - differentiability is defined using the same definition as single - variable real functions .
This is allowed by the possibility of dividing complex numbers .
So , a function formula_18 is said to be differentiable at formula_19 when Although this definition looks similar to the differentiability of single - variable real functions , it is however a more restrictive condition .
A function formula_18 , that is complex - differentiable at a point formula_19 is automatically differentiable at that point , when viewed as a function
formula_23 .
This is because the complex - differentiability implies that However , a function formula_18 can be differentiable as a multi - variable function , while not being complex - differentiable .
For example , formula_26 is differentiable at every point , viewed as the 2-variable real function formula_27 , but it is not complex - differentiable at any point .
Any function that is complex - differentiable in a neighborhood of a point is called holomorphic at that point .
Such a function is necessarily infinitely differentiable , and in fact analytic .
DIFFERENTIABLE FUNCTIONS
ON
MANIFOLDS
Section::::Differentiable functions on manifolds .
If M is a differentiable manifold , a real or complex - valued function f on M is said to be differentiable at a point p if it is differentiable with respect to some ( or any ) coordinate chart defined around
p. More generally , if M and N are differentiable manifolds , a function f : M → N is said to be differentiable at a point p if it is differentiable with respect to some ( or any ) coordinate charts defined around p and f(p ) .
SEE ALSO
* Generalizations of the derivative * Semi - differentiability REFERENCES