RUFFED GROUSE
The ruffed grouse ( Bonasa umbellus ) is a medium - sized grouse occurring in forests from the Appalachian Mountains across Canada to Alaska .
It is non - migratory .
It is the only species in the genus Bonasa .
The ruffed grouse is sometimes incorrectly referred to as a " partridge " , an unrelated phasianid , and occasionally confused with the grey partridge , a bird of open areas rather than woodlands .
The ruffed grouse is the state bird of Pennsylvania , United States .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
Bonasa umbellus was first described by Linnaeus who classified it as Tetrao umbellus , placing it in a subfamily with Eurasian grouse .
The subfamily Bonasa was applied by British naturalist John Francis Stephens in 1819 .
Ruffed grouse is the preferred common name because it applies only to this species .
Misleading vernacular names abound , however , and it is often called partridge ( sometimes rendered pa'tridge , or shortened to pat ) , pheasant , or prairie chicken , all of which are properly applied to other birds .
Other nicknames for ruffed grouse include drummer or thunder - chicken .
There are 14 recognized subspecies of ruffed grouse : * B. u. yukonensis
* B. u. umbelloides
* B. u. labradorensis * B. u. castanea
* B. u. affinis * B. u. obscura * B. u. sabini
* B. u. brunnescens * B. u. togata * B. u. mediana
* B. u.
phaios * B. u. incana
* B. u. monticola * B. u. umbellus DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
These chunky , medium - sized birds weigh from , measure from in length and span across their short , strong wings .
Ruffed grouse have two distinct morphs : grey and brown .
In the grey morph , the head , neck and back are grey - brown ; the breast is light with barring .
There is much white on the underside and flanks , and overall the birds have a variegated appearance ; the throat is often distinctly lighter .
The tail is essentially the same brownish grey , with regular barring and a broad black band near the end ( " subterminal " ) .
Brown - morph birds have tails of the same color and pattern , but the rest of the plumage is much more brown , giving the appearance of a more uniform bird with less light plumage below and a conspicuously grey tail .
There are all sorts of intergrades between the most typical morphs ; warmer and more humid conditions favor browner birds in general .
The ruffs are on the sides of the neck in both sexes .
They also have a crest on top of their head , which sometimes lies flat .
Both genders are similarly marked and sized , making them difficult to tell apart , even in hand .
The female often has a broken subterminal tail band , while males tend to have unbroken tail bands , though the opposite of either can occur .
Females may also do a display similar to the male .
Another fairly accurate sign is that rump feathers with a single white dot indicate a female ; rump feathers with more than one white dot indicate a male .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
Like most grouse , they spend most of their time on the ground ; mixed woodland rich in aspen seems to be particularly well - liked .
These birds forage on the ground or in trees .
They are omnivores , eating buds , leaves , berries , seeds , and insects .
According to nature writer Don L. Johnson : " More than any other characteristic , it is the ruffed grouse 's ability to thrive on a wide range of foods that has allowed it to adapt to such a wide and varied range of habitat on this continent .
A complete menu of grouse fare might itself fill a book .
One grouse crop yielded a live salamander in a salad of watercress .
Another contained a small snake . "
HUNTING
Section::::Hunting .
Ruffed grouse frequently seek gravel and clover along road beds during early morning and late afternoon .
These are good areas to walk during this time to flush birds .
Also , grouse use sandy road beds to dust their feathers to rid themselves of skin pests .
Dusting sites are visible as areas of disturbed soils with some signs of feathers .
Birds will return to these spots during the late afternoon to bathe in dust and to socialize and mate .
Minnesota is the top ruffed grouse – producing state in the U.S. BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
The ruffed grouse differs from other grouse species in its courtship display .
Unlike other grouse species , the ruffed grouse relies entirely on a non - vocal acoustic display , known as drumming .
The drumming itself is a rapid , wing - beating display that creates a low frequency sound , starting slow and speeding up ( thump ... thump
... thump .. thump - thump - thump - thump ) .
Even in thick woods this can be heard for a or more .
The ruffed grouse spends most of its time quietly on the ground , and when surprised , may explode into flight , beating their wings very loudly .
In the winter , they will burrow into the snow for warmth , and may suddenly burst out of the snow when approached too closely .
The ruffed grouse population has a cycle , and follows the cycle no matter how much or how little hunting there is .
The cycle has puzzled scientists for years , and is simply referred to as the " grouse cycle " .
In spite of this historic cycle , populations have been declining in Pennsylvania and management plans adopted .
Habitat loss has been a concern for the species , but the introduction of the West Nile virus has been seen to be further increasing mortality .
SEE ALSO
*
Sage grouse REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Ohio Ornithological Society ( 2004 ) :
Annotated Ohio state checklist .
* State Symbols of Pennsylvania :
State Bird ,
The Ruffed Grouse PDF fulltext EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ruffed Grouse Species Account – Cornell Lab of Ornithology
* Ruffed Grouse hen video Appalachian Mountains , Floyd Virginia