MERVYN 'S
Mervyn 's was an American middle - scale department store chain based in Hayward , California , and founded by Mervin G. Morris .
It carried national brands of clothing , footwear , bedding , furniture , jewelry , beauty products , electronics , and housewares .
Many of the company 's stores were created in shopping malls ; however some locations are operated independently .
Based on 2005 revenue , Mervyn 's was the 83rd largest retailer in the United States .
In 2006 , Mervyn 's had 189 stores in 10 states .
One year later , Mervyn 's had reduced its store count to 177 stores in seven states .
On October 17 , 2008 , the company announced that it would liquidate its assets through a Chapter 7 filing .
All remaining locations were closed by the end of the year .
The Morris family , having bought back intellectual property rights to the company in 2009 , announced plans to relaunch Mervyn 's as an internet - based enterprise .
The proposed revival never came to fruition .
HISTORY BEGINNINGS Section::::History .
Section::::Beginnings .
Mervin G. Morris founded the first Mervyn 's store in San Lorenzo , California ( a suburb of Oakland and San Francisco ) on July 29 , 1949 .
The store was supposed to be named Mervin 's , but the architect suggested that a spelling with a y instead of an i would be more visually appealing .
Mervyn 's was located in the midst of San Lorenzo Village , a planned residential community nestled between the cities of Hayward and San Leandro , composed of two- and three - bedroom tract homes built between 1944 and the 1950s .
Mervyn 's carved a niche for itself by having a relatively no - frills shopping environment that reduced overhead , enabling the store to price merchandise lower than competing department stores in the area .
Mervyn 's also offered significantly - discounted factory seconds of basics such as jeans , t - shirts , underwear and similar garments , as well as household linens , with flaws minor and undetectable by most .
During the 1950s and 1960s , this made Mervyn 's popular with the young suburban families comprising the majority of San Lorenzo 's population .
This marketing strategy was later abandoned before Mervyn 's expanded beyond its original single location , but Mervyn 's remained popular as a lower - priced alternative to national department store chains .
The second Mervyn 's store opened about south as an anchor tenant of the Fremont Hub Shopping Center , one of two regional malls in Fremont , California in 1962 .
TARGET YEARS AND EXPANSION
Section::::Target years and expansion .
In mid-1975 , Mervyn 's operated stores in the following locations , all in California : Alameda , Antioch , Campbell , Citrus Heights , Cupertino , Daly City , Dublin , Fremont , Merced , Millbrae , Modesto , Mountain View , Napa , Oakland , Petaluma , Sacramento - Point West and Florin , Salinas , East San Jose and South San Jose , San Lorenzo , San Pablo , Vallejo and Visalia .
In October 1975 , the chain expanded to southern California , opening stores in Fullerton and Huntington Beach .
By 1978 the company had grown to a chain of more than 50 stores in three states , and Mervyn 's was acquired by the Dayton Hudson Corporation ( now Target Corporation ) .
Mervyn 's kept its separate identity as a Dayton Hudson subsidiary .
The average store had 80 - 130 employees .
There was a Store Team Leader ( 1 ) , Executive Team Leaders ( 2 - 4 ) , Department Leaders ( 7 - 10 ) , benefited team members ( full - time employees not part of the leadership team ) , and part - time employees .
All employees had " credit goals " , which referred to the number of customers that opened a Mervyn 's credit account .
Part - time employees were expected 1 per every 8 hours , and the leadership team was expected 1 per every 40 hours .
When entering Florida with a store in Lakeland in 1986 , Mervyn 's began major expansions outside of California with Atlanta being the site of a particularly strong expansion campaign , followed by Miami in 1991 .
Mervyn 's , which had not previously had a retail presence in the southern U.S. competed for mall space with JCPenney which later received top anchor spots at the Town Center Mall in Kennesaw , Shannon Mall in Union City ( rebuilt as a DHL Distribution Center ) , and Gwinnett Place Mall in Duluth ( now Beauty Master ) .
Stores that were unaffected were those at North Dekalb Mall in Decatur that was taken over by Upton 's ( Burlington Coat Factory now occupies the store ) and North Point Mall in Alpharetta , which became Parisian and was rebuilt as AMC Theatres .
This was also likewise done at the same time in Florida where the company sold ten stores to Dillard 's which opened at Cutler Ridge Mall in Cutler Ridge ( rebuilt as Regal Cinemas ) ,
Miami International Mall in Doral , Coral Square in Coral Springs ( both are now Kohl 's stores just like many of the other former Mervyn 's stores today ) , Boynton Beach Mall in Boynton Beach ( Dillard 's converted the store into a clearance center using only half of the building ) , Broward Mall in Plantation , Pembroke Lakes Mall in Pembroke Pines , Melbourne Square in Melbourne , and Lakeland Square Mall in Lakeland
( rebuilt as Cinemark and Sports Authority , which closed in 2016 ) , the latter three locations became " double headers " for Dillard 's .
The locations at Treasure Coast Square in Jensen Beach ( demolished for Borders , which closed in 2011 and became H. H. Gregg that closed in 2017 ) and Pompano Fashion Square in Pompano Beach ( rebuilt as Lowe 's ) did not become Dillard 's when being sold to the Little Rock retailer while some stores that were n't included in the deal were sold to other retailers , such as a larger Saks Fifth Avenue taking over an empty store at Town Center Mall in Boca Raton , where Dillard 's wanted to open a new store there since its closure in 1995 .
Mervyn 's had withdrawn from both Miami and Atlanta in 1997 .
During the 1990s , Mervyn 's also expanded into Arizona , Colorado , Texas , Michigan and Minnesota .
MERVYN 'S CALIFORNIA ; SALE FROM TARGET Section::::Mervyn 's California ; Sale from Target .
From 1995 to 2001 , the stores were rebranded as Mervyn 's California , in an effort to identify with its West Coast roots .
A media campaign was launched to publicize the rebranding , with TV commercials and catalogs featuring former San Francisco 49ers ' quarterback Joe Montana .
The rebranding had little effect on the company 's revenues , and the " California " was dropped from the name in 2001 , reverting to the original name .
The majority of their stores in Texas did n't even consider adding the " California " name to their stores .
In March 2004 , Target Corporation announced that they planned to put the Mervyn 's and Marshall Field 's divisions up for sale to focus on Target stores .
Target Corporation was approached by many buyers for both stores but many of the potential buyers saw value only in the real estate .
Target refused to sell to the groups which wanted to buy the property only , and said they would only look at deals that would not close the company and put the then 30,000 employees out of work .
In July 2004 , Target Corporation announced that Mervyn 's had been sold to a group of investors that included private investment firm and turnaround specialist Sun Capital Partners , Cerberus Capital Management , and
real estate investment company Lubert - Adler Management Inc. Rick Leto was named the new president and chief merchandising officer in January 2005 .
STORE CLOSURES PRIOR TO BANKRUPTCY Section::::Store closures prior to bankruptcy .
One of the first acts of the new owners was to cease store operations in certain states , with stores in Minnesota being the first to close .
Locations in Minnesota were much larger than the normal store of about ; a few had restaurants .
The size of these stores , and their proximity to Target Corporation , made the new owners think them unnecessary .
Further store closures were announced in September 2005 , as Mervyn 's announced that it would begin to focus exclusively on its Western and Southwestern U.S. markets , and that 62 stores in the Midwest and South would be closed .
Prior to the formal announcement , store employees saw weekly shipments shrink and delivery schedules went from 3 days per week to one .
Mervyn 's stores in Michigan , Oklahoma , and Louisiana were the first to close , in February 2006 .
28 stores in Texas , as well as one store in Salt Lake City , Utah , were also closed .
In 2007 , an additional 18 stores were closed .
Of the stores closed , 17 were in Oregon and Washington , and one in Grand Junction , Colorado , which was the last remaining Mervyn 's store in that state .
BANKRUPTCY AND STORE CLOSURES Section::::Bankruptcy and store closures .
Signs of financial distress and possible bankruptcy surfaced on July 21 , 2008 , when the Associated Press reported that Mervyn 's had stopped updating its financial status and that the department store 's vendors ceased shipping some products , hurting the store 's back - to - school season sales efforts .
In addition , financing requests were denied by lenders .
This raised the possibility of the company having to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy , or going out of business altogether .
The company made no official comments at the time , but on July 29 , 2008 , Mervyn 's announced that it had filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection in the United States Bankruptcy Court for the Northern District of California .
Soon , the Chapter 11 case was converted to Chapter 7 liquidation on October 17 , 2008 .
At the time of this announcement 3 stores had just held grand openings only a few months prior to being told they would soon close .
Although the company initially vowed to keep all locations open during the reorganization efforts , the company announced in August 2008 the closure of all 26 underperforming stores .
The company hired an outside company to assist in the liquidation of assets from the stores affected .
The closures also marked a complete retreat by Mervyn 's from the Idaho market , whose sole store in Boise was one of the ones marked for closure .
In Texas , a complete retreat was slated from San Antonio , where all three remaining stores were marked for closure , in addition to the closure of the sole stores in Lubbock , Midland , and Odessa .
After these closures , Mervyn 's was left with about 150 stores : 16 in Arizona , 121 in California , three each in Nevada and New Mexico , seven in Texas and six in Utah .
In September 2008 , Mervyn 's sued the private equity firms involved in the leveraged buyout of the chain , alleging that the deal had stripped the retailer of its real estate assets , forcing it into bankruptcy .
Mervyn 's said in the suit that Cerberus Capital Management and its partners had used the increased rent to finance the buyout .
LIQUIDATION Section::::Liquidation .
Although the company attempted to undergo reorganization under bankruptcy , Mervyn 's ultimately succumbed to the ongoing US recession and announced that it would liquidate its assets through Chapter 7 of Title 11 in the United States Code , stating it " is the best course of action to maximize value for all of the company 's creditors , employees and other stakeholders .
"
The bankruptcy called for the company to liquidate and close its remaining stores .
The announcement came amidst an offer by fashion retailer Forever 21 to purchase 149 of the remaining Mervyn 's stores for an undisclosed amount .
The original negotiations failed , and Mervyn 's liquidated all 149 stores under the bankruptcy action .
Several months later , department store retailer Kohl 's and Forever 21 prevailed in a joint bid at bankruptcy auction to take over the leases of 46 Mervyn 's stores ; Kohl 's has assumed 31 stores , while Forever 21 has assumed 15 stores .
In a KPIX - TV interview on February 11 , 2009 , Mervin Morris ' son Jeff revealed that the family had bought the Mervyn 's name and intellectual property , including the company 's customer list as part of an effort to relaunch the company .
Morris did not say when the website would launch or how much it would cost , only that decisions will be up to his sons .
Since 2009 , the Mervyn 's website has been replaced with a single - page site that allows visitors to sign - up for a mailing list to receive updates about the future of Mervyn 's , but was shut down .
As of June 2017 , the website is no longer accessible .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
A street named Mervyn 's Drive still exist as is in Fullerton , California as a location once existed there prior to 2008 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS