GUMMY BEAR Gummy bears ( German : Gummibär ) are small , fruit gum candies , similar to a jelly baby in some English - speaking countries .
The candy is roughly long and shaped in the form of a bear .
The gummy bear is one of many gummies , popular gelatin - based candies sold in a variety of shapes and colors .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The gummy bear originated in Germany , where it is popular under the name ( gum or gummy bear ) , or in the endearing form ( [ little ] gum or gummy bear ) .
Gum arabic was the original base ingredient used to produce the gummy bears , hence the name gum or gummy .
Hans Riegel , Sr . , a confectioner from Bonn , started the Haribo company in 1920 .
In 1922 , inspired by the trained bears seen at street festivities and markets in Europe through to the 19th century , he invented the Dancing Bear ( Tanzbär ) , a small , affordable , fruit - flavored gum candy treat for children and adults alike , which was much larger in form than its later successor , the Gold - Bear ( Goldbär ) .
Even during Weimar Germany 's hyperinflation period that wreaked havoc on the country , Haribo 's fruit - gum Dancing Bear treats remained affordably priced for a mere 1 Pfennig , in pairs , at kiosks .
The success of the Dancing Bear 's successor would later become Haribo 's world - famous Gold - Bears candy product in 1967 .
VARIATIONS AND FLAVORS Section::::Variations and flavors .
The success of gummi bears has spawned the production of many other gummy candies that look like animals and other objects : rings , worms , frogs , snakes , hamburgers , cherries , sharks , penguins , hippos , lobsters , octopuses , apples , peaches , oranges , and even Ampelmännchen , Smurfs , and spiders .
Manufacturers offer sizes from the standard candy size , and smaller , to bears that weigh several kilograms .
In the United States , Haribo gummy bears are sold in five flavors : raspberry ( red ) ; orange ( orange ) ; strawberry ( green ) ; pineapple ( colorless ) ; and lemon ( yellow ) .
Trolli 's bears are similarly most often sold in five flavors in the United States , and in the same colors ; however , Trolli 's red bear is strawberry - flavored , while the green is lime and the colorless is grape .
Many companies emulate either Haribo or Trolli flavor - color combinations .
Health - oriented brands , which often use all - natural flavors , sometimes opt for more and different flavors .
For example , the boxed bulk gummis sold by Sunflower / Newflower Markets include grape , pineapple - coconut , and peach , among others .
INGREDIENTS AND PRODUCTION Section::::Ingredients and production .
The traditional gummy bear is made from a mixture of sugar , glucose syrup , starch , flavoring , food coloring , citric acid , and gelatin .
However , recipes vary , such as organic candy , those suitable for vegetarians , or those following religious dietary laws .
Production uses a specialized machine called a starch mogul .
The image of the gummy bear is stamped into a tray filled with powdered starch .
The hot , liquid mixture is poured into the indentations in the starch and allowed to cool overnight .
Once the mixture has set , the candies can be removed from the mold and packaged .
The molds are open on top , so only the bear 's front is formed while the back remains flat .
The original design for each type of candy is carved into plaster by an artist , then duplicated by a machine and used to create the starch molds for the production line .
Gummy bears made with bovine , porcine or piscine gelatin are not suitable for vegetarians and vegans .
Those with porcine gelatin or from animals not slaughtered in either of the two contradictory ritualistic fashions do not conform to kashrut or halal dietary laws .
In its factory in Turkey , Haribo produces halal bears and other sweets which are made with bovine gelatin .
Also , some gummy bears are made with pectin or starch instead of gelatin , making them suitable for vegetarians .
Large sour gummy bears are larger and flatter than regular ones , have a softer texture , and include fumaric acid or other acid ingredients to produce a sour flavor .
Some manufacturers produce sour bears with a different texture , based on starch instead of gelatin .
Typically , starch produces a shorter ( cleaner bite , less chewy ) texture than gelatin .
HEALTH ISSUES Section::::Health issues .
Gummy bears ordinarily contain mostly empty calories , but recently gummy bears containing vitamin C , produced by manufacturers such as Sconza or Bear Essentials , are being marketed to parents of young children .
Multivitamins have also been produced in the form of gummi bears to motivate consumption by young , picky eaters .
Gummy bears , and other gummi candy , stick to teeth and may cause tooth decay .
However , gummi bears containing the cavity - fighting additive xylitol ( wood sugar ) are now being tested .
Trolli has developed a line of gummi candy which is claimed to help the immune system and teeth : the acti - line .
There has been concern that gelatin in most gummy bears may harbor prions , particularly those that cause bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE ) in cattle and new - variant Creutzfeldt –
Jakob disease in humans .
Based on studies , the United States FDA and other national organizations and countries consider the risk of BSE transmission through gelatin to be minuscule as long as precautions are followed during manufacturing .
SEE ALSO
* I Am Your Gummy Bear
* " I 'm a Gummy Bear ( The Gummy Bear Song )
" * " Disney 's Adventures of the Gummi Bears * Turkish delight REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Haribo Gummies