LOTTERIES IN THE UNITED STATES
In the United States , lotteries are run by 47 jurisdictions : 44 states plus the District of Columbia , Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands .
Lotteries are subject to the laws of and operated independently by each jurisdiction , and there is no national lottery organization .
However , consortiums of state lotteries jointly organize games spanning larger geographical footprints , which in turn , carry larger jackpots .
Two major lottery games , Mega Millions and Powerball , are both offered in nearly all jurisdictions that operate lotteries , and serve as de facto national lotteries .
In fiscal 2018 , Americans spent $ 77.7 billion on various lotteries , up about $ 5 billion from 2017 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Gambling as a generalization has roots in the United States and other English colonies as far back as the 1600s .
Not every colony allowed gambling , however .
The Massachusetts Bay Colony , for example , did not allow cards , dice or gaming tables , even in private residences .
In most colonies however , gambling was seen as a harmless distraction as long as it was played in a gentlemanly manner .
The acceptance of gambling in the colonies was fairly short - lived by English investors because it was seen as a sign of laziness and as a vice .
The investors saw gambling as a root cause of the colonies ' inability to sustain themselves .
Lotteries were used not only as a form of entertainment but as a source of revenue to help fund the colonies .
The financiers of Jamestown , Virginia , for instance , funded lotteries to raise money to support their colony .
These lotteries were quite sophisticated for the time period and even included instant winners .
Not long after , each of the 13 original colonies established a lottery system to raise revenue .
In early American history , legislators commonly authorized lotteries to fund schools , roads , bridges , and other public works .
Evangelical reformers in the 1830s began denouncing lotteries on moral grounds and petitioned legislatures and constitutional conventions to ban them .
Recurring lottery scandals and a general backlash against legislative corruption following the Panic of 1837 also contributed to anti - lottery sentiments .
From 1844 to 1859 alone , 10 new state constitutions contained lottery bans .
By 1890 , lotteries were prohibited in every state except Delaware and Louisiana .
EARLY LOTTERIES Section::::Early lotteries .
Lotteries in the United States did not always have sterling reputations .
One early lottery in particular , the National Lottery , which was passed by Congress for the beautification of Washington , D.C. and was administered by the municipal government , was the subject of a major U.S. Supreme Court decision – Cohens v. Virginia .
The lottery never paid out , and it brought to light the prevalent issue of crookedness amongst the lotteries in the United States .
The wave of anti - lottery protests finally broke through when , by 1860 , all states had prohibited lotteries except Delaware , Missouri , and Kentucky .
The scarcity of lotteries in the United States meant that tickets were shipped across the country and eventually led to the creation of illegal lotteries .
In 1868 , after years of illegal operation , the Louisiana State Lottery Company obtained a 25-year charter for its state lottery system .
The charter was passed by the Legislature due to immense bribing from a criminal syndicate in New York .
The Louisiana Lottery Company derived 90 % of its revenue from tickets sold across state borders .
These continued issues of corruption led to the complete prohibition of lotteries in the United States by 1895 .
It was discovered that the promoters of the Louisiana Lottery Company had accrued immense sums of money from illegitimate sources and that the Legislature was riddled with bribery .
Before the advent of government - sponsored lotteries , many illegal lotteries thrived , such as number games .
The first modern government - run US lottery was established in Puerto Rico in 1934 .
This was followed , decades later , by the New Hampshire lottery in 1964 .
Instant lottery tickets , also known as scratch cards , were introduced in the 1970s and have become a major source of lottery revenue .
Individual lotteries often feature three - digit and four - digit games akin to numbers games ; a five number game , and a six number game ( the latter two often have a jackpot . )
Some lotteries also offer at least one game similar to keno , and some offer video lottery terminals .
Presently , many US lotteries support public education systems .
As of November 2018 , lotteries are established in 45 states , the District of Columbia , Puerto Rico , and the U.S. Virgin Islands ; the most recent U.S. state to legalize a lottery is Mississippi , with lottery commission members receiving appointments on October 19 , 2018 .
Ticket sales for the Mississippi Lottery are expected to begin in 2019 .
The first U.S. multi - state lottery game was formed in 1985 in Maine , New Hampshire , and Vermont ; its flagship game remains Tri - State Megabucks .
In 1988 , the Multi - State Lottery Association ( MUSL ) was formed with Iowa , Kansas , Missouri , Oregon , Rhode Island , West Virginia , and the District of Columbia as its charter members ; it is best known for Powerball , which was designed to create large jackpots .
Another joint lottery , The Big Game ( now called Mega Millions ) , was formed in 1996 by six other lotteries as its charter members .
As of November 2018 , each of the 44 state lotteries offer both Mega Millions and Powerball as a result of a 2009 agreement between the Mega Millions consortium and MUSL to cross - license their game to one another 's members , although the two organizations continue to administer Mega Millions and Powerball separately .
The District of Columbia and the U.S. Virgin Islands also offer both games .
( The Puerto Rico Lottery does not offer Mega Millions . )
STATE REVENUES Section::::State revenues .
State lotteries have become a significant source of revenue for states , raising $ 17.6 billion in profits for state budgets in the 2009 fiscal year ( FY ) with 11 states collecting more revenue from their state lottery than from their state corporate income tax during FY2009 .
Lottery policies within states can have conflicting goals .
Given that instructions are passed down from state legislatures , lottery implementation is often expected to be carried out with reduced advertising and funding while still producing the same amount of revenue .
This issue led states to look for loopholes in the system .
Massachusetts , for example , had its advertising budget dramatically cut , and therefore started using free - play coupons as money to pay for advertising .
This led to an IRS investigation into alleged non - reporting of income because the IRS considered the coupons to have monetary value .
STATES WITH NO LOTTERIES Section::::States with no lotteries .
Among the states that do not have lotteries , Alabama and Utah cite religious objections .
Nevada 's lucrative gambling industry has lobbied against a state lottery there , fearing the competition ; similarly , the Mississippi Gaming Commission expressed concern that a state lottery would constitute a " competing force " for gambling dollars spent at Mississippi casinos .
Despite this , in August 2018 , Mississippi passed legislation to create a state lottery .
The governor expressed his support for the lottery to fund transportation in the state and has indicated he will sign the bill .
Sales are expected to begin sometime in 2019 .
Alaska and Hawaii , being outside the contiguous United States , have not felt the pressure of losing sales to competitors .
NEW TECHNOLOGIES Section::::New technologies .
In recent years , new applications such as Lottery.com and Jackpocket were created for people to purchase lotteries over their smartphones .
U.S. LOTTERIES
Key : AoN =
All or Nothing C4L = Cash4Life LA =
Lotto America
LFL =
Lucky for Life TSM =
Tri - State Megabucks consortium OTHER JOINT U.S. LOTTERIES
Section::::Other joint U.S. lotteries .
These games also are offered by multiple lotteries .
Some of these games feature a shared progressive jackpot ( noted by ° ):
* 2by2 ( 3 lotteries ) : Kansas , Nebraska , North Dakota * All or Nothing : Iowa and Minnesota ( several other draw games with this name and format are one - state games )
* Cash4Life ( 9 ) : Florida , Georgia , Indiana , Maryland , New Jersey , New York , Pennsylvania , Tennessee , Virginia
* Lotto America ° ( 13 ) : Delaware , Idaho , Iowa , Kansas , Maine , Minnesota , Montana , New Mexico , North Dakota , South Dakota , Tennessee , Vermont , West Virginia
* Lucky for Life ( 25 ) :
Arkansas , Colorado , Connecticut , Delaware , District of Columbia , Idaho , Iowa , Kansas , Kentucky , Maine , Massachusetts , Michigan , Minnesota , Missouri , Montana , Nebraska , New Hampshire , North Carolina , North Dakota , Ohio , Rhode Island , South Carolina , South Dakota , Vermont , Wyoming
* Tri - State Lottery ( Megabucks Plus ° , Pick 3 ( Day & Night ) ,
Pick 4 ( Day & Night ) , Fast Play ° ) :
Maine , New Hampshire ,
Vermont
SEE ALSO
* Gambling in the United States
* Lottery jackpot records
*
Sweepstake REFERENCES