SPECIAL FORCES ( UNITED STATES ARMY )
The United States Army Special Forces , colloquially known as the Green Berets due to their distinctive service headgear , are a special operations force tasked with five primary missions : unconventional warfare ( the original and most important mission of Special Forces ) , foreign internal defense , special reconnaissance , direct action , and counter - terrorism .
The first two emphasize language , cultural , and training skills in working with foreign troops .
Other duties include combat search and rescue ( CSAR ) , counter - narcotics , counter - proliferation , hostage rescue , humanitarian assistance , humanitarian demining , information operations , peacekeeping , psychological operations , security assistance , and manhunts ; other components of the United States Special Operations Command ( USSOCOM ) or other U.S. government activities may also specialize in these secondary areas .
Many of their operational techniques are classified , but some nonfiction works and doctrinal manuals are available .
As special operations units , Special Forces are not necessarily under the command authority of the ground commanders in those countries .
Instead , while in theater , SF units may report directly to a geographic combatant command , USSOCOM , or other command authorities .
The Central Intelligence Agency 's ( CIA ) highly secretive Special Activities Division ( SAD ) and more specifically its Special Operations Group ( SOG ) recruits from the Army 's Special Forces .
Joint CIA –
Army Special Forces operations go back to the MACV - SOG branch during the Vietnam War .
The cooperation still exists today and is seen in the War in Afghanistan .
MISSION Section::::Mission .
The primary mission of the Army Special Forces is to train and lead unconventional warfare ( UW ) forces , or a clandestine guerrilla force in an occupied nation .
The 10th Special Forces Group was the first deployed SF unit , intended to train and lead UW forces behind enemy lines in the event of a Warsaw Pact invasion of Western Europe .
As the U.S. became involved in Southeast Asia , it was realized that specialists trained to lead guerrillas could also help defend against hostile guerrillas , so SF acquired the additional mission of Foreign Internal Defense ( FID ) , working with Host Nation ( HN ) forces in a spectrum of counter - guerrilla activities from indirect support to combat command .
Special Forces personnel qualify both in advanced military skills and the regional languages and cultures of defined parts of the world .
While they are best known for their unconventional warfare capabilities , they also undertake other missions that include direct action raids , peace operations , counter - proliferation , counter - drug advisory roles , and other strategic missions .
As strategic resources , they report either to USSOCOM or to a regional Unified Combatant Command .
To enhance their DA capability , specific Commanders In - Extremis Force ( CIF ) teams were created with a focus on the direct action side of special operations .
SF team members work closely together and rely on one another under isolated circumstances for long periods of time , both during extended deployments and in garrison .
Because of this , they develop clannish relationships and long - standing personal ties .
SF non - commissioned officers ( NCO ) often spend their entire careers in Special Forces , rotating among assignments to detachments , higher staff billets , liaison positions , and instructor duties at the U.S. Army John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School ( USAJFKSWCS ) .
They are then required to move to staff positions or to higher command echelons .
With the creation of USSOCOM , SF commanders have risen to the highest ranks of U.S. Army command , including command of USSOCOM , the Army 's Chief of Staff , and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Special Forces traces its roots as the Army 's premier proponent of unconventional warfare from purpose - formed special operations units like the Alamo Scouts , Philippine guerrillas , First Special Service Force , and the Operational Groups ( OGs ) of the Office of Strategic Services .
Although the OSS was not an Army organization , many Army personnel were assigned to the OSS and later used their experiences to influence the forming of Special Forces .
During the Korean War , individuals such as former Philippine guerrilla commanders Col . Wendell Fertig and Lt .
Col .
Russell W. Volckmann used their wartime experience to formulate the doctrine of unconventional warfare that became the cornerstone of the Special Forces .
In 1951 , Major General Robert A. McClure chose former OSS member Colonel Aaron Bank as Operations Branch Chief of the Special Operations Division of the Psychological Warfare Staff ( OCPW ) in the Pentagon .
In June 1952 , the 10th Special Forces Group ( Airborne ) was formed under Col . Aaron Bank , soon after the establishment of the Psychological Warfare School , which ultimately became today 's John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School .
The 10th Special Forces Group ( Airborne ) was split , with the cadre that kept the designation 10th SFG deployed to Bad Tölz , Germany , in September 1953 .
The remaining cadre at Fort Bragg formed the 77th Special Forces Group , which in May 1960 was reorganized and designated as today 's 7th Special Forces Group .
Since their establishment in 1952 , Special Forces soldiers have operated in Vietnam , Cambodia , Laos , North Vietnam , Guatemala , Nicaragua , El Salvador , Colombia , Panama , Haiti , Somalia , Bosnia , Kosovo , 1st Gulf War , Afghanistan , Iraq , the Philippines , Syria , Yemen , Niger and , in an FID role , East Africa .
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
Section::::Organizational structure .
1st
Special Forces Command ( Airborne )
SPECIAL FORCES GROUPS Section::::Special Forces groups .
In 1957 the two original special forces groups ( 10th and 77th ) were joined by the 1st , stationed in the Far East .
Additional groups were formed in 1961 and 1962 after President John F. Kennedy visited the Special Forces at Fort Bragg in 1961 .
Nine groups were organized for the reserve components in 1961 .
( Tsouras , 1994 , 91 ) .
Among them were the 16th and 17th Special Forces , Groups .
However , 17th Special Forces Group , a National Guard formation with elements in Washington , was disestablished on 31 January 1966 .
In the early twenty - first century , Special Forces are divided into five active duty ( AD ) and two Army National Guard ( ARNG ) Special Forces groups .
Each Special Forces Group ( SFG ) has a specific regional focus .
The Special Forces soldiers assigned to these groups receive intensive language and cultural training for countries within their regional area of responsibility ( AOR ) .
Due to the increased need for Special Forces soldiers in the War on Terror , all Groups — including those of the National Guard ( 19th and 20th SFGs)—have been deployed outside of their areas of operation ( AOs ) , particularly to Iraq and Afghanistan .
A recently released report showed Special Forces as perhaps the most deployed SOF under USSOCOM , with many soldiers , regardless of Group , serving up to 75 % of their careers overseas , almost all of which had been to Iraq and Afghanistan .
Until recently an SF group has consisted of three battalions , but since the Department of Defense has authorized the 1st Special Forces Command to increase its authorized strength by one third , a fourth battalion was activated in each active component group by 2012 .
A Special Forces group is historically assigned to a Unified Combatant Command or a theater of operations .
The Special Forces Operational Detachment C or C - detachment ( SFODC ) is responsible for a theater or a major subcomponent , which can provide command and control of up to 18 SFODAs , three SFODB , or a mixture of the two .
Subordinate to it is the Special Forces Operational Detachment Bs or B - detachments ( SFODB ) , which can provide command and control for six SFODAs .
Further subordinate , the SFODAs typically raise company- to battalion - sized units when on unconventional warfare missions .
They can form 6-man " split A " detachments that are often used for special reconnaissance . BATTALION HQ ELEMENT –
SF OPERATIONAL DETACHMENT - C ( SFODC )
COMPOSITION
Section::::Battalion HQ Element – SF Operational Detachment - C ( SFODC ) composition .
The SFODC , or " C - Team " , is the headquarters element of a Special Forces battalion .
As such , it is a command and control unit with operations , training , signals and logistic support responsibilities to its three subordinate line companies .
A lieutenant colonel commands the battalion as well as the C - Team , and
the Battalion Command Sergeant Major is the senior NCO of the battalion and the C - Team .
There is an additional 20–30 SF personnel who fill key positions in operations , logistics , intelligence , communications and medical .
A Special Forces battalion usually consists of four companies : " A " , " B " , " C " , and Headquarters / Support .
COMPANY HQ ELEMENT –
SF OPERATIONAL
DETACHMENT - B ( SFODB ) COMPOSITION Section::::Company HQ Element – SF Operational Detachment - B ( SFODB ) composition .
The ODB , or " B - Team " , is the headquarters element of a Special Forces company , and it is usually composed of 11–13 soldiers .
While the A - team typically conducts direct operations , the purpose of the B - Team is to support the company 's A - Teams both in garrison and in the field .
When deployed , in line with their support role , B - Teams are usually found in more secure rear areas .
However , under some circumstances a B - Team will deploy into a hostile area , usually to coordinate the activities of multiple A - Teams .
The ODB is led by an 18A , usually a major , who is the company commander ( CO ) .
The CO is assisted by his company executive officer ( XO ) , another 18A , usually a captain .
The XO is himself assisted by a company technician , a 180A , generally a chief warrant officer three , who assists in the direction of the organization , training , intelligence , counter - intelligence , and operations for the company and its detachments .
The company commander is assisted by the company sergeant major , an 18Z , usually a Sergeant Major .
A second 18Z acts as the operations sergeant , usually a Master Sergeant , who assists the XO and technician in their operational duties .
He has an 18F assistant operations sergeant , who is usually a Sergeant First Class .
The company 's support comes from an 18D medical sergeant , usually a Sergeant First Class , and two 18E communications sergeants , usually a Sergeant First Class and a Staff Sergeant .
The following jobs are outside of the Special Forces 18-series career management field ( CMF ) , but hold positions on a Special Forces B - Team .
Soldiers in these positions are not " Special Forces qualified " , as they have not completed the Special Forces Qualification Course ( SFQC or " Q " Course ) ; however , they do have the potential to be awarded the Special Qualification Identifier ( SQI ) " S " ( Special Operations / Special Operations Support ) once they complete the appropriate unit level training , 24 months with their Special Forces unit , and Basic Airborne School :
* The supply NCO , usually a Staff Sergeant , the commander 's principal logistical planner , works with the battalion S-4 to supply the company .
* The Chemical , Biological , Radiological , Nuclear ( CBRN defense ) NCO , usually a Sergeant , maintains and operates the company 's NBC detection and decontamination equipment , and assists in administering NBC defensive measures .
* Other jobs can also exist depending on the B - Team structure .
Specialist team members can include I.T. ( S-6 ) personnel , and Military Intelligence Soldiers , including Intelligence Analysts ( 35F ) , Human Intelligence Collectors ( 35 M ) , Signals Intelligence ( 35 N / P - also known as SOT - A and SOT - B as related to their positions on SFODA and SFODB teams ) , Intelligence Officers ( 35 D / E / F ) , and Counterintelligence Special Agents ( 35L/351L ) .
BASIC ELEMENT –
SF OPERATIONAL DETACHMENT - A ( SFODA ) COMPOSITION Section::::Basic Element –
SF Operational Detachment - A ( SFODA ) composition .
A Special Forces company normally consists of six ODAs ( Operational Detachments - A ) or " A - Teams " .
Each ODA specializes in an infiltration skill or a particular mission - set ( e.g. Military Freefall ( HALO ) , combat diving , mountain warfare , maritime operations , etc . ) .
An ODA is identified by its group , battalion , company , and the team itself .
For example , ODA 1234 would be the fourth team in the third company of the second battalion of 1st Special Forces Group .
An ODA consists of 12 men , each of whom has a specific function ( MOS or Military Occupational Specialty ) on the team , however all members of an ODA conduct cross - training .
The ODA is led by an 18A ( Detachment Commander ) , a Captain , and a 180A ( Assistant Detachment Commander ) who is his second in command , usually a Warrant Officer One or Chief Warrant Officer Two .
The team also includes the following enlisted men : one 18Z ( Operations Sergeant ) ( known as the " Team Sergeant " ) , usually a Master Sergeant , one 18F ( Assistant Operations and Intelligence Sergeant ) , usually a Sergeant First Class , and two each , 18Bs ( Weapons Sergeant ) , 18Cs ( Engineer Sergeant ) , 18Ds ( Medical Sergeant ) , and 18Es ( Communications Sergeant ) , usually Sergeants First Class , Staff Sergeants or Sergeants .
This organization facilitates 6-man " split team " operations , redundancy , and mentoring between a senior NCO and his junior assistant .
QUALIFICATIONS Section::::Qualifications .
The basic eligibility requirements to be considered for entry into the Special Forces are : SELECTION AND TRAINING Section::::Selection and training .
The Special Forces soldier trains on a regular basis over the course of his entire career .
The initial formal training program for entry into Special Forces is divided into four phases collectively known as the Special Forces Qualification Course or , informally , the " Q Course " .
The length of the Q Course changes depending on the applicant 's primary job field within Special Forces and his assigned foreign language capability , but will usually last between 55 and 95 weeks .
After successfully completing the Special Forces Qualification Course , Special Forces soldiers are then eligible for many advanced skills courses .
These include , but are not limited to , the Military Free Fall Parachutist Course ( MFF ) , the Combat Diver Qualification Course , and the Special Forces Sniper Course ( SFSC ) .
SPECIAL FORCES MOS
DESCRIPTIONS
* 18A – Special Forces Officer * 180A – Special Forces Warrant Officer * 18B – Special Forces Weapons Sergeant
* 18C – Special Forces Engineer Sergeant * 18D – Special Forces Medical Sergeant * 18E – Special Forces Communications Sergeant * 18F – Special Forces Intelligence Sergeant * 18X – Special Forces Candidate ( Active Duty Enlistment Option )
* 18Z – Special Forces Operations Sergeant UNIFORMS AND INSIGNIA THE GREEN BERET Section::::Uniforms and insignia .
Section::::The Green Beret .
U.S. Army Special Forces adopted the green beret unofficially in 1954 after searching for a piece of headgear that would set them visually apart .
Members of the 77th SFG began searching through their accumulated berets and settled on the Rifle Green color from Captain Miguel de la Peña 's collection .
Captain Frank Dallas had the new beret designed and produced in small numbers for the members of the 10th & 77th Special Forces Groups .
Their new headdress was first worn at a retirement parade at Fort Bragg on 12 June 1955 for Lieutenant General Joseph P. Cleland , the now - former commander of the XVIII Airborne Corps .
Onlookers thought that the commandos were a foreign delegation from NATO .
In 1956 General Paul D. Adams , the post commander at Fort Bragg , banned the wearing of the distinctive headdress , ( although members of the Special Forces continued to wear it surreptitiously ) .
This was reversed on 25 September 1961 by Department of the Army Message 578636 , which designated the green beret as the exclusive headdress of the Army Special Forces .
In 1961 , President John F. Kennedy authorized them for use exclusively by the U.S. Special Forces .
Preparing for a 12 October visit to the Special Warfare Center at Fort Bragg , North Carolina , the President sent word to the Center 's commander , Colonel William P. Yarborough , for all Special Forces soldiers to wear green berets as part of the event .
The President felt that since they had a special mission , Special Forces should have something to set them apart from the rest .
In 1962 , he called the green beret " a symbol of excellence , a badge of courage , a mark of distinction in the fight for freedom " .
Forrest Lindley , a writer for the newspaper Stars and Stripes who served with Special Forces in Vietnam said of Kennedy 's authorization : " It was President Kennedy who was responsible for the rebuilding of the Special Forces and giving us back our Green Beret .
People were sneaking around wearing [ them ] when conventional forces were n't in the area and it was sort of a cat and mouse game .
Then Kennedy authorized the Green Beret as a mark of distinction , everybody had to scramble around to find berets that were really green .
We were bringing them down from Canada .
Some were handmade , with the dye coming out in the rain " .
Kennedy 's actions created a special bond with the Special Forces , with specific traditions carried out since his funeral , when a sergeant in charge of a detail of Special Forces soldiers guarding the grave placed his beret on the coffin .
The moment was repeated at a commemoration of the 25th anniversary of JFK 's death – General Michael D. Healy ( ret . ) , the last commander of Special Forces in Vietnam and later a commander of the John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School , spoke at Arlington Cemetery , after which a wreath in the form of a green beret was placed on Kennedy 's grave .
DISTINCTIVE UNIT INSIGNIA Section::::Distinctive Unit Insignia .
On a wreath of the colors ( Argent and Sable ) , two arrows saltire - wise Argent – that is , two silver arrows crossed with a dagger , also silver , above them , surrounded by a black ribbon .
*
The regimental crest is taken from the gold crossed arrow collar ( branch ) beret insignia of the First Special Service Force , an American - Canadian commando unit organized in 1942 for World War II .
The crest was changed to silver to create visual harmony with the shield , as well as to make a difference from the collar insignia .
* A silver color metal and enamel device in height consisting of a pair of silver arrows in saltire , points up and surmounted at their junction by a silver dagger with black handle point up ; all over and between a black motto scroll arcing to base and inscribed " DE OPPRESSO LIBER " in silver letters .
The motto , De oppresso liber , is traditionally but incorrectly thought to mean " To Free the Oppressed " .
A correct translation of the phrase de oppresso liber would be " from ( being ) an oppressed man , ( to being ) a free one " ...
This distinctive unit insignia was approved on 8 July 1960 .
The insignia of the 1st Special Forces was authorized to be worn by enlisted personnel of the U.S. Army Special Forces Command ( Airborne ) and its subordinate units since at least 1965 .
SHOULDER
SLEEVE INSIGNIA Section::::Shoulder Sleeve Insignia .
The US Army 's 1st Special Forces Command ( Airborne ) shoulder sleeve insignia ( SSI ) is worn by all those assigned to the command and its subordinate units that have not been authorized their own SSI , such as the Special Forces Groups .
According to the U.S. Army Institute of Heraldry , the shape and items depicted in the SSI have special meaning : " The arrowhead alludes to the American Indian 's basic skills in which Special Forces personnel are trained to a high degree .
The dagger represents the unconventional nature of Special Forces operations , and the three lightning flashes , their ability to strike rapidly by air , water or land . "
The SSI was originally approved on 22 August 1955 and was amended to add an Airborne Tab on 20 November 1958 .
The SSI was authorized to be worn by personnel of the U.S. Army Special Forces Command ( Airborne ) and its subordinate units not currently authorized an SSI of their own on 7 March 1991 .
This SSI was eventually reauthorized on 27 October 2016 , to reflect the renaming of the command to 1st Special Forces Command ( Airborne ) .
THE TAB Section::::The Tab .
Introduced in June 1983 , the Special Forces Tab is a service school qualification tab awarded to soldiers who complete one of the Special Forces Qualification Courses .
Unlike the Green Beret , soldiers who are awarded the Special Forces Tab are authorized to wear it for the remainder of their military careers , even when not serving with Special Operations units .
The cloth tab is an olive drab arc tab
3 1/4 inches ( 8.26 cm ) in length and 11/16 inch ( 1.75 cm ) in height overall , the designation " SPECIAL FORCES " in black letters 5/16 inch ( .79 cm ) in height and is worn on the left sleeve of utility uniforms above a unit 's Shoulder Sleeve Insignia and below the President 's Hundred Tab ( if so awarded ) .
The metal Special Forces Tab replica comes in two sizes , full and dress miniature .
The full size version measures 5/8 inch ( 1.59 cm ) in height and 1 9/16 inches ( 3.97 cm ) in width .
The miniature version measures 1/4 inch ( .64 cm ) in height and 1 inch ( 2.54 cm ) in width .
Both are teal blue with yellow border trim and letters and are worn above or below ribbons or medals on the Army Service Uniform .
Award Eligibility :
* 1 ) Basic Eligibility Criteria .
Any person meeting one of the criteria below may be awarded the Special Forces ( SF ) tab : * 1.1)Successful completion of U.S. Army John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School ( USAJFKSWCS ) approved Active Army ( AA ) institutional training leading to SF qualification .
* 1.2 )
Successful completion of a USAJFKSWCS approved Reserve Component
( RC ) SF qualification program .
* 1.3 )
Successful completion of an authorized unit administered SF qualification program .
* 2 )
Active Component institutional training .
The SF Tab may be awarded to all personnel who meet the following : * 2.1 )
For successful completion of the Special Forces Qualification Course or Special Forces Detachment Officer Qualification Course ( previously known as the Special Forces Officer Course ) .
These courses are / were conducted by the USAJFKSWC ( previously known as the U.S. Army Institute for Military Assistance ) .
* 2.2 )
Prior to 1 January 1988 , for successful completion of the then approved program of instruction for Special Forces qualification in a Special Forces Group , who were subsequently awarded , by competent authority , SQI " S " in Career Management Field 18 ( enlisted ) , or SQI " 3 " in Functional Area 18 ( officer ) .
* 3 )
Reserve Component ( RC ) SF qualification programs .
The SF Tab may be awarded to all personnel who successfully complete an RC SF qualification program according to TRADOC Regulation 135 - 5 , dated 1 June 1988 or its predecessors and who were subsequently awarded , by competent authority , SQI " S " or " 3 " in MOS 11b , 11C , 12B , 05B , 91B , or ASI " 5 G " or " 3 .
" The USAJFKSWCS will determine individual entitlement for an award of the SF Tab based on historical review of Army , Continental Army Command ( CONRAC ) , and TRADOC regulations prescribing SF qualification requirements in effect at the time the individual began an RC SF qualification program .
* 4 )
Unit administered SF qualification programs .
The SF Tab may be awarded to all personnel who successfully completed unit administered SF qualification programs as authorized by regulation .
The USAJFKSWCS will determine individual entitlement to an award of the SF Tab based upon a historical review of regulations prescribing SF qualification requirements in effect at the time the individual began a unit administered SF qualification program .
* 5 ) Former wartime service .
The Special Forces Tab may be awarded retroactively to all personnel who performed the following wartime service : * 5.1 ) 1942 through 1973 .
Served with a Special Forces unit during wartime and were either unable to or not required to attend a formal program of instruction but were awarded SQI " S " , " 3 " , " 5 G " by the competent authority .
* 5.2 )
Prior to 1954 .
Service for at least 120 consecutive days in one of the following organizations : * 5.2.1 )
1st
Special Service Force , August 1942 to December 1944 .
* 5.2.2 ) OSS Detachment 101 , April 1942 to September 1945 .
* 5.2.3 ) OSS Jedburgh Detachments , May 1944 to May 1945 .
* 5.2.4 ) OSS Operational Groups , May 1944 to May 1945 .
* 5.2.5 ) OSS Maritime Unit , April 1942 to September 1945 .
* 5.2.6 ) 6th Army Special Reconnaissance Unit ( Alamo Scouts ) , February 1944 to September 1945 .
* 5.2.7 ) 8240th Army Unit , June 1950 to July 1953 .
* 5.2.8 ) 1954 through 1975 .
Any company grade officer or enlisted member awarded the CIB or CMB while serving for at least 120 consecutive days in one of the following type organizations :
* 5.2.8a )
SF Operational Detachment - A ( A - Team ) .
* 5.2.8b )
Mobile Strike Force .
* 5.2.8c )
SF Reconnaissance Team .
* 5.2.8d )
SF Special Project Unit .
USE OF THE TERM " SPECIAL FORCES " Section::::Use of the term " Special Forces " .
In countries other than the U.S. , the term " special forces " or " special operations forces " ( SOF ) is often used generically to refer to any units with elite training and special mission sets .
In the U.S. military , " Special Forces " is a proper ( capitalized ) noun referring exclusively to U.S. Army Special Forces ( a.k.a .
" The Green Berets " ) .
The media and popular culture frequently misapply the term to Navy SEALs and other members of the U.S. Special Operations Forces .
USE OF THE TERM " OPERATOR " Section::::Use of the term " Operator " .
The origin of the term operator in American special operations comes from the U.S. Army Special Forces ( aka the Green Berets ) .
The Army Special Forces was established in 1952 , ten years before the Navy SEALs and 25 years before DELTA .
Every other modern U.S. special operations unit in the Army , Navy , Air Force and Marines was established after 1977 .
In Veritas : Journal of Army Special Operations History , Charles H. Briscoe states that the Army " Special Forces did not misappropriate the appellation .
Unbeknownst to most members of the Army Special Operations Force ( ARSOF ) community , that moniker was adopted by the Special Forces in the mid-1950s .
"
He goes on to state that all qualified enlisted and officers in Special Forces had to " voluntary subscribe to the provisions of the ' Code of the Special Forces Operator ' and pledge themselves to its tenets by witnessed signature .
" This pre - dates every other special operations unit that currently uses the term / title operator .
Inside the United States Special Operations community , an operator is a Delta Force member who has completed selection and has graduated OTC ( Operators Training Course ) .
Operator was used by Delta Force to distinguish between operational and non - operational personnel assigned to the unit .
Other special operations forces use specific names for their jobs , such as Army Rangers and Air Force Pararescuemen .
The Navy uses the acronym SEAL for both their special warfare teams and their individual members , who are also known Special Operators .
In 2006 the Navy created " Special Warfare Operator " ( SO ) as a rating specific to Naval Special Warfare enlisted personnel , grades E-4 to E-9 .
( See Navy special warfare ratings ) .
Operator is the specific term for operational personnel , and has become a colloquial term for almost all special operations forces in the U.S. military , as well as around the world .
IN POPULAR CULTURE Books , movies & video games * 1965 : The Green Berets , a book by Robin Moore .
* 1965 :
Outpost of Freedom , by Medal of Honor recipient Captain Roger H. C. Donlon ( as told to Warren Rogers ) 1965 , McGraw - Hill * 1966 : " Ballad of the Green Berets " , a song performed by Vietnam veteran and Green Beret Barry Sadler .
The song was written by Sadler and Robin Moore .
* 1968 :
The Green Berets , a film based on Moore 's book , produced , directed , and starring John Wayne , who plays a key role in it as " Colonel Kirby " .
* Tales of the Green Beret , a comic strip and American comic book written by Robin Moore with artwork by Joe Kubert .
* 1975 :
Parthian Shot , by former Green Beret
Loyd Little .
, ; winner of the 1976 Hemingway Foundation / PEN Award .
* 1982 : Rambo , the main character in a series of films , starting with First Blood , who is a former Green Beret and Vietnam vet .
* 1998 : " Metal Gear Solid , an action - adventure stealth video game directed by Hideo Kojima , it stars Solid Snake as a fictional former Green Beret .
* 2008
: White Passage :
Red Sun , by former Green Beret Matt Rowe . , 2008 , Authorhouse .
* 2009 : Horse Soldiers :
The Extraordinary Story of a Band of U.S. Soldiers Who Rode to Victory in Afghanistan , by Doug Stanton ; adapted into the 2018 film , 12 Strong .
SEE ALSO
* 1st Special Forces Operational Detachment - Delta ( Delta Force )
* Alamo Scouts
* Central Intelligence Agency 's Special Activities Division
* Defense Intelligence Agency
* Devil 's Brigade
* Green Light Teams
* Military Assistance Command , Vietnam –
Studies and Observations Group *
Roger Mobley * Operation Jedburgh * Phoenix Program * United States Army Counterintelligence ( CI , or USAI )
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * U.S. Army Special Operations Command News
* Special Forces Command website * Special Forces Recruiting at the Special Operations Recruiting Battalion website
* United States Army John F. Kennedy Special Warfare Center and School
* Official website of the Special Forces Association * United States Special Operations Command * United States Army Special Forces Overview
* Special Forces Medic talks about coming home from Iraq and Afghanistan