BLUE RIDGE PARKWAY
The Blue Ridge Parkway is a National Parkway and All - American Road in the United States , noted for its scenic beauty .
The parkway , which is America 's longest linear park , runs for through 29 Virginia and North Carolina counties , linking Shenandoah National Park to Great Smoky Mountains National Park .
It runs mostly along the spine of the Blue Ridge , a major mountain chain that is part of the Appalachian Mountains .
Its southern terminus is at U.S. 441 on the boundary between Great Smoky Mountains National Park and the Cherokee Indian Reservation in North Carolina , from which it travels north to Shenandoah National Park in Virginia .
The roadway continues through Shenandoah as Skyline Drive , a similar scenic road which is managed by a different National Park Service unit .
Both Skyline Drive and the Virginia portion of the Blue Ridge Parkway are part of Virginia State Route 48 , though this designation is not signed .
The parkway has been the most visited unit of the National Park System every year since 1946 except three ( 1949 , 2013 , and 2016 ) .
Land on either side of the road is owned and maintained by the National Park Service , and in many places parkway land is bordered by United States Forest Service property .
The parkway was on North Carolina 's version of the America the Beautiful quarter in 2015 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Begun during the administration of President Franklin D. Roosevelt , the project was originally called the Appalachian Scenic Highway .
Most construction was carried out by private contractors under federal contracts under an authorization by Harold L. Ickes in his role as federal public works administrator .
Work began on September 11 , 1935 , near Cumberland Knob in North Carolina ; construction in Virginia began the following February .
On June 30 , 1936 , Congress formally authorized the project as the Blue Ridge Parkway and placed it under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service .
Some work was carried out by various New Deal public works agencies .
The Works Progress Administration did some roadway construction .
Crews from the Emergency Relief Administration carried out landscape work and development of parkway recreation areas .
Personnel from four Civilian Conservation Corps camps worked on roadside cleanup , roadside plantings , grading slopes , and improving adjacent fields and forest lands .
During World War II , the CCC crews were replaced by conscientious objectors in the Civilian Public Service program .
The parkway 's construction created jobs in the region , but also displaced many residents and created new rules and regulations for landowners , including requirements related to how farmers could transport crops .
Residents could no longer build on their lands without permission , or develop land except for agricultural use .
They were not permitted to use the parkway for any commercial travel but were required to transport equipment and materials on side roads .
The Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians were also affected by the parkway , which was built through their lands .
From 1935 to 1940 , they resisted giving up the right - of - way through the Qualla Boundary , and they were successful in gaining more favorable terms from the U.S. government .
Specifically , the revised bill " specified the parkway route , assured the $ 40,000 payment for the tribe 's land , and required the state to build [ a ] regular highway through the Soco Valley " .
( The highway referred to is part of U.S. Route 19 . )
Cherokee leaders participated in the dedications when the Cherokee sections opened in the 1950s .
Construction of the parkway was complete by the end of 1966 with one notable exception .
The stretch including the Linn Cove Viaduct around Grandfather Mountain did not open until 1987 .
The project took over 52 years to complete .
ECOLOGY ALONG THE PARKWAY Section::::Ecology along the parkway .
Flowering shrubs and wildflowers dominate the parkway in the spring , including rhododendrons and dogwoods , moving from valleys to mountains as the cold weather retreats .
Smaller annuals and perennials such as the daisy and aster flower through the summer .
Brilliant autumn foliage occurs later in September on the mountaintops , descending to the valleys by later in October .
Often in early - to - middle October and middle to late April , all three seasons can be seen simply by looking down from the cold and windy parkway to the green and warm valleys below .
October is especially dramatic , as the colored leaves stand out boldly and occur mostly at the same time , unlike the flowers .
Major trees include oak , hickory , and tulip tree at lower elevations and buckeye and ash in the middle , turning into conifers such as fir and spruce at the highest elevations on the parkway .
Trees near ridges , peaks , and passes ( often called gaps or notches ) are often distorted and even contorted by the wind , and persistent rime ice is deposited by passing clouds in the winter .
ROUTE DESCRIPTION Section::::Route description .
The Blue Ridge Parkway tunnels were constructed through the rock — one in Virginia and 25 in North Carolina .
Sections of the parkway near the tunnels are often closed in winter .
Because groundwater drips from above with freezing temperatures and a lack of sunlight , ice often accumulates inside these locations despite above - freezing temperatures in the surrounding areas .
The highest point on the parkway ( south of Waynesville , near Mount Pisgah in North Carolina ) is above sea level on Richland Balsam at milepost 431 and is often closed from November to April because of inclement weather such as snow , fog , and even freezing fog from low clouds .
The parkway is carried across streams , railway ravines and cross roads by 168 bridges and six viaducts .
The parkway runs from the southern terminus of Shenandoah National Park 's Skyline Drive in Virginia at Rockfish Gap to U.S. Route 441 ( US 441 ) at Oconaluftee in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park near Cherokee , North Carolina .
There is no fee for using the parkway ; however , commercial vehicles are prohibited without approval from the Park Service Headquarters , near Asheville , North Carolina .
The roadway is not maintained in the winter , and sections which pass over especially high elevations and through tunnels are often impassable and therefore closed from late fall through early spring .
Weather is extremely variable in the mountains , so conditions and closures often change rapidly .
The speed limit is never higher than and lower in some sections .
The parkway uses short side roads to connect to other highways , and there are no direct interchanges with Interstate Highways , making it possible to enjoy wildlife and other scenery without stopping for cross - traffic .
Mileposts along the parkway start at zero at the northeast end in Virginia and count to 469 at the southern end in North Carolina .
The mileposts can be found on the right - hand side of the road while traveling southbound on the parkway .
Major towns and cities along the way include Waynesboro , Roanoke , and Galax in Virginia ; and in North Carolina , Boone and Asheville , where it runs across the property of the Biltmore Estate .
The Blue Ridge Music Center ( also part of the park ) is located in Galax , and Mount Mitchell ( the highest point in eastern North America ) is only accessible via a state highway ( NC 128 ) from the parkway at milepost 355.4 .
HIGHLIGHTS IN VIRGINIA
* Mile 0 Rockfish Gap near Waynesboro , Virginia , is the northern end of the Blue Ridge Parkway .
To the north the parkway connects directly to Skyline Drive , which winds through Shenandoah National Park .
* 5 to 9.3 Humpback Rock has a self - guiding trail through a collection of old Appalachian farm buildings .
A hiking trail from the parking area ( at mile 6.1 ) leads to The Rocks , whose humped appearance gives the area its name .
Greenstone self - guiding trail ( 8.8 ) .
* 10.7 Ravens Roost offers vistas of Torry Mountain and the Shenandoah Valley to the west .
The overlook is built above a cliff , so it is frequently used for rock climbing and hang gliding .
There is also a single picnic table .
* 16 Sherando Lake is a recreation area in George Washington National Forest from the parkway via VA 814 .
Swimming , picnicking , and camping .
* 29 Whetstone Ridge provided many a mountain man with a fine - grained sharpening stone .
* 34.4 Yankee Horse Ridge supposedly is where a hard - riding Union soldier 's horse fell and had to be shot .
A reconstructed spur of an old logging railroad provides access to Wigwam Falls .
* 58 to 63.6 Otter Creek runs down the Blue Ridge to the James River .
Otter Lake ( 63.1 ) , fishing , trail .
* 63.8 The James River and Kanawha Canal is where a footbridge leads across the river to the restored canal locks and exhibits .
A self - guiding trail follows the river bluff .
* 71 Onion Mountain 's short loop trail leads through rhododendron and mountain laurel .
*
83.4 Fallingwater Cascades can be seen along a loop trail .
* 84 to 87 Peaks of Otter are three mountain peaks which have been popular viewing sites since the days of Thomas Jefferson .
A shuttle bus provides service to Sharp Top .
* 114.9 The Roanoke River Gorge is visible after a short walk .
* 120.4 Roanoke Mountain is a side trip .
A one - way loop road , with steep grades , crosses over the mountain .
Towed vehicles are prohibited .
*
129.6 Roanoke Valley Overlook gives a view of the largest city along the parkway .
* 154.5 Smart View is named for having " a right smart view " .
A nearby cabin built in the 1890s is known as a spot for viewing dogwood blooms in early May. * 167 to 174 Rocky Knob overlooks Rock Castle Gorge .
*
176.1 Mabry Mill was operated by E.B. Mabry from 1910 to 1935 .
A trail leads to his gristmill , sawmill , blacksmith shop , and other exhibits .
Old - time skills are demonstrated in the summer and fall .
*
188.8 Groundhog Mountain has a variety of rural fences : snake , Post - and - rail , picket and buck .
Picnic grounds and observation tower are also nearby .
* 189.1 Groundhog Mountain * 189.9 Aunt Orelena Puckett Cabin Exhibit was the home of an area midwife .
* 213 Blue Ridge Music Center near the town of Galax with concerts , music demonstrations , and a museum dedicated to anything musical , especially old - time music .
HIGHLIGHTS IN NORTH CAROLINA Section::::Highlights in North Carolina .
The Blue Ridge Parkway crosses the North Carolina – Virginia state line at mile 216.9 .
The 1749 party that surveyed the boundary included Peter Jefferson , father of Thomas Jefferson .
* Mile 217.5 Cumberland Knob , at , is the centerpiece of a small parkway recreation area .
* 218.6 Fox Hunters Paradise , down a short walking path , is where hunters could listen to their hounds baying in the valley below .
*
238.5 Brinegar Cabin was built by Martin Brinegar about 1880 and lived in until the 1930s when the homestead was purchased from his widow for the parkway .
The original cabin stands there today .
* 238.5 to 244.7 Doughton Park was named for Congressman Robert L. Doughton , a staunch supporter and neighbor of the parkway .
The park has many miles of hiking trails , a lodge , dinner , picnic area and a campground .
* 258.6 Northwest Trading Post offers crafts from North Carolina 's northwestern counties .
* 260.6 Jumpinoff Rock is at the end of a short woodland trail .
* 264.4 The Lump is a grassy knob that provides views of the forested foothills .
* 272 E. B. Jeffress Park has a self - guided trail to a waterfall known as the Cascades .
Another trail goes to an old cabin and church .
* 285.1 Daniel Boone 's Trace , which Boone blazed to the West , crosses near here .
* 292 to 295 Moses H. Cone Memorial Park has hiking , fishing and horse trails .
Flat Top Manor , the former house of Moses H. Cone , is now used as the Parkway Craft Center .
* 295.1 to 298 Julian Price Memorial Park , the former retreat of the insurance executive Julian Price , offers a variety of hiking trails , campground , and Price Lake .
This is the only lake on the parkway on which paddling is allowed .
* 304.4 Linn Cove Viaduct , the last segment of the parkway built , skirts the side of Grandfather Mountain .
A visitor center is located nearby and provides access to a trail under the viaduct .
* 308.3 Flat Rock provides views of Grandfather Mountain and Linville Valley .
* 316.3 Linville Falls Recreation Area provides trails with overlooks of Linville Falls and the Linville Gorge .
A campground and picnic area are also provided .
* 331
The Museum of North Carolina Minerals interprets the state 's mineral wealth .
* 339.5 Crabtree Meadows & Crabtree Falls is a parkway recreation area with a picnic area , campground , giftshop and hiking trails .
*
349.2 Laurel Knob provides views of Grandfather Mountain , Linville Mountain , Hawksbill Mountain , and Table Rock .
* 355.4 Mount Mitchell State Park , reached via N.C. 128 , is the highest point east of the Mississippi River .
* 359.8 Walker Knob , formerly known as Balsam Gap , is located where the Black Mountains and the Great Craggy Mountains meet .
*
361.2 Glassmine Falls is an ephemeral waterfall visible from an overlook on the side of the parkway .
* 363.4 to 369.6 Craggy Gardens in the Great Craggy Mountains are covered with purple rhododendron in mid - to - late June .
Craggy Pinnacle Trail and other trails ( 364.1 and 364.6 ) ; road to picnic area and trails ( 367.6 ) .
*
382 The Folk Art Center is the flagship facility of the Southern Highland Craft Guild .
It offers sales and exhibits of traditional and contemporary crafts of the Appalachian region .
There are interpretive programs , three galleries , a library and a book store .
*
384 The Blue Ridge Parkway Visitor Center is the newest along the parkway .
Exhibits focus on the history and heritage of the parkway and western North Carolina .
* 408.6 Mount Pisgah was part of the Biltmore Estate .
The estate became home of the first forestry school in America and the nucleus of the Pisgah National Forest .
Also located here is the Pisgah Inn resort , a park service concession .
* 417 Looking Glass Rock is visible from many spots on the parkway starting at Mount Pisgah .
* 418 East Fork Overlook .
Located here are the headwaters of the Pigeon River .
Yellowstone Falls is a short distance away and gets its name from the yellowish moss covering the rocks .
* 420.2 Shining Rock Wilderness is the largest wilderness area in North Carolina , covering , with of trails and peaks over .
The wilderness is named for Shining Rock .
* 420.2 Black Balsam Knob is a grassy bald with panoramic views just outside the Shining Rock Wilderness in Pisgah National Forest .
The wilderness area also includes Cold Mountain .
* 422.4 Devil 's Courthouse is a rugged exposed mountaintop rich in Cherokee traditions .
* 423.5 Herrin Knob Overlook .
A hiking trail goes around Tanasee Bald and Herrin Knob .
Tanasee Bald ( 423.7 ) is said to be the home of the mythical Cherokee giant Tsul ' Kalu .
* 431 Richland Balsam is the highest point on the parkway at .
There is a self - guiding trail that passes through a remnant spruce - fir forest .
* 435.7 Licklog Ridge once hosted cattlemen and their herds of cattle before it became part of the national forest .
The area earns its name from the cattlemen who would place rocks of salt into logs and holes in the earth .
*
451.2 Waterrock Knob provides a panorama of the Great Smokies , visitor center , trail , comfort station , exhibits .
* 458.2 Heintooga Ridge Road runs north from the parkway to Heintooga Overlook in Great Smoky Mountains National Park .
* Mile 469
The southern end of the Blue Ridge Parkway intersects with U.S. 441 in Great Smoky Mountains National Park and the Cherokee Reservation near Cherokee , North Carolina .
CLOSURES Section::::Closures .
It is not unusual for small sections of the parkway to be temporarily closed to repair damage caused by the cold winter climate of the mountains or for other maintenance .
Detours caused by these closures are well marked and are arranged to cause as little disruption as possible , though maintenance such as repaving only warrants a stop / slow switch with a one - lane - only restriction .
Due to serious damage in 2004 from Hurricane Frances , then again by Hurricane Ivan , many areas along the parkway were closed until the spring of 2005 , with two areas that were not fully repaired until the spring of 2006 .
MAJOR INTERSECTIONS
SEE
ALSO
* Skyline Drive * Natchez Trace Parkway
* Cherohala Skyway *
Foothills Parkway NOTES REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS * National Park Service : Blue Ridge Parkway
* Blue Ridge Parkway Association * Blue Ridge Parkway in Virginia * Driving Through Time :
The Digital Blue Ridge Parkway