CHEVROLET AVALANCHE
The Chevrolet Avalanche was a four - door , five or six passenger pickup truck sharing GM 's long - wheelbase chassis used on the Chevrolet Suburban and Cadillac Escalade EXT .
Breaking with a long - standing tradition , the Avalanche was not available as a GMC , but only as a Chevrolet .
Production of the Avalanche started in September 2001 and ended April 2013 ; producing two generations in its lifespan .
2001–2006
Section::::2001–2006 .
The Avalanche was launched in September 2001 as a 2002 model on the GMT800 platform .
First year Avalanches featured light gray plastic body cladding , intended to provide visual distinction from the Suburban / Yukon XL .
Avalanche also gave the public an advance look at the next generation of front fascia designs for the entire GM line .
A full - length chrome strip splits each lamp assembly and the grille , with a gold Chevrolet " bow tie " in the center .
The hood and fenders featured aggressive folds , in contrast to the soft box of the other GMT800 models .
2003 models featured a darker cladding , but GM 's new president , Rick Wagoner , demanded removal of this " unpopular " trim ( as did certain elements of the public ) .
From mid - year , Avalanche could be ordered without the cladding .
The uncladded model , known as the Without Body Hardware ( or better by its acronym " WBH " ) , and alternatively called " slicksides " by GM marketers , resembles the ' 03-'05 Silverado in the front .
Avalanche was nominated for the North American SUV of the Year award and was Motor Trend magazine 's SUV of the Year for 2002 .
There are two engine choices : *
A Vortec 5.3 L V8 producing 285 hp ( 216 kW ) , for the half - ton 1500 series ; * A Vortec 8.1 L V8 with 340 hp ( 253 kW ) and the 4L85-E four - speed transmission , for the three - quarter - ton 2500 series .
The drive train is rear - wheel drive or available with selectable high / low four - wheel drive .
The Avalanche was originally marketed as being able to " change from a SUV to a super SUV " .
This was made possible by a plastic cover and an exclusive " midgate " which could open and close .
The midgate was a divider behind the second row of seats that could be folded down , with the seats , to create a longer bed area , or folded up to make a larger cab area .
A similar midgate was found on the Cadillac Escalade EXT , Hummer H2 SUT and the GMC Envoy XUV .
For those who planned to go off - road in their Avalanche , a Z71 Off - Road package was available
that added off - road suspension , GM 's AutoTrac full - time , push - button four - wheel - drive system , all - terrain white - lettered tires , seventeen - inch alloy wheels , leather seating surfaces with cloth accents , front dual power bucket seats , cloth door panel inserts , GM 's OnStar telematics system , all - weather rubber floor mats , Chevrolet bowtie emblems embedded into the backrests of the seats ( for 2002 models ) , dual - zone automatic climate controls with rear HVAC vents and remote controls , remote radio controls with headphone jacks for two pairs of headphones , a security system , gray - finished side running boards , power - heated side view mirrors with integrated turn signals , mud flaps , SRS side airbags , and more .
Aside from these details , a Z71 Off - Road sticker on the rear side panels identified an Avalanche equipped with this package .
Full leather seating surfaces were an available option , also removing the cloth door panel inserts , and also added heated front seats .
For those who liked the styling of the Z71 Off - Road package but did not plan to take their Avalanche off - road , a Z66 On - Road package was also available .
The Z66 On - Road package featured all the equipment that the Z71 Off - Road package offered , but replaced the off - road suspension with sport on - road suspension , and did not offer four - wheel - drive .
Aside from these details , a Z66 On - Road sticker on the rear side panels identified an Avalanche equipped with this package .
As with the Z71 Off - Road package , full leather seating surfaces without the cloth accents were an available option , also removing the cloth door panel inserts , and also added heated front seats .
To further distinguish it from its Silverado siblings , the Avalanche was practically fully equipped , and only came with body side cladding .
The Avalanche included features such as sixteen - inch alloy wheels and tires ( chromed steel on the 2500 model ) , an AM / FM stereo with single - disc CD player and six speakers , cloth seating surfaces , front bench seat with power front driver 's seat , power windows , power door locks , keyless entry , full instrumentation , dual front airbags , and air conditioning .
Options included OnStar telematics system , cassette player , leather seating surfaces , front dual power bucket seats that could be heated , and side airbags for the front seats .
A North Face Edition , in partnership with the North Face brand included limited exterior color options , a unique Ebony / Green leather interior , special exterior ornamentation and decals , white - faced gauges , OnStar telematics system , specially colored door panel inserts and speaker grilles , and more .
For 2003 , the Avalanche was slightly changed .
A new interior , shared with the Chevrolet Tahoe and Chevrolet Suburban , added a new , larger steering wheel with subsequent audio system and OnStar controls and cruise and speed controls , an optional six - speaker premium Bose sound system with external amplifier , a new gauge cluster with information center , memory for the front driver 's seat ( on some models ) , new radio head units , which included an AM / FM stereo with single - disc CD / MP3 player and Radio Data System or an AM / FM stereo with six - disc CD / MP3 changer and Radio Data System , optional XM Satellite Radio , standard OnStar telematics system , optional rear audio controls with heaphone jacks , an optional rear DVD entertainment system by Panasonic with wireless headphones , new warning chimes that played through the vehicle 's audio system instead of through a separate speaker behind the dashboard , and newly available seventeen - inch alloy wheels and tires .
A new WBH option , standing for Without Body Hardware , deleted the Avalanche 's standard gray body - side cladding panels and replacing them with a thin black strip of plastic , for a cleaner exterior appearance .
If an Avalanche owner did not want any black accents on the side of their trucks , the black strip of plastic could also be removed altogether .
Conversion van specialists Southern Comfort offered a conversion package for the Avalanche , which offered unique chrome - plated alloy wheels , a rear DVD entertainment system with satellite TV service , unique two - tone and fading paint jobs with exterior color - keyed lower trim and front and rear bumpers , unique seating surfaces , multiple wood interior trim options , and most of the features which were also offered on its conversion vans .
The trucks also featured the Southern Comfort emblems on the exterior of the vehicle , and since they retained the same basic features as a factory Avalanche , a full General Motors warranty was offered , and the trucks could also be serviced at any Chevrolet dealership , as with the factory trucks .
CLADDING TROUBLE Section::::Cladding trouble .
Soon after the release of the Chevrolet Avalanche , customers began to notice cosmetic problems with the cladding on their vehicles .
Over time exposure to heat and sunlight would cause a chalky faded appearance .
It was especially noticeable on the cargo bed panels , and sail - panel windows where " Zebra Striping " would appear .
Customer reaction to this problem resulted in General Motors agreeing to a one time treatment of a product called ArmorDillo .
This product would temporarily restore the cladding for a period of about 6 months .
After that it would wear off then need to be re - applied .
Realizing this was not a permanent solution , GM , together with Gatorback Coatings , developed a coating that could be applied to the cladding to restore it to a like - new shine .
This product was designed to etch into the plastic and bond a new layer of tinted acrylic over the faded plastic .
Customers within the 3yr/36,000 original factory warranty could go to their dealership to have it restored under their original warranty under GM TSB:04 - 08 - 111 - 001C. General Motors did not use side body cladding on the second generation model .
General Motors has also identified the original source of the faded cladding .
2007–2013
Section::::2007–2013 .
The GMT900 Avalanche was introduced at the Chicago Auto Show in February 2006 .
Production of the redesigned Avalanche began at the Silao Assembly in April 2006 .
The Avalanche maintained the styled front end much like its sister vehicles , the Tahoe / Yukon and Suburban / Yukon XL , yet it still had the distinct midgate and integrated bed as found on the previous incarnation .
It had all the same standard and available features as the Suburban and the Tahoe .
The 2500 model of the previous generation was discontinued .
A special Z71 package was offered for the second generation Avalanche .
This off - road package consisted of a suspension tuned for rough terrain , an exclusive automatic locking rear differential , aluminum under body skid plates ( visible from the front of the SUV ) , wheel flares , badges , wheels and tires .
Later models introduced another version of the Vortec 5.3-liter V8 as the engine is now capable of running on E85 ethanol .
When the 5.3 is running on normal gasoline , it produces and of torque whereas its output rises to and of torque on E85 , up from and in 2009 .
For the 2010 model year , the 6.0-liter was dropped from the Avalanche lineup which left the 5.3 V8 as the only engine available for the SUV .
In its final year , the 6.0-liter produced and of torque .
A 2007 Avalanche was given away to the Most Valuable Player of the 2006 Major League Baseball All - Star Game , Michael Young .
An Avalanche is regularly featured on the popular US crime drama and is driven by some members of the team .
In addition , a 2007 Z-71 Avalanche placed second in Speed TV 's reality TV series ' Bullrun ' in 2009 .
TRIM LEVELS Section::::Trim Levels .
The second - generation Avalanche came in three well - equipped trim levels :
The LS served as the base model Avalanche .
It included seventeen - inch alloy wheels and tires , cloth seating surfaces , power front driver 's bucket seat , OnStar telematics system , an AM / FM stereo with single - disc CD / MP3 player and auxiliary audio input jack with six speakers , keyless entry , and black door handles , tailgate handle , and side mirrors , aluminum interior trim , front and side airbags , traction control , StabiliTrak , and more .
The LT served as the midlevel model Avalanche .
It added power dual front bucket seats , remote start , XM Satellite Radio , Bluetooth hands - free telephone system , and exterior color - keyed door handles , tailgate handle , and side mirrors , wood interior trim , as well as other features .
The LTZ was the top - of - the - line model Avalanche .
It added leather seating surfaces , security alarm , an AM / FM stereo with six - disc CD / MP3 / DVD changer , an eight - speaker premium Bose CenterPoint amplified surround sound system , memory for the front driver 's seat , twenty - inch polished alloy wheels and tires , and rear seat audio and video system controls , and the LTZ exclusive self - leveling Auto Ride suspension .
BLACK DIAMOND EDITION Section::::Black Diamond Edition .
2013 marked the Avalanche 's last year of production .
For 2013 , all Avalanches , regardless of trim level , featured the Black Diamond Edition Package , which added Black Diamond Edition emblems to the rear pillars , replacing the previous trim level designation emblems , and also adding unique emblems inside the Avalanche commemorating its production from 2002 to 2013 .
The 2013 Avalanche was produced in limited numbers .
Each 2013 Avalanche buyer received a limited - edition coffee table book with photographs of the owner 's 2013 Avalanche , a copy of the window sticker from their vehicle , and a complete history of the Avalanche from 2002 to 2013 .
The book was shipped to either the dealership or owner 's home after the owner took delivery of their new 2013 Avalanche .
In addition , a newly available color , named Fairway Green Metallic , commemorated the last year of production for the Avalanche ( 2013 ) .
Engines : * 5.3-liter Vortec 5300 V8 with Active Fuel Management , * 6.0-liter VortecMAX V8 with VVT and Active Fuel Management , ( late 2006 ) DISCONTINUATION Section::::Discontinuation .
In April 2012 , GM announced that production of the Avalanche would end after the 2013 model year , after 2011 saw a sales decline of 2.6 % to 20,088 vehicles .
Production of the Cadillac Escalade EXT also ended after the 2013 model year .
YEARLY AMERICAN
SALES
Section::::Yearly American sales . !
Calendar Year !
Total American sales
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Chevrolet Avalanche official site