STUDY BIBLE
A study Bible is an edition of the Bible prepared for use by a serious student of the Bible .
It provides scholarly information designed to help the reader gain a better understanding of and context for the text .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Perhaps the first edition of an English language Bible that qualified as a " study Bible " was the Geneva Bible ; it contained extensive cross - references , synopses , and doctrinal points .
The text of the Geneva Bible was usually not printed without the commentary , though the Cambridge edition was printed without commentary .
The Church of England disputed some of the statements made in the Geneva Bible annotations .
This led to the creation of the King James Bible , which was typically printed with a much less extensive apparatus or none at all .
Several commentators have supplied annotated King James Bibles containing their own points of view , but unlike the Geneva Bible , these commentaries are not as thoroughly integrated into the text .
Another historically significant study
Bible was the Scofield Reference Bible , first printed by Cyrus Scofield in 1909 .
This study Bible became widely popular in the United States , where it spread the interpretation system known as dispensationalism among fundamentalist Christians .
A new version , the Recovery Version , was published in 1985 .
It holds a similar interpretation , and this study
Bible has a very large number of cross - references and explanatory and interpretative footnotes .
Nearly all Catholic Bibles have explanatory and interpretative footnotes .
For example , the Jerusalem Bible is a widely respected study Bible originally made by French monks in Jerusalem , under the auspices of the Catholic Church .
The original French edition of 1961 became the basis of versions of this study Bible in several other languages , including English , revised as the New Jerusalem Bible ; some versions have more extensive notes than others .
Logos International published the Logos International Study Bible in 1972 .
Based on the 1901 American Standard Bible , it is essentially an updated version of The Cross - Reference Bible , published before 1929 and edited by Harold E. Monser .
It includes an unusually large number of cross - references , in - text articles , and treatment of variant readings .
Zondervan claims that its NIV Study Bible has six million in distribution and that it is the world 's best selling study Bible .
The ESV Study Bible is a recent addition which sold well in its pre - release phase , in the fall of 2008 .
In recent times , study Bibles focusing on specific aspects of the Biblical message , have appeared , such as The Green Bible , an English version of the New Revised Standard Version Bible ( originally published by Harper Bibles on October 7 , 2008 ) , which focuses on environmental issues and teachings .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
A study Bible usually contains an extensive help and a critical apparatus , which may contain such features as : * Annotations explaining difficult passages or points of theology and doctrine * Articles and short biographies or character studies of Biblical people , places , and topics * A concordance , a word index that indicates where various keywords are used in the Bible * Contextual setting , including discussion of culture , customs , history , and timelines that relate Bible history to world history
* Harmonies of the Gospels , pointing out parallel incidents in the life of Jesus
* Illustrations of locations and artifacts * Introductions and historical notes for each book of the Bible * Life / practical application * Maps and charts that illustrate the Holy Land during Biblical times and may show the same areas today
* References or cross - references , to indicate where one passage of the text relates to others * Variant readings or interpretations of certain debatable passages , or possible conjectural emendations ( i.e. , alterations based on a philological expert 's " educated guess " of the likely form of the original Hebrew or Greek , when the translators feel this is not sufficiently clear , possible translations from other ancient versions such as the Septuagint , Targumim , Peshitta , and Vulgate , readings from other manuscript families , such as marking those passages missing which are present in the Byzantine text - type in a modern textual eclectic translation , or marking those passages present which are missing in the Alexandrian text - type and the modern critical text in a translation from the Textus Receptus or Byzantine text - type , etc . )
* Word definitions to explain difficult or complex words and ideas STUDY BIBLE SOFTWARE Section::::Study Bible software .
Study Bible software is also available which can aid readers in the study of the Bible .
This software normally includes several Bible translations , commentaries , dictionaries , maps and other content .
They also include search engines to enable users to find Bible passages by keyword and by theme .
SEE ALSO * Biblical studies , a formal academic discipline * Bible study ( Christian ) , the study of the Bible by ordinary people *
Dake Annotated Reference Bible *
The Lutheran Study Bible
* Thompson Chain - Reference Bible * Zondervan REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Into Thy Word * Bible Study Notes