WING CLIPPING Wing clipping is the process of trimming a bird 's primary wing feathers or remiges so that it is no longer fully flighted .
TECHNIQUE Section::::Technique .
Wing clipping is usually performed by avian veterinarians , pet store employees , breeders , or the birds ' owners themselves .
It is generally carried out on pet birds , particularly parrots .
If performed correctly , it is a painless procedure and is quite distinct from pinioning , which is carried out by amputation of the wing at the carpal joint .
Techniques for clipping the wings vary primarily in the number of feathers cut and the amount of each feather left behind .
A mild clip on one wing only can impair a bird 's flight greatly , as it renders the bird unbalanced in the air .
This can cause injury or death to the bird if it strikes a hard surface during a fall .
In most cases , it is only the primary flight feathers that are cut , and an equal number of feathers are trimmed on each wing to avoid causing the bird to become unbalanced in flight .
The most common clip involves trimming the primary flight feathers below the level of the primary coverts ( usually removing about half to a third of the length of the flight feather ) .
This clip is quick and simple to do , but leaves exposed cut ends that occasionally may cause a bird to chew on the cut feathers .
Another method of clipping involves cutting the flight feather above the level of the coverts , so almost the entire feather is removed .
This clip does not leave any exposed cut ends , but as more of each feather is removed , fewer feathers should be cut .
However , these cut feather stumps are still present and may irritate the bird , causing significant discomfort .
Where parrots have clipped primary feathers , the moulting sequence of these birds renders them vulnerable to damage of their growing blood feathers .
Most parrots have 10 primary feathers , numbered 1 ( innermost ) to 10 ( outermost ) .
The moult starts by the bird shedding and replacing a central primary feather , usually number 6 ( Glendell 2007 ) .
The sequence continues in both directions along the primaries , so the last primary feathers to be replaced are the innermost and the outermost ones numbered 1 and 10 respectively .
Clipped birds therefore have their first blood feathers growing down without the normal protection of full - length feathers lying next to them .
These unprotected blood feathers are vulnerable to being broken and profuse bleeding can occur .
Regardless of their size , most parrots replace their feathers by a daily growth rate of 3 to 4 mm ( Glendell 2007 )
Thus , large species such as macaws may take over a year to complete a moult , but smaller species such as cockatiels will moult within a few weeks .
So , larger birds , and those with a higher wing - loading , remain vulnerable to blood feather damage for a longer period , since they are moulting almost continually .
A ' light ' symmetrical wing - clip will allow a bird to fly down and land safely while indoors .
However such a clip may not prevent the bird from flying when outdoors , since lift is generated in proportion to wind speed .
Many escaped birds which are recovered are found to have been clipped .
So , while a light clip allows downward flight indoors , it does not prevent a bird gaining lift if it should escape outdoors .
Conversely , a more severe clip will certainly render a bird flightless , but it increases the risk of injury if the bird falls and hits a hard surface .
In addition to the physical effects of wing - clipping , there can be adverse behavioural effects .
Birds use flight as an instinctive reflex action and as their first means of escaping any threat : they take to the air to fly upwards and away from the source of the threat ; their fear then dissipates .
Where this behaviour is prevented by wing - clipping , this innate reflex action is denied the bird , and its fear will not subside .
This may cause behavioural problems for the afflicted bird .
When a bird needs to reduce its speed during flight , it employs a ' reverse thrust ' action by extending its wing at the wrist joint and using the drag of its primaries as air brakes .
While the reduced function of the clipped bird 's primaries prevent propulsion and therefore lift , this also reduces braking abilities , so clipped birds may crash - land at higher speeds than full - winged birds .
Clipped birds should not be taken outdoors unrestrained , as even clipped birds have been known to fly away when spooked outdoors .
It is generally considered very important for a young bird to be allowed to fledge ( learn to fly ) properly , prior to any wing clipping .
Breeders and owners usually find that a fledged bird , even after being clipped , will remain more confident and active than an unfledged bird .
Learning to fly also helps a bird learn how to land safely , an important skill even in clipped birds .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
While clipping is endorsed by some avian veterinarians , other avian veterinarians oppose it .
By restricting flight , wing clipping may help prevent indoor birds from risking injury from ceiling fans or flying into large windows .
But there is no evidence to show that clipped birds are safer than full - winged ones , only that clipped birds are subject to different kinds of accidents than full - winged birds .
Social pet birds ( such as parrots ) may also be clipped both to restrict independence and in attempts to make them tamer and easier to manage in order to encourage them to socialize with their owners ; some parrots that show aggression to certain people or other birds may be clipped to prevent attack .
However , birds can be trained to accept flight requests or ' commands ' and this removes the need for wing - clipping ( Glendell 2007 ) .
Some people feel wing clipping is a cruel or unhealthy practice as it denies a bird its most natural way of getting around , obtaining exercise and avoiding fearful situations .
Although clipped birds can and should be encouraged to do wing flapping exercises , this does not provide the same exercise as flight .
Others feel that for birds that can climb well , wing clipping is a necessary safety practice for birds in many situations .
The practice seems more prevalent in American bird care books than in similar British publications .
SEE ALSO
* Pinioning REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Wing clipping information and instructions * Feathers , Flight , and Parrot Keeping ( pros and cons of clipping )
* Wing Clipping - Clipping the wings of a chicken