CAMELID
Camelids are members of the biological family Camelidae , the only currently living family in the suborder Tylopoda .
The extant members of this group are : dromedary camels , Bactrian camels , wild Bactrian camels , llamas , alpacas , vicuñas , and guanacos .
Camelids are even - toed ungulates classified in the order Cetartiodactyla , along with pigs , whales , deer , cattle , antelope , and many others .
CHARACTERISTICS Section::::Characteristics .
Camelids are large , strictly herbivorous animals with slender necks and long legs .
They differ from ruminants in a number of ways .
Their dentition show traces of vestigial central incisors in the incisive bone , and the third incisors have developed into canine - like tusks .
Camelids also have true canine teeth and tusk - like premolars , which are separated from the molars by a gap .
The musculature of the hind limbs differs from those of other ungulates in that the legs are attached to the body only at the top of the thigh , rather than attached by skin and muscle from the knee upwards .
Because of this , camelids have to lie down by resting on their knees with their legs tucked underneath their bodies .
They have three - chambered stomachs , rather than four - chambered ones ; their upper lips are split in two , with each part separately mobile ; and , uniquely among mammals , their red blood cells are elliptical .
They also have a unique type of antibodies which lack the light chain , in addition to the normal antibodies found in other mammals .
These so - called heavy - chain antibodies are being used to develop single - domain antibodies with potential pharmaceutical applications .
Camelids do not have hooves , rather they have two - toed feet with toenails and soft foot pads ( Tylopoda is Greek for " padded foot " ) .
Most of the weight of the animal rests on these tough , leathery sole pads .
The South American camelids , adapted to steep and rocky terrain , can move the pads on their toes to maintain grip .
Many fossil camelids were unguligrade and probably hooved , in contrast to all living species .
Camelids are behaviorally similar in many ways , including their walking gait , in which both legs on the same side are moved simultaneously .
Consequently , camelids large enough for human beings to ride have a typical swaying motion .
Dromedary camels , bactrian camels , llamas and alpacas are all induced ovulators .
The three Afro - Asian camel species have developed extensive adaptations to their lives in harsh , near - waterless environments .
Wild populations of the Bactrian camel are even able to drink brackish waterCamelLamaVicugna EVOLUTION Section::::Evolution .
Camelids are unusual in that their modern distribution is almost the inverse of their area of origin .
Camelids first appeared very early in the evolution of the even - toed ungulates , around 45 million years ago during the middle Eocene , in present - day North America .
Among the earliest camelids was the rabbit - sized Protylopus , which still had four toes on each foot .
By the late Eocene , around 35 million years ago , camelids such as Poebrotherium had lost the two lateral toes , and were about the size of a modern goat .
The family diversified and prospered , but remained confined to the North American continent until only about two or three million years ago , when representatives arrived in Asia , and ( as part of the Great American Interchange that followed the formation of the Isthmus of Panama )
South America .
A high arctic camel from this time period has been documented in the far northern reaches of Canada .
The original camelids of North America remained common until the quite recent geological past , but then disappeared , possibly as a result of hunting or habitat alterations by the earliest human settlers , and possibly as a result of changing environmental conditions after the last ice age , or a combination of these factors .
Three species groups survived : the dromedary of northern Africa and southwest Asia ; the Bactrian camel of central Asia ; and the South American group , which has now diverged into a range of forms that are closely related , but usually classified as four species : llamas , alpacas , guanacos , and vicuñas .
Fossil camelids show a wider variety than their modern counterparts .
One North American genus , Titanotylopus , stood 3.5 m at the shoulder , compared with the about 2 m of the largest modern camelids .
Other extinct camelids included small , gazelle - like animals , such as Stenomylus .
Finally , a number of very tall , giraffe - like camelids were adapted to feeding on leaves from high trees , including such genera as Aepycamelus , and Oxydactylus .
It is still debated whether the wild Bactrian camel ( Camelus ferus ) is in fact a distinct species or a subspecies ( Camelus bactrianus ferus ) .
The divergence date is 0.7 million years ago , long before the start of domestication .
SCIENTIFIC CLASSIFICATION Section::::Scientific classification .
Family Camelidae *
†Subfamily Poebrodontinae * †Subfamily
Poebrotheriinae * †Subfamily
Miolabinae *
†Subfamily Stenomylinae * †Subfamily Floridatragulinae
* Subfamily Camelinae
* Tribe Lamini
* Genus : Lama * Llama , Lama glama
* Guanaco
, Lama guanicoe
* Genus :
Vicugna * Vicuña ,
Vicugna vicugna
* Alpaca , Vicugna pacos ( previously categorized in genus Lama )
* Genus :
Hemiauchenia * †Hemiauchenia macrocephala
* †Hemiauchenia minima
* †Hemiauchenia
blancoensis * †Hemiauchenia vera
* †Hemiauchenia
paradoxa *
Genus Palaeolama * †Palaeolama
mirifica
* Tribe Camelini
* Genus :
Camelus * Dromedary , Camelus dromedarius
* Bactrian camel , Camelus bactrianus * Wild Bactrian camel , Camelus ferus
* †Syrian camel , Camelus moreli
* †Camelus sivalensis
* Genus : Camelops
* †Camelops hesternus * Genus :
Paracamelus * †Paracamelus
gigas
PHYLOGENY
mya EXTINCT
GENERA Section::::Extinct genera . !
Genus name !
Epoch !
Remarks Aepycamelus Miocene Tall , s - shaped neck , true padded camel feet Camelops Pliocene - Pleistocene Large , with true camel feet , hump status
uncertain Eulamaops From South America
Floridatragulus
Early Miocene
A bizarre species of camel with a long snout Hemiauchenia A North and South American lamine genus Megacamelus
The largest species of camelid Megatylopus
Large camelid from North America
Oxydactylus
Early Miocene
The earliest member of the " giraffe camel " family Palaeolama Pleistocene A North and South American lamine genus Poebrotherium Oligocene
This species of camel took the place of deer and antelope in the White River Badlands .
Procamelus Miocene Ancestor of extinct Titanolypus and modern Camelus
Protylopus
Late Eocene Earliest member of the camelids
Stenomylus
Early Miocene Small , gazelle - like camel that lived in large herds on the Great Plains
Titanotylopus Miocene - Pleistocene Tall , humped , true camel feet
The newly discovered giant Syrian camel has yet to be officially described .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pictures of camelid species