COCKATIEL
The cockatiel ( Nymphicus hollandicus ) , is a bird that is a member of the cockatoo family endemic to Australia .
They are prized as household pets and companion parrots throughout the world and are relatively easy to breed .
As a caged bird , cockatiels are second in popularity only to the budgerigar .
The cockatiel is the only member of the genus Nymphicus .
It was previously considered a crested parrot or small cockatoo ; however , more recent molecular studies have assigned it to its own subfamily , Nymphicinae .
It is , therefore , now classified as the smallest of the Cacatuidae ( cockatoo family ) .
Cockatiels are native to Australia , and favour the Australian wetlands , scrublands , and bush lands .
TAXONOMY AND ETYMOLOGY Section::::Taxonomy and etymology .
Originally described by Scottish writer and naturalist Robert Kerr in 1793 as Psittacus hollandicus , the cockatiel ( or cockateel ) was moved to its own genus , Nymphicus , by Wagler in 1832 .
Its genus name reflects the experience of one of the earliest groups of Europeans to see the birds in their native habitat ; the travellers thought the birds were so beautiful that they named them after mythical nymphs .
The specific name hollandicus refers to New Holland , a historic name for Australia .
Its biological relationship had long been argued ; it is now classified into a monotypic subfamily Nymphicinae but had sometimes in the past been misclassified among the Platycercinae , the broad - tailed parrots .
This issue has now been settled with molecular studies .
A 1984 study of protein allozymes signalled its closer relationship to cockatoos than to parrots , and Mitochondrial 12S rRNA sequence data places it amongst the Calyptorhynchinae ( dark cockatoos ) subfamily .
The unique , parakeet ( meaning long - tailed parrot )
morphological feature is a consequence of the decrease in size and accompanying change of ecological niche .
Sequence analysis of intron 7 of the nuclear ?
-fibrinogen gene , on the other hand , indicates that it may yet be distinct enough as to warrant recognition of the Nymphicinae rather than inclusion of the genus in the Calyptorhynchinae .
The cockatiel is now biologically classified as a genuine member of Cacatuidae on account of sharing all of the cockatoo family 's biological features , namely , the erectile crest , a gallbladder , powder down , suppressed cloudy - layer ( which precludes the display of blue and green structural colours ) , and facial feathers covering the sides of the beak , all of which are rarely found outside the family Cacatuidae .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The cockatiel 's distinctive erectile crest expresses the animal 's emotional state .
The crest is dramatically vertical when the cockatiel is startled or excited , gently oblique in its neutral or relaxed state , and flattened close to the head when the animal is angry or defensive .
The crest is also held flat but protrudes outward in the back when the cockatiel is trying to appear alluring or flirtatious .
In contrast to most cockatoos , the cockatiel has long tail feathers roughly making up half of its total length .
At , the cockatiel is the smallest of the cockatoos which are generally larger at between .
The " normal grey " or " wild - type " cockatiel 's plumage is primarily grey with prominent white flashes on the outer edges of each wing .
The face of the male is yellow or white , while the face of the female is primarily grey or light grey , and both sexes feature a round orange area on both ears , often referred to as " cheddar cheeks " .
This orange colouration is generally vibrant in adult males , and often quite muted in females .
Visual sexing is often possible with this variant of the bird .
Cockatiels are relatively vocal birds , the calls of the male being more varied than that of the female .
Cockatiels can be taught to sing specific melodies and speak many words and phrases .
SEXUAL DIMORPHISM
Section::::Sexual dimorphism .
All wild cockatiel chicks and juveniles look female , and are virtually indistinguishable from the time of hatching until their first moulting .
They display horizontal yellow stripes or bars on the ventral surface of their tail feathers , yellow spots on the ventral surface of the primary flight feathers of their wings , a grey coloured crest and face , and a dull orange patch on each of their cheeks .
Adult cockatiels are sexually dimorphic , though to a lesser degree than many other avian species .
This is only evident after the first moulting , typically occurring about six to nine months after hatching : the male loses the white or yellow barring and spots on the underside of his tail feathers and wings .
The grey feathers on his cheeks and crest are replaced by bright yellow feathers , while the orange cheek patch becomes brighter and more distinct .
The face and crest of the female will typically remain mostly grey , though also with an orange cheek patch .
Additionally , the female commonly retains the horizontal barring on the underside of her tail feathers .
The colour in cockatiels is derived from two pigments : melanin ( which provides the grey colour in the feathers , eyes , beak , and feet ) , and lipochromes ( which provide the yellow colour on the face and tail and the orange colour of the cheek patch ) .
The grey colour of the melanin overrides the yellow and orange of the lipochromes when both are present .
The melanin content decreases in the face of the males as they mature , allowing the yellow and orange lipochromes to be more visible , while an increase in melanin content in the tail causes the disappearance of the horizontal yellow tail bars .
In addition to these visible characteristics , the vocalisation of adult males is typically louder and more complex than that of females .
COLOUR MUTATIONS Section::::Colour mutations .
Worldwide there are currently twenty two ( 22 ) cockatiel colour mutations established in aviculture with eight being exclusive to Australia .
Mutations in captivity have emerged in various colours , some quite different from those observed in nature .
Wild cockatiels are grey with visible differences between males and females .
Male grey cockatiels typically have yellow heads while the female has a grey head .
Juveniles tend to look like females with pinker beaks .
The pied mutation first appeared in California in 1949 .
This mutation is a blotch of colour on an otherwise solid - coloured bird .
For example , this may appear as a grey blotch on a yellow cockatiel .
Lutino coloration was first seen in 1958 .
These birds lack the grey of their wild counterparts and are white to soft yellow .
This is a popular colour ; due to inbreeding , these cockatiels often have a small bald patch behind their crests .
The cinnamon mutation , first seen in the 1950s , is very similar in appearance to the grey ; however , these birds have a warmer , browner colouring .
Pearling was first seen in 1967 .
This is seen as a feather of one colour with a different coloured edge , such as grey feathers with yellow tips .
This distinctive pattern is on a bird 's wings or back .
The albino colour mutation is a lack of pigment .
These birds are white with red eyes .
Fallow cockatiels first appeared sometime in the 1970s .
This mutation shows as a bird with cinnamon colouring with yellow sections .
Other mutations include : emerald / olive , dominant and recessive silver as well as mutations exclusive to Australia .
These are : Australian fallow , faded ( west coast silver ) , dilute / pastel silver ( east coast silver ) silver spangle ( edged dilute ) , platinum , suffused ( Australian olive ) and pewter .
Other mutations such as face altering mutations include ; whiteface , pastelface , dominant yellow cheek , sex - linked yellow cheek , gold cheek , creamface and the Australian yellow cheek .
Cockatiel colour mutations can become even more complex as one bird can have multiple colour mutations .
For example , a yellow lutino cockatiel may have pearling – white spots on its back and wings .
This is a double mutation .
An example of a quadruple mutation would be cinnamon cockatiel with yellowface colouring with pearling and pied markings .
DISTRIBUTION AND HABITAT Section::::Distribution and habitat .
Cockatiels are native to Australia , where they are found largely in arid or semi - arid country , but always close to water .
Largely nomadic , the species will move to where food and water is available .
They are typically seen in pairs or small flocks .
Sometimes , hundreds will flock around a single body of water .
To many farmers ' dismay , they often eat cultivated crops .
They are absent from the most fertile south west and south east corners of the country , the deepest Western Australian deserts , and Cape York Peninsula .
They are the only cockatoo species which can sometimes reproduce in the end of their first year .
LIFE SPAN
Section::::Life span .
The cockatiel 's lifespan in captivity is generally given as 16 to 25 years , though it is sometimes given as short as 10 to 15 years , and there are reports of cockatiels living as long as 32 years , the oldest confirmed specimen reported being 36 years old .
Diet and exercise are major determining factors .
SEE ALSO
* Cockatiel ( aviculture )
* Cockatiel colour genetics *
Companion parrot *
Pied cockatiel
* Lutino cockatiel REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Astuti , Dwi ( 2004 ? ) : A phylogeny of cockatoos ( Aves : Psittaciformes ) inferred from DNA sequences of the seventh intron of nuclear β - fibrinogen gene .
Doctoral work , Graduate School of Environmental Earth Science , Hokkaido University , Japan .
PDF fulltext
* Flegg , Jim ( 2002 ) : Photographic Field Guide : Birds of Australia .
Reed New Holland , Sydney & London .
EXTERNAL LINKS * Inte Onsman 's MUTAVI Research & Advice Group * Cockatiels – National Cockatiel Society * Cockatiel Information Forum and Bulletin Board –
Talk Cockatiels
* Videos , images and sounds – Internet Bird Collection