PLAYA DEL CARMEN
Playa del Carmen ( ) is a city located along the Caribbean Sea in the municipality of Solidaridad , in the state of Quintana Roo , Mexico .
It is a popular tourist area in eastern Mexico .
Playa del Carmen features a wide array of tourist activities due to its geographical location in the Riviera Maya .
It has also been the destination of PGA Tour golf tournaments and the set location for various television shows .
The town has become one of the fastest to grow in population size in Mexico .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
Playa del Carmen is located within the Riviera Maya , which runs from south of Cancún to Tulum and the Sian Ka'an biosphere reserve .
Playa is a stop for several cruise ships which dock at the nearby Calica quarry docks , about six miles ( 10 km ) south of the city .
The Xcaret Eco Park , a Mexican - themed " eco - archaeological park " , is a popular tourist destination located just south of the town in Xcaret ( pronounced " ish - kar - et " ) .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
In October 2005 , Hurricane Wilma passed directly over Playa del Carmen , remaining in the vicinity for two days and causing significant damage and a temporary drop in tourist arrivals .
Most of the damage was relatively superficial and repaired within a few weeks of the storm .
Hurricane Wilma arrived from the Caribbean Sea , passing over Cozumel before making landfall in Playa del Carmen .
It then moved north along the Mexican coast , hitting Cancún especially hard .
DEMOGRAPHICS TOURISM Section::::Tourism .
Originally a small fishing town , tourism to Playa del Carmen began with the passenger ferry service to Cozumel , an island across the Cozumel Channel and a world - famous scuba diving destination .
Playa del Carmen has recently undergone extreme rapid development with new luxury residential condominium buildings , restaurants , boutiques and entertainment venues .
Tourist activity in Playa del Carmen centers on Quinta Avenida , or Fifth Avenue , which stretches from Calle 1 norte to Calle 40 .
A pedestrian walkway located just one or two blocks inland from the beach , Fifth Avenue is lined with hundreds of shops , bars and restaurants .
There are many small boutique hotels on and just off Fifth Avenue and on the beach .
Playacar is a residential and tourist development in Playa del Carmen just south of the main urban area .
Most of the all - inclusive hotels , the aviary and the golf course are located in this development .
There are two phases – phase 1 is mostly residential with a few hotels and some stores , while phase 2 contains the largest all - inclusive resorts as well as the golf course and a significant number of residential properties .
Playa del Carmen is host to several major annual events .
The largest of these was The BPM Festival , a world - famous electronic dance music festival which , up until recently , took place in January each year .
SPORTS
Section::::Sports .
The city is home to Inter Playa del Carmen , an association football club founded in 1999 , which competes in the south group of the Segunda División Profesional , the third tier of Mexican football league system .
The OHL Classic at Mayakoba is a PGA Tour golf tournament held at El Camaleón Golf Club since 2007 .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The telenovela takes place in Playa del Carmen .
The Real Housewives of Vancouver featured Playa del Carmen in two episodes .
The Amazing Race has shot on location in Playa del Carmen .
The Celebrity Mole was set in the Playa del Carmen area .
UK Reality Series Geordie Shore featured Playa del Carmen .
NOTABLE RESIDENTS Section::::Notable residents .
Notable residents include the following : * WSOP winner Barry Shulman * Artist David Guetta
* Fashion designer Tory Burch SEE
ALSO
* Cenote
* Riviera Maya Jazz Festival * Puerto Aventuras REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS