SQUARE ROOT OF 2
The square root of 2 , or the ( 1/2)th power of 2 , written in mathematics as or , is the positive algebraic number that , when multiplied by itself , gives the number 2 .
Technically , it is called the principal square root of 2 , to distinguish it from the negative number with the same property .
Geometrically the square root of 2 is the length of a diagonal across a square with sides of one unit of length ; this follows from the Pythagorean theorem .
It was probably the first number known to be irrational .
As a good rational approximation for the square root of two , with a reasonable small denominator , the fraction ( ≈ 1.4142857 ) is sometimes used .
The sequence in the OEIS gives the numerical value for the square root of two , truncated to 65 decimal places : Binary HISTORY Section::::History .
The Babylonian clay tablet YBC 7289 ( c. 1800–1600 BC ) gives an approximation of in four sexagesimal figures , , which is accurate to about six decimal digits , and is the closest possible three - place sexagesimal representation of : Another early close approximation is given in ancient Indian mathematical texts , the Sulbasutras ( c. 800–200 BC ) as follows : Increase the length [ of the side ] by its third and this third by its own fourth less the thirty - fourth part of that fourth .
That is , This approximation is the seventh in a sequence of increasingly accurate approximations based on the sequence of Pell numbers , which can be derived from the continued fraction expansion of .
Despite having a smaller denominator , it is only slightly less accurate than the Babylonian approximation .
Pythagoreans discovered that the diagonal of a square is incommensurable with its side , or in modern language , that the square root of two is irrational .
Little is known with certainty about the time or circumstances of this discovery , but the name of Hippasus of Metapontum is often mentioned .
For a while , the Pythagoreans treated as an official secret the discovery that the square root of two is irrational , and , according to legend , Hippasus was murdered for divulging it .
The square root of two is occasionally called " Pythagoras ' number " or " Pythagoras ' constant " , for example by .
COMPUTATION
ALGORITHMS Section::::Computation algorithms .
There are a number of algorithms for approximating , which in expressions as a ratio of integers or as a decimal can only be approximated .
The most common algorithm for this , one used as a basis in many computers and calculators , is the Babylonian method of computing square roots , which is one of many methods of computing square roots .
It goes as follows : First , pick a guess , ; the value of the guess affects only how many iterations are required to reach an approximation of a certain accuracy .
Then , using that guess , iterate through the following recursive computation :
The more iterations through the algorithm ( that is , the more computations performed and the greater " ") , the better approximation of the square root of 2 is achieved .
Each iteration approximately doubles the number of correct digits .
Starting with the next approximations are
* = 1.5 * = 1.416 ...
* = 1.414215 ...
* = 1.4142135623746 ...
The value of was calculated to 137,438,953,444 decimal places by Yasumasa Kanada 's team in 1997 .
In February 2006 the record for the calculation of was eclipsed with the use of a home computer .
Shigeru Kondo calculated 1 trillion decimal places in 2010 .
For a development of this record , see the table below .
Among mathematical constants with computationally challenging decimal expansions , only has been calculated more precisely .
Such computations aim to check empirically whether such numbers are normal .
RATIONAL APPROXIMATIONS Section::::Rational approximations .
A simple rational approximation ( ≈ 1.4142857 ) is sometimes used .
Despite having a denominator of only 70 , it differs from the correct value by less than ( approx . ) .
Since it is a convergent of the continued fraction representation of the square root of two , any better rational approximation has a denominator not less than 169 , since ( ≈ 1.4142012 ) is the next convergent with an error of approx . .
The rational approximation of the square root of two , , derived from the fourth step in the Babylonian algorithm starting with , is too large by approx .
: its square is … RECORD PROGRESSION Section::::Record progression .
This is a table of recent records in calculating digits of !
Date ! !
Name ! !
Number of digits + Reference : PROOFS OF IRRATIONALITY Section::::Proofs of irrationality .
A short proof of the irrationality of can be obtained from the rational root theorem , that is , if is a monic polynomial with integer coefficients , then any rational root of is necessarily an integer .
Applying this to the polynomial , it follows that is either an integer or irrational .
Because is not an integer ( 2 is not a perfect square ) , must therefore be irrational .
This proof can be generalized to show that any root of any natural number which is not the square of a natural number is irrational .
See quadratic irrational or infinite descent for a proof that the square root of any non - square natural number is irrational .
PROOF BY INFINITE DESCENT Section::::Proof by infinite descent .
One proof of the number 's irrationality is the following proof by infinite descent .
It is also a proof by contradiction , also known as an indirect proof , in that the proposition is proved by assuming that the opposite of the proposition is true and showing that this assumption is false , thereby implying that the proposition must be true .
* Assume that is a rational number , meaning that there exists a pair of integers whose ratio is .
*
* If the two integers have a common factor , it can be eliminated using the Euclidean algorithm .
* * Then can be written as an irreducible fraction such that and are coprime integers ( having no common factor ) .
*
*
It follows that
and . ( ) ( are integers )
*
* Therefore , is even because it is equal to .
( is necessarily even because it is 2 times another whole number and multiples of 2 are even . )
*
*
It follows that must be even ( as squares of odd integers are never even ) .
*
* Because is even , there exists an integer that fulfills : .
*
* Substituting from step 7 for in the second equation of step 4 : is equivalent to , which is equivalent to .
*
* Because is divisible by two and therefore even , and because , it follows that is also even which means that is even .
*
* By steps 5 and 8 and are both even , which contradicts that is irreducible as stated in step 3 .
* Because there is a contradiction , the assumption ( 1 ) that is a rational number must be false .
This means that is not a rational number ; i.e. , is irrational .
This proof was hinted at by Aristotle , in his Analytica Priora , § I.23 .
It appeared first as a full proof in Euclid 's Elements , as proposition 117 of
Book X. However , since the early 19th century historians have agreed that this proof is an interpolation and not attributable to Euclid .
PROOF BY UNIQUE FACTORIZATION Section::::Proof by unique factorization .
An alternative proof uses the same approach with the fundamental theorem of arithmetic which says every integer greater than 1 has a unique factorization into powers of primes .
* Assume that is a rational number .
Then there are integers and such that is coprime to and .
In other words , can be written as an irreducible fraction .
*
* The value of can not be 1 as there is no integer the square of which is 2 .
*
* There must be a prime which divides and which does not divide , otherwise the fraction would not be irreducible .
*
* The square of can be factored as the product of the primes into which is factored but with each power doubled .
*
*
Therefore , by unique factorization the prime which divides , and also its square , can not divide the square of .
*
*
Therefore , the square of an irreducible fraction can not be reduced to an integer .
*
* Therefore , can not be a rational number .
* This proof can be generalized to show that if an integer is not an exact th power of another integer then its th root is irrational .
For a proof of the same result which does not rely on the fundamental theorem of arithmetic , see : quadratic irrational .
PROOF BY INFINITE DESCENT , NOT
INVOLVING FACTORING Section::::Proof by infinite descent , not involving factoring .
The following reductio ad absurdum argument showing the irrationality of is less well - known .
It uses the additional information so that .
* Assume that is a rational number .
This would mean that there exist positive integers and with such that .
Then and .
*
* We may assume that is the smallest integer so that is an integer .
That is , that the fraction is in lowest terms .
*
* Because , it follows from ( 1 ) that .
So .
*
* Also from ( 1 ) , we have .
* * Thus the fraction for , which according to ( 2 ) is already in lowest terms , is represented by ( 4 ) in yet lower terms ( which follows from the result ( 3 ) ) .
This is a contradiction , so the assumption that is rational must be false .
* This argument may be tightened as follows .
Let b be the least positive integer for which is a rational .
Then b has the property that twice its square is a square , that is , .
For a contradiction , we show that is a smaller positive integer with the same property .
Multiply the inequalities by to show .
Now twice the square of is .
Rewrite the first and last terms using b 's property to yield , which is just the expansion of , the promised square .
Thus , can also be written as .
This procedure can be iterated and understood geometrically , as shown below .
GEOMETRIC PROOF
Section::::Geometric proof .
The immediately preceding argument has a simple geometric formulation attributed by John Horton Conway to Stanley Tennenbaum when the latter was a student in the early 1950s and whose most recent appearance is in an article by Noson Yanofsky in the May – June 2016 issue of American Scientist .
Given two squares with integer sides respectively a and b , one of which has twice the area of the other , place two copies of the smaller square in the larger as shown in Figure 1 .
The square overlap region in the middle ( ) must equal the sum of the two uncovered squares ( ) .
But these squares on the diagonal have positive integer sides that are smaller than the original squares .
Repeating this process we can find arbitrarily small squares one twice the area of the other , yet both having positive integer sides , which is impossible since positive integers can not be less than 1 .
Another geometric reductio ad absurdum argument showing that is irrational appeared in 2000 in the American Mathematical Monthly .
It is also an example of proof by infinite descent .
It makes use of classic compass and straightedge construction , proving the theorem by a method similar to that employed by ancient Greek geometers .
It is essentially the algebraic proof of the previous section viewed geometrically in yet another way .
Let be a right isosceles triangle with hypotenuse length and legs as shown in Figure 2 .
By the Pythagorean theorem , .
Suppose and are integers .
Let be a ratio given in its lowest terms .
Draw the arcs and with centre .
Join .
It follows that , and the and coincide .
Therefore , the triangles and are congruent by SAS .
Because is a right angle and is half a right angle , is also a right isosceles triangle .
Hence implies .
By symmetry , , and is also a right isosceles triangle .
It also follows that .
Hence we have an even smaller right isosceles triangle , with hypotenuse length and legs .
These values are integers even smaller than and and in the same ratio , contradicting the hypothesis that is in lowest terms .
Therefore , and can not be both integers , hence is irrational .
PYTHAGOREAN THEOREM PROOF Section::::Pythagorean theorem proof .
This is another proof by contradiction , supposing that is rational .
*
That means that we can make a right isosceles triangle where the side lengths are natural numbers and the legs and the hypotenuse do not share any common factors ( except 1 ) .
*
* Since the legs are equal , so are their squares .
So in order for the Pythagorean theorem to work for this special right triangle , the square of the hypotenuse has to be an even number ( and if we cut it in half once then we have the area of the square of the leg ) .
*
* Recall that the square of an even number is even and the square of an odd number is odd .
So if the square of the hypotenuse is even the hypotenuse is even as well .
*
* Remember that a square is a quadrilateral with 2 pairs of parallel sides which are equal in length and has 4 right angles .
So both sides of the square of the hypotenuse are even .
*
* So the square of the hypotenuse of this right triangle can be cut in half twice and still have integer area .
Since we only want to cut it in half once , then we 'll get an even number .
*
* So the square of the leg is even .
Now according to ( 2 ) the leg must be even .
*
*
This contradicts our assumption at ( 1 ) that the leg and hypotenuse have no common factors ( except 1 ) .
Because if they 're both even they share a common factor of 2 .
So the assumption that was rational has to be false .
Or in other words is an irrational number .
Q. E. D. * ANALYTIC PROOF
* Lemma : let and such that for all and * is irrational .
CONSTRUCTIVE PROOF
Section::::Constructive proof .
In a constructive approach , one distinguishes between on the one hand not being rational , and on the other hand being irrational ( i.e. , being quantifiably apart from every rational ) , the latter being a stronger property .
Given positive integers and , because the valuation ( i.e. , highest power of 2 dividing a number ) of is odd , while the valuation of is even , they must be distinct integers ; thus .
Then the latter inequality being true because we assume ( otherwise the quantitative apartness can be trivially established ) .
This gives a lower bound of for the difference , yielding a direct proof of irrationality not relying on the law of excluded middle ; see Errett Bishop ( 1985 , p. 18 ) .
This proof constructively exhibits a discrepancy between and any rational .
PROOF BY DIOPHANTINE EQUATIONS
* Lemma : For the Diophantine equation formula_18 in its primitive ( simplest ) form , integer solutions exist if and only if either formula_19 or formula_20 is odd , but never when both formula_19 and formula_20 are odd .
Section::::Proof by Diophantine equations .
Proof : For the given equation , there are only six possible combinations of oddness and evenness for whole - number values of formula_19
and formula_20 that produce a whole - number value for formula_25 .
A simple enumeration of all six possibilities shows why four of these six are impossible .
Of the two remaining possibilities , one can be proven to not contain any solutions using modular arithmetic , leaving the sole remaining possibility as the only one to contain solutions , if any . !
x , y !
z
Both even Even Impossible .
The given Diophantine equation is primitive and therefore contains no common factors throughout
Both odd Odd Impossible .
The sum of two odd numbers does not produce an odd number .
Both even Odd Impossible .
The sum of two even numbers does not produce an odd number .
One even , another odd Even Impossible .
The sum of an even number and an odd number does not produce an even number .
Both odd Even Possible .
One
even , another odd Odd Possible .
The fifth possibility ( both formula_19 and formula_20 odd and formula_25 even ) can be shown to contain no solutions as follows .
Since formula_25 is even , formula_30 must be divisible by formula_31 , which makes the entire equation congruent to modulo formula_31 :
The square of any odd number is always formula_34 .
The square of any even number is always formula_35 .
Since both formula_19 and formula_20 are odd and formula_25 is even , we have : which is impossible .
Therefore , the fifth possibility is also ruled out , leaving the sixth to be the only possible combination to contain solutions , if any .
An extension of this lemma is the result that two identical whole - number squares can never be added to produce another whole - number square , even when the equation is not in its simplest form .
* Theorem : formula_41 is irrational .
Proof :
Assume formula_41 is rational .
Therefore , But the lemma proves that the sum of two identical whole - number squares can not produce another whole - number square .
Therefore , the assumption that formula_41 is rational is contradicted .
formula_41 is irrational .
Q. E. D. PROPERTIES OF THE SQUARE ROOT OF TWO Section::::Properties of the square root of two .
One - half of , also the reciprocal of , approximately , is a common quantity in geometry and trigonometry because the unit vector that makes a 45 ° angle with the axes in a plane has the coordinates
This number satisfies One interesting property of is as follows : since This is related to the property of silver ratios .
if the square root symbol is interpreted suitably for the complex numbers and . for square roots and only one minus sign .
Similar in appearance but with a finite number of terms , appears in various trigonometric constants : It is not known whether is a normal number , a stronger property than irrationality , but
statistical analyses of its binary expansion are consistent with the hypothesis that it is normal to base two .
SERIES AND PRODUCT REPRESENTATIONS Section::::Series and product representations .
The identity , along with the infinite product representations for the sine and cosine , leads to products such as and or equivalently , The number can also be expressed by taking the Taylor series of a trigonometric function .
For example , the series for gives The Taylor series of with and using the double factorial gives
The convergence of this series can be accelerated with an Euler transform , producing It is not known whether can be represented with a BBP - type formula .
BBP - type formulas are known for and , however .
The number can be represented by an infinite series of Egyptian fractions , with denominators defined by 2th terms of a Fibonacci - like recurrence relation a(n)=34a(n-1)-a(n-2 ) , a(0)=0 , a(1)=6 .
CONTINUED FRACTION REPRESENTATION
Section::::Continued fraction representation .
The square root of two has the following continued fraction representation :
The convergents formed by truncating this representation form a sequence of fractions that approximate the square root of two to increasing accuracy , and that are described by the Pell numbers ( known as side and diameter numbers to the ancient Greeks because of their use in approximating the ratio between the sides and diagonal of a square ) .
The first convergents are : .
The convergent differs from by almost exactly and then the next convergent is .
NESTED SQUARE REPRESENTATIONS
Section::::Nested square representations .
The following nested square expressions converge to formula_80 : DERIVED CONSTANTS Section::::Derived constants .
The reciprocal of the square root of two ( the square root of ) is a widely used constant .
formula_82 PAPER SIZE
Section::::Paper size .
The ( approximate ) aspect ratio of paper sizes under ISO 216 ( A4 , A0 , etc . ) is 1 : .
This ratio of lengths of the shorter over the longer side guarantees that cutting a sheet in half along a line parallel to its shorter side results in the smaller sheets having the same ( approximate ) ratio as the original sheet .
Proof :
Let formula_83 shorter length and formula_84 longer length of the sides of a sheet of paper , with Let formula_86 be the analogue ratio of the halved sheet , then SEE ALSO
* Square root of 3 * Square root of 5 * Silver ratio , *
The square root of two is the frequency ratio of a tritone interval in twelve - tone equal temperament music .
*
The square root of two forms the relationship of f - stops in photographic lenses , which in turn means that the ratio of areas between two successive apertures is 2 .
*
The celestial latitude ( declination ) of the Sun during a planet 's astronomical cross - quarter day points equals the tilt of the planet 's axis divided by .
*
Gelfond –
Schneider constant , .
* Viète 's formula NOTES
REFERENCES
* Bishop , Errett ( 1985 ) , Schizophrenia in contemporary mathematics .
Errett Bishop : reflections on him and his research ( San Diego , Calif. , 1983 ) , 1–32 , Contemp .
Math .
39 , Amer .
Math .
Soc . , Providence , RI .
* . * .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Square Root of Two to 5 million digits by Jerry Bonnell and Robert J. Nemiroff .
May , 1994 .
* Square root of 2 is irrational , a collection of proofs