JUNGLE
A jungle is land covered with dense vegetation dominated by trees .
Application of the term has varied greatly over recent centuries and it has little scientific meaning .
Before the 1970s , various tropical forests were referred to as jungles but this terminology has fallen out of usage .
Jungles in Western literature can represent a less civilized or unruly space outside the control of civilization , attributed to the jungle 's association in colonial discourse with places colonised by Europeans .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word jungle originates from the Sanskrit word Jangla ( ) , meaning uncultivated land .
Although the Sanskrit word refers to dry land , it has been suggested that an Anglo - Indian interpretation led to its connotation as a dense " tangled thicket " while others have argued that a cognate word in Urdu did refer to forests .
The term is prevalent in many languages of the Indian subcontinent , and the Iranian Plateau , where it is commonly used to refer to the plant growth replacing primeval forest or to the unkempt tropical vegetation that takes over abandoned areas .
WILDLIFE Section::::Wildlife .
Because jungles occur on all inhabited landmasses and may incorporate numerous vegetation and land types in different climatic zones , the wildlife of jungles can not be straightforwardly defined .
VARYING USAGE
AS DENSE AND IMPENETRABLE VEGETATION Section::::Varying usage . Section::::As dense and impenetrable vegetation .
One of the most common meanings of jungle is land overgrown with tangled vegetation at ground level , especially in the tropics .
Typically such vegetation is sufficiently dense to hinder movement by humans , requiring that travelers cut their way through .
This definition draws a distinction between rainforest and jungle , since the understorey of rainforests is typically open of vegetation due to a lack of sunlight , and hence relatively easy to traverse .
Jungles may exist within , or at the borders of , rainforests in areas where rainforest has been opened through natural disturbance such as hurricanes , or through human activity such as logging .
The successional vegetation that springs up following such disturbance of rainforest is dense and impenetrable and is a ' typical ' jungle .
Jungle also typically forms along rainforest margins such as stream banks , once again due to the greater available light at ground level .
Monsoon forests and mangroves are commonly referred to as jungles of this type .
Having a more open canopy than rainforests , monsoon forests typically have dense understoreys with numerous lianas and shrubs making movement difficult , while the prop roots and low canopies of mangroves produce similar difficulties .
AS
MOIST FOREST Section::::As moist forest .
Because European explorers initially travelled through tropical rainforests largely by river , the dense tangled vegetation lining the stream banks gave a misleading impression that such jungle conditions existed throughout the entire forest .
As a result , it was wrongly assumed that the entire forest was impenetrable jungle .
This in turn appears to have given rise to the second popular usage of jungle as virtually any humid tropical forest .
Jungle in this context is particularly associated with tropical rain forest , but may extend to cloud forest , temperate rainforest , and mangroves with no reference to the vegetation structure or the ease of travel .
The generic term " tropical forest " and " rainforest " have largely replaced " jungle " as the descriptor of humid tropical forests , a linguistic transition that has occurred since the 1970s .
"
Rainforest " itself did not appear in English dictionaries prior to the 1970s .
The word " jungle " accounted for over 80 % of the terms used to refer to tropical forests in print media prior to the 1970s ; since then it has been steadily replaced by " rainforest " , although " jungle " still remains in common use when referring to tropical rainforests .
AS METAPHOR Section::::As metaphor .
As a metaphor , jungle often refers to situations that are unruly or lawless , or where the only law is perceived to be " survival of the fittest " .
This reflects the view of " city people " that forests are such places .
Upton Sinclair gave the title The Jungle ( 1906 ) to his famous book about the life of workers at the Chicago Stockyards , portraying the workers as being mercilessly exploited with no legal or other lawful recourse .
The term " The Law of the Jungle " is also used in a similar context , drawn from Rudyard Kipling 's The Jungle Book ( 1894)—though in the society of jungle animals portrayed in that book and obviously meant as a metaphor for human society , that phrase referred to an intricate code of laws which Kipling describes in detail , and not at all to a lawless chaos .
The word " jungle " itself carries connotations of untamed and uncontrollable nature and isolation from civilization , along with the emotions that evokes : threat , confusion , powerlessness , disorientation and immobilisation .
The change from " jungle " to " rainforest " as the preferred term for describing tropical forests as has been a response to an increasing perception of these forests as fragile and spiritual places , a viewpoint not in keeping with the darker connotations of " jungle " .
Cultural scholars , especially post - colonial critics , often analyse the jungle within the concept of hierarchical domination and the demand western cultures often places on other cultures to conform to their standards of civilization .
For example : Edward Said notes that the Tarzan depicted by Johnny Weissmuller was a resident of the jungle representing the savage , untamed and wild , yet still a white master of it ; and in his essay " An Image of Africa " about Heart of Darkness Nigerian novelist and theorist Chinua Achebe notes how the jungle and Africa become the source of temptation for white European characters like Marlowe and Kurtz .
Former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak compared Israel to " a villa in the jungle " - a comparison which had been often quoted in Israeli political debates .
Barak 's critics on the left side of Israeli politics strongly criticized the comparison .
For example , Uri Avnery charged that comparing " civilized " Israel with " a villa " and Israel 's Arab neighbors with the " wild beasts " of the " jungle " tends to throw the blame for the absence of peace on the " wild " Arab and Palestinian side , and absolve Israel of responsibility .
SEE ALSO * Arid Forest Research Institute * Rainforest * Tropical seasonal forest or Monsoon forest
* Tropical vegetation
* Wilderness REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * BBC - Science and Nature :
Jungle - * Jungle : Definition , Synonyms from Answers.com *
Amazon Rainforest Fund - * Link illustrating Biomes - * Link Indonesia Rain Forest exploration and Jungle trek Guide