CORIANDER Coriander (; Coriandrum sativum ) , also known as cilantro ( ) or Chinese parsley , is an annual herb in the family Apiaceae .
All parts of the plant are edible , but the fresh leaves and the dried seeds are the parts most traditionally used in cooking .
Most people perceive the taste of coriander leaves as a tart , lemon / lime taste , but a smaller group , of about 4–14 % of people tested , think the leaves taste like bath soap , as linked to a gene which detects aldehyde chemicals also present in soap .
BOTANICAL DESCRIPTION
Section::::Botanical description .
Coriander is native to regions spanning from southern Europe and northern Africa to southwestern Asia .
It is a soft plant growing to tall .
The leaves are variable in shape , broadly lobed at the base of the plant , and slender and feathery higher on the flowering stems .
The flowers are borne in small umbels , white or very pale pink , asymmetrical , with the petals pointing away from the center of the umbel longer ( ) than those pointing toward it ( only long ) .
The fruit is a globular , dry schizocarp in diameter .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
First attested in English in the late 14th century , the word " coriander " derives from the , which comes from , in turn from , koriannon , derived from , kóris ( a bed bug ) , and was given on account of its foetid , bed bug - like smell .
The earliest attested form of the word is the Mycenaean Greek ' written in Linear B syllabic script ( reconstructed as ' , similar to the name of Minos 's daughter Ariadne ) which later evolved to koriannon or koriandron , and koriander ( German ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Although native to Iran , coriander grows wild over a wide area of Western Asia and southern Europe , prompting the comment , " It is hard to define exactly where this plant is wild and where it only recently established itself . "
Fifteen desiccated mericarps were found in the Pre - Pottery Neolithic B level of the Nahal Hemar Cave in Israel , which may be the oldest archaeological find of coriander .
About half a litre of coriander mericarps was recovered from the tomb of Tutankhamen , and because this plant does not grow wild in Egypt , Zohary and Hopf
interpret this find as proof that coriander was cultivated by the ancient Egyptians .
Coriander seems to have been cultivated in Greece since at least the second millennium BC .
One of the Linear B tablets recovered from Pylos refers to the species as being cultivated for the manufacture of perfumes , it apparently was used in two forms : as a spice for its seeds and as a herb for the flavour of its leaves .
This appears to be confirmed by archaeological evidence from the same period ; the large quantities of the species retrieved from an Early Bronze Age layer at Sitagroi in Macedonia could point to cultivation of the species at that time .
USES Section::::Uses .
All parts of the plant are edible , but the fresh leaves and the dried seeds are the parts most traditionally used in cooking .
Coriander is used in cuisines throughout the world .
LEAVES
Section::::Leaves .
The leaves are variously referred to as coriander leaves , fresh coriander , dhania , Chinese parsley , or ( in the US and commercially in Canada ) cilantro .
Coriander potentially may be confused with culantro ( Eryngium foetidum L. ) , an Apiaceae like coriander ( Coriandrum sativum L. ) , but from a different genus .
Culantro has a distinctly different spiny appearance , a more potent volatile leaf oil and a stronger aroma .
The leaves have a different taste from the seeds , with citrus overtones .
The fresh leaves are an ingredient in many South Asian foods ( such as chutneys and salads ) ; in Chinese , Thai , and Burmese dishes ; in Mexican cooking , particularly in salsa and guacamole and as a garnish ; and in salads in Russia and other CIS countries .
In Portugal , chopped coriander is used in the bread soup Açorda , and in India , chopped coriander is a garnish on Indian dishes such as dal .
As heat diminishes their flavour , coriander leaves are often used raw or added to the dish immediately before serving .
In Indian and Central Asian recipes , coriander leaves are used in large amounts and cooked until the flavour diminishes .
The leaves spoil quickly when removed from the plant , and lose their aroma when dried or frozen .
FRUITS
Section::::Fruits .
The dry fruits are known as coriander seeds .
The word " coriander " in food preparation may refer solely to these seeds ( as a spice ) , rather than to the plant .
The seeds have a lemony citrus flavour when crushed , due to terpenes linalool and pinene .
It is described as warm , nutty , spicy , and orange - flavoured .
The variety C. s. vulgare has a fruit diameter of , while var .
C. s. microcarpum fruits have a diameter of .
Large - fruited types are grown mainly by tropical and subtropical countries , e.g. Morocco , India , and Australia , and contain a low volatile oil content ( 0.1 - 0.4 % ) .
They are used extensively for grinding and blending purposes in the spice trade .
Types with smaller fruit are produced in temperate regions and usually have a volatile oil content around 0.4 - 1.8 % , so are highly valued as a raw material for the preparation of essential oil .
Coriander is commonly found both as whole dried seeds and in ground form .
Roasting or heating the seeds in a dry pan heightens the flavour , aroma , and pungency .
Ground coriander seed loses flavour quickly in storage and is best ground fresh .
Coriander seed is a spice in garam masala and Indian curries which often employ the ground fruits in generous amounts together with cumin , acting as a thickener in a mixture called dhana jeera .
Roasted coriander seeds , called dhana dal , are eaten as a snack .
They are the main ingredient of the two south Indian dishes sambhar and rasam .
Outside of Asia , coriander seed is used widely in the process for pickling vegetables .
In Germany and South Africa ( see boerewors ) , the seeds are used while making sausages .
In Russia and Central Europe , coriander seed is an occasional ingredient in rye bread ( e.g. Borodinsky bread ) , as an alternative to caraway .
The Zuni people of North America have adapted it into their cuisine , mixing the powdered seeds ground with chile and using it as a condiment with meat , and eating leaves as a salad .
Coriander seeds are used in brewing certain styles of beer , particularly some Belgian wheat beers .
The coriander seeds are used with orange peel to add a citrus character .
Coriander seed is one of the main traditional ingredients in the South African Boerewors , a spiced mixed - meat sausage .
One preliminary study showed coriander essential oil to inhibit Gram - positive and Gram - negative bacteria , including Staphylococcus aureus , Enterococcus faecalis , Pseudomonas aeruginosa , and Escherichia coli .
Coriander is listed as one of the original ingredients in the secret formula for Coca - Cola .
ROOTS Section::::Roots .
Coriander roots have a deeper , more intense flavor than the leaves , and are used in a variety of Asian cuisines , especially in Thai dishes such as soups or curry pastes .
FLOWERING CORIANDER FOR APHID CONTROL Section::::Flowering coriander for aphid control .
In the Salinas Valley of California , aphids have been one of the worst pests in the lettuce fields .
The USDA Cooperative Extension Service has been investigating organic methods for aphid control , and experimented with coriander plants and Alyssum plants ; when intercropped with the lettuce and allowed to flower , they attract beneficial insects such as hoverflies , the larvae of which eat up to 150 aphids per day before they mature into flying adults .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
Raw coriander leaves are 92 % water , 4 % carbohydrates , 2 % protein , and less than 1 % fat ( table ) .
The nutritional profile of coriander seeds is different from the fresh stems or leaves .
In a 100 gram reference amount , leaves are particularly rich in vitamin A , vitamin C and vitamin K , with moderate content of dietary minerals ( table ) .
Although seeds generally have lower content of vitamins , they do provide significant amounts of dietary fiber , calcium , selenium , iron , magnesium and manganese .
TASTE AND SMELL Section::::Taste and smell .
The essential oil from coriander leaves and seeds contains mixed polyphenols and terpenes , including linalool as the major constituent accounting for the aroma and flavor of coriander .
Different people may perceive the taste of coriander leaves differently .
Those who enjoy it say it has a refreshing , lemony or lime - like flavor , while those who dislike it have a strong aversion to its taste and smell , characterizing it as soapy or rotten .
Studies also show variations in preference among different ethnic groups : 21 % of East Asians , 17 % of Caucasians , and 14 % of people of African descent expressed a dislike for coriander , but among the groups where coriander is popular in their cuisine , only 7 % of South Asians , 4 % of Hispanics , and 3 % of Middle Eastern subjects expressed a dislike .
Studies have shown that 80 % of identical twins shared the same preference for the herb , but fraternal twins agreed only about half the time , strongly suggesting a genetic component to the preference .
In a genetic survey of nearly 30,000 people , two genetic variants linked to perception of coriander have been found , the most common of which is a gene involved in sensing smells .
The gene , OR6A2 , lies within a cluster of olfactory - receptor genes , and encodes a receptor that is highly sensitive to aldehyde chemicals .
Flavor chemists have found that the coriander aroma is created by a half - dozen or so substances , and most of these are aldehydes .
Those who dislike the taste are sensitive to the offending unsaturated aldehydes and at the same time may be unable to detect the aromatic chemicals that others find pleasant .
Association between its taste and several other genes , including a bitter - taste receptor , have also been found .
ALLERGY Section::::Allergy .
Some people are allergic to coriander leaves or seeds , having symptoms similar to those of other food allergies .
In one study , 32 % of pin - prick tests in children and 23 % in adults were positive for coriander and other members of the Apiaceae family , including caraway , fennel , and celery .
The allergic symptoms may be minor or life - threatening .
SIMILAR PLANTS Section::::Similar plants .
Other herbs are used where they grow in much the same way as coriander leaves .
*
Eryngium foetidum has a similar , but more intense , taste .
Known as culantro , it is found in Mexico , South America , and the Caribbean .
* Persicaria odorata is commonly called Vietnamese coriander , or rau răm .
The leaves have a similar odour and flavour to coriander .
It is a member of the Polygonaceae , or buckwheat family .
* Papaloquelite is one common name for Porophyllum ruderale subsp .
macrocephalum , a member of the Asteraceae , the sunflower family .
This species is found growing wild from Texas to Argentina .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS