NORTHERN FLYING SQUIRREL
The northern flying squirrel ( Glaucomys sabrinus ) is one of three species of the genus Glaucomys , the only flying squirrels found in North America .
They are found in coniferous and mixed coniferous forests across much of Canada , from Alaska to Nova Scotia , and south to the mountains of North Carolina and west to Utah , Washington , and Oregon in the United States .
They are light brown with pale underparts and grow to a length of .
They are proficient gliders but clumsy walkers on the ground .
They feed on a variety of plant material as well as tree sap , fungi , insects , carrion , bird eggs and nestlings .
They mostly breed once a year in a cavity lined with lichen or other soft material .
Except when they have young , they change nests frequently , and in winter a number of individuals may huddle together in a shared nest .
Unlike most members of their family , flying squirrels are strictly nocturnal .
HABITAT AND RANGE Section::::Habitat and range .
The northern flying squirrel is found in coniferous and mixed coniferous forests across the top of North America , from Alaska to Nova Scotia , south to the mountains of North Carolina and west to Utah , Washington and Oregon .
The Humboldt 's flying squirrel was formerly considered conspecific , but was found to be a cryptic species , and now considered distinct .
They are generally smaller and darker than northern flying squirrels .
Two subspecies are found in the southern Appalachians , the Carolina northern flying squirrel , G. s. coloratus , and the West Virginia northern flying squirrel G. s. fuscus , both of which are endangered , although the West Virginia subspecies has recovered enough that it was delisted in August 2008 .
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service put the northern flying squirrel back under protection on June 6 , 2011 .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
These nocturnal , arboreal rodents have thick light brown or cinnamon fur on their upper body and greyish fur on the flanks and whitish fur underneath .
They have large eyes and a flat tail .
They can also be identified by their long whiskers , common to nocturnal mammals .
The adult northern flying squirrel measures from 25 to 37 cm long , and their weight can range from 110 to 230 grams .
GLIDING
Section::::Gliding .
Flying squirrels do not actually fly , they glide using a patagium created by a fold of skin .
From atop trees , flying squirrels can initiate glides from a running start or from a stationary position by bringing their limbs under the body , retracting their heads , and then propelling themselves off the tree .
It is believed that they use triangulation to estimate the distance of the landing as they often lean out and pivot from side to side before jumping .
Once in the air , they form an " X " with their limbs , causing their membrane to stretch into a square - like shape and glide down at angles of 30 to 40 degrees .
They maneuver with great efficiency in the air , making 90 degree turns around obstacles if needed .
Just before reaching a tree , they raise their flattened tails , which abruptly changes their trajectory upwards , and point all of their limbs forward to create a parachute effect with the membrane to reduce the shock of landing .
The limbs absorb the remainder of the impact , and the squirrels immediately run to the other side of the trunk or to the top of the tree to avoid any potential predators .
Although graceful in flight , they are very clumsy walkers and if they happen to be on the ground in the presence of danger , they will prefer to hide rather than attempt to escape .
DIET Section::::Diet .
A major food source for the squirrels are fungi of various species , although they also eat lichens , mushrooms , all mast - crop nuts , tree sap , insects , carrion , bird eggs and nestlings , buds and flowers .
The squirrels are able to locate truffles by olfaction , though they also seem to use cues such as the presence of coarse woody debris , indicating a decaying log , and spatial memory of locations where truffles were found in the past .
The northern flying squirrel is also known to cache food for when food supplies are lower .
These caches can be in cavities in trees , as well as in the squirrels ' nest .
Lichens and seeds are commonly cached .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
The northern flying squirrel also disseminates spores of the fungi that they eat .
BEHAVIOUR
Section::::Behaviour .
Northern flying squirrels generally nest in holes in trees , preferring large - diameter trunks and dead trees , and will also build outside leaf nests called dreys and will also nest underground .
Tree cavities created by woodpeckers as suitable nest sites tend to be more abundant in old - growth forests , and so do the squirrels , though harvested forests can be managed in ways that are likely to increase squirrel numbers .
Except when rearing young , the squirrels shift from nest to nest frequently .
They often share nests during winter months , forming aggregations .
Usually , aggregate nests contain 4 to 10 individuals .
The sharing of nests in winter by northern flying squirrels is important in maintaining body temperature ( biothermal regulation ) , as northern flying squirrels do not hibernate , nor do they enter torpor states .
Northern flying squirrels gliding distances tend to be between 5 and 25 metres , though glides of up to 45 m and longer have been observed .
Average glides are about 5 m less for females than for males .
Glide angle has been measured at 26.8 degrees and glide ratio at 1.98 .
Since first documented by Shaw in 1801 , the general understanding was that northern flying squirrels bred but once per year .
Recently , in southern Ontario , Canada , polyestrus behaviour ( two litters per year ) has been documented for the first time .
This observation has since been confirmed by a second research team in New Brunswick , Canada .
In southern Ontario , Canada , genetic evidence has recently shown hybridization with the rapid northward expansion and increased sympatry of southern flying squirrels .
PREDATION Section::::Predation .
Northern flying squirrels , along with pine squirrels , are an important prey species for the spotted owl ( Strix occidentalis ) and eastern screech owl ( Megascops asio ) .
Other predators include various other large birds , especially the great horned owl , hawks , the American marten , the Canadian lynx , the red fox , and the domestic cat .
REFERENCES
* Arbogast , B. S. ( 1999 ) .
Mitochondrial DNA phylogeography of the New World flying squirrels Glaucomys : implications for Pleistocene biogeography .
Journal of Mammalogy , 80 , 142 - 155 .
* Arbogast , B. S. , Browne , R. A. , Weigl , P. D. and Kenagy , G. J. ( 2005 ) .
Conservation genetics of endangered flying squirrels from the Appalachian mountains of eastern North America .
Animal Conservation , 8 , 123 - 133 .
* Bakker , V. J. , & Hastings , K. ( 2002 ) .
Den trees used by northern flying squirrels ( Glaucomys sabrinus ) in southeastern Alaska .
Canadian Journal of Zoology , 80 , 1623 - 1633 .
* Carey , A. B. , Kershner , J. , Biswell , B. , & De Toledo , L. D. ( 1999 ) .
Ecological scale and forest development : squirrels , dietary fungi , and vascular plants in managed and unmanaged forests .
Wildlife Monographs 5 - 71 .
* Carey , A. B. , Wilson , T. M. , Maguire , C. C. , & Biswell , B. L. ( 1997 ) .
Dens of northern flying squirrels in the Pacific northwest .
Journal of Wildlife Management , 61 , 684 - 699 .
* Cotton , C. L. , & Parker , K. L. ( 2000 ) .
Winter activity patterns of northern flying squirrels in sub - boreal forests .
Canadian Journal of Zoology , 78 , 1896 - 1901 .
* Forsman , E. D. , Otto , I. A. , Aubuchon , D. , Lewis , J. C. , Sovereign , S. G. , Maurice , K. J. , & Kaminski , T. ( 1994 ) .
Reproductive chronology of the northern flying squirrel on the Olympic peninsula , Washington .
Northwest Science , 68 , 273 - 276 .
* Martin , K. J. , & Anthony , R. G. ( 1999 ) .
Movements of northern flying squirrels in different - aged forest stands of western Oregon .
Journal of Wildlife Management , 63 , 291 - 297 .
* Mitchell , D. ( 2001 ) .
Spring and fall diet of the endangered West Virginia northern flying squirrel ( Glaucomys sabrinus fuscus ) .
American Midland Naturalist , 146 , 439 - 443 .
* Pyare , S. , & Longland , W. S. ( 2001 ) .
Mechanisms of truffle detection by northern flying squirrels .
Canadian Journal of Zoology , 79 , 1007 - 1015 .
* Pyare , S. , Smith , W. P. , Nicholls , J. V. , & Cook , J. A. ( 2002 ) .
Diets of northern flying squirrels , Glaucomys sabrinus , in southeast Alaska .
Canadian Field Naturalist , 116 , 98 - 103 .
* Odom , R.H. ,
W.M. Ford , J.W. Edwards , C.W. Stihler , and J.M. Menzel .
2001 .
Developing a habitat model for the endangered Virginia northern flying squirrel ( Glaucomys sabrinus fuscus ) in the Allegheny Mountains of West Virginia .
Biological Conservation 99 : 245 - 252 .
* Vernes , K. ( 2001 ) .
Gliding performance of the northern flying squirrel ( Glaucomys sabrinus ) in mature mixed forest of eastern Canada .
Journal of Mammalogy , 82 , 1026 - 1033 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Animal Diversity Web - Glaucomys sabrinus