MAUDE ( TV SERIES )
Maude is an American sitcom that was originally broadcast on the CBS network from September 12 , 1972 , until April 22 , 1978 .
Maude stars Beatrice Arthur as Maude Findlay , an outspoken , middle - aged , politically liberal woman living in suburban Tuckahoe , Westchester County , New York , with her fourth husband , household appliance store owner Walter Findlay ( Bill Macy ) .
Maude embraces the tenets of women 's liberation , always votes for Democratic Party candidates , and advocates for civil rights and racial and gender equality .
However , her overbearing and sometimes domineering personality often gets her into trouble when speaking about these issues .
The show was billed as the first spin - off of All in the Family , on which Beatrice Arthur had made two appearances in the character of Maude , Edith Bunker 's cousin .
Like All in the Family , Maude was a sitcom with topical storylines created by producers Norman Lear and Bud Yorkin .
Unusual for a U.S. sitcom , several episodes ( such as " Maude 's Night Out " and " The Convention " ) featured only the characters of Maude and her husband Walter , in what amounted to half - hour " two - hander " teleplays .
CHARACTERS Section::::Characters .
Maude Findlay
( Beatrice Arthur ) first appears in two season - two episodes of All in the Family : the first in December 1971 as a visitor to the Bunker home , and the second , a backdoor pilot setting up the premise of the Maude series , in March 1972 .
She is Edith Bunker 's ( Jean Stapleton ) cousin who has been married four times .
Her first husband , Barney , had died shortly after their marriage ; she had divorced the next two , Albert and Chester .
Albert was never portrayed on screen , but the episode " Poor Albert " revolved around his death , while second former husband Chester would appear once on the show ( played by Martin Balsam ) .
Her current husband , Walter Findlay ( played by Bill Macy ) , owns an appliance store called Findlay 's Friendly Appliances .
Maude and Walter met just before the 1968 presidential election .
Maude sometimes gets in the last word during their many arguments with her hallmark catchphrase , " God'll get you for that , Walter " , which came directly from Bea Arthur .
Maude 's deep , raspy voice is also an occasional comic foil whenever she answers the phone and explaining in one episode , " No , this is not Mr. Findlay ; this is Mrs. Findlay !
Mr. Findlay has a much higher voice . "
Maude 's daughter , Carol Traynor ( played by Adrienne Barbeau – in the All in the Family pilot episode the character was played by Marcia Rodd ) , is also divorced and has one child , like Maude .
Carol and her son , Phillip ( played by Brian Morrison and later by Kraig Metzinger ) , live with the Findlays .
Though single , Carol maintains her reputation of dating many men .
She dates various men throughout early seasons , later forming a serious relationship with a man named Chris ( played by Fred Grandy ) ; Grandy left at the end of the second season .
Like her mother , Carol is an outspoken liberal feminist who is not afraid to speak her mind , though they often clash .
There are conflicting accounts as to whether Carol 's father was Maude 's first or second husband .
The Findlays ' next - door neighbors are Dr. Arthur Harmon , a stuffy , sardonic Republican and foil for Maude played by Conrad Bain and his sweet but scatterbrained second wife Vivian , played by Rue McClanahan , who confirmed in an interview with the Archive of American Television that she was approached by Norman Lear during the taping of the All in the Family episode " The Bunkers and the Swingers " ( 1972 ) to take on the role as a late replacement for Doris Roberts , who was originally intended for the part .
Arthur has been Walter 's best friend since the two men served together in World War II ; he was the one who brought Walter and Maude together in 1968 and " affectionately " called Maude " Maudie .
" Vivian has been Maude 's best friend since they attended college together .
At the beginning of the series , Arthur is a widower .
Vivian was introduced in a guest appearance that focused on her split with her first husband .
She later got involved with Arthur as a divorcée .
THE HOUSEKEEPERS Section::::The housekeepers .
For the entire run of the show , Maude also has a housekeeper .
At the beginning of the series , the Findlays hire Florida Evans , a no - nonsense black woman who often has the last laugh at Maude 's expense .
Maude often makes a point of conspicuously and awkwardly demonstrating how open - minded and liberal she is ( Florida almost quits working for Maude because of this ) .
Despite Florida 's status as a maid , Maude emphasizes to Florida that they are " equals , " and insists she enter and exit the Findlay house via the front door ( even though the back door is more convenient ) .
As portrayed by Esther Rolle , the character of Florida was so popular that , in 1974 , she became the star of her own series , entitled Good Times .
In the storyline of Maude , Florida 's husband Henry receives a promotion at his job , and she quits to be a full - time housewife .
While Maude took place in New York , the setting for Good Times was Chicago , with numerous other differences in Florida 's situation , such as her husband being called James Evans-
' Henry ' being the name of James 's long lost father .
After Florida 's departure in 1974 , Mrs. Nell Naugatuck ( played by Hermione Baddeley ) , an elderly ( and vulgar )
British woman who drinks excessively and lies compulsively , assumes the role of housekeeper .
Unlike Florida , who commuted to work , Mrs. Naugatuck is a live - in maid .
She meets and begins dating Bert Beasley ( an elderly security guard at a cemetery , played by J. Pat O'Malley ) in 1975 .
They marry in 1977 and move to Ireland to care for Bert 's mother .
Mrs. Naugatuck 's frequent sparring with Maude is , arguably , just as comedically popular as Florida 's sparring .
The difference in the two relationships was that Mrs. Naugatuck often seems to despise Maude Findlay , whereas Florida seems only periodically frustrated by her boss .
Lear said the last name ' Naugatuck ' was directly taken from the town of Naugatuck , Connecticut , which he found amusing .
Due to the popularity of the program , Baddeley even visited the town in the late 1970s and was given a warm , official ceremony at the town green .
Maude then hires Victoria Butterfield ( played by Marlene Warfield ) , a native of Saint Norman in the West Indies , whom Maude initially accuses of stealing her wallet .
Victoria remains until the end of the series in 1978 .
However , Warfield 's character was never as popular as her two predecessors , and she was never given a credit as a series regular .
TITLE SEQUENCE
Section::::Title sequence .
The opening title sequence begins with an aerial shot of New York City , including the Chrysler Building .
It then showcases a drive from the city to Maude 's house in Tuckahoe , where Maude answers her door , wearing a Bob Mackie dress and mid long vest , ostensibly to greet the viewing audience .
Although the sequence supposedly shows the trip in the then - present day ( 1970s ) , most of the cars in one part of the sequence appear to be from the 1950s .
The first travel shot was taken on the old West Side Elevated Highway , heading downtown ( south ) , which is the opposite direction from Tuckahoe .
If a driver on the highway was headed uptown , to the driver 's left would be abandoned piers on the Hudson River and New Jersey .
Like the shot on the Miller Highway , another in the title sequence takes the viewer over the George Washington Bridge .
In reality , this bridge connects New York City with New Jersey to the west , whereas Westchester County , where Maude lives , lies to the north of Manhattan .
The most obvious and direct route from Manhattan to Tuckahoe would be to drive through The Bronx .
The show 's theme song , "
And Then There 's Maude " , was written by Marilyn and Alan Bergman and Dave Grusin , and performed by Donny Hathaway .
SERIES HISTORY AND TOPICALITY
Section::::Series history and topicality .
The character of Maude Findlay was said to be loosely based on creator Norman Lear 's then - wife Frances .
She first appeared on two episodes of All in the Family as Edith Bunker 's cousin .
A " Cousin Maud , " with a similar role , had also appeared on an episode of Till Death
Us Do Part , the British series on which All in the Family had been based .
Maude represented everything Archie Bunker did not :
She was a liberal , a feminist , and upper - middle class , whereas Archie was conservative , sexist , and working class .
Maude 's political beliefs were closer to those of the series creators than Archie Bunker 's , but the series often lampooned Maude as a naive " limousine liberal " and did not show her beliefs and attitudes in an entirely complimentary light .
Just before the show 's premiere in September 1972 , TV Guide described the character of Maude as " a caricature of the knee - jerk liberal . " While the show was conceived as a comedy , scripts also incorporated much darker humor and drama .
Maude took Miltown , a mild tranquilizer , and also Valium ; she and her husband Walter began drinking in the evening .
Maude had an abortion in November 1972 , two months before the Roe v. Wade decision made abortion legal throughout the U.S. , and the episodes that dealt with the situation are probably the series ' most famous and most controversial .
Maude , at age 47 , was dismayed to find herself unexpectedly pregnant .
Her daughter Carol brought to her attention that abortion had become legal in the state of New York .
After some soul - searching ( and discussions with Walter , who agreed that raising a baby at their stage of life was not what they wanted to do ) , Maude decided at the end of the two - part episode that abortion was probably the best choice for their lives and their marriage .
Noticing the controversy around the storyline , CBS decided to rerun the episodes in August 1973 , and members of the country 's clergy reacted strongly to the decision .
39 stations pre - empted the episode .
The two - part episode was written by Susan Harris , who would work with Bea Arthur again later on The Golden Girls .
The producers and the writers of the show tackled other controversies .
In a story arc that opened the 1973–74 season , Walter came to grips with his alcoholism and subsequently had a nervous breakdown .
The beginning of the story arc had Maude , Walter , and Arthur enjoying a night of revelry .
However , Maude panicked when she awoke the following morning to find Arthur in her bed .
This alarmed her to the point that both of them swore off alcohol entirely .
Walter could not do it ( " Dean Martin gets a million dollars for his buzz " ) and became so frustrated during his attempts to stop that he struck Maude .
Afterward , he suffered a breakdown as a result of his alcoholism and guilt over the domestic violence incident .
The arc , which played out in two parts , was typically controversial for the show but gained praise for highlighting how social drinking can lead to alcoholism .
The first - season episode " The Grass Story " tackled the then - recent Rockefeller Drug Laws , as Maude and her well - meaning housewife friends try to get arrested in protest over a grocery boy 's tough conviction for marijuana possession .
The severity of the marijuana laws was contrasted with the characters ' own lax attitudes toward drinking and prescription pill abuse .
In season four , Maude had a session with an analyst , in which she revealed insecurities about her life and marriage and talked through memories from her childhood .
The episode was a solo performance by Beatrice Arthur .
During the fifth season , Walter suffered another nervous breakdown , this time even attempting suicide , when he saw his business go bankrupt .
The Nielsen ratings for Maude were high , in particular , during the first seasons of the program ( during the heyday of topical sitcoms , which its presence helped to create ) , when it was regularly one of the top - ten highest - rated American television programs in any given week .
In Great Britain , Maude was not shown nationally , although it was shown ( beginning in 1975 ) in the ITV regions of Westward , Border , Tyne Tees , Anglia , Yorkshire , Granada and Channel .
Satellite station
Sky One ran the series in the early / mid 1990s .
CANCELLATION Section::::Cancellation .
In the fifth season , Maude unexpectedly plunged from # 4 to # 31 in the Nielsen ratings as its lead - ins Rhoda and Phyllis began to struggle .
In 1978 , late in the sixth season , CBS revamped the series .
In the last three episodes of that year , the fictional governor of New York appointed Maude as a congresswoman from Tuckahoe , as a Democrat during the 1978 U.S. midterm elections ( she helped campaign for a congresswoman who unexpectedly died in her home ) .
With this change , Maude and husband Walter would move to Washington , D.C. , and the rest of the regular cast written out of the series .
In the story , the Harmons moved to Idaho , where Arthur accepted a job offer as a country doctor ( his " lifelong dream " ) , while Carol also got a new job offer and she and Phillip moved to Denver .
Those plans changed after the three episodes in the new format at the end of that season when Bea Arthur decided to leave the series and without its star , Maude was forced to end production .
Lear still liked the idea of a member of a minority group in Congress , and it evolved into the pilot Mr. Dugan , with John Amos replacing Arthur as the lead character .
Intended for a March 1979 premiere , negative backlash from a screening for African - American members of Congress resulted in CBS pulling the plug and not airing any of the three episodes produced .
Lear went back to work on the project and it was eventually reworked into Hanging In , with Bill Macy returning to play a former professional football player turned university president .
Premiering in the summer of 1979 , the show did not find an audience and ended shortly after it began .
EPISODES
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment released the first season of Maude on DVD in Region 1 on March 20 , 2007 .
Sony has since discontinued this release .
On August 27 , 2013 , Mill Creek Entertainment announced it had acquired the rights to various television series from the Sony Pictures library including Maude .
Mill Creek subsequently re - released the first season on DVD on February 3 , 2015 .
On December 2 , 2014 , Shout !
Factory announced it had acquired the rights to the series ; it subsequently released the complete series on DVD on March 17 , 2015 .
Among the bonus features , the set includes the two Second season episodes of All in the Family , which introduced Maude ( " Cousin Maude 's Visit " and " Maude " ) ; two previously unaired episodes of Maude ( " The Double Standard " and " Maude 's New Friends " ) ; the Syndicated Sales Presentation , hosted by Norman Lear ; as well as three featurettes called "
And Then There 's Maude : Television 's First Feminist " ;
" Everything but Hemorrhoids : Maude Speaks to America " ; and " Memories of Maude " with interviews by Adrienne Barbeau and Bill Macy , along with newly discovered interviews with the late Bea Arthur , the late Rue McClanahan and Maude director , the late Hal Cooper .
In 2015 , Shout ! began releasing individual season sets ; the second season was released on August 11 , 2015 , followed by the third season on November 10 , 2015 .
the fourth season on March 22 , 2016 , the fifth season on June 14 , 2016 and the sixth and final season on August 9 , 2016 . !
DVD Name !
Ep # !
Release Date AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
GOLDEN GLOBES * 1973 :
Best TV Show - Musical / Comedy ( Nominated ) * 1973 : Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy : Bea Arthur ( Nominated ) * 1974 :
Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy : Bea Arthur ( Nominated ) * 1975 : Best TV Show - Musical / Comedy ( Nominated ) * 1976 :
Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy :
Bea Arthur ( Nominated ) * 1976 :
Best Supporting Actress - Television :
Hermione Baddeley
For playing " Mrs. Nell Naugatuck " ( Won ) * 1977 :
Best Supporting Actress - Television : Adrienne Barbeau ( Nominated ) * 1978 : Best TV Actress - Musical / Comedy : Bea Arthur ( Nominated ) EMMY AWARDS * 1973 :
Outstanding Continued Performance by an Actress in a Leading Role in a Comedy Series - Bea Arthur For [ paying : " Maude Findlay " ( Nominated ) * 1973 :
Outstanding New Series - Norman Lear ( executive producer ) and Rod Parker ( producer )
( Nominated )
* 1973 :
Outstanding Comedy Series - Norman Lear ( executive producer ) and Rod Parker ( Nominated ) * 1974 : Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series - Bea Arthur For playing : " Maude Findlay " ( Nominated ) * 1976 :
Outstanding Writing in a Comedy Series - Jay Folb
For episode " The Analyst " ( Nominated ) * 1976 : Outstanding Directing in a Comedy Series - Hal Cooper For episode " The Analyst " ( Nominated ) * 1976 :
Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series - Bea Arthur For playing : " Maude Findlay " ( Nominated ) * 1977 :
Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series - Bea Arthur For playing : " Maude Findlay " ( Won ) * 1977 :
Outstanding Art Direction or Scenic Design for a Comedy Series - Chuck Murawski ( art director )
For episode " Walter 's Crisis " ( Nominated ) * 1978 : Outstanding Art Direction for a Comedy Series - Chuck Murawski ( art director )
For episode
" The Wake ( Nominated ) * 1978 : Outstanding Directing in a Comedy Series - Hal Cooper ( director ) For episode " Vivian 's Decision " ( Nominated ) * 1978 : Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series - Bea Arthur For playing : " Maude Findlay " ( Nominated ) SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
Maude aired on TV Land in 1999 for a brief time , including an introductory " Maude - a - thon " marathon .
Maude was later seen on Nick at Nite in the United States in 2001 .
Reruns of Maude are occasionally shown on Canwest 's digital specialty channel , DejaView in Canada .
In 2010 , Maude began reruns in Chicago , on WWME - CA 's Me - TV .
In 2011 , Maude began airing on Antenna TV , a new digital broadcast network , which has since run the entire six season cycle of the show .
In 2015 , reruns of Maude began airing on Logo TV during late night / early morning .
It also airs weeknights on FETV ( Family Entertainment Television ) .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
Maude was adapted in France as .
Maguy aired on Sundays at 19.30 from September 1985 to December 1994 on France 2 for 333 episodes .
Maude had previously been adapted in 1980 by ITV in the United Kingdom as Nobody 's Perfect .
Starring Elaine Stritch and Richard Griffiths , the show ran for two series with a total of 14 episodes .
Of the 14 episodes , Stritch herself adapted 13 original Maude scripts and Griffiths adapted one .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Information about Maude from the Museum of Broadcast Communications
* Information of Season 1 's release on DVD