AUTOMOTIVE ENGINEERING Automotive engineering , along with aerospace engineering and marine engineering , is a branch of vehicle engineering , incorporating elements of mechanical , electrical , electronic , software and safety engineering as applied to the design , manufacture and operation of motorcycles , automobiles and trucks and their respective engineering subsystems .
It also includes modification of vehicles .
Manufacturing domain deals with the creation and assembling the whole parts of automobiles is also included in it .
The automotive engineering field is research -intensive and involves direct application of mathematical models and formulas .
The study of automotive engineering is to design , develop , fabricate , and testing vehicles or vehicle components from the concept stage to production stage .
Production , development , and manufacturing are the three major functions in this field .
DISCIPLINES
AUTOMOBILE ENGINEERING
Section::::Disciplines .
Section::::Automobile Engineering .
Automobile Engineering is a branch study of engineering which teaches manufacturing , designing , mechanical mechanisms as well operations of automobiles .
It is an introduction to vehicle engineering which deals with motorcycles , cars , buses , trucks , etc .
It includes branch study of mechanical , electronic , software and safety elements .
Some of the engineering attributes and disciplines that are of importance to the automotive engineer and many of the other aspects are included in it :
Safety engineering :
Safety engineering is the assessment of various crash scenarios and their impact on the vehicle occupants .
These are tested against very stringent governmental regulations .
Some of these requirements include : seat belt and air bag functionality testing , front and side impact testing , and tests of rollover resistance .
Assessments are done with various methods and tools , including Computer crash simulation ( typically finite element analysis ) , crash test dummy , and partial system sled and full vehicle crashes .
Fuel economy / emissions :
Fuel economy is the measured fuel efficiency of the vehicle in miles per gallon or kilometers per liter .
Emissions testing includes the measurement of vehicle emissions , including hydrocarbons , nitrogen oxides ( NOx ) , carbon monoxide ( CO ) , carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) , and evaporative emissions .
NVH engineering ( noise , vibration , and harshness )
: NVH is the customer 's feedback ( both tactile [ felt ] and audible [ heard ] ) from the vehicle .
While sound can be interpreted as a rattle , squeal , or hot , a tactile response can be seat vibration or a buzz in the steering wheel .
This feedback is generated by components either rubbing , vibrating , or rotating .
NVH response can be classified in various ways :
powertrain NVH , road noise , wind noise , component noise , and squeak and rattle .
Note , there are both good and bad NVH qualities .
The NVH engineer works to either eliminate bad NVH or change the " bad NVH " to good ( i.e. , exhaust tones ) .
Vehicle Electronics : Automotive electronics is an increasingly important aspect of automotive engineering .
Modern vehicles employ dozens of electronic systems .
These systems are responsible for operational controls such as the throttle , brake and steering controls ; as well as many comfort and convenience systems such as the HVAC , infotainment , and lighting systems .
It would not be possible for automobiles to meet modern safety and fuel economy requirements without electronic controls .
Performance : Performance is a measurable and testable value of a vehicle 's ability to perform in various conditions .
Performance can be considered in a wide variety of tasks , but it 's generally associated with how quickly a car can accelerate ( e.g. standing start 1/4 mile elapsed time , 0–60 mph , etc . ) , its top speed , how short and quickly a car can come to a complete stop from a set speed ( e.g. 70 - 0 mph ) , how much g - force a car can generate without losing grip , recorded lap times , cornering speed , brake fade , etc .
Performance can also reflect the amount of control in inclement weather ( snow , ice , rain ) .
Shift quality : Shift quality is the driver 's perception of the vehicle to an automatic transmission shift event .
This is influenced by the powertrain ( engine , transmission ) , and the vehicle ( driveline , suspension , engine and powertrain mounts , etc . )
Shift feel is both a tactile ( felt ) and audible ( heard ) response of the vehicle .
Shift quality is experienced as various events : Transmission shifts are felt as an upshift at acceleration ( 1–2 ) , or a downshift maneuver in passing ( 4–2 ) .
Shift engagements of the vehicle are also evaluated , as in Park to Reverse , etc .
Durability / corrosion engineering : Durability and corrosion engineering is the evaluation testing of a vehicle for its useful life .
Tests include mileage accumulation , severe driving conditions , and corrosive salt baths .
Drivability :
Drivability is the vehicle 's response to general driving conditions .
Cold starts and stalls , RPM dips ,
idle response , launch hesitations and stumbles , and performance levels .
Cost :
The cost of a vehicle program is typically split into the effect on the variable cost of the vehicle , and the up - front tooling and fixed costs associated with developing the vehicle .
There are also costs associated with warranty reductions and marketing .
Program timing :
To some extent programs are timed with respect to the market , and also to the production schedules of the assembly plants .
Any new part in the design must support the development and manufacturing schedule of the model .
Assembly feasibility : It is easy to design a module that is hard to assemble , either resulting in damaged units or poor tolerances .
The skilled product development engineer works with the assembly / manufacturing engineers so that the resulting design is easy and cheap to make and assemble , as well as delivering appropriate functionality and appearance .
Quality management : Quality control is an important factor within the production process , as high quality is needed to meet customer requirements and to avoid expensive recall campaigns .
The complexity of components involved in the production process requires a combination of different tools and techniques for quality control .
Therefore , the International Automotive Task Force ( IATF ) , a group of the world 's leading manufacturers and trade organizations , developed the standard ISO / TS 16949 .
This standard defines the design , development , production , and when relevant , installation and service requirements .
Furthermore , it combines the principles of ISO 9001 with aspects of various regional and national automotive standards such as AVSQ ( Italy ) , EAQF ( France ) , VDA6 ( Germany ) and QS-9000 ( USA ) .
In order to further minimize risks related to product failures and liability claims of automotive electric and electronic systems , the quality discipline functional safety according to ISO / IEC 17025 is applied .
Since the 1950s , the comprehensive business approach total quality management , TQM , helps to continuously improve the production process of automotive products and components .
Some of the companies who have implemented TQM include Ford Motor Company , Motorola and Toyota Motor Company .
JOB FUNCTIONS DEVELOPMENT ENGINEER Section::::Job Functions .
Section::::Development Engineer .
A development engineer has the responsibility for coordinating delivery of the engineering attributes of a complete automobile ( bus , car , truck , van , SUV , motorcycle etc . )
as dictated by the automobile manufacturer , governmental regulations , and the customer who buys the product .
Much like the Systems Engineer , the development engineer is concerned with the interactions of all systems in the complete automobile .
While there are multiple components and systems in an automobile that have to function as designed , they must also work in harmony with the complete automobile .
As an example , the brake system 's main function is to provide braking functionality to the automobile .
Along with this , it must also provide an acceptable level of : pedal feel ( spongy , stiff ) , brake system " noise " ( squeal , shudder , etc . ) , and interaction with the ABS ( anti - lock braking system )
Another aspect of the development engineer 's job is a trade - off process required to deliver all of the automobile attributes at a certain acceptable level .
An example of this is the trade - off between engine performance and fuel economy .
While some customers are looking for maximum power from their engine , the automobile is still required to deliver an acceptable level of fuel economy .
From the engine 's perspective , these are opposing requirements .
Engine performance is looking for maximum displacement ( bigger , more power ) , while fuel economy is looking for a smaller displacement engine ( ex : 1.4 L vs. 5.4 L ) .
The engine size however , is not the only contributing factor to fuel economy and automobile performance .
Different values come into play .
Other attributes that involve trade - offs include : automobile weight , aerodynamic drag , transmission gearing , emission control devices , handling / roadholding , ride quality , and tires .
The development engineer is also responsible for organizing automobile level testing , validation , and certification .
Components and systems are designed and tested individually by the Product Engineer .
The final evaluation is to be conducted at the automobile level to evaluate system to system interactions .
As an example , the audio system ( radio ) needs to be evaluated at the automobile level .
Interaction with other electronic components can cause interference .
Heat dissipation of the system and ergonomic placement of the controls need to be evaluated .
Sound quality in all seating positions needs to be provided at acceptable levels .
MANUFACTURING ENGINEER Section::::Manufacturing Engineer .
Manufacturing Engineers are responsible for ensuring proper production of the automotive components or complete vehicles .
While the development engineers are responsible for the function of the vehicle , manufacturing engineers are responsible for the safe and effective production of the vehicle .
This group of engineers consist of Process Engineers ,
Logisti
In the automotive industry manufacturers are playing a larger role in the development stages of automotive components to ensure that the products are easy to manufacture .
Design for Manufacturability in the automotive world is crucial to make certain whichever design is developed in the Research and Development Stage of automotive design .
Once the design is established , the manufacturing engineers take over .
They design the machinery and tooling necessary to build the automotive components or vehicle and establish the methods of how to mass - produce the product .
It is the manufacturing engineers job to increase the efficiency of the automotive plant and to implement lean manufacturing techniques such as Six Sigma and Kaizen .
OTHER AUTOMOTIVE
ENGINEERING ROLES
Section::::Other automotive engineering roles .
Other automotive engineers include those listed below :
* Aerodynamics engineers will often give guidance to the styling studio so that the shapes they design are aerodynamic , as well as attractive .
* Body engineers will also let the studio know if it is feasible to make the panels for their designs .
* Change control engineers make sure that all of the design and manufacturing changes that occur are organized , managed and implemented ...
* NVH engineers perform sound and vibration testing to prevent loud cabin noises , detectable vibrations , and/or improve the sound quality while the vehicle is on the road .
THE MODERN AUTOMOTIVE PRODUCT ENGINEERING PROCESS Section::::The modern automotive product engineering process .
Studies indicate that a substantial part of the modern vehicle 's value comes from intelligent systems , and that these represent most of the current automotive innovation .
To facilitate this , the modern automotive engineering process has to handle an increased use of mechatronics .
Configuration and performance optimization , system integration , control , component , subsystem and system - level validation of the intelligent systems must become an intrinsic part of the standard vehicle engineering process , just as this is the case for the structural , vibro - acoustic and kinematic design .
This requires a vehicle development process that is typically highly simulation - driven .
THE V - APPROACH Section::::The V - approach .
One way to effectively deal with the inherent multi - physics and the control systems development that is involved when including intelligent systems , is to adopt the V - Model approach to systems development , as has been widely used in the automotive industry for twenty years or more .
In this V - approach , system - level requirements are propagated down the V via subsystems to component design , and the system performance is validated at increasing integration levels .
Engineering of mechatronic systems requires the application of two interconnected " V - cycles " : one focusing on the multi - physics system engineering ( like the mechanical and electrical components of an electrically powered steering system , including sensors and actuators ) ; and the other focuses on the controls engineering , the control logic , the software and realization of the control hardware and embedded software .
PREDICTIVE ENGINEERING ANALYTICS Section::::Predictive engineering analytics .
An alternative approach is called predictive engineering analytics , and takes the V - approach to the next level .
It lets design continue after product delivery .
That is important for development of built - in predictive functionality and for creating vehicles that can be optimized while being in use , even based on real use data .
This approach is based on the creation of a Digital Twin , a replica of the real product that remains in - sync .
Manufacturers try to achieve this by implementing a set of development tactics and tools .
Critical is a strong alignment of 1D systems simulation , 3D CAE and physical testing to reach more realism in the simulation process .
This is combined with intelligent reporting and data analytics for better insight in the vehicle use .
By supporting this with a strong data management structure that spans the entire product lifecycle , they bridge the gap between design , manufacturing and product use .
REFERENCES