FAMILY MATTERS Family Matters is an American sitcom series that originated on ABC from September 22 , 1989 to May 9 , 1997 , before moving to CBS from September 19 , 1997 to July 17 , 1998 .
A spin - off of Perfect Strangers , the series revolves around the Winslow family , a middle - class African American family living in Chicago , Illinois .
Midway through the first season , the show introduced the Winslows ' nerdy neighbor Steve Urkel ( Jaleel White ) , who quickly became its breakout character and eventually the show 's main character .
Having run for nine seasons , Family Matters became the second longest - running non - animated U.S. sitcom with a predominantly African American cast , behind only The Jeffersons ( 11 ) .
Having aired 215 episodes , Family Matters is ranked third , behind only Tyler Perry 's House of Payne ( 254 ) , and The Jeffersons ( 253 ) . HISTORY Section::::History .
The series originally focused on the character of police officer Carl Winslow and his family : wife Harriette , son Eddie , elder daughter Laura , and younger daughter Judy ( who appeared until the character was written out in season four ) .
In the pilot episode , " The Mama Who Came to Dinner , " the family had also opened their home to Carl 's street - wise mother , Estelle ( Rosetta LeNoire ) , usually known as " Mother Winslow . "
Prior to the start of the series , Harriette 's sister , Rachel Crawford and her infant son , Richie , had moved into the Winslow household after the death of Rachel 's husband .
The Winslows ' nerdy teenage next - door neighbor , Steve Urkel ( Jaleel White ) , was introduced midway through the first season in the episode " Laura 's First Date " and quickly became the focus of the show .
The popular sitcom was a mainstay of ABC 's TGIF lineup from 1989 until 1997 , at which point it became part of the CBS Block Party lineup for its final season .
Family Matters was produced by Bickley - Warren Productions ( 1991–1998 ) and Miller - Boyett Productions , in association with Lorimar Television ( 1989–1993 ) and later Warner Bros. Television ( 1993–1998 ) .
As the show progressed , episodes began to center increasingly on Steve Urkel , and other original characters also played by White , including Steve 's suave alter - ego , Stefan Urquelle , and his female cousin , Myrtle Urkel .
NETWORK CHANGE Section::::Network change .
In early 1997 , CBS picked up Family Matters and Step by Step in a $ 40 million deal to acquire the rights to the programs from ABC .
ABC then promised to pay Miller - Boyett Productions $ 1.5 million per episode for a ninth and tenth season of Family Matters .
However , tensions had risen between Miller - Boyett Productions and ABC 's corporate parent , The Walt Disney Company ( which had bought the network in 1995 as part of its merger with ABC 's then - parent Capital Cities / ABC , Inc. ) .
Miller - Boyett thought that it would not be a big player on ABC after the network 's recent purchase by Disney .
In turn , Miller - Boyett Productions agreed to a $ 40 million offer from CBS for a 22-episode season for both Family Matters and Step By Step .
CBS scheduled Family Matters along with Step By Step as a part of its new Friday lineup branded as the CBS Block Party and scheduled the family - oriented block against ABC 's TGIF lineup , where the two series originated .
Near the end of the ninth season , the cast was informed that a tenth and final season was planned , so scripts and plot synopses were written for the show .
Ultimately , due to poor ratings , CBS cancelled Family Matters ( as well as Step By Step ) after one season , along with the rest of the " Block Party " lineup .
CBS also pulled the show from its regular schedule in the winter .
As a result , the series finale was broadcast with little fanfare during " burn off " summer TV time in 1998 .
CAST Section::::Cast . !
rowspan="2"Actor !
rowspan="2"Character !
colspan="9"Seasons !
width="5 % " 1 ! !
width="5 % " 2 ! !
width="5 % " 3 ! !
width="5 % " 4 ! !
width="5 % " 5 ! !
width="5 % " 6 ! !
width="5 % " 7 ! !
width="5 % " 8 ! !
width="5 % " 9 Judyann ElderShawn HarrisonMichelle ThomasOrlando Brown EPISODES PRODUCTION NOTES Section::::Production notes .
Family Matters was created by William Bickley and Michael Warren ( who also wrote for , and were producers of parent series Perfect Strangers ) and developed by Thomas L. Miller and Robert L. Boyett ( who also served as producers on Perfect Strangers ) , all four also served as executive producers of the series .
The series was produced by Miller - Boyett Productions , in association with Lorimar Television who co - produced the show until 1993 , when Warner Bros. Television absorbed Lorimar ( a sister company under the co - ownership of Time Warner ) .
Starting with season three , the series was also produced by Bickley - Warren Productions .
The series was filmed in front of a live studio audience ; the Lorimar - produced episodes were shot at Lorimar Studios ( later Sony Pictures Studios ) in Culver City , California , while the Warner Bros.-produced episodes were filmed at Warner Bros. Studios in nearby Burbank .
Family Matters is the second sitcom from the 80 's and 90 's to take place in the city of Chicago , the first is FOX 's sitcom Married ... with Children .
THEME SONG AND OPENING CREDITS Section::::Theme song and
opening credits .
The show 's original theme was Louis Armstrong 's " What a Wonderful World " ; it was scrapped after the fifth episode of season one ( " Straight A 's " ) , though it was heard only in the pilot episode in syndicated reruns .
The second theme , " As Days Go By , " written by Jesse Frederick , Bennett Salvay and Scott Roeme and performed by Frederick , was the theme for the majority of the series until 1995 ; it was last used in the season seven episode " Fa La La La Laagghh , " the only episode during the final three seasons to feature it ( this was heard in season
one episodes in ABC Family and syndicated airings ) .
A longer version of " As Days Go By " was used during the first three seasons , though in syndicated reruns the short version is heard ( in ABC Family airings , the long theme was used for all of the episodes during the first three seasons ) .
The opening sequence begins with a shot of the Chicago Lakefront ( the John Hancock Center can be seen in the center ) , then a shot of the Winslow home .
In the opening titles , the main characters were shown around the Winslow home ( though in some shots featured some characters in other places as well , such as Rachel at the Rachel 's Place restaurant during the seasons 2–4 version or Waldo at the Vanderbilt High School gym during the seasons 4–6 version ) .
The opening credits during the first three seasons feature a scene showing the Winslow family riding their bicycles across the Irv Kupcinet Bridge over the Chicago River ; an allusion to parent series Perfect Strangers , which featured a scene of Balki and Larry ( played by Bronson Pinchot and Mark Linn - Baker ) , riding a tour boat underneath the same bridge , shot from the same angle , in its own opening credits from seasons 3–8 of that series .
Clips of episodes were shown after the bike scene and before the house shot in the season one through three versions .
The house shown at the beginning and the end of the opening credits ( as well as in establishing shots for scenes set at the Winslow house ) is located at 1516 West Wrightwood Avenue in Chicago ( ) .
The closing shot at the end of the credits with the Winslow family at the piano ( which also was shown during the closing credits when there was no tag scene ) , in which the shot pans outside the house and the camera zooms out showing neighborhoods and the northside Chicago skyline ( Wrigleyville ) in the background , was originally used in the pilot episode " The Mama Who Came to Dinner " ( though the scene featuring the Winslows before the pan was redone twice in seasons two and five ) .
The role of Richie as a baby was credited as being played by " Joseph [ and ] Julius Wright " in season 1 , with Julius ' name made to appear as Joseph 's middle name in the titles — the duo was credited this way because the show 's producers did not want audiences to know that Richie was then played by twins —
the role of Richie as a baby was played by two children because California state law regulates the number of work hours for a young child , therefore it is common for the role of one baby in a television or film production to be played by twins ( another Miller - Boyett series , Full House , credited Mary - Kate & Ashley Olsen in the same manner in its opening sequences until that show 's seventh season , in which the Olsen twins were credited separately ) .
In season five , after Hopkins left the show , White was given special billing in response to the popularity he earned as Steve Urkel .
Appearing last in the credits , he was credited as " and Jaleel White as Steve Urkel , " starting in the sixth season ( Hopkins was credited similarly as " and Telma Hopkins as Rachel " prior to season five ) .
For season seven onwards , the opening theme song and credit sequence were dropped entirely ( though it was brought back for one episode , "
Fa La La La Laagghh , " the eleventh episode of that same season ) ; for all other episodes during the last three seasons , the names of the show 's main cast members , as well as co - executive producers and executive producers were shown during each episode 's teaser scene .
In lieu of the full theme song , several episodes during season 7 featured the last few notes of " As Days Go By " as fade - out music at the end of the opening scene .
CROSSOVERS WITH OTHER TGIF SHOWS Section::::Crossovers with other TGIF shows .
Family Matters is set in the same " TV universe " as several other TV shows related to ABC 's TGIF or CBS ' Block Party : * Perfect Strangers — Before Family Matters , Harriette Winslow was originally the elevator operator at the Chicago Chronicle newspaper office in the third and fourth seasons of Perfect Strangers .
Family Matters was a spin - off series given to this character in 1989 .
In the second episode of Family Matters , Harriette was fired as elevator operator at the Chronicle , but was soon re - hired as " Chief of Security , " which explained her absence from dealings with the Perfect Strangers cast .
* Full House —
In the season 4 Full House episode " Stephanie Gets Framed , " Urkel helps Stephanie Tanner ( Jodie Sweetin ) deal with her anxiety after she finds out she has to wear eyeglasses because her vision is fading .
*
Boy Meets World —
In the episode " " Urkel sent a chain letter to his friend Cory Matthews ( Ben Savage ) , who lived in Philadelphia .
The two never actually appeared together on either show .
In an episode of Boy Meets World , Cory says he received a chain letter from his friend Steve .
( In the spin - off Girl Meets World , VelJohnson made a cameo appearance as " James , " an NYPD officer . )
* Step by Step — In the original ABC broadcast , the ending gag of Family Matters ' third season episode " " is crossed over with the opening of the second episode of Step By Step , " .
" Urkel 's jet - propelled flight pack causes him to fly through the Winslows ' roof as one show ends and crash - land in Port Washington , Wisconsin , where the Lambert - Foster family is enjoying a barbecue as the other show opens .
Urkel goes on to help his science - fair pen pal , Mark Foster ( Christopher Castile ) and lifts
Alicia " Al " Lambert 's ( Christine Lakin ) spirits after her potential date dumps her just before a school dance .
He reprises his " Do the Urkel " dance in the scene where Al gives the guy who dumped her his comeuppance .
Urkel also makes a brief cameo in the 1997 episode " , " snapping a clapperboard on the set of the movie that Al was cast in over her two sisters .
* Meego — In this short - lived series , Steve makes a non - speaking cameo appearance in the second episode " Love and Money " where he angrily retrieves a television set stolen by Meego .
He then appears in the third episode " The Truth About Cats and Dogs " helping out at a model car derby competition .
SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
In September 1993 , Warner Bros. Domestic Television Distribution began distributing Family Matters for broadcast in off - network syndication ; most television stations stopped carrying the show by around 2002 , though some stations in larger markets such as WTOG in Tampa , Florida continued to air Family Matters until as recently as 2005 and WPIX as 2007 .
In 1995 , reruns of the series began airing on TBS Superstation , where it ran until 2003 .
From 1997 to 2003 , reruns of the series aired on WGN America .
In 2003 , ABC Family picked up the series and aired it for five years until February 29 , 2008 .
From 2004 to 2006 , UPN aired the show for 2 years .
BET aired reruns briefly in December 2009 and began airing the series on a regular basis on March 1 , 2013 .
MTV2 also began airing reruns on September 7 , 2013 .
The show aired on Nick at Nite from June 29 , 2008 to December 31 , 2012 .
ABC Family and Nick at Nite airings cut the tag scenes at the end of all episodes , despite the fact that many episodes during the series have tag scenes during the closing credits .
In 2015 , the series now airs on a Viacom owned cable network BET Her .
In Canada , the series also aired on CTV and CBC for reruns .
On September 29 , 2017 , Family Matters became available for streaming on Hulu along with fellow Warner Bros. TV productions Full House , Hangin ' with Mr. Cooper , Perfect Strangers and Step by Step in addition to Disney - ABC TV productions Boy Meets World , Dinosaurs and Home Improvement .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Warner Home Video has released the first four seasons of Family Matters on DVD in Region 1 while the remaining five seasons were released by the Warner Archive Collection .
On February 4 , 2014 , Warner Home Video released season 4 on DVD , but consumers complained when it was found that the season 4 set contained syndication edits rather than the original broadcast masters .
Warner Bros. responded to the complaints , offered a replacement program to receive corrected discs and reissuing the set with corrected broadcast copies on April 4 .
All episodes are the original broadcast form , except for the episode " Number One With a Bullet " , disc 1 , episode 6 .
The entire series is also available for digital download on Amazon.com and the iTunes Store , all but season 6 remastered in both SD and HD . !
DVD Name !
Ep # !
Release Date February 4 , 2014 February 16 , 2016
The Complete 6th Season align="center"25 April 12 , 2016
The Complete 7th Season align="center"24 July 26 , 2016
The Complete 8th Season align="center"24 September 20 , 2016
The Complete 9th Season align="center"22 November 8 , 2016 AWARDS , NOMINATIONS AND OTHER RECEPTION
WatchMojo.com rated Family Matters as the # 8 African American TV show .
Steve Urkel was rated as the # 2 most annoying TV character and as the # 4 TV neighbor .
His catchphrase Did I do that ?
was rated as the # 10 sitcom catchphrase .
APPEARANCES IN OTHER MEDIA
* A 2014 episode of the Comedy Central sketch comedy program Key & Peele featured a sketch about how the Steve Urkel character took over Family Matters , and how that change affected others involved in show .
*
The website Funny or Die featured a 2014 April Fool 's skit in which Reginald VelJohnson tried to crowdfund a Family Matters movie , which would cross over with the film series Taken .
* Steve Urkel will appear in Scooby - Doo and Guess
Who ? .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Family Matters at Nick at Nite