STEEL - TOE BOOT
A steel - toe boot ( also known as a safety boot , steel - capped boot or safety shoe ) is a durable boot or shoe that has a protective reinforcement in the toe which protects the foot from falling objects or compression , usually combined with a mid sole plate to protect against punctures from below .
Although traditionally made of steel , the reinforcement can also be made of a composite material , a plastic such as thermoplastic polyurethane ( TPU ) or even aluminum .
Steel - toe boots are important in the construction industry and in many industrial settings .
Occupational safety and health legislation or insurance requirements may require the use of such boots in some settings , and may mandate certification of such boots and the display of such certification directly on the boots .
The markings on the boot label will indicate the national or international standards that the boot was intended to meet , and identify the level of protection offered for impact , penetration , electric shock , and chemical hazards .
Safety shoes are effective in keeping the feet of industrial workers safe from sharp and heavy objects while working in factories .
Footwear for use in chemical processing or semiconductor manufacturing may also be rated to dissipate static electricity while still protecting the wearer from electric shock .
Safety footwear now comes in many styles , including sneakers and clogs .
Some are quite formal , for supervising engineers who must visit sites where protective footwear is mandatory .
Some brands of steel - toe footwear have become fashionable within subcultures such as skinhead , punk , and rivethead .
While brands that were previously renowned within the fashion industry have also diversified into the safety footwear market , industrial brands like Caterpillar , Rock Fall and JCB have also issued licenses to produce safety footwear .
SAFETY CRITERIA Section::::Safety criteria .
Some safety shoes have symbols on the outside , to indicate the protection that the shoe offers .
These include : * Green Triangle indicates that it is a class 1 toe cap with puncture - resistant sole * Yellow Triangle indicates that it is a class 2 toe cap with puncture - resistant sole .
* White Square ( with Ω ) indicates electrical protection .
* Yellow Square ( with SD ) indicates anti - static protection .
* Red Square ( with C ) indicates electrically conductive .
* Fir Tree indicates protection against chain - saws .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , the applicable standard for protective footwear is ASTM standards F2412 - 05 , Standard Test Methods for Foot Protection and ASTM F2413 - 05 , Standard Specification for Performance Requirements for Foot Protection .
OSHA requires compliance of ANSI Z41.1 - 1991 , " American National Standard for Personal Protection - Protective Footwear , " if purchased after July 5 , 1994 , or ANSI standard " USA Standard for Men 's Safety - Toe Footwear , " Z41.1 - 1967 .
if purchased before .
California has updated its regulations with the new 2005 ASTM standards F 2412 - 05 , Standard Test Methods for Foot Protection and ASTM
F 2413 - 05 , Standard Specification for Performance Requirements for Foot Protection .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
The Canadian Standards Association ( CSA ) have been using symbols on safety footwear for more than 30 years .
, published in CSA standard Z195 .
Each shape & color represents specific safety criteria for all safety footwear and apparel purchased in Canada .
* Green triangle with CSA symbol
- Sole puncture protection with a Grade 1 protective toe .
( Heavy work environment : construction ; machine shops ; where sharp objects are present )
* Yellow triangle with registered symbol - Sole puncture protection with a Grade 2 protective toe .
( Light industrial work environments )
* White rectangle with orange Greek letter omega and CSA symbol - Soles that provide electric shock resistance , with Ω ( capital omega ) being the symbol for ohms of electrical resistance .
( Any industrial environment where live electrical conductors can occur ) * Yellow rectangle with green letters " SD " , a grounding symbol and CSA symbol - Capable of dissipating an electrostatic charge in a controlled manner .
( Any industrial environment where a static discharge can be a hazard for workers or equipment )
* Red rectangle with a black letter C , grounding symbol and CSA symbol - Soles that are electrically conductive ( Any industrial environment where low - power electrical charges can be a hazard for workers or equipment ) * White label with green fir tree symbol and CSA symbol - Provides protection when using chainsaws .
( Forestry workers & others required to use a chainsaw )
* Blue Square with CSA symbol - Grade 1 protective toe only .
( For all other environments not listed above )
Generally , a safety shoe is a shoe that follows at least one of five criteria .
The criteria that a safety shoe adheres to can be found by looking for the CSA ( Canadian Standards Association ) alphanumerical code found inside the shoe .
This code is made up of a combination of 5 different symbols : * 1 , 2 or 0 ;
* P or 0 ; * M or 0 ; * E , S or C ;
* X or 0 .
*
The first code indicates if the shoe has a steel - toe cap ( a metal shell embedded on top of the toes part of the shoe ) .
" 0 " means there is none .
" 1 " means that there is , and it resists an impact of 125 joules ( 22.7 kg object falling from 56 cm above ) .
" 2 " means that it resists an impact of 90 joules .
*
* The second code indicates if the shoe has soles that protect the arches of the feet from punctures .
" P " means it does .
" O " means it does n't .
*
* The third code indicates if the shoe has a metatarsus protection against shocks and collisions .
" M " means it does .
" O " does n't .
*
* The fourth code indicates the shoe 's electrical properties .
" E " means it resists electrical shocks .
" S " means it disperses static electrical .
" C " means it conducts electricity .
*
* This last code is found only on shoes that protect the foot from chainsaws , i.e. chainsaw boots .
"
X " it does , " O " does not .
* EUROPE Section::::Europe .
The International Organization for Standardization provides the European standard for Safety footwear .
The current one is ISO 20345:2011 - previously ISO 20345:2004 .
The codes applicable to European safety footwear are : !
Protected Area !
Type of Protection !
Code
There is also EN ISO 20346:2004 for protective footwear ( must comply to basic safety requirements but toe cap impact resistance requirement is lower - 100 Joules ) & EN ISO 20347:2004 for Occupational Footwear ( must comply to basic safety requirements with anti static or slip resistant properties .
This standard does not require a protective toe cap )
ASIA Section::::Asia .
Safety shoe standards in Asia are :
* China : GB 21148 & An1 , An2 , An3 , An4 , An5
* Indonesia : SNI 0111:2009
* Japan : JIS T8101 * Malaysia : SIRIM MA 1598:1998
* Singapore : SS 513 - 1:2005
* India : IS 15298-I : 2011 test methods , IS 15298 – II for safety footwear , IS 15298-III Protective footwear , IS 15298-IV Occupational Footwear
* Thailand : TIS 523 - 2011 AUSTRALIA /
NEW ZEALAND
* Australia :
AS / NZS 2210.3:2009 USE AS
A WEAPON Section::::Use as a weapon .
Steel - toe boots have been used in assaults , such as the attack on Josie Lou Ratley , a Florida teenager .
Nightclubs and other entertainment venues frequently include a " no steel toecaps " rule as part of their dress code to mitigate the possibility of serious injury to other patrons if the wearer becomes violent .
Use of bovver boots in football hooliganism was countered by warnings to fans that they would have to remove such boots in order to attend football matches .
SEE ALSO
* Chainsaw safety clothing * Personal protective equipment
*
Combat boot
*
Rigger boot * Safety engineering REFERENCES