EROGENOUS ZONE
An erogenous zone ( from Greek , érōs " love " and English -genous " producing " from Greek , -genḗs " born " ) is an area of the human body that has heightened sensitivity , the stimulation of which may generate a sexual response , such as relaxation , the production of sexual fantasies , sexual arousal and orgasm .
Erogenous zones are located all over the human body , but the sensitivity of each varies , and depends on concentrations of nerve endings that can provide pleasurable sensations when stimulated .
The touching of another person 's erogenous zone is regarded as an act of physical intimacy .
Whether a person finds stimulation in these areas to be pleasurable or objectionable depends on a range of factors , including their level of arousal , the circumstances in which it takes place , cultural context , nature of the relationship between persons involved , and personal history .
Erogenous zones may be classified by the type of sexual response that they generate .
Many people are gently aroused when their eyelids , eyebrows , temples , shoulders , hands , arms and hair are subtly touched .
Gently touching or stroking of these zones stimulates a partner during foreplay and increases the arousal level .
Also , the gentle massage or stroke of the abdominal area along with kissing or simply touching the navel can be a type of stimulation .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Erogenous zones are either nonspecific or specific .
NONSPECIFIC ZONES Section::::Nonspecific zones .
In these zones , the skin is similar to normal - haired skin and has the normal high density of nerves and hair follicles .
These areas include the sides and back of the neck , the inner arms , the axillae ( armpits ) and sides of the thorax ( chest ) .
An exaggerated tickle and anticipatory response are responsible for the heightened sensual response .
SPECIFIC ZONES Section::::Specific zones .
Specific zones are associated with sexual response , and include the lips and nipples in addition to areas of the genitals , notably the foreskin and corona of the glans penis , clitoris and rest of the vulva , and perianal skin .
The neuroanatomy and neurophysiology of erogenous zones is partly unknown .
These zones are apparently mucocutaneous skin .
The rete ridges of the epithelium are well - formed and more of the nerves are close to the external surface of the skin than in normal - haired skin .
These zones seem to have a high density of innervation , an efficiency of wound healing , and a capacity to stimulate generalized cerebral arousal .
Moreover , a connection with the reward system seems also necessary .
GENITALS MALE Section::::Genitals . Section::::Male .
Males can be aroused by stimulation to the sides of the glans and penis , upper side of the glans , the foreskin , the front side of the scrotum , the skin between the scrotum and anus perineum , and around the anus .
The prostate gland may be stimulated from inside the rectum , such as by anal sex , or by applying pressure on the base of the perineum near the anus .
( Last updated / reviewed on 2008 - 03 - 28 )
Men who report the sensation of prostate stimulation often give descriptions similar to females ' accounts of G - spot stimulation .
The foreskin , which carries the highly innervated ridged band and lower frenular delta , has mucocutaneous end - organs extending from the distal margin to the point where hairy skin starts .
The thin dermis and minimal subcutaneous tissue results in closely set nerve networks .
Vater - Pacini corpuscles are present .
The mucocutaneous end - organs are formed after birth , with few in newborn infants and many well - organized endings in adults .
Cold and Taylor state in 1999 that the foreskin is primary erogenous tissue .
Alanis and Lucidi in 2004 describe this as speculative and unproven .
FEMALE Section::::Female .
Parts of the vulva , especially the clitoris , are erogenous zones .
While the vagina is not especially sensitive as a whole , its lower third ( the area close to the entrance ) has concentrations of the nerve endings that can provide pleasurable sensations during sexual activity when stimulated ; this is also called the anterior wall of the vagina or the outer one - third of the vagina , and it contains the majority of the vaginal nerve endings , making it more sensitive to touch than the inner two - thirds of the vaginal barrel .
Within the anterior wall of the vagina , there is a patch of ribbed rough tissue which has a texture that is sometimes described as similar to the palate ( the roof of a mouth ) or a raspberry , and may feel spongy when a woman is sexually aroused .
This is the urethral sponge , which may also be the location of the G - spot — a structure described as an area of the vagina that some women report is an erogenous zone which , when stimulated , can lead to sexual arousal , orgasms and female ejaculation .
The existence of the G - spot and whether or not it is a distinct structure is debated among researchers , as reports of its location vary from woman to woman , it appears to be nonexistent in some women , and scientists commonly believe that it is an extension of the clitoris .
HEAD MOUTH Section::::Head .
Section::::Mouth .
The lips and tongue are sensitive and can be stimulated by kissing and licking .
Biting at the lip can also provide stimulus .
NECK
Section::::Neck .
The neck , clavicle area and the back of the neck are very sensitive in both males and females , which can be stimulated by licking , kissing or light caressing .
Some people also like being bitten gently in these areas , often to the point that a " hickey " , or " love - bite " is formed .
EARS Section::::Ears .
Some people find whispering or breathing softly in the ear to be pleasurable and relaxing , as well as licking , biting , caressing and/or kissing it
especially the area of and behind the earlobe .
TORSO CHEST Section::::Torso .
Section::::Chest .
The areola and nipple contain Golgi - Mazzoni , Vater - Pacini and genital corpuscles .
No Meissner 's corpuscles and few organized nerve endings are present .
There are concentrations of nerve tissue in the area of ducts and masses of smooth muscle .
The hair surrounding the areola adds additional sensory tissue .
The mass of smooth muscle and glandular - duct tissue in the nipple and areola block the development of normal dermal nerve networks which are present in other erogenous regions and the development of special end organs .
The entire breast has a network of nerve endings , and it has the same number of nerve endings no matter how large the breast is , so that larger breasts may need more stimulation than smaller ones .
Intense nipple stimulation may result in a surge in the production of oxytocin and prolactin which could have a significant effect on the individual 's genitals , even to the point that some people of both sexes can achieve orgasm through nipple stimulation alone .
Having the chest , breasts and nipples stimulated manually ( hands ) , digitally ( fingers , toes ) and/or orally ( mouth , lips , teeth , tongue ) is a pleasurable experience for many people of both sexes .
ABDOMEN AND NAVEL Section::::Abdomen and navel .
Many people find stimulation ( kissing , biting , scratching , tickling , caressing ) of the abdomen to be pleasurable , especially close to the pubic region .
It can cause strong arousal in men and women , in some even stronger than stimulation of the genitals .
The navel is one of the many erogenous zones that has heightened sensitivity .
In a 1982 study of eroticism in dress entitled " Skin to Skin " , Prudence Glynn claimed that the waist symbolized virginity and that it was the first place that a man would touch a woman " when indicating more than a formal courtesy " .
The navel and the region below when touched by the finger or the tip of the tongue result in the production of erotic sensations .
Madonna has told in an interview to the SPIN magazine ( May 1985 issue ) , " When I stick my finger in my belly button , I feel a nerve in the center of my body shoot up my spine . "
SACRUM Section::::Sacrum .
The sacrum , the triangular bone located near the base of the spine , is also an erogenous zone .
ARMS Section::::Arms .
The skin of the arms , and specifically the softer skin of the inner arms and across the creased mid - arm bend covering the ventral side of the elbow , are highly sensitive to manual or oral stimulation .
Caressing with fingers or tongue , more vigorous kneading , and butterfly kissing can initiate arousal and , in some cases , induce clitoral / vaginal orgasm or penile ejaculation without direct contact with the latter areas .
The mid - arm bend is especially sensitive due to the thinner skin found there , which makes nerve endings more accessible .
Arm sensitivity may be reduced or concentrated to a more narrow range by excessive muscularity or obesity on the one hand , or transformed to uncomfortable tenderness by excessive thinness on the other .
ARMPITS Section::::Armpits .
Some consider the armpits to be an erogenous zone , despite the similarity of the axillae ( armpits ) to normal - haired skin in both the density of nerves and hair follicles .
Exaggerated or anticipated digital ( fingers , toes ) or oral ( mouth , lips , tongue ) stimulation is believed to be responsible for the heightened sensual response .
If pheromones exist for humans , they would likely be secreted by a mixture of liquid from the apocrine glands with other organic compounds in the body .
George Preti , an organic chemist at the Monell Chemical Senses Center in Philadelphia and Winnefred Cutler of the University of Pennsylvania 's psychology department , discovered that women with irregular menstrual cycles became regular when exposed to male underarm extracts .
They hypothesized that the only explanation was that underarms contain pheromones , as there was no other explanation for the effects , which mirrored how pheromones affect other mammals .
FINGERS
Section::::Fingers .
The fingertips have many nerves and are responsive to very light touches , like the brushing of a tongue , light fingernail scratching or teeth stroking .
The sides of the fingers are somewhat less sensitive and more ticklish .
Both light and firmer touches work well at the junction of the fingers .
Human fingertips are the second - most sensitive parts of the body , after the tongue .
LEGS Section::::Legs .
The thighs can be sensitive to touch .
An exaggerated tickle on the back of the legs and knees can also be sensitive for some .
FEET AND TOES Section::::Feet and toes .
Because of the concentration of nerve endings in the sole and digits of the human foot — and possibly due to the close proximity between the area of the brain dealing with tactile sensations from the feet and the area dealing with sensations from the genitals — the sensations produced by both the licking of the feet and sucking of toes can be pleasurable to some people .
Similarly , massaging the sole of the foot can also produce stimulation .
Many people are extremely ticklish in the foot area , especially on the soles .
SEE ALSO
* Neuroanatomy of intimacy
* Foreplay * Human sexuality
* Intimate parts * Partialism REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS