OLYMPIC MEDAL
An Olympic medal is awarded to successful competitors at one of the Olympic Games .
There are three classes of medal : gold , awarded to the winner ; silver , awarded to the 1st runner - up ; and bronze , awarded to the second runner - up .
The granting of awards is laid out in detail in the Olympic protocols .
Medal designs have varied considerably since the first Olympic Games in 1896 , particularly in size and weight .
A standard obverse ( front ) design of the medals for the Summer Olympic Games began in 1928 and remained for many years , until its replacement at the 2004 Games as the result of controversy surrounding the use of the Roman Colosseum rather than a building representing the Games ' Greek roots .
The medals of the Winter Olympic Games never had a common design , but regularly feature snowflakes and the event where the medal has been won .
In addition to generally supporting their Olympic athletes , some countries provide sums of money and gifts to medal winners , depending on the classes and number of medals won .
Total medals won are used to rank competitor nations in medal tables , these may be compiled for a specific discipline , for a particular Games , or over all time .
These totals always total event placements rather than actual medals — a victory in a team event ( such as relay race ) equates to a single gold for such rankings even though each team member would receive a physical medal .
INTRODUCTION AND EARLY HISTORY Section::::Introduction and early history .
The olive wreath was the prize for the winner at the Ancient Olympic Games .
It was an olive branch , off the wild - olive tree that grew at Olympia , intertwined to form a circle or a horse - shoe .
According to Pausanias it was introduced by Heracles as a prize for the winner of the running race to honour Zeus .
When the modern Olympic Games began in 1896 medals started to be given to successful olympian competitors .
However , gold medals were not awarded at the inaugural Olympics in 1896 in Athens , Greece .
The winners were instead given a silver medal and an olive branch , while runners - up received a laurel branch and a copper or bronze medal .
In 1900 , most winners received cups or trophies instead of medals .
The custom of the sequence of gold , silver , and bronze for the first three places dates from the 1904 Summer Olympics in St. Louis , Missouri in the United States .
The International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) has retroactively assigned gold , silver and bronze medals to the three best placed athletes in each event of the 1896 and 1900 Games .
If there is a tie for any of the top three places all competitors are entitled to receive the appropriate medal according to IOC rules .
Some combat sports ( such as boxing , judo , taekwondo and wrestling ) award two bronze medals per competition , resulting in , overall , more bronze medals being awarded than the other colours .
Medals are not the only awards given to competitors ; every athlete placed first to eighth receives an Olympic diploma .
Also , at the main host stadium , the names of all medal winners are written onto a wall .
Finally , as noted below , all athletes receive a participation medal and diploma .
PRODUCTION AND DESIGN Section::::Production and design .
The IOC dictates the physical properties of the medals and has the final decision about the finished design .
Specifications for the medals are developed along with the National Olympic Committee ( NOC ) hosting the Games , though the IOC has brought in some set rules :
* Recipients : The top three competitors receive medals
* Shape :
Usually circular , featuring an attachment for a chain or ribbon
* Diameter : A minimum of 60 mm
* Thickness : A minimum of 3 mm
* Material :
* First place ( the Gold medal ) : It is composed of silver of at least .925 grade , plated with 6 grams of gold .
* Second place ( the Silver medal ) : .925 silver .
* Third place ( the Bronze medal ) : It is 97.0 % copper with 0.5 % tin and 2.5 % zinc ; the metal value was about US$ 3 in 2010 .
* Event details : The sport for which the medal has been awarded should be written on the medal
The first Olympic medals in 1896 were designed by French sculptor Jules - Clément Chaplain and depicted Zeus holding Nike , the Greek goddess of victory , on the obverse and the Acropolis on the reverse .
They were made by the Paris Mint , which also made the medals for the 1900 Olympic Games , hosted by Paris .
This started the tradition of giving the responsibility of minting the medals to the host city .
For the next few Olympiads the host city also chose the medal design .
Until 1912 the gold medals were made of solid gold .
TRIONFO Section::::Trionfo .
In 1923 the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) launched a competition for sculptors to design the medals for the Summer Olympic Games .
Giuseppe Cassioli 's Trionfo design was chosen as the winner in 1928 .
The obverse brought back Nike but this time as the main focus , holding a winner 's crown and palm with a depiction of the Colosseum in the background .
In the top right section of the medal a space was left for the name of the Olympic host and the Games numeral .
The reverse features a crowd of people carrying a triumphant athlete .
His winning design was first presented at the 1928 Summer Olympics in Amsterdam .
The competition saw this design used for 40 years until the 1972 Summer Olympics in Munich became the first Games with a different design for the reverse side of the medal .
Cassioli 's design continued to inspire the obverse of the medal for many more years , though recreated each time , with the Olympic host and numeral updated .
The obverse remained true to the Trionfo design until the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona , Spain , where the IOC allowed an updated version to be created .
For the next few events they mandated the use of the Nike motif but allowed other aspects to change .
The trend ended in 2004 due to the negative publicity in reaction to the design of medal for the 2000 Summer Olympics in Sydney .
Wojciech Pietranik , the designer of the medal , along with the organisers of the Games were criticised by the Greek press for using the Roman Colosseum rather than the Greek Parthenon .
Pietranik 's original design had featured the Sydney Opera House on the obverse but the IOC concluded that it should be replaced by the Colosseum and a chariot rider .
He made the changes and , despite the criticism , the Sydney Organising Committee for the Olympic Games decided to continue with the design as it was , noting that there was insufficient time to complete another version and that it would be too costly .
The error had remained for 76 years until a new style depicting the Panathinaiko Stadium was introduced at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens .
This new obverse design is currently in use since than .
CUSTOM
REVERSE
DESIGNS
Section::::Custom reverse designs .
The German Olympic Committee , Nationales Olympisches Komitee für Deutschland , were the first Summer Games organisers to elect to change the reverse of the medal .
The 1972 design was created by Gerhard Marcks , an artist from the Bauhaus , and features mythological twins Castor and Pollux .
Since then the Organising Committee of the host city has been given the freedom of the design of the reverse , with the IOC giving final approval .
COMPARISON BETWEEN SUMMER AND WINTER Section::::Comparison between Summer and Winter .
The IOC has the final decision on the specifications of each design for all Olympic medals , including the Summer Games , Winter Games , and Paralympic Games .
There has been a greater variety of design for the Winter Games ; unlike with the Summer Games , the IOC never mandated one particular design .
The medal at the inaugural 1924 Winter Olympics in Chamonix , France did not even feature the Olympic rings .
Nike was featured on the medals of the 1932 and 1936 Games but has only appeared on one medal design since then .
One regular motif is the use of the snowflake , while laurel leaves and crowns appear on several designs .
The Olympic motto Citius , Altius , Fortius features on four Winter Games medals but does not appear on any Summer Games medal .
For three events in a row , hosts of the Winter Games included different materials in the medals : glass ( 1992 ) , sparagmite ( 1994 ) , and lacquer ( 1998 ) .
It was not until the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China that a Summer Olympic host chose to use something different , in this case jade .
While every Summer Olympic medal except for the 1900 Games has been circular , the shapes of the Winter Games have been considerably more varied .
The Winter Games medals are also generally larger , thicker , and heavier than those for the Summer Games .
INDIVIDUAL DESIGN
DETAILS
SUMMER
OLYMPIC MEDAL DESIGNS
Section::::Individual design details .
Section::::Summer Olympic medal designs .
Details about the medals from each of the Summer Olympic Games : !
scope="col"Games !
scope="col"Host ! scope="col " class="unsortable"Details !
scope="col"Designer(s ) !
scope="col"Mint !
scope="col"Diameter(mm ) !
scope="col"Thickness(mm ) !
scope="col"Weight(g ) !
scope="col"image WINTER OLYMPIC MEDAL
DESIGNS
Section::::Winter Olympic medal designs .
Details about the medals from each of the Winter Olympic Games : !
scope="col"Games !
scope="col"Host ! scope="col " class="unsortable"Details !
scope="col"Designer(s ) !
scope="col"Mint !
scope="col"Diameter(mm ) !
scope="col"Thickness(mm ) !
scope="col"Weight(g ) !
Image PARTICIPATION MEDALS Section::::Participation medals .
Since the beginning of the modern Olympics the athletes and their support staffs , event officials , and certain volunteers involved in planning and managing the games have received commemorative medals and diplomas .
Like the winners ' medals , these are changed for each Olympiad , with different ones issued for the summer and winter games .
GALLERY PRESENTATION Section::::Presentation .
The presentation of the medals and awards changed significantly until the 1932 Summer Olympics in Los Angeles brought in what has now become standard .
Before 1932 all the medals were awarded at the closing ceremony , with the athletes wearing evening dress for the first few Games .
Originally the presenting dignitary was stationary while the athletes filed past to receive their medals .
The victory podium was introduced upon the personal instruction in 1931 of Henri de Baillet - Latour , who had seen one used at the 1930 British Empire Games .
The winner is in the middle at a higher elevation , with the silver medallist to the right and the bronze to the left .
At the 1932 Winter Olympics , medals were awarded in the closing ceremony , with athletes for each event in turn mounting the first - ever podium .
At the Summer Olympics , competitors in the Coliseum received their medals immediately after each event for the first time ; competitors at other venues came to the Coliseum next day to receive their medals .
Later Games have had a victory podium at each competition venue .
The 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome , Italy were the first in which the medals were placed around the neck of the athletes .
The medals hung from a chain of laurel leaves , while they are now hung from a coloured ribbon .
When Athens hosted the 2004 Summer Olympics the competitors on the podium also received an olive wreath crown .
In the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro , each medalist received a wooden statuette of the Olympic logo .
SEE ALSO
* Summer Olympic coins
* Winter Olympic coins * Lists of Olympic medalists * James Brendan Connolly , recipient of the first winner 's medal * Pierre de Coubertin medal , a special medal awarded by the International Olympic Committee for sportsmanship or exceptional service to the Olympic movement
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS