ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY An echocardiogram , often referred to as a cardiac echo or simply an echo , is a sonogram of the heart .
( It is not abbreviated as ECG , because that is an abbreviation for an electrocardiogram . )
Echocardiography uses standard two - dimensional , three - dimensional , and Doppler ultrasound to create images of the heart .
Echocardiography has become routinely used in the diagnosis , management , and follow - up of patients with any suspected or known heart diseases .
It is one of the most widely used diagnostic tests in cardiology .
It can provide a wealth of helpful information , including the size and shape of the heart ( internal chamber size quantification ) , pumping capacity , and the location and extent of any tissue damage .
An echocardiogram can also give physicians other estimates of heart function , such as a calculation of the cardiac output , ejection fraction , and diastolic function ( how well the heart relaxes ) .
Echocardiography can help detect cardiomyopathies , such as hypertrophic cardiomyopathy , dilated cardiomyopathy , and many others .
The use of stress echocardiography may also help determine whether any chest pain or associated symptoms are related to heart disease .
The biggest advantage to echocardiography is that it is not invasive ( does not involve breaking the skin or entering body cavities ) and has no known risks or side effects .
Not only can an echocardiogram create ultrasound images of heart structures , but it can also produce accurate assessment of the blood flowing through the heart by Doppler echocardiography , using pulsed- or continuous - wave Doppler ultrasound .
This allows assessment of both normal and abnormal blood flow through the heart .
Color Doppler , as well as spectral Doppler , is used to visualize any abnormal communications between the left and right sides of the heart , any leaking of blood through the valves ( valvular regurgitation ) , and estimate how well the valves open ( or do not open in the case of valvular stenosis ) .
The Doppler technique can also be used for tissue motion and velocity measurement , by tissue Doppler echocardiography .
Echocardiography was also the first ultrasound subspecialty to use intravenous contrast .
Echocardiography is performed by cardiac sonographers , cardiac physiologists ( UK ) , or physicians trained in echocardiography .
Recognized as the " Father of Echocardiography " , the Swedish physician Inge Edler ( 1911 - 2001 ) , a graduate of Lund University , was the first of his profession to apply in diagnosing cardiac disease ultrasonic pulse echo imaging technique , which the acoustical physicist Floyd Firestone had developed to detect defects in metal castings .
In fact , Dr. Edler in 1953 produced the first echocardiographs using an industrial Firestone - Sperry Ultrasonic Reflectoscope .
In developing echocardiography , Edler worked with the physicist Carl Hellmuth Hertz , the son of the Nobel laureate Gustav Hertz and grandnephew of Heinrich Rudolph Hertz .
MEDICAL USES Section::::Medical uses .
Health societies recommend the use of echocardiography for initial diagnosis when a change in the patient 's clinical status occurs and when new data from an echocardiogram would result in the physician changing the patient 's care .
Health societies do not recommend routine testing when the patient has no change in clinical status or when a physician is unlikely to change care for the patient based on the results of testing .
A common example of overuse of echocardiography when not indicated is the use of routine testing in response to a patient diagnosis of mild valvular heart disease .
In this case , patients are often asymptomatic for years before the onset of deterioration and the results of the echocardiogram would not result in a change in care without other change in clinical status .
TRANSTHORACIC ECHOCARDIOGRAM Section::::Transthoracic echocardiogram .
A standard echocardiogram is also known as a transthoracic echocardiogram , or cardiac ultrasound .
In this case , the echocardiography transducer ( or probe ) is placed on the chest wall ( or thorax ) of the subject , and images are taken through the chest wall .
This is a noninvasive , highly accurate , and quick assessment of the overall health of the heart .
TRANSESOPHAGEAL ECHOCARDIOGRAM Section::::Transesophageal echocardiogram .
This is an alternative way to perform an echocardiogram .
A specialized probe containing an ultrasound transducer at its tip is passed into the patient 's esophagus .
This allows image and Doppler evaluation from a location directly behind the heart .
This is known as a transesophageal echocardiogram .
Transesophageal echocardiograms are most often used when transthoracic images are suboptimal and when a more clear and precise image is needed for assessment .
This test is performed in the presence of a cardiologist , registered nurse , and ultrasound technician .
Conscious sedation and/or localized numbing medication may be used to make the patient more comfortable during the procedure .
STRESS ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY Section::::Stress echocardiography .
A stress echocardiogram , also known as a stress echo , uses ultrasound imaging of the heart to assess the wall motion in response to physical stress .
First , images of the heart are taken " at rest " to acquire a baseline of the patient 's wall motion at a resting heart rate .
The patient then walks on a treadmill or uses another exercise modality to increase the heart rate to his or her target heart rate , or 85 % of the age - predicted maximum heart rate ( 220 − patient 's age ) .
Finally , images of the heart are taken " at stress " to assess wall motion at the peak heart rate .
A stress echo assesses wall motion of the heart ; it does not , however , create an image of the coronary arteries directly .
Ischemia of one or more coronary arteries could cause a wall motion abnormality , which could indicate coronary artery disease .
The gold standard test to directly create an image of the coronary arteries and directly assess for stenosis or occlusion is a cardiac catheterization .
A stress echo is not invasive and is performed in the presence of a licensed medical professional , such as a cardiologist , and a cardiac sonographer .
THREE - DIMENSIONAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY Section::::Three - dimensional echocardiography .
Three - dimensional echocardiography ( also known as four - dimensional echocardiography when the picture is moving ) is now possible , using a matrix array ultrasound probe and an appropriate processing system .
This enables detailed anatomical assessment of cardiac pathology , particularly valvular defects , and cardiomyopathies .
The ability to slice the virtual heart in infinite planes in an anatomically appropriate manner and to reconstruct three - dimensional images of anatomic structures make it unique for the understanding of the congenitally malformed heart .
Real - time three - dimensional echocardiography can be used to guide the location of bioptomes during right ventricular endomyocardial biopsies , placement of catheter - delivered valvular devices , and in many other intraoperative assessments .
Three - dimensional echocardiography technology may feature anatomical intelligence , or the use of organ - modeling technology , to automatically identify anatomy based on generic models .
All generic models refer to a dataset of anatomical information that uniquely adapts to variability in patient anatomy to perform specific tasks .
Built on feature recognition and segmentation algorithms , this technology can provide patient - specific three - dimensional modeling of the heart and other aspects of the anatomy , including the brain , lungs , liver , kidneys , rib cage , and vertebral column .
CONTRAST ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY
Section::::Contrast echocardiography .
Contrast echocardiography , or contrast - enhanced ultrasound is the addition of an ultrasound contrast medium , or imaging agent , to traditional ultrasonography .
The ultrasound contrast is made up of tiny microbubbles filled with a gas core and protein shell .
This allows the microbubbles to circulate through the cardiovascular system and return the ultrasound waves , creating a highly reflective image .
There are multiple applications in which contrast - enhanced ultrasound can be useful .
The most commonly used application is in the enhancement of LV endocardial borders for assessment of global and regional systolic function .
Contrast may also be used to enhance visualization of wall thickening during stress echocardiography , for the assessment of LV thrombus , or for the assessment of other masses in the heart .
Contrast echocardiography has also been used to assess blood perfusion throughout myocardium in the case of coronary artery disease .
ACCREDITATION EUROPE Section::::Accreditation . Section::::Europe .
At the European level individual and laboratory accreditation is provided by the European Association of Echocardiography ( EAE ) .
There are three subspecialties for individual accreditation :
Adult Transthoracic Echocardiography ( TTE ) , Adult Transesophageal Echocardiography ( TEE ) and Congenital Heart Disease Echocardiography ( CHD ) .
UK Section::::UK .
In the UK , accreditation is regulated by the British Society of Echocardiography .
Accredited radiographers , sonographers , or other professionals are required to pass a mandatory exam .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The " Intersocietal Accreditation Commission for Echocardiography " ( IAC ) sets standards for echo labs across the US .
Cardiologists and sonographers who wish to have their laboratory accredited by IAC must comply with these standards .
The purpose of accreditation is to maintain quality and consistency across echocardiography labs in the United States .
Accreditation is offered in adult and pediatric transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiography , as well as adult stress and fetal echo .
Accreditation is a two part process ; first each facility will conduct a detailed self - evaluation , paying close attention to the IAC standards and Guidelines .
The facility will then complete the application and submit actual case studies to the board of directors for review .
Once all requirements have been met , the lab will receive IAC certification .
IAC certification is a continual process and must be maintained by the facility , this may include audits or site visits by the IAC .
There are several states in which Medicare and/or private insurance carriers are requiring either the accreditation of the laboratory and/or sonographer credentialing for reimbursement of echocardiograms .
There are two credentialing bodies in the United States for sonographers , the Cardiovascular Credentialing International ( CCI ) , established in 1968 , and the American Registry for Diagnostic Medical Sonography ( ARDMS ) , established in 1975 .
Both CCI and ARDMS have earned the prestigious ANSI - ISO 17024 accreditation for certifying bodies from the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ) .
Accreditation is granted through the American National Standards Institute ( ANSI ) .
Recognition of ARDMS programs in providing credentials has also earned the ARDMS accreditation with the National Commission for Certifying Agencies ( NCCA ) .
The NCCA is the accrediting arm of the National Organization for Competency Assurance ( NOCA ) .
Under both credentialing bodies sonographers must first document completion of prerequisite requirements , which contain both didactic and hands - on experience in the field of ultrasound .
Applicants must then take a comprehensive exam demonstrating knowledge in both the physics of ultrasound and the clinical competency related to their specialty .
Credentialed sonographers are then required to maintain competency in their field by obtaining a certain number of Continuing Medical Education credits , or CME 's .
In 2009 , New Mexico and Oregon became the first two states to require licensure of sonographers .
The American Society of Echocardiography ( ASE ) is a professional organization made up of physicians , sonographers , nurses , and scientists involved in the field of echocardiography .
One of the most important rolls that the ASE plays is providing their recommendations through the ASE Guidelines and Standards , providing a resource and educational opportunities for sonographers and physicians in the field .
SEE ALSO
* Angiogram * Aortic valve area calculation
* Electrocardiogram * Fetal echocardiography
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * American Society of Echocardiography * British Society of Echocardiography *
An interactive learning site for 3D Echocardiography
* International Society of Cardiovascular Ultrasound * European Association of Echocardiography * VIRTUAL TEE – online self - study and teaching resource
* VIRTUAL Transthoracic Echocardiography -
online self - study and teaching resource * Echobasics – free online echocardiography tutorial * Algorithms and System for Digital Echocardiogram Video Indexing and Su
* CT2TEE –
transesophageal echocardiography simulator
* Wikiecho – Free Echocardiography encyclopedia by the European Association of Cardiovascular Imaging ( EACVI )
* Basic ultrasound , echocardiography and Doppler for clinicians