FLYING SQUIRREL
Flying squirrels ( scientifically known as Pteromyini or Petauristini ) are a tribe of 50 species of squirrels in the family Sciuridae .
They are not capable of flight in the same way as birds or bats but are able to glide from one tree to another with the aid of a patagium , a furry , parachute - like membrane that stretches from wrist to ankle .
Their long tail provides stability in flight .
Anatomically they are very similar to other squirrels but have a number of adaptations to suit their life style ; their limb bones are longer and their hand , foot bones and distal vertebrae are shorter .
Flying squirrels are able to steer and exert control over their glide path with their limbs and tail .
Molecular studies have shown that flying squirrels are monophyletic and originated some 18–20 million years ago .
Most are nocturnal and omnivorous , eating fruit , seeds , buds , flowers , insects , gastropods , spiders , fungi , bird 's eggs and tree sap .
The young are born in a nest and are at first naked and helpless .
They are cared for by their mother and by five weeks are able to practice gliding skills so that by ten weeks they are ready to leave the nest .
Some captive - bred southern flying squirrels have become domesticated as small household pets , a type of " pocket pet " .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Flying squirrels are not capable of flight like birds or bats ; instead , they glide between trees .
They are capable of obtaining lift within the course of these flights , with flights recorded to .
The direction and speed of the animal in midair are varied by changing the positions of its limbs , largely controlled by small cartilaginous wrist bones .
There is a cartilage projection from the wrist that squirrel holds upwards during a glide .
This specialized cartilage is only present in flying squirrels and not other gliding mammals .
Possible origins for the styliform cartilage have been explored , and the data suggests that it is most likely homologous to the carpal structures that can be found in other squirrels .
This cartilage along with the manus forms a wing tip to be used during gliding .
After being extended , the wing tip may adjust to various angles , controlling aerodynamic movements .
The wrist also changes the tautness of the patagium , a furry parachute - like membrane that stretches from wrist to ankle .
It has a fluffy tail that stabilizes in flight .
The tail acts as an adjunct airfoil , working as an air brake before landing on a tree trunk .
The colugos , Petauridae , and Anomaluridae are gliding mammals which are similar to flying squirrels because of convergent evolution .
These mammals can glide through the trees , but they do not actually fly ( like birds and bats ) .
They have a membrane of skin on either side of their body .
Prior to the 21st century , the evolutionary history of the flying squirrel was frequently debated .
This debate was clarified greatly as a result of two molecular studies .
These studies found support that flying squirrels originated 18–20 million years ago , are monophyletic , and have a sister relationship with tree squirrels .
Due to their close ancestry , the morphological differences between flying squirrels and tree squirrels reveal insight into the formation of the gliding mechanism .
Compared to squirrels of similar size , flying squirrels , northern and southern flying squirrels show lengthening in bones of the lumbar vertebrae and forearm , whereas bones of the feet , hands , and distal vertebrae are reduced in length .
Such differences in body proportions reveal the flying squirrels ' adaptation to minimize wing loading and to increase more maneuverability while gliding .
The consequence for these differences is that unlike regular squirrels , flying squirrels are not well adapted for quadrupedal locomotion and therefore must rely more heavily on their gliding abilities .
Several hypotheses have attempted to explain the evolution of gliding in flying squirrels .
One possible explanation is related to energy efficiency and foraging .
Gliding is an energetically efficient way to progress from one tree to another while foraging , as opposed to climbing down trees and maneuvering on the ground floor or executing dangerous leaps in the air .
By gliding at high speeds , flying squirrels can rummage through a greater area of forest more quickly than tree squirrels .
Flying squirrels can glide long distances by increasing their aerial speed and increasing their lift .
Other hypotheses state that the mechanism evolved to avoid nearby predators and prevent injuries .
If a dangerous situation arises on a specific tree , flying squirrels can glide to another , and thereby typically escape the previous danger .
Furthermore , take - off and landing procedures during leaps , implemented for safety purposes , may explain the gliding mechanism .
While leaps at high speeds are important to escape danger , the high - force impact of landing on a new tree could be detrimental to a squirrel 's health .
Yet the gliding mechanism of flying squirrels involves structures and techniques during flight that allow for great stability and control .
If a leap is miscalculated , a flying squirrel may easily steer back onto the original course by using its gliding ability .
A flying squirrel also creates a large glide angle when approaching its target tree , decreasing its velocity due to an increase in air resistance and allowing all four limbs to absorb the impact of the target .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The largest of the species is the woolly flying squirrel ( Eupetaurus cinereus ) .
The three species of the genus Glaucomys ( Glaucomys sabrinus , Glaucomys volans and Glaucomys oregonensis ) are native to North America , and Central America , while the Siberian flying squirrel is native to parts of northern Europe ( Pteromys volans ) .
* Pliopetaurista
* Pliopetaurista kollmanni Daxner - Höck , 2004 Thorington and Hoffman ( 2005 ) recognize 15 genera of flying squirrels in two subtribes .
Tribe Pteromyini – flying squirrels
* Subtribe Glaucomyina
* Genus Eoglaucomys
* Kashmir flying squirrel , Eoglaucomys fimbriatus * Genus Glaucomys – New World flying squirrels ( American flying squirrels ) , North America * Southern flying squirrel , Glaucomys volans * Northern flying squirrel , Glaucomys sabrinus
* Humboldt 's flying squirrel ,
Glaucomys oregonensis
* Genus Hylopetes , Southeast Asia
*
Particolored flying squirrel , Hylopetes alboniger * Afghan flying squirrel ,
Hylopetes baberi
* Bartel 's flying squirrel ,
Hylopetes bartelsi * Gray - cheeked flying squirrel , Hylopetes lepidus
*
Palawan flying squirrel ,
Hylopetes nigripes
* Indochinese flying squirrel , Hylopetes phayrei * Jentink 's flying squirrel ,
Hylopetes platyurus *
Sipora flying squirrel , Hylopetes sipora
* Red - cheeked flying squirrel , Hylopetes spadiceus * Sumatran flying squirrel , Hylopetes winstoni
* Genus Iomys , Malaysia and Indonesia * Javanese flying squirrel ( Horsfield 's flying squirrel ) , Iomys horsfieldi
* Mentawi flying squirrel , Iomys sipora * Genus Petaurillus – pygmy flying squirrels , Borneo and the Malay Peninsula * Lesser pygmy flying squirrel , Petaurillus emiliae * Hose 's pygmy flying squirrel , Petaurillus hosei * Selangor pygmy flying squirrel , Petaurillus kinlochii * Genus Petinomys , Southeast Asia * Basilan flying squirrel ,
Petinomys crinitus *
Travancore flying squirrel ,
Petinomys fuscocapillus * Whiskered flying squirrel , Petinomys genibarbis
* Hagen 's flying squirrel , Petinomys hageni
* Siberut flying squirrel ,
Petinomys lugens
* Mindanao flying squirrel , Petinomys mindanensis * Arrow flying squirrel , Petinomys sagitta
* Temminck 's flying squirrel , Petinomys setosus * Vordermann 's flying squirrel , Petinomys vordermanni * Subtribe Pteromyina * Genus Aeretes , northeastern China
* Groove - toothed flying squirrel ( North Chinese flying squirrel ) , Aeretes melanopterus * Genus Aeromys – large black flying squirrels , Thailand to Borneo * Black flying squirrel , Aeromys tephromelas
* Thomas 's flying squirrel , Aeromys thomasi * Genus Belomys , Southeast Asia
* Hairy - footed flying squirrel , Belomys pearsonii * Genus Biswamoyopterus , India and Bangladesh
* Namdapha flying squirrel ,
Biswamoyopterus biswasi
* Laotian giant flying squirrel ,
Biswamoyopterus laoensis
* Genus Eupetaurus , Kashmir ; rare * Woolly flying squirrel , Eupetaurus cinereus * Genus Petaurista - giant flying squirrels , Southeast Asia * Red and white giant flying squirrel , Petaurista alborufus
* Spotted giant flying squirrel , Petaurista elegans
* Hodgson 's giant flying squirrel , Petaurista magnificus * Bhutan giant flying squirrel , Petaurista nobilis * Indian giant flying squirrel
, Petaurista philippensis * Chinese giant flying squirrel , Petaurista xanthotis * Japanese giant flying squirrel , Petaurista leucogenys * Red giant flying squirrel , Petaurista petaurista * Mechuka giant flying squirrel , Petaurista mechukaensis * Mishmi Hills giant flying squirrel , Petaurista mishmiensis
* Mebo giant flying squirrel , Petaurista siangensis * Genus Pteromys – Old World flying squirrels , Finland to Japan * Siberian flying squirrel ,
Pteromys volans
* Japanese dwarf flying squirrel , Pteromys momonga * Genus Pteromyscus , southern Thailand to Borneo * Smoky flying squirrel , Pteromyscus pulverulentus
* Genus Trogopterus , China
* Complex - toothed flying squirrel , Trogopterus xanthipes The Mechuka , Mishmi Hills , and Mebo giant flying squirrels were discovered in the northeastern state of India of Arunachal Pradesh in the late 2000s .
Their holotypes are preserved in the collection of the Zoological Survey of India , Kolkata , India .
LIFE CYCLES Section::::Life cycles .
The life expectancy of flying squirrels in the wild is about six years , but flying squirrels can live up to fifteen years in zoos .
The mortality rate in young flying squirrels is high because of predators and diseases .
Predators of flying squirrels include tree snakes , raccoons , owls , martens , fishers , coyotes , bobcats , and feral cats .
In the Pacific Northwest of North America , the northern spotted owl ( Strix occidentalis ) is a common predator of flying squirrels .
Flying squirrels are usually nocturnal , since they are not adept at escaping birds of prey that hunt during the daytime .
They eat according to their environment ; they are omnivorous , and will eat whatever food they can find .
The North American southern flying squirrel eats seeds , insects , gastropods ( slugs and snails ) , spiders , shrubs , flowers , fungi , and tree sap .
REPRODUCTION
Section::::Reproduction .
The mating season for flying squirrels is during February and March .
When the infants are born , the female squirrels live with them in maternal nest sites .
The mothers nurture and protect them until they leave the nest .
The males do not participate in nurturing their offspring .
At birth , flying squirrels are mostly hairless , apart from their whiskers , and most of their senses are not present .
Their internal organs are visible through the skin , and their sex can be signified .
By week five , they are almost fully developed .
At that point , they can respond to their environment and start to develop a mind of their own .
Through the upcoming weeks of their lives , they practice leaping and gliding .
After two and a half months , their gliding skills are perfected , they are ready to leave the nest , and are capable of independent survival .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Flying squirrels can easily forage for food in the night , given their highly developed sense of smell .
They harvest fruits , nuts , fungi , and birds ' eggs .
Gliding conserves energy .
Many gliders have specialized diets and there is evidence to believe that gliders may be able to take advantage of scattered protein deficient food .
Additionally , gliding is a fast form of locomotion and by reducing travel time between patches , they can increase the amount of foraging time .
SEE ALSO
* Anomalure , aka : scaly - tailed squirrel
* Flying and gliding animals
*
Gliding possum
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Thorington , R. W. Jr. and R. S. Hoffman .
2005 .
Family Sciuridae .
pp .
754–818 in Mammal Species of the World a Taxonomic and Geographic Reference .
D. E. Wilson and D. M. Reeder eds .
Johns Hopkins University Press , Baltimore .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Flying Squirrels , National Wildlife Foundation * Animal Diversity Web : Pteromyinae , classification