SERUM ( BLOOD )
In blood , the serum ( ) is the component that is neither a blood cell ( serum does not contain white blood cells- leukocytes , or red blood cells- erythrocytes ) , nor a clotting factor ; it is the blood plasma not including the fibrinogens .
Serum includes all proteins not used in blood clotting and all the electrolytes , antibodies , antigens , hormones , and any exogenous substances ( e.g. , drugs and microorganisms ) .
The study of serum is serology .
Serum is used in numerous diagnostic tests , as well as blood typing .
Measurements of serum concentrations has proved useful in many fields including clinical trials of therapeutic vs toxic response .
Blood is centrifuged to remove cellular components .
Anti - coagulated blood yields plasma containing fibrinogen and clotting factors .
Coagulated blood ( clotted blood ) yields serum without fibrinogen , although some clotting factors remain .
Serum is an essential factor for the self - renewal of embryonic stem cells in combination with the cytokine leukemia inhibitory factor .
The serum of convalescent patients successfully recovering ( or already recovered ) from an infectious disease can be used as a biopharmaceutical in the treatment of other people with that disease , because the antibodies generated by the successful recovery are potent fighters of the pathogen .
Such convalescent serum ( antiserum ) is a form of immunotherapy .
PURIFICATION STRATEGIES Section::::Purification strategies .
Blood serum and plasma are some of the largest sources of biomarkers , whether for diagnostics or therapeutics .
Its vast dynamic range , further complicated by the presence of lipids , salts , and post - translational modifications , as well multiple mechanisms of degradation , presents challenges in analytical reproducibility , sensitivity , resolution , and potential efficacy .
For analysis of biomarkers in blood serum samples , it is possible to do a pre - separation by free - flow electrophoresis that usually consists of a depletion of serum albumin protein .
This method enables greater penetration of the proteome via separation of a wide variety of charged or chargeable analytes , ranging from small molecules to cells .
USAGE NOTE
Section::::Usage note .
Like many other mass nouns , the word serum can be pluralized when used in certain senses .
To speak of multiple serum specimens from multiple people ( each with a unique population of antibodies ) , physicians sometimes speak of sera ( the Latin plural , as opposed to * serums ) .
SEE ALSO
* Antiserum
* Albumin * Globulin
* Human serum albumin * Lipid * Serum iron * Serum protein electrophoresis
* Serum total protein REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Blood