GHOST IN THE SHELL 2 :
INNOCENCE Ghost in the Shell 2 :
Innocence , known in Japan as , is a 2004 anime / computer - animated cyberpunk film that serves as a sequel to 1995 's Ghost in the Shell .
It was co - produced by Production I.G and Studio Ghibli for Tokuma Shoten , Nippon Television Network , Dentsu , Disney , Toho and the Mitsubishi Corporation , and distributed by Toho .
It was released in Japan on March 6 , 2004 , and was later released in the US on September 17 , 2004 by Go Fish Pictures
, Innocence had a production budget of approximately $ 20 million ( approximately 2 billion yen ) .
To raise the sum , Production I.G studio 's president , Mitsuhisa Ishikawa , asked Studio Ghibli 's president , Toshio Suzuki , to co - produce .
With a story loosely connected to the manga by Masamune Shirow , the film was written and directed by Ghost in the Shell director Mamoru Oshii .
The film was honored best sci - fi film at the 2004 Nihon SF Taisho Awards and was in competition at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival .
The soundtrack for the film was released under the name Innocence O.S.T. and a related novel called Ghost in the Shell :
Innocence - After the Long Goodbye was released on February 29 , 2004 .
This film makes many allusions and references to other famous works , such as The Future Eve .
The foreign DVD release of the film faced many issues ranging from licensing to audio .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The story is loosely based on Ghost in the Shell manga chapter " Robot Rondo " ( with elements of " Phantom Fund " ) .
Opening in 2032 , Public Security Section 9 cybernetic operative Batou is teamed with Togusa , an agent with very few cybernetic upgrades , following the events of Ghost in the Shell .
After a series of deaths due to malfunctioning gynoids — doll - like sex robots — Section 9 is asked to investigate .
As the gynoids all malfunctioned without clear cause , the deaths are believed to be premeditated murders ; Batou and Togusa are sent to investigate possible terrorist or political motives .
Additionally , the most recent gynoid 's remains show they all contained an illegal " ghost " .
Section 9 concludes human sentience is being artificially duplicated onto the dolls illegally , making the robots more lifelike , and possibly acting as a motive in the murders .
Called to a homicide scene , information warfare / technology specialist Ishikawa explains the victim is Jack Walkson , a consignment officer at gynoid company LOCUS SOLUS , who may have been killed by the Yakuza .
A previous Yakuza boss was recently killed by a gynoid , so Ishikawa concludes Walkson was held responsible and killed in an act of revenge .
Batou and Togusa enter a Yakuza bar to question the current boss , only to be threatened by the bar occupants .
Batou opens fire , killing and wounding numerous gang members , including the cyborg that murdered Walkson .
The current boss then admits his predecessor was somehow involved in LOCUS SOLUS , but insists he does n't know how .
Entering a store on his way home , Batou is then seemingly warned by the Major and shot in the arm by an unseen assailant .
Caught in a firefight , Batou nearly kills the store owner in confusion , but is subdued when Ishikawa appears .
While having his damaged arm replaced , Batou is informed by Ishikawa that his e - brain was hacked , causing him to shoot himself and attack the store occupants .
Ishikawa explains that Batou was hacked to try and cause further scandal following his Yakuza assault in an attempt to stop the Section 9 investigation .
Batou and Togusa then head for the mansion of Kim , a soldier - turned - hacker with an obsession with dolls .
Seemingly dead , Kim soon reveals he " lives " inside the shell of a human - sized marionette , and discusses philosophy with his visitors .
Kim admits ties to LOCUS SOLUS , divulging that the company has secret headquarters in international waters .
Warned again by the Major , Batou realizes that Kim has secretly hacked into his
and Togusa 's e - brains , and is currently trapping them in a false reality .
Resetting Togusa 's brain , Batou subdues Kim , noting he knows Kim hacked his brain in the store .
Resolved to gather material evidence , Batou infiltrates the LOCUS SOLUS headquarters ship while Togusa remotely hacks its security systems using an unaware Kim as a proxy .
The ship 's security becomes aware of the hacking and retaliates with a virus that fries Kim 's cyberbrain .
Simultaneously , a hidden virus loads a combat program into the production - line gynoids , causing them to attack everyone aboard .
As Batou fights to the ship 's center , the Major then appears by controlling a gynoid remotely , helping Batou fight the gynoids and hack the ship 's security .
Taking control of the ship , the Major then reveals to Batou the truth about the gynoids .
Hiring the Yakuza to traffick young girls , LOCUS SOLUS duplicated their consciousnesses into the gynoids , giving them human " ghosts " to make them more realistic .
Batou rescues a young girl from a " ghost dubbing " machine , and she explains that Jack Walkson , learning the truth about LOCUS SOLUS , promised to save the girls by tampering with the ghosting process ; this caused the gynoids to murder their owners , allowing Walkson to attract police attention and indirectly kill the Yakuza boss .
Despite Walkson 's actions saving the girls , Batou objects that he also victimized the gynoids as well , causing them severe distress by giving them damaged ghosts .
Having solved the case , Batou asks the Major if she 's happy now , and she notes that she 'll always be beside him on the network , before disconnecting from the gynoid .
ALLUSIONS AND REFERENCES Section::::Allusions and references .
Innocence contains many references to fantasy , philosophy and Zen , and addresses aesthetic and moral questions .
For example , the film begins with a quotation from Auguste Villiers de l'Isle - Adam 's Tomorrow 's Eve from 1886 : " If our Gods and our hopes are nothing but scientific phenomena , then let us admit it must be said that our love is scientific as well .
" Other numerous quotations in the film come from Buddha , Confucius , Descartes , the Old Testament , Meiji - era critic Saitō Ryokuu , Richard Dawkins , Max Weber , Jacob Grimm , Plato , John Milton , 14th century playwright Zeami Motokiyo , the Tridentine Mass , and Julien Offray de La Mettrie , French Enlightenment philosopher and author of " Man a Machine " .
The characters and their names contain many allusions to other older works .
For example , the " Hadaly " model robots refer to a human - like robot named Hadaly featured in Tomorrow 's Eve , also the book that popularized the word android .
The company LOCUS SOLUS is named for the 1914 novel by Raymond Roussel , which also shares certain thematic elements with the film , such as a mansion containing tableaux vivants .
The police forensic specialist , Haraway , is most likely named for Donna Haraway , feminist author of A Cyborg Manifesto .
Haraway 's character is likely based on Susan Calvin from Asimov 's Robot series .
The Robot series is also referenced in the film 's androids as they comply with a modified version of Asimov 's Third Law of Robotics .
Dolls are also an important motif in Innocence ; many have " spirits " of some sort , but at the same time are not quite human .
They are based on the art of Hans Bellmer , a dollmaker famous for his disturbing , erotic ball - jointed female dolls .
The parade sequence is based on a religious procession and a temple in Taiwan .
PRODUCTION DIRECTOR 'S IDEAS Section::::Production .
Section::::Director 's ideas .
On the origins of the movie , director Mamoru Oshii says he did n't envision it solely as a sequel to Ghost in the Shell .
He said , " I had a dozen ideas , linked to my views on life , my philosophy , that I wanted to include in this film ...
I attacked Innocence as a technical challenge ; I wanted to go beyond typical animation limits , answer personal questions and at the same time appeal to filmgoers . "
Oshii traveled the world in order to find inspirations for the film .
Oshii based the appearance on the dolls created by Hans Bellmer he saw at the International Center of Photography in New York .
He credited Jean - Luc Godard for the idea of including quotes by other authors : "
[ The texts ] ... give a certain richness to cinema because the visual is not all there is .
Thanks to Godard , the spectator can concoct his own interpretation ...
The image associated with the text is a unifying act that aims at renewing cinema , that it take to new dimensions . "
Oshii noted his attention to detail might be particularly Japanese : " I get absorbed in the finer points – like what the back of a bottle label looks like when you see it through the glass [ demonstrates with a bottle of mineral water ] .
That 's very Japanese , I suppose .
I want people to go back to the film again and again to pick up things they missed the first time . "
Describing the overall look , the director said , " The film is set in the future , but it 's looking at present - day society .
And as I said , there 's an autobiographical element as well .
I 'm looking back at some of the things I liked as a child — the 1950s cars and so on .
Basically , I wanted to create a different world — not a future world . "
The dog Gabriel , looking once more like the only " real " being , makes a key appearance , as in many of Oshii 's movies .
A scene with Batou feeding his dog is echoed in Ash in Avalon ( 2001 ) .
He explained the reason why all his films feature a basset hound — his companion in real life : " This body you see before you is an empty shell .
The dog represents my body .
Human beings can be free only if they free themselves from their bodies .
When I am playing around with my dog , I forget that I am a human being , and it 's only then that I feel free . "
As for the state of art and animation , Oshii had this to say : I think that Hollywood is relying more and more on 3D imaging like that of Shrek .
The strength behind Japanese animation is based in the designer 's pencil .
Even if he mixes 2D , 3D , and computer graphics , the foundation is still 2D. Only doing 3D does not interest me .
On the overall message of the film , the director said " This movie ... concludes that all forms of life – humans , animals and robots – are equal .
In this day and age when everything is uncertain , we should all think about what to value in life and how to coexist with others . "
On his narrative intentions Oshii comments : " I had a bigger budget than for Ghost in the Shell .
I also had more time to prepare it .
Yet despite the economic leeway , abundant details and orientations , it was still important to tell an intimate story . "
TITLE CHANGE
Section::::Title change .
In order to better market the film outside Japan , the Ghost in the Shell 2 moniker was added to the title of the film , with Innocence becoming the subtitle .
Some fans saw this as conflicting with Oshii 's statements that the film was n't , in actuality , a standard Hollywood - esque sequel , and was able to , and intended to , stand on its own .
ENGLISH - LANGUAGE DUB Section::::English - language dub .
When Go Fish Pictures released Innocence , they released it subtitled , without English dubbing , a controversial choice since every Ghost in the Shell anime released by Manga Entertainment outside of Japan had been dubbed .
Anime News Network announced Manga Entertainment UK 's co - production of an English dub with Madman Entertainment , their Australian distributor and longtime partner , and Richard Epcar 's ( the voice of Batou )
Epcar Entertainment studio for the dubbing .
This was the first dub Manga UK had produced since X in 1999 and the first dub Madman produced .
This dub was released in the UK by Manga and in Australia by Madman Entertainment ( using the Go Fish Pictures transfer ) .
Bandai Entertainment created a second dub for the North American market using most of the voice actors from the Manga / Madman version making some changes to the cast and production team and using Animaze 's studio .
RELATED MEDIA
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Related media .
Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack was composed by Kenji Kawai , who also did Ghost in the Shell soundtrack .
As he expressed in the liner notes , he agreed with Mamoru Oshii that the soundtrack pattern itself somewhat after " would follow the music from the original film . "
Additionally , Oshii made specific requests for " a huge music box , " a " jazzy theme , " and a " reprise of the song ' Follow Me ' " .
The music box , heard in the " Doll House " tracks , was procured from Sankyo Shoji .
Wanting it to sound as if played in a huge space , Kenji Kawai had the music box recorded in studio , and then played back in the underground quarry of Ohya with four speakers and two subwoofers , where it was recorded with eight microphones .
The minyoh singers chorus , heard in the " Chants " in the first movie , and in the " Ballade of Puppets " in Innocence , was expanded to include 75 performers , which proved challenging to record .
The session lasted for 14 straight hours .
" Follow Me " is a reprise of a song originally interpreted by Demis Roussos in 1982 .
The music is based on Joaquín Rodrigo 's Concierto de Aranjuez , with lyrics by Herbert Kretzmer and Hal Shaper .
NOVEL Section::::Novel .
A novel by Masaki Yamada called serves as a prequel , taking place just before the film and told from Batou 's perspective as he surrounds his search for his dog Gabriel ( Gabu ) .
It was published by Tokuma Shoten on February 29 , 2004 , and the English - language version was published by Viz Media in the US on October 2005 .
Viz media later released a four - volume Ani - manga boxset on April 2005 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Innocence ranked 28th at the US box office earning $ 317,000 on its opening weekend in September 2004 .
Honored best sci - fi film at the 2004 Nihon SF Taisho Awards , the film was in competition at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival , only the sixth animated film to be featured at Cannes ever .
Along with Persepolis , it was the only animated film to be screened in the official selection , competing for the Palme d'Or award that year .
( The eventual winner was Fahrenheit 9/11 . )
The movie was praised by Manohla Dargis of the New York Times , who wrote " Innocence does n't just reveal a wealth of visual enchantments ; it restates the case that there can and should be more to feature - length animations than cheap jokes , pathos and pandering .
" The movie holds a 65 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , with an average rating of 6.3 out of 10 .
The critical consensus states : " The animation is lovely , but the plot is complex to the point of inscrutability , leaving Ghost in the Shell 2 :
Innocence both original and numbing . "
Criticism of the movie rests upon a mixture of reasons .
It is cited to be overly heavy on philosophical dialogue and thus hard to follow , and its ending has been described as weak and unmeaningful in the arc of character development .
Helen McCarthy in 500 Essential Anime Movies praises the quality script and direction , stating that " it 's a challenging film , but it 's one of the best anime ever " .
RELEASE PROBLEMS WITH THE FOREIGN DVD RELEASES Section::::Release .
Section::::Problems with the foreign DVD releases .
On December 28 , 2004 , DreamWorks ( parent company of theatrical distributor Go Fish Pictures ) released Innocence on DVD in the US .
Reviews immediately began appearing on Amazon and other websites criticizing the movie 's subtitle track : Instead of including the overlay subtitles from the theatrical release , DreamWorks produced the DVD subtitles using closed captioning , resulting in subtitles that intruded on the movie 's visual effects .
In addition to reading dialogue , audiences saw cues like " Footsteps ... " or " Helicopter approaches ...
" After receiving numerous complaints , DreamWorks released a statement saying that unsatisfied customers could exchange their DVDs for properly subtitled ones , postage paid ; and that version 4 already had the proper subtitling .
Manga Entertainment , which released and co - produced the first film and collaborated with Bandai Entertainment to release the TV series , released Innocence with an English dub featuring the same cast as the one used in in the UK on February 27 , 2006 .
The Manga UK dub was co - produced with long - time anime partner , Madman Entertainment who has distributed Manga UK titles in Australia since its founding in 1996 .
The UK English dub on the Region 1 Blu - ray disc features an audio error where the soundtrack has been pitch shifted down , resulting in unnatural sounding deep voices , and mechanical sound effects in slow motion .
This is also present on the standard DVD .
Bandai Entertainment has released the film on Blu - ray and DVD in the US , with an English dub also featuring the cast used in Ghost in the Shell
: Stand Alone Complex .
Bandai had licensed the film for a short period from Paramount .
The controversy with licensing also affected its release in Australia .
Although Madman licensed it through Go Fish Pictures , the English dub used is from Manga Entertainment , through which Madman have licensed all Ghost in the Shell properties .
The licensing costs are extremely high due to two different licenses being in effect on the DVD release .
It is unknown whether Madman will use the Manga Entertainment dub or the Bandai dub for the Blu - ray version .
Funimation released the film on DVD and on Blu - ray combo - pack on February 7 , 2017 .
The combo pack features the Japanese version and includes the official English audio track and subtitles .
Along with the special features .
ORIGINAL VOICEOVERS * Atsuko Tanaka - Motoko Kusanagi *
Akio Ōtsuka - Batou
* Kōichi Yamadera - Togusa
* Tamio Ōki - Daisuke Aramaki
* Yutaka Nakano - Ishikawa
* Naoto Takenaka - Kim * Yoshiko Sakakibara - Haraway * Hiroaki Hirata - Koga
* Masaki Terasoma - Azuma * Katsunosuke Hori - Forensics Chief ENGLISH DUB VOICEOVERS
MANGA UK / MADMAN CAST
* Mary Elizabeth McGlynn as Motoko Kusanagi
* Richard Epcar as Batou * Crispin Freeman as Togusa
* Erik Davies as Azuma * Michael McCarty as Ishikawa * Ellyn Stern as Haraway
* William Knight as Daisuke Aramaki
* Robert Axelrod as Koga , Lin * Richard Cansino as Man , Security 1 , Katsunari Wakabayashi , Yakuza 1 * Joey D'Auria as Kim
* Steve Kramer as Detective , Security 4 , Security 5 * Sherry Lynn as Gynoid , Rescue Girl
* Terrence Stone as Forensics Chief , Pilot , Security 2 , Shop Owner , Yakuza 3 * Michael McConnohie as Forensics Staff , Section 9 Member , Security 3 * Bob Papenbrook as Crab Man , Cyborg Doctor , Underwater Cyborg , Yakuza 2 * Stephanie Sheh as Dispatcher ,
Togusa 's Daughter * Kevin Seymour ( as Mr. X ) as Yakuza 4 ANIMAZE CAST * Mary Elizabeth McGlynn as Motoko Kusanagi
* Richard Epcar as Batou * Crispin Freeman as Togusa
* Erik Davies as Azuma * Michael McCarty as Ishikawa
* William Knight as Daisuke Aramaki
* Barbara Goodson as Haraway * Fred Sanders as Koga * Doug Stone as Lin * Travis Willingham as Kim
* Steve Kramer as Katsunari Wakabayashi
* Karen Huie as Locus Solus Security System # 1
( Cantonese ) * Jim Lau as Locus Solus Security System
# 2 ( Cantonese ) * Joe Romersa as Crab Man ,
Undersea Cyborg * John Snyder as Cyborg Arm Doctor * David Vincent as SWAT Commander , Yakuza 1 * Kyle Hebert as Detective * Loy Edge as Forensics Chief * Roger Craig Smith as Briefing Voice , Yamadori Transport Pilot * Laura Bailey as Rescued Girl
* Sandy Fox as Togusa 's Daughter REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Brown , Steven T. , " Machinic Desires : Hans Bellmer 's Dolls and the Technological Uncanny in Ghost in the Shell 2 : Innocence " , Mechademia 3 ( 2008 ) , 222 - 253 * Hartlieb , Sean , " Humanity in Anime :
Analyzing the Films of Mamoru Oshii " , ' Chapter Nine :
Innocence ' ( 2016 ) , 347 - 453 * Monnet , Livia , " Anatomy of Permutational Desire : Perversion in Hans Bellmer and Oshii Mamoru " , Mechademia 5 ( 2010 ) , 285 - 309 * Monnet , Livia , " Anatomy of Permutational Desire , Part II : Bellmer 's Dolls and Oshii 's Gynoids " , Mechademia 6 ( 2010 ) , 153 - 169 * Monnet , Livia , " Anatomy of Permutational Desire , Part III : The Artificial Woman and the Perverse Structure of Modernity " , Mechademia 7 ( 2012 ) , 282 - 297 EXTERNAL LINKS
* Essays on Inosensu ( Ghost in the Shell 2 : Innocence )
* Analyzes on Inosensu ( Ghost in the Shell 2 : Innocence )