YELLOW - BILLED CUCKOO
The yellow - billed cuckoo ( Coccyzus americanus ) is a cuckoo .
Common folk - names for this bird in the southern United States are rain crow and storm crow .
These likely refer to the bird 's habit of calling on hot days , often presaging rain or thunderstorms .
The genus name is from Ancient Greek , which means to call like a common cuckoo , and americana means " of America " .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Adults have a long tail , brown above and black - and - white below , and a black curved bill with yellow especially on the lower mandible .
The head and upper parts are brown and the underparts are white .
There is a yellow ring around the eye .
It shows cinnamon on the wings in flight .
Juveniles are similar , but the black on the undertail is replaced by gray .
This bird has a number of calls ; the most common is a rapid ka
ka
ka
ka
ka kow kow kow .
There is an ongoing debate regarding the taxonomic status of the western race and if it is distinct from those birds in the east .
This question is significant to the conservation status of this species in the west , where it has declined to a tiny fraction of its population a century ago .
Populations of this species in western North America are in steep decline .
The bird disappeared from British Columbia , Washington , and Oregon during the first half of the twentieth century .
Eastern populations have declined as well , though not as precipitously .
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service has proposed listing the western Distinct Population Segment ( DPS ) of Yellow - billed Cuckoos as threatened under the Endangered Species Act , and the service also has proposed establishing 546,335 acres in nine western states as critical habitat for the western DPS of the yellow - billed cuckoo .
However , controversy over the taxonomic status and heavy pressure from livestock and mining industries have caused the Trump administration to attempt to end the species ' protections , while the FWS has proposed a review of the bird 's listing .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
Their breeding habitat is deciduous woods from southern Canada to Mexico .
They migrate to Central America and as far south as northern Argentina .
This bird is a rare vagrant to western Europe .
These birds forage in dense shrubs and trees , also may catch insects in flight .
They mainly eat insects , especially tent caterpillars and cicadas , but also some lizards , eggs of other birds and berries .
Cuckoos sometimes congregate near insect outbreaks or emergences , including outbreaks of exotic gypsy moth caterpillars .
They nest in a tree or shrub , usually up to 2–12 feet ( 1–4 meters ) above the ground .
The nest is a flimsy platform of short twigs placed on a horizontal branch .
The 3 - 4 eggs are incubated for 14 days or less .
The chicks are able to climb about with agility at 7–9 days of age .
At about this same time , the feathers of the chicks burst out of their sheaths and the young are able to fly .
The entire time from egg - laying to fledging may be as little as 17 days .
Yellow - billed cuckoos occasionally lay eggs in the nests of other birds ( most often the closely related black - billed cuckoo ) , but they are not obligate brood parasites of other birds as is the common cuckoo of Eurasia .
IMAGES
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* John K. Terres ( 1980 ) , Audubon Society Encyclopedia of North American Birds , Knopf , * David Gaines Review of the Status of the Yellow - Billed Cuckoo in California : Sacramento Valley Populations
The Condor , Vol .
76 , No . 2
( Summer , 1974 ) , pp .
204–209
*
Laymon , S.A. , and M.D. Halterman .
1987 .
Can the western subspecies of Yellow - billed Cuckoo be saved from extinction ?
Western Birds 18:19 - 25 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Natchez Naturalist * Center for Biological Diversity * Cornell University -- All About Birds
* eNature.com profile
* USGS * PRBO Western Race * Yellow - Billed Cuckoo Bird Sound