SEMIPRIME
In mathematics , a semiprime is a natural number that is the product of two prime numbers .
The two primes in the product may equal each other , so the semiprimes include the squares of prime numbers .
Because there are infinitely many prime numbers , there are also infinitely many semiprimes .
Semiprimes are also called biprimes .
EXAMPLES AND VARIATIONS Section::::Examples and variations .
The semiprimes less than 100 are : Semiprimes that are not square numbers are called discrete , distinct , or squarefree semiprimes :
The semiprimes are the case formula_1 of the formula_2-almost primes , numbers with exactly formula_2 prime factors .
However some sources use " semiprime " to refer to a larger set of numbers , the numbers with at most two prime factors ( including unit ( 1 ) , primes , and semiprimes ) .
These are : PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Semiprime numbers have no composite numbers as factors other than themselves .
For example , the number 26 is semiprime and its only factors are 1 , 2 , 13 , and 26 , of which only 26 is composite .
For a squarefree semiprime formula_4 ( with formula_5 )
the value of Euler 's totient function
formula_6 ( the number of positive integers less than or equal to formula_7 that are relatively prime to formula_7 ) takes the simple form
This calculation is an important part of the application of semiprimes in the RSA cryptosystem .
For a square semiprime formula_10 , the formula is again simple : APPLICATIONS
Section::::Applications .
Semiprimes are highly useful in the area of cryptography and number theory , most notably in public key cryptography , where they are used by RSA and pseudorandom number generators such as Blum Blum Shub .
These methods rely on the fact that finding two large primes and multiplying them together ( resulting in a semiprime ) is computationally simple , whereas finding the original factors appears to be difficult .
In the RSA Factoring Challenge , RSA Security offered prizes for the factoring of specific large semiprimes and several prizes were awarded .
The original RSA Factoring Challenge was issued in 1991 , and was replaced in 2001 by the New RSA Factoring Challenge , which was later withdrawn in 2007 .
In 1974 the Arecibo message was sent with a radio signal aimed at a star cluster .
It consisted of formula_12 binary digits intended to be interpreted as a formula_13 bitmap image .
The number formula_14 was chosen because it is a semiprime and therefore can be arranged into a rectangular image in only two distinct ways ( 23 rows and 73 columns , or 73 rows and 23 columns ) .
SEE ALSO
*
Chen 's theorem REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS