CALCIUM CHLORIDE Calcium chloride is an inorganic compound , a salt with the chemical formula CaCl .
It is a white coloured crystalline solid at room temperature , highly soluble in water .
Calcium chloride is commonly encountered as a hydrated solid with generic formula CaCl(HO ) , where x = 0 , 1 , 2 , 4 , and 6 .
These compounds are mainly used for de - icing and dust control .
Because the anhydrous salt is hygroscopic , it is used as a desiccant .
USES DE - ICING AND FREEZING - POINT
DEPRESSION Section::::Uses .
Section::::De - icing and freezing - point depression .
By depressing the freezing point of water , calcium chloride is used to prevent ice formation and is used to de - ice .
This application consumes the greatest amount of calcium chloride .
Calcium chloride is relatively harmless to plants and soil .
As a de - icing agent , it is much more effective at lower temperatures than sodium chloride .
When distributed for this use , it usually takes the form of small , white spheres a few millimeters in diameter , called prills .
Solutions of calcium chloride can prevent freezing at temperature as low as −52 ° C ( −62 ° F ) , making it ideal for filling agricultural implement tires as a liquid ballast , aiding traction in cold climates .
It is also used in domestic and industrial chemical air dehumidifiers .
ROAD SURFACING Section::::Road surfacing .
The second largest application of calcium chloride exploits hygroscopic properties and the tackiness of its hydrates .
A concentrated solution keeps a liquid layer on the surface of dirt roads , which suppresses formation of dust .
It keeps the finer dust particles on the road , providing a cushioning layer .
If these are allowed to blow away , the large aggregate begins to shift around and the road breaks down .
Using calcium chloride reduces the need for grading by as much as 50 % and the need for fill - in materials as much as 80 % .
WATER TREATMENT Section::::Water treatment .
Calcium chloride is used to increase the water hardness in swimming pools .
This process reduces the erosion of the concrete in the pool .
By Le Chatelier 's principle and the common - ion effect , increasing the concentration of calcium in the water reduces the dissolution of calcium compounds essential to the structure of concrete .
FOOD
Section::::Food .
The average intake of calcium chloride as food additives has been estimated to be 160–345 mg / day .
Calcium chloride is permitted as a food additive in the European Union for use as a sequestrant and firming agent with the E number E509 .
It is considered as generally recognized as safe ( GRAS ) by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration .
Its use in organic crop production is generally prohibited under the US National Organic Program .
In marine aquariums , calcium chloride is one way to introduce bioavailable calcium for calcium carbonate - shelled animals such as mollusks and some cnidarians .
Calcium hydroxide ( kalkwasser mix ) or a calcium reactor can also be used .
As a firming agent , calcium chloride is used in canned vegetables , in firming soybean curds into tofu and in producing a caviar substitute from vegetable or fruit juices .
It is commonly used as an electrolyte in sports drinks and other beverages , including bottled water .
The extremely salty taste of calcium chloride is used to flavor pickles without increasing the food 's sodium content .
Calcium chloride 's freezing - point depression properties are used to slow the freezing of the caramel in caramel - filled chocolate bars .
Also , it is frequently added to sliced apples to maintain texture .
In brewing beer , calcium chloride is sometimes used to correct mineral deficiencies in the brewing water .
It affects flavor and chemical reactions during the brewing process , and can also affect yeast function during fermentation .
In cheesemaking , calcium chloride is sometimes added to processed ( pasteurized / homogenized ) milk to restore the natural balance between calcium and protein in casein .
It is added before the coagulant .
Calcium chloride is used to prevent cork spot and bitter pit on apples by spraying on the tree during the late growing season .
LABORATORY AND RELATED DRYING OPERATIONS Section::::Laboratory and related
drying operations .
Drying tubes are frequently packed with calcium chloride .
Kelp is dried with calcium chloride for use in producing sodium carbonate .
Anhydrous calcium chloride has been approved by the FDA as a packaging aid to ensure dryness ( CPG 7117.02 ) .
MEDICINE Section::::Medicine .
It is injected to treat internal hydrofluoric acid burns .
It can be used to treat magnesium intoxication .
Calcium chloride injection may improve the appearance of an electrocardiogram .
It can help to protect the myocardium from dangerously high levels of serum potassium in hyperkalemia .
Calcium chloride can be used to quickly treat calcium channel blocker toxicity , from the side effects of drugs such as diltiazem .
CARDIAC ARREST Section::::Cardiac arrest .
While intravenous calcium has been used to treat cardiac arrest , its general use is not recommended .
Cases of cardiac arrest in which it is still recommended include high blood potassium , low blood calcium such as may occur following blood transfusions , and calcium channel blocker overdose .
There is the potential that general use could worsen outcomes .
If calcium is used , calcium chloride is generally the recommended form .
SCIENCE
Section::::Science .
Aqueous calcium chloride is used in genetic transformation of cells by increasing the cell membrane permeability , inducing competence for DNA uptake ( allowing DNA fragments to enter the cell more readily ) .
MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATIONS
Section::::Miscellaneous applications .
Calcium chloride is used in concrete mixes to accelerate the initial setting , but chloride ions lead to corrosion of steel rebar , so it should not be used in reinforced concrete .
The anhydrous form of calcium chloride may also be used for this purpose and can provide a measure of the moisture in concrete .
Calcium chloride is included as an additive in plastics and in fire extinguishers , in wastewater treatment as a drainage aid , in blast furnaces as an additive to control scaffolding ( clumping and adhesion of materials that prevent the furnace charge from descending ) , and in fabric softener as a thinner .
The exothermic dissolution of calcium chloride is used in self - heating cans and heating pads .
In the oil industry , calcium chloride is used to increase the density of solids - free brines .
It is also used to provide inhibition of swelling clays in the water phase of invert emulsion drilling fluids .
CaCl acts as flux material ( decreasing melting point ) in the Davy process for the industrial production of sodium metal , through the electrolysis of molten NaCl .
Similarly , CaCl is used as a flux and electrolyte in the FFC Cambridge process for titanium production , where it ensures the proper exchange of calcium and oxygen ions between the electrodes .
Calcium chloride is also used in the production of activated charcoal .
Calcium chloride is also an ingredient used in ceramic slipware .
It suspends clay particles so that they float within the solution making it easier to use in a variety of slipcasting techniques .
ANIMAL STERILIZATION
Section::::Animal sterilization .
Calcium chloride dihydrate ( 20 % by weight ) dissolved in ethanol ( 95 % ABV ) has been used as a sterilant for male animals .
The solution is injected into the testes of the animal .
Within 1 month , necrosis of testicular tissue results in sterilization .
HAZARDS Section::::Hazards .
Calcium chloride can act as an irritant by desiccating moist skin .
Solid calcium chloride dissolves exothermically , and burns can result in the mouth and esophagus if it is ingested .
Ingestion of concentrated solutions or solid products may cause gastrointestinal irritation or ulceration .
Consumption of calcium chloride can lead to hypercalcemia .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Calcium chloride dissolves in water , producing chloride and the aquo complex [ Ca(HO ) ] .
In this way , these solutions are sources of " free " calcium and free chloride ions .
This description is illustrated by the fact that these solutions react with phosphate sources to give a solid precipitate of calcium phosphate :
Calcium chloride has a very high enthalpy change of solution , indicated by considerable temperature rise accompanying dissolution of the anhydrous salt in water .
This property is the basis for its largest - scale application .
Molten calcium chloride can be electrolysed to give calcium metal and chlorine gas : PREPARATION Section::::Preparation .
In much of the world , calcium chloride is derived from limestone as a by - product of the Solvay process : North American consumption in 2002 was 1,529,000 tonnes ( 3.37 billion pounds ) .
In the US , most of calcium chloride is obtained by purification from brine .
A Dow Chemical Company manufacturing facility in Michigan houses about 35 % of the total U.S. production capacity for calcium chloride .
As with most bulk commodity salt products , trace amounts of other cations from the alkali metals and alkaline earth metals ( groups 1 and 2 ) and other anions from the halogens ( group 17 ) typically occur , but the concentrations are trifling .
OCCURRENCE Section::::Occurrence .
Calcium chloride occurs as the rare evaporite minerals sinjarite ( dihydrate ) and antarcticite ( hexahydrate ) .
The related minerals chlorocalcite ( potassium calcium chloride , KCaCl ) and tachyhydrite ( calcium magnesium chloride , CaMgCl·12HO ) are also very rare .
SEE ALSO * Calcium(I ) chloride
* Calcium chloride transformation *
Magnesium chloride
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* International Chemical Safety Card 1184
* Product and Application Information ( Formerly Dow Chemical Calcium Chloride division )
* Report on steel corrosion by chloride including CaCl
* Collection of calcium chloride reports and articles * Calcium chloride , Anhydrous MSDS
* Difusivity of calcium chloride
* Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , National Institutes of Occupational Safety and Health , " Calcium Chloride ( anhydrous ) "