BEETROOT
The beetroot is the taproot portion of the beet plant , usually known in North America as the beet and also known as the table beet , garden beet , red beet , or golden beet .
It is one of several of the cultivated varieties of Beta vulgaris grown for their edible taproots and their leaves ( called beet greens ) .
These varieties have been classified as B. vulgaris subsp .
vulgaris Conditiva Group .
Other than as a food , beets have use as a food colouring and as a medicinal plant .
Many beet products are made from other Beta vulgaris varieties , particularly sugar beet .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Beta is the ancient Latin name for beets , possibly of Celtic origin , becoming bete in Old English around 1400 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
From the Middle Ages , beetroot was used as a treatment for a variety of conditions , especially illnesses relating to digestion and the blood .
Bartolomeo Platina recommended taking beetroot with garlic to nullify the effects of " garlic - breath " .
During the middle of the 19th century , wine often was coloured with beetroot juice .
CULTIVARS Section::::Cultivars .
Below is a list of several commonly available cultivars of beets .
Generally , 55 to 65 days are needed from germination to harvest of the root .
All cultivars can be harvested earlier for use as greens .
Unless otherwise noted , the root colours are shades of red and dark red with different degrees of zoning noticeable in slices .
FOOD Section::::Food .
Usually the deep purple roots of beetroot are eaten boiled , roasted , or raw , and either alone or combined with any salad vegetable .
A large proportion of the commercial production is processed into boiled and sterilized beets or into pickles .
In Eastern Europe , beet soup , such as borscht , is a popular dish .
In Indian cuisine , chopped , cooked , spiced beet is a common side dish .
Yellow - coloured beetroots are grown on a very small scale for home consumption .
The green , leafy portion of the beet is also edible .
The young leaves can be added raw to salads , whilst the mature leaves are most commonly served boiled or steamed , in which case they have a taste and texture similar to spinach .
Those greens selected should be from bulbs that are unmarked , instead of those with overly limp leaves or wrinkled skins , both of which are signs of dehydration .
The domestication of beets can be traced to the emergence of an allele which enables biennial harvesting of leaves and taproot .
Beetroot can be boiled or steamed , peeled , and then eaten warm with or without butter as a delicacy ; cooked , pickled , and then eaten cold as a condiment ; or peeled , shredded raw , and then eaten as a salad .
Pickled beets are a traditional food in many countries .
A traditional Pennsylvania Dutch dish is pickled beet egg .
Hard - boiled eggs are refrigerated in the liquid left over from pickling beets and allowed to marinate until the eggs turn a deep pink - red colour .
In Poland and Ukraine , beet is combined with horseradish to form popular ćwikła , which is traditionally used with cold cuts and sandwiches , but often also added to a meal consisting of meat and potatoes .
Similarly in Serbia where the popular cvekla is used as winter salad , seasoned with salt and vinegar , with meat dishes .
As an addition to horseradish , it is also used to produce the " red " variety of chrain , a popular condiment in Ashkenazi Jewish , Hungarian , Polish , Lithuanian , Russian , and Ukrainian cuisine .
Popular in Australian hamburgers , a slice of pickled beetroot is combined with other condiments on a beef patty to make an Aussie burger .
In Northern Germany , beetroot is mashed with Labskaus or added as its side order .
When beet juice is used , it is most stable in foods with a low water content , such as frozen novelties and fruit fillings .
Betanins , obtained from the roots , are used industrially as red food colourants , e.g. to intensify the colour of tomato paste , sauces , desserts , jams and jellies , ice cream , sweets , and breakfast cereals .
Beetroot can also be used to make wine .
A moderate amount of chopped beetroot is sometimes added to the Japanese pickle fukujinzuke for color .
Food shortages in Europe following World War
I caused great hardships , including cases of mangelwurzel disease , as relief workers called it .
It was symptomatic of eating only beets .
NUTRITION Section::::Nutrition .
Raw beetroot is 88 % water , 10 % carbohydrates , 2 % protein , and less than 1 % fat ( see table ) .
In a 100-gram amount providing 43 calories , raw beetroot is a rich source ( 27 % of the Daily Value - DV ) of folate and a moderate source ( 16 % DV ) of manganese , with other nutrients having insignificant content ( table ) .
PRELIMINARY RESEARCH Section::::Preliminary research .
In preliminary research , beetroot juice reduced blood pressure in hypertensive animals , so may have an effect on mechanisms of cardiovascular disease .
Tentative evidence has found that dietary nitrate supplementation such as from beets and other vegetables results in a small to moderate improvement in endurance exercise performance .
Beets contain betaines , which may function to reduce the concentration of homocysteine , a homolog of the naturally occurring amino acid cysteine .
High circulating levels of homocysteine may be harmful to blood vessels , thus contribute to the development of cardiovascular disease .
this hypothesis is controversial as it has not yet been established whether homocysteine itself is harmful or is just an indicator of increased risk for cardiovascular disease .
OTHER USES
Section::::Other uses .
Betanin , obtained from the roots , is used industrially as red food colorant , to improve the color and flavor of tomato paste , sauces , desserts , jams and jellies , ice cream , candy , and breakfast cereals , among other applications .
The chemical adipic acid rarely occurs in nature , but happens to occur naturally in beetroot .
SAFETY Section::::Safety .
The red colour compound betanin is not broken down in the body , and in higher concentrations may temporarily cause urine or stools to assume a reddish colour , in the case of urine a condition called beeturia .
Although harmless , this effect may cause initial concern due to the visual similarity to what appears to be blood in the stool , hematochezia ( blood passing through the anus , usually in or with stool ) or hematuria ( blood in the urine ) .
Nitrosamine formation in beet juice can reliably be prevented by adding ascorbic acid .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES