FIRE ANT Fire ant is the common name for several species of ants in the genus Solenopsis .
They are , however , only a minority in the genus , which includes over 200 species of Solenopsis worldwide .
Solenopsis are stinging ants and most of their common names reflect this , for example , ginger ants and tropical fire ants .
Many species also are called red ants because of their light brown color , though species of ants in many other genera are similarly named for similar reasons .
Examples include Myrmica rubra and Pogonomyrmex barbatus .
None of these names apply in all countries nor to all species of Solenopsis , nor only to Solenopsis species ; for example the colloquial names for several species of weaver ants in the genus Oecophylla in Southeast Asia include " fire ants " because of their red color and painful sting ; the two genera , however , are not closely related .
Also , Wasmannia auropunctata is commonly called the " little fire ant " .
APPEARANCE OF FIRE ANTS Section::::Appearance of fire ants .
The bodies of mature fire ants , like the bodies of all typical mature insects , are divided into three sections : the head , the thorax , and the abdomen , with three pairs of legs and a pair of antennae .
Fire ants of those species invasive in the United States can be distinguished from other ants locally present by their copper brown head and body with a darker abdomen .
The worker ants are blackish to reddish and their size varies from .
In an established nest these different sizes of ants all are present at the same time .
Solenopsis spp .
ants can be identified by three body features — a pedicel with two nodes , an unarmed propodeum , and antennae with 10 segments plus a two - segmented club .
Many ants bite , and formicine ants can cause irritation by spraying formic acid ; myrmecine ants like fire ants have a dedicated venom - injecting sting , which injects an alkaloid venom , as well as mandibles for biting .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
A typical fire ant colony produces large mounds in open areas , and feeds mostly on young plants and seeds .
Fire ants often attack small animals and can kill them .
Unlike many other ants , which bite and then spray acid on the wound , fire ants bite only to get a grip and then sting ( from the abdomen ) and inject a toxic alkaloid venom called solenopsin , a compound from the class of piperidines .
For humans , this is a painful sting , a sensation similar to what one feels when burned by fire ( hence the name ) , and the after effects of the sting can be deadly to sensitive people .
Fire ants are more aggressive than most native species , so have pushed many species away from their local habitat .
One such species that Solenopsis ants parasitically take advantage of are bees , such as Euglossa imperialis , a nonsocial orchid bee species , from which the ants would enter the cells from below the nest and rob the cell 's contents .
These ants are renowned for their ability to survive extreme conditions .
They do not hibernate , but can survive cold conditions , although this is costly to fire ant populations as observed during several winters in Tennessee , where 80 to 90 % of colonies died due to several consecutive days of extremely low temperatures .
Fire ants have been known to form mutualistic relationships with several species of Lycaenidae and Riodinidae butterflies .
In Lycaena rubidus , the larvae secrete a fluid that is high in sugar content .
Fire ants bring the larvae back to the nest , and protect them through the pupal stage in exchange for feeding on the fluid .
In Eurybia elvina , fire ants were observed to frequently construct soil shelters over later instars of larvae on inflorescences on which the larvae are found .
Fire ants nest in the soil , often near moist areas , such as river banks , pond shores , watered lawns , and highway shoulders .
Usually , the nest will not be visible , as it will be built under objects such as timber , logs , rocks , or bricks .
If no cover for nesting is available , dome - shaped mounds are constructed , but these are usually only found in open spaces , such as fields , parks , and lawns .
These mounds can reach heights of , but can be even higher on heavier soils , standing at in height and in diameter .
Colonies are founded by small groups of queens or single queens .
Even if only one queen survives , within a month or so , the colony can expand to thousands of individuals .
Some colonies may be polygynous ( having multiple queens per nest ) .
Fire ants are resilient and can survive floods .
During Hurricane Harvey in Texas in 2017 , clumps of fire ants , known as rafts , were seen clumped together on the surface of the water .
Each clump had as many as 100,000 individual ants , which formed a temporary structure until finding a new permanent home .
ROLES QUEEN Section::::Roles .
Section::::Queen .
Fire ant queens , the reproductive females in their colony , also are generally the largest .
Their primary function is reproduction ; fire ant queens may live up to 7 years and can produce up to 1,600 eggs per day , and colonies will have as many as 250,000 workers .
The estimated potential life span is around 5.83 to 6.77 years .
Young , virgin fire ant queens have wings ( as do male fire ants ) , but they rip them off after mating .
MALES ( DRONES )
Section::::Males ( drones ) .
Males mate with the queen .
They die soon after mating .
OTHER ROLES
Section::::Other roles .
There are other types of roles in an ant colony like the workers and the soldier ants .
The soldier ants are known for their larger and more powerful mandibles while the worker takes care of regular tasks ( the main tasks in a colony are caring for the eggs / larvae / pupae , cleaning the nest , and foraging for food ) .
However , Solenopsis daguerrei colonies contain no workers , as they are considered social parasites .
INVASIVE SPECIES Section::::Invasive species .
Although most fire ant species do not bother people and are not invasive , Solenopsis invicta , known in the United States as the red imported fire ant ( or RIFA ) is an invasive pest in many areas of the world , notably the United States , Australia , China and Taiwan .
The RIFA was believed to have been accidentally introduced to these countries via shipping crates , particularly with Australia when they were first found in Brisbane in 2001 .
These ants have now since been spotted in Sydney for the first time .
They were believed to be in the Philippines , but they are most likely to be misidentified for Solenopsis geminata ants .
In the US the FDA estimates that more than US$ 5 billion is spent annually on medical treatment , damage , and control in RIFA - infested areas .
Furthermore , the ants cause approximately $ 750 million in damage annually to agricultural assets , including veterinarian bills and livestock loss , as well as crop loss .
Over 40 million people live in RIFA - infested areas in the southeastern United States .
It is estimated that 30%-60 % of the people living in fire ant - infested areas of the US are stung each year .
RIFA are currently found mainly in subtropical southeastern USA states including Florida , Georgia , South Carolina , Louisiana , Mississippi , Alabama , and parts of North Carolina , Virginia , Tennessee , Arkansas , Texas , Oklahoma , New Mexico , and California .
Since September 2004
Taiwan has been seriously affected by the red fire ant .
The US , Taiwan and Australia all have ongoing national programs to control or eradicate the species , but , except for Australia , none have been especially effective .
In Australia , there is an intensive program costing A$ 175 million , although the fire ant had remained despite efforts .
By July 2013 multiple sites west of Brisbane were confirmed , including the Lockyer Valley , Muirlea and Goodna .
According to a study published in 2009 , it only took seventy years for the lizards in parts of the United States to adapt to the ant 's presence – they now have longer legs and new behaviors that aid them in escaping from the danger .
SYMPTOMS AND TREATMENT FOR
FIRE ANT STING Section::::Symptoms and treatment for fire ant sting .
The venom of fire ants is mainly ( > 95 % ) composed of oily alkaloids structurally derived from piperidine ( see Solenopsis saevissima ) mixed with a small amount of toxic proteins .
Fire ant stings are painful , characterised by a local burning sensation , followed by urticaria .
The sting site typically swells into a bump within hours , which can cause further pain and irritation , especially following several stings are at the same place .
The bump may develop into a white pustule within 24 - 36h which can become infected if scratched , but will spontaneously flatten within a few days if left alone .
The pustules are obtrusive and uncomfortable while active and , if they become infected , may cause scarring .
Some people may become allergic to the venom , and if untreated , may become increasingly sensitive to the point of experiencing anaphylaxis following fire ant stings , which requires emergency treatment .
Management of an emergency visit due to anaphylaxis is recommended with the use of adrenaline .
It has been demonstrated that , whilst pustule formation results from the injected venom alkaloids , allergy to fire ant stings is caused solely by venom allergenic proteins .
First aid for fire ant stings includes external treatments and oral medicines .
There are also many home remedies of varying efficacy , including immediate application of a solution of half bleach and half water , or aloe vera gel - the latter of which is also often included in over - the - counter creams that also include medically tested and verified treatments .
External , topical treatments include the anesthetic benzocaine , the antihistamine diphenhydramine , and the corticosteroid hydrocortisone .
Antihistamines or topical corticosteroids may help reduce the itching and will generally benefit local sting reactions .
Oral medicine include antihistamines .
Severe allergic reactions to fire ant stings , including severe chest pain , nausea , severe sweating , loss of breath , serious swelling , and slurred speech , can be fatal if not treated .
PREDATORS Section::::Predators .
Phorid flies , or Phoridae , are a large family of small , hump - backed flies somewhat smaller than vinegar flies ; two species in this family ( Pseudacteon tricuspis and Pseudacteon curvatus ) are parasitoids of the red imported fire ant in its native range in South America .
Some 110 species of the genus Pseudacteon , or ant - decapitating flies , have been described .
Members of Pseudacteon reproduce by laying eggs in the thorax of the ant .
The first instar larvae migrates to the head , then develops by feeding on the hemolymph , muscle tissue , and nervous tissue .
After about two weeks , they cause the ant 's head to fall off by releasing an enzyme that dissolves the membrane attaching the ant 's head to its body .
The fly pupates in the detached head capsule , emerging two weeks later .
Pseudacteon flies appear to be important ecological constraints on Solenopsis species and they have been introduced throughout the southern United States , starting with Travis , Brazos , and Dallas counties in Texas , as well as south central Alabama , where the ants first entered North America .
The Venus flytrap , a carnivorous plant , is native only to North and South Carolina in the United States .
About 33 % of the prey of the Venus flytrap are ants of various species .
They lure their prey with a sweet sap .
Once the prey has entered the trap and within about 3 seconds has touched two or three " trigger hairs " , bristles on the surface of the trap , the leaf closes around the prey , confining it behind the " teeth " on its perimeter , and digests it .
The majority of ants that are captured include non - native RIFAs , and three other species of ants .
Other carnivorous plants , such as sundews ( Drosera ) and various kinds of pitcher plants also trap many ants .
SPECIES Section::::Species .
The genus contains over 200 species .
Some of the most studied species include : *
Solenopsis daguerrei
* Solenopsis fugax
* Solenopsis invicta *
Solenopsis molesta
*
Solenopsis richteri *
Solenopsis saevissima *
Solenopsis silvestrii *
Solenopsis
solenopsidis * Solenopsis xyloni
*
Solenopsis geminata
SEE ALSO
* Ant stings
* Ant venom * Ants of medical importance *
Bullet ant * Red imported fire ants in Australia REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS