UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH FLORIDA ST .
PETERSBURG
The University of South Florida St. Petersburg ( USFSP ) , commonly known as USF St. Pete , is a separately accredited institution in the University of South Florida System , located in downtown St. Petersburg , Florida by the Tampa Bay waterfront .
As part of a multi - institutional system , USF St. Petersburg retains a separate identity and mission while contributing to and benefiting from the associations , cooperation , and shared resources of the USF System .
The campus is bounded by the Salt Creek Marine District , Bayfront Medical Center and All Children 's Hospital and the Roser Park and Bartlett Park residential neighborhoods .
Opened in 1965 as a satellite campus of the University of South Florida , USFSP gained accreditation as a separate entity in 2006 .
USF St. Petersburg is the only public university in Pinellas County and the only public university offering bachelors and graduate degree programs in the area .
USF St. Petersburg enrolled nearly 5,000 students during the fall 2012 semester .
Students across the USF System enroll at USF St. Petersburg , creating a typical semester student population of more than 6,000 .
The other separately accredited institutions in the System are the University of South Florida in Tampa , Florida and University of South Florida Sarasota - Manatee in Sarasota , Florida .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1965 , the University of South Florida created a satellite campus in downtown St. Petersburg , Florida , the " Bay Campus , " the University of South Florida St. Petersburg .
The campus opened in the fall of 1965 to 257 freshman .
In 1967 , USF St. Petersburg organized the USF Marine Science Program .
In that same year , the Florida Institute of Oceanography opened facilities on land leased from the University of South Florida St. Petersburg .
In 1969 , USF St. Petersburg opened its library with 2,248 volumes and offered its first degrees to 51 graduates of elementary education program .
In that same year , a State Legislature passed bill establishing USF St. Petersburg as a branch of the University of South Florida .
By 1981 , USF St. Petersburg had completed its first stage of expansion with the addition of Bayboro Hall .
In 1984 , Coquina Hall opened its doors .
In 1990 , the Campus Activities Center opened its doors .
In 2005 , USF St. Petersburg celebrated its 40th Anniversary and the groundbreaking for Residence Hall One .
In 2006 , USF St. Petersburg was accredited as a separate entity from the University of South Florida .
In that same year , the University of South Florida St. Petersburg opened its new student residence hall , Residence Hall One , to house future and returning students .
ACADEMICS
ACCREDITATION Section::::Academics .
Section::::Accreditation .
Having been a satellite campus of the University of South Florida for the first 40 years of its existence , the University of South Florida St. Petersburg gained autonomy and was accredited as a separate entity within the University of South Florida system by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools starting with the 2006 - 2007 school year .
Accreditation allows the University of South Florida St. Petersburg to award bachelor 's and master 's degrees .
The College of Business and the Program of Accountancy are both accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business ( AACSB ) International .
Less than one - third of U.S. business school programs , fewer than 15 percent of business school programs worldwide meet the rigorous standards for AACSB accreditation .
Only 180 institutions worldwide are separately accredited in accounting .
The Department of Journalism and Media Studies is accredited by the Accrediting Council on Education in Journalism and Mass Communications ( ACEJMC ) , and it is the only journalism program in the central and south Florida area that has both undergraduate and graduate degree programs accredited .
Only 111 professional programs out of 400 colleges and universities in the U.S. are accredited .
COLLEGES
Section::::Colleges .
USF St. Petersburg has three colleges that offer both bachelor 's and master 's degrees .
The three colleges are the College of Arts & Sciences , the College of Business , and the College of Education .
The separate USF College of Marine Science is also located on the campus .
PROGRAMS Section::::Programs .
The University of South Florida St. Petersburg has four Programs of Distinction : * Florida Studies : The Masters in Liberal Arts degree allows for focus in Florida Studies .
The Florida Studies Program brings together faculty from history , economics , geography , political science , anthropology , and other disciplines to create an integrated , in - depth exploration of the state 's changing identity as a part of the American South as well as a bridge to the Caribbean Basin .
* * Environmental Sciences * * Journalism and Media Studies :
The Department of Journalism and Media Studies offers M.A. in digital journalism and design ( fully online ) ; M.A. in journalism and media studies ; B.A. in mass communications with a journalism studies concentration ; and Minor in mass communications .
Dr. Deni Elliott is the chair .
In 1988 , University of South Florida agreed to house the journalism master 's program in St. Petersburg , Florida .
The campus hired Michael Killenberg , a University of Southern Illinois full professor , to teach master 's and undergraduate classes and supervise adjuncts .
The professional journalism M.A .program , with support from local media and the Poynter Institute , complemented USF Tampa 's School of Mass Communications PR and Media Studies M.A. programs .
Initially , students took classes in St. Petersburg and most completed degrees in Tampa .
Killenberg in 1991 hired Dr. Robert Dardenne ( University of Tennessee at Chattanooga ) and in 1992 they co - founded the master 's program .
They also started Neighborhood News Bureau ( NNB )
so students covered stories in an under - represented neighborhood and were exposed to an African - American urban culture .
In 1993 , they hired internationally recognized ethics scholar
Jay Black ( University of Alabama ) as the Eleanor Poynter Jamison Chair in Media Ethics and Press Policy .
The three created a complete undergraduate program to match its master 's program .
By the time the legislature required USF St. Petersburg to seek separate SACS accreditation , the campus had officially designated the program as the only named department on campus .
It became a " direct receipt " graduate program , separated from Tampa School of Mass Communications and achieved in 2004 the Accrediting Council on Education in Journalism and Mass Communications ( ACEJMC ) accreditation , fully compliant on all standards .
In September 2006 , the department opened the Neighborhood News Bureau office at 2335 22nd Avenue South in Midtown , St. Petersburg .
Dr. Jay Black retired in 2008 .
The department was among 11 leading journalism schools to participate the Edward R. Murrow Program for Journalists in 2009 , 2010 and 2011 .
Dr. Michael Killenberg retired in 2011 .
The college offers " the Edward R. Murrow Program for Journalists , which brings ' emerging leaders ' in journalism from around the world to the U.S. " * * Social Responsibility & Corporate Reporting * ATHLETICS Section::::Athletics .
USF has athletic teams in baseball , basketball , cross country , football , golf , outdoor track , sailing , soccer , and volleyball .
USF SAILING TEAM Section::::USF Sailing Team .
The USF Sailing Team has male and female teams .
The Co - ed Sailing and Varsity Women 's Sailing Teams are both ranked in the Top 30 Collegiate Sailing Teams in the nation .
USF Sailing is a member of the South Atlantic Intercollegiate Sailing Association ( SAISA ) .
The team has two coaches and a waterfront facility on campus .
They have travelled widely throughout the northeast and mid - Atlantic regions for competition at other schools including Dartmouth , MIT , Tufts , Brown ,
St. Mary 's , Boston , Stanford , Coast Guard , URI , Bowdoin , Yale , Conn College , and Navy .
CAMPUS COMPUTING
Section::::Campus computing .
The Office of Campus Computing at USF St. Petersburg is responsible for all functions that involve computing , data communication and Voice over IP services .
Campus Computing Services ( CCS ) and the St. Petersburg Regional Data Center ( SPRDAC ) are an integral part of the Office of Campus Computing .
The Office of Campus Computing is also involved in the planning and implementation of the information technology infrastructure necessary to support the evolution of USF St. Petersburg as a major research institution and its academic programs .
LIBRARY NELSON POYNTER MEMORIAL LIBRARY Section::::Library .
Section::::Nelson Poynter Memorial Library .
The Nelson Poynter Memorial Library opened in 1996 to commemorate Nelson Poynter .
The Nelson Poynter Memorial Library , serving the University of South Florida St. Petersburg 's community , is an inviting place for students , faculty , and campus visitors to read , relax , research , or study .
The Nelson Poynter Library has over a 200,000 volume collection featuring business , education , liberal arts , and marine science .
Literature selections range from classics such as Herman Melville 's Moby - Dick to the latest award - winning novels .
A children 's collection features outstanding juvenile and young adult books .
The Poynter Library 's Special Collections department offers outstanding collections of rare books , oral histories , and local history photographs and documents .
Notable collections include the John C. Briggs Collection of Ichthyology and Natural History , the David Hubbell Mark Twain Collection , the Miller Family Collection of Presidential Signatures and Documents , and the Papers of Nelson Poynter .
The library subscribes to more than 800 periodicals and newspapers , including Science , The Economist , Foreign Affairs , and local and national newspapers .
Over 10,000 electronic journals and newspapers augmenting these print collections are accessible through the library 's on the wireless network or on computers in the library 's information commons .
In 1950 , when the Merchant Marine training base at Bayboro Harbor was deactivated , Nelson Poynter started a campaign to persuade the City of St. Petersburg to donate the land to the state .
Poynter committed himself to donate $ 500,000 to help buy additional land for expansion and was the principal contributor and fundraiser for the first St. Petersburg campus library .
On June 15 , 1978 , Nelson Poynter , his wife Marion , business and civic leaders , educators , and students took turns with eight gold - painted shovels to break ground for the first phase expansion of the campus .
A few hours later , Nelson Poynter suffered a cerebral hemorrhage .
Poynter died that same evening .
That library would become Bayboro Hall , the Nelson Poynter Memorial Library would open in 1996 in his name .
THE CROW 'S NEST Section::::The Crow 's Nest .
The Crow 's Nest is a student - run newspaper circulated in USF St. Petersburg that was first published in 1969 .
The newspaper is published in the fall and spring semesters , and contains news stories , features and entertainment pieces that are of interest to the students .
The newspaper distributes 800 copies of the paper every Monday on campus .
Since the spring of 2005 , The Crow 's Nest has been published on a weekly basis .
The Crow 's Nest is funded each semester by a portion of revenue generated from Activities and Services fees as well as advertising revenue .
CAMPUS LIFE Section::::Campus life .
The University of South Florida St. Petersburg has an active campus life .
The majority of activities involving students are officially the responsibility of the Division of Student Affairs , but over the years , Student Government Association has become the sole funding source of Student Life , Campus Reservations and New Student Orientation .
In April 2006 , Student Government opened a new volleyball and basketball courts facility on campus .
STUDENT SUCCESS CENTER
Section::::Student Success Center .
The Student Success Center ( SSC ) was created to help students achieve their educational goals .
Through tutoring sessions , workshops , seminars , and academic coaching , the SSC helps students succeed at USF St. Petersburg .
* Assistant Director , Student Success :
CeCe
Edwards
STUDENT LIFE
Section::::Student life .
The Department of Student Life & Engagement and the Student Life Center work together to allow for opportunities for students to learn outside of class .
The Student Life Center is located on the same street as Residence Hall One and is across the street from the campus .
It houses the fitness center which a weight and cardio room , recreation areas , aerobics area , locker rooms , and basketball , and volleyball .
HARBORSIDE ACTIVITIES BOARD Section::::Harborside Activities Board .
The Harborside Activities Board is the university 's campus programming board , that plans and implements educational , cultural , and social co - curricular activities for the USF St. Petersburg campus .
Harborside Activities Board is made up of three entertainment divisions : film , stage acts and special events .
Film brings blockbuster movies to campus for free screenings months before they are released on DVD , as well as educational films and childhood classics .
Stage Acts is most well known for bringing up - and - coming and well known comedians to perform free shows for students twice a semester , as well as music acts , speakers , performers and many others .
Special Events is most well known for their make and take programming that allows students to enjoy fun activities such as " Build - A - Bull , " where students get the opportunity to make their own stuffed animal bull mascot , as well as tie - dye events , casino nights where students are able to compete for over $ 1,000 in prizes and many more .
STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS
Section::::Student organizations .
The University of South Florida St. Petersburg has many student organizations .
They include the Student Green Energy Fund , COMission ( College Outreach Mission ) , SPECTRUM Mentor Program , Alpha Phi Omega , Anthropology , Barbecue Club , Beta Alpha Psi , Beta Gamma Sigma , Black Student Association , Board Club , COMission ( a Christian Student Organization ) , Chess Club , Criminology Student Association , Extreme Dodgeball Club , Film Club , French Club , Gay - Straight Alliance , Harborside Activities Board , Intervarsity Christian Fellowship , Latin American Student Association , Law Society , Lux Mundi :
Catholic Student Association , Bull Horn Radio , Grappling Club , Marine Science Advisory Committee , American Red Cross , Omicron Delta Kappa , Pre - Med Society , Psychology Science Club , Sigma Tau Delta , Entrepreneur Club , Latin American Student Association ( LASA ) , No - Bull dance Troupe , Student Education Association , and Student Environmental Awareness Society ( SEAS ) .
STUDENT GOVERNMENT Section::::Student government .
The USF St. Petersburg Student Government is the governing entity of the student body at USF St. Petersburg .
It is the active voice of the student body and is responsible for the annual allocation of Activities and Services ( A&S ) fee revenue generated by the enrolled student population .
Student Government recognizes student organizations through this funding .
The Student Government is responsible for allocating a 3.3 Millon dollar annual budget , which funds both campus activities and the Student Center .
The USFSP Student Government ( SG ) is a Presidential Government composed of three branches , the Judicial , Executive , and the Legislative Branches .
The Executive Branch is composed of the Office of the President , the Senior Leadership , the Executive Cabinet , and the agencies of Student Government .
The Executive Branch is headed by Student Body President David Thompson , the Student Body President so serves as the student representative to the USFSP Campus Board .
The Executive Branch is composed of the Student Body President and Vice President , the Chief of Staff , the Chief Financial Officer , and the Chief Legal Officer , as well as 6 Directors .
STUDENT HOUSING RESIDENCE
HALL ONE
Section::::Student housing .
Section::::Residence Hall One .
To accommodate extra students and students wishing to pursue a degree full - time on campus , USF St. Petersburg built a residence hall , Residence Hall One .
First year students who live 30 miles or farther from the USFSP campus are required to live In Residence Hall One .
Residence Hall One is located across the street from the campus .
Students can easily walk to class , the gym , parking garage and Campus Activity Center , located on the same street as Residence Hall One , within minutes .
Students wishing to live in Residence Hall One can choose from any of two suites ; Manatee and Dolphin .
There is a third suite , Falcon , that exists in the form of one room and houses two students in single bedrooms .
Residence Hall
One also offers its students a sense of community in an already welcoming university .
Every floor has a Resident Assistant to monitor , help , and organize meetings for the students .
Residence Hall
One is also the University of South Florida St. Petersburg 's first student dormitory since Merchant Marine training bases were used as dormitories for students .
USF St. Petersburg officially opened the doors to Residence Hall One on August 23 , 2006 for the Fall semester .
Residence Hall
One is a seven - story building that can house 354 students in 95 apartments that contain four - person double bedrooms , four - person single bedrooms , and one two - person apartment with single bedrooms .
Each apartment contains two bathrooms , a living room and kitchen with garbage disposal , refrigerator and microwave .
All utilities are included ; electricity , water , heat and air conditioning , local telephone service , high speed Internet and cable TV .
Every floor in Residence Hall
One has a laundry room and lounge .
Lounges are equipped with furniture and a high - definition television with cable TV .
Resident students can also park their cars in the seven - story parking garage across the street built at the same time as Residence Hall One .
A $ 1,500 Sails Scholarship was offered to students who moved into Residence Hall One during its first year open .
Residence Hall One also offers its students beautiful views of Tampa Bay and downtown St. Petersburg .
Students are in close range of supermarkets , movie theaters and restaurants .
The Student Government Safe Team transported students while patrolling the campus parking lots and buildings and facilities until the program was ended in 2010 .
The University of South Florida St. Petersburg has on - campus police to safeguard the campus , students , and parking garage .
Residence Hall
One is the University of South Florida St. Petersburg 's first step in its second phase of expansion .
2007 was the first year that USF St. Petersburg was able to house incoming freshman during the summer semester during their summer program .
UNIVERSITY STUDENT CENTER Section::::University Student Center .
The university launched its 81,00 square foot University Student Center on September 6 , 2012 .
The $ 21 million facility was partly financed with a special student fee passed by the Florida Legislature and supported by students who saw a need for a central gathering place at USFSP .
The building , 200 Sixth Avenue South , opened August 25 , 2012 when 200 residential students moved into rooms in the six - story residential tower .
Besides student housing , the building also includes a dining hall called The Reef that is open to the public serving breakfast , lunch and dinner seven days a week .
It offers the first full - service meal plans for USFSP .
The center also includes an atrium lobby , wireless internet , laundry facilities , a student lounge , seating areas and two outdoor basketball courts .
The 75-ft building was designed by Rowe Architects of Tampa and built by Creative Contractors of Clearwater .
Among its architectural features is a 65-ft multi - colored glass - enclosed circular staircase for the residential tower , and an 8,000 sq .
ft . curtain of glass along 6th Avenue South .
The residential tower brings the total number of residential students to nearly 650 , a record number in the university 's history .
Many of the rooms in the residential tower offer views of Tampa Bay and the downtown St. Petersburg skyline .
NOTABLE FACULTY
* Deni Elliott , professor in Department of Journalism and Media Studies , and Eleanor Poynter Jamison Chair in Media Ethics and Press Policy .
* Gary Mormino , Frank E. Duckwall Professor of History and co - director of the Florida Studies Program .
* Raymond Arsenault , American historian and author , known for recent book Freedom Riders POINTS OF INTEREST
* Nelson Poynter Memorial Library
* Poynter Institute * Florida Center for Teachers
* Salvador Dalí Museum
* Albert Whitted Airport * All Children 's Hospital * U.S. Geological Survey 's Center for Coastal Geology * The Florida Institute of Oceanography *
The Florida Marine Research Institute FOOTNOTES EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official Athletics website