PROPERTY TAX
A house tax or millage rate is an ad valorem tax on the value of a house , usually levied on real estate .
The tax is levied by the governing authority of the jurisdiction in which the house is located .
This can be a national government , a federated state , a county or geographical region or a municipality .
Multiple jurisdictions may tax the same house .
This tax can be contrasted to a rent tax which is based on rental income or imputed rent , and a land value tax , which is a levy on the value of land , excluding the value of buildings and other improvements .
Under a house - tax system , the government requires or performs an appraisal of the monetary value of each house , and tax is assessed in proportion to that value .
TYPES Section::::Types .
The four broad types of property taxes are land , improvements to land (
immovable man - made objects , such as buildings ) , personal property ( movable man - made objects ) and intangible property .
Real property ( also called real estate or realty ) is the combination of land and improvements .
Forms of property tax vary across jurisdictions .
Real property is often taxed based on its class .
Classification is the grouping of properties based on similar use .
Properties in different classes are taxed at different rates .
Examples of property classes are residential , commercial , industrial and vacant real property .
In Israel , for example , property tax rates are double for vacant apartments versus occupied apartments .
A special assessment tax is sometimes confused with property tax .
These are two distinct forms of taxation : one ( ad valorem tax ) relies upon the fair market value of the property .
The other ( special assessment ) relies upon a special enhancement called a " benefit " for its justification .
The property tax rate is typically given as a percentage .
It may be expressed as a per mil ( amount of tax per thousand currency units of property value ) , which is also known as a millage rate or mill ( one - thousandth of a currency unit ) .
To calculate the property tax , the authority multiplies the assessed value by the mill rate and then divides by 1,000 .
For example , a property with an assessed value of $ 50,000 located in a municipality with a mill rate of 20 mills would have a property tax bill of $ 1,000 per year .
JURISDICTIONS Section::::Jurisdictions .
Property classes , tax rates , assessment rules and valuations vary by jurisdiction .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Australian property is taxed at both the state and council ( local municipal ) level .
Taxes are payable by property owners - there is no property tax charged to renters .
A state tax commonly called " stamp duty " is assessed when is property is purchased or transferred .
It is typically around 5 % of the purchase price , payable by the purchaser .
Other transfer charges may also apply , including special fees for investors from overseas .
" Land tax " - also a state tax - is assessed every year on a property 's value .
Most Australians do not pay land tax , as most states provide a land tax exemption for the primary home or residence .
Depending on the state , surcharge tax rates can apply to foreign owners .
" Council rates " is a municipal tax levied by local government .
This is assessed each year on a property 's value .
Council rates are around $ 1300 per annum for an average Australian household .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
Brazil is a Federation Republic , and its federated entities ( internal States and Municipalities ) , as well as the Federal government , levy property taxes .
They are all declared in the Federal Constitution .
These are the current property taxes :
* Tax on Rural Territorial Property – federal : levied upon real state property on rural areas ; * Tax on Urban Territorial Property – municipal : levied upon real state property on urban areas ; * Tax on Motorized Vehicles Property – state : levied upon the property of cars , trucks , motorcycles , and the likes ; * Tax on Big Fortunes – federal : it is declared on the Federal Constitution , but there is still no regulation defining its incidence .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Many provinces levy property tax on real estate based upon land use and value .
This is the major source of revenue for most municipal governments .
While property tax levels vary across municipalities , a common property assessment or valuation criteria is laid out in provincial legislation .
The trend is to use a market value standard for valuation purposes with varying revaluation cycles .
Multiple provinces established an annual reassessment cycle where market activity warrants , while others have longer periods between valuation periods .
CALCULATING INDIVIDUAL PROPERTY TAXES
Section::::Calculating Individual Property Taxes .
In Ontario , for most properties ( e.g. , residential , farms ) , property taxes can be calculated by multiplying the phased - in assessment indicated on the Property Assessment Notice by the tax rate .
The municipal tax rate x phased - in assessment for the particular taxation year = municipal portion of tax .
The county / regional tax rate x phased - in assessment for the particular taxation year = county / regional portion of tax .
The education tax rate x phased - in assessment for the particular taxation year = education portion of tax .
The municipal portion of tax + county / regional portion of tax + education portion of tax = Total Property Tax .
In some cases ( e.g. , commercial , industrial , multi - residential properties ) , the Province or municipality may implement measures that affect the actual taxes paid on a property .
LAND TRANSFER TAX Section::::Land Transfer Tax .
Land transfer tax is a provincial tax levied when purchasing a home or land in Canada .
All provinces have a land transfer tax , except Alberta and Saskatchewan .
In most provinces the tax is calculated as a percentage of the purchase price .
In Toronto there is an additional municipal tax .
Ontario , British Columbia , Prince Edward Island and the City of Toronto offer land transfer tax rebates for first - time homebuyers .
BRITISH COLUMBIA Section::::British Columbia .
In British Columbia the property transfer tax is equal to one percent tax on the first $ 200,000 of the purchase price , two percent on the remaining amount up to $ 2 million and three percent on the rest .
An additional 15 % tax that applies only to non - resident foreign home buyers in Greater Vancouver started on August 2 , 2016 .
The definition of foreign buyer includes international students and temporary foreign workers .
Anti - avoidance measures include fines of $ 100,000 for individuals and $ 200,000 for corporations .
FIRST TIME HOME BUYERS PROGRAM
Section::::First time home buyers program .
The First Time Home Buyers Program is a program by the BC government that offers qualifying first - time homebuyers a reduction or elimination of the property transfer tax .
It can be used in conjunction with the B.C. Home Owner Mortgage and Equity Partnership .
The First Time Home Buyers Tax Credit is also available in Ontario , which offers First Time Home Buyers a 750 dollar tax Rebate .
In 2017 the Ontario Government also released the Land Transfer Tax Rebate , which allowed for up to 4,000 dollar rebate - ensuring that first time home buyers of homes valued under 368,000 dollars would not pay land transfer tax .
NEW HOME EXEMPTION Section::::New home exemption .
The Newly Built Home Exemption is a program that reduces or eliminates the property transfer tax on new homes .
The amount is limited to $ 13,000 for qualifying individuals who must be either a Canadian citizen or a permanent resident .
The property purchased must be located in British Columbia , have a fair market value of $ 750,000 , be smaller than 1.25 acres and be used as a principle residence .
It can be used in conjunction with the B.C. Home Owner Mortgage and Equity Partnership .
CHILE Section::::Chile .
The land property tax , called " territorial tax " or " contribution " , is an annual amount paid quarterly by the property 's owner .
It is determined as a percentage of the property 's " fiscal value " , which is calculated by the Internal Revenue Service , based on the property 's land and built area , construction materials , age and use .
The fiscal value , which is usually much lower than the market value , may be disputed by the owner .
The annual levy varies between 1 and 2 % of this value , depending on the property 's use ( residential , agricultural or commercial ) .
Residential properties valued below US$ 40 K ( as of 2013 ) are not taxed ; those above that threshold are taxed only on the amount exceeding US$ 40K. Revenues go to the municipality administering the property 's commune .
All municipalities contribute a share of the revenue to a " common municipal fund " that is then redistributed back to municipalities according to a their needs ( commune 's poverty rate , etc . ) .
Additionally , municipalities charge a quarterly trash collection tax , which is often paid together with the territorial tax ( if applicable ) .
EGYPT
Section::::Egypt .
The law imposes a tax on each property .
Public buildings are excluded ( such as government buildings ) , as are religious buildings ( mosques and churches ) .
Families owning private properties worth up to LE 2 million ( $ 290,000 ) are exempt .
commercial stores with an annual rent value over LE 1,200 are not exempt .
GREECE Section::::Greece .
Greece has a Municipal and a Government property tax .
The municipal property tax ( ΤΑΠ / ΔΤ / ΔΦ ) is included in electricity bills and incorporates , among others , charges for street cleaning and lighting .
The Government property tax ( ENFIA ) is a combination of the individual asset 's tax based upon floor - area and a progressive real - estate wealth tax per individual which is based on the estimated net - worth of all properties and can reach 2 % .
HONG KONG Section::::Hong Kong .
In Hong Kong , the " property tax " is not an ad valorem tax ; it is actually an income tax .
According to HK Inland Revenue Ordinance IRO s5B , all property owners are not be subject to this tax unless they received a consideration , like rental income for the year of assessment .
The property tax is computed on the net assessable value at the standard rate .
The period of assessment is from 1 April to 31 March .
NET ASSESSABLE VALUE Section::::Net assessable value .
The formula is : INDIA Section::::India .
Property tax or ' house tax ' is a local tax on buildings , along with appurtenant land .
It is and imposed on the Possessor ( not the custodian of property as per 1978 , 44th amendment of constitution ) .
It resembles the US - type wealth tax and differs from the excise - type UK rate .
The tax power is vested in the states and is delegated to local bodies , specifying the valuation method , rate band , and collection procedures .
The tax base is the annual rental value ( ARV ) or area - based rating .
Owner - occupied and other properties not producing rent are assessed on cost and then converted into ARV by applying a percentage of cost , usually four percent .
Vacant land is generally exempt .
Central government properties are exempt .
Instead a ' service charge ' is permissible under executive order .
Properties of foreign missions also enjoy tax exemption without requiring reciprocity .
The tax is usually accompanied by service taxes , e.g. , water tax , drainage tax , conservancy ( sanitation ) tax , lighting tax , all using the same tax base .
The rate structure is flat on rural ( panchayat ) properties , but in the urban ( municipal ) areas it is mildly progressive with about 80 % of assessments falling in the first two brackets .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
A Local Property Tax came into effect in Republic of Ireland on 1 July 2013 , and is collected by the Revenue Commissioners .
The tax is on residential properties .
The property owner is liable ( though in the case of leases over twenty years , the tenant is liable ) .
The revenue funds the provision of services by local authorities .
Such services currently include public parks , libraries , open spaces and leisure amenities , planning and development , fire and emergency services , maintenance and street cleaning and lighting .
The tax is based upon market value , taxed via a system of market bands .
The initial national central rate of the tax is 0.18 % of a property 's value up to € 1 million .
Properties valued over € 1 million are assessed 0.25 % on the excess .
From 1 January 2015 , local authorities are able to vary LPT rates -/+
15 % of the national central rate .
In the case of properties valued over € 1 million , no banding applies – 0.18 % is charged on the first € 1 million ( € 1,800 ) and 0.25 % on the balance .
The government estimates that 85 % to 90 % of all properties fall within the first five taxation bands .
JAMAICA
Section::::Jamaica .
This tax is paid annually and is based on a percentage of the unimproved value of a property .
LITHUANIA Section::::Lithuania .
The tax period for a property tax is a calendar year .
Property tax rate ranging from 0.3 % to 1 % the tax value of real estate is determined by the municipality .
Since January 1 2015 if the persons property value is higher than 220 000 euros , 0.5 per cent of property tax is applied for exceeding amount .
LUXEMBOURG Section::::Luxembourg .
Property tax in Luxembourg is calculated on the basis of the property 's " unitary value " determined by tax authorities and levied by the communes .
The tax is calculated as property unitary value * assessment rate * communal rate .
The assessment rate is determined by the legislator and generally ranges from 0.7 % to 1 % .
The communal rate is set by the communal authority and varies from 120 % to 900 % depending on the municipality .
Luxembourg has minimal property taxes compared to its neighbours in Benelux or in the European Union .
It amounts to more or less € 150 for a € 500 000 apartment in Luxembourg City .
NETHERLANDS
Section::::Netherlands .
Property tax ( Dutch :
Onroerendezaakbelasting ( OZB ) ) is levied on property on a municipal basis .
Only the owners of residential property and people who rent / own commercial space are taxed .
People who rent a home do not pay property tax .
Municipalities combine their property taxes with a tax for garbage collection and for the sewer system .
Owners and users of property and land also pay taxes based on the value of property to the water boards for flood protection and water and wastewater treatment ( " waterschapsbelasting " ) .
A percentage of the value of a house ( " huurwaardeforfait " ) is added to the income of the owner , so the owner of a house pays more income tax .
All property - related taxes are based on the value of the house estimated by the municipality .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the UK the ownership of residential property or land is not taxed , a situation almost unique in the OECD .
Instead , the Council Tax is usually paid by the resident of a property , and only in the case of unoccupied property does the owner become liable to pay it ( although owners can often obtain a discount or an exemption for empty properties ) .
Her Majesty 's Revenue and Customs ( HMRC ) guidelines state :
The Valuation Tribunal Service states that :
There have been a lot of property tax changes since the introduction of the 2015/16 budget .
Changes to Section 24 mortgage interest relief , removal of the 10 % wear & tear allowance , and the maintenance of high rates of Capital Gains Tax ( CGT ) .
These changes have resulted in UK landlords paying a lot more tax than previously .
The Council Tax depends on the value of the property , but is not calculated as a simple percentage .
Instead , the property is allocated to a Council Tax band , ( 9 in England and 8 in Scotland and Wales ) .
Valuation is carried out by the Valuation Office Agency under the auspices of Her Majesty 's Revenue and Customs ( HMRC ) .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , property tax on real estate is usually levied by local government , at the municipal or county level .
Rates vary across the states , between about 0 % and 4 % of the home value .
The assessment is made up of two components — the improvement or building value and the land or site value .
The property tax is the main tax supporting local education , police / fire protection , local governments , some free medical services and most of other local infrastructure .
Many state and local jurisdictions add personal property taxes .
( See exceptions below . )
PLACES WITHOUT PROPERTY TAX
AFRICA
EUROPE
OCEANIA
ASIA
UNITED STATES Section::::Places without property tax .
Section::::United States .
In Alaska , " ... only a small portion of the land mass is subject to a property tax . ...
only 24 municipalities in Alaska ( either cities or boroughs ) levy a property tax .
" There is no tax on the private land in American Samoa , the Territory of Palmyra Island or Kingman Reef in the Pacific Ocean insular areas .
SEE ALSO
*
Allodial title * Land value tax
*
Udal title
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
* Slack , E. , & Bird , R. M. ( 2014 ) .
The Political Economy of Property Tax Reform , OECD Working Papers on Fiscal Federalism 18 , OECD Publishing .