AUSLAN
Auslan is the sign language of the Australian Deaf community .
The term Auslan is an acronym of " Australian Sign Language " , coined by Trevor Johnston in the early 1980s , although the language itself is much older .
Auslan is related to British Sign Language ( BSL ) and New Zealand Sign Language ( NZSL ) ; the three have descended from the same parent language , and together comprise the BANZSL language family .
Auslan has also been influenced by Irish Sign Language ( ISL ) and more recently has borrowed signs from American Sign Language ( ASL ) .
As with other sign languages , Auslan 's grammar and vocabulary is quite different from English .
Its development can not be attributed to any individual ; rather , it is a natural language that developed organically over time .
The number of people for whom Auslan is their primary or preferred language is very difficult to determine .
According to the 2001 , 2006 and 2011 Censuses published by Australian Bureau of Statistics , the population of Auslan users in Australia have increased by 54.57 % thus debunking the speculation that Auslan is an endangered language .
As of 2011 , the Census population of Auslan users in Australia is 9723 - an increase of 4417 new users from the 2001 Census .
Based on this statistical trajectory , it is expected that the number of people for whom Auslan is their primary or preferred language could exceed 12000 in the 2016 Census .
Although the number is increasing , approximately 5 % of all Auslan users are acquiring the language from their parents with the rest learning the language from other peers such as friends or colleagues later in life .
RECOGNITION AND STATUS Section::::Recognition and status .
Auslan was recognised by the Australian government as a " community language other than English " and the preferred language of the Deaf community in policy statements in 1987 and 1991 .
However , this recognition has yet to filter through to many institutions , government departments and professionals who work with Deaf people .
The emerging status of Auslan has gone hand - in - hand with the advancement of the Deaf community in Australia , beginning in the early 1980s .
In 1982 , the registration of the first sign language interpreters by NAATI , a newly established regulatory body for interpreting and translating , accorded a sense of legitimacy to Auslan , furthered by the publishing of the first dictionary of Auslan in 1989 .
Auslan began to emerge as a language of instruction for Deaf students in secondary schools in the 1990s — mainly through the provision of interpreters in mainstream ( hearing ) schools with deaf support units .
Boosted by the 1992 enactment of the federal Disability Discrimination Act , sign language interpreters are also increasingly provided in tertiary education .
Today there is a growing number of courses teaching Auslan as a second language , from an elective language subject offered by some secondary schools to a two - year full - time diploma at TAFE .
Though becoming more and more visible , Auslan is still rarely seen at public events or on television ; there are , for example , no interpreted news services .
There is a regular program on community television station Channel 31 in Melbourne , " Deaf TV " , which is entirely in Auslan and is produced by Deaf volunteers .
PROMINENT ADVOCATES FOR AUSLAN Section::::Prominent advocates for Auslan .
In 2006 David Gibson was the first member of any Parliament in Australia to give a maiden speech in Auslan and was involved in Auslan events for the National Week of Deaf People at the Queensland Parliament , including the use of Auslan interpreters for question time and a debate between members of the deaf community and members of parliament on disability issues in 2007 .
The Young Australian of the Year for 2015 , Drisana Levitzke - Gray , is a strong proponent of Auslan and , in her acceptance speech using Auslan , called on the Government of Australia , and Australians , to learn and use Auslan as a natural language , as a human right for Australians .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Auslan evolved from sign languages brought to Australia during the nineteenth century from Britain and Ireland .
The earliest record of a deaf Australian was convict Elizabeth Steel , who arrived in 1790 on the Second Fleet ship " Lady Juliana " .
There is as yet no historical evidence , however , that she used a sign language .
The first known signing Deaf immigrant was the engraver John Carmichael who arrived in Sydney in 1825 from Edinburgh .
He had been to a Deaf school there , and was known as a good storyteller in sign language .
Thirty - five years later , in 1860 , a school for the Deaf was established by another Deaf Scotsman , Thomas Pattison — the Royal Institute for Deaf and Blind Children in New South Wales .
In Victoria just a few weeks later , the Victorian College for the Deaf was founded by a Deaf Englishman ,
Frederick J Rose , who had been educated at the Old Kent Road School in London .
These schools and others had an enormous role in the development of Auslan , as they were the first contact with sign language for many Deaf children .
Because they were residential boarding schools , they provided ample opportunity for the language to thrive , even though in many schools , signing was banned from the classroom for much of the 20th century .
Irish Sign Language ( ISL ) also had an influence on the development of Auslan , as it was used in Catholic schools until the 1950s .
The first Catholic school for Deaf children was established in 1875 by Irish nuns .
Unlike British Sign Language , ISL uses a one - handed alphabet originating in French Sign Language ( LSF ) , and although this alphabet has now almost disappeared from Australia , some initialised signs from the Irish alphabet can still be seen .
In more recent times Auslan has seen a significant amount of lexical borrowing from American Sign Language ( ASL ) , especially in signs for technical terms .
Some of these arose from the signed English educational philosophies of the 1970s and 80s , when a committee looking for signs with direct equivalence to English words found them in ASL and/or in invented English - based signed systems used in North America and introduced them in the classroom .
ASL contains many signs initialised from an alphabet which was also derived from LSF , and Auslan users , already familiar with the related ISL alphabet , accepted many of the new signs easily .
AUSLAN IN RELATION TO ENGLISH Section::::Auslan in relation to English .
It is sometimes wrongly assumed that English - speaking countries share a sign language .
Auslan is a natural language distinct from spoken or written English .
Its grammar and vocabulary often do not have direct English equivalents and vice versa .
However , English , as the dominant language in Australia , has had a significant influence on Auslan , especially through
manual forms such as fingerspelling and ( more recently ) Signed English .
It is difficult to sign Auslan fluently while speaking English , as the word order is different , and there is often no direct sign - to - word equivalence .
However , mouthing of an English word together with a sign may serve to clarify when one sign may have several English equivalents .
In some cases the mouth gesture that accompanies a sign may not reflect the equivalent translation in English ( e.g. a sign meaning ' thick ' may be accompanied by a mouthed ' fahth ' ) .
FINGERSPELLING
Section::::Fingerspelling .
A two - handed manual alphabet , identical to the one used in British Sign Language and New Zealand Sign Language , is integral to Auslan .
This alphabet is used for fingerspelling proper nouns such as personal or place names , common nouns for everyday objects , and English words , especially technical terms , for which there is no widely used sign .
Fingerspelling can also be used for emphasis , clarification , or , sometimes extensively , by English - speaking learners of Auslan .
The amount of fingerspelling varies with the context and the age of the signer .
A recent small - scale study puts fingerspelled words in Auslan conversations at about 10 % of all lexical items , roughly equal to ASL and higher than many other sign languages , such as New Zealand Sign Language .
The proportion is higher in older signers , suggesting that the use of fingerspelling has diminished over time .
Schembri and Johnston ( in press ) found that the most commonly fingerspelled words in Auslan include " so " , " to " , " if " , " but " and " do " .
Some signs also feature an English word 's initial letter as a handshape from a one- or two - handed manual alphabet and use it within a sign .
For example , part of the sign for " Canberra " incorporates the letter " C " .
SIGNED ENGLISH
Section::::Signed English .
Australasian Signed English was created in the late 1970s to represent English words and grammar , using mostly Auslan signs together with some additional contrived signs , as well as borrowings from American Sign Language ( ASL ) .
It was , and still is , used largely in education for teaching English to Deaf children or for discussing English in academic contexts .
It was thought to be much easier for hearing teachers and parents to learn another mode of English than to learn a new language with a complex spatial grammar such as Auslan .
The use of Signed English in schools is controversial with some in the Deaf community , who regard Signed English as a contrived and unnatural artificially constructed language .
Signed English has now been largely rejected by Deaf communities in Australia and its use in education is dwindling ; however , a number of its signs have made their way into normal use .
ACQUISITION AND NATIVENESS Section::::Acquisition and nativeness .
Unlike oral languages , only a minority of Deaf children acquire their language from their parents ( about 4 or 5 % have Deaf parents ) .
Most acquire Auslan from Deaf peers at school or later through Deaf community networks .
Many learn Auslan as a " delayed " first language in adolescence or adulthood , after attempting to learn English ( or another spoken / written language ) without the exposure necessary to properly acquire it .
The Deaf community often distinguish between " oral deaf " who grew up in an oral or signed English educational environment without Auslan , and those " Deaf Deaf " who learnt Auslan at an early age from Deaf parents or at a Deaf school .
Regardless of their background , many Deaf adults consider Auslan to be their first or primary language , and see themselves as users of English as a second language .
VARIATION AND STANDARDISATION Section::::Variation and standardisation .
Auslan exhibits a high degree of variation , determined by the signer 's age , educational background and regional origin , and the signing community is very tolerant of individual differences in signing style .
There is no standard dialect of Auslan .
Standard dialects arise through the support of institutions , such as the media , education , government and the law .
As this support has not existed for most sign languages , coupled with the lack of a widely used written form and communications technologies , Auslan has diverged much more rapidly than Australian English .
Auslan was introduced to Papua New Guinea , where it mixed with local or home sign and Tok Pisin to produce Papua New Guinean Sign Language .
DIALECTS
Section::::Dialects .
Linguists often regard Auslan as having two major dialects - Northern ( Queensland and New South Wales ) , and Southern ( Victoria , Tasmania , South Australia , and Western Australia ) .
The vocabulary of the two dialects differs significantly , with different signs used even for very common concepts such as colours , animals , and days of the week ; differences in grammar appear to be slight .
These two dialects may have roots in older dialectal differences from the United Kingdom , brought over by Deaf immigrants who founded the first schools for the Deaf in Australia — English varieties ( from London ) in Melbourne and Scottish ones ( from Edinburgh ) in Sydney , although the relationship between lexical variation in the UK and Australia appears much more complicated than this ( some Auslan signs appear similar to signs used in the Newcastle variety of BSL , for example ) .
Before schools were established elsewhere , Deaf children attended one of these two initial schools , and brought signs back to their own states .
As schools opened up in each state , new signs also developed in the dormitories and playgrounds of these institutions .
As a result , Auslan users can identify more precise regional varieties ( e.g. , " Sydney sign " , " Melbourne sign " , " Perth sign " , "
Adelaide sign " and " Brisbane sign " ) .
In a conversation between two strangers , one from Melbourne and the other from Perth , it is likely that one will use a small number of signs unfamiliar to the other , despite both belonging to the same " southern dialect " .
Signers can often identify which school someone went to , even within a few short utterances .
Despite these differences , communication between Auslan users from different regions poses little difficulty for most Deaf Australians , who often become aware of different regional vocabulary as they grow older , through travel and Deaf community networks , and because Deaf people are so well practised in bridging barriers to communication .
INDIGENOUS
AUSTRALIAN SIGN LANGUAGES AND AUSLAN
Section::::Indigenous Australian sign languages and Auslan .
A number of Indigenous Australian sign languages exist , unrelated to Auslan , such as Warlpiri Sign Language .
They occur in the southern , central , and western desert regions , coastal Arnhem Land , some islands of the north coast , the western side of Cape York Peninsula , and on some Torres Strait Islands .
They have also been noted as far south as the Murray River .
Deaf Indigenous people of Far North Queensland ( extending from Yarrabah to Cape York ) form a distinct signing community using a dialect of Auslan ; it has features of indigenous sign languages and gestural systems as well as signs and grammar of Auslan .
WRITTEN AND RECORDED AUSLAN Section::::Written and recorded Auslan .
Auslan has no widely used written form ; in the past transcribing Auslan was largely an academic exercise .
The first Auslan dictionaries used either photographs or drawings with motion arrows to describe signs ; more recently , technology has made possible the use of short video clips on CD - ROM or online dictionaries .
SignWriting , however , has its adherents in Australia .
SEE ALSO
* List of sign languages REFERENCES OTHER REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Johnston , T. & Schembri , A. ( 2007 ) .
Australian Sign Language ( Auslan ) :
An introduction to sign language linguistics .
Cambridge :
Cambridge University Press . .
* Johnston , T.A. & Wilkin , P. ( 1998 ; reprinted 2010 , see Deaf Australia : Auslan Shop . )
Signs of Australia :
A new dictionary of Auslan ( the sign language of the Australian Deaf community ) .
North Rocks , NSW , Australia :
North Rocks Press : Royal Institute for Deaf and Blind Children .
EXTERNAL LINKS * www.auslan.org.au - An online dictionary of Auslan video clips * ASLIA - Australian Sign Language Interpreters Association
* Auslan online dictionaries /
*
The Endangered Languages Archive of Auslan recordings