NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART
The National Gallery of Art , and its attached Sculpture Garden , is a national art museum in Washington , D.C. , located on the National Mall , between 3rd and 9th Streets , at Constitution Avenue NW .
Open to the public and free of charge , the museum was privately established in 1937 for the American people by a joint resolution of the United States Congress .
Andrew W. Mellon donated a substantial art collection and funds for construction .
The core collection includes major works of art donated by Paul Mellon , Ailsa Mellon Bruce , Lessing J. Rosenwald , Samuel Henry Kress , Rush Harrison Kress , Peter Arrell Browne Widener , Joseph E. Widener , and Chester Dale .
The Gallery 's collection of paintings , drawings , prints , photographs , sculpture , medals , and decorative arts traces the development of Western Art from the Middle Ages to the present , including the only painting by Leonardo da Vinci in the Americas and the largest mobile created by Alexander Calder .
The Gallery 's campus includes the original neoclassical West Building designed by John Russell Pope , which is linked underground to the modern East Building , designed by I. M. Pei , and the Sculpture Garden .
The Gallery often presents temporary special exhibitions spanning the world and the history of art .
It is one of the largest museums in North America .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Pittsburgh banker ( and Treasury Secretary from 1921 until 1932 )
Andrew W. Mellon began gathering a private collection of old master paintings and sculptures during World War I. During the late 1920s , Mellon decided to direct his collecting efforts towards the establishment of a new national gallery for the United States .
In 1930 , partly for tax reasons , Mellon formed the A. W. Mellon Educational and Charitable Trust , which was to be the legal owner of works intended for the gallery .
In 1930–1931 , the Trust made its first major acquisition , 21 paintings from the Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg as part of the Soviet sale of Hermitage paintings , including such masterpieces as Raphael 's Alba Madonna , Titian 's Venus with a Mirror , and Jan van Eyck 's Annunciation .
In 1929 Mellon had initiated contact with the recently appointed Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution , Charles Greeley Abbot .
Mellon was appointed in 1931 as a Commissioner of the Institution 's National Gallery of Art .
When the director of the Gallery retired , Mellon asked Abbot not to appoint a successor , as he proposed to endow a new building with funds for expansion of the collections .
However , Mellon 's trial for tax evasion , centering on the Trust and the Hermitage paintings , caused the plan to be modified .
In 1935 , Mellon announced in The Washington Star , his intention to establish a new gallery for old masters , separate from the Smithsonian .
When asked by Abbot , he explained that the project was in the hands of the Trust and that its decisions were partly dependent on " the attitude of the Government towards the gift " .
In January 1937 , Mellon formally offered to create the new Gallery .
On his birthday , 24 March 1937 , an Act of Congress accepted the collection and building funds ( provided through the Trust ) , and approved the construction of a museum on the National Mall .
The new gallery was to be effectively self - governing , not controlled by the Smithsonian , but took the old name " National Gallery of Art " while the Smithsonian 's gallery would be renamed the " National Collection of Fine Arts " ( now the Smithsonian American Art Museum ) .
Designed by architect John Russell Pope , the new structure was completed and accepted by President Franklin D. Roosevelt on behalf of the American people on March 17 , 1941 .
Neither Mellon nor Pope lived to see the museum completed ; both died in late August 1937 , only two months after excavation had begun .
At the time of its inception it was the largest marble structure in the world .
The museum stands on the former site of the Baltimore and Potomac Railroad station , where in 1881 a disgruntled office seeker , Charles Guiteau , shot President James Garfield ( see James A. Garfield assassination ) .
As anticipated by Mellon , the creation of the National Gallery encouraged the donation of other substantial art collections by a number of private donors .
Founding benefactors included such individuals as Paul Mellon , Samuel H. Kress , Rush H. Kress , Ailsa Mellon Bruce , Chester Dale , Joseph Widener , Lessing J. Rosenwald and Edgar William and Bernice Chrysler Garbisch .
The Gallery 's East Building was constructed in the 1970s on much of the remaining land left over from the original congressional action .
Andrew Mellon 's children , Paul Mellon and Ailsa Mellon Bruce , funded the building .
Designed by architect I. M. Pei , the contemporary structure was completed in 1978 and was opened on June 1 of that year by President Jimmy Carter .
The new building was built to house the Museum 's collection of modern paintings , drawings , sculptures , and prints , as well as study and research centers and offices .
The design received a National Honor Award from the American Institute of Architects in 1981 .
The final addition to the complex is the National Gallery of Art Sculpture Garden .
Completed and opened to the public on May 23 , 1999 , the location provides an outdoor setting for exhibiting a number of pieces from the Museum 's contemporary sculpture collection .
OPERATIONS Section::::Operations .
The National Gallery of Art is supported through a private - public partnership .
The United States federal government provides funds , through annual appropriations , to support the museum 's operations and maintenance .
All artwork , as well as special programs , are provided through private donations and funds .
The museum is not part of the Smithsonian Institution .
Noted directors of the National Gallery have included David E. Finley ,
Jr. ( 1938 - 1956 ) , John Walker ( 1956–1968 ) , and J. Carter Brown ( 1968–1993 ) .
Earl A. " Rusty " Powell III was named director in 1993 .
In March 2019 he will be succeeded by Kaywin Feldman , director and president of the Minneapolis Institute of Art .
Entry to both buildings of the National Gallery of Art is free of charge .
From Monday through Saturday , the museum is open from 10 a.m. – 5 p.m. ; it is open from 11 – 6 p.m. on Sundays .
It is closed on December 25 and January 1 .
ARCHITECTURE
Section::::Architecture .
The museum comprises two buildings : the West Building ( 1941 ) and the East Building ( 1978 ) linked by an underground passage .
The West Building , composed of pink Tennessee marble , was designed in 1937 by architect John Russell Pope in a neoclassical style ( as is Pope 's other notable Washington , D.C. building , the Jefferson Memorial ) .
Designed in the form of an elongated H , the building is centered on a domed rotunda modeled on the interior of the Pantheon in Rome .
Extending east and west from the rotunda , a pair of skylit sculpture halls provide its main circulation spine .
Bright garden courts provide a counterpoint to the long main axis of the building .
The West Building has an extensive collection of paintings and sculptures by European masters from the medieval period through the late 19th century , as well as pre-20th century works by American artists .
Highlights of the collection include many paintings by Jan Vermeer , Rembrandt van Rijn , Claude Monet , Vincent van Gogh , and Leonardo da Vinci .
In contrast , the design of the East Building by architect I. M. Pei is geometrical , dividing the trapezoidal shape of the site into two triangles : one isosceles and the other a smaller right triangle .
The space defined by the isosceles triangle came to house the museum 's public functions .
The portion outlined by the right triangle became the study center .
The triangles in turn became the building 's organized motif , echoed and repeated in every dimension .
The building 's central feature is a high atrium designed as an open interior court that is enclosed by a sculptural space spanning .
The atrium is centered on the same axis that forms the circulation spine for the West Building and is constructed in the same Tennessee marble .
However , in 2005 the joints attaching the marble panels to the walls began to show signs of strain , creating a risk that panels might fall onto visitors below .
In 2008 , NGA officials decided that it had become necessary to remove and reinstall all of the panels .
The renovation was completed in 2016 .
The East Building focuses on modern and contemporary art , with a collection including works by Pablo Picasso , Henri Matisse , Jackson Pollock , Andy Warhol , Roy Lichtenstein , Alexander Calder , a 1977 mural by Robert Motherwell and works by many other artists .
The East Building also contains the main offices of the NGA and a large research facility , Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts ( CASVA ) .
Among the highlights of the East Building in 2012 was an exhibition of Barnett Newman 's The Stations of the Cross series of 14 black and white paintings ( 1958–66 ) .
Newman painted them after he had recovered from a heart attack ; they are usually regarded as the peak of his achievement .
The series has also been seen as a memorial to the victims of the Holocaust .
The two buildings are connected by a walkway beneath 4th street , called " the Concourse " on the museum 's map .
In 2008 , the National Gallery of Art commissioned American artist Leo Villareal to transform the Concourse into an artistic installation .
Today , Multiverse is the largest and most complex light sculpture by Villareal featuring approximately 41,000 computer - programmed LED nodes that run through channels along the entire -long space .
The concourse also includes the food court and a gift shop .
The final element of the National Gallery of Art complex , the Sculpture Garden was completed in 1999 after more than 30 years of planning .
To the west of the West Building , on the opposite side of Seventh Street , the Sculpture Garden was designed by landscape architect Laurie Olin as an outdoor gallery for monumental modern sculpture .
The Sculpture Garden contains plantings of Native American species of canopy and flowering trees , shrubs , ground covers , and perennials .
A circular reflecting pool and fountain form the center of its design , which arching pathways of granite and crushed stone complement .
( The pool becomes an ice - skating rink during the winter . )
The sculptures exhibited in the surrounding landscaped area include pieces by David Smith , Mark Di Suvero , Roy Lichtenstein , Sol LeWitt , Tony Smith , Roxy Paine , Joan Miró , Louise Bourgeois , and Hector Guimard .
RENOVATIONS Section::::Renovations .
The NGA 's West Building was renovated from 2007 to 2009 .
Although some galleries closed for periods of time , others remained open .
After congressional testimony that the East Building suffered from " systematic structural failures " , NGA adopted a Master Renovations Plan in 1999 .
This plan established the timeline for closing the building , and planned for the renovation of the electronic security systems , elevators , and HVAC .
Space between the ceilings of existing galleries and the building 's skylights ( which was never completed when the building was constructed in 1978 ) would be renovated into two , high , hexagonal Tower Galleries .
The galleries would have a combined of space and will be lit by skylights .
A rooftop sculpture garden would also be added .
NGA officials said that the Tower Galleries would probably house modern art , and the creation of a distinct " Rothko Room " was possible .
Beginning in 2011 , NGA undertook an $ 85 million restoration of the East Building 's façade .
The East Building is clad in thick pink marble panels .
The panels are held about away from the wall by stainless steel anchors .
Gravity holds the panel in the bottom anchors ( which are placed at each corner ) , while " button head " anchors ( stainless steel posts with large , flat heads ) at the top corners keep the panel upright .
Mortar was used on the gravity anchors to level the stones .
Joints of flexible colored neoprene were placed between the panels .
This system was designed to allow each panel to hang independent of its neighbors , and NGA officials say they are not aware of any other panel system like it .
However , many panels were accidentally mortared together .
Seasonal heating and cooling of the façade , infiltration of moisture , and shrinkage of the building 's structural concrete by over time caused extensive damage to the façade .
In 2005 , regular maintenance showed that some panels were cracked or significantly damaged , while others leaned by more than out from the building ( threatening to fall ) .
The NGA hired the structural engineering firm Robert Silman Associates to determine the cause of the problem .
Although the Gallery began raising private funds to fix the issue , eventually federal funding was used to repair the building .
In 2012 , the NGA chose a joint venture , Balfour Beatty / Smoot , to complete the repairs .
Anodized aluminum anchors replaced the stainless steel ones , and the top corner anchors were moved to the center of the top edge of each stone .
The neoprene joints were removed and new colored silicone gaskets installed , and leveling screws rather than mortar used to keep the panels square .
Work began in November 2011 , and originally was scheduled to end in 2014 .
By February 2012 , however , the contractor said work on the façade would end in late 2013 , and site restoration would take place in 2014 .
The East Building remained open throughout the project .
In March 2013 , the National Gallery of Art announced a $ 68.4 million renovation to the East Building .
This included $ 38.4 million to refurbish the interior mechanical plant of the structure , and $ 30 million to create new exhibition space .
Because the angular interior space of the East Building made it impossible to close off galleries , the renovation required all but the atrium and offices to close by December 2013 .
The structure remained closed for three years .
The architectural firm of Hartman - Cox oversaw both aspects of the renovation .
A group of benefactors — which included Victoria and Roger Sant , Mitchell and Emily Rales , and David Rubenstein — privately financed the renovation .
The Washington Post reported that the donation was one of the largest the NGA had received in a decade .
NGA staff said that they would use the closure to conserve artwork , plan purchases , and develop exhibitions .
Plans for renovating conservation , construction , exhibition prep , groundskeeping , office , storage , and other internal facilities were also ready , but would not be implemented for many years .
BUILDINGS
COLLECTION Section::::Collection .
The NGA 's collection galleries and Sculpture Garden display European and American paintings , sculpture , works on paper , photographs , and decorative arts .
The permanent collection of paintings extends from the Middle Ages to the present day .
The Italian Renaissance collection includes two panels from Duccio 's Maesta , the tondo of the Adoration of the Magi by Fra Angelico and Filippo Lippi , a Botticelli work on the same subject , Giorgione 's Allendale Nativity , Giovanni Bellini 's The Feast of the Gods , Ginevra de ' Benci ( the only painting by Leonardo da Vinci in the Americas ) and groups of works by Titian and Raphael .
Other European collections include examples of the work of many of the masters of western painting , including a version of Saint Martin and the Beggar , by El Greco , and works by Matthias Grünewald , Cranach the Elder , Rogier van der Weyden , Albrecht Dürer , Frans Hals , Rembrandt , Johannes Vermeer , Francisco Goya , Jean Auguste Dominique Ingres , and Eugène Delacroix , among others .
The collection of sculpture and decorative arts includes such works as the Chalice of Abbot Suger of St - Denis and a collection of work by Auguste Rodin and Edgar Degas .
Other highlights of the permanent collection include the second of the two original sets of Thomas Cole 's series of paintings titled The Voyage of Life , ( the first set is at the Munson - Williams - Proctor Arts Institute in Utica , New York ) and the original version of Watson and the Shark by John Singleton Copley ( two other versions are in the Museum of Fine Arts , Boston and the Detroit Institute of Arts ) .
The National Gallery 's print collection comprises 75,000 prints , in addition to rare illustrated books .
It includes collections of works by Albrecht Dürer , Rembrandt , Giovanni Battista Piranesi , William Blake , Mary Cassatt , Edvard Munch , Jasper Johns , and Robert Rauschenberg .
The collection began with 400 prints donated by five collectors in 1941 .
In 1942 , Joseph E. Widener donated his entire collection of nearly 2,000 works .
In 1943 , Lessing Rosenwald donated his collection of 8,000 old master and modern prints ; between 1943 and 1979 , he donated almost 14,000 more works .
In 2008 , Dave and Reba White Williams donated their collection of more than 5,200 American prints .
In 2013 , the NGA purchased from a private French collection Gerard van Honthorst 's 1623 painting , The Concert , which had not been publicly viewed since 1795 .
After initially displaying the The Concert in a special installation in the West Building , the NGA moved the painting to a permanent display in the museum 's Dutch and Flemish galleries .
Although the NGA did not reveal the amount that it had paid for The Concert , art experts estimated the sale price at $ 20 million .
HIGHLIGHTS OF THE COLLECTION
SELECTED HIGHLIGHTS FROM THE AMERICAN COLLECTION
SEE ALSO
* List of most visited art museums
* Head of a Catalan Peasant and The Farm , both made by Joan Miró and preserved at the NGA .
* The Voyage of Life by Thomas Cole * List of original Hermitage paintings in the National Gallery of Art NOTES FURTHER READING
* David Cannadine , Mellon : An American Life , Knopf , 2006 , * Neil Harris , Capital Culture : J. Carter Brown , the National Gallery of Art , and the Reinvention of the Museum Experience , University of Chicago Press , 2013 , * Andrew Kelly , Kentucky by Design : The Decorative Arts , American Culture , and the Index of American Design , University Press of Kentucky , 2015 .
*
" The National Gallery of Art , Washington " , special number of Connaissance des Arts , Société Français de Promotion Artistique ( 2000 ) EXTERNAL LINKS
* NGA Collection * Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts