CHEMICAL POLARITY
Polar molecules must contain polar bonds due to a difference in electronegativity between the bonded atoms .
A polar molecule with two or more polar bonds must have a geometry which is asymmetric in at least one direction , so that the bond dipoles do not cancel each other .
Polar molecules interact through dipole – dipole intermolecular forces and hydrogen bonds .
Polarity underlies a number of physical properties including surface tension , solubility , and melting and boiling points .
POLARITY OF BONDS Section::::Polarity of bonds .
Not all atoms attract electrons with the same force .
The amount of " pull " an atom exerts on its electrons is called its electronegativity .
Atoms with high electronegativitiessuch as fluorine , oxygen , and nitrogenexert a greater pull on electrons than atoms with lower electronegativities such as alkali metals and alkaline earth metals .
In a bond , this leads to unequal sharing of electrons between the atoms , as electrons will be drawn closer to the atom with the higher electronegativity .
Because electrons have a negative charge , the unequal sharing of electrons within a bond leads to the formation of an electric dipole : a separation of positive and negative electric charge .
Because the amount of charge separated in such dipoles is usually smaller than a fundamental charge , they are called partial charges , denoted as δ+ ( delta plus ) and δ− ( delta minus ) .
These symbols were introduced by Christopher Kelk Ingold and Edith Hilda Ingold in 1926 .
The bond dipole moment is calculated by multiplying the amount of charge separated and the distance between the charges .
These dipoles within molecules can interact with dipoles in other molecules , creating dipole - dipole intermolecular forces .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Bonds can fall between one of two extremesbeing completely nonpolar or completely polar .
A completely nonpolar bond occurs when the electronegativities are identical and therefore possess a difference of zero .
A completely polar bond is more correctly called an ionic bond , and occurs when the difference between electronegativities is large enough that one atom actually takes an electron from the other .
The terms " polar " and " nonpolar " are usually applied to covalent bonds , that is , bonds where the polarity is not complete .
To determine the polarity of a covalent bond using numerical means , the difference between the electronegativity of the atoms is used .
Bond polarity is typically divided into three groups that are loosely based on the difference in electronegativity between the two bonded atoms .
According to the Pauling scale : * Nonpolar bonds generally occur when the difference in electronegativity between the two atoms is less than 0.5 * Polar bonds generally occur when the difference in electronegativity between the two atoms is
roughly between 0.5 and 2.0 * Ionic bonds generally occur when the difference in electronegativity between the two atoms is greater than 2.0 Pauling based this classification scheme on the partial ionic character of a bond , which is an approximate function of the difference in electronegativity between the two bonded atoms .
He estimated that a difference of 1.7 corresponds to 50 % ionic character , so that a greater difference corresponds to a bond which is predominantly ionic .
As a quantum - mechanical description , Pauling proposed that the wave function for a polar molecule AB is a linear combination of wave functions for covalent and ionic molecules : ψ = aψ(A : B )
+
bψ(AB ) .
The amount of covalent and ionic character depends on the values of the squared coefficients a and b. POLARITY OF MOLECULES Section::::Polarity of molecules .
While the molecules can be described as " polar covalent " , " nonpolar covalent " , or " ionic " , this is often a relative term , with one molecule simply being more polar or more nonpolar than another .
However , the following properties are typical of such molecules .
A molecule is composed of one or more chemical bonds between molecular orbitals of different atoms .
A molecule may be polar either as a result of polar bonds due to differences in electronegativity as described above , or as a result of an asymmetric arrangement of nonpolar covalent bonds and non - bonding pairs of electrons known as a full molecular orbital .
POLAR MOLECULES Section::::Polar molecules .
A polar molecule has a net dipole as a result of the opposing charges ( i.e. having partial positive and partial negative charges ) from polar bonds arranged asymmetrically .
Water ( HO ) is an example of a polar molecule since it has a slight positive charge on one side and a slight negative charge on the other .
The dipoles do not cancel out resulting in a net dipole .
Due to the polar nature of the water molecule itself , polar molecules are generally able to dissolve in water .
Other examples include sugars ( like sucrose ) , which have many polar oxygen – hydrogen ( −OH ) groups and are overall highly polar .
If the bond dipole moments of the molecule do not cancel , the molecule is polar .
For example , the water molecule ( HO ) contains two polar O−H bonds in a bent ( nonlinear ) geometry .
The bond dipole moments do not cancel , so that the molecule forms a molecular dipole with its negative pole at the oxygen and its positive pole midway between the two hydrogen atoms .
In the figure each bond joins the central O atom with a negative charge ( red ) to an H atom with a positive charge ( blue ) .
The hydrogen fluoride , HF , molecule is polar by virtue of polar covalent bondsin the covalent bond electrons are displaced toward the more electronegative fluorine atom .
Ammonia , NH , molecule the three N−H bonds
have only a slight polarity ( toward the more electronegative nitrogen atom ) .
The molecule has two lone electrons in an orbital , that points towards the fourth apex of the approximate tetrahedron , ( VSEPR ) .
This orbital is not participating in covalent bonding ; it is electron - rich , which results in a powerful dipole across the whole ammonia molecule .
In ozone ( O ) molecules , the two O−O bonds are nonpolar ( there is no electronegativity difference between atoms of the same element ) .
However , the distribution of other electrons is unevensince the central atom has to share electrons with two other atoms , but each of the outer atoms has to share electrons with only one other atom , the central atom is more deprived of electrons than the others ( the central atom has a formal charge of +1 , while the outer atoms each have a formal charge of − ) .
Since the molecule has a bent geometry , the result is a dipole across the whole ozone molecule .
When comparing a polar and nonpolar molecule with similar molar masses , the polar molecule in general has a higher boiling point , because the dipole – dipole interaction between polar molecules results in stronger intermolecular attractions .
One common form of polar interaction is the hydrogen bond , which is also known as the H - bond .
For example , water forms H - bonds and has a molar mass M = 18 and a boiling point of +100 ° C , compared to nonpolar methane with M = 16 and a boiling point of – 161 ° C .
NONPOLAR MOLECULES Section::::Nonpolar molecules .
A molecule may be nonpolar either when there is an equal sharing of electrons between the two atoms of a diatomic molecule or because of the symmetrical arrangement of polar bonds in a more complex molecule .
For example , boron trifluoride ( BF ) has a trigonal planar arrangement of three polar bonds at 120 ° .
This results in no overall dipole in the molecule .
Not every molecule with polar bonds is a polar molecule .
Carbon dioxide ( CO ) has two polar C = O bonds , but the geometry of CO is linear so that the two bond dipole moments cancel and there is no net molecular dipole moment ; the molecule is nonpolar .
Examples of household nonpolar compounds include fats , oil , and petrol / gasoline .
Therefore , most nonpolar molecules are water - insoluble ( hydrophobic ) at room temperature .
Many nonpolar organic solvents , such as turpentine , are able to dissolve non - polar substances .
In the methane molecule ( CH ) the four C−H bonds are arranged tetrahedrally around the carbon atom .
Each bond has polarity ( though not very strong ) .
However , the bonds are arranged symmetrically so there is no overall dipole in the molecule .
The diatomic oxygen molecule ( O ) does not have polarity in the covalent bond because of equal electronegativity , hence there is no polarity in the molecule .
AMPHIPHILIC MOLECULES Section::::Amphiphilic molecules .
Large molecules that have one end with polar groups attached and another end with nonpolar groups are described as amphiphiles or amphiphilic molecules .
They are good surfactants and can aid in the formation of stable emulsions , or blends , of water and fats .
Surfactants reduce the interfacial tension between oil and water by adsorbing at the liquid – liquid interface .
PREDICTING MOLECULE POLARITY Section::::Predicting molecule polarity . ! !
Formula !
Description !
Example !
Name !
rowspan=5 Polar !
rowspan=2 Nonpolar Determining the point group is a useful way to predict polarity of a molecule .
In general , a molecule will not possess dipole moment , if the individual bond dipole moments of the molecule cancel each other out .
This is because dipole moments are euclidean vector quantities with magnitude and direction , and a two equal vectors who oppose each other will cancel out .
Any molecule with a centre of inversion ( " i " ) or a horizontal mirror plane ( " σ " ) will not possess dipole moments .
Likewise , a molecule with more than one C axis will not possess dipole moment because dipole moments can not lie in more than one dimension .
As a consequence of that constraint , all molecules with D symmetry ( Schönflies notation ) will , therefore , not have dipole moment because , by definition , D point groups have two or multiple C axis .
Since C , C , C C and C point groups do not have a centre of inversion , horizontal mirror planes or multiple C axis , molecules in one of those point groups will have dipole moment .
ELECTRICAL DEFLECTION OF WATER Section::::Electrical deflection of water .
Contrary to popular misconception , the electrical deflection of a stream of water from a charged object is not based on polarity .
The deflection occurs because of electrically charged droplets in the stream , which the charged object induces .
A stream of water can also be deflected in a uniform electrical field , which can not exert force on polar molecules .
Additionally , after a stream of water is grounded , it can no longer be deflected .
Weak deflection is even possible for nonpolar liquids .
SEE ALSO
* Chemical properties
* Colloid * Detergent * Electronegativities of the elements ( data page )
* Polar point group REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Chemical Bonding * Polarity of Bonds and Molecules * Molecule Polarity