YELLOWSTONE CALDERA
The Yellowstone Caldera is a volcanic caldera and supervolcano in Yellowstone National Park in the Western United States , sometimes referred to as the Yellowstone Supervolcano .
The caldera and most of the park are located in the northwest corner of Wyoming .
The major features of the caldera measure about 34 by 45 miles ( 55 by 72 km ) .
The caldera formed during the last of three supereruptions over the past 2.1 million years : the Huckleberry Ridge eruption 2.1 million years ago ( which created the Island Park Caldera and the Huckleberry Ridge Tuff ) ; the Mesa Falls eruption 1.3 million years ago ( which created the Henry 's Fork Caldera and the Mesa Falls Tuff ) ; and the Lava Creek eruption approximately 630,000 years ago ( which created the Yellowstone Caldera and the Lava Creek Tuff ) . VOLCANISM AT YELLOWSTONE Section::::Volcanism at Yellowstone .
Volcanism at Yellowstone is relatively recent , with calderas that were created during large eruptions that took place 2.1 million , 1.3 million , and 630,000 years ago .
The calderas lie over a hotspot where light and hot magma ( molten rock ) from the mantle rises toward the surface .
While the Yellowstone hotspot is now under the Yellowstone Plateau , it did help to create the eastern Snake River Plain ( to the west of Yellowstone ) through a series of huge volcanic eruptions .
The hotspot appears to move across terrain in the east - northeast direction , but in fact the hotspot is much deeper than terrain and remains stationary while the North American Plate moves west - southwest over it .
Over the past 18 million years or so , this hotspot has generated a succession of violent eruptions and less violent floods of basaltic lava .
Together these eruptions have helped create the eastern part of the Snake River Plain from a once - mountainous region .
At least a dozen of these eruptions were so massive that they are classified as supereruptions .
Volcanic eruptions sometimes empty their stores of magma so swiftly that the overlying land collapses into the emptied magma chamber , forming a geographic depression called a caldera .
The oldest identified caldera remnant straddles the border near McDermitt , Nevada – Oregon , although there are volcaniclastic piles and arcuate faults that define caldera complexes more than in diameter in the Carmacks Group of southwest - central Yukon , Canada , which are interpreted to have been formed 70 million years ago by the Yellowstone hotspot .
Progressively younger caldera remnants , most grouped in several overlapping volcanic fields , extend from the Nevada – Oregon border through the eastern Snake River Plain and terminate in the Yellowstone Plateau .
One such caldera , the Bruneau - Jarbidge caldera in southern Idaho , was formed between 10 and 12 million years ago , and the event dropped ash to a depth of one foot ( 30 cm ) away in northeastern Nebraska and killed large herds of rhinoceros , camel , and other animals at Ashfall Fossil Beds State Historical Park .
The United States Geological Survey ( " USGS " ) estimates there are one or two major caldera - forming eruptions and 100 or so lava extruding eruptions per million years , and " several to many " steam eruptions per century .
The loosely defined term " supervolcano " has been used to describe volcanic fields that produce exceptionally large volcanic eruptions .
Thus defined , the Yellowstone Supervolcano is the volcanic field which produced the latest three supereruptions from the Yellowstone hotspot ; it also produced one additional smaller eruption , thereby creating the West Thumb of Yellowstone Lake 174,000 years ago .
The three supereruptions occurred 2.1 million , 1.3 million , and approximately 630,000 years ago , forming the Island Park Caldera , the Henry 's Fork Caldera , and Yellowstone calderas , respectively .
The Island Park Caldera supereruption ( 2.1 million years ago ) , which produced the Huckleberry Ridge Tuff , was the largest , and produced 2,500 times as much ash as the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption .
The next biggest supereruption formed the Yellowstone Caldera ( ~ 630,000 years ago ) and produced the Lava Creek Tuff .
The Henry 's Fork Caldera ( 1.2 million years ago ) produced the smaller Mesa Falls Tuff , but is the only caldera from the Snake River Plain - Yellowstone hotspot that is plainly visible today .
Non - explosive eruptions of lava and less - violent explosive eruptions have occurred in and near the Yellowstone caldera since the last supereruption .
The most recent lava flow occurred about 70,000 years ago , while a violent eruption excavated the West Thumb of Lake Yellowstone around 150,000 years ago .
Smaller steam explosions occur as well : an explosion 13,800 years ago left a diameter crater at Mary Bay on the edge of Yellowstone Lake ( located in the center of the caldera ) .
Currently , volcanic activity is exhibited via numerous geothermal vents scattered throughout the region , including the famous Old Faithful Geyser , plus recorded ground - swelling indicating ongoing inflation of the underlying magma chamber .
The volcanic eruptions , as well as the continuing geothermal activity , are a result of a great cove of magma located below the caldera 's surface .
The magma in this cove contains gases that are kept dissolved by the immense pressure under which the magma is contained .
If the pressure is released to a sufficient degree by some geological shift , then some of the gases bubble out and cause the magma to expand .
This can cause a chain reaction .
If the expansion results in further relief of pressure , for example , by blowing crust material off the top of the chamber , the result is a very large gas explosion .
According to analysis of earthquake data in 2013 , the magma chamber is long and wide .
It also has underground volume , of which 6–8 % is filled with molten rock .
This is about 2.5 times bigger than scientists had previously imagined it to be ; however , scientists believe that the proportion of molten rock in the chamber is much too low to allow another supereruption .
YELLOWSTONE HOTSPOT ORIGIN Section::::Yellowstone hotspot origin .
The source of the Yellowstone hotspot is controversial .
Some geoscientists hypothesize that the Yellowstone hotspot is the effect of an interaction between local conditions in the lithosphere and upper mantle convection .
Others suggest an origin in the deep mantle ( mantle plume ) .
Part of the controversy is the relatively sudden appearance of the hotspot in the geologic record .
Additionally , the Columbia Basalt flows appeared at the same approximate time in the same place , causing speculation about their common origin .
As the Yellowstone hotspot traveled to the east and north , the Columbia disturbance moved northward and eventually subsided .
An alternate theory to the mantle plume model was proposed in 2018 .
It is suggested that the volcanism may be caused by upwellings from the lower mantle resulting from water - rich fragments of the Farallon plate descending from the Cascadia subduction region , sheared off at a subducted spreading rift .
HAZARDS EARTHQUAKES Section::::Hazards .
Section::::Earthquakes .
Volcanic and tectonic actions in the region cause between 1,000 and 2,000 measurable earthquakes annually .
Most are relatively minor , measuring a magnitude of 3 or weaker .
Occasionally , numerous earthquakes are detected in a relatively short period of time , an event known as an earthquake swarm .
In 1985 , more than 3,000 earthquakes were measured over a period of several months .
More than 70 smaller swarms were detected between 1983 and 2008 .
The USGS states these swarms are likely caused by slips on pre - existing faults rather than by movements of magma or hydrothermal fluids .
In December 2008 , continuing into January 2009 , more than 500 quakes were detected under the northwest end of Yellowstone Lake over a seven - day span , with the largest registering a magnitude of 3.9 .
Another swarm started in January 2010 , after the Haiti earthquake and before the Chile earthquake .
With 1,620 small earthquakes between January 17 , 2010 , and February 1 , 2010 , this swarm was the second - largest ever recorded in the Yellowstone Caldera .
The largest of these shocks was a magnitude 3.8 that occurred on January 21 , 2010 .
This swarm reached the background levels by February 21 .
On March 30 , 2014 , at 6:34 AM MST , a magnitude 4.8 earthquake struck Yellowstone , the largest recorded there since February 1980 .
In February 2018 , more than 300 earthquakes occurred , with the largest being a magnitude 2.9 .
VOLCANOES Section::::Volcanoes .
The last full - scale eruption of the Yellowstone Supervolcano , the Lava Creek eruption which happened approximately 640,000 years ago , ejected approximately of rock , dust and volcanic ash into the sky .
Geologists are closely monitoring the rise and fall of the Yellowstone Plateau , which has been rising as quickly as per year , as an indication of changes in magma chamber pressure .
The upward movement of the Yellowstone caldera floor between 2004 and 2008—almost each year — was more than three times greater than ever observed since such measurements began in 1923 .
From 2004 to 2008 , the land surface within the caldera moved upward as much as at the White Lake GPS station .
By the end of 2009 , the uplift had slowed significantly and appeared to have stopped .
In January 2010 , the USGS stated that " uplift of the Yellowstone Caldera has slowed significantly " and that uplift continues but at a slower pace .
The U.S. Geological Survey , University of Utah and National Park Service scientists with the Yellowstone Volcano Observatory maintain that they " see no evidence that another such cataclysmic eruption will occur at Yellowstone in the foreseeable future .
Recurrence intervals of these events are neither regular nor predictable .
"
This conclusion was reiterated in December 2013 in the aftermath of the publication of a study by University of Utah scientists finding that the " size of the magma body beneath Yellowstone is significantly larger than had been thought " .
The Yellowstone Volcano Observatory issued a statement on its website stating ,
Although fascinating , the new findings do not imply increased geologic hazards at Yellowstone , and certainly do not increase the chances of a ' supereruption ' in the near future .
Contrary to some media reports , Yellowstone is not ' overdue ' for a supereruption .
Other media reports were more hyperbolic in their coverage .
A study published in GSA Today , the monthly news and science magazine of the Geological Society of America , identified three fault zones on which future eruptions are most likely to be centered .
Two of those areas are associated with lava flows aged 174,000–70,000 years , and the third is a focus of present - day seismicity .
In 2017 , NASA conducted a study to determine the feasibility of preventing the volcano from erupting .
The results suggested that cooling the magma chamber by 35 percent would be enough to forestall such an incident .
NASA proposed introducing water at high pressure 10 kilometers underground .
The circulating water would release heat at the surface , possibly in a way that could be used as a power source .
If enacted , the plan would cost about $ 3.46 billion .
Nevertheless , according to Brian Wilson of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory , a completed project might trigger , instead of prevent , an eruption .
HYDROTHERMAL EXPLOSIONS
Section::::Hydrothermal explosions .
Studies and analysis may indicate that the greater hazard comes from hydrothermal activity which occurs independently of volcanic activity .
Over 20 large craters have been produced in the past 14,000 years , resulting in such features as Mary Bay , Turbid Lake , and Indian Pond which was created in an eruption about 1300 BC .
In a 2003 report , USGS researchers proposed that an earthquake may have displaced more than ( 576,000,000 US gallons ) of water in Yellowstone Lake , creating colossal waves that unsealed a capped geothermal system and led to the hydrothermal explosion that formed Mary Bay .
Further research shows that very distant earthquakes reach and have effects upon the activities at Yellowstone , such as the 1992 7.3 magnitude Landers earthquake in California 's Mojave Desert that triggered a swarm of quakes from more than away , and the 2002 7.9 magnitude Denali fault earthquake away in Alaska that altered the activity of many geysers and hot springs for several months afterward .
In 2016 , the United States Geological Survey announced plans to map the subterranean systems responsible for feeding the area 's hydrothermal activity .
According to the researchers , these maps could help predict when another supereruption occurs .
SEE ALSO
* Iceland hotspot and Iceland plume describes aspects of volcanic processes * Long Valley Caldera , Valles Caldera , La Garita Caldera : examples of other calderas close to but not related to Yellowstone .
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Snake River Plain and the Yellowstone Hot Spot *
Yellowstone Volcano Observatory
* FAQ relating to the supervolcano
* Supervolcano documentary from BBC
* Interactive : When Yellowstone Explodes from National Geographic *
The Yellowstone magmatic system from the mantle plume to the upper crust ( 46,000 km3 magma reservoir below chamber )