GEOGRAPHY OF QUEBEC Quebec , Canada 's largest province , occupies a vast territory ( nearly three times the size of France ) , most of which is very sparsely populated .
With an area of 1,542,056 square kilometres ( 595,391 square miles ) , it is the second largest of Canada 's provinces and territories and the tenth largest country subdivision in the world .
More than 90 percent of Quebec 's area lies within the Canadian Shield , and includes the greater part of the Labrador Peninsula .
Quebec 's highest mountain is Mont D'Iberville , which is located on the border with Newfoundland and Labrador in the northeastern part of the province in the Torngat Mountains .
The addition of parts of the vast and scarcely populated District of Ungava of the Northwest Territories between 1898 and 1912 gave the province its current form .
Quebec is bordered by the province of Ontario , James Bay and Hudson Bay ( including the circular Nastapoka arc ) to the west , the provinces of New Brunswick and Newfoundland and Labrador to the east , the United States ( Maine , New Hampshire , Vermont and New York ) to the south , and Hudson Strait and Ungava Bay to the north .
Its northernmost point is Cape Wolstenholme .
Quebec includes several islands .
These include Island of Montreal and Îles Laval , which are parts of the major cities of Montreal and Laval , respectively , Anticosti Island , a sparsely populated island in the outlet of the Saint Lawrence River , and the Magdalen Islands , an archipelago in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence .
In 1927 , the border between the Province of Quebec and the Dominion of Newfoundland was delineated by the British Judicial Committee of the Privy Council .
The government of Quebec does not officially recognize this boundary .
See The Labrador boundary dispute .
The territory of Quebec is extremely rich in resources in its coniferous forests , lakes , and rivers — pulp and paper , lumber , and hydroelectricity are still some of the province 's most important industries .
The far north of the province , Nunavik , is subarctic or arctic and is mostly inhabited by Inuit .
The most populous region is the Saint Lawrence River valley in the south , where the capital , Quebec City , and the largest city , Montreal , are situated .
North of Montreal are the Laurentians , a range of ancient mountains , and to the east are the Appalachian Mountains which extends into the Eastern Townships and Gaspésie regions .
The Gaspé Peninsula juts into the Gulf of Saint Lawrence to the East .
The Saint Lawrence River Valley is a fertile agricultural region , producing dairy products , fruit , vegetables , maple sugar ( Quebec is the world 's largest producer ) , and livestock .
In 1899 , the United States claimed Fox Island under the Guano Islands Act of 1856 .
BORDERS Section::::Borders .
Quebec shares a land border with four northeast states of the United States ( Maine , New Hampshire , New York and Vermont ) and with three other Canadian provinces ( New Brunswick , Ontario and Newfoundland and Labrador ) .
However , as said in the Etymology and boundary changes section , a border dispute remains regarding the ownership of Labrador .
The border with Labrador is still not officially recognized by the Quebec Government .
A maritime boundary also exists with the territories of Nunavut , Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia .
Quebec has officially more than of borders of all types .
Half of these are land limits , 12 % river limits and 38 % marine limits .
GEOLOGY
Section::::Geology .
About a hundred million years ago , the area of southern Quebec was over the New England hotspot , creating the magma intrusions of the Monteregian Hills .
These intrusive stocks have been variously interpreted as the feeder intrusions of long extinct volcanoes , which would have been active about 125 million years ago , or as intrusives that never breached the surface in volcanic activity .
CLIMATE Section::::Climate .
Quebec has three main climate regions .
Southern and western Quebec , including most of the major population centres , have a humid continental climate ( Köppen climate classification Dfb )
with warm , humid summers and long , cold winters .
The main climatic influences are from western and northern Canada which move eastward and from the southern and central United States that move northward .
Due to the influence of both storm systems from the core of North America and the Atlantic Ocean , precipitation is abundant throughout the year , with most areas receiving more than 1,000 mm ( 40 inches ) of precipitation , including over 300 cm ( 120 inches ) of snow in many areas .
During the summer , severe weather patterns ( such as tornadoes and severe thunderstorms ) are far less common than in southern Ontario , although they occasionally occur .
Most of central Quebec has a subarctic climate ( Köppen Dfc ) .
Winters are long and among the coldest in eastern Canada , while summers are warm but very short due to the higher latitude and the greater influence of Arctic air masses .
Precipitation is also somewhat less than farther south , except at some of the higher elevations .
The northern regions of Quebec have an arctic climate ( Köppen ET ) , with very cold winters and short , much cooler summers .
The primary influences in this region are the Arctic Ocean currents ( such as the Labrador Current ) and continental air masses from the High Arctic .
CLIMATE CHARTS ENVIRONMENTAL GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Environmental geography .
The province is home to a wide variety of flora and fauna .
The birdlife is diverse including Wild Turkey , Meleagris gallopavo , Yellow - bellied Sapsucker , Sphyrapicus varius and Loggerhead Shrike , Lanius ludovicianus .
SEE ALSO
* Île Rouleau crater *
Manicouagan crater REFERENCES