MORTAL SIN
A mortal sin ( ) , in Catholic theology , is a gravely sinful act , which can lead to damnation if a person does not repent of the sin before death .
A sin is considered to be " mortal " when its quality is such that it leads to a separation of that person from God 's saving grace .
This type of sin should be distinguished from a venial sin that simply leads to a weakening of a person 's relationship with God .
Despite its gravity , a person can repent of having committed a mortal sin .
Such repentance is the primary requisite for forgiveness and absolution .
Teaching on absolution from serious sins has varied somewhat throughout history .
The current Catholic teaching was formalized at the 16th century Council of Trent .
According to Catholic teaching , perfect contrition , coupled with a firm resolution to sin no more , can restore a person 's relationship with God , as well as God 's saving grace .
Under ordinary circumstances this takes place through absolution , which is received during the Sacrament of Penance .
However , as God 's mercy and forgiveness is not bound by the Sacrament of Penance , under extraordinary circumstances a mortal sin can be remitted through perfect contrition , which is a human act that arises from a person 's love of God .
When perfect contrition is the means by which one seeks to restore ones relationship with God , there must also be a resolution to confess all mortal sins ( that have not been confessed and absolved previously ) in the Sacrament of Penance .
A resolution to confess these sins should be made with an act of perfect contrition , regardless of whether or not a person believes that they will have access to the Sacrament of Penance .
The term " mortal sin " is thought to be derived from the New Testament of the Bible .
Specifically , it has been suggested that the term comes from the 1 John 5:16–17 .
In this particular verse , the author of the Epistle writes " There is a sin that leads to death . "
ROMAN CATHOLICISM Section::::Roman Catholicism .
In Roman Catholic moral theology , a mortal sin requires that all of the following conditions are met : *
Its subject matter must be grave .
*
* It must be committed with full knowledge ( and awareness ) of the sinful action and the gravity of the offense .
*
* It must be committed with deliberate and complete consent .
*
The Catechism of the Catholic Church defines grave matter : 1858 .
Grave matter is specified by the Ten Commandments , corresponding to the answer of Jesus to the rich young man : " Do not murder , Do not commit adultery , Do not steal , Do not bear false witness , Do not defraud , Honor your father and your mother .
" The gravity of sins is more or less great : murder is graver than theft .
One must also take into account who is wronged : violence against parents is in itself graver than violence against a stranger .
This would include worshiping other gods and blasphemy .
Although the Church itself does not provide a precise list of mortal sins or divide actions into mortal and venial categories , Church documents do name certain " grave sins " as well as " offenses " and " actions " whose subject - matter is considered to be grave .
For example , in the area of human sexuality , the Catechism of the Catholic Church notes that the following actions can involve increased gravity :
extramarital sex , divorce ( but not legitimate separation ) , and masturbation .
With respect to a person 's full knowledge of a certain act being a mortal sin , the Catholic Church teaches that " unintentional ignorance can diminish or even remove the imputability of a grave offense .
But no one is deemed to be ignorant of the principles of the moral law , which are written in the conscience of every man .
The promptings of feelings and passions can also diminish the voluntary and free character of the offense , as can external pressures or pathological disorders [ [ mental illness ] ] .
Sin committed through malice , by deliberate choice of evil , is the gravest . "
Furthermore , Catholic teaching also holds that " imputability and responsibility for an action can be diminished or even nullified by ignorance , inadvertence , duress , fear , habit , inordinate attachments , and other psychological or social factors .
" In this regard , a sin committed while one is inebriated may lack the awareness and consent necessary for the sin to be mortal .
But when one becomes aware of the danger of excessive drink , such drinking itself becomes a serious matter .
Mortal sins should not to be confused with the seven deadly sins .
The latter are not necessarily mortal sins ; they are sins that lead to other sins .
Mortal sins are sometimes called " grave " , " grievous " , or " serious " sins , but this term seems to deny the other two conditions necessary for mortal sin .
Theological debate also exists as to whether the term introduces a third category of sins .
Mortal sins must be confessed by naming the specific offence along with how many times it was committed .
It is not necessary to confess venial sins although they may be confessed , a practice that began with the Irish monks around the 12th century .
Venial sins are all sins that are not mortal .
The Church encourages frequent , intelligent use of the sacrament of confession even if a person has only venial sins , in view of the benefits that might be derived .
Some acts cause automatic excommunication by the very deed itself , for example renunciation of faith and religion , known as apostasy , desecration of the Eucharistic species , and " a completed abortion " .
Those mortal sins are so serious that the Church through law has made them crimes .
The Church forbids the excommunicated from receiving any sacrament ( not just the Eucharist ) and also severely restricts the person 's participation in other Church liturgical acts and offices .
A repentant excommunicated person may talk to a priest , usually in a confessional , about their excommunication to arrange for the remission .
Remission can not be denied to someone who has truly repented their actions and has also made suitable reparation for damages and scandal or at least has seriously promised according to church law .
However , even if excommunicated , a Catholic who has not been juridically absolved is still , due to the irrevocable nature of baptism , a member of the Catholic Church , albeit their communion with the Christ and the Church is gravely impaired .
" Perpetual penalties can not be imposed or declared by decree . "
However , " the following are expiatory penalties which can affect an offender either perpetually ...
"
Since the mid - twentieth century , some theologians have taught that a person who lives by a constant attitude of charity is unlikely to fall in and out of God 's graces without being profoundly aware of the change .
The term " fundamental option " arose and is used in a variety of senses .
Pope John Paul II reaffirmed traditional teaching going back to the Council of Trent in his encyclical Veritatis Splendor , as does the Catechism of the Catholic Church , which states : " The teaching of the Church affirms the existence of hell and its eternity .
Immediately after death the souls of those who die in a state of mortal sin descend into hell , where they suffer the punishments of hell , ' eternal fire ' .
"
The Catechism then adds : " The chief punishment of hell is eternal separation from God , in whom alone man can possess the life and happiness for which he was created and for which he longs . "
However , the Catechism does not by name say a specific person is in Hell , but it does say that " ... our freedom has the power to make choices for ever , with no turning back .
" Most significantly , the Catechism also proclaims that " There are no limits to the mercy of God ... " and that " although we can judge that an act is in itself a grave offence , we must entrust judgment of persons to the justice and mercy of God .
" We can not see into their mind to know if it was deliberate or committed in full knowledge .
Also , like the father in the Parable of the Prodigal Son , God forgives those who repent sincerely .
Vatican II , in its Dogmatic Constitution Lumen Gentium , reflects the traditional teaching of the Church .
EASTERN CATHOLIC
CHURCHES Section::::Eastern Catholic churches .
Eastern Catholic churches ( autonomous , self - governing [ in Latin , sui iuris ] particular churches in full communion with the Bishop of Rome , the Pope ) , which derive their theology and spirituality from some of the same sources as the Eastern Orthodox and Oriental Orthodox , use the Latin Catholic distinction between mortal and venial sin , though they are not named mortal and venial .
ACTIONS CONSTITUTING A " GRAVE MATTER " Section::::Actions constituting a " grave matter " .
The following is a partial list of actions that are defined as constituting a grave matter by the Catechism of the Catholic Church or like sources ( such as declarations by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith , Apostolic Letters , or other sources printed by Church authorities ) . !
width=140pt
Name !
width=500pt Description
" On the other hand , the Church does not consider at all illicit the use of those therapeutic means necessary to cure bodily diseases , even if a foreseeable impediment to procreation should result there from —
provided such impediment is not directly intended for any motive whatsoever . "
" Among the sins gravely contrary to chastity are masturbation , fornication , pornography , and homosexual practices . "
" Among the sins gravely contrary to chastity are masturbation , fornication , pornography , and homosexual practices .
"
" Even if in the earliest times [ Mass attendance ] was not judged necessary to be prescriptive , the Church has not ceased to confirm this obligation of conscience , which rises from the inner need felt so strongly by the Christians of the first centuries .
It was only later , faced with the half - heartedness or negligence of some , that the Church had to make explicit the duty to attend Sunday Mass : more often than not , this was done in the form of exhortation ...
The present Code reiterates ... saying that ' on Sundays and other holy days of obligation the faithful are bound to attend Mass ' .
This legislation has normally been understood as entailing a grave obligation . "
" We should not despair of the eternal salvation of persons who have taken their own lives .
By ways known to him alone , God can provide the opportunity for salutary repentance .
The Church prays for persons who have taken their own lives . "
EASTERN ORTHODOXY Section::::Eastern Orthodoxy .
According to Fr .
Allyne Smith ,
" While the Roman Catholic tradition has identified particular acts as ' mortal ' sins , in the Orthodox tradition we see that only a sin for which we do n't repent is ' mortal . ' " In the Orthodox Church there are no " categories " of sin as found in the Christian West .
In the pre - Vatican II Catholic catechism , sins were categorized as " mortal " and " venial .
" In this definition , a " mortal " sin was one which would prevent someone from entering heaven unless one confessed it before death ...
These categories do not exist in the Orthodox Church .
Sin is sin .
Concerning Confession , having a list of deadly sins could , in fact , become an obstacle to genuine repentance .
For example , imagine that you commit a sin .
You look on the list and do not find it listed .
It would be very easy to take the attitude that , since it is not on a list of deadly sins , it is not too serious .
Hence , you do not feel the need to seek God 's forgiveness right away .
A week passes and you have completely forgotten about what you had done .
You never sought God 's forgiveness ; as a result , you did not receive it , either .
We should go to Confession when we sin — at the very least , we should ask God to forgive us daily in our personal prayers .
We should not see Confession as a time to confess only those sins which may be found on a list .
Though not part of the dogma of the Orthodox Church
the mortal / venial distinction is assumed by some Orthodox authors and saints as a theologoumenon .
For example , Saint Ignatius Brianchaninov ( 1807–1867 ) , in his book A Word on Death , in a chapter entitled " Mortal sin " , says : * Under " unnatural carnal sins " the following are implied : sodomy , bestiality , masturbation , and any unnatural intercourse between married people ( such as using contraceptives , consummated oral or consummated anal intercourse , etc . )
as is explained in the book Ascetical Trials , also written by Saint Ignatius Brianchaninov ( 1807–1867 ) .
Similarly , the Exomologetarion of Nicodemus the Hagiorite ( 1749–1809 ) distinguishes seven classes of sin :
* Pardonable
* * Near the pardonable * * Non - mortal * * Near the non - mortal * * Between the mortal and the non - mortal * * Near the mortal * * Mortal * Nicodemus gives the following example for the seven classes of sin .
" The initial movement of anger is pardonable ; near to the pardonable is for someone to say harsh words and get hot - tempered .
A non - mortal sin is to swear ; near the non - mortal is for someone to strike with the hand .
Between the non - mortal and the mortal is to strike with a small stick ; near the mortal is to strike with a large stick , or with a knife , but not in the area of the head .
A mortal sin is to murder .
A similar pattern applies to the other sins .
Wherefore , those sins nearer to the pardonable end are penanced lighter , while those nearer to the mortal end are more severely penanced . "
He also stipulates seven conditions of sin : * Who is the doer of the sin
*
* What sin was committed *
* Why was it committed
* * In what manner was it committed
* * At what time / age was it committed *
* Where was it committed *
* How many times was it committed
* SEE ALSO
* Ancestral sin
* Blood atonement * Original sin
* Seven deadly sins
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Catholic Encyclopedia entry on Sin * Catholic Encyclopedia entry on Contrition * Catechism of the Catholic Church from the official website of the Vatican
* The Council of Trent - Session XIV - The fourth under the Supreme Pontiff , Julius III , celebrated on November 25 , 1551 - The Most Holy Sacraments Of Penance And Extreme Unction
* Excerpt from the Exomologetarion of Nicodemus the Hagiorite