GENETIC
VARIATION
Genetic variation means that biological systems – individuals and populations – are different over space .
Each gene pool includes various alleles of genes .
The variation occurs both within and among populations , supported by individual carriers of the variant genes .
Genetic variation is brought about , fundamentally , by mutation , which is a permanent change in the chemical structure of chromosomes .
Genetic recombination also produces changes within alleles .
AMONG INDIVIDUALS WITHIN A POPULATION Section::::Among individuals within a population .
Genetic variation among individuals within a population can be identified at a variety of levels .
It is possible to identify genetic variation from observations of phenotypic variation in either quantitative traits ( traits that vary continuously and are coded for by many genes ( e.g. , leg length in dogs ) ) or discrete traits ( traits that fall into discrete categories and are coded for by one or a few genes ( e.g. , white , pink , red petal color in certain flowers ) ) .
Genetic variation can also be identified by examining variation at the level of enzymes using the process of protein electrophoresis .
Polymorphic genes have more than one allele at each locus .
Half of the genes that code for enzymes in insects and plants may be polymorphic , whereas polymorphisms are less common among vertebrates .
Ultimately , genetic variation is caused by variation in the order of bases in the nucleotides in genes .
New technology now allows scientists to directly sequence DNA which has identified even more genetic variation than was previously detected by protein electrophoresis .
Examination of DNA has shown genetic variation in both coding regions and in the non - coding intron region of genes .
Genetic variation will result in phenotypic variation if variation in the order of nucleotides in the DNA sequence results in a difference in the order of amino acids in proteins coded by that DNA sequence , and if the resultant differences in amino acid sequence influence the shape , and thus the function of the enzyme .
BETWEEN POPULATIONS Section::::Between populations .
Geographic variation means genetic differences in populations from different locations .
This is caused by natural selection or genetic drift .
MEASUREMENT Section::::Measurement .
Genetic variation within a population is commonly measured as the percentage of gene loci that are polymorphic or the percentage of gene loci in individuals that are heterozygous .
SOURCES
Section::::Sources .
Random mutations are the ultimate source of genetic variation .
Mutations are likely to be rare and most mutations are neutral or deleterious , but in some instances , the new alleles can be favored by natural selection .
Polyploidy is an example of chromosomal mutation .
Polyploidy is a condition wherein organisms have three or more sets of genetic variation ( 3n or more ) .
Crossing over ( genetic recombination ) and random segregation during meiosis can result in the production of new alleles or new combinations of alleles .
Furthermore , random fertilization also contributes to variation .
Variation and recombination can be facilitated by transposable genetic elements , endogenous retroviruses , LINEs , SINEs , etc .
For a given genome of a multicellular organism , genetic variation may be acquired in somatic cells or inherited through the germline .
FORMS Section::::Forms .
Genetic variation can be divided into different forms according to the size and type of genomic variation underpinning genetic change .
Small - scale sequence variation ( < 1Kbp ) includes base - pair substitution and indels .
Large - scale Structural variation ( > 1Kbp ) can be either copy number variation ( loss or gain ) , or chromosomal rearrangement ( translocation , inversion , or Segmental acquired uniparental disomy ) .
Genetic variation and recombination by transposable elements and endogenous retroviruses sometimes is supplemented by a variety of persistent viruses and their defectives which generate genetic novelty in host genomes .
Numerical variation in whole chromosomes or genomes can be either polyploidy or aneuploidy .
MAINTENANCE IN POPULATIONS Section::::Maintenance in populations .
A variety of factors maintain genetic variation in populations .
Potentially harmful recessive alleles can be hidden from selection in the heterozygous individuals in populations of diploid organisms ( recessive alleles are only expressed in the less common homozygous individuals ) .
Natural selection can also maintain genetic variation in balanced polymorphisms .
Balanced polymorphisms may occur when heterozygotes are favored or when selection is frequency dependent .
SEE ALSO * Genetic diversity
* Genetic variability
* Human genetic variation REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Mayr E. ( 1970 ) : Populations , species , and evolution – An abridgment of Animal species and evolution .
The Belknap Press of Harvard University Press , Cambridge , Massachusetts and London , England , .
* Dobzhansky T. ( 1970 ) : Genetics of the evolutionary process .
Columbia , New York , .
* McGinley , Mark ; J. Emmett Duffy ( ed ) .
2008 .
" Genetic variation . "
In : Encyclopedia of Earth .
Washington , D.C. : National Council for Science and the Environment .
* " Genetic Variation " in Griffiths , A.J.F. Modern Genetic Analysis , Vol 2 . , p. 7
* " How is Genetic Variation Maintained in Populations " in Sadava , D. et al .
Life : The Science of Biology , p.
456
* Nevo , E. ; Beiles , A. " Genetic variation in nature " .
Scholarpedia , 6(7):8821 .
* Hedrick P. ( 2011 ) : Genetics of populations .
Jones & Bartlett Learning , .
* Albers P. K. and McVean G. ( 2018 ) :
Dating genomic variants and shared ancestry in population - scale sequencing data .
bioRxiv : 416610 .
doi : .
* Rieger R. Michaelis A. , Green M. M. ( 1976 ) : Glossary of genetics and cytogenetics : Classical and molecular .
Springer - Verlag , Heidelberg - New York , ; .
* Griffiths , A. J. F. ( 1999 ) .
An Introduction to genetic analysis .
W. H. Freeman , San Francisco , .
* Cavalli - Sforza L. L. , Bodmer W. F. ( 1999 ) : The genetics of human populations .
Dover , Mineola , New York , .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Genetic variation