OWN GOAL
An own goal is an event in competitive goal - scoring sports ( such as association football or hockey ) where a player scores on his own side of the playing area rather than the one defended by the opponent .
Own goals sometimes result from the opponent 's defensive strength , as when the player is stopped in the scoring area , but can also happen by accident .
Since own goals are often added to the opponent 's score , they are often an embarrassing blunder for the scoring player , but in certain sports are occasionally done for strategic reasons .
In some parts of the world , the term has become a metaphor for any action that backfires on the person / group undertaking it , sometimes even carrying a sense of " poetic justice " .
A player trying to throw a game might deliberately attempt an own goal .
Such players run the risk of being sanctioned or banned from further play .
ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL Section::::Association football .
In association football , an own goal occurs when a player causes the ball to go into his own team 's goal , resulting in a goal being scored for the opposition .
Defenders often " turn behind " dangerous balls into the penalty area , particularly crosses , by kicking or heading the ball out of play behind their goal - line .
In this way , the defender 's aim is to concede a corner rather than giving attacking players scoring opportunities .
Consequently , the defender may misjudge and inadvertently turn the ball into his own goal , particularly if he is under pressure from attacking players who might otherwise score .
The defending player who scored the own goal is personally " credited " with the goal as part of the statistical abstract of the game .
The credit is annotated " ( og ) " to indicate its nature .
The Laws of the Game stipulate that an own goal can not be scored directly from most methods of restarting the game ; instead , a corner kick is awarded to the attacking team .
This is the case for the kick - off , goal kick , dropped - ball ( since 2012 ) , throw - in , corner kick , and free kick ( indirect and direct ) .
The Laws do not stipulate any rules or procedures for crediting goals to players , and indeed such records are not a compulsory part of the game .
In 1997 FIFA issued detailed guidelines for crediting own goals , recognising the increasing commercial importance of statistics such as and fantasy football .
The guidelines state that credit for scoring is decided by the referee , or match commissioner if present ; and " [ a ] defender 's intervention must be deliberate in order for an own goal to be registered against him " .
Regarding a shot which deflects or ricochets into the goal off a defender , some sources credit the score to the attacker ; others count them as own goals ; for others it depends on whether the original shot was off target ; others are more nuanced .
There was controversy in 2013 when the FA Premier League credited Tim Howard with an own goal when a shot came off the post , hit him in the back , and went in .
Major competitions may have video reviews which can alter the accreditation , such as the Dubious Goals Committee of the FA Premier League .
In the 2002 FIFA World Cup , one of Ronaldo 's eight goals in winning the Golden Boot was initially credited as an own goal but reassigned on appeal by Brazil .
UEFA 's review procedure was formalised in 2008 .
, the English Football League allowed the club which scored to nominate the scorer , which The Guardian criticised with an example from 2002 : " every single national newspaper , agency and football factbook agreed that Coventry City defender Calum Davenport had scored an own goal against Burnley .
The Clarets , however , gave the goal to Gareth Taylor " .
The most infamous own goal was by Andrés Escobar of Colombia in the 1994 FIFA World Cup which lost the match against the United States and knocked Colombia out ; a week later , Escobar was shot dead in Colombia by a drug gang member whose boss had lost betting on the match .
ICE HOCKEY Section::::Ice hockey .
If a goal is scored by a player on the defending team , credit for the goal goes to the last player on the other team to have touched the puck ; this is because own goals in hockey are typically cases where the player so credited had the shot deflected , but this convention is used even where this is not the case .
Occasionally , it is also credited to the closest player to the goal from the other team if he is determined to have caused the opposing player to shoot it into the wrong net .
Assists are not awarded on an own goal because the defending team has possession of the puck between any pass and the goal itself .
Occasionally in the NHL , players have directed the puck into their own empty net , either late in the game or because of a delayed penalty call .
This was the situation which resulted in Billy Smith of the New York Islanders becoming the first goaltender to receive credit for a goal in the NHL .
In some parts of Canada , an own goal is referred to as a limoges .
The term is believed to have originated in New Brunswick ( approximately 1970 ) and became more common in the greater Toronto region starting in the 1990s .
FIELD HOCKEY Section::::Field hockey .
Treatment of " own goals " in field hockey has varied over recent years .
In 2013 the International Hockey Federation ( FIH ) implemented a " mandatory experiment " such that a deflection of a shot from outside the shooting circle from a defender would be equivalent to a touch from an attacker , and thus if the shot continued into the goal the score would be counted .
This proved unpopular and the change was reversed .
Presently rule 8.1 states that " A goal is scored when the ball is played within the circle by an attacker and does not travel outside the circle before passing completely over the goal - line and under the crossbar . "
Added clarification : " The ball may be played by a defender or touch their body before or after being played in the circle by an attacker . "
Thus , an " own goal " may occur , but in such situations the goal will likely be credited to the attacker whose initial play into the circle was necessary for the goal to stand .
BASKETBALL Section::::Basketball .
When accidentally scoring at an opposing team 's basket ( basketball 's equivalent of an " own goal " ) , the goal is credited to an offensive player .
One typical own - goal scenario occurs when a player tries to block a goal shot but ends up knocking the ball into the goal .
In NFHS basketball , the two points are merely listed for the scoring team , as a footnote .
In NCAA basketball , the rules state :
" When a player scores a field goal in the opponent 's basket , it shall count two points for the opponent regardless of the location on the playing court from where it was released .
Such a field goal shall not be credited to a player in the scorebook but shall be indicated with a footnote . "
In NBA rules , the goal is credited to the player on the scoring team who is closest to defensive shooter and is mentioned in a footnote .
Under FIBA rules , the player designated captain is credited with the basket .
AMERICAN FOOTBALL Section::::American football .
When a ball carrier is tackled or exits the field of play within the end zone being defended by his team , the result is a safety and the opposing team is awarded two points , and receives the ball after a free kick taken at the twenty - yard line .
( This does not apply if the ball carrier secures possession of the ball in the end zone as a result of an interception or a kick ; in that case , no points are awarded and the play is considered a touchback . )
In Canadian football , if a scrimmage kick ( punt or missed field goal attempt ) is kicked into the end zone and the opponent does not advance it out , the kicking team is awarded a rouge , worth one point .
A true " own goal " , in which the team place kicks or drop kicks the ball through their own goal posts ( which has never happened at any level in football history and would require either a very strong headwind or a deliberate act of sabotage ) , is treated as any other backward kick in most leagues ' rule books .
Backward kicks are treated as fumbles , and as such , a backward kick through the back of the end zone , including through the goal posts , is scored as a safety .
This occurred in a 2012 game between two Texas high schools ; a punter kicked against a strong wind that blew the ball backward into the end zone , where the defense took control of it .
In the final minutes of a game , a team may take a deliberate safety in order to get the free kick , rather than punting from the end zone .
In 2003 , the New England Patriots came back to win a game after giving a safety that put them three points behind .
Similarly , the Baltimore Ravens took a safety with twelve seconds left in Super Bowl XLVII instead of punting out of the end zone , cutting their lead to three points but winning the game since they were able to burn eight seconds off the clock with the safety play , and the opposing San Francisco 49ers were unable to score on the ensuing free kick .
CANADIAN FOOTBALL Section::::Canadian football .
In the 2017 Grey Cup , the Calgary Stampeders deliberately took a safety when their punter Rob Maver , having lost control of a high snap , was faced with loss of down deep in his own territory .
He intentionally kicked the ball backwards through the back of his own end zone for a safety .
GAELIC FOOTBALL Section::::Gaelic football .
Gaelic footballers can play the ball with their hands ; therefore , they have a much greater degree of control over the ball and thus , own goals are much rarer than they are in association football .
They do occur , and two were scored by Mayo in the drawn 2016 All - Ireland SFC Final .
As an own goal is scored when the ball goes under the crossbar , so an " own point " is scored ( like any other point )
when the ball goes over the crossbar .
However , when a shot on goal is deflected over the bar by the defending team , the point is credited to the attacker who shot and not considered an " own point " .
AUSTRALIAN RULES
FOOTBALL Section::::Australian rules football .
As a legitimate defensive play , an Australian rules football defender may concede an " own score " .
Such a score , referred to as a rushed behind and statistically credited to no player ( score sheets simply include the tally of rushed behinds ) , results in the opposition team scoring one point .
A defending player may choose to concede a rushed behind when the risk of the opposition scoring a goal ( worth six points ) is high .
It is impossible for a team to concede an own goal worth six points .
FOOTNOTES REFERENCES