SEMI - AUTOMATIC
FIREARM A semi - automatic firearm , also called self - loading firearm or autoloading firearm ( though fully automatic and selective fire firearms technically are also self - loading ) , is one that not only fires a bullet each time the trigger is pulled , but also performs all steps necessary to prepare it to discharge again — assuming cartridges remain in the firearm 's feed device .
Typically , this includes extracting and ejecting the spent cartridge case from the firing chamber , re - cocking the firing mechanism , and loading a new cartridge into the firing chamber .
To fire again , the trigger is released and re - pressed .
Ferdinand Ritter von Mannlicher produced the first successful design for a semi - automatic rifle in 1885 , and by the early 20th century , many manufacturers had introduced semi - automatic shotguns , rifles and pistols .
In military use , self - loading rifles were barely used in World War I , and most armies in World War II also still relied upon bolt - action rifles , with the exception of the Americans , who in 1937 had adopted the M1 Garand as the standard - issue infantry weapon .
EARLY HISTORY ( 1885–1945 )
Section::::Early history ( 1885–1945 ) .
The first successful design for a semi - automatic rifle is attributed to Austria - born gunsmith Ferdinand Ritter von Mannlicher , who unveiled the design in 1885 .
The Model 85 was followed by the equally innovative Mannlicher Models 91 , 93 and 95 semi - automatic rifles .
Although Mannlicher earned his reputation with his bolt - action rifle designs , he also produced a few semi - automatic pistols , including the Steyr Mannlicher M1894 , which employed an unusual blow - forward action and held five rounds of 6.5 mm ammunition that were fed into the M1894 by a stripper clip .
SEMI - AUTOMATIC
SHOTGUN Section::::Semi - automatic shotgun .
A few years later , American gunsmith John Moses Browning developed the first successful semi - automatic shotgun , the Browning Auto-5 , which was first manufactured in 1902 by Fabrique Nationale de Herstal and sold in America under the Browning name .
The Auto-5 relied on long recoil operation ; this design remained the dominant form in semi - automatic shotguns for approximately 50 years .
Production of the Auto-5 was ended in 1999 .
BLOWBACK SEMI - AUTOMATIC Section::::Blowback semi - automatic .
In 1903 and 1905 , the Winchester Repeating Arms Company introduced the first semi - automatic rimfire and centerfire rifles designed especially for the civilian market .
The Winchester Model 1903 and Winchester Model 1905 operated on the principle of blowback in order to function semi - automatically .
Designed entirely by T.C. Johnson , the Model 1903 achieved commercial success and continued to be manufactured until 1932 when the Winchester Model 63 replaced it .
By the early 20th century , several manufacturers had introduced semi - automatic .22 sporting rifles , including Winchester , Remington , Fabrique Nationale and Savage Arms , all using the direct blow - back system of operation .
Winchester introduced a medium caliber semi - automatic sporting rifle , the Model 1907 as an upgrade to the Model 1905 , utilizing a blowback system of operation , in calibers such as .351 Winchester .
Both the Models of 1905 and 1907 saw limited military and police use .
NOTABLE EARLY SEMI - AUTOMATIC RIFLES Section::::Notable early semi - automatic rifles .
In 1906 , Remington Arms introduced the " Remington Auto - loading Repeating Rifle . "
Remington advertised this rifle , renamed the " Model 8 " in 1911 , as a sporting rifle .
This is a locked - breech , long recoil action designed by John Browning .
The rifle was offered in .25 , .30 , .32 , and .35 caliber models , and gained popularity among civilians as well as some law enforcement officials who appreciated the combination of a semi - automatic action and relatively powerful rifle cartridges .
The Model 81 superseded the Model 8 in 1936 and was offered in .300 Savage as well as the original Remington calibers .
The first semi - automatic rifle adopted and widely issued by a major military power ( France ) was the Fusil Automatique Modele 1917 .
This is a locked breech , gas - operated action which is very similar in its mechanical principles to the future M1 Garand in the United States .
The M1917 was fielded during the latter stages of World War I but it did not receive a favorable reception .
However its shortened and improved version , the Model 1918 , was much more favourably received during the Moroccan Rif War from 1920 to 1926 .
The Lebel bolt - action rifle remained the standard French infantry rifle until replaced in 1936 by the MAS-36 despite the various semi - automatic rifles designed between 1918 and 1935 .
Other nations experimented with self - loading rifles between the two World Wars , including the United Kingdom , which had intended to replace the bolt - action Lee – Enfield with a self - loader , possibly chambered for sub - caliber ammunition , but discarded that plan as the imminence of the Second World War and the emphasis shifted from replacing every rifle with a new design to speeding - up re - armament with existing weapons .
The Soviet Union and Nazi Germany would both issue successful self - loading and selective - fire rifles on a large scale during the course of the war , but not in sufficient numbers to replace their standard bolt - action rifles .
NOTABLE
GAS - OPERATED
RIFLES Section::::Notable gas - operated rifles .
In 1937 , the American M1 Garand was the first semi - automatic rifle to replace its nation 's bolt - action rifle as the standard - issue infantry weapon .
The gas - operated M1 Garand was developed by Canadian - born John Garand for the U.S. government at the Springfield Armory in Springfield , Massachusetts .
After years of research and testing , the first production model of the M1 Garand was unveiled in 1937 .
During World War II , the M1 Garand gave American infantrymen an advantage over their opponents , most of whom were issued slower firing bolt - action rifles .
The Soviet AVS-36 , SVT-38 and SVT-40 , as well as the German Gewehr 43 , were semi - automatic gas - operated rifles issued during World War II in relatively small numbers .
In practice , they did not replace the bolt - action rifle as a standard infantry weapon .
Another gas - operated semi - automatic rifle developed toward the end of World War II was the SKS .
Designed by Sergei Gavrilovich Simonov in 1945 , it came equipped with a bayonet and could be loaded with ten rounds , using a stripper clip .
However , the SKS was quickly replaced by the AK-47 .
It was the first widely issued weapon to use the 7.62×39 mm cartridge .
TYPES Section::::Types .
There are semi - automatic pistols , rifles , and shotguns designed and made as semi - automatic only .
Selective - fire firearms are capable of both full automatic and semi - automatic modes .
Semi - automatic refers to a firearm which uses the force of recoil or gas to eject the empty case and load a fresh cartridge into the firing chamber for the next shot and which allows repeat shots solely through the action of pulling the trigger .
A double - action revolver also requires only a trigger pull for each round that is fired but is not considered semi - automatic since the manual action of pulling the trigger is what advances the cylinder , not the energy of the preceding shot .
FULLY AUTOMATIC
COMPARED TO SEMI - AUTOMATIC Section::::Fully automatic compared to semi - automatic .
The usage of the term automatic may vary according to context .
Gun specialists point out that the word automatic is sometimes misunderstood to mean fully automatic fire when used to refer to a self - loading , semi - automatic firearm not capable of fully automatic fire .
In this case , automatic refers to the loading mechanism , not the firing capability .
The term " automatic pistol " almost exclusively refers to a semi - automatic ( i.e. not fully automatic ) pistol .
With handguns , the term " automatic " is commonly used to distinguish semi - automatic pistols from revolvers .
The term " auto - loader " may also be used to describe a semi - automatic handgun .
However , to avoid confusion , the term " automatic rifle " is generally , conventionally and best restricted to a rifle capable of fully automatic fire .
Both uses of the term " automatic " can be found ; the exact meaning must be determined from context .
AUTO - LOADING Section::::Auto - loading .
The mechanism of semi - automatic ( or autoloading ) firearms is usually what is known as a closed - bolt firing system .
In a closed - bolt system , a round must first be chambered manually before the weapon can fire .
When the trigger is pulled , only the hammer and firing pin move , striking and firing the cartridge .
The bolt then recoils far enough rearward to extract and load a new cartridge from the magazine into the firearm 's chamber , ready to fire again once the trigger is pulled .
An open - bolt mechanism is a common characteristic of fully automatic firearms .
With this system , pulling the trigger releases the bolt from a cocked , rearward position , pushing a cartridge from the magazine into the chamber , firing the gun .
The bolt retracts to the rearward position , ready to strip the next cartridge from the magazine .
The open - bolt system is often used in submachine guns and other weapons with a high rate of fire .
It is rarely used in semi - automatic - only firearms , which can fire only one shot with each pull of the trigger .
The closed - bolt system is generally more accurate , as the centre of gravity changes relatively little at the moment the trigger is pulled .
With fully automatic weapons , open - bolt operation allows air to circulate , cooling the barrel ; with semi - automatic firearms , the closed - bolt operation is preferred , as overheating is not as critical , and accuracy is preferred .
Some select - fire military weapons use an open bolt in fully automatic mode and a closed bolt when semi - automatic is selected .
EXAMPLES SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * NPR Audio Report :
The Appeal of Semi - Automatic Weapons