LET 'S MAKE
A DEAL Let 's Make a Deal is a television game show that originated in the United States in 1963 and has since been produced in many countries throughout the world .
The program was created and produced by Stefan Hatos and Monty Hall , the latter serving as its host for many years .
The format of Let 's Make a Deal involves selected members of the studio audience , referred to as " traders , " making deals with the host .
In most cases , a trader will be offered something of value and given a choice of whether to keep it or exchange it for a different item .
The program 's defining game mechanism is that the other item is hidden from the trader until that choice is made .
The trader thus does not know if he or she is getting something of greater value or a prize that is referred to as a " zonk , " an item purposely chosen to be of little or no value to the trader .
Let 's Make a Deal is also known for audience members who dress up in outrageous or crazy costumes in order to increase their chances of being selected as a trader .
The most recent edition of Let 's Make a Deal has been airing on CBS since October 5 , 2009 , when it took over the spot on the network 's daytime schedule vacated by the long running soap opera Guiding Light .
Wayne Brady is the host of the current series , with Jonathan Mangum as his announcer / assistant .
Tiffany Coyne is the current model , joining in 2010 , with musician Cat Gray in 2011 .
BROADCAST HISTORY Section::::Broadcast history .
Let 's Make a Deal first aired on NBC in 1963 as part of its daytime schedule .
The show moved to ABC in 1968 , where it remained until 1976 ; and on two separate occasions the show was given a weekly nighttime spot on those networks .
The first syndicated edition of Let 's Make a Deal premiered in 1971 .
Distributed by ABC Films , and then by its successor Worldvision Enterprises once the fin - syn rules were enacted , the series ran until 1977 and aired weekly .
A revival of the series based in Hall 's native Canada was launched in 1980 and aired in syndication on American and Canadian stations for one season .
This series was produced by Catalena Productions and distributed in America by Rhodes Productions , Catalena 's partner company .
In the fall of 1984 , the series returned for a third run in syndication as The All - New Let 's Make a Deal .
Running for two seasons until 1986 , this series was distributed by Telepictures .
NBC revived
Let 's Make a Deal twice in a thirteen - year span .
The first was a daytime series in 1990 that was the first to not be produced or hosted by Monty Hall .
Instead , the show was a production of Ron Greenberg and Dick Clark , and featured Bob Hilton ( best known for announcing other game shows ) as host ( although Hall would eventually return as host for special episodes ) .
A primetime edition was launched in 2003 but drew poor ratings and was cancelled after three of its intended five episodes had aired .
This version had CNN reporter Billy Bush as host , and had a significantly larger budget .
A partial remake called Big Deal , hosted by Mark DeCarlo , was broadcast on Fox in 1996 .
In 1998 and 1999 , Buena Vista Television ( now Disney – ABC Domestic Television ) was in talks with Stone - Stanley ( the producers of Big Deal ) to create a revival hosted by Gordon Elliott , but it was never picked up .
The show was one of several used as part of the summer series Gameshow Marathon on CBS in 2006 , hosted by Ricki Lake .
As noted above , CBS revived Let 's Make a Deal in 2009 .
The revival premiered on October 5 , 2009 , and CBS airs the show daily at 10:00 am and 3:00 pm
Eastern time ( 9:00 am and 2:00 pm in other time zones ) .
Like the program that it replaced , the long - running soap opera Guiding Light , affiliates can choose to air it in either time slot ; most affiliates , however , prefer the early slot in order to pair the two CBS daytime game shows together .
From September 20 to October 15 , 2010 , Let 's Make a Deal and
The Price Is
Right aired two episodes a day on alternating weeks .
CBS did this to fill a gap between the final episode of As the World Turns , which ended a fifty - four - year run on September 17 , 2010 , and the debut of The Talk .
The double - run games aired at 2:00 pm Eastern .
Although the current version of the show debuted in September 2009 , long after The Price Is Right ( which made the switch in September 2008 ) and the two Sony Pictures Television daytime dramas had made the switch to high definition , Let 's Make a Deal was , along with Big Brother , one of only two programs across the five major networks that was still being actively produced in standard definition .
For the start of production for its 2014–15 season in June 2014 , Let 's Make a Deal began being produced in high definition , with Big Brother 16 making the switch later in June .
Let 's Make a Deal was the last remaining CBS program to make the switch by air date , with the first HD episode airing on September 22 , 2014 .
PAST PERSONNEL Section::::Past personnel .
Monty Hall hosted the original daytime network series for its entire run ( with the exception of a short time in early 1972 when Hall fell ill and early television pioneer Dennis James substituted in his stead ) ; Hall also hosted its accompanying primetime and syndicated series as well as the two 1980s syndicated efforts , and he served as consultant for the current version until his death .
Game show announcer Bob Hilton became the new host for the NBC 1990 series ; however , due to low ratings , Hilton was fired from the show and in October 1990 , Hall returned to the show ( but was announced as " guest host " ) and remained as host until the series was canceled in January 1991 .
Access Hollywood host Billy Bush emceed the 2003 series , with Hall making a cameo appearance in one episode .
Each Let 's Make a Deal announcer also served as a de facto assistant host , as many times the announcer would be called upon to carry props across the trading floor .
The original announcer for the series was Wendell Niles , who was replaced by Jay Stewart in 1964 .
Stewart remained with Let 's Make a Deal until the end of the syndicated series in 1977 .
The 1980 Canadian - produced syndicated series was announced by Chuck Chandler .
The 1984 syndicated series employed voice actor Brian Cummings in the announcer / assistant role for its first season , with disc jockey Dean Goss taking the position for the following season .
The 1990 NBC revival series was announced by Dean Miuccio , with the 2003 edition featuring Vance DeGeneres in that role .
The longest tenured prize model on Let 's Make a Deal was Carol Merrill , who stayed with the series from its debut until 1977 .
The models on the 1980s series were Maggie Brown , Julie Hall ( 1980 ) , Karen LaPierre , and Melanie Vincz ( 1984 ) .
For the 1990 series , the show featured Georgia Satelle and identical twins Elaine and Diane Klimaszewski , who later gained fame as the Coors Light Twins .
Hall ( 2010 and 2013 ) and Merrill ( 2013 ) both appeared on the current Brady version , each making one - week appearances each .
The 2013 celebration of the franchise 's 50th anniversary was Hall 's last official appearance on the show prior to his death , but Hall also appeared in 2017 CBS publicity shots with Brady as part of a CBS Daytime publicity photo celebrating the network 's daytime ratings .
When the current version debuted in 2009 at Las Vegas , Alison Fiori was the show 's original model , lasting for much of the first season in Las Vegas before the show moved to Los Angeles .
During the 2013 - 14 season , Danielle Demski was the show 's model for most of the season while Tiffany Coyne was on maternity leave .
PRODUCTION LOCATIONS Section::::Production locations .
The original daytime series was recorded at NBC Studios in Burbank , California and then at ABC Television Center in Los Angeles once the program switched networks in 1968 .
The weekly syndicated series also taped at ABC Television Center , doing so for its first five seasons .
After ABC cancelled the daytime series in 1976 , production of the syndicated series ceased there as well and the sixth and final season was recorded in the ballroom of the Las Vegas Hilton hotel in Las Vegas , Nevada .
The 1980 Canadian series taped at Panorama Studios in Vancouver , BC , which production company Catalena Productions used as its base of operations .
The All - New Let 's Make a Deal taped its first season of episodes in Burbank at NBC Studios , then moved to Hollywood Center Studios in Hollywood , California for the second and final season .
The 1990 NBC daytime series was recorded at Disney - MGM Studios on the grounds of Walt Disney World in Orlando , Florida .
The 2003 revival returned production to Burbank .
The current edition of the series originally emanated from the Tropicana in Las Vegas .
The show returned to Hollywood in 2010 , first at Sunset Bronson Studios and later at Raleigh Studios .
FORMAT GAME PLAY Section::::Format .
Section::::Game play .
Each episode of Let 's Make a Deal consists of several " deals " between the host and a member ( or members , generally a married couple ) of the audience , referred to as " traders .
" Audience members are picked at the host 's whim as the show moves along , and couples are often selected to play together as traders .
The deals are mini - games within the show that take several formats .
In the simplest format , a trader is given a prize of medium value ( such as a television set or a few hundred dollars in cash ) , and the host offers them the opportunity to trade for another prize .
However , the offered prize is unknown .
It might be concealed on the stage behind one of three curtains , or behind " boxes " onstage ( large panels painted to look like boxes ) , within smaller boxes brought out to the audience , or occasionally in other formats .
The initial prize given to the trader may also be concealed , such as in a box , wallet or purse , or the trader might be initially given a box , envelope or curtain .
The format varies widely .
Technically , traders are supposed to bring something to trade in , but this rule has seldom been enforced .
On several occasions , a trader is actually asked to trade in an item such as their shoes or purse , only to receive the item back at the end of the deal as a " prize " .
On at least one occasion , the purse was taken backstage and a high - valued prize was placed inside of it .
Prizes generally are either a legitimate prize , such as a trip , electronics , furniture , appliances , or a car .
Certain contestants also win cash , or a junked booby prize called a " zonk " ( e.g. , live animals , large amounts of food , fake money , fake trips , junked cars , etc .
or something outlandish such as a giant article of clothing , a room full of junked furniture , etc . ) .
Sometimes zonks are legitimate prizes but of a low value ( e.g. , Matchbox cars , wheelbarrows , T - shirts , groceries , etc . ) .
On rare occasions , a trader appears to get zonked , but the zonk is a cover - up for a legitimate prize .
Also on rare occasions , a contestant who is zonked is given an opportunity to play for the Big Deal of the Day ; usually , this happens only if there are very few or no big winners during the show .
Though usually considered joke prizes , traders legally win the zonks .
However , after the taping of the show , any trader who had been zonked is offered a consolation prize ( currently $ 100 ) instead of having to take home the actual zonk .
This is partly because some of the zonks are impractical or physically impossible to receive or deliver to the traders ( such as live animals or the guy in an animal costume ) , or the props are owned by the studio .
A disclaimer at the end of the credits of later 1970s episodes read " Some traders accept reasonable duplicates of zonk prizes . "
Starting in the 2012–13 season , CBS invited viewers to provide zonk ideas to producers .
At the end of the season , the zonk declared the most creative was worth $ 2,500 to the winner , and other viewers ' zonk ideas were also used .
For every viewer - developed zonk , the host announced the viewer who provided the zonk .
The contest has been continued throughout the past several seasons after its 2012 introduction .
QUICKIE DEALS Section::::Quickie Deals .
As the end credits of the show roll , it is typical for the host to ask random members of the studio audience to participate in fast deals .
In the current Wayne Brady version , these are often referred to as " quickie deals " , and are conducted by the host , announcer , and model each .
CBS will post information on the show 's Twitter address ( @LetsMakeADeal ) days before taping to encourage audience members to carry certain items in their pockets in order to win an additional $ 500 cash , when one of the hosts approaches them at the end of the show and asks to see such items .
The deals are usually in the form of the following :
* Offering cash to a person for possessing a certain item .
* Paying a small cash amount for each instance of a certain item ( coins , paperclips , etc . )
that a person can produce .
* Offering cash for each instance of a particular digit in the serial number on a dollar bill , driver 's license , etc .
* Offering to pay the last check in the person 's checkbook , if they had one , up to a certain limit ( usually $ 500 or $ 1,000 ) .
* Offering cash to one person if they can correctly guess how much the Big Deal of the Day was worth exactly , or the name of the contestant who played for it .
* Offering cash to one person if they can correctly choose which one of two photos appeared on the show 's Instagram account .
* Offering cash to one person if they can correctly answer a question relating to their costume .
* Offering cash to one person if they can correctly guess how much money ( $ 100 , $ 200 , or $ 300 ) was in the announcer 's hand .
OTHER DEAL FORMATS Section::::Other deal formats .
Deals were often more complicated than the basic format described above .
Additionally , some deals took the form of games of chance , and others in the form of pricing games .
TRADING DEALS
* Choosing an envelope , purse , wallet , etc . , which conceal dollar bills .
One of them conceals a pre - announced value ( usually $ 1 or $ 5 ) , which awards a car or trip .
The other envelopes contain a larger amount of money as a consolation prize .
The trader must decide whether to keep their choice or trade .
In some playings it is possible for more than one trader to win the grand prize .
* Making decisions for another person , such as a spouse or a series of unrelated traders .
Sometimes after several offers , the teams are broken up to make an individual decision .
* Being presented with a large grocery item ( e.g. , a box of candy bars)—almost always containing a hidden cash amount — or a " claim check " at the start of the show .
Throughout the show , the trader is given several chances to trade the item and/or give it to another trader in exchange for a different box or curtain .
The final trader in possession of the item prior to the Big Deal is usually offered first choice of the three doors in exchange for giving up the item .
The contents of the item are only revealed after the Big Deal is awarded ( or prior to the Big Deal if the last trader with the item elected to choose one of the three doors ) .
A variation included a cash box with at various points the host inserting packets of money inside , with the trader allowed to give it to another trader in exchange for a curtain or box .
As with the above deal , the host revealed the contents only after the last trader with the box goes for the Big Deal ( again , he / she is given first choice of the doors ) or after the Big Deal segment and before the closing credits .
GAMES OF CHANCE Section::::Games of chance .
A wide variety of chance - based games have been used on the show .
Examples :
* Collecting a certain amount of money hidden inside wallets , envelopes , etc . , or by pressing unlabeled buttons on a cash register , in order to reach a pre - stated " selling price " for a larger prize , such as a car , trip or larger amount of cash .
Typically , there may also be one or more zonk items hidden which end the game immediately if found .
In the cash register game , if the zonk button — the one that rings up " No Sale " – is found , the trader was offered a chance to find the second " No Sale " sign to win the grand prize , otherwise the trader won whatever amount was rang up , often double the amount .
In the current CBS version , a board with thirteen cash amounts and two zonks is used .
* Choosing one from among several items ( e.g. , one of three keys that unlocks a safe , one of three diamond rings that is genuine , one of three eggs that is raw , etc . )
in order to win money or a prize .
Sometimes , two or perhaps all three of the items would pay off with the stated prize , especially if multiple traders played .
* Games involving a deck of cards in which a trader must find matching cards , draw cards that reach a cumulative total within a certain number of draws , draw a certain number of cards from a certain suit to win a designated prize ( with one suit always designated as going toward a " zonk , " which ends the game with nothing won ) , etc .
to win a prize or additional money .
* Receiving clues about an unknown prize ( such as a partial spelling of the prize or clues in the form or rap , rhyme , etc . ) and deciding whether to take the unknown prize or a cash prize .
* Receiving money in the form of a long strip of bills dispensed one at a time from a machine .
The trader can end the game at any time and keep the accumulated money , but he / she forfeits it if a blank sheet appears .
Updated versions of the game involve an ATM .
Depositing a card withdraws cash , but if the ATM displays " overdrawn " on the screen the trader loses everything .
* Being given a choice between a cash prize or one spin of a wheel that can award larger / smaller amounts , a zonk , or a car .
* Rolling dice to receive cash based upon the roll or achieving a cumulative score within a certain number of rolls to win a larger prize .
Depending on the game , the trader is given the opportunity to stop the game at various points and take a " sure thing " deal or cash / prizes already accumulated or continue on and risk possibly losing .
PRICING GAMES
Section::::Pricing games .
Other deals related to pricing merchandise are featured in order to win a larger prize or cash amounts .
Sometimes traders are required to price individual items ( either grocery products or smaller prizes generally valued less than $ 100 ) within a certain range to win successively larger prizes or a car .
Other times traders must choose an item that a pre - announced price , order grocery items or small prizes from least to most expensive , or two items with prices that total a certain amount to win a larger prize .
These games are not used on the CBS version because of their similarities to The Price is Right .
QUIZ GAMES Section::::Quiz games .
On the CBS version , due to the similarities of the pricing game concept with The Price is Right , quiz games are used instead .
These deals involve products in the form of when they were introduced to the market , general knowledge quizzes , currency exchange rates ( at the time of taping ) , or knowledge of geography of trips to certain locales used as prizes .
BIG DEAL Section::::Big Deal .
The Big Deal serves as the final segment of the show and offers a chance at a significantly larger prize for a lucky trader .
Before the round , the value of the day 's Big Deal is announced to the audience .
The process for choosing traders was the same for every series through the 2003 NBC primetime series .
Monty Hall ( or his successors ) would begin asking the day 's traders , starting with the highest winner , if they wanted to give back what they had managed to win earlier in the show for a chance to choose one of three numbered doors on the stage .
The process continued until two traders agreed to play , and the biggest winner of the two got first choice of Door # 1 , Door # 2 , or Door # 3 .
The other trader then chose from the remaining two doors .
Since the 2009 series , the Big Deal has been played with just one trader .
Each of the doors conceals either a prize package of some sort , or a cash award hidden inside a prop such as " Monty 's Piggy Bank " or the " Let 's Make a Deal Vault .
"
On occasion , a door containing an all - cash prize is opened before the traders make their choices , but the amount of the prize is not revealed .
Most often , the value of the " Low " Door ( the lowest - valued door ) is less than the value of the player 's original winnings , while the " Medium " Door 's value is at least $ 1,000 more than the player 's traded winnings .
When the Big Deal is not behind the selected door , one of the non - Big Deal doors is opened first , then the chosen door , with the Big Deal revealed last .
If the Big Deal door IS selected , the other two doors are usually revealed first , although on rare occasions , the Big Deal door has been revealed second , after one of the other two doors ( usually the " Medium " door ) is revealed .
The Big Deal prize is usually the most extravagant on each episode , and is often a car or a vacation with first - class accommodations .
On occasion , the Big Deal consists of one of the all - cash prizes mentioned above ; at other times , a cash bonus is added to the prizes in the Big Deal to bring the total up to the announced value .
On other occasions , the Big Deal is revealed to include " Everything in the Big Deal " , meaning the prizes behind all 3 doors are won if the player chose the Big Deal .
The Big Deal is the one time in the show where a trader is guaranteed to not walk away with a Zonk .
SUPER DEAL Section::::Super Deal .
During the 1975–76 syndicated season , winners of the Big Deal were offered a chance to win the " Super Deal " .
At this point , Big Deals were limited to a range of $ 8,000 to $ 10,000 .
The trader could risk their Big Deal winnings on a shot at adding a $ 20,000 cash prize , which was hidden behind only one of three mini - doors onstage .
The other two doors contained cash amounts of $ 1,000 or $ 2,000 ; however , the $ 1,000 value was later replaced with a " mystery " amount between $ 1,000 and $ 9,000 .
A trader who decided to play risked their Big Deal winnings and selected one of the mini - doors .
If the $ 20,000 prize was behind the door , the trader kept the Big Deal and added the $ 20,000 prize , for a potential maximum total of $ 30,000 .
However , if a trader selected one of the other two doors , he or she forfeited the Big Deal prizes but kept the cash amount behind the door .
The Super Deal was discontinued when the show permanently moved to Las Vegas for the final season ( 1976–77 ) , and Big Deal values returned to the previous range of $ 10,000 to $ 15,000 .
From 2012 to 2016 of the Brady version , the Super Deal was offered as a limited event ( usually for a week of shows promoted as " Super Deal Week " ) and was not played regularly .
The show designated one or two weeks of episodes , typically airing during a special event ( e.g. , the 500th episode , 50th anniversary of franchise , etc . ) .
In this version , the top cash prize was $ 50,000 while the other two cash prizes were $ 1,000 and $ 2,000 .
In addition , instead of using mini - doors , the cash amounts were hidden in three large colored envelopes of red , green , and purple , respectively referred by Brady as ruby , emerald , and sapphire .
MEGA - DEAL WEEK Section::::Mega - Deal week .
For season premiere weeks in 2015 and 2016 of the Brady version , Big Deal of the Day winners had an opportunity to win every non - zonk , non - cash prize from that day 's episode as a " Mega - Deal " .
Prior to the start of the Big Deal , the contestant picked both a Big Deal curtain and one of seven Mega Deal cards ( reduced by one for each day that the Mega Deal was not won that week ) .
Unlike the Super Deal , the contestant does not risk their winnings in the Mega Deal .
Only if the contestant won the Big Deal would the contestant 's card be revealed .
If the card was the Mega Deal , they won every non - zonk , non - cash prize on the show that day .
Regardless , at the end of the Big Deal , whichever door was chosen was the contestant 's to keep .
MASH - UP WEEK Section::::Mash - Up Week .
The week of May 9 , 2016 was designated Mash - Up Week .
During each of the five broadcast days , Deal and The Price Is Right each featured one game from the other 's lineup .
The games were slightly modified to reflect the nature of the shows on which they were played ; those on TPIR required contestants to price items , while those on Deal used random draws and the offer of cash / prize deals to stop a game early .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Upon the original
Let 's Make a Deals debut , journalist Charles Witbeck was skeptical of the show 's chances of success , noting that the previous four NBC programs to compete with CBS 's Password had failed .
Some critics described the show as " mindless " and " demeaning to traders and audiences alike " .
By 1974 , however , the show had spent more than a decade at or near the top of daytime ratings , and became the highest - rated syndicated primetime program .
At the time , the show held the world 's record for the longest waiting list for tickets in show - business history – there were 350 seats available for each show , and a wait time of two - to - three years after requesting a ticket .
In 2001 , Let 's Make a Deal was ranked as # 18 on TV Guides list of " The 50 Greatest Game Shows of All Time " .
In 2006 , GSN aired a series of specials counting down its own list of the " 50 Greatest Game Shows of All Time " , on which Let 's Make a Deal was # 7 .
In 2014 , the American series won a Daytime Creative Arts Emmy Award for Outstanding Original Song for " 30,000 Reasons to Love Me " , composed by Cat Gray and sung by Wayne Brady .
EPISODE STATUS
* ABC Daytime :
A clip from the ABC daytime premiere was used on Monty Hall 's " Biography " , which aired during Game Show Week on A&E. Another episode from 1969 was found , which features a gaffe that Hall himself rated as his most embarrassing moment on Let 's Make a Deal – at the end of the show , he attempted to make a deal with a woman carrying a baby 's bottle .
Noting that it had a removable rubber nipple , he offered the woman $ 100 if she could show him another nipple ( she did n't ) .
Episodes substitute - hosted by Dennis James exist in his personal library ; a portion of one such episode is widely circulated as part of a pitch film for James 's version of The Price Is Right .
* ABC Nighttime/1971–77 Syndicated :
Episodes have been seen on GSN in the past .
The CBN Cable Network reran the syndicated series in the 1980s and its successor , The Family Channel , from June 7 , 1993 to March 29 , 1996 .
* The 1980 - 81 version continued to air in reruns on Canada 's Global Television Network through the late 1980s .
*
The 1984–86 syndicated version has been seen on GSN in the past .
Reruns previously aired on the USA Network from December 29 , 1986 to December 30 , 1988 and The Family Channel from August 30 , 1993 to March 29 , 1996 .
Buzzr began airing episodes from 1985 on June 1 , 2016 .
GameTV in Canada aired 40 episodes of this version starting in July 2018 as part of their Gameshow RETRO block until it was dropped in October 2018 .
* The 1990s NBC version has not been seen since its cancellation .
* The 2003 NBC prime time version only aired three of the five episodes produced , with no rebroadcasts since .
INTERNATIONAL VERSIONS
Section::::International versions .
RTL Group holds international ( and as of February 2009 , American ) rights to the show , and has licensed the show to 15 countries . !
Region or country !
Local name !
Host !
Network !
Dates rowspan=2 Australia
rowspan=2 Let 's Make A Deal
rowspan=4 Greece
rowspan=3 Andreas Mikroutsikos rowspan=2 Mega Channel rowspan=4 Indonesia rowspan=3
antv rowspan=2 rowspan=3 Spain rowspan=2 Antena
3 Trần Ngọc January 6 , 2008 – February 19 , 2012 *
The 1980–81 version aired in both the U.S. and Canada . MERCHANDISE Section::::Merchandise .
In 1964 , Milton Bradley released a home version of Let 's Make a Deal featuring gameplay somewhat different from the television show .
In 1974 , Ideal Toys released an updated version of the game featuring Hall on the box cover , which was also given to all traders on the syndicated version in the 1974–75 season .
An electronic tabletop version by Tiger Electronics was released in 1998 .
In the late summer of 2006 , an interactive DVD version of Let 's Make a Deal was released by Imagination Games , which also features classic clips from the Monty Hall years of the show .
In 2010 , Pressman Toy Corporation released an updated version of the box game , with gameplay more similar to the 1974 version , featuring Brady on the box cover .
Various U.S. lotteries have included instant lottery tickets based on Let 's Make a Deal .
In 1999 , the website BuyBidWin.com licensed the rights to Let 's Make a Deal as it launched a website featuring Monty Hall .
In 1999 , Shuffle Master teamed up with Bally 's to do a video slot machine game based on the show with the voice and likeness of Monty Hall .
In 2004 , IGT ( International Gaming Technology ) did a new video slot game based on the show still featuring Monty Hall .
In 2004 , the now defunct website GameShow24.com was going to release a beta game based on Let 's Make a Deal .
In 2012 , a Facebook game based on the Wayne Brady version was released by RealNetwork 's GameHouse .
In 2013 , Aristocrat Technology did an all - new video slot machine game based on the Wayne Brady version .
THE MONTY HALL PROBLEM Section::::The Monty Hall Problem .
The Monty Hall Problem , also called the Monty Hall paradox , is a veridical paradox because the result appears impossible but is demonstrably true .
The Monty Hall problem , in its usual interpretation , is mathematically equivalent to the earlier Three Prisoners problem , and both bear some similarity to the much older Bertrand 's box paradox .
The problem examines the counterintuitive effect of switching one 's choice of doors , one of which hides a " prize " .
The problem has been analyzed many times , in books , articles and online .
In an interview with The New York Times reporter John Tierney in 1991 , Hall gave an explanation of the solution to that problem , stating that he played on the psychology of the trader , and why the solution did not apply to the case of the actual show .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website
* CBS 's website for the show
* CBC Television Archives profile of Monty Hall with behind - the - scenes footage of Let 's Make a Deal ( 1970 ) * " Geh Aufs Ganze !
"
the 1992–2003 ( German version ) of " Let 's Make A Deal " courtesy of Grundy Light Entertainment
* description of " Geh Aufs Ganze ! "
( Original website ) * Official site of Super Deal 2 Milyar ( 2010 ) via
internet archive
* Article about the 2004 Spain version * Monty Hall interview on TVParty.com