EGG WHITE Egg white is the clear liquid ( also called the albumen or the glair / glaire ) contained within an egg .
In chickens it is formed from the layers of secretions of the anterior section of the hen 's oviduct during the passage of the egg .
It forms around fertilized or unfertilized egg yolks .
The primary natural purpose of egg white is to protect the yolk and provide additional nutrition for the growth of the embryo ( when fertilized ) .
Egg white consists primarily of about 90 % water into which is dissolved about 10 % proteins ( including albumins , mucoproteins , and globulins ) .
Unlike the yolk , which is high in lipids ( fats ) , egg white contains almost no fat , and carbohydrate content is less than 1 % .
Egg whites contain about 56 % of the protein in the egg .
Egg white has many uses in food ( e.g. meringue , mousse ) and also many other uses ( e.g. in the preparation of vaccines such as those for influenza ) .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Egg white makes up around two - thirds of a chicken egg by weight .
Water constitutes about 90 % of this , with protein , trace minerals , fatty material , vitamins , and glucose contributing the remainder .
A raw U.S. large egg contains around 33 grams of egg white with 3.6 grams of protein , 0.24 grams of carbohydrate and 55 milligrams of sodium .
It contains no cholesterol and the energy content is about 17 Calories .
Egg white is an alkaline solution and contains around 148 proteins .
The table below lists the major proteins in egg whites by percentage and their natural functions . !
Protein ! !
Abundance Ovalbumin 54 % Ovotransferrin 12 %
Ovomucoid 11 % Ovoglobulin G2 4 % Ovoglobulin G3 4 % Ovomucin 3.5 %
Lysozyme 3.4 % Ovoinhibitor 1.5 %
Ovoglycoprotein 1 % Flavoprotein 0.8 % Ovomacroglobulin 0.5 %
Avidin 0.05 %
Cystatin 0.05 % Ovalbumin is the most abundant protein in albumen .
Classed as phosphoglycoprotein , during storage , it converts into s - ovalbumin ( 5 % at the time of laying ) and can reach up to 80 % after six months of cold storage .
Ovalbumin in solution is heat - resistant .
Denaturation temperature is around 84 ° C , but it can be easily denatured by physical stresses .
Conalbumin / ovotransferrin is a glycoprotein which has the capacity to bind the bi- and trivalent metal cations into a complex and is more heat sensitive than ovalbumin .
At its isoelectric pH ( 6.5 ) , it can bind two cations and assume a red or yellow color .
These metal complexes are more heat stable than the native state .
Ovomucoid is the major allergen from egg white and is a heat - resistant glycoprotein found to be a trypsin inhibitor .
Lysozyme is a holoprotein which can lyse the wall of certain Gram - positive bacteria and is found at high levels in the chalaziferous layer and the chalazae which anchor the yolk towards the middle of the egg .
Ovomucin is a glycoprotein which may contribute to the gel - like structure of thick albumen .
The amount of ovomucin in the thick albumen is four times greater than in the thin albumen .
FOAM Section::::Foam .
The physical stress of beating egg whites can create a foam .
Two types of physical stress are caused by beating them with a whisk , the first of which occurs as the whisk drags the liquid through itself , creating a force that unfolds the protein molecules .
This process is called denaturation .
The second stress comes from the mixing of air into the whites , which causes the proteins to come out of their natural state .
These denatured proteins gather together where the air and water meet and create multiple bonds with the other unraveled proteins , and thus become a foam , holding the incorporated air in place , because the proteins consist of amino acids ; some are hydrophilic ( attracted to water ) and some are hydrophobic ( repelled by water ) .
This process is called coagulation .
When beating egg whites , they are classified in three stages according to the peaks they form when the beater is lifted : soft , firm , and stiff peaks .
Overbeaten eggs take on a dry appearance , and eventually collapse .
Egg whites do not beat up correctly if they are exposed to any form of fat , such as cooking oils or the fats contained in egg yolk .
STABILIZING FOAM FOR CULINARY PURPOSES COPPER BOWL Section::::Stabilizing foam for culinary purposes .
Section::::Copper bowl .
Copper bowls have been used in France since the 18th century to stabilize egg foams .
The copper in the bowl assists in creating a tighter bond in reactive sulfur items such as egg whites .
The bond created is so tight that the sulfurs are prevented from reacting with any other material .
A silver - plated bowl has the same result as the copper bowl , as will a pinch of powdered copper supplement from a health store used in a glass bowl .
Drawbacks of the copper bowl include the expense of the bowl itself , and the bowls are difficult to keep clean .
Copper contamination from the bowl is minimal , as a cup of foam contains a tenth of a human 's normal daily intake level .
HEALTH ISSUES Section::::Health issues .
Although egg whites are prized as a source of low - fat , high - protein nutrition , a small number of people can not eat them .
Egg allergy is more common among infants than adults , and most children will outgrow it by the age of five .
Allergic reactions against egg white are more common than reactions against egg yolks .
In addition to true allergic reactions , some people experience a food intolerance to egg whites .
Eggs are susceptible to Salmonella contamination .
Thorough cooking eliminates the direct threat ( i.e. cooked egg whites that are solid and not runny ) ,
the threat of cross - contamination remains if people handle contaminated eggs and then touch other foods or items in the kitchen , thus spreading the bacteria .
In August 2010 , the FDA ordered the recall of 380 million eggs because of possible Salmonella contamination .
USES Section::::Uses .
Egg white is a fining agent that can be used in the clarification and stabilization of wine .
Egg white can also be added to shaken cocktails to create a delicate froth .
Some protein powders also use egg whites as a primary source of protein .
In the 1750s , egg whites were believed to prevent swelling , and were used for that purpose .
To help soothe areas of skin that were afflicted , egg white mixed with Armenic bole could help restore the fibers .
Egg whites are also used in bookbinding during the gilding process , where it is referred to as ' glaire ' , and to give a book cover shine .
SEE ALSO
* Egg yolk * Albumen print
* Haugh unit , a unit of measure for egg albumen
* Meringue , a dessert or dessert ingredient made from egg white REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Gilbertus .
Compendium Medicine Gilberti Anglici Tam Morborum Universalium Quam Particularium Nondum Medicis Sed & Cyrurgicis Utilissimum .
Lugduni : Impressum per Jacobum Sacconum , expensis Vincentii de Portonariis , 1510 .
* Good Eats , Let Them Eat Foam .
DVD .
Television Food Network , June 13 , 2001 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Elmhurst College , Denaturation Protein
* Exploratorium , Anatomy of an Egg