CHASE BANK J.P. Morgan Chase Bank , N.A. ,
doing business as Chase Bank , is a national bank headquartered in Manhattan , New York City , that constitutes the consumer and commercial banking subsidiary of the U.S. multinational banking and financial services holding company , JPMorgan Chase &
Co. The bank was known as Chase Manhattan Bank until it merged with J.P. Morgan & Co. in 2000 .
Chase Manhattan Bank was formed by the merger of the Chase National Bank and The Manhattan Company in 1955 .
The bank has been headquartered in Columbus , Ohio since its merger with Bank One Corporation in 2004 .
The bank acquired the deposits and most assets of The Washington Mutual . Chase offers more than 5,100 branches and 16,000 ATMs nationwide .
JPMorgan Chase & Co. has 250,355 employees ( as of 2016 ) and operates in more than 100 countries .
JPMorgan Chase & Co. had their assets of $ 2.49 trillion in 2016 .
JPMorgan Chase , through its Chase subsidiary , is one of the Big Four banks of the United States .
HISTORY Section::::History .
From September 1 , 1799 , to 1955 , it was called The Bank of The Manhattan Company ( New York ) ; after a 1955 merger with the Chase National Bank ( which existed separately from 1877 to 1954 )
it was called The Chase Manhattan Bank .
THE MANHATTAN COMPANY Section::::The Manhattan Company .
Chase traces its history back to the founding of The Manhattan Company by Aaron Burr on September 1 , 1799 , in a house at 40 Wall Street :
In 2006 , the modern - day Chase bought the retail banking division of the Bank of New York , which then only months later merged with Pittsburgh - based Mellon Financial to form the present - day BNY Mellon .
CHASE NATIONAL BANK
Section::::Chase National Bank .
Chase National Bank was formed in 1877 by John Thompson .
It was named after former United States Treasury Secretary and Chief Justice Salmon P. Chase , although Chase did not have a connection with the bank .
The Chase National Bank acquired a number of smaller banks in the 1920s , through its Chase Securities Corporation .
In 1926 , for instance , it acquired Mechanics and Metals National Bank .
However , its most significant acquisition was the Equitable Trust Company of New York in 1930 , the largest stockholder of which was John D. Rockefeller ,
Jr. This made Chase the largest bank in America and indeed , in the world .
Chase was primarily a wholesale bank , dealing with other prominent financial institutions and major corporate clients , such as General Electric , which had , through its RCA subsidiary , leased prominent space and become a crucial first tenant of Rockefeller Center , rescuing that major project in 1930 .
The bank is also closely associated with and has financed the oil industry , having longstanding connections with its board of directors to the successor companies of Standard Oil , especially ExxonMobil , which are also Rockefeller holdings .
MERGER AS
CHASE MANHATTAN BANK
Section::::Merger as Chase Manhattan Bank .
In 1955 , Chase National Bank and The Manhattan Company merged to create The Chase Manhattan Bank .
As Chase was a much larger bank , it was first intended that Chase acquire the " Bank of Manhattan " , as it was nicknamed , but it transpired that Burr 's original charter for the Manhattan Company had not only included the clause allowing it to start a bank with surplus funds , but another requiring unanimous consent of shareholders for the bank to be taken over .
The deal was therefore structured as an acquisition by the Bank of the Manhattan Company of Chase National , with John J. McCloy becoming chairman of the merged entity .
This avoided the need for unanimous consent by shareholders .
For Chase Manhattan Bank 's new logo , Chermayeff & Geismar designed a stylized octagon in 1961 , which remains part of the bank 's logo today .
The Chase logo is a stylized representation of the primitive water pipes laid by the Manhattan Company , which were made by nailing together wooden planks .
The bank included an asset management business called the Chase Investors Management Corporation .
Under McCloy 's successor , George Champion , the bank relinquished its antiquated 1799 state charter for a modern one .
In 1969 , under the leadership of David Rockefeller , the bank became part of a bank holding company , the Chase Manhattan Corporation .
MERGERS WITH CHEMICAL , J.P. MORGAN Section::::Mergers with Chemical , J.P. Morgan .
In July 1996 , Chemical Bank of New York purchased Chase Manhattan Bank .
Chemical 's previous acquisitions included Manufacturers Hanover Corporation , in 1991 , and Texas Commerce Bank , in 1987 .
Although Chemical was the nominal survivor , the merged company retained the Chase name since it was better known ( particularly outside the United States ) .
In December 2000 , the combined Chase Manhattan completed the acquisition of J.P. Morgan & Co. in one of the largest banking mergers to date .
The combined company was renamed JPMorgan Chase .
In 2004 , the bank acquired Bank One , making Chase the largest credit card issuer in the United States .
JPMorgan Chase added Bear Stearns & Co. and Washington Mutual to its acquisitions in 2008 and 2009 respectively .
After closing nearly 400 overlapping branches of the combined company , less than 10 % of its total , Chase will have approximately 5,410 branches in 23 states as of the closing date of the acquisition .
According to data from SNL Financial ( data as of June 30 , 2008 ) , this places Chase third behind Wells Fargo and Bank of America in terms of total U.S. retail bank branches .
In October 2010 , Chase was named in two lawsuits alleging manipulation of the silver market .
The suits allege that by managing giant positions in silver futures and options , the banks influenced the prices of silver on the New York Stock Exchange 's Comex Exchange since early 2008 .
The following is an illustration of the company 's major mergers and acquisitions and historical predecessors to 1995 ( this is not a comprehensive list ) : BANK ONE CORPORATION
Section::::Bank One Corporation .
In 2004 , JPMorgan Chase merged with Chicago - based Bank One Corp. , bringing on board its current chairman and CEO Jamie Dimon as president and COO and designating him as CEO William B. Harrison , Jr. 's successor .
Dimon 's pay was pegged at 90 % of Harrison 's .
Dimon quickly made his influence felt by embarking on a cost - cutting strategy and replaced former JPMorgan Chase executives in key positions with Bank One executives — many of whom were with Dimon at Citigroup .
Dimon became CEO in January 2006 and Chairman in December 2006 after Harrison 's resignation .
Bank One Corporation was formed upon the 1998 merger between Banc One of Columbus , Ohio and First Chicago NBD .
These two large banking companies were themselves created through the merger of many banks .
JPMorgan Chase completed the acquisition of Bank One in Q3 2004 .
The merger between Bank One and JPMorgan Chase meant that corporate headquarters were now in New York City while the retail bank operations of Chase were consolidated in New York .
The following is an illustration of Bank One 's major mergers and acquisitions and historical predecessors ( this is not a comprehensive list ) : WASHINGTON MUTUAL
Section::::Washington Mutual .
On September 25 , 2008 , JPMorgan Chase bought most banking operations of Washington Mutual from the receivership of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation ( FDIC ) .
That night , the Office of Thrift Supervision , in what was by far the largest bank failure in American history , seized Washington Mutual Bank and placed it into receivership .
The FDIC sold the bank 's assets , secured debt obligations and deposits to JPMorgan Chase Bank , NA for $ 1.888 billion , which re - opened the bank the following day .
As a result of the takeover , Washington Mutual shareholders lost all their equity .
Through the acquisition , JPMorgan became owner of the former accounts of Providian Financial , a credit card issuer WaMu acquired in 2005 .
The company completed the rebranding of Washington Mutual branches to Chase in late 2009 .
OTHER RECENT ACQUISITIONS
Section::::Other recent acquisitions .
In the first - quarter of 2006 , Chase purchased Collegiate Funding Services , a portfolio company of private equity firm Lightyear Capital , for $ 663 million .
CFS was used as the foundation for the Chase Student Loans , previously known as Chase Education Finance .
In April of that same year ( 2006 ) , Chase acquired the Bank of New York Co. 's retail and small business banking network .
This gave Chase access to 338 additional branches and 700,000 new customers in New York , New Jersey , Connecticut , and Indiana .
CONTROVERSIES PURCHASE OF NAZI GERMANY 'S REICHSMARKS
DURING WWII Section::::Controversies .
Section::::Purchase of Nazi Germany 's Reichsmarks during WWII .
A press release from the National Archives and Records Administration ( NARA ) in 2004 announced that many of the new Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) files had become declassified .
This declassification enabled the discovery that before and during the early years of World War II , the German government sold a special kind of Reichsmark , known as Rückwanderer [ returnee ]
Marks , to American citizens of German descent .
Chase National Bank , along with other businesses , were involved in these transactions .
Through Chase , this allowed Nazi sympathizers to purchase Marks with dollars at a discounted rate .
Specifically , " The financial houses understood that the German government paid the commissions ( to its agents , including Chase ) through the sale of discounted , blocked Marks that came mainly from Jews who had fled Germany .
"
In other words , Nazi Germany was able to offer these Marks below face - value because they had been stolen from emigrés fleeing the Nazi regime .
Between 1936 and 1941 , the Nazis amassed over $ 20 million , and the businesses enabling these transactions earned $ 1.2 million in commissions .
Of these commissions , over $ 500,000 went to Chase National Bank and its subagents .
These facts were discovered when the FBI began its investigation in October 1940 .
The purpose of the investigation was to follow German - Americans who had bought the Marks .
However , Chase National Bank 's executives were never federally prosecuted because Chase 's lead attorney threatened to reveal FBI , Army , and Navy " sources and methods " in court ( needs reference ) .
Publicly naming the sources and methods could have posed security risks and threatened future intelligence gathering .
To avoid such revelations , the executives ' violations of the Johnson Act , the Espionage Act , and the Foreign Agents Registration Act were never prosecuted .
RELEASE OF FUNDS FOR NAZI GERMANY
DURING WWII Section::::Release of funds for Nazi Germany during WWII .
Besides the controversial Rückwanderer Mark Scheme , NARA records also revealed another controversy during the occupation of France by the Nazis .
From the late 1930s until June 14 , 1941 , when President Franklin D. Roosevelt ( FDR ) issued an Executive Order freezing German assets , Chase National Bank worked with the Nazi government .
The order blocking any access to French accounts in the U.S. by anyone , but especially by the Nazis was issued by Secretary of the Treasury , Henry Morgenthau Jr. , with the approval of FDR .
Within hours of the order , Chase unblocked the accounts and the funds were transferred through South America to Nazi Germany .
REFUSAL TO RELEASE FUNDS BELONGING TO JEWS IN OCCUPIED FRANCE Section::::Refusal to release funds belonging to Jews in Occupied France .
US Treasury officials wanted an investigation of French subsidiaries of American banks , such as Chase Bank , J.P. Morgan & Co , National City Corporation , Guaranty Bank , Bankers Trust , and American Express .
Of these banks , only Chase and Morgan remained open in France during the Nazi occupation .
The Chase branch chief in Paris , France , Carlos Niedermann , told his supervisor in New York that there had been an " expansion of deposits " .
Also , Niedermann was , " very vigorous in enforcing restrictions against Jewish property , even going so far as to refuse to release funds belonging to Jews in anticipation that a decree with retroactive provisions prohibiting such release might be published in the near future by the occupying Nazi authorities " .
In 1998 , Chase general counsel William McDavid , said that Chase did not have control over Niedermann .
Whether that claim was true or not , Chase Manhattan Bank acknowledged seizing about 100 accounts during the Vichy regime .
Kenneth McCallion , an attorney , led a lawsuit against Barclays Bank for the illegal seizure of assets during WWII and has since turned his attention toward Chase .
The World Jewish Congress ( WJC ) , entered into discussions with Chase and a spokesperson for the WJC said , " Nobody at Chase today is guilty .
They were not involved in whatever happened , but they do accept that they have an institutional responsibility . "
A Chase spokesman said , " This is a moral issue that we take very seriously . "
Chase general counsel
McDavid added , " that Chase intends to compensate Jewish account holders whose assets were illegally plundered " .
In 1999 , the French government formed a commission to report findings to Prime Minister Lionel Jospin .
Claire Andrieu , a commission member and history professor at the Sorbonne , said that under the Vichy regime , French banks received visits from Nazi officials but U.S. banks did not .
At that time , they did not have to report Jewish accounts , but they did just as the French banks did .
She goes on to say that an American ambassador protected the U.S. subsidiaries .
RECENT CONTROVERSIES Section::::Recent controversies .
JPMorgan Chase has paid $ 16 billion in fines , settlements and other litigation expenses from 2011 to 2013 .
Of the $ 16 billion JPMorgan Chase has paid , about $ 8.5 billion were for fines and settlements resulting from illegal actions taken by bank executives , according to Richard Eskow at the Campaign for America 's Future , who cited a new report from Joshua Rosner of Graham Fisher & Co.
The $ 16 billion total does not include a recent settlement that calls for JPMorgan Chase to pay $ 100 million to waive $ 417 million in claims it had made against clients of the firm MF Global .
The U.S. Treasury 's Office of Foreign Assets Control found that JPMorgan had illegally aided dictatorships in Cuba , Sudan , Liberia and Iran , including transferring 32,000 ounces of gold bullion ( valued at approximately $ 20,560,000 ) to the benefit of a bank in Iran .
JPMorgan did not voluntarily self - disclose the Iranian matter to OFAC .
Among its other transgressions , JPMorgan has been found to have :
* Misled investors * Engaged in fictitious trades * Collected illegal flood insurance commissions
* Wrongfully foreclosed on soldiers ; charged veterans hidden fees for refinancing *
Violated the Federal Trade Commission Act by making false statements to people seeking automobile loans *
Illegally increased their collection of overdraft fees by processing large transactions before smaller ones *
Helped drive Jefferson County , Alabama , into bankruptcy by switching its fixed - rate debt to variable
* Violated antitrust provision of the Sherman Act relating to bid rigging TARGETED ACCOUNT CLOSURES Section::::Targeted account closures .
During 2013 and 2014 , Chase and other banks received media attention for the practice of canceling the personal and business accounts of hundreds of legal sex workers , citing in some instances the " morality clause " of their account agreement .
Later it was discovered that this practice included mortgage accounts and business loans .
Chase canceled the mortgage refinancing process for one individual , that the bank had initiated , whose production company made soft core films like those broadcast on Cinemax .
This resulted in a lawsuit which cited evasive dealings and misleading statements by several Chase executives including Securities Vice President Adam Gelcich , Legal Fair Lending Department Vice President Deb Vincent , and an unnamed executive director and assistant general counsel .
In addition to closing accounts for sex workers , the bank has also been using its " morality clause " to disassociate from other types of businesses .
Some of these other businesses include medical marijuana dispensaries and any
that are " gun related " .
Another was a woman - owned condom manufacturing company called Lovability Condoms .
Company founder Tiffany Gaines was rejected by Chase Paymentech services " as processing sales for adult - oriented products is a prohibited vertical " and was told that it was a " reputational risk " to process payment for condoms .
Gaines then started a petition to ask Chase to review and change its policy of classifying condoms as an " adult oriented product " .
The bank later reversed its decision and invited Gaines to submit an application citing that was already doing business with a " wide variety of merchants , including grocers and drug stores , that sell similar products " .
DAKOTA ACCESS PIPELINE Section::::Dakota Access Pipeline .
Financial documents from Energy Transfer Partners , the pipeline builder for the Dakota Access Pipeline , lists a number of large banking institutions that have provided credit for the project , including JP Morgan Chase .
Because of these financial ties , Chase and other banks have been a target of the Dakota Access Pipeline protests during 2016 and 2017 .
REFERENCES FURTHER READING EXTERNAL LINKS
* Chase mobile banking * An Evolutionary View of Internationalization : Chase Manhattan Bank , 1917 to 1996 .
A Financial Institutions Center study ( PDF ) completed in 2002 .
* About J.P. Morgan Chase * Chase Bank Login - Login guide