HUDSON RIVER SCHOOL
The Hudson River School was a mid-19th century American art movement embodied by a group of landscape painters whose aesthetic vision was influenced by Romanticism .
The paintings for which the movement is named depict
the Hudson River Valley and the surrounding area , including the Catskill , Adirondack , and White Mountains ; eventually works by the second generation of artists associated with the school expanded to include other locales in New England , the Maritimes , the American West , and South America .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Neither the originator of the term Hudson River School nor its first published use has been fixed with certainty .
The term is thought to have originated with the New York Tribune art critic Clarence Cook or the landscape painter Homer Dodge Martin .
As originally used , the term was meant disparagingly , as the work so labeled had gone out of favor after the plein - air Barbizon School had come into vogue among American patrons and collectors .
Hudson River School paintings reflect three themes of America in the 19th century : discovery , exploration , and settlement .
The paintings also depict the American landscape as a pastoral setting , where human beings and nature coexist peacefully .
Hudson River School landscapes are characterized by their realistic , detailed , and sometimes idealized portrayal of nature , often juxtaposing peaceful agriculture and the remaining wilderness , which was fast disappearing from the Hudson Valley just as it was coming to be appreciated for its qualities of ruggedness and sublimity .
In general , Hudson River School artists believed that nature in the form of the American landscape was an ineffable manifestation of God , though the artists varied in the depth of their religious conviction .
They took as their inspiration such European masters as Claude Lorrain , John Constable and J. M. W. Turner .
Their reverence for America 's natural beauty was shared with contemporary American writers such as Henry David Thoreau and Ralph Waldo Emerson .
Several painters were members of the Düsseldorf school of painting , others were educated by the German Paul Weber .
While the elements of the paintings were rendered realistically , many of the scenes were composed as a synthesis of multiple scenes or natural images observed by the artists .
In gathering the visual data for their paintings , the artists would travel to extraordinary and extreme environments , which generally had conditions that would not permit extended painting at the site .
During these expeditions , the artists recorded sketches and memories , returning to their studios to paint the finished works later .
A number of women artists were associated with the Hudson River School , though they tend to be less well known because they were excluded from formal training during most of the 19th century and had fewer exhibition opportunities .
Notable women painters of the Hudson River School include Susie M. Barstow , an avid mountain - climber who painted the mountain scenery of the Catskills and the White Mountains ; Eliza Pratt Greatorex , an Irish - born painter who was the second woman elected to the National Academy of Design ; Julie Hart Beers , who led sketching expeditions in the Hudson Valley region before moving to a New York City art studio with her daughters ; Harriet Cany Peale , who studied with fellow painter Rembrandt Peale ; and Mary Blood Mellen , a student and collaborator with the luminist Fitz Henry Lane .
FOUNDER Section::::Founder .
The artist Thomas Cole is generally acknowledged as the founder of the Hudson River School .
Cole took a steamship up the Hudson in the autumn of 1825 , the same year the Erie Canal opened , stopping first at West Point , then at Catskill landing .
He hiked west high up into the eastern Catskill Mountains of New York State to paint the first landscapes of the area .
The first review of his work appeared in the New York Evening Post on November 22 , 1825 .
At that time , only the English native Cole , born in a landscape where autumnal tints were of browns and yellows , found the brilliant autumn hues of the area to be inspirational .
Cole 's close friend , Asher Durand , became a prominent figure in the school as well .
An important part of the popularity of the Hudson River School was its celebration of its themes of nationalism , nature , and property .
However , adherents of the movement were also suspicious ( or perhaps ambivalent ) of the economic and technological development of the age .
SECOND GENERATION Section::::Second generation .
The second generation of Hudson River school artists emerged to prominence after Cole 's premature death in 1848 ; its members included Cole 's prize pupil Frederic Edwin Church , John Frederick Kensett , and Sanford Robinson Gifford .
Works by artists of this second generation are often described as examples of Luminism .
In addition to pursuing their art , many of the artists , including Kensett , Gifford and Church , were among the founders of the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York City .
Most of the finest works of the second generation were painted between 1855 and 1875 .
During that time , artists such as Frederic Edwin Church and Albert Bierstadt were celebrities .
They were both influenced by the Düsseldorf school of painting , and Bierstadt had studied in that city for several years .
When Church exhibited paintings such as Niagara or The Icebergs , thousands of people paid twenty - five cents a head to view the solitary works .
The epic size of these landscapes , unexampled in earlier American painting , reminded Americans of the vast , untamed , but magnificent wilderness areas in their country .
Such works were being painted during the period of settlement of the American West , preservation of national parks , and establishment of green city parks .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Along with museum collections , Hudson River School art has had minor periods of resurgence in popularity .
Philip Verre , director of the Hudson River Museum , described that the school gained interest after World War I , probably due to nationalist attitudes .
A decline in interest then took place until the 1960s , and the regrowth of the Hudson Valley has spurred further interest in the movement .
Historic house museums and other sites primarily dedicated to the Hudson River School include Olana State Historic Site in Hudson , New York , the Thomas Cole National Historic Site in the town of Catskill , the Newington - Cropsey Foundation 's historic house museum , art gallery , and research library in Hastings - on - Hudson , and the John D. Barrow Art Gallery in the village of Skaneateles .
COLLECTIONS
PUBLIC COLLECTIONS Section::::Collections .
Section::::Public collections .
One of the largest collections of paintings by artists of the Hudson River School is at the Wadsworth Atheneum in Hartford , Connecticut .
Some of the most notable works in the Atheneum 's collection are 13 landscapes by Thomas Cole , and 11 by Hartford native Frederic Edwin Church , both of whom were personal friends of the museum 's founder , Daniel Wadsworth .
OTHER COLLECTIONS * Albany Institute of History & Art in Albany , New York
* Arnot Art Museum in Elmira , New York
* Berkshire Museum in Pittsfield , MA * Brooklyn Museum in Brooklyn , NY * Corcoran Gallery of Art , in Washington , DC * Crystal Bridges Museum , in Bentonville , AR * Cummer Museum of Art & Gardens , in Jacksonville , FL * Detroit Institute of Arts in Detroit , MI * Fenimore Art Museum in Cooperstown , NY
* Frances Lehman Loeb Art Center , in Poughkeepsie , NY * Fruitlands Museum in Harvard , MA * Gilcrease Museum in Tulsa , OK * Haggin Museum in Stockton , CA * Hudson River Museum in Yonkers , NY
* Mabee - Gerrer Museum of Art in Shawnee , OK * Metropolitan Museum of Art , in Manhattan , NY * Museum of Fine Arts , Boston , in Boston , MA * Museum of White Mountain Art at Jackson , in NH
* National Gallery of Art in Washington , DC * Newark Museum in Newark , NJ * Newington - Cropsey Foundation in Hastings - on - Hudson , NY * New - York Historical Society , in Manhattan , NY * Olana State Historic Site , in Hudson , NY * St. Johnsbury Athenaeum , in St. Johnsbury , VT * Westervelt Warner Museum of American Art , in Tuscaloosa , AL * Thyssen - Bornemisza Museum , in Madrid , Spain .
*
The Heckscher Museum of Art , in Huntington , NY
*
Worcester Art Museum , in Worcester , MA * Wadsworth Atheneum , in Hartford , CT Section::::Other collections .
The Newington - Cropsey Foundation , in their Gallery of Art Building , maintains a research library of Hudson River School art and painters , open to the public by reservation .
NOTABLE ARTISTS
*
Albert Bierstadt *
William Mason Brown
*
John William Casilear *
Frederic Edwin Church
* Thomas Cole * Samuel Colman * Jasper Francis Cropsey
* Thomas Doughty * Robert Duncanson
*
Asher Brown Durand
* Sanford Robinson Gifford * James McDougal Hart
* William Hart *
William Stanley Haseltine
* Martin Johnson Heade
* Hermann Ottomar
Herzog
* Thomas Hill * David Johnson * John Frederick Kensett
* Jervis McEntee * Thomas Moran * Frederic Remington * Robert Walter Weir
*
Worthington Whittredge SEE ALSO * Düsseldorf school of painting * History of painting
* Landscape art
* List of Hudson River School artists * Macchiaioli
* Romanticism * Western painting * White Mountain art * Young America Movement REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes Sources
* Ferber , Linda S. The Hudson River School : Nature and the American Vision .
New - York Historical Society , 2009 .
* Sullivan , Mark W.
The Hudson River School : An Annotated Bibliography .
Metcuhen , NJ ; Scarecrow Press , 1991 .
* Wilmerding , John .
American Light :
The Luminist Movement , 1850–1875 : Paintings , Drawings , Photographs .
National Gallery of Art , Washington , D.C. , 1980 . . .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Hudson River School , American Art Gallery
* The Hudson River School , The Metropolitan Museum of Art
* National Park Service overview of Hudson River School
*
Wadsworth Atheneum 's Hudson River School Collection