IMPERIAL STATE CROWN
The Imperial State Crown is one of the Crown Jewels of the United Kingdom and symbolises the sovereignty of the monarch .
It has existed in various forms since the 15th century .
The current version was made in 1937 and is worn by the monarch after a coronation ( St Edward 's Crown having been used to crown the monarch ) and used at the annual State Opening of Parliament .
The crown is adorned with 2,901 precious stones , including the Cullinan II diamond , St Edward 's Sapphire , the Stuart Sapphire , and the Black Prince 's Ruby .
HISTORY
ORIGIN Section::::History .
Section::::Origin .
St Edward 's Crown , used to crown English monarchs , was considered to be a holy relic , kept in the saint 's shrine at Westminster Abbey and therefore not worn by monarchs at any other time .
Instead , a " great crown " with crosses and fleurs - de - lis , but without arches ( an open crown ) , was a king 's usual headgear at state occasions until the time of Henry V , who is depicted wearing an imperial crown of state with gold arches ( a closed crown ) .
Arches were a symbol of sovereignty , and by this point in history , the king of England was being celebrated as rex in regno suo est imperator – an emperor of his own domain – owing obedience to no one but God , unlike some continental rulers , who owed fealty to more powerful kings or the Holy Roman Emperor .
Henry VII or his son and successor Henry VIII may have commissioned a more elaborate version of the state crown which is first described in detail in an inventory of royal jewels in 1521 , and again in 1532 , 1550 , 1574 and 1597 , and was included in a painting by Daniel Mytens of Charles I in 1631 .
The Tudor Crown had more pearls and jewels than its medieval predecessor , and the centre petals of each of the fleurs - de - lis had images of Christ , the Virgin Mary and St George .
The crown weighed 3.3 kg ( 7 lb 6 oz ) and was set with 168 pearls , 58 rubies , 28 diamonds , 19 sapphires and 2 emeralds .
Following the abolition of the monarchy and the execution of Charles I in 1649 , the Tudor Crown was broken up and its valuable components sold for £ 1,100 .
RESTORATION TO PRESENT DAY Section::::Restoration to present day .
Upon the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 , a new state crown was made for Charles II by Sir Robert Vyner .
About 10 versions of the crown have existed since the restoration .
The one made for Queen Victoria in 1838 is the basis for today 's crown .
Made by Rundell and Bridge in 1838 using old and new jewels , it had a crimson velvet cap with ermine border and a lining of white silk .
It weighed and was decorated with 1,363 brilliant - cut , 1,273 rose - cut and 147 table - cut diamonds , 277 pearls , 17 sapphires , 11 emeralds , 4 rubies , and the Black Prince 's Ruby ( a spinel ) .
At the State Opening of Parliament in 1845 , the Duke of Argyll was carrying the crown before Queen Victoria when it fell off the cushion and broke .
Victoria wrote in her diary , " it was all crushed and squashed like a pudding that had sat down " .
The gems in the crown were remounted for the coronation of George VI in 1937 by Garrard &
Co. The crown was adjusted for Queen Elizabeth II 's coronation in 1953 , with the head size reduced and the arches lowered by 25 mm ( 1 inch ) to give it a more feminine appearance .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The Imperial State Crown is 31.5 cm ( 12.4 in ) tall and weighs 1.06 kg ( 2.3 lb ) , and has four fleurs - de - lis and four crosses pattée , supporting two arches topped by a monde and cross pattée .
Its purple velvet cap is trimmed with ermine .
The frame is made of gold , silver and platinum , and decorated with 2,868 diamonds , 273 pearls , 17 sapphires , 11 emeralds , and 5 rubies .
Notable stones are St Edward 's Sapphire on the top cross , reputedly taken from the ring of Edward the Confessor when he was re - interred at Westminster Abbey in 1163 , and the Black Prince 's Ruby ( a large spinel ) on the front cross .
In 1909 , the 104-carat ( 21 g )
Stuart Sapphire , set in the front of the crown , was moved to the back and replaced by the 317-carat ( 63 g )
Cullinan II .
Below the monde hang four pearls , three of which are often said to have belonged to Queen Elizabeth I , but the association is almost certainly erroneous .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
The crown is worn by the monarch on leaving Westminster Abbey at the end of his or her coronation .
It is also worn or carried at the annual State Opening of Parliament , although in 1974 and 2017 , when snap general elections were held , Queen Elizabeth II chose to wear a hat ( but had the crown carried on a cushion beside her ) .
Usually , the crown is taken to the Palace of Westminster under armed guard in its own carriage and placed in the Robing Room , where the Queen dons her robes and puts on the crown before giving her speech to Parliament .
If a State Opening occurs before a coronation , the crown is placed on a cushion beside the monarch .
In 1689 , one week after being proclaimed king , William III wore his crown in Parliament to pass the Crown and Parliament Recognition Act 1689 .
When not in use , the Imperial State Crown is on public display in the Jewel House at the Tower of London .
GALLERY
SEE ALSO Section::::See also .
Imperial Crown of India
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Crown Jewels at the Royal Family website