OPTION TIME VALUE
In finance , the time value ( TV ) ( extrinsic or instrumental value ) of an option is the premium a rational investor would pay over its current exercise value ( intrinsic value ) , based on the probability it will increase in value before expiry .
For an American option this value is always greater than zero in a fair market , thus an option is always worth more than its current exercise value ..
As an option can be thought of as ' price insurance ' ( e.g. , an airline insuring against unexpected soaring fuel costs caused by a hurricane ) , TV can be thought of as the risk premium the option seller charges the buyer — the higher the expected risk ( volatility formula_1 time ) , the higher the premium .
Conversely , TV can be thought of as the price an investor is willing to pay for potential upside .
TV decays to zero at expiration , with a general rule that it will lose of its value during the first half of its life and in the second half .
As an option moves closer to expiry , moving its price requires an increasingly larger move in the price of the underlying security .
INTRINSIC VALUE Section::::Intrinsic value .
The intrinsic value ( IV ) of an option is the value of exercising it now .
If the price of the underlying stock is above a call option strike price , the option has a positive monetary value , and is referred to as being in - the - money .
If the underlying stock is priced cheaper than the call option 's strike price , the call option is referred to as being out - of - the - money .
If an option is out - of - the - money at expiration , its holder simply abandons the option and it expires worthless .
Hence , a purchased option can never have a negative value .
This is because a rational investor would choose to buy the underlying stock at market rather than exercise an out - of - the - money call option to buy the same stock at a higher - than - market price .
For the same reasons , a put option is in - the - money if it allows the purchase of the underlying at a market price below the strike price of the put option .
A put option is out - of - the - money if the underlying 's spot price is higher than the strike price .
As shown in the below equations and graph , the intrinsic value ( IV ) of a call option is positive when the underlying asset 's spot price S exceeds the option 's strike price K. OPTION
VALUE Section::::Option value .
Option value ( i.e .. price ) is estimated via a predictive formula such as Black - Scholes or using a numerical method such as the Binomial model .
This price incorporates the expected probability of the option finishing " in - the - money " .
For an out - of - the - money option , the further in the future the expiration date — i.e .
the longer the time to exercise — the higher the chance of this occurring , and thus the higher the option price ; for an in - the - money option the chance of being in the money decreases ; however the fact that the option can not have negative value also works in the owner 's favor .
The sensitivity of the option value to the amount of time to expiry is known as the option 's theta .
The option value will never be lower than its IV .
As seen on the graph , the full call option value ( IV + TV ) , at a given time t , is the red line .
TIME VALUE Section::::Time value .
Time value is , as above , the difference between option value and intrinsic value , i.e. More specifically , TV reflects the probability that the option will gain in IV — become ( more ) profitable to exercise before it expires .
An important factor is the option 's volatility .
Volatile prices of the underlying instrument can stimulate option demand , enhancing the value .
Numerically , this value depends on the time until the expiration date and the volatility of the underlying instrument 's price .
TV of American option can not be negative ( because the option value is never lower than IV ) , and converges to zero at expiration .
Prior to expiration , the change in TV with time is non - linear , being a function of the option price .
SEE ALSO * Intrinsic value ( finance )
* Naked call
* Time value of money
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Basic Options Concepts : Intrinsic Value and Time Value , biz.yahoo.com