THE NIGHTMARE BEFORE CHRISTMAS
The Nightmare Before Christmas ( marketed as Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas ) is a 1993 American stop - motion animated musical dark fantasy Halloween - Christmas film directed by Henry Selick , and produced and conceived by Tim Burton .
It tells the story of Jack Skellington , the King of " Halloween Town " who stumbles through a portal to " Christmas Town " and decides to celebrate the holiday .
Danny Elfman wrote the songs and score , and provided the singing voice of Jack .
The principal voice cast also includes Chris Sarandon , Catherine O'Hara , William Hickey , Ken Page , Paul Reubens , Glenn Shadix , and Ed Ivory .
The Nightmare
Before Christmas originated in a poem written by Burton in 1982 while he was working as an animator at Walt Disney Feature Animation .
With the success of Vincent in the same year , Burton began to consider developing The Nightmare Before Christmas as either a short film or 30-minute television special to no avail .
Over the years , Burton 's thoughts regularly returned to the project , and in 1990 , he made a development deal with Walt Disney Studios .
Production started in July 1991 in San Francisco ; Disney released the film through Touchstone Pictures because the studio believed the film would be " too dark and scary for kids " .
The film was met with both critical and financial success , grossing over $ 76 million during its initial run .
It was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects , a first for an animated film .
The film has since been reissued by Walt Disney Pictures , and was re - released annually in Disney Digital 3-D from 2006 until 2009 , making it the first stop - motion animated feature to be entirely converted to 3D. PLOT Section::::Plot .
Halloween Town is a fantasy world filled with monsters , ghosts , ghouls , goblins , zombies , demons , mummies , vampires , werewolves , and witches .
Jack Skellington , the " Pumpkin King " and leader of the town , leads them in organizing the annual Halloween celebrations .
However , privately Jack has grown weary of the same routine year after year and wants something new .
Wandering in the woods the morning after Halloween , he stumbles across seven trees containing doors leading to towns representing various holidays , and opens a portal to Christmas Town .
Awed by the unfamiliar holiday , Jack returns to Halloween Town to show the residents his findings , but they fail to grasp the idea of Christmas and compare everything to their ideas of Halloween , although they do relate to one Christmas Town character ; a red lobster - like king who flies at night named " Sandy Claws " .
Jack sequesters himself in his tower to study Christmas and find a way to rationally explain it , but can not .
He ultimately decides that it 's unfair for Christmas Town alone to enjoy the holiday and announces that he and the citizens of Halloween Town will take over Christmas this year .
Jack assigns the citizens of Halloween Town Christmas - themed jobs , including singing carols , making presents , and building a sleigh to be pulled by skeletal reindeer .
Sally , a beautiful rag doll woman that is secretly in love with Jack , feels that their efforts will end in disaster , but Jack dismisses this and assigns her the task of sewing him a red coat to wear .
He also tasks Lock , Shock and Barrel , a trio of mischievous trick - or - treating children , to abduct Santa Claus and bring him back to Halloween Town .
Jack tells Santa he will be bringing Christmas to the world in his place this year .
Jack orders the trio to keep Santa safe , but the children instead deliver Santa to Oogie Boogie , a gambling - addicted bogeyman , who plots to play a game with Santa 's life at stake .
Sally attempts to rescue Santa so he can stop Jack , but Oogie captures her as well .
Jack departs to deliver presents to the world , but the Halloween - styled gifts terrify and attack the populace .
As concerns over " Santa 's " behavior grows , the military takes action and shoots down Jack , causing him to crash in a cemetery .
As Jack bemoans the disaster he has made of Christmas , he finds he enjoyed the experience nonetheless , reigniting his love of Halloween .
Jack returns to Halloween Town and finds Oogie 's lair .
Oogie tries to kill Jack , but Jack pulls apart the thread holding his cloth form together , revealing a massive pile of bugs that fall into Oogie 's cauldron and are killed .
Jack apologizes to Santa for his actions , and Santa assures Jack that he can fix things and returns to Christmas Town .
As Santa replaces the Halloween - style presents with genuine ones , the townspeople of Halloween Town celebrate Jack 's return .
Santa then visits Halloween Town and brings them a snowfall for the residents to play with .
In the graveyard , Jack and Sally declare their love for each other .
CAST
* Chris Sarandon ( speaking voice ) and Danny Elfman ( singing voice ) as Jack Skellington , a skeleton known as the " Pumpkin King " of Halloween Town .
He owns a ghost dog named Zero , who has a small , glowing jack - o'-lantern nose .
Danny Elfman also voices Barrel , one of the trick - or - treaters working for Oogie Boogie .
Elfman was initially cast as Jack 's singing voice and , after the songs were recorded , Sarandon was cast to match Elfman 's voice style .
* Elfman also voices Barrel , one of the trick - or - treaters working for Oogie Boogie .
* Elfman also voices the Clown with the Tear - Away Face , the self - described clown who rides a unicycle .
* Catherine O'Hara as Sally , a rag doll- scarecrow like creation of Finklestein , and the growing love interest of Jack .
She is an amateur toxicologist that uses various types of poison to liberate herself from the captivity of Finklestein .
She 's also psychic and has premonitions when anything bad is about to happen .
O'Hara had previously co - starred in Burton 's Beetlejuice ( 1988 ) .
* O'Hara also voices Shock , one of the trick - or - treaters working for Oogie Boogie .
* William Hickey as Doctor Finklestein , a mad scientist and the " father " of Sally .
He is listed in the credits only as " Evil Scientist " and is only mentioned by name once in the film .
* Glenn Shadix as Mayor of Halloween Town , an enthusiastic leader who conducts town meetings .
His wild mood swings from happy to distraught because his head spins between a " happy " and " sad " face ; where some career politicians are figuratively two - faced , the Mayor is literally so .
Burton and Shadix previously worked on Beetlejuice .
* Ken Page as Oogie Boogie , a villainous bogeyman in Halloween Town , who has a passion for gambling .
* Ed Ivory as Santa Claus , the leader of Christmas Town .
Santa Claus is responsible for the annual celebration of Christmas , at which time he delivers presents to children around the world .
Ivory also does the brief narration at the start of the film .
* Paul Reubens as Lock , one of the trick - or - treaters working for Oogie Boogie .
Reubens and Burton previously worked on Pee - wee 's Big Adventure ( 1985 ) and Batman Returns ( 1992 ) .
Section::::Cast .
The cast also features Kerry Katz , Carmen Twillie , Randy Crenshaw , Debi Durst , Glenn Walters , Sherwood Ball , and Greg Proops voicing various characters .
Patrick Stewart recorded narration for a prologue and epilogue .
While not used in the final scene of the film , the narration is included on the soundtrack album .
PRODUCTION
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
As writer Tim Burton 's upbringing in Burbank , California was associated with the feeling of solitude , the filmmaker was largely fascinated by holidays during his childhood .
"
Anytime there was Christmas or Halloween ,
[ … ] it was great .
It gave you some sort of texture all of a sudden that was n't there before " , Burton would later recall .
After completing his short film Vincent in 1982 , Burton , who was then employed at Walt Disney Feature Animation , wrote a three - page poem titled The Nightmare Before Christmas , drawing inspiration from television specials of Rudolph the Red - Nosed Reindeer , How the Grinch Stole Christmas !
and the poem A Visit from St. Nicholas .
Burton intended to adapt the poem into a television special with the narration spoken by his favorite actor , Vincent Price , but also considered other options such as a children 's book .
He created concept art and storyboards for the project in collaboration with Rick Heinrichs , who also sculpted character models ; Burton later showed his and Heinrichs ' works - in - progress to Henry Selick , also a Disney animator at the time .
After the success of Vincent in 1982 , Disney started to consider developing The Nightmare Before Christmas as either a short film or 30-minute holiday television special .
However , the project 's development eventually stalled , as its tone seemed " too weird " to the company .
As Disney was unable to " offer his nocturnal loners enough scope " , Burton was fired from the studio in 1984 , and went on to direct the commercially successful films , Beetlejuice and Batman .
Over the years , Burton regularly thought about the project .
In 1990 , Burton found out that Disney still owned the film rights .
He and Selick committed to produce a full - length film with the latter as director .
Burton 's own success in live - action films piqued the interest of Walt Disney Studios chairman Jeffrey Katzenberg , who saw the film as an opportunity of continuing the studio 's streak of recent success in feature animation .
Disney was looking forward to Nightmare " to show capabilities of technical and storytelling achievements that were present in Who Framed Roger Rabbit . "
Walt Disney Pictures president David Hoberman , believed the film would prove to be a creative achievement for Disney 's image , elaborating " we can think outside the envelope .
We can do different and unusual things . "
Nightmare marked Burton 's third film in a row to have a Christmas setting .
Burton could not direct because of his commitment to Batman Returns and he did not want to be involved with " the painstakingly slow process of stop motion " .
To adapt his poem into a screenplay , Burton approached Michael McDowell , his collaborator on Beetlejuice .
McDowell and Burton experienced creative differences , which convinced Burton to make the film as a musical with lyrics and compositions by frequent collaborator Danny Elfman .
Elfman and Burton created a rough storyline and two - thirds of the film 's songs .
Elfman found writing Nightmares eleven songs as " one of the easiest jobs I 've ever had .
I had a lot in common with Jack Skellington .
" Caroline Thompson still had yet to be hired to write the screenplay .
With Thompson 's screenplay , Selick stated , " there are very few lines of dialogue that are Caroline 's .
She became busy on other films and we were constantly rewriting , re - configuring and developing the film visually . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
Selick and his team of animators began production in July 1991 in San Francisco , California with a crew of over 120 workers , utilizing 20 sound stages for filming .
Joe Ranft was hired from Disney as a storyboard supervisor , while Eric Leighton was hired to supervise animation .
At the peak of production , 20 individual stages were simultaneously being used for filming .
In total , there were 109,440 frames taken for the film .
The work of Ray Harryhausen , Ladislas Starevich , Edward Gorey , Étienne Delessert , Gahan Wilson , Charles Addams , Jan Lenica , Francis Bacon , and Wassily Kandinsky influenced the filmmakers .
Selick described the production design as akin to a pop - up book .
In addition , Selick stated , " When we reach Halloween Town , it 's entirely German Expressionism .
When Jack enters Christmas Town , it 's an outrageous Dr. Seuss - esque setpiece .
Finally , when Jack is delivering presents in the ' Real World ' , everything is plain , simple and perfectly aligned . "
Vincent Price , Don Ameche , and James Earl Jones were considered to provide the narration for the film 's prologue ; however , all proved difficult to cast , and the producers instead hired local voice artist , Ed Ivory .
Patrick Stewart provided the prologue narration for the film 's soundtrack .
On the direction of the film , Selick reflected , " It 's as though he [ Burton ] laid the egg , and I sat on it and hatched it .
He was n't involved in a hands - on way , but his hand is in it .
It was my job to make it look like ' a Tim Burton film ' , which is not so different from my own films . "
When asked on Burton 's involvement , Selick claimed , " I do n't want to take away from Tim , but he was not in San Francisco when we made it .
He came up five times over two years , and spent no more than eight or ten days in total . "
Walt Disney Feature Animation contributed with some use of second - layering traditional animation .
Burton found production somewhat difficult because he was directing Batman Returns and in pre - production of Ed Wood .
The filmmakers constructed 227 puppets to represent the characters in the movie , with Jack Skellington having " around four hundred heads " , allowing the expression of every possible emotion .
Sally 's mouth movements " were animated through the replacement method .
During the animation process , [ … ] only Sally 's face ' mask ' was removed in order to preserve the order of her long , red hair .
Sally had ten types of faces , each made with a series of eleven expressions ( e.g. eyes open and closed , and various facial poses ) and synchronized mouth movements .
"
The stop motion figurine of Jack was reused in James and the Giant Peach ( also directed by Selick ) as Captain Jack .
SOUNDTRACKS Section::::Soundtracks .
The film 's soundtrack album was released in 1993 on Walt Disney Records .
For the film 's 2006 re - release in Disney Digital 3-D , a special edition of the soundtrack was released , featuring a bonus disc which contained covers of five of the film 's songs by Fall Out Boy , Panic !
at the Disco , Marilyn Manson , Fiona Apple , and She Wants Revenge .
Four original demo tracks by Elfman were also included .
On September 30 , 2008 , Disney released the cover album Nightmare Revisited , featuring artists such as Amy Lee , Flyleaf , Korn , Rise Against ,
Plain White T 's , The All - American Rejects , and many more .
American gothic rock band London After Midnight featured a cover of " Sally 's Song " on their 1998 album Oddities .
LiLi Roquelin did a French cover of " Sally 's Song " which was released on her album
Will you hate the rest of the world or will you renew your life ?
in 2010 .
Pentatonix released a cover of " Making Christmas " for their 2018 Christmas album Christmas Is Here ! .
Another soundtrack released in 2003 was the Disneyland Haunted Mansion Holiday CD .
Although most were not original songs from the movie , one song provided on the CD is a medley of " Making Christmas " , " What 's This ? " , and " Kidnap the Sandy Claws " .
Other songs included are original holiday songs changed to incorporate the theme of the movie .
The last song on the list , however , is the soundtrack for the Disneyland Haunted Mansion Holiday ride .
RELEASE Section::::Release .
Disney decided to release the film under its adult film label Touchstone Pictures because they thought the film would be " too dark and scary for kids " , Selick remembered .
" Their biggest fear , and why it was kind of a stepchild project , [ was ] they were afraid of their core audience hating the film and not coming . "
To convey Burton 's involvement and attract a wider audience , Disney marketed the film as Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas .
Burton explained that," …
it turned more into more of a brand - name thing , it turned into something else , which I 'm not quite sure about . "
The film premiered at the New York Film Festival on October 9 , and was given a limited release on October 15 , 1993 , before its wide theatrical release on October 22 .
The Nightmare
Before Christmas was reissued under the Walt Disney Pictures label and re - released on October 20 , 2006 , with conversion to Disney Digital 3-D. Industrial Light & Magic assisted in the process .
The film subsequently received re - releases in October 2007 and 2008 .
The El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California has been showing the film in 4-D screenings annually in October , ending on Halloween , since 2010 .
The reissues have led to a reemergence of 3-D films and advances in RealD Cinema .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
With years of successful home video sales , Nightmare later achieved the ranks of a cult film .
Touchstone Home Video first released the film on VHS on September 30 , 1994 , and on DVD on December 2 , 1997 .
The DVD release contained no special features .
Nightmare was released a second time on October 3 , 2000 as a special edition .
The release included an audio commentary by Selick and cinematographer Pete Kozachik , a 28-minute making - of documentary , a gallery of concept art , storyboards , test footage and deleted scenes .
Burton 's Vincent and Frankenweenie were also included .
Both DVDs were non - anamorphic widescreen releases .
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released the film on DVD again ( this time with an anamorphic transfer ) and on Blu - ray Disc ( for the first time ) on August 26 , 2008 as a two - disc digitally remastered " collector 's edition " , but still containing the same special features .
Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released The Nightmare Before Christmas on Blu - ray 3D on August 30 , 2011 .
The release included a Blu - ray 3D disc , Blu - ray Disc and a DVD that includes both a DVD and digital copy of the film .
MARKETING
Section::::Marketing .
Disney has undertaken an extensive marketing campaign of these characters across many media .
Since 2001 , Disneyland has held a seasonal Nightmare Before Christmas theme for its Haunted Mansion Holiday attraction .
The attraction , an overlay of the park 's Haunted Mansion , features characters , decorations and music from the film .
In addition to Mickey 's Not - So - Scary Halloween Party and Mickey 's Halloween Party featuring the film 's characters , Jack Skellington , Sally , Pajama Jack , and the Mayor have been made into Bendies figures , while Jack and Sally even appear in fine art .
Moreover , Sally has been made into an action figure and a Halloween costume .
A Jack Skellington figurine is available for the Disney Infinity video game , allowing the character to be playable in the game 's " Toy Box Mode " .
Jack is also the titular character in the short story " Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas : Jack 's Story " , and also appeared in HalloWishes and Halloween Screams fireworks at Magic Kingdom ( where the host is Ghost Host ) and Disneyland ( where the host is Jack himself ) .
Nightmare has inspired video game spin - offs , including and , and is among the many Disney - owned franchises that contribute to the mythology of the Kingdom Hearts series .
A trading card game is also available .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Around the release of the film , Disney executive David Hoberman was quoted , " I hope Nightmare goes out and makes a fortune .
If it does , great .
If it does n't , that does n't negate the validity of the process .
The budget was less than any Disney blockbuster so it does n't have to earn Aladdin - sized grosses to satisfy us . "
The film earned $ 50 million in the United States on its first theatrical run and was regarded as a moderate " sleeper hit " .
The Nightmare
Before Christmas made a further $ 8.7 million in box office gross in its 2006 reissue .
The 2007 and 2008 reissues earned $ 14.5 million and $ 1.1 million , respectively , increasing the film 's total box office gross to $ 75 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film initially received positive reviews from critics ; it has since gone on to receive widespread critical acclaim .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a rating of 95 % , based on 88 reviews , with an average rating of 8.2/10 .
The site 's consensus reads , " The Nightmare Before Christmas is a stunningly original and visually delightful work of stop - motion animation . "
On Metacritic the film has a score of 82 out of 100 , based on 30 critics , indicating " universal acclaim " .
Roger Ebert gave a highly positive review for Nightmare .
Ebert believed the film 's visual effects were as revolutionary as Star Wars , taking into account that Nightmare was " filled with imagination that carries us into a new world " .
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone called it a restoration of " originality and daring to the Halloween genre .
This dazzling mix of fun and fright also explodes the notion that animation is kid stuff .
… It 's 74 minutes of timeless movie magic . "
James Berardinelli stated " The Nightmare Before Christmas has something to offer just about everyone .
For the kids , it 's a fantasy celebrating two holidays .
For the adults , it 's an opportunity to experience some light entertainment while marveling at how adept Hollywood has become at these techniques .
There are songs , laughs , and a little romance .
In short , The Nightmare Before Christmas does what it intends to : entertain . "
Desson Thomson of The Washington Post enjoyed stylistic features in common with Oscar Wilde , German Expressionism , the Brothers Grimm and The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari .
Michael A. Morrison discusses the influence of Dr. Seuss ' How the Grinch Stole Christmas !
on the film , writing that Jack parallels the Grinch and Zero parallels Max , the Grinch 's dog .
Philip Nel writes that the film " challenges the wisdom of adults through its trickster characters " , contrasting Jack as a " good trickster " with Oogie Boogie , whom he also compares with Dr. Seuss ' Dr. Terwilliker as a bad trickster .
Entertainment Weekly reports that fan reception of these characters borders on obsession , profiling Laurie and Myk Rudnick , a couple whose " degree of obsession with [ the ] film is so great that … they named their son after the real - life person that a character in the film is based on .
" This enthusiasm for the characters has also been profiled as having spread beyond North America to Japan .
Yvonne Tasker notes " the complex characterization seen in The Nightmare Before Christmas " .
Danny Elfman was worried the characterization of Oogie Boogie would be considered racist by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) .
Elfman 's predictions came true ; however , director Henry Selick stated the character was inspired by the Betty Boop cartoon The Old Man of the Mountain . "
Cab Calloway would dance his inimitable jazz dance and sing ' Minnie the Moocher ' or ' Old Man of the Mountain ' , and they would rotoscope him , trace him , turn him into a cartoon character , often transforming him into an animal , like a walrus , " Selick continued .
" I think those are some of the most inventive moments in cartoon history , in no way racist , even though he was sometimes a villain .
We went with Ken Page , who is a black singer , and he had no problem with it " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated for both the Academy Award for Best Visual Effects and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation .
Nightmare won the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film , while Elfman won Best Music .
Selick and the animators were also nominated for their work .
Elfman was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score " .
Most recently , the film ranked # 1 on Rotten Tomatoes ' " Top 25 Best Christmas Movies " list .
POSSIBLE SEQUEL
Section::::Possible sequel .
In 2001 , Disney began to consider producing a sequel , but rather than using stop motion , Disney wanted to use computer animation .
Burton convinced Disney to drop the idea .
" I was always very protective of Nightmare not to do sequels or things of that kind , " Burton explained .
" You know , ' Jack visits Thanksgiving world ' or other kinds of things just because I felt the movie had a purity to it and the people that like it … Because it 's a mass - market kind of thing , it was important to kind of keep that purity of it . "
The 2004 video game did serve as a sequel of the film , with Capcom 's crew of developers going after Burton for advice , and having the collaboration of the film 's art director , Deane Taylor .
In 2009 , Selick said he would do a film sequel if he and Burton could create a good story for it .
RELATED MEDIA Section::::Related media .
A collectible card game based on the film called The Nightmare Before Christmas TCG was released in 2005 by NECA .
The game was designed by Quixotic Games founder Andrew Parks and Kez Shlasnger .
It consists of a Premiere set and 4 Starter Decks based on four characters , Jack Skellington , the Mayor , Oogie Boogie , and Doctor Finklestein .
Each Starter Deck contains a rule book , a Pumpkin King card , a Pumpkin Points card , and a 48-card deck .
The game has four card types : Characters , Locales , Creations , and Surprises .
The Cards ' rarities are separated into four categories : Common , Uncommon , Rare , Ultra Rare .
Quixotic Games also developed The Nightmare Before Christmas Party Game that was released in 2007 by NECA .
A collector 's edition
The Nightmare
Before Christmas - themed Jenga game was issued with orange , purple and black blocks with Jack Skellington heads on them .
The set comes in a coffin - shaped box instead of the normal rectangular box .
A 168-card Munchkin Tim Burton 's The Nightmare Before Christmas - themed Munchkin was developed by USAopoly featuring the citizens of Halloween Town such as Jack Skellington , Oogie Boogie , Doctor Finklestein , and Lock , Shock and Barrel .
The game comes with a custom die similar to the ones used by Oogie Boogie in the film .
A live concert , produced by Disney Concerts , was held at the Hollywood Bowl in October 2015 , and was followed by subsequent performances in 2016 and 2018 .
The shows featured Elfman , O'Hara , and Page reprising their roles from the film .
SEE ALSO
* List of ghost films NOTES
* The Nightmare Before Christmas was reissued as a Walt Disney Pictures release in 2006 .
* REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Manga adaptation of the film .
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Nightmare Before Christmas at The
Tim Burton Collective
* Nightmare Before Christmas Behind The Scenes
A time lapse of the stop - motion animation process .