ALDI Aldi ( stylised as ALDI ) is the common brand of two German family owned discount supermarket chains with over 10,000 stores in 20 countries , and an estimated combined turnover of more than € 50 billion .
Based in Germany , the chain was founded by brothers Karl and Theo Albrecht in 1946 when they took over their mother 's store in Essen , which had been in operation since 1913 .
The business was split into two separate groups in 1960 , that later became Aldi Nord , headquartered in Essen , and Aldi Süd , headquartered in Mülheim .
In 1962 , they introduced the name Aldi ( a syllabic abbreviation for Albrecht Diskont ) , which is pronounced .
In Germany , Aldi Nord and Aldi Süd have been financially and legally separate since 1966 , although both divisions ' names may appear as if they were a single enterprise with certain store brands or when negotiating with contractor companies .
The formal business name is Aldi Einkauf GmbH & Compagnie , oHG .
Aldi 's German operations consist of Aldi Nord 's 35 individual regional companies with about 2,500 stores in western , northern , and eastern Germany , and Aldi Süd 's 32 regional companies with 1,600 stores in western and southern Germany .
Internationally , Aldi Nord operates in Denmark , France , the Benelux countries , Portugal , Spain and Poland , while Aldi Süd operates in Ireland , Great Britain , Hungary , Switzerland , Australia , China , Italy , Austria and Slovenia .
Both Aldi Nord and Aldi Süd also operate in the United States with 1,600 stores as of 2017 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The earliest roots of the company trace back to 1913 , when the mother of Karl and Theo Albrecht opened a small store in a suburb of Essen .
Their father was employed as a miner and later as a baker 's assistant .
Karl Albrecht was born in 1920 , Theo Albrecht in 1922 .
Theo Albrecht completed an apprenticeship in his mother 's store , while Karl Albrecht worked in a delicatessen .
Karl Albrecht took over a food shop formerly run by F. W. Judt who already advertised that they were the " cheapest food source " .
Karl Albrecht served in the German Army during World War II .
In 1946 , the brothers took over their mother 's business and soon opened another retail outlet nearby .
By 1950 , the Albrecht brothers owned 13 stores in the Ruhr Valley .
The brothers ' idea , which was new at the time , was to subtract the legal maximum rebate of 3 % before sale .
The market leaders at the time , which often were co - operatives , required their customers to collect rebate stamps , and to send them at regular intervals to reclaim their money .
The Albrecht brothers also rigorously removed merchandise that did not sell from their shelves , cutting costs by neither advertising nor selling fresh produce , and keeping the size of their retail outlets small .
When the brothers split the company in 1960 over a dispute whether they should sell cigarettes , they owned 300 shops with a cash flow of DM90 million yearly .
In 1962 , they introduced the name Aldi — short for Albrecht - Diskont .
Aldi Nord and Aldi Süd have been financially and legally separate since 1966 , although both divisions ' names may appear as if they were a single enterprise with certain store brands or when negotiating with contractor companies .
The individual groups were originally owned and managed jointly by the brothers .
Karl Albrecht , who died in 2014 , retained ownership of Aldi Süd with a personal wealth of € 17.2 billion that made him the richest man in Germany .
The co - owners of Aldi Nord , Berthold and Theo Albrecht Jr. came close behind at € 16 billion .
Dieter Schwarz , owner of Lidl and Kaufland came in third , with a fortune of € 11.5 billion .
Aldi started to expand internationally in 1967 , when Aldi Süd acquired the grocery chain Hofer in Austria ; Aldi Nord opened its first stores abroad in the Netherlands in 1973 , and other countries followed .
In 1976 , Aldi opened its first store in the United States in Iowa , and , in 1979 , Aldi Nord acquired Trader Joe 's .
After German reunification and the fall of the Iron Curtain , Aldi experienced a rapid expansion .
The brothers retired as CEOs in 1993 ; control of the companies was placed in the hands of private family foundations , the Siepmann Foundation ( Aldi Süd ) and the Markus Foundation ( Aldi Nord , Trader Joe 's ) .
BUSINESS ORGANIZATION GERMANY
Section::::Business organization .
Section::::Germany .
The Aldi Nord group currently consists of 35 independent regional branches with approximately 2,500 stores .
Aldi Süd is made up of 31 companies with 1,600 stores .
The border between their territories is commonly known as ″Aldi - Äquator″ ( literally : Aldi equator ) and runs from the Rhine via Mülheim an der Ruhr , Wermelskirchen , Marburg , Siegen , and Gießen east to just north of Fulda .
The former East Germany is served by Aldi Nord , except for one Aldi Süd in Sonneberg , Thuringia , whose regional office is in Bavaria .
The regional branches are organised as limited partnerships with a regional manager for each branch who reports directly to the head office in Essen ( Aldi Nord ) or Mülheim an der Ruhr ( Aldi Süd ) .
In December 2002 , a survey conducted by the German market research institute Forsa found 95 % of blue - collar workers , 88 % of white - collar workers , 84 % of public servants , and 80 % of self - employed Germans shop at Aldi .
One of Aldi 's direct competitors internationally is Lidl .
INTERNATIONALLY Section::::Internationally .
The Aldi group operates over 8,000 stores worldwide .
Aldi Nord is responsible for its stores in Belgium , the Netherlands , Luxembourg , France , Poland , Spain , Denmark , and Portugal , and also operates the Trader Joe 's markets in the United States .
Aldi Süd 's responsibilities are in the United States ( operating under the Aldi name ) , Austria , Slovenia and Italy ( as Hofer ) , Great Britain , Ireland , Australia , and Switzerland .
Aldi Süd 's first Switzerland store opened in 2005 , while it has operated in Hungary since 2007 .
Aldi Süd had invested an estimated € 800 m ( $ 1bn ; £ 670 m ) in Greece from November 2008 until pulling out on 31 December 2010 .
While Aldi Nord has renamed its Dutch and Belgian subsidiaries Combi and Lansa to the Aldi Markt / Aldi Marché brand , Aldi Süd tries to maintain a regional appearance , branding its stores Aldi Süd in Germany , Aldi Suisse in Switzerland , and Hofer in Austria and Slovenia .
Aldi launched in Great Britain , on 5 April 1990 , when it opened its first store there in Stechford , Birmingham , using the wholly owned English registered company of Aldi Stores Limited and Aldi sales in Britain grew consistently .
In October 2013 , Aldi opened the 300th store in Great Britain .
By 2017 Aldi had over 600 stores there , and was opening them at a rate of more than one a week with the aim of having a thousand stores by 2022 .
It was still a small player in Great Britain , with a grocery share of less than 3.6 % , but its importance , along with that of continental no - frills competitor Lidl was growing , with half of shoppers in Great Britain visiting Lidl or Aldi over Christmas that year .
Aldi opened stores in affluent locations , including Knutsford and Bury St Edmunds .
In much of Australia , Aldi filled a void in the discount supermarket business that arose when the discount grocery chain Franklins went out of business .
Aldi opened its first store in Sydney , 2001 and has grown rapidly since , maintaining a 12.6 % market share as of early 2016 .
Aldi Süd expanded to the United States under the Aldi banner , having expanded throughout the Eastern and Midwestern U.S. , mostly through organic expansion , though it did buy Bottom Dollar Food in late 2014 from Delhaize Group .
Aldi Süd revealed expansion plans in 2015 and expanded into the Southern California market , where Aldi Nord 's Trader Joe 's is based .
On 25 November 2016 , Aldi Süd confirmed that it will expand to China in late 2017 .
Hofer , subsidiary of Aldi Süd , opened its first 10 stores in Italy on 1 March 2018 .
GEOGRAPHIC DISTRIBUTION
BUSINESS PRACTICES
Section::::Business practices .
Some Aldi practices are common in German supermarkets but largely unique to Aldi in other countries .
These include the system of metal gates and turnstiles forcing customers to exit through the checkout , and charging customers for shopping bags .
Until 2004 , Aldi stores accepted only cash ( since then , German stores have accepted domestic Girocard debit cards ) .
Debit cards also are accepted in the United States , Great Britain , Austria , Belgium , Denmark , France , Portugal , Spain , the Netherlands , Switzerland , Ireland , Australia , Slovenia , and Hungary .
All 4 major credit cards are accepted in the United States as of 1 March 2016 .
Electronic Benefit Transfer cards are also accepted in the United States .
Outside of Great Britain , United States and France , Aldi generally does not accept credit cards , though Aldi Australia accepts MasterCard and Visa for a 0.5 % surcharge and Aldi Ireland accepts Visa and MasterCard with no surcharge .
In the United States , as of February 2016 , Aldi accepts all four major credit cards ( MasterCard , Visa , American Express and Discover Card ) , and from the beginning all credit cards " Carte Bleue " ( Visa , American Express or MasterCard ) in France due to the banking system in France where debit cards do n't exist ; before this , Aldi only accepted debit cards .
Aldi has accepted Visa / MasterCard without surcharge throughout Great Britain from October 2014 , which had previously been accepted only in Scotland , and throughout Germany from September 2015 .
Aldi Suisse became one of the first companies to accept the Apple Pay contactless payment system in Switzerland on 7 July 2016 .
On 9 August 2018 , Aldi announced plans to expand its product selection by offering more organic , fresh and easy - to - prepare meals .
Aldi also aims to expand to about 2,500 stores in the United States by 2022 .
On 18 September 2018 , Aldi announced its intent to offer grocery delivery in the United States .
Aldi began testing grocery delivery in 2017 in select cities such as Atlanta , Georgia and Chicago , Illinois .
Grocery delivery is expected to be available nationwide by Thanksgiving 2018 .
IN - STORE LAYOUT Section::::In - store layout .
Aldi stores are noted as examples of so - called no - frills stores that often display a variety of items at discount prices , specializing in staple items , such as food , beverages , toilet paper , sanitary articles , and other inexpensive household items .
Many of its products are own brands , with the number of other brands usually limited to a maximum of two for a given item .
This increases sales for each article , and lets Aldi shops be smaller than stores with more brand choice .
This practice let Aldi avoid price tags , even before the introduction of barcode scanners .
On many of its own brands , if feasible , Aldi will place multiple barcodes on products to speed the check out process .
Aldi mainly sells exclusively produced , custom - branded products ( often very similar to and produced by major brands ) with brand names including Grandessa and Fit & Active .
Branded products carried include HARIBO in Germany , Knoppers in Belgium and France , Marmite and Branston Pickle in Great Britain ; and Vegemite and Milo in Australia .
In the United States , major brand - name products , such as Oscar Mayer bacon , sometimes are offered as a ' special purchase ' : name - brand items that Aldi has received at a special price from the vendor and can offer for a reduced price .
Unlike most shops , Aldi does not accept manufacturers ' coupons , although some US stores successfully experimented with store coupons ( e.g. $ 10 off a $ 25 purchase ) .
In addition to its standard assortment , Aldi has weekly special offers , some of them on more expensive products such as electronics , tools , appliances , or computers , usually from in - house electronics brand Medion and workzone brand for tools .
Discount items can include clothing , toys , flowers , and gifts .
Specials have strict limits on quantities , and are for one week .
Aldi 's early computer offers in Germany ( such as a Commodore 64 in 1987 ) resulted in those products selling out in a few hours .
Aldi is the largest wine retailer in Germany .
Some Australian stores now sell alcoholic beverages .
Some US stores also sell alcoholic beverages ( mainly beer and wine ) where permitted by local and state laws .
ADVERTISING POLICY Section::::Advertising policy .
Aldi has a policy in Germany of not advertising , apart from a weekly newsletter of special prices called " Aldi informs " that is distributed in stores and by direct mail and often printed in local newspapers .
It claims this is a cost saving that can be passed on to consumers .
In Germany , Aldi has never used an external advertising agency .
In the United States , it advertises in newspapers and on television , as well as print ads distributed in stores , and via the Internet .
In Great Britain , print and television ads have appeared since May 2005 .
In Australia , television advertising is common and the current ads are listed on the Australian website .
In Belgium , print , radio and television ads started appearing in late 2017 .
These ads were based on the positive results of taste - tests where the chain pitted its own products against common name - brand products .
LOGOS AND BRANDING Section::::Logos and branding .
The two stores Nord and Süd have distinct logos with Nord displaying the entire ' A ' for ALDI while Süd unveiled a logo in 1982 which displays only half .
In 2006 , Aldi Süd modified the logo slightly and then in March 2017 , unveiled a new logo which removed the blue box line around the artistic ' A ' and revealed a more rounded , 3D look for the logo as well as a new font for the word ' ALDI ' , further differentiating it from the Aldi Nord logo which had shared the same font for the brand until then .
REPUTATION Section::::Reputation .
Originally , Aldi shops were often ridiculed as being cheap shops selling low - quality goods , whose customers could not afford to shop elsewhere .
In the United Kingdom , Aldi has won Supermarket of the Year two years in a row ( 2012/13 ) , and in 2013 , Aldi won the Grocer of the Year Award .
However , in February 2015 , Aldi narrowly lost to Waitrose for the title of Supermarket of the Year 2015 .
In April 2015 , Aldi overtook Waitrose to become the United Kingdom 's sixth - largest supermarket chain .
In February 2017 , Aldi overtook Co - op to become the United Kingdom 's fifth largest supermarket chain .
In May 2017 , Aldi lost out to Marks & Spencer for the title of Supermarket of the Year 2017 ( published by the magazine Which ? ) .
In the United States , due to the relatively low staffing of Aldi locations compared to other supermarket chains , Aldi has a reputation of starting employees out at significantly higher than minimum wage , unusual among American supermarkets .
In Ireland , Aldi has been accused of a " lack of corporate responsibility " to their farmer suppliers by the Irish Farmers ' Association .
Aldi was named 2018 " Retailer of the Year " by Supermarket News .
SUBSIDIARIES AND JOINT VENTURES
ALDI
TALK
Section::::Subsidiaries and joint ventures .
Section::::Aldi Talk .
Aldi has a mobile virtual network operator in Germany , Belgium and the Netherlands , called Aldi Talk .
Aldi also operates a similar network in Australia using Telstra 's 4 G network , called Aldimobile .
Its Austrian and Slovenian Hofer stores serve as distributor for HoT ( Hofer Telekom ) .
ALDI LIQUOR Section::::Aldi Liquor .
Aldi sells low cost liquor from its liquor stores .
Until March 2016 , Aldi had a liquor website serving the east coast of Australia .
This has now been closed down , citing it wishes to focus on expanding the supermarket chain across Australia .
DISKONT Section::::Diskont .
In Austria and Slovenia through its subsidiary Hofer , Aldi has a joint venture with the local petrol retailer Free Energy ( FE ) Trading GmbH , to create some no frills petrol stations called Diskont .
The 66 stations in Austria and six in Slovenia are on or nearby the stores , providing self - serve unleaded or diesel fuel by card - operated pumps .
These have been in operation since 2009 .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS