10 THINGS I HATE ABOUT YOU
10 Things I Hate About You is a 1999 American teen romantic comedy - drama film directed by Gil Junger and starring Julia Stiles , Heath Ledger , Joseph Gordon - Levitt , and Larisa Oleynik .
The screenplay , written by Karen McCullah and Kirsten Smith , is a loose modernization of William Shakespeare 's late-16th century comedy
The Taming of the Shrew , retold in a late-1990s American high school setting .
In the story , new student Cameron ( Gordon - Levitt ) is smitten with Bianca Stratford ( Oleynik ) and , in order to get around her father 's strict rules on dating , attempts to get bad boy Patrick ( Ledger ) to date Bianca 's ill - tempered sister , Kat Stratford ( Stiles ) .
The film is titled after a poem written by Kat about her bittersweet romance with Patrick .
Much of the filming took place in the Seattle metropolitan area , with many scenes shot at Stadium High School in Tacoma .
Released March 31 , 1999 , 10 Things I Hate About You was number two at the domestic box office during its opening weekend , behind only The Matrix , and was a moderate financial and critical success .
It was a breakthrough role for Stiles , Ledger , and Gordon - Levitt , all of whom were nominated for various teen - oriented awards .
Ten years later , the film was adapted into a television series of the same title , which ran for twenty episodes and featured Larry Miller reprising his role as the father , Walter Stratford , from the film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Cameron James , a new student at Padua High School in the Seattle area , becomes instantly smitten with popular sophomore Bianca Stratford .
Geeky Michael Eckman warns him that Bianca is vapid and conceited , and that her overprotective father does not allow Bianca or her older sister , the shrewish Kat , to date .
Kat , a senior , is accepted to Sarah Lawrence College in New York , but her father , Walter , wants her to stay close to home .
Bianca wishes to date affluent senior Joey Donner , but Walter , an obstetrician worrisome of teenage pregnancy , will not allow his daughters to date until they graduate .
Frustrated by Bianca 's insistence and Kat 's rebelliousness , Walter declares that Bianca may date only when Kat does , knowing that Kat 's antisocial attitude makes this unlikely .
When Cameron asks Bianca out , she informs him of her father 's new rule and , as a pretense for allowing her to date Joey , suggests that Cameron find someone willing to date Kat .
Cameron selects " bad boy " Patrick Verona , but Patrick scares him off .
Michael assists by convincing Joey to pay Patrick to take out Kat , under the pretense that this will allow Joey to date Bianca .
Patrick agrees to the deal , but Kat rebuffs his first few advances .
Michael and Cameron help him by prying Bianca for information on Kat 's likes and dislikes .
Armed with this knowledge , Patrick begins to win Kat 's interest .
She goes to a party with him , which enables Bianca to go as well , much to Walter 's dismay .
At the party , Kat becomes upset when she sees Bianca with Joey , and responds by getting drunk .
Patrick attends to her , and Kat starts to open up , expressing her interest in starting a band .
However , when she tries to kiss him , Patrick pulls away and Kat leaves , infuriated .
Meanwhile , Bianca ignores Cameron in favor of Joey , leaving Cameron dejected .
Bianca soon realizes , however , that Joey is shallow and self - absorbed , and asks Cameron for a ride home .
Cameron admits his feelings for her and his frustration with how she has treated him .
Bianca responds by kissing him .
Joey offers to pay Patrick to take Kat to the prom so he can take Bianca .
Patrick initially refuses , but relents when Joey offers him more money .
Kat is still angry with Patrick , but he wins her over by serenading her with the accompaniment of the marching band , and she helps him sneak out of detention .
They go on a date which turns romantic , but Kat becomes suspicious and angry when Patrick insists that she go with him to the prom , an event she is adamantly against .
Bianca is irritated that Cameron has not asked her to the prom , and so accepts Joey 's invitation , but Walter will not allow it unless Kat goes too .
Kat confesses to Bianca that she dated Joey when they were freshmen and , succumbing to peer pressure , had sex with him .
Afterward she regretted it and Joey dumped her , so she vowed to never again do anything just because everyone else was doing it .
Bianca insists that she can make her own choices , so Kat agrees to go to the prom with Patrick , and Bianca decides to go with Cameron instead of Joey .
All is going well at the prom until Bianca learns that Joey planned to have sex with her that night .
Angry that Bianca has spurned him for Cameron , Joey reveals his arrangement with Patrick , which causes Kat to leave heartbroken .
Joey then punches Cameron , but is in turn beaten up by Bianca for having hurt her , Kat , and Cameron .
Bianca and Cameron share another kiss .
The next day , Bianca reconciles with Kat and begins dating Cameron .
Walter admits that Kat is capable of taking care of herself , and gives her permission to attend Sarah Lawrence College .
For an assignment in which the students were required to write their own version of William Shakespeare 's Sonnet 141 , Kat reads aloud a poem titled " 10 Things I Hate About You " , revealing that she still loves Patrick .
Patrick surprises her with a guitar bought with the money that Joey paid him , and confesses that he has fallen for her .
Kat forgives him , and the two reconcile with a kiss .
CAST
* Julia Stiles as Katarina " Kat " Stratford , the antisocial , shrewish elder Stratford sister .
Throughout the course of the movie , the mean , tough girl persona is revealed to be an act and she is shown to be secretly vulnerable underneath .
* Heath Ledger as Patrick Verona , the " bad boy " who is hired to date Kat and falls for her in the process .
Like Kat , Patrick 's " bad boy " persona is revealed to be mostly a front .
* Joseph Gordon - Levitt as Cameron James , the new student at Padua High School who is a total outsider and nerdy who is smitten with Bianca and goes to great lengths to win her attention .
He and his new friend Michael helps Patrick to get a date with Kat .
* Larisa Oleynik as Bianca Stratford , the younger of the two Stratford sisters , superficial and popular .
* Larry Miller as Walter Stratford , an obstetrician and single parent who is overprotective of his daughters , Kat and Bianca .
* Andrew Keegan as Joey Donner , an affluent , self - absorbed high school senior and aspiring model who is popular in high school who intends to have sex with Bianca , and to that end pays Patrick to date Kat .
He is the main antagonist in the movie .
* David Krumholtz as Michael Eckman , a geek who assists Cameron and becomes his best friend in his quest to woo Bianca , and in the process tries to woo Kat 's friend Mandella .
He and Cameron help Patrick get a date with Bianca sister Kat .
* Susan May Pratt as Mandella , Kat 's only close friend and an aficionado of William Shakespeare , who ends up going to the prom with Michael .
She becomes Michael 's love interest .
* Gabrielle Union as Chastity Church , Bianca 's best friend , who betrays Bianca by going out with Joey when Bianca spurns him .
* Daryl Mitchell as Mr. Morgan , teacher of Kat , Patrick , and Joey 's English class .
* Allison Janney as Ms. Perky , Padua High School 's guidance counselor and a writer of erotic literature .
* David Leisure as Mr. Chapin , coach of the girls ' soccer team .
* Greg Jackson as " Scurvy " , a friend of Patrick .
* Kyle Cease as Bogey Lowenstein , a golf enthusiast and member of a clique of aspiring MBAs .
He is Michael 's rival and nemesis .
*
The band Letters to Cleo ( singer Kay Hanley , guitarists Greg McKenna and Michael Eisenstein , bassist Scott Riebling , and drummer Jason Sutter ) appears as the band performing at Club Skunk , playing their songs " Come On " and " Co - Pilot " , and playing a cover version of Cheap Trick 's
" I Want You to Want Me " on the school 's rooftop during the closing credits .
Hanley and Eisenstein also appear in the prom scene , performing a cover of Nick Lowe 's " Cruel to Be Kind " with Save Ferris .
*
The band Save Ferris ( singer Monique Powell , guitarist Brian Mashburn , bassist Bill Uechi , trumpeter José Castellaños , trombonist Brian Williams , saxophonist Eric Zamora , and drummer Evan Kilbourne ) appears as the band performing at the prom , playing their songs " I Know " and " Ca n't Stop " as well as covers of The Isley Brothers ' " Shout " and
Nick Lowe 's " Cruel to Be Kind " .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Many of the scenes were filmed on location at Stadium High School and at a house in the Proctor District of Tacoma , Washington .
The prom sequence was shot over three days in Seattle .
Costume designer Kim Tillman designed original dresses for Larisa Oleynik and Julia Stiles as well as the period outfits for Susan May Pratt and David Krumholtz .
Gabrielle Union 's snakeskin prom dress is a Betsey Johnson design .
Heath Ledger and Joseph Gordon - Levitt 's vintage tuxes came from Isadora 's in Seattle .
The primary tagline is an allusion to a poem written by Elizabeth Barrett Browning from her Sonnets from the Portuguese collection .
( " How do I loathe thee ?
Let me count the ways . " )
Another tagline is a spoof from Shakespeare 's Romeo and Juliet ( " Romeo , Oh Romeo , Get Out Of My Face . " ) and another is a line from The Taming of the Shrew that is spoken in the film by Cameron ( " I burn , I pine , I perish ! " ) .
The original script was finalized on November 12 , 1997 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
In its opening weekend , the film grossed US$ 8,330,681 in 2,271 theaters in the United States and Canada , averaging $ 3,668 per venue , and ranking number two at the box office ( behind The Matrix ) .
It grossed a total of $ 38,178,166 in the United States and Canada and $ 15,300,000 in other territories , about $ 53,500,000 worldwide .
The film had an estimated budget of $ 16 million and is considered a moderate financial and critical success .
On October 12 , 1999 , the Region 1 DVD was released .
In the box office , the film is number ten in teen romance , 18th in high school comedies , and ranked 96th in comedies .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film received generally positive feedback from critics .
Geoff Andrew from Time Out praised the film 's leads , stating " Stiles grows into her character , and Ledger is effortlessly charming " .
Brad Laidman from Film Threat said the film was " pure of heart and perfectly executed . "
Ron Wells , another critic from Film Threat , expressed , " Of all the teen films released this year , this one is , by far , the best . "
Roger Ebert gave the film two and a half stars out of four : Entertainment Weekly listed the film at # 49 on its list of Best High School Movies .
On Rotten Tomatoes , the film got a 61 % from critics , based on 62 reviews , with a rating of 6.1/10 .
The website 's critical consensus was : " Julia Stiles and Heath Ledger add strong performances to an unexpectedly clever script , elevating 10 Things ( slightly ) above typical teen fare . "
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
10 Things I Hate About You was a breakthrough role for stars Stiles , Ledger , and Gordon - Levitt .
Gordon - Levitt , Stiles , and Oleynik each received Young Star Award nominations for Best Actor / Actress in a Comedy Film .
The movie was nominated for seven Teen Choice Awards :
Choice Movie :
Breakout Star ( Stiles ) , Choice Movie : Comedy , Choice Movie : Funniest Scene ( featuring Krumholtz ) , Choice Movie : Love Scene ( featuring Stiles and Ledger ) , Choice Movie :
Hissy Fit ( Gordon - Levitt ) ,
Choice Movie : Villain ( Gordon - Levitt ) and Choice Movie : Soundtrack .
The film 's casting directors Marcia Ross and Donna Morong won " Best Casting for Feature Film , Comedy " at the Casting Society of America in 1999 .
In 2000 , Stiles won the CFCA Award for " Most Promising Actress " for her role as Kat Stratford ( tied with Émilie Dequenne in Rosetta ) and an MTV Movie Award for Breakthrough Female Performance .
The same year , Ledger was nominated for Best Musical Performance for the song
" Ca n't Take My Eyes Off You . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The soundtrack album features popular modern rock anthems from 1970s up to the late 1990s , including various covers from Letters to Cleo , who created modernised renditions of songs such as " I Want You To Want Me " by Cheap Trick and " Cruel to Be Kind " by Nick Lowe .
The albums peak position in the Billboard ( magazine ) charts was 52nd , which was just after its release and it managed to hold a place in the Billboard top 200 for a total of 27 weeks .
Artists such as The Notorious B.I.G. and Joan Jett were also used in the films soundtrack , although were not featured on the soundtrack album .
The album was described by AllMusic as " One of the best modern rock soundtracks of the spring 1999 season " .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
In June 1999 , the Scholastic Corporation published a novelization of the story , adapted by David Levithan .
The story is retold as it is in the film with each chapter written from the point of view of either Bianca , Cameron , Kat , Patrick , or Michael .
In October 2008 , ABC Family ordered a pilot episode of 10 Things I Hate About You , a half - hour , single - camera comedy series based on the feature film of the same name .
Larry Miller is the only actor from the film to reprise his role in the television series .
The director of the film , Gil Junger , directed many of the episodes including the pilot while the film 's music composer , Richard Gibbs , also returned to do the show 's music .
The series was adapted and produced by Carter Covington .
The show premiered on July 7 , 2009 , and lasted 20 episodes .
REFERENCES TO SHAKESPEARE Section::::References to Shakespeare .
The film is a retelling of William Shakespeare 's play The Taming of the Shrew in an American high school setting .
Screenwriters Karen McCullah and Kirsten Smith also wrote the script for She 's the Man ( 2006 ) , a retelling of Shakespeare 's play Twelfth Night set in an American college .
Kat and Bianca share the same names as the female leads in the original play .
Their surname is Stratford , a nod to Shakespeare 's birthplace .
Patrick 's surname Verona references the home of his relative character Petruchio .
The characters attend Padua High School , named after where the play is set .
Cameron ( Lucentio , who disguises himself as a tutor named Cambio )
tutors Bianca in French and slips in a line from play while obsessing over her : " I burn , I pine , I perish " .
Patrick 's character reflects the outlandish behavior of Petruchio , and Michael coerces Patrick into the marching band incident with the words from Sonnet 56 :
" Sweet love , renew thy force " .
The physicality of Petruchio and Katherina is transformed into a playful paintball match ; the prom substitutes for the Act V feast ; Kat 's poem replaces Katherina 's famous Act V speech ; and Joey Donner 's wager over Bianca 's virginity parallels the bet placed by Shakespeare 's husbands regarding their partners ' obedience .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS