REMEMBER THE TITANS Remember the Titans is a 2000 American biographical sports drama film produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and directed by Boaz Yakin .
The screenplay , written by Gregory Allen Howard , is based on the true story of African - American coach Herman Boone , portrayed by Denzel Washington , and his attempt to integrate the T. C. Williams High School football team in Alexandria , Virginia , in 1971 .
Will Patton portrays Bill Yoast , Boone 's assistant coach .
Real - life athletes Gerry Bertier and Julius Campbell are portrayed by Ryan Hurst and Wood Harris , respectively .
The film was co - produced by Walt Disney Pictures and Jerry Bruckheimer Films and released by Buena Vista Pictures .
On September 29 , 2000 , the film 's soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records .
It features songs by several recording artists including Creedence Clearwater Revival , The Hollies , Marvin Gaye , James Taylor , The Temptations , and Cat Stevens .
Remember the Titans had a budget of $ 30 million and premiered in theaters nationwide in the United States on September 29 , 2000 .
It has grossed an estimated $ 115,654,751 in the U.S. , and $ 136,706,683 worldwide .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In the autumn of 1981 , a group of former football coaches and players attend a funeral .
Ten years earlier in July 1971 , at the desegregated T. C. Williams High School in Alexandria , Virginia , a black head coach , Herman Boone , is hired to coach the school 's football team .
Boone is assigned to the coaching team under current coach Bill Yoast , nominated for the Virginia High School Hall of Fame .
In an attempt to placate rising racial tensions and the fact that all other high schools are " white " only , Boone is assigned the head coach job .
He refuses , believing it is unfair to Yoast , but relents after seeing what it means to the black community .
Yoast is then offered an assistant coach 's job by the school board and initially refuses , but reconsiders after the white players pledge to boycott the team if he does not participate .
Dismayed at the prospect of the students losing their chances at scholarships , Yoast changes his mind and takes up the position of defensive coordinator under Boone , to his daughter Sheryl 's dismay .
The black students have a meeting in the gymnasium in auditioning to play for the team until Boone arrives , but the meeting turns into a fiasco when Yoast and white students interrupt .
On August 15 , the players gather and journey to Gettysburg College , where their training camp takes place .
As their days of training camp progress , black and white football team members frequently clash in racially motivated conflicts , including some between captains Gerry Bertier and Julius Campbell .
But after forceful coaching and rigorous athletic training by Boone , which includes an early morning run to the Gettysburg cemetery , and a motivational speech , the team achieves racial harmony and success .
After returning from football camp , Boone is told by a member of the school board that if he loses even a single game , he will be dismissed .
Subsequently , the Titans go through the season undefeated while battling racial prejudice , before slowly gaining support from the community .
Gerry even has his best friend Ray removed from the team because of his racism , following a game where he intentionally missed a block which consequently led to the near - season - ending injury of starting quarterback Jerry " Rev " Harris .
Just before the state semi - finals , Yoast is told by the chairman of the school board that he will be inducted into the Hall of Fame after the Titans lose one game , implying he wants Boone to be dismissed over his race .
During the game , it becomes apparent that the referees are biased against the Titans .
Upon seeing the chairman and other board members in the audience looking on with satisfaction , Yoast realizes that they 've rigged the game and warns the head official that he will go to the press and expose the scandal unless the game is officiated fairly .
The Titans nonetheless win and advance to the state championship , but Yoast is told by the chairman that his actions have resulted in his loss of candidacy for Hall of Fame induction .
While celebrating the victory , Bertier is severely injured in a car accident with a truck after driving through an intersection .
Although Bertier is unable to play due to being paralyzed from the waist down , the team goes on to win the state championship .
Bertier would remain a paraplegic for the rest of his life .
Ten years later , Bertier dies in another automobile accident caused by a drunk driver , after winning the gold medal in shot put in the Paralympic Games ; it is then revealed that it is his funeral the former football coaches and players are attending .
In the epilogue , descriptions show the players ' and coaches ' activities after the events in 1971 .
CAST * Denzel Washington as Coach Herman Boone
* Will Patton as Assistant Coach Bill Yoast
* Wood Harris as DE Julius Campbell
* Ryan Hurst as LB Gerry Bertier * Donald Faison as RB / LB Petey Jones * Craig Kirkwood as QB Jerry " Rev " Harris * Ethan Suplee as OL Louie Lastik
* Kip Pardue as QB Ronnie " Sunshine " Bass * Hayden Panettiere as Sheryl Yoast , Bill Yoast 's tomboyish 9-and - a - half - year - old daughter * Nicole Ari Parker as Carol Boone , Herman Boone 's wife * Kate Bosworth as Emma Hoyt , Gerry 's girlfriend * Earl C. Poitier as DL Darryl " Blue " Stanton * Ryan Gosling as Alan Bosley
* Burgess Jenkins as TE Ray Budds * Neal Ghant as Frankie Glascoe PRODUCTION FILMING
Section::::Production .
Section::::Filming .
Filming locations for the motion picture included the campus of Berry College in Rome , GA , as well as in Atlanta , Georgia , including Henry Grady High School and Druid Hills High School which both filled in for T.C. Williams High School .
HISTORICAL ACCURACY Section::::Historical accuracy .
As with any movie that is not a documentary film but is rather " based on a true story " , it has strayed from the actual events that had occurred on many occasions to add new elements of teamwork , commitment , and friendship to the film .
*
Coach Boone may not have been as inspirational a coach as Washington portrays in the movie ; in interviews , many former Titans football players said they believed his coaching strategies had no correlation to their success , and were indeed too harsh , causing some players to quit .
*
It is fully true that the Titans were ranked second in the nation at the end of the 1971 season , finishing 13–0 with 9 of those wins being shutouts .
*
In the movie , Coach Boone states , " We are not like all the other schools in this conference , they 're all white .
They do n't have to worry about race .
We do .
" This is false as well ; all the schools the Titans faced were integrated years before .
* While the team is at camp , it shows Coach Boone waking them up at three in the morning to go for a run .
This did not occur ; neither did his speech at Gettysburg .
The team did go on a tour in Gettysburg , although it was not as dramatic as portrayed in the film .
* Ronnie " Sunshine " Bass was far from being the only one with long hair at the time .
Even Gerry Bertier had long hair .
But in interviews Bass said " I 'll say for the record my hair was never that long . "
He also says the kiss with Gerry never happened .
* The climax of the movie is a fictionalized 1971 AAA state championship football game between T. C. Williams and George C. Marshall High School .
The dramatic license taken in the movie was to convert what was actually a mid - season match - up between T. C. Williams and Marshall into a made - for - Hollywood state championship .
In reality , the Marshall game was the toughest game T. C. Williams played all year .
As depicted in the movie , the real Titans won the Marshall game on a fourth down come - from - behind play at the very end of the game .
The actual state championship ( against Andrew Lewis High School of Salem ) was a 27–0 blowout , played at Victory Stadium in Roanoke , VA .
* Bertier 's car accident took place on December 11 , 1971 , after ( rather than a few days before )
the season - ending State Championship game .
Bertier had been at a banquet honoring the team for their undefeated season .
After the banquet , Bertier borrowed his mother 's new 1971 Chevrolet Camaro .
Bertier lost control of the Camaro and crashed ( the movie shows him getting broadsided ) .
The cause of the accident was determined to be a mechanical failure in the engine mount .
*
The " where are they now " , shown during the film 's closing credits , omits the fact that Sheryl Yoast died in 1996 at the age of 34 and that she was not an only child as she had three sisters .
Her oldest sister Bonnie was in college , her second oldest Angela went to a different high school , and her younger sister Deidre was only three years old in 1971 .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
On September 19 , 2000 , the soundtrack was released by Walt Disney Records .
The film score was orchestrated by musician Trevor Rabin and features music composed by various artists .
From the instrumental score , Rabin 's track " Titans Spirit " , was the only cue ( of the 12 composed ) added to the soundtrack .
It is also the only piece of music on the soundtrack album not to have been previously released .
" Titans Spirit " was a seven - minute instrumental .
It has been used on numerous sports telecasts , particularly those on NBC , which utilized the score during its closing credits for the Salt Lake 2002 , Athens 2004 , Torino 2006 , Beijing 2008 , Vancouver 2010 , London 2012 , and the Rio 2016 Olympic Games as well in 2002 with the final closing credits montage ending their 12-year run of NBA coverage .
The song was also played as veteran New York Mets players crossed home plate during the closing ceremonies at Shea Stadium , and as the New York Yankees were awarded their rings from their 2009 World Series championship .
The New Jersey Devils also used this song during the jersey number retirement ceremonies for Scott Stevens , Ken Daneyko , Scott Niedermayer , Martin Brodeur and Patrik Eliáš .
In 2018 , at the conclusion of the Stanley Cup playoffs , the song was used during the Washington Capitals Stanley Cup celebration as captain Alex Ovechkin lifted the cup in Las Vegas .
It was also used during the 2008 Democratic National Convention to accompany the celebration and fireworks at Invesco Field after future president Barack Obama gave his nomination acceptance speech , and was also used immediately following his victory speech upon winning the 2008 Presidential Election .
SOUNDTRACK RELEASE
HOME MEDIA Section::::Release .
Section::::Home media .
Following its release in theaters , the Region 1 widescreen and Pan and scan edition of the motion picture was released on DVD in the United States on March 20 , 2001 .
A Special Edition widescreen format of the film was released on March 20 , 2001 , along with a widescreen Director 's cut on March 14 , 2006 .
A restored widescreen hi - definition Blu - ray version was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on September 4 , 2007 .
Special features include backstage feature audio commentary with director Boaz Yakin , producer Jerry Bruckheimer and writer Gregory Allen Howard , feature audio commentary with real - life coaches Herman Boone and Bill Yoast , " Remember The Titans : An inspirational journey behind the scenes " hosted by Lynn Swann , " Denzel Becomes Boone , " " Beating The Odds " ; Deleted scenes ; Movie Showcase and seamless menus .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Remember the Titans opened strongly at the U.S. box office , grossing $ 26,654,715 in its first weekend and staying within the top five for six weeks .
It eventually went on to gross an estimated $ 115,654,751 in the U.S. , and $ 136,706,684 worldwide .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Among mainstream critics in the U.S. , Remember the Titans received generally positive reviews .
Rotten Tomatoes reported that 73 % of 132 sampled critics gave the film a positive review , with an average score of 6.3/10 .
At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted average out of 100 to critics ' reviews , the film received a score of 48 based on 32 reviews .
CinemaScore reported that audiences gave the film a rare " A+ " grade .
James Berardinelli writing for ReelViews , called the film " relentlessly manipulative and hopelessly predictable " but noted that it was " a notch above the average entry in part because its social message ( even if it is soft - peddled ) creates a richer fabric than the usual cloth from which this kind of movie is cut .
" Describing some pitfalls , Robert Wilonsky of the Dallas Observer said that " beneath its rah - rah rhetoric and pigskin proselytizing , it 's no more provocative or thoughtful than a Hallmark Hall of Fame film or , for that matter , a Hallmark greeting card .
Its heart is in the right place , but it has no soul .
"
Wilonsky however was quick to admit " The film 's intentions are noble , but its delivery is ham - fisted and pretentious ; you ca n't deny the message , but you can loathe the messenger without feeling too guilty about it . "
Todd McCarthy , writing in Variety , said , " As simplistic and drained of complexity as the picture is , it may well appeal to mainstream audiences as an ' if only it could be like this ' fantasy , as well as on the elemental level of a boot camp training film , albeit a PG - rated one with all the cuss words removed . "
Roger Ebert , in the Chicago Sun - Times , viewed the film as " a parable about racial harmony , yoked to the formula of a sports movie , " adding , " Victories over racism and victories over opposing teams alternate so quickly that sometimes we 're not sure if we 're cheering for tolerance or touchdowns .
Real life is never this simple , but then that 's what the movies are for " .
In the San Francisco Chronicle , Mick LaSalle wrote that the film reminds the viewer that " it 's possible to make a sentimental drama that is n't sickening — and a sports movie that transcends cliches . "
Columnist Bob Grimm of the Sacramento News & Review , somewhat praised the film , writing , " The film is quite lightweight for the subject matter , but Washington and company make it watchable .
" Some detractors like Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote , " Denzel Washington should have held out for a better script before he signed on to star in Remember the Titans , but you can see why he wanted to do the movie : He gets to play Martin Luther King Jr. and Vince Lombardi rolled into one nostalgically omnipotent tough - love saint . "
Jeff Vice of the Deseret News admitted that although the film contained dialogue that was " corny , clichéd , and downright cheesy at times , " as well as how it relayed its message in one of the " most predictable , heavy - handed manners we 've seen in a movie in years " , the film " serves as a reminder of how much goodness there is inside people , just waiting for the right person to bring it out . "
He also viewed the casting as top - notch , saying that it helped to have a " rock - solid foundation in the form of leading - man Denzel Washington " at the helm .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated and won several awards in 2000–2001 . !
Award !
Category !
Nominee !
Result 2001
Angel Awards align="center
" Silver Angel align="center " — — — — BET Awards 2001 align="center " Best Actor align="center " Denzel Washington 2001 BMI Film & TV Awards align="center " Film Music Award align="center " Trevor Rabin rowspan=3Black Reel Awards of 2001 align="center " Best Actor align="center " Denzel Washington align="center " Best Screenplay align="center " Gregory Allen Howard align="center " Best Film align="center " Jerry Bruckheimer , Chad Oman rowspan=22001 Blockbuster Entertainment Awards align="center " Favorite Actor - Drama align="center " Denzel Washington align="center "
Favorite Supporting Actor - Drama align="center
" Wood Harris 2001 Casting Society of America Awards align="center " Best Casting for Feature Film - Drama align="center
" Ronna Kress rowspan=52001 NAACP Image Awards align="center
" Outstanding Actor in a Motion Picture align="center " Denzel Washington align="center
"
Outstanding Motion Picture
align="center " — — — — align="center " Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Motion Picture align="center
"
Wood Harris align="center " Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture align="center " Nicole Ari Parker align="center " Outstanding Youth Actor / Actress align="center " Krysten Leigh Jones rowspan=2Las Vegas Film Critics Society Awards 2000 align="center " Best Male Newcomer align="center
"
Kip Pardue align="center " Youth in Film align="center " Hayden Panettiere rowspan=22001 Motion Picture Sound Editors Awards align="center " Best Sound Editing - Dialogue & ADR align="center
" Robert L. Sephton , Christopher T. Welch , Julie Feiner , Cindy Marty , Gaston Biraben , Suhail Kafity align="center " Best Sound Editing - Music align="center "
Will Kaplan
Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards 2000 align="center
"
Best Performance by a Youth in a Leading or Supporting Role align="center "
Hayden Panettiere rowspan=22001 Political Film Society Awards align="center " Human Rights align="center "
— — — — align="center " Exposé align="center " — — — — Golden Satellite Awards 2000 align="center "
Best Performance by an Actor in a Motion Picture Drama align="center "
Denzel Washington 2001 Teen Choice Awards align="center
" Film - Choice Drama / Action Adventure align="center " — — — — rowspan=222nd Young Artist Awards align="center
" Best Performance in a Feature Film - Supporting Young Actress align="center " Hayden Panettiere align="center " Best Family Feature Film - Drama align="center " — — — — The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists : * 2006 : AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Cheers – Nominated
SEE ALSO
* T. C. Williams High School REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS