PLAY MISTY FOR ME Play Misty for Me is a 1971 American psychological thriller film , directed by and starring Clint Eastwood , in his directorial debut .
Jessica Walter and Donna Mills co - star .
The original music score was composed by Dee Barton .
In the film , Eastwood plays the role of a radio disc jockey being stalked by an obsessed female fan .
The film was a critical and financial success , with Walter earning praise for her first major film role .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dave Garver is a KRML radio disc jockey who broadcasts nightly from a studio in Carmel - by - the - Sea , California , often incorporating poetry into his program .
At his favorite bar , seemingly by chance , he encounters a woman named Evelyn Draper .
Dave drives her home , where she reveals that their meeting was not accidental ; she sought him out after hearing the bar mentioned on his radio show .
He guesses correctly that she is the recurring caller who always requests the jazz standard " Misty " .
The two have sex .
A casual relationship begins between Dave and Evelyn .
But before long , Evelyn begins to display obsessive behavior .
She shows up at Dave 's house uninvited , follows him to work , and calls to demand that he not leave her alone for a single minute .
The final straw comes when Evelyn disrupts a business meeting , mistaking Dave 's lunch companion for his date .
His efforts to gently sever ties with Evelyn lead her to attempt suicide in his home by slashing her wrists .
After Dave rejects her again , Evelyn breaks into his home and his housekeeper finds her vandalizing his possessions .
Evelyn stabs the housekeeper ( who survives but is taken to the hospital ) and is subsequently committed to a psychiatric hospital .
During Evelyn 's incarceration , Dave rekindles a relationship with his ex - girlfriend , Tobie Williams .
A few months later , Evelyn again calls the studio to request " Misty " .
She tells Dave that she has been released from the mental hospital and is moving to Hawaii for a fresh start in life .
She then quotes an Edgar Allan Poe poem , " Annabel Lee " .
That night , while Dave is asleep , she sneaks into his house and tries to kill him with a large knife .
He wakes up to see her standing over him wielding the knife , and as she screams and stabs downward , he rolls away from the descending knife ( which plunges into his pillow ) and he falls onto the floor ; Evelyn flees , and he contacts the police .
Dave tells Tobie about Evelyn and cautions her to stay away from him until the woman is caught .
For her safety , she goes home .
There , she meets with a girl who answered her ad for a roommate : Evelyn , using the alias Annabel .
Tobie eventually realizes that Annabel is Evelyn when she sees the fresh scars on Evelyn 's wrists , but before Tobie can escape , Evelyn takes her hostage .
Evelyn also kills McCallum , a police detective who had come to check on Tobie .
Dave makes the connection between Tobie 's roommate and the quote from " Annabel Lee " .
When he calls Tobie to warn her , Evelyn answers and says Tobie
and she are waiting for him .
Dave switches from a live show to taped music and rushes to the house , where he finds Tobie bound and gagged .
Evelyn attacks him with the butcher knife , slashing Dave multiple times .
He punches Evelyn , knocking her through the window , over a railing , down onto the rocky shore below .
He and Tobie leave the house as his voice on the radio show leads into the song " Misty " .
CAST * Clint Eastwood as Dave Garver * Jessica Walter as Evelyn Draper * Donna Mills as Tobie Williams
* John Larch as Sgt .
McCallum * Jack Ging as Frank * Irene Hervey as Madge * James McEachin as Al Monte * Clarice Taylor as Birdie
* Donald Siegel as Murphy PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Before Malpaso Productions co - founder Irving Leonard died , he and Eastwood discussed a final film , one giving Eastwood the artistic control he desired by making his directorial debut .
The film was Play Misty for Me .
Eastwood reflected on his new role : After seventeen years of bouncing my head against the wall , hanging around sets , maybe influencing certain camera set - ups with my own opinions , watching actors go through all kinds of hell without any help , and working with both good directors and bad ones , I 'm at the point where I 'm ready to make my own pictures .
I stored away all the mistakes I made and saved up all the good things I learned , and now I know enough to control my own projects and get what I want out of actors .
The script was originally conceived by Jo Heims , a former model and dancer turned secretary , and was polished by Dean Riesner .
The idea of another love interest , with a level - headed girlfriend Tobie added to the plot , was a suggestion by Sonia Chernus , an editor who had been with Eastwood when he was initially spotted for Rawhide .
The story line was originally set in Los Angeles , but at Eastwood 's insistence , the film was shot in the more comfortable surroundings of the actual Carmel - by - the - Sea , where he could shoot scenes at the local radio station , bars and restaurants , and friends ' houses .
Filming commenced in Monterey , California , in September 1970 , and although this was Eastwood 's debut as film director , Don Siegel stood by to help and also had an acting role in the film as a bartender .
Frequent collaborators of Siegel 's , such as cinematographer Bruce Surtees , editor Carl Pingitore , and composer Dee Barton , made up part of the filming team .
Additional scenes were shot at the Monterey Jazz Festival in September 1970 , featuring jazz greats Johnny Otis , Cannonball Adderley , and future Weather Report founder Joe Zawinul .
( The commentator mentions : " That was the Cannonball Adderley group .
They are playing at the Monterey Jazz Festival with Duke Ellington , Woody Herman , Joe Williams , and many others .
Now we are gon na hear from ' The Gator Creek Organization ' and ' Feeling Fine ' ... " . )
The Sardine Factory is still at the same location as in the film , at Prescott and Wave Streets , just one block up from Cannery Row in Monterey .
The radio station , KRML , was an actual jazz station in Carmel , whose studios were relocated to the Eastwood Building at San Carlos and 5th , in the same building as the Hog 's Breath Inn ( a restaurant that Eastwood owned ) .
After a brief dark period in 2010 , the radio station returned to the air in 2011 .
The rights to the song " Misty " were obtained after Eastwood saw Erroll Garner perform at the Concord Music Festival in 1970 .
Eastwood also paid $ 2,000 for the use of the song " The First Time Ever I Saw Your Face " by Roberta Flack .
Meticulous planning and efficient directorship by Eastwood ( which would become one of his trademarks ) enabled the film to be made nearly $ 50,000 short of its $ 1 million budget , and it was completed four or five days ahead of schedule .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Play Misty for Me premiered in October 1971 at the San Francisco Film Festival and was widely released in November .
It was a financial success , grossing $ 10.6 million at the box office against a budget of $ 950,000 .
It earned $ 5,413,000 in domestic rentals .
The film has been given mostly positive reviews , with an 83 % " fresh " rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
In his 1971 review of the film , Roger Ebert wrote , " Play Misty for Me is not the artistic equal of Psycho , but in the business of collecting an audience into the palm of its hand and then squeezing hard , it is supreme . "
Critics such as Jay Cocks in Time , Andrew Sarris in the Village Voice , and Archer Winsten in the New York Post all praised Eastwood 's directorial skills and the film , including his performance in the scenes with Walter .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
Jessica Walter was nominated for the 1972 Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Drama , but lost to Jane Fonda for Klute .
Play Misty for Me was number 26 on Bravo ! 's " 30 Even Scarier Movie Moments . "
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring home invasions REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS