CALCIUM HYDROXIDE Calcium hydroxide ( traditionally called slaked lime ) is an inorganic compound with the chemical formula Ca(OH ) .
It is a colorless crystal or white powder and is obtained when calcium oxide ( called lime or quicklime ) is mixed , or slaked with water .
It has many names including hydrated lime , caustic lime , builders ' lime , slack lime , cal , or pickling lime .
Calcium hydroxide is used in many applications , including food preparation , where it has been identified as E number E526 .
Limewater is the common name for a saturated solution of calcium hydroxide .
PROPERTIES Section::::Properties .
Calcium hydroxide is relatively insoluble in water , with a solubility product K of 5.5 × 10 .
It is large enough that its solutions are basic according to the following reaction :
At ambient temperature .
Calcium hydroxide ( portlandite ) dissolves in pure water to produce an alkaline solution with a pH of about 12.4 .
Calcium hydroxide solutions can cause chemical burns .
At high pH value ( see common ion effect ) , its solubility drastically decreases .
This behavior is relevant to cement pastes .
Aqueous solutions of calcium hydroxide are called limewater and are medium strength bases that reacts with acids and can attack some metals such as aluminium ( amphoteric hydroxide dissolving at high pH ) while protecting other metals from corrosion such as iron and steel by passivation of their surface .
Limewater turns milky in the presence of carbon dioxide due to formation of calcium carbonate , a process called carbonatation : for example lime water When heated to 512 ° C , the partial pressure of water in equilibrium with calcium hydroxide reaches 101kPa ( normal atmospheric pressure ) , which decomposes calcium hydroxide into calcium oxide and water .
STRUCTURE , PREPARATION , OCCURRENCE Section::::Structure , preparation , occurrence .
Calcium hydroxide adopts a polymeric structure , as do all metal hydroxides .
The structure is identical to that of Mg(OH )
( brucite structure ) ; i.e. , the cadmium iodide motif .
Strong hydrogen bonds exist between the layers .
Calcium hydroxide is produced commercially by treating lime with water :
In the laboratory it can be prepared by mixing aqueous solutions of calcium chloride and sodium hydroxide .
The mineral form , portlandite , is relatively rare but can be found in some volcanic , plutonic , and metamorphic rocks .
It has also been known to arise in burning coal dumps .
The positively charged ionized species CaOH has been detected in the atmosphere of S - type stars .
RETROGRADE SOLUBILITY
Section::::Retrograde solubility .
The solubility of calcium hydroxide ( portlandite ) at 70 ° C is about half of its value at 25 ° C .
The reason for this rather uncommon phenomenon is that the dissolution of calcium hydroxide in water is an exothermic process , and also adheres to Le Chatelier 's principle .
A lowering of temperature thus favours the elimination of the heat liberated through the process of dissolution and increases the equilibrium constant of dissolution of Ca(OH ) , and so increase its solubility at low temperature .
This counter - intuitive temperature dependence of the solubility is referred to as " retrograde " or " inverse " solubility .
The variably hydrated phases of calcium sulfate ( gypsum , bassanite and anhydrite ) also exhibit a retrograde solubility for the same reason because their dissolution reactions are exothermic .
USES Section::::Uses .
One significant application of calcium hydroxide is as a flocculant , in water and sewage treatment .
It forms a fluffy charged solid that aids in the removal of smaller particles from water , resulting in a clearer product .
This application is enabled by the low cost and low toxicity of calcium hydroxide .
It is also used in fresh water treatment for raising the pH of the water so that pipes will not corrode where the base water is acidic , because it is self - regulating and does not raise the pH too much .
It is also used in the preparation of ammonia gas ( NH ) , using the following reaction :
Another large application is in the paper industry , where it is an intermediate in the reaction in the production of sodium hydroxide .
This conversion is part of the causticizing step in the Kraft process for making pulp .
In the causticizing operation burned lime is added to green liquor which is a solution primarily of sodium carbonate and sodium sulfate produced by dissolving smelt , which is the molten form of these chemicals from the recovery furnace .
FOOD INDUSTRY Section::::Food industry .
Because of its low toxicity and the mildness of its basic properties , slaked lime is widely used in the food industry to : * clarify raw juice from sugarcane or sugar beets in the sugar industry , ( see carbonatation )
* process water for alcoholic beverages and soft drinks * pickle cucumbers and other foods
* make Chinese century eggs * in maize preparation : removes the cellulose hull of maize kernals ( see nixtamalization ) * clear a brine of carbonates of calcium and magnesium in the manufacture of salt for food and pharmaceutical uses
* fortify ( Ca supplement ) fruit drinks , such as orange juice , and infant formula * aid digestion ( called Choona , used in India in paan , a mixture of areca nuts , calcium hydroxide and a variety of seeds wrapped in betel leaves )
* substitute for baking soda in making papadam .
NATIVE AMERICAN
USES Section::::Native American uses .
In Spanish , calcium hydroxide is called cal .
Maize cooked with cal ( nixtamalization ) becomes hominy ( nixtamal ) , which significantly increases the bioavailability of niacin ( vitamin B3 ) , and it is also considered tastier and easier to digest .
In chewing coca leaves , calcium hydroxide is usually chewed alongside to keep the alkaloid stimulants chemically available for absorption by the body .
Similarly , Native Americans traditionally chewed tobacco leaves with calcium hydroxide derived from burnt mollusc shells to enhance the effects .
It has also been used by some indigenous American tribes as an ingredient in yopo , a psychedelic snuff prepared from the beans of some Anadenanthera species .
ASIAN USES Section::::Asian uses .
Calcium hydroxide is typically added to a bundle of areca nut and betel leaf to keep the alkaloid stimulants chemically available to enter the bloodstream via sublingual absorption .
It is used in making naswar ( also known as nass or niswar ) , a type of dipping tobacco made from fresh tobacco leaves , calcium hydroxide ( chuna ) , and wood ash .
It is consumed most in the Pathan diaspora , Afghanistan , Pakistan , India , Bangladesh .
Villagers also use calcium hydroxide to paint their mud houses in Afghanistan , Pakistan and India .
HEALTH RISKS
Section::::Health risks .
Unprotected exposure to Ca(OH ) can cause severe skin irritation , chemical burns , blindness or lung damage .
SEE ALSO
* Baralyme ( carbon dioxide absorbent )
* Cement
* Lime mortar
* Lime plaster
* Plaster * Magnesium hydroxide ( less alkaline due to a lower solubility product )
* Soda lime ( carbon dioxide absorbent )
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* CDC – NIOSH Pocket Guide to Chemical Hazards – Calcium Hydroxide * MSDS Data Sheet