PIZZA PIZZA Pizza Pizza Ltd. is a franchised Canadian pizza quick - service restaurant , with its headquarters in Toronto , Ontario .
Its restaurants are mainly in the province of Ontario , Quebec , Nova Scotia , and in Western Canada .
Franchises in western Canada are mostly run through Alberta - based subsidiary Pizza 73 .
It has over 500 locations , including over 150 non - traditional locations .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The chain was founded by Michael Overs , who opened the first location on December 31 , 1967 , at the corner of Wellesley and Parliament Streets in Toronto .
He owned the chain until his death in 2010 .
It expanded throughout the Toronto area in the 1970s , and throughout the rest of Ontario throughout the 1980s and 1990s .
The chain opened its first locations in Quebec in the mid-1980s , but withdrew after a few years .
It returned to the province , in Gatineau , in March 2007 .
Locations were opened in the Montreal area in late 2007 in the boroughs of Notre - Dame - de - Grâce and Pierrefonds - Roxboro .
Pizza Pizza began to expand significantly outside Ontario during the 2000s .
In its 2005 initial public offering filings , the chain announced it would consider expansion in western Canada , potentially including purchasing existing local chains .
This led to a June 2007 agreement to purchase Alberta - based Pizza 73 .
As well , in October 2006 , the company announced it would expand in the Quebec market , beginning with sponsorship of the Montreal Canadiens .
The chain expanded to the British Columbia Lower Mainland in 2009 , however all locations closed ( Pizza 73 already had a location in Prince George in the B.C. Interior ) , and soon after added locations in Manitoba and Saskatchewan .
The chain returned to Vancouver in 2018 .
Pizza Pizza opened its first store in Halifax , Nova Scotia in June 2010 .
Major southern Ontario competitors include Pizza Hut , Domino 's Pizza , Little Caesars , Gino 's Pizza , Mamma 's Pizza , Pizzaiolo , 241 Pizza , Double Double Pizza , and Pizza Nova .
Two other major Canadian chains , Greco and Panago , which have a presence similar to Pizza Pizza in the Atlantic and Western Canada respectively , have entered the Ontario market .
In Montreal , Quebec , its competitors are Mikes , Pizza Hut , and Double Pizza .
On March 6 , 2017 , Pizza Pizza introduced dairy - free , vegan cheese to the menu .
MARKETING TECHNIQUES
Section::::Marketing techniques .
Pizza Pizza is known for the chain 's phone number , XXX–1111 .
The company claims that its early adoption of the centralized single - number ordering system , and its subsequent use and heavy promotion of this rhyming phone number , helped the chain to expand through Ontario .
A central local number is used for all locations until it becomes a long distance call .
In other cities , local numbers are requested with the " 11 - 11 " suffix to match the standard jingle in the chain 's radio advertisements .
Pizza Pizza has registered " 967–1111 " and variants as trademarks .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * List of Canadian restaurant chains * List of Canadian pizza chains REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Pizza Pizza 's history page ( source )
* Michael Overs 's Obituary