BLUNT ( CIGAR )
A blunt is a cigar which is wider than a cigarillo and not quite as wide as a Corona .
These cigars typically consist of two main parts ; the inner leaf , which is similar to a cigarette rolling paper , except it is made of tobacco , and a thicker outer leaf which is rolled around the inner leaf in a spiral .
In most commercially available blunts , the " leaves " are not actual tobacco leaves but rather paper made from tobacco pulp .
Blunts originally got their name from their " broad or rounded tip " , and were named as such in the 19th century to differentiate them from other cigars with a tapered , pointed tip .
Blunts are a specific size cigar that have been so popular as to have been once sold in specific vending machines .
The original blunt cigar was manufactured in Philadelphia out of a single leaf outer tobacco wrapper .
At the time this was the only cigar wrapped in one continuous leaf , other cigars used pieces of leaves for their outer wrapper .
Tobacco leaves naturally taper at the ends .
Since this cigar was rolled in one leaf the end would taper and had a round appearance ( thus leading to the Blunt name ) .
Due to the popularity of this style of cigar many other Blunts were launched into the marketplace .
Brands of blunts include : Phillies , Dutch Masters , Backwoods , White Owl , Altadis marketing " Antonio Y Cleopatra " , " El Producto " , and " Tampa Nugget " brands , Swedish Match marketing " Game " and " Garcia Y Vega " brands , and Swisher Sweets marketing " King Edward " , " Optimo " , and Pom Pom brands .
These types of cigars are commonly sold in convenience stores , gas stations , grocery stores , and drugstores , in contrast to premium cigars , which are sold in cigar shops .
Blunts burn quickly like cigarettes , and some can be smoked in about five minutes , whereas a premium cigar takes an hour or so to burn .
Unlike premium cigars , blunts are either already cut or have a hole in the mouth end for the smoke to go through , and so they do not need to be cut at the mouth end .
Blunts are also significantly cheaper than premium cigars .
Over time the term Blunt came to describe any cigar wrapped in a single continuous leaf .
However , in the 1970s a new manner of producing cigars was invented .
This manner is known as spiral binding .
No longer did cigars have to be rolled in a continuous single leaf but instead a continuous spiral wrap from base to tip could be employed .
The basic shape of a blunt remained unchanged although the burn characteristics of a spiral wrapped cigar is not the same as a single continuous leaf .
However spiral wrapping is much less expensive than using a full single tobacco leaf .
Spiral wrapping gives a better seal than a single continuous leaf as overlapping can be done ( much like wrapping an arm in a bandage , spiral wrapping is easier to seal than a single continuous bandage ) .
Individually packaged blunt leaves have been available for many years .
These are tobacco leaves that because of their nature and appearance are used to roll a cigar in one continuous sheet ( thus the name blunt is used ) .
The United States Tobacco Taxation Board has classified all individual cigar wrappers as " blunts " and taxes them as roll - your - own tobacco .
Many US states classify blunt wraps as tobacco and a license is required to sell them and collect tax .
Canada defines a blunt wrap as " a sheet or tube made of tobacco used to roll cigarette tobacco in — similar to rolling paper " .
Use of these single continuous sheets is closer to the original blunts of the 19th century since it is not a spiral wrap .
SEE ALSO
* Blunt ( cannabis cigar ) REFERENCES