NATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION OF INDIA National Human Rights Commission ( NHRC ) of India is an autonomous public body constituted on 12 October 1993 under the Protection of Human Rights Ordinance of 28 September 1993 .
It was given a statutory basis by the Protection of Human Rights Act , 1993 ( TPHRA ) .
The NHRC is the National Human Rights Commission of India , responsible for the protection and promotion of human rights , defined by the Act as " rights relating to life , liberty , equality and dignity of the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or embodied in the International Covenants " .
FUNCTIONS Section::::Functions .
The Protection of Human Rights Act mandates the NHRC to perform the following functions : * proactively or reactively inquire into violations of government of India human rights or negligence in the prevention of such violation by a public servant * by leave of the court , to intervene in court proceeding relating to human rights
* make recommendations about granting relief to the victims and their families .
* review the safeguards provided by or under the Constitution or any law for the time being in force for the protection of human rights and recommend measures for their effective implementation * review the factors , including acts of terrorism that inhibit the enjoyment of human rights and recommend appropriate remedial measures * to study treaties and other international instruments on human rights and make recommendations for their effective implementation
* undertake and promote research in the field of human rights * engage in human rights education among various sections of society and promote awareness of the safeguards available for the protection of these rights through publications , the media , seminars and other available means * encourage the efforts of NGOs and institutions congress to working in the field of human rights .
* such other function as it may consider it necessary for the protection of human rights .
* requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office .
* by sitting and taking application and rejecting them on the basic of sex , caste , income and social status .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
The NHRC consists of : * A Chairperson , should be retired [ Chief Justice of India ] ( through GoI mulling appointment of retired SC Judges as chairperson ) * One member who is , or has been , a Judge of the Supreme Court of India
* One member who is , or has been , the Chief Justice of a High Court * Two members to be appointed from among persons having knowledge of , or practical experience in , matters relating to human rights
*
In addition , the Chairpersons of four National Commissions ( Scheduled Castes , Scheduled Tribes , Women and Minorities ) serve as ex officio members .
The sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or sitting Chief Justice of any High Court can be appointed only after the consultation with the Chief Justice of Supreme Court .
CHAIRMAN AND MEMBERS Section::::Chairman and Members .
Justice JS Kehar is going to be next chairman after H.L. Dattu
The chairman of the NHRC is Justice H. L. Dattu and the other members are : * Justice Pinaki Chandra Ghose , Judge Supreme Court of India * Justice D. Murugesan , Chief Justice of Delhi High Court * Jyotika Kalra Ex - officio members : * Chairperson , National Commission for Scheduled Castes Chairperson , National Commission for Scheduled Tribes * Syed Gayorul Hasan Rizvi , Chairperson , National Commission for Minorities
* Rekha Sharma , Chairperson , National Commission for Women STATE HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION Section::::State Human Rights Commission .
A State Government may constitute a body known as the Human Rights Commission of that State to exercise the powers conferred upon , and to perform the functions assigned to , a State Commission .
In accordance to the amendment brought in TPHRA,1993 point No.10 below is the list of State Human Rights Commissions formed to perform the functions of the commission as stated under chapter V of TPHRA,1993 ( with amendment act 2006 ) .
At present , 25 states have constituted SHRC !
State Commission ! !
City ! !
Date constituted Meghalaya State Human Right Commission
Shillong 2013 Jammu & Kashmir Human Rights Commission Srinagar
January 1997
APPOINTMENT Section::::Appointment .
Section 2 Sections 3 and 4 of TPHRA lay down the rules for appointment to the NHRC .
The Chairperson and members of the NHRC are appointed by the President of India , on the recommendation of a committee consisting of : * The Prime Minister ( Chairperson ) * The Home Minister * The Leader of the Opposition in the Lok Sabha ( Lower House ) * The Leader of the Opposition in the Rajya Sabha ( Upper House )
* The Speaker of the Lok Sabha ( Lower House )
* The Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha ( Upper House )
FORMER CHAIRPERSONS Section::::Former chairpersons . !
SrNo ! !
Name ! !
Tenure ACTING CHAIRPERSONS *
Justice Cyriac Joseph from 11 May 2015 to 28 February 2016 * Dr. Justice Shivaraj Patil , from 1 November 2006 to 1 April 2007
* Justice G.P. Mathur , from 1 June 2009 to 6 June 2010 CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
A report concerning the manner of which the Shivani Bhatnagar murder controversy case was rejected , a case which involved high - ranking officials being implicated in the murder of a journalist , opened the organisation up to questioning over the usefulness of human rights commissions set up by the government at the national and state levels .
In mid-2011 , the chairman of the NHRC , ex - Chief Justice K.G. Balakrishnan came under a cloud for allegedly owning assets disproportionate to his income .
His son - in - law P. V. Srinijan , an Indian National Congress politician , had to resign for suddenly coming into possession of land worth Rs . 25 lakhs .
Many prominent jurists , including former CJ J. S. Verma , SC ex - Judge V. R. Krishna Iyer , noted jurist Fali S. Nariman , former NHRC member Sudarshan Agrawal and prominent activist lawyer Prashant Bhushan , have called on Balakrishnan 's resignation pending from the HRC pending inquiry .
In February 2012 , the Supreme Court inquired of the government regarding the status of the inquiry .
HUMAN RIGHTS
CAMPAIGN 'S RECOMMENDATIONS Section::::Human Rights Campaign 's recommendations .
NHRC held that 16 out of 19 police encounters with suspected maoists in Guntur and Kurnool districts of Andhra Pradesh , prior to 2002 were fake and recommended to Government payment of compensation of Rs 5 lakh each to the kin of the families .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * National Human Rights Commission Official Website