CANADA – UNITED STATES
FREE TRADE AGREEMENT Canada – United States Free Trade Agreement ( CUSFTA ) , official name as the Free Trade Agreement between Canada and the United States of America
( French : Accord de libre - échange
entre le
Canada
et les États - Unis D'Amérique ) , is a trade agreement reached by negotiators for Canada and the United States on October 4 , 1987 , and signed by the leaders of both countries on January 2 , 1988 .
The agreement phased out a wide range of trade restrictions in stages over a ten - year period , and resulted in a substantial increase in cross - border trade .
With the addition of Mexico in 1994 FTA was superseded by the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA )
( French : Accord de libre - échange Nord Américain ( ALENA )
, Spanish : Tratado de Libre Comercio de América del Norte ( TLCAN ) ) .
As stated in the agreement , the main purposes of the Canadian - United States Free Trade Agreement were :
* Eliminate barriers to trade in goods and services between Canada and the United States
* Facilitate conditions of fair competition within the free - trade area established by the Agreement *
Significantly liberalize conditions for investment within that free - trade area
* Establish effective procedures for the joint administration of the Agreement and the resolution of disputes
* Lay the foundation for further bilateral and multilateral cooperation to expand and enhance the benefits of the Agreement HISTORY BACKGROUND Section::::History .
Section::::Background .
Starting in 1855 , while Canada was under British control , free trade was implemented between the colonies of British North America and the United States under the Reciprocity Treaty .
In 1866 , a year before Canadian Confederation , the United States Congress voted to cancel the treaty .
Canada 's first Prime Minister , John A. Macdonald , the protectionist National Policy attempted and failed to reinstate reciprocity , after which the government moved to a more protectionist policy .
Fears grew among many politicians that closer economic ties with the United States would lead to political annexation .
The Liberal Party of Canada had traditionally supported free trade .
Free trade in natural products was a central issue in the 1911 Canadian federal election .
The Conservative Party campaigned using anti - American rhetoric , and the Liberals lost the election .
The issue of free trade did not rise to this level of national prominence in Canada again for many decades .
From 1935–1980 , the two nations entered a number of bilateral trade agreements that greatly reduced tariffs in both nations .
The most significant of these agreements was the 1960s Automotive Products Trade Agreement ( also known as the Auto Pact ) .
After the signing of the Auto Pact , the Canadian Government considered proposing free - trade agreements in other sectors of the economy .
However , the United States government was less receptive to this idea , and in fact , wanted to phase out some guarantees in the Pact .
Canadian attention turned to the question of a broader free - trade agreement between the two countries .
During the next two decades , a number of academic economists studied the effects of a free trade agreement between the two countries .
Several of them — Ronald Wonnacott and Paul Wonnacott , and Richard G. Harris and David Cox — concluded that Canadian real GDP would be significantly increased if both U.S. and Canadian tariffs and other trade barriers were removed and Canadian industry could consequently produce at larger , more efficient scale .
Other economists on the free - trade side included John Whalley of the University of Western Ontario and Richard Lipsey of the C. D. Howe Institute .
Others were concerned that free trade would have negative effects , fearing capital flight and job insecurity because of international outsourcing , and also that closer economic ties with the Giant to the South might risk an erosion of Canadian sovereignty .
Opponents included Mel Watkins of the University of Toronto and David Crane of the Toronto Star , one of Canada 's leading newspapers .
A number of government studies drew increasing attention to the possibility of a bilateral free - trade negotiation : Looking Outward ( 1975 ) , by the Economic Council of Canada ; several reports of the Senate Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs ( 1975 , 1978 , and 1982 ) ; and the 1985 report of the Macdonald Commission ( formally , the Royal Commission on the Economic Union and Development Prospects for Canada ) , chaired by former Liberal politician Donald Stovel Macdonald .
Macdonald declared that " Canadians should be prepared to take a leap of faith " and pursue more open trade with the United States .
Although Macdonald was a former Liberal Minister of Finance , the commission 's findings were embraced by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney 's Progressive Conservative Party , even though they had opposed a free - trade initiative in the 1984 Canadian election campaign .
The stage was set for the beginning of free - trade negotiations .
NEGOTIATIONS
Section::::Negotiations .
US President Ronald Reagan welcomed the Canadian initiative and the United States Congress gave the President the authority to sign a free trade agreement with Canada , subject to it being presented for Congressional review by October 5 , 1987 .
In May 1986 , Canadian and American negotiators began to work out a trade deal .
The Canadian team was led by former deputy Minister of Finance Simon Reisman and the American side by Peter O. Murphy , the former deputy United States trade representative in Geneva .
The agreement between the two countries ultimately created substantially liberalized trade between them , removing most remaining tariffs , although tariffs were only a minor part of the FTA .
Average tariffs on goods crossing the border were well below 1 % by the 1980s .
Instead , Canada desired unhindered access to the American economy .
Americans , in turn , wished to have access to Canada 's energy and cultural industries .
In the negotiations , Canada retained the right to protect its cultural industries and such sectors as education and health care .
As well , some resources such as water were meant to be left out of the agreement .
The Canadians did not succeed in winning free competition for American government procurement contracts .
Canadian negotiators also insisted on the inclusion of a dispute resolution mechanism .
DEBATE AND IMPLEMENTATION Section::::Debate and implementation .
The debate in Canada over whether to implement the negotiated agreement was very contentious .
The opposition Liberal Party of Canada under leader John Turner vociferously opposed the agreement , saying that he would " tear it up " if he became prime minister .
The opposition New Democratic Party under leader Ed Broadbent also strongly opposed the agreement .
Both parties objected that the agreement would erode Canadian sovereignty , arguing that Canada would effectively become the " 51st state " of the US if the agreement was implemented .
They also raised concerns about how Canada 's social programs and other trade agreements such as the Auto Pact would be affected .
The legislation to implement the agreement was delayed in the Senate , which had a Liberal Party majority .
Partly in response to these delays , Mulroney called an election in 1988 .
Trade Agreement was by far the most prominent issue of the campaign , prompting some to call it the " Free Trade Election .
" It was the first Canadian election to feature large third - party campaign advertising , with supporters and opponents using lobbyists to buy television advertisements .
It was also the first Canadian election to use much negative advertising ; one anti - free - trade advertisement showed negotiators " removing a line " from the Free Trade Agreement , which at the end of the advertisement was revealed to be the Canada – US border .
Although some opinion polls showed slightly more Canadians against the Agreement than in favour of it , Mulroney 's Progressive Conservatives benefited from being the only party in favour of the agreement , while the Liberals and NDP split the anti - free trade vote .
In addition , future Quebec Premiers Jacques Parizeau and Bernard Landry backed the agreement which was seen as a factor for the PC party support in Quebec .
Mulroney won a governing majority and the agreement was passed into law even if a majority of the voters had voted for parties opposing free trade .
The Free Trade Agreement faced much less opposition in the US .
Polls showed that up to 40 % of Americans were unaware that the agreement had been signed .
The Agreement implementation act was given to the Congress for " fast - track " approve by President Reagan on July 26,1988 , meaning that it could be accepted or rejected but could not be amended .
the United States - Canada Free - Trade Agreement Implementation Act of 1988 is passed to in House by Yea - Nay Vote : 366 - 40 passed to in the House on August 9 , 1988 and it is passed to in Senate by Yea - Nay Vote .
83 - 9 on September 19 , 1988.The act is signed by President on September 28 , 1988 and became Public Law
No : 100 - 449 .
The Agreement implementation act was given to the Congress for " fast - track " approve by President Reagan on July 26,1988 , meaning that it could be accepted or rejected but could not be amended .
the United States - Canada Free - Trade Agreement Implementation Act of 1988 is passed to in House by Yea - Nay Vote : 366 - 40 passed to in the House on August 9 , 1988 and it is passed to in Senate by Yea - Nay Vote .
83 - 9 on September 19 , 1988.The act is signed by President on September 28 , 1988 and became Public Law
No : 100 - 449 .
EFFECTS Section::::Effects .
The exact ramifications of the agreement are hard to measure .
Trade between Canada and the U.S. , which had already been on the rise , increased at an accelerated rate after the agreement was signed .
While throughout the 20th century , exports fairly consistently made up about 25 % of Canada 's gross domestic product ( GDP ) , since 1990 exports have been about 40 % of GDP .
After 2000 , they reached nearly 50 % .
A 2016 paper estimates " that CUSFTA increased the yearly profits of Canadian manufacturing by 1.2 % " .
Often , analyses of the free trade agreement find that its effects on the two countries depend on the difference in value between the Canadian dollar and the US dollar .
In 1990–1991 , the Canadian dollar rose sharply in value against the US dollar , making Canadian manufactured goods much more expensive for Americans to buy and making American manufactured goods much cheaper for Canadians , who no longer had to pay high duties on them .
The phenomenon of " cross - border shopping " , where Canadians would make shopping daytrips to US border towns to take advantage of tariff - free goods and a high Canadian dollar , provided a mini - boom for these towns .
The loss of many Canadian jobs , particularly in the Ontario manufacturing sector during the recession of the early 1990s , was attributed ( fairly or not ) to the Free Trade Agreement .
In the mid - to - late 1990s , however , the Canadian dollar fell to record lows in value to against the US dollar .
Cheaper Canadian primary products such as lumber and oil could be bought tariff - free by Americans , and Hollywood studios sent their crews to film many movies in Canada due to the cheap Canadian dollar ( see " runaway production " and " Hollywood North " ) .
The removal of protective tariffs meant that market forces , such as currency values , have a greater effect on the economies of both countries than they would have with tariffs .
The agreement has failed to liberalize trade in some areas , most notably the ongoing dispute over softwood lumber .
Issues such as mineral , fresh water , and softwood lumber trade still remain disputed .
While the agreement remains decades later , it is no longer at the forefront of Canadian politics .
It was superseded by the North American Free Trade Agreement ( NAFTA ) in 1994 .
The Liberals under Jean Chrétien were elected to office in the 1993 election , partly on a promise to renegotiate key labor and environmental parts of NAFTA .
An agreement was indeed struck with the Democrats under Bill Clinton that created separate side deals to address both of these concerns .
REFERENCES
* Derek Burney , Getting it Done : A Memoir .
McGill – Queens University Press , 2005 .
Includes details of the final stages of the free - trade negotiations , as told by the Chief of Staff to Prime Minister Mulroney .
* Gordon Ritchie , Wrestling with the Elephant : The Inside Story of the Canadian – U.S. Trade Wars .
Toronto : Macfarlane Walter & Ross , 1997 .
The Canadian Deputy Chief Negotiator 's account of the free - trade negotiations .
* Bruce Wilkinson . " Free Trade .
"
The Canadian Encyclopedia
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* CBC Digital Archives – Canada –
U.S. Free Trade Agreement
* Canada – United States Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act * Canada – United States Free Trade Agreement :
Eliminating Barriers to Trade