DUDLEY ZOO Dudley Zoological Gardens is a zoo located within the grounds of Dudley Castle in the town of Dudley , in the Black Country region of the West Midlands , England .
The Zoo opened to the public on 18 May 1937 .
It contains 12 modernist animal enclosures and other buildings designed by the architect Berthold Lubetkin and the Tecton Group .
The zoo went into receivership in 1977 and was purchased by Dudley Metropolitan Council .
Dudley Zoo is now operated by Dudley and West Midlands Zoological Society , founded in 1978 and a registered charity .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The owner of Dudley Castle , the Third Earl of Dudley , decided to create a zoo in the castle grounds in the 1930s .
The initial Board of the Dudley Zoological Society was made up of the earl , Ernest Marsh ( director of Marsh and Baxter ) and Captain Frank Cooper , owner of Oxford Zoo , who wanted to sell his animals and it was Oxford Zoo , which closed in 1936 , that supplied Dudley with the majority of its initial collection of animals .
The zoo was built between 1935 and 1937 , with Dr Geoffrey Vevers , the Superintendent at London Zoo acting as an advisor .
Thirteen zoo buildings were designed by Berthold Lubetkin and engineering was carried out by Ove Arup .
The steepness of much of the terrain and the presence of caverns produced by limestone mining in previous centuries presented the architects and builders with a number of difficulties .
Further constraints were presented by the castle being a scheduled monument , its structure and immediate surroundings being protected by a government department , the Office of Works .
The architects chose a deliberately modern style for the animal enclosures , entrance and visitor refreshment facilities , making no attempt to match the appearance of the castle ruins .
The main material chosen for the construction was pre - stressed reinforced concrete which gave the possibility of forming curved structures and projecting platforms .
It was decided to avoid cages where possible and to display the animals in a deliberately artificial manner rather than create an imitation of natural surroundings .
The zoo opened on 18 May 1937 .
The opening day was a great success , with over 250,000 people recorded as visiting the zoo on its opening day , 700,000 in its first year .
The opening weeks of the zoo were not always so positive though as on 18 June 1937 , a Malayan Brown Bear escaped from the zoo , bit a Dudley resident , was struck by a policeman 's truncheon and spent a few hours in local gardens before recapture .
Just 3 days later the animal made another escape , this time being shot dead in the castle grounds .
A miniature railway was added in 1938 with two locomotives constructed by G & S Light Engineering , of Stourbridge .
The locomotives ran on a track about 1 mile long , carrying up to 150 passengers .
The zoo was bought by the Scotia leisure group in 1970 .
In 1977 , the zoo went into receivership but was bought by Dudley Metropolitan Council .
Finally , in 1978 , a charity , The Dudley and West Midlands Zoological Society was set up to run the zoo , although the council still owns the grounds .
In 1979 , the Penguin Pool had to be demolished because of damage to the concrete caused by the salty water .
This was the one major original animal enclosure to be lost .
On 23 October 2018 zoo staff shot dead an 8-year - old snow leopard named Margaash , after he had left his enclosure when a keeper failed to secure it .
In a post to its website on 30 November 2018
the zoo confirmed that it was closed with no visitors on site at the time of the incident , and there is no suggestion that Margaash posed any immediate threat to any human .
The zoo described the killing as " euthanasia " but there is no indication that Margaash was in any distress and it is unclear why the word was used .
ANIMALS Section::::Animals .
In 2003 , in common with other urban zoos , Dudley parted with their two female African elephants so that they could benefit from more spacious surroundings .
The remaining large animals include giraffes , tigers , lions , reindeer , wallabies , and three snow leopards , the latest being born in May 2013 .
Primates are well represented , and there are several aviaries and a reptile house .
The zoo has over 1,000 animals from over 200 species ; most of these are endangered and are the product of captive breeding programmes .
There was a time where the Dudley Zoo housed polar bears and Southern elephant seals .
It was once home to Cuddles , a male orca , or killer whale .
He was housed at the zoo from 1971 , until his death in February 1974 .
The dolphin and whale pools were modified seal and sea lions pools with the walls being built up to create more depth .
However , these plans fell foul of the local planning laws and the zoo was ordered to return the pools to the original state .
As the zoo was not prepared to invest in new purpose built pools the whale Cuddles was put up for sale , but died before being moved , from long - term gastro - intestinal problems .
The pools were returned to their original design and now house sea lions .
The zoo is currently expanding its education department with a variety of workshops available for schools .
MODERNIST ARCHITECTURE Section::::Modernist Architecture .
The zoo buildings include twelve listed buildings , seven Grade II and five Grade II * , erected in 1937 by Berthold Lubetkin 's Tecton Group which employed , among others , structural engineer Ove Arup .
Most of the zoo buildings are art deco in style .
In 2011 , the zoo announced refurbishment and renovation plans for the zoo 's listed buildings and parts of the zoo itself ; totalling £ 1.15 million .
Initial funding for the project has been met by the Heritage Lottery Fund .
In January 2013 , newly released construction proposals indicate the entrance to the zoo will connect with the Black Country Museum and the Dudley Canal Trust , creating a single entrance for the three attractions .
The new entrance was completed in September 2015 .
Focus will then shift to the bear pits , which zoo officials say will be renovated to provide " a dramatic backdrop in the landscape " .
This was the subject of an investigation by the Born Free Foundation in 2012 .
LISTED LUBETKIN AND TECTON BUILDINGS
AT
DUDLEY ZOO
*
The Castle Restaurant *
The Elephant House
*
The Entrance Gateway * The Education Centre ( formerly the Moat Café )
* Tropical Bird House * Sea lion pools
* Brown bear ravine
* Kiosk south of the former brown bear pit
* Former Station Café , now the Safari Shop
* Polar Bear Pit and Lion and Tiger Ravines
* Kiosk east of the former brown bear pit
*
The former reptiliary , now the Meerkat Enclosure Section::::Listed Lubetkin and Tecton Buildings at Dudley Zoo .
A further Tectron building , The Penguin Enclosure , was demolished in the 1960 's .
ARTISTIC CONNECTIONS Section::::Artistic connections .
A painting by Percy Shakespeare , Tropical Bird House , Dudley Zoo ( 1939 ) , is in Dudley Museum and Art Gallery .
In 2015 , 89-year - old artist Rama Samaraweera , who was inspired to paint while a keeper at Dudley Zoo , donated three original oil paintings to the zoo to express his gratitude .
His painting Clouded Leopard was a best - selling print in America in the 1970s .
CASTLE Section::::Castle .
Access to Dudley Castle , a Grade I listed building built in the 11th century , is included in the zoo entrance fee .
CHAIRLIFT Section::::Chairlift .
A visitor chairlift was erected between the zoo 's entrance and the castle in 1958 .
It was taken out of use in 2000 due to health and safety concerns .
In August 2012 the chairlift was reopened after a 12-week , £ 117,000 restoration which included returning it to its original light cream colour .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Modernist buildings of Dudley Zoo Film * Dudley Zoo and Berthold Lubetkin Film