GOOD TIMES
Good Times is an American sitcom that aired on CBS from February 8 , 1974 , to August 1 , 1979 .
Created by Eric Monte and Mike Evans , and developed by Norman Lear , the series ' primary executive producer , it was television 's first African American two - parent family sitcom .
Good Times is a spin - off of Maude , which was itself a spin - off of All in the Family .
SYNOPSIS
Section::::Synopsis . Florida and James Evans and their three children live at 921 North Gilbert Avenue , apartment 17C , in a housing project in a poor , black neighborhood in inner - city Chicago .
The project is unnamed on the show , but is implicitly the infamous Cabrini – Green projects , shown in the opening and closing credits .
Florida and James have three children : James Jr. , also known as " J.J. " ; Thelma ; and Michael , called " the militant midget " by his father due to his passionate activism .
When the series begins , J.J. is seventeen years old , Thelma is sixteen , and Michael is eleven .
Their exuberant neighbor , and Florida 's best friend , is Willona Woods , a recent divorcée who works at a boutique .
Their building superintendent is Nathan Bookman ( seasons 2–6 ) , who James , Willona and later J.J. refer to as " Buffalo Butt " , or , even more derisively , " Booger " .
The characters originated on the sitcom Maude as Florida and Henry Evans , with Florida employed as Maude Findlay 's housekeeper in Tuckahoe , New York , and Henry employed as a New York City firefighter .
When producers decided to feature the Florida character in her own show , they changed the characters ' history to fit a new series that was well into development rather than start from scratch to create a consistent starring vehicle .
Henry 's name became James , he worked various odd jobs , there was no mention of Maude , and the couple lived in Chicago .
Episodes of Good Times deal with the characters ' attempts to overcome poverty living in a high rise project building in Chicago .
James Evans often works at least two jobs , mostly manual labor such as dishwasher , construction laborer , etc .
Often he is unemployed , but he is a proud man who will not accept charity .
When he has to , he hustles money playing pool , although Florida disapproves of this .
CAST CONFLICTS Section::::Cast conflicts .
Good Times was intended to be a good show for Esther Rolle and John Amos .
Both expected the show to deal with serious topics in a comedic way while providing positive characters for viewers to identify with .
However , Jimmie Walker 's character of J.J. was an immediate hit with audiences and became the breakout character of the series .
J.J. 's frequent use of the expression " Dy - no - mite ! "
( often in the phrase " Kid Dy - no - mite ! " ) , credited to director John Rich , became a popular catchphrase ( later included in TV Land 's The 100 Greatest TV Quotes and Catch Phrases special ) .
Rich insisted Walker say it in every episode .
Walker and executive producer Norman Lear were skeptical of the idea , but the phrase and the J.J. Evans character caught on with the audience .
As a result of the character 's popularity , the writers focused more on J.J. 's comedic antics instead of serious issues .
Through seasons two and three , Rolle and Amos grew increasingly disillusioned with the direction of the show and especially with J.J. 's antics and stereotypically buffoonish behavior .
Rolle was vocal about her hate of his character .
In a 1975 interview with Ebony magazine she stated : Although doing so less publicly , Amos also was outspoken about his dissatisfaction with the J.J. character .
Amos stated : While Amos was less public with his dissatisfaction , he was ultimately fired after season three due to disagreements with Norman Lear .
Amos ' departure was initially attributed to his desire to focus on a film career , but he admitted in a 1976 interview that Lear called him and told him that his contract option with the show was not being renewed .
Amos stated , " That 's the same thing as being fired . "
The producers decided not to recast the character of James Evans , instead opting to kill off the character in the two - part season four episode , " The Big Move " .
FINAL SEASONS
Section::::Final seasons .
By the end of season four , Esther Rolle had also become dissatisfied with the show 's direction and decided to leave the series .
In the final two episodes of the season , " Love Has a Spot On His Lung " , Rolle 's character gets engaged to Carl Dixon ( Moses Gunn ) , a man she began dating toward the end of season four .
In the season five premiere episode , it is revealed that Florida and Carl married off screen and moved to Arizona for the sake of Carl 's health .
With Amos and Rolle gone , Ja'net Dubois took over as the lead character , as Willona checked in on the Evans children since they were now living alone .
In season five Janet Jackson joined the cast , playing Penny Gordon Woods , an abused girl who is abandoned by her mother and eventually adopted by Willona .
Before taping of season six began , CBS and the show 's producers decided that they had to do " something drastic " to increase viewership .
According to then - vice president of CBS programming Steve Mills , " We had lost the essence of the show .
Without parental guidance the show slipped .
Everything told us that : our mail , our phone calls , our research .
We felt we had to go back to basics . "
Producers approached Esther Rolle with an offer to appear in a guest role on the series .
Rolle was initially hesitant but when producers agreed to a number of her demands ( including an increased salary and higher quality scripts ) , she agreed to return to the series on a full - time basis .
Rolle also wanted producers to make the character of J.J. more responsible , as she felt the character was a poor role model for black American youths .
She also requested that producers write out the character of Carl Dixon ; Rolle reportedly disliked the storyline surrounding the Carl Dixon character , as she believed Florida would not have moved on so quickly after James ' death or leave her children .
Rolle also thought the writers had disregarded Florida 's devout Christian beliefs by having her fall for and marry Carl , who was an atheist .
In the season six premiere episode " Florida 's Homecoming : Part 1 " , Florida returns from Arizona without Carl to attend Thelma 's upcoming wedding to professional football player Keith Anderson ( Ben Powers , who joined the cast for the final season ) .
In a rare uncut version of " Florida 's Homecoming : Part 2 " , after Florida arrives home from Arizona , Willona briefly pulls her aside and mentions Carl , to which Florida sadly smiles and shakes her head implying that Carl had died from cancer .
Florida later mentions Carl one last time when she tells Michael about a book they 'd both bought him .
Despite changes in the series at Esther Rolle 's request and her return , ratings did not improve and CBS canceled the series during the 1978–79 season .
In the series finale , " The End of the Rainbow " , each character finally gets a " happy ending . "
J.J. gets his big break as an artist for a comic book company with his newly created character , DynoWoman , which is based on Thelma ( much to her surprise and delight ) , and is moving into an apartment with some lady friends .
Michael attends college and moves into an on - campus dorm .
Keith 's bad knee heals due to his exercise and own physical therapy , leading to the Chicago Bears offering him a contract to play football .
Keith announces that he and Thelma are moving into a luxury apartment in the city 's upscale Gold Coast district .
Thelma also announces that she is pregnant with the couple 's first child .
Keith offers Florida the chance to move in with them
so she can help Thelma with the new baby .
Willona becomes the head buyer of the boutique she works in and announces that she and Penny are also moving out of the projects .
Willona then reveals that her new apartment is in the same apartment building that Keith , Thelma and Florida are moving to ; once again , she and Penny become the Evans ' downstairs neighbors .
CAST AND CHARACTERS MAIN Section::::Cast and characters . Section::::Main . !
rowspan="2"Actor !
rowspan="2"Character !
colspan="6"Seasons !
width="10 % " 1 ! !
width="10 % " 2 ! !
width="10 % " 3 ! !
width="10 % " 4 ! !
width="10 % " 5 ! !
width="10 % " 6 MINOR CHARACTERS
* Ned the Wino ( Raymond Allen ) is the local drunk who frequents the neighborhood and the apartment building where the Evans family reside .
In the season one episode " Black Jesus " , J.J. uses Ned the Wino as the model for a portrait of Jesus .
Another episode is centered on Michael 's plan to " clean up " Ned and get him off the booze by letting him stay at the Evans ' house .
* Carl Dixon ( Moses Gunn ) is an atheist shop owner who Michael briefly works for .
Despite their religious differences , Carl and Florida begin dating and become engaged in the final episode of season four .
Carl breaks off the engagement after he is diagnosed with lung cancer .
After a talk from Bookman , Carl again asks Florida for her hand in marriage .
The two marry off - screen and move to Arizona .
Florida returns at the beginning of season six , without Carl , for Thelma 's wedding .
Carl is referenced briefly in episode two of season six , but he is never mentioned again ( Florida continues to use the surname Evans instead of Dixon ) .
( Esther Rolle decided to come back to the show if the character was written out . )
Florida then revealed he died from his battle of lung cancer .
* Marion " Sweet Daddy " Williams ( Theodore Wilson ) is a menacing neighborhood numbers runner and pimp , who has a reputation for wearing flashy clothing and jewelry .
He is usually accompanied by bodyguards ( one portrayed by Bubba Smith , the other by series painter Ernie Barnes ) and comes across as cool and threatening , but has shown a soft heart on occasion , particularly when he decided not to take an antique locket ( to settle a debt ) that Florida had given to Thelma because it had reminded him of his late mother .
( Wilson also plays a club owner named Stanley in the season four episode , " The Comedian and the Loan Sharks " ) .
* Alderman Fred C. Davis ( Albert Reed , Jr. ) is a local politician with a slightly shady disposition whom the Evans generally despise .
Spoofing President Richard M. Nixon , he would state in a speech " I am not a crook . "
He frequently relies on the support of the Evans family ( his " favorite project family " ) for reelection or support and resorts to threats of eviction to secure their support .
In a running joke , Alderman Davis frequently forgets Willona 's name and calls her another similar - sounding name that began with a " W " ( such as Wilhemina , Winnifrieda , Winsomnium , Wyomia and even Waldorf - Astoria ) , thus earning him her everlasting ire as well as the nickname " Baldy " .
*
Lenny ( Dap ' Sugar ' Willie ) is a neighborhood hustler and peddler who tries to sell presumably stolen items that are usually attached to the lining of his fur coat .
He usually approaches people with a laid - back rap and a rhyme ( " my name is Len - nay , if I ai n't got it , there ai n't an - nay " ) .
He is typically rebuffed by the people he approaches and responds by saying " that 's cold " or uses a small brush to " brush off " the negativity .
* " Grandpa " Henry Evans ( Richard Ward ) is James ' long lost father .
He abandoned the family years before because he was ashamed that he could not do more to provide for them .
This hurt James deeply , who disregarded his father 's existence , telling everyone he was dead .
Thelma learns about her grandfather while doing some family research .
She meets him and invites him to the Evans ' home to surprise James for his birthday , not knowing that James was well aware of his whereabouts but chose to stay out of his life .
After Henry arrives at the Evans home and meets the rest of the family , he realizes that James would not welcome him in the home and decides to leave .
Florida convinces him to stay and talk to James and explains that there may never be another chance to do so .
Henry and James have a heart - to - heart talk , with Henry being remorseful and apologetic .
James ultimately forgives his father .
After James ' death , the Evans family embraces Henry into the family , alongside his common law ( and eventually legal ) wife Lena in later episodes .
* Wanda ( Helen Martin ) is another resident in the apartment building where the Evans reside .
Earlier episodes show her at a women 's support group , and the tenants rallying around her by giving her a rent party .
Later episodes show her appearing and crying at several funerals , whether she knew the person or not , thus earning her the nickname " Weeping Wanda " from J.J. and Willona .
* Lynnetta Gordon ( Chip Fields ) is Penny 's abusive biological mother .
Her first appearance is in the four part Fifth season opening episode , " The Evans Get Involved " .
Lynnetta 's father abandoned her when she became pregnant at 16 .
As a result , she takes her anger and frustrations out on Penny , including burning her with a hot iron .
After the abuse is finally brought to light , she tells the Evans family that she , herself , was abused as a child .
She gets into a fighting match with Willona and Thelma , and they plead for her to seek therapy .
Just before she disappears , she expresses regret for hurting her child , telling Willona that Penny deserves better than her .
This clears the way for Willona to adopt Penny .
She reappears more than a year later , in the sixth - season episode , " A Matter of Mothers " , having gotten married , and reveals that her new husband is from a very wealthy family .
She uses her husband 's wealth to send Penny anonymous gifts , and in an effort to regain custody of Penny , she also attempts to frame Willona as an unfit adoptive mother who throws wild parties with less than wholesome attendees .
However , her scheme is exposed by being recorded on tape admitting that the scheme was a set up to get Penny back .
After trying to get the tape from Penny and threatening to hurt her again , which is stopped by Willona , Penny tells her birth mother that no matter what anyone says , she will always consider Willona her mother .
Devastated , she agrees to drop the charges against Willona and leaves Penny with her , never to be seen again .
* Cleatus ( Jack Baker ) is a cousin of J.J. Evans , Thelma Evans Anderson , and Michael Evans and nephew of Florida Evans and James Evans .
He made one appearance in the episode " Cousin Cleatus " .
* Violet Bookman ( Marilyn Coleman ) is the wife of Bookman ( episodes : " Bye , Bye Bookman " and " Willona , the Other Woman " in season 5 ) .
NOTABLE GUEST STARS
* Debbie Allen as J.J. 's heroin - addicted fiancée , Diana in " J.J. 's Fiancee ( Parts 1 & 2 )
" ( season 3 )
* Matthew " Stymie " Beard ( former Our Gang child actor ) in five episodes , including four appearances as James ' friend
Monty
*
Sorrell Booke as Mr. Galbraith , J.J. 's boss at the ad agency ( season 5 , episode 17 )
* Albert Reed , Jr. as Alderman Fred C. Davis also played cousin Oscar in Season 2 episode
Sometimes There 's No Bottom in the Bottle * Roscoe Lee Browne as a shady televangelist Reverend Sam " the Happiness Man " , who befriended James in the military ( season 1 , episode 4 )
* T. K. Carter as J.J. 's friend " Head " ( part of the " Awesome Foursome " , later the " Gleesome Threesome " , the " Gruesome Twosome " and the " Lonesome Onesome " , as stated in the episode " The New Car " * Rosalind Cash as Thelma 's teacher , Jessica Bishop , who becomes romantically involved with a much younger J.J. ( season 4 , episode 3 )
* Judith Cohen as herself in the episode " The Judy Cohen Story " ( season 4 , episode 12 )
* Gary Coleman as Gary , a sharp - tongued classmate of Penny 's in two season five episodes * Conchata Ferrell as Miss Johnson , Willona 's supervisor at her short - lived second job as security in a department store ( season 5 , episode 6 )
* Kim Fields ( real - life daughter of Chip Fields ) as Penny 's friend , Kim , who has a tendency to add the suffix " -ness " to emphasize her anxiety such as " hopelessnessness " ( 2 season 6 episodes ) * Carl Franklin as Larry , Thelma 's fiancé ' , ultimately breaking up when Larry is offered a job on the West Coast and Thelma is not ready to accompany him ( 2 episodes )
* Alice Ghostley as Ms Dobbs , a social worker who is working on Penny being adopted by Willona ( 3 episodes ) * Ron Glass as Michael 's elementary school principal ( 2.4 ) ; also made an appearance as a blind encyclopedia salesman who tries to swindle the Evans family ( 2.8 ) * Louis Gossett , Jr. , in season two as Thelma 's older boyfriend ( Florida and James object to their relationship because of the age difference ) ( 2.6 ) ; also appears as Uncle Wilbert ( Florida 's brother ) , who comes from Detroit to look in on the family while James is away ( 3.8 ) * Robert Guillaume as Fishbone the wino in the episode " Requiem for a Wino " ( season 5 , episode 11 )
* Phillip Baker Hall as Motel Owner in the episode " J.J. 's Fiancee ( Part 2 )
" ( season 3 , episode 18 )
* Shirley Hemphill as " Roz " , the dimwitted sister of Edna , who was being tutored by Thelma ( season 4 , episode 10 )
* Gordon Jump as Mr. Rogers , the head of security at Willona 's short - lived second job as security in a department store ( season 5 , episode 6 ) * Paula Kelly as Dr. Kelly in the episode " Where Have All The Doctors Gone " ( season 6 , episode 17 )
* Jay Leno as " Young Man " in the season three 's " J.J. in Trouble " , which was one of the first times that the subject of " VD " ( STD ) was addressed on a primetime series * Calvin Lockhart as Florida 's cousin Raymond , who earned his riches by betting on horses ( season 6 , episode 23 )
* Don Marshall as FBI Agent Lloyd in the episode
" The Investigation " ( season 3 , episode 20 ) .
* Paul Mooney as " The Second Guy " in the episode " J.J. and
T.C. " ( season 6 )
* Debbi Morgan as Samantha , a date of J.J. 's ( 3.23 ) ; and as Ellen ( 4.18 ) * J. A. Preston as Walter Ingles in the episode
" Wilona 's Dilemma " ( season 3 , episode 10 )
* Charlotte Rae as a hiring manager for a sales job that Florida stole from James ( season 2 , episode 14 ) * Sheryl Lee Ralph as Vanessa in the episode " J.J. and The Plumber 's Helper " ( season 6 , episode 9 )
* Bubba Smith as Claude , a bodyguard / thug working for Marion " Sweet Daddy " Williams ( 4 season 6 episodes ) * Thalmus Rasulala as Ernie Harris , a childhood friend of James with a gambling problem ( season 3 , episode 20 )
* Philip Michael Thomas as Eddie , Thelma 's college - age boyfriend ( season 1 , episode 6 )
* Adam Wade as successful businessman Frank Mason ,
Willona 's boyfriend ( 2 season 5 episodes )
* Vernee Watson - Johnson as Thelma 's friend and college mate Valerie , in the episode " Thelma 's African Romance ( Part 1 ) " ( season 4 ) * Carl Weathers as Calvin Brooks , husband of the ' nude ' model for J.J. 's painting ( season 2 , episode 16 )
* Hal Williams as one of the movers in a season one episode ; James ' friend , Willie Washington ( season 2 ) ; and Mr. Mitchell , the father of Earl Mitchell , who is an art student of J.J. 's ( season 6 )
* John Witherspoon as Officer Lawson in the episode " A Matter of Mothers " ( season 6 , episode 20 )
PRODUCTION NOTES Section::::Production notes .
Good Times was created by Eric Monte and actor Mike Evans .
The series also features a character named " Michael Evans " , after co - creator Mike Evans who portrayed Lionel Jefferson on the Norman Lear - produced series All in the Family and The Jeffersons .
THEME SONG AND OPENING
SEQUENCE Section::::Theme song and opening sequence .
The gospel - styled theme song was composed by Dave Grusin with lyrics written by Alan and Marilyn Bergman .
It was sung by Jim Gilstrap and Motown singer Blinky Williams with a gospel choir providing background vocals .
The lyrics to the theme song are notorious for being hard to discern , notably the line " Hangin ' in a chow line"/"Hangin ' in and jivin ' " ( depending on the source used ) .
Dave Chappelle used this part of the lyrics as a quiz in his " I Know Black People " skit on Chappelle 's Show in which the former was claimed as the answer .
The insert for the Season One DVD box set has the lyric as " Hangin ' in a chow line " .
However , the Bergmans confirmed that the lyric is actually " Hangin ' in and jivin ' .
" Slightly different lyrics were used for the closing credits , with the song beginning on a verse instead of the chorus .
EPISODES RECEPTION RATINGS
Section::::Reception .
Section::::Ratings .
The program premiered in February 1974 ; high ratings led CBS to renew the program for the 1974–75 season , as it was the seventeenth - highest - rated program that year .
During its first full season on the air , 1974–75 , the show was the seventh - highest - rated program in the Nielsen ratings , with more than 25 % of all American households tuning into an episode each week .
Three of the top ten highest - rated programs on American TV that season centered on the lives of African - Americans : Sanford and Son , The Jeffersons , and Good Times .
The Nielsen ratings for the series declined over time , partly because of its many time slot changes and the departure of John Amos .
The ratings went down considerably when the show entered its final two seasons : !
rowspan="2"Season !
rowspan="2"TV Season !
rowspan="2"No .
of Episodes !
rowspan="2"Time slot ( ET ) !
colspan="2"Nielsen ratings !
Rank !
Rating AWARDS AND NOMINATIONS
SYNDICATION Section::::Syndication .
Cable network TV One aired reruns of the show since its launch on January 19 , 2004 , with the exception of a period from 2002 until June 2013 .
Good Times had also aired at various times on TV Land and on the Canadian specialty cable channel DejaView .
Minisodes of the show are available for free on Crackle .
Additionally , digital multicast network Antenna TV also aired episodes of the show until January 1 , 2018 , when GetTV , operated by Sony ( which distributes the show ) began airing the program .
Good Times airs on GetTV with a TV - PG rating .
Also , most episodes run on TV One with a TV - G rating , with the exception being the Season 3 episode " J.J. in Trouble " , in which J.J. fears he may have contracted an STD ; this episode airs on TV One with a TV-14 rating , as well as the " parental guidance is suggested " slide that preceded the episode when it was originally broadcast on CBS .
In the past , it aired on TV Land with a TV - PG rating .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Sony Pictures Home Entertainment released the entire series on DVD in Region 1 between February 2003 and August 2006 , with a complete box set following the separate seasons on October 28 , 2008 .
Season 1 was released on DVD in Region 4 on December 27 , 2006 .
On August 27 , 2013 , it was announced that Mill Creek Entertainment REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Good Times at TVLand.com