PERFUME ( NOVEL )
Perfume :
The Story of a Murderer is a 1985 literary historical fantasy novel ( published originally in German as Das Parfum , ) by German writer Patrick Süskind .
The novel explores the sense of smell and its relationship with the emotional meaning that scents may have .
The story mainly concerns Jean - Baptiste Grenouille , an unloved 18th - century French orphan who is born with an exceptional sense of smell , being able to distinguish a vast range of scents in the world around him .
Grenouille becomes a perfumer but later becomes involved in murder when he encounters a young girl with an unsurpassed wondrous scent .
With translations into 49 languages and more than 20 million copies sold to date worldwide , Perfume is one of the largest book sales among 20th Century German novels .
The title remained in bestseller lists for about 9 years , and received almost unanimously positive national and international critical acclaim .
The novel was translated into English by John E. Woods and won the PEN Translation Prize during 1987 .
Some editions of Perfume , including the first , have as their cover image
Antoine Watteau 's painting Jupiter and Antiope , which depicts a sleeping woman .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Grenouille ( French for " frog " ) was born in Paris , France during 1738 ; his mother is tried almost immediately for previous infanticide and subsequently executed , leaving him an orphan .
He is fostered but is a difficult solitary child and eventually apprenticed to a tanner .
Unknown to other people , he has a remarkable sense of smell , and an extraordinary ability to discern odors ; as a result he can perform apparently magical feats such as identifying bad vegetables by the worms they contain , or visitors as they approach the house , and can navigate in total darkness by the smell of objects around him .
On a day when he had memorized nearly all the smells of the city , he is surprised by a unique smell .
He then traces it with his nose , and finds that the source of this scent is a young virgin girl just passing puberty .
She is not much younger than Grenouille .
Entranced by her scent and believing that he alone must possess it , he kills her and stays with her body until the scent has left it .
In his quest to learn more about the art of perfume - making , he becomes apprenticed to a once great perfumer , Baldini , and proves himself a wonder although this is not revealed to anyone except Baldini .
Baldini eventually reveals to him that there are techniques other than distillation that can be used to preserve a wider range of odours , which can be found in the heartland of the perfumer 's craft , in the region of Grasse , in the French Riviera .
On his way to Grasse , Grenouille travels the countryside and discovers that he is disgusted with the scent of humanity .
Avoiding habitations , he comes instead to live in a mountain cave for many years .
However his peace is ended when he realizes after some years that he himself does not have any scent .
Travelling to Montpellier with a fabricated story about being kidnapped and kept in a cave to account for his appearance , he creates a body odour for himself from everyday materials , and finds that his new " disguise " tricks people into thinking that it is the scent of a human ; he is now accepted by society instead of shunned .
Humanity being fooled by a simple scent , his hatred becomes contempt .
He realizes that it is within his ability to develop scents described as " superhuman " and " angelic " , that will affect in an unprecedented way how other people perceive him .
Reaching Grasse , he trains in the arts of scent extraction and preservation and one day encounters a second scent that is even more inspiring to him than his original victim .
It is the scent of a young girl named Laure Richis .
He decides this time that he will seek to preserve the scent physically and not just in his memory , and begins a campaign of serial killing of teenage girls to practice keeping and preserving their scent – the victims are not otherwise molested beyond the removal of their hair for scent preservation .
Laure 's father realizes his daughter must be the goal of the murderer 's campaign and , not telling anybody , takes her to a place of safety , but Grenouille follows them by following her scent , and when they stop for the night , he finally kills her and successfully preserves her scent .
He is caught soon afterwards and sentenced to death .
However , on the way to his execution he wears a new scent he has created , that causes awe and adoration in others , and although the evidence of his guilt is absolute , the crowd becomes so fond of him , and so convinced of the innocence he now exudes , that he is freed ; even Laure 's father asks if he would consider being adopted as his son .
Because of this scent , the entire town participates in a mass orgy of which no one speaks afterwards .
Grenouille however now realizes how much he hates people , and that even this degree of control does not make him happy .
Returning to Paris , he approaches a crowd and pours the entire bottle of perfume on himself .
The people are so drawn to him due to his scent that they became compelled to obtain and consume pieces of him , tearing him to pieces .
It is notable that this is a suicide .
The story ends with the crowd , who are left embarrassed by their own action , but are also left " uncommonly proud .
For the first time they had done something out of Love . "
CHARACTERS ( IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE )
Section::::Characters ( in order of appearance ) .
In France , before meeting Baldini : Paris perfumers :
In Pierrefort , after emerging from his isolation in the mountains : In Grasse , France : POSSIBLE INSPIRATION Section::::Possible inspiration .
The real story of the serial killer Manuel Blanco Romasanta ( 1809 - 1863 ) , also known as the wolfman , who killed several women and children and extracted their body fat to make soap and sold their clothes , resembles this character .
The name of Jean - Baptiste Grenouille might be inspired by the French perfumer Paul Grenouille , who changed his name into ' Grenoville ' when he opened his luxury perfume house in 1879 .
ADAPTATIONS
* A movie adaptation , , co - written and directed by Tom Tykwer ( who also composed the movie score ) , premiered in Germany on 14 September 2006 .
* A Russian musical adaptation of the novel , Perfumer , premiered on 5 December 2010 in Moscow .
Composer and singer Igor Demarin received Süskind 's approval after communicating with a representative of his for two years .
*
The song " Scentless Apprentice " , by the American grunge band Nirvana , was inspired by Perfume .
It is part of their 1993 album In Utero .
The band 's singer and guitarist Kurt Cobain described the novel as one of his favourite books that he re - read ten times and kept near him , in an interview on August 10 , 1993 in Seattle , Washington .
*
The song " Herr Spiegelmann " from the Portuguese gothic - doom metal band Moonspell contains an excerpt from the book .
*
The song " Red Head Girl " by French downtempo duo Air is inspired by Perfume .
*
The song " Du riechst so gut " ( German for " You smell so good " ) by Rammstein was inspired by the book , which is one of lead singer Till Lindemann 's favourite books .
* Marilyn Manson credits the novel as one of the inspirations behind the title of his second album , Smells Like Children .
*
The episode " Sense Memory " of the television show Criminal Minds bears many similarities to the novel .
*
The song " Nearly Witches ( Ever Since We Met ) " by Panic !
at the Disco is inspired by Perfume .
* A song by the YouTube user Steampianist , created using the voice synthesizer Vocaloid , called " The Perfumer 's Perfect Fumes " is based on the novel .
*
The song " 향 ( Scentist ) " by K - pop boy group VIXX and its music video are based on the novel .
REFERENCES
* Süskind , Patrick .
Perfume .
Trans .
John E. Woods .
New York :
Vintage International , 1986 .