CONDENSED MILK Condensed milk is cow 's milk from which water has been removed .
It is most often found in the form of " sweetened condensed milk " ( " SCM " ) , with sugar added , and the terms " condensed milk " and " sweetened condensed milk " are often used interchangeably today .
Sweetened condensed milk is a very thick , sweet product , which when canned can last for years without refrigeration if not opened .
Condensed milk is used in numerous dessert dishes in many countries .
A related product is evaporated milk , which has undergone a more complex process and which is not sweetened .
Evaporated milk is known in some countries as unsweetened condensed milk .
HISTORY Section::::History .
According to the writings of Marco Polo , in the 13th century the Tatars were able to condense milk .
Marco Polo reported that ten pounds ( 4.5 kg ) of milk paste was carried by each man , who would subsequently mix the product with water .
However , this probably refers to the soft Tatar curd ( katyk ) , which can be made into a drink ( ayran ) by diluting it , and therefore refers to fermented , not fresh , milk concentrate .
Nicolas Appert condensed milk in France in 1820 , and Gail Borden , Jr. , in the United States in 1853 , in reaction to difficulties in storing milk for more than a few hours .
Before this development , milk could be kept fresh for only a short while and was available only in the immediate vicinity of a lactating cow .
While returning from a trip to England in 1851 , Borden was devastated by the deaths of several children , apparently from poor milk obtained from shipboard cows .
With less than a year of schooling and following a series of failures , both of his own and of others , Borden was inspired by the vacuum pan he had seen being used by Shakers to condense fruit juice and managed to reduce milk without scorching or curdling it .
Even then his first two factories failed and only the third , built with new partner Jeremiah Milbank in Wassaic , New York , produced a usable milk derivative that was long - lasting and needed no refrigeration .
Probably of equal importance for the future of milk production were Borden 's requirements ( the " Dairyman 's Ten Commandments " ) for farmers who wanted to sell him raw milk : they were required to wash the cows ' udders before milking , keep barns swept clean , and scald and dry their strainers morning and night .
By 1858 , Borden 's milk , sold as Eagle Brand , had gained a reputation for purity , durability and economy .
In 1864 , Gail Borden 's New York Condensed Milk Company constructed the New York Milk Condensery in Brewster , New York .
This was the largest and most advanced milk factory of its day and was Borden 's first commercially successful plant .
Over 200 dairy farmers supplied 20,000 gallons ( 76,000 litres ) of milk daily to the Brewster plant as demand increased driven by the American Civil War .
The U.S. government ordered huge amounts of condensed milk as a field ration for Union soldiers during the war .
This was an extraordinary field ration for the 19th century : a typical 10-oz ( 300-ml ) can contained 1,300 calories ( 5440 kJ ) , 1 oz ( 28 g ) each of protein and fat , and more than 7 oz ( 200 g ) of carbohydrate .
Soldiers returning home from the war soon spread the word , and by the late 1860s condensed milk was a major product .
The first Canadian condensery was built at Truro , Nova Scotia , in 1871 .
In 1899 , E. B. Stuart opened the first Pacific Coast Condensed Milk Company ( later known as the Carnation Milk Products Company ) plant in Kent , Washington .
The condensed milk market developed into a bubble , with too many manufacturers chasing too little demand .
In 1911 , Nestlé constructed the world 's largest condensed milk plant in Dennington , Victoria , Australia .
By 1912 , high stocks of condensed milk led to a drop in price and many condenseries went out of business .
In 1914 , Otto F. Hunziker , head of Purdue University 's dairy department , self - published Condensed Milk and Milk Powder : Prepared for the Use of Milk Condenseries , Dairy Students and Pure Food Departments .
This text , along with the additional work of Hunziker and others involved with the American Dairy Science Association , standardized and improved condensery operations in the United States and internationally .
Hunziker 's book was republished in a seventh edition in October 2007 by Cartwright Press .
The First World War regenerated interest in , and the market for , condensed milk , primarily due to its storage and transportation benefits .
In the US the higher price for raw milk paid by condenseries created significant problems for the cheese industry .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Raw milk is clarified and standardised to a desired fat to solid - not - fat ( SNF ) ratio , and is then heated to for several seconds .
This heating process destroys some microorganisms , decreases fat separation and inhibits oxidation .
Some water is evaporated from the milk and sugar is added until a 9:11 ( nearly half ) ratio of sugar to ( evaporated ) milk is reached .
The sugar extends the shelf life of sweetened condensed milk .
Sucrose increases the liquid 's osmotic pressure , which prevents microorganism growth .
The sweetened evaporated milk is cooled and lactose crystallization is induced .
CURRENT USE Section::::Current use .
Condensed milk is used in recipes for the Brazilian candy brigadeiro ( where condensed milk is the main ingredient ) , key lime pie , caramel candies , and other desserts .
Condensed milk and sweetened condensed milk is also sometimes used in combination with clotted cream to make fudge in certain countries such as the United Kingdom .
In parts of Asia and Europe , sweetened condensed milk is the preferred milk to be added to coffee or tea .
Many countries in Southeast Asia , such as Vietnam and Cambodia , use condensed milk to flavor their hot or iced coffee .
In Malaysia , teh tarik is made from tea mixed with condensed milk , and condensed milk is an integral element in Hong Kong tea culture .
In the Canary Islands , it is served as the bottom stripe in a glass of the local café cortado and , in Valencia , it is served as a café bombón .
In New Orleans , sweetened condensed milk is commonly used as a topping on chocolate or similarly cream - flavored snowballs .
In Scotland , it is mixed with sugar and butter then boiled to form a popular sweet candy called tablet or Swiss milk tablet , this recipe being very similar to another version of the Brazilian candy brigadeiro called branquinho .
In some parts of the Southern United States , condensed milk is a key ingredient in lemon ice box pie , a sort of cream pie .
In the Philippines , condensed milk is mixed with some evaporated milk and eggs , spooned into shallow metal containers over liquid caramelized sugar , and then steamed to make a stiffer and more filling version of crème caramel known as leche flan , also common in Brazil under the name pudim de leite .
In Mexico , sweetened condensed milk is one of the main ingredients of the cold cake dessert ( the leading brand is " La Lechera " , the local version of Swiss Milchmädchen by Nestlé ) , combined with evaporated milk , Marie biscuits , lemon juice , and tropical fruit .
In Brazil , this recipe is also done exchanging fruit for puddings , most commonly vanilla and chocolate , known as pavê or torta de bolacha .
It is also used to make homemade dulce de leche by baking it in an oven .
In Brazil , this is done by baking the unopened can in a bain - marie , the result being doce de leite .
In Britain and Ireland , the contents of a boiled can is used as the layer between biscuit base and the banana and cream level in banoffee .
In Latin American and Central American countries , condensed milk ( along with evaporated milk and whole milk or canned cream ) is used as a key ingredient in the tres leches cake dessert .
In Poland , it was once common to boil a can of condensed milk in water for about three hours .
The resulting product – a sweet semi - liquid substance which can be used as a cake icing or put between dry wafers – essentially the same as dulce de leche , is called kajmak ( although the original kaymak is a product similar to clotted cream ) .
Some manufacturers of condensed milk introduced canned , ready - made kajmak which now is widely commercially produced , and is a national favourite for the sweets fillings .
In Russia , the same product is called varionaya sguschyonka ( translates as " boiled condensed milk " ) .
SUBSTITUTIONS
Section::::Substitutions .
Condensed milk can be made from evaporated milk by mixing one measure of evaporated milk with one and a quarter measures of sugar in a saucepan , then heating and stirring the mixture until the sugar is completely dissolved , then cooling .
It can also be made by simmering regular milk and sugar , until it is reduced by 60 % .
SEE ALSO
* Baked milk
* Powdered milk * Scalded milk REFERENCES