CHICKEN
TIKKA
MASALA
Chicken tikka masala is a dish of chunks of roasted marinated chicken ( chicken tikka ) in a spiced curry sauce .
The sauce is usually creamy and orange - coloured .
There are multiple claims to its place of origin , including the Punjab region of the Indian subcontinent or Glasgow in Scotland .
It is among the United Kingdom 's most popular dishes , leading a government minister , Robin Cook , to claim in 2001 that it was " a true British national dish " .
COMPOSITION Section::::Composition .
Chicken tikka masala is chicken tikka , chunks of chicken marinated in spices and yogurt , that is then baked in a tandoor oven , and served in a masala ( spice mixture ) sauce .
A tomato and coriander sauce is common , but no recipe for chicken tikka masala is standard ; a survey found that of 48 different recipes , the only common ingredient was chicken .
The sauce usually includes tomatoes ( frequently as purée ) , cream , coconut cream and spices .
The sauce and chicken pieces may be coloured orange using foodstuffs such as turmeric , paprika , tomato purée or with food dye .
The dish shares some similarity with butter chicken , both in the method of creation and appearance .
VARIANTS Section::::Variants .
Other tikka masala dishes replace chicken with lamb , fish , or paneer .
ORIGINS Section::::Origins .
The origin of the dish is not certain .
Some trace the origins of the dish to the South Asian community in Britain .
The Multicultural Handbook of Food , Nutrition and Dietetics credits its creation to Bangladeshi migrant chefs in the 1960s , after migrating from what was then East Pakistan ( now Bangladesh ) .
At the time , most of Britain 's Indian restaurants were owned and run by Bangladeshi chefs , who developed and served a number of new inauthentic " Indian " dishes , including chicken tikka masala .
Historians of ethnic food Peter and Colleen Grove discuss various origin - claims of chicken tikka masala , concluding that the dish " was most certainly invented in Britain , probably by a Bangladeshi chef " .
They suggest that " the shape of things to come may have been a recipe for Shahi Chicken Masala in Mrs Balbir Singh 's Indian Cookery published in 1961 " .
Another explanation is that it originated in an Indian restaurant in Glasgow , Scotland .
This version recounts how a Pakistani chef , Ali Ahmed Aslam , proprietor of the Shish Mahal restaurant in the west end of Glasgow , invented chicken tikka masala by improvising a sauce made from yogurt , cream , and spices .
In 2013 , his son Asif Ali told the story of its invention in 1971 to the BBC 's Hairy Bikers TV cookery programme :
In July 2009 , then British Member of Parliament Mohammad Sarwar tabled an Early Day Motion in the House of Commons asking that Parliament support a campaign for Glasgow to be given European Union protected geographical status for chicken tikka masala .
The motion was not chosen for debate , nor did Sarwar speak on this subject in Parliament .
Rahul Verma , a food critic who writes for The Hindu , said he first tasted the dish in 1971 and that its origins were in Punjab , India .
He said " It 's basically a Punjabi dish not more than 40–50 years old and must be an accidental discovery which has had periodical improvisations " .
POPULARITY Section::::Popularity .
In 2001 , British Foreign Secretary Robin Cook mentioned the dish in a speech acclaiming the benefits of Britain 's multiculturalism , declaring : Chicken tikka masala is served in restaurants around the world , including Indian restaurants in Britain and North America .
According to a 2012 survey of 2,000 people in Britain , it is the country 's second - most popular foreign dish to cook , after Chinese stir fry .
It was previously Britain 's most popular foreign dish to cook , up until it was overtaken by stir - fry in 2012 .
SEE ALSO
* Balti , a South Asian dish
*
Chicken curry , a spiced chicken dish * Butter chicken , a mild curry dish of Indian origin * List of chicken dishes * Mughlai cuisine REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Curry Club Tandoori and Tikka Dishes , Piatkus , London — ( 1993 )
* Curry Club 100 Favourite Tandoori Recipes , Piatkus , London — ( 1995 )
* India : Food & Cooking , New Holland , London — ( 2007 ) EXTERNAL LINKS
* BBC Good Food 's version