THE NINTH GATE
The Ninth Gate is a 1999 mystery thriller film directed , produced , and co - written by Roman Polanski .
An international co - production between the United States , Portugal , France , and Spain , the film is loosely based upon Arturo Pérez - Reverte 's 1993 novel The Club Dumas .
The plot involves the search for a rare and ancient book that purportedly contains a magical secret for summoning the Devil .
The premiere showing was at San Sebastián , Spain , on 25 August 1999 , a month before the 47th San Sebastian International Film Festival .
Though critically and commercially unsuccessful in North America , where reviewers compared it unfavorably with Polanski 's supernatural film Rosemary 's Baby ( 1968 ) , The Ninth Gate earned a worldwide gross of $ 58.4 million against a $ 38 million budget .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Dean Corso ( Johnny Depp ) , a New York City rare book dealer , makes his living conning people into selling him valuable antique books for a low price , and then re - selling them to private collectors .
Corso meets with wealthy book collector Boris Balkan ( Frank Langella ) , who has recently acquired a copy of The Nine Gates of the Kingdom of Shadows by 17th - century author Aristide Torchia , one of only three extant copies .
The author adapted the book from one written by the Devil himself , and was burned for heresy . "
The Nine Gates " purportedly contains the means to summon the Devil and acquire invincibility and immortality .
Balkan believes two of the three copies are forgeries .
He hires Corso to check all three and acquire the legitimate one by any means necessary .
Balkan 's copy was acquired from Andrew Telfer ( Willy Holt ) , who killed himself soon after .
Telfer 's widow Liana ( Lena Olin ) seduces Corso , in a failed attempt to get the book back .
Meanwhile , Corso leaves the book for safekeeping with bookseller Bernie Rothstein ( James Russo ) , who is then murdered ; his corpse is found posed like an engraving in The Nine Gates .
Corso travels to Toledo , Spain .
The Ceniza brothers , book restorers who sold Balkan 's copy to Telfer originally , show him that three of the nine engravings are signed " LCF " , rather than " AT " , which aligns with the rumors that Lucifer himself was Aristide Torchia 's co - author , and implies Satan designed the three images personally .
Corso travels to Sintra , Portugal , to compare Victor Fargas ' ( Jack Taylor ) copy of the book to Balkan 's .
To Corso 's surprise , he discovers that the signature " LCF " is found in three different engravings , which vary in small but significant details from the " AT " images in the Balkan copy .
The next morning , a mysterious young woman ( identified only as " the Girl " ) ( Emmanuelle Seigner ) who appears to have been shadowing Corso since Balkan hired him , awakens Corso and leads him to Fargas ' house .
He finds the old man murdered and the " LCF"-signed engravings ripped out of that copy .
In Paris , Corso visits the Baroness Kessler ( Barbara Jefford ) , who owns the third copy .
At first , the Baroness refuses to cooperate , but Corso intrigues her with evidence that the engravings differ among the three copies .
He explains his idea : each copy contains a different set of three " LCF"-signed engravings , therefore all three copies are required to acquire the complete set of 9 images for the ritual .
Corso finds " LCF " on three different engravings in the Baroness 's book , confirming his theory .
Kessler is killed , and the Girl rescues Corso from Liana 's bodyguard .
When Liana steals Balkan 's copy from Corso 's hotel room , he follows her , and witnesses her using the book in a Satanic ceremony .
Balkan suddenly interrupts the ceremony , kills Liana , and leaves with the engraved pages and his own intact copy .
Corso pursues Balkan to a remote castle , depicted in one of the engravings , and finds Balkan preparing the final ritual .
After a struggle , Balkan traps Corso in a hole in the floor .
Balkan performs his summoning ritual : he arranges the engravings on a makeshift altar , and recites a series of phrases related to each of the nine engravings .
Balkan then douses the floor and himself with gasoline and sets it alight , believing himself to be immune to suffering .
Balkan 's invocation fails , and he screams in pain as the flames engulf him .
Corso frees himself , shoots Balkan , takes the engravings , and escapes .
Outside , the Girl appears and has sex with him by the light of the burning castle , her eyes and face seeming to change as she writhes on top of Corso .
She tells him that Balkan failed because the ninth engraving he had used was a forgery .
On her suggestion before she disappears , Corso returns to the Ceniza brothers ' now vacant shop .
By chance , he finds there the authentic ninth engraving .
On it , there is a likeness of the Girl riding a multiple headed beast , reminiscent of the Whore of Babylon .
With the last engraving in hand , Corso returns to the castle .
He completes the ritual and crosses through the Ninth Gate into the light .
CAST * Johnny Depp as Dean Corso * Lena Olin as Liana Telfer * Frank Langella as Boris Balkan
* Emmanuelle Seigner as The Girl
* James Russo as Bernie Rothstein * Jack Taylor as Victor Fargas * Allen Garfield as Witkin
* Barbara Jefford as Baroness Frida Kessler *
Willy Holt as Andrew Telfer * Catherine Benguigui as The concierge PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Roman Polanski read the screenplay by Enrique Urbizu , an adaptation of the Spanish novel El Club Dumas ( The Club Dumas , 1993 ) , by Arturo Pérez - Reverte .
Impressed with the script , Polanski read the novel , liking it because he " saw so many elements that seemed good for a movie .
It was suspenseful , funny , and there were a great number of secondary characters that are tremendously cinematic " .
Pérez - Reverte 's novel , El Club Dumas features intertwined plots , so Polanski wrote his own adaptation with his usual partner , John Brownjohn ( Tess , Pirates and Bitter Moon ) .
They deleted the novel 's literary references and a sub - plot about Corso 's investigation of an original manuscript of a chapter of The Three Musketeers and concentrated upon Dean Corso 's pursuing the authentic copy of The Nine Gates .
Polanski approached the subject skeptically , saying , " I do n't believe in the occult .
I do n't believe .
Period . "
Yet he enjoyed the genre .
" There [ are ] a great number of clichés of this type in The Ninth Gate , which I tried to turn around a bit .
You can make them appear serious on the surface , but you can not help but laugh at them . "
The appeal of the film was that it featured " a mystery in which a book is the leading character " and its engravings " are also essential clues " .
In reading El Club Dumas , Polanski pictured Johnny Depp as " Dean Corso " , who joined the production as early as 1997 , when he met Polanski at the Cannes Film Festival , while promoting The Brave .
Initially , he did not think Depp right as " Corso " , because the character was forty years old ( Depp at the time was only 34 ) .
He considered an older actor , but Depp persisted ; he wanted to work with Roman Polanski .
The film press reported , around the time of the North American release of The Ninth Gate , creative friction between Depp and Polanski .
Depp said , " It 's the director 's job to push , to provoke things out of an actor " .
Polanski said of Depp , " He decided to play it rather flat , which was n't how I envisioned it ; and I did n't tell him it was n't how I saw it " .
Visually , in the neo - noir genre style , rare - book dealer Dean Corso 's disheveled grooming derives from Philip Marlowe , Raymond Chandler 's quintessential literary private investigator .
Polanski cast Frank Langella as Boris Balkan based upon his performance as Clare Quilty in Lolita ( 1997 ) .
Barbara Jefford was a last - minute replacement for the German actress originally cast as the Baroness Frida Kessler , who fell sick with pneumonia , and after a second actress proved unable to learn the character 's dialogue ; with only days ' notice , Barbara Jefford learned her part , spoken with a German accent .
Depp met his long - time partner Vanessa Paradis during the shooting .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The Ninth Gate was filmed in France , Portugal , and Spain in the summer of 1998 .
Selected prominent buildings in the film are : * Chalet Biester , Sintra , Portugal ( as mansion of book collector Victor Fargas ) * Château de Ferrières , Seine - et - Marne , France ( as mansion owned by Liana Telfer ) * Château de Puivert , Aude , France ( castle seen in the closing scenes of the film ) * Château des Cathares , Ariège , France * Calle Buzones in Toledo , Spain
( street with Ceniza Brothers ' bookshop )
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The musical score for The Ninth Gate was composed by Wojciech Kilar , who previously collaborated with Polanski on Death and the Maiden ( 1994 ) .
The film 's main theme is loosely based upon Havanaise , for violin and orchestra , by Camille Saint - Saëns ; some of the score has a vocalization ( specifically , a melodic aria ) by Korean soprano Sumi Jo .
A soundtrack album was released on 16 November 1999 via Silva Screen label .
RELEASE
BOX OFFICE
Section::::Release .
Section::::Box office .
The premiere screening of The Ninth Gate was in San Sebastián , Spain , on 25 August 1999 ; in North America , it appeared in 1,586 cinemas during the 10 March 2000 weekend , earning a gross income of $ 6.6 million , and $ 18.6 million in total .
Worldwide , it earned $ 58.4 million against a $ 38 million production budget .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The Ninth Gate holds a 42 % rating at Rotten Tomatoes and a score of 44/100 on Metacritic .
Roger Ebert said the ending was lackluster , " while at the end , I did n't yearn for spectacular special effects , I did wish for spectacular information — something awesome , not just a fade - to - white " .
In his review for The New York Times , Elvis Mitchell said the movie was " about as scary as a sock - puppet re - enactment of The Blair Witch Project , and not nearly as funny " .
Entertainment Weekly rated the film " D+ " , and Lisa Schwarzbaum said it had an " aroma of middle - brow , art - house Euro - rot , a whiff of decay and hauteur in a film not even a star as foxed , and foxy , as Johnny Depp , himself , could save " .
In the Los Angeles Times , Kenneth Turan said the film was " too laid - back , and unconcerned about the pacing of its story to be satisfying " , because " a thriller that 's not high - powered , is an intriguing concept , in reality it can hold our attention for only so long " .
In the Village Voice , J. Hoberman said the film was " barely releasable hokum , stuffed with cheesy blah - blah " .
European reviews were generally more attentive and praised the film 's pace and irony .
In Sight and Sound magazine , Phillip Strick said it was " not particularly liked at first outing — partly because Johnny Depp , in fake grey temples , personifies the odious Corso of the book a little too accurately — the film is intricately well - made , deserves a second chance , despite its disintegrations , and , in time , will undoubtedly acquire its own coven of heretical fans " .
In Time magazine , Richard Corliss said that The Ninth Gate was Polanski 's most accessible effort " since fleeing the U.S. soon after Chinatown " .
In the San Francisco Chronicle , Bob Graham said that " Depp is the best reason to see Polanski 's satanic thriller " and " Polanski 's sly sense of film - noir conventions pokes fun at the genre , while , at the same time , honoring it " .
On his website Groucho Reviews , web critic Peter Canavese called the film " an insinuating trip into devilish darkness " and a " sorely underrated occult mystery " .
After the release of The Ninth Gate , Artisan sued Polanski for taking more than $ 1 million from the budget , refunds of France 's value - added tax that he did not give to the completion bond company guaranteeing Artisan Entertainment a completed film .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Texts , engravings and formatting of the book - Original * " Satanic Verses " article from American Cinematographer magazine