INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE Involuntary servitude or involuntary slavery is a United States legal and constitutional term for a person laboring against that person 's will to benefit another , under some form of coercion other than the worker 's financial needs .
While laboring to benefit another occurs also in the condition of slavery , involuntary servitude does not necessarily connote the complete lack of freedom experienced in chattel slavery ; involuntary servitude may also refer to other forms of unfree labor .
Involuntary servitude is not dependent upon compensation or its amount .
The Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution makes involuntary servitude illegal under any U.S. jurisdiction whether at the hands of the U.S. government or in the private sphere , except as punishment for a crime : Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude , except as a punishment for crime whereof the party shall have been duly convicted , shall exist within the United States , or any place subject to their jurisdiction .
The Supreme Court has held , in Butler v. Perry , that the Thirteenth Amendment does not prohibit " enforcement of those duties which individuals owe to the state , such as services in the army , militia , on the jury , etc .
"
Onerous long term alimony and spousal support orders , premised on a proprietary interest retained by former marital partners in one another 's persons , have also been allowed in many states , though they may in practice embody features of involuntary servitude .
OTHER INTERPRETATIONS OF INVOLUNTARY SERVITUDE Section::::Other interpretations of involuntary servitude .
The Libertarian Party of the United States and other libertarians consider military conscription to be involuntary servitude in the sense of the Thirteenth Amendment .
The U.S. Supreme Court disagreed with that interpretation in Arver v. United States , relying on text of Article I and the prerequisites of sovereignty .
Some libertarians consider compulsory schooling involuntary servitude .
John Taylor Gatto , a retired schoolteacher and libertarian activist critical of compulsory schooling writes of what he terms " The Cult Of Forced Schooling " .
Many libertarians consider income taxation a form of involuntary servitude .
Republican Congressman Ron Paul has described income tax as " a form of involuntary servitude , and has written , " ...
things like Selective Service and the income tax make me wonder how serious we really are in defending just basic freedoms .
Some have also argued that , should Roe v. Wade , 410 U.S. 113 ( 1973 ) , be overturned by the United States Supreme Court , a constitutional right to abortion could still be sustained on the basis that denying it would subject women to involuntary servitude contrary to the Thirteenth Amendment .
However , no U.S. court has yet accepted such an argument .
Differing views have been expressed as to whether the argument is so unpersuasive as to be " frivolous " .
One major difficulty with the argument relates to the claim that pregnancy and child - bearing are within the scope of the term " servitude " .
SEE ALSO
* Cruel and unusual punishment * Debt bondage
* Peonage * Person * Slavery * Thirteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Slave
Next Door :
Human Trafficking and Slavery in America Today – video report by Democracy Now !