ISOTHERMAL PROCESS
An isothermal process is a change of a system , in which the temperature remains constant : ΔT = 0 .
This typically occurs when a system is in contact with an outside thermal reservoir ( heat bath ) , and the change in the system will occur slowly enough to allow the system to continue to adjust to the temperature of the reservoir through heat exchange .
In contrast , an adiabatic process is where a system exchanges no heat with its surroundings ( Q = 0 ) .
In other words , in an isothermal process , the value ΔT = 0 and therefore the change in internal energy ΔU = 0 ( only for an ideal gas ) but Q ≠ 0 , while in an adiabatic process , ΔT ≠ 0 but Q = 0 . EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Isothermal processes can occur in any kind of system that has some means of regulating the temperature , including highly structured machines , and even living cells .
Some parts of the cycles of some heat engines are carried out isothermally ( for example , in the Carnot cycle ) .
In the thermodynamic analysis of chemical reactions , it is usual to first analyze what happens under isothermal conditions and then consider the effect of temperature .
Phase changes , such as melting or evaporation , are also isothermal processes when , as is usually the case , they occur at constant pressure .
Isothermal processes are often used and a starting point in analyzing more complex , non - isothermal processes .
Isothermal processes are of special interest for ideal gases .
This is a consequence of Joule 's second law which states that the internal energy of a fixed amount of an ideal gas depends only on its temperature .
Thus , in an isothermal process the internal energy of an ideal gas is constant .
This is a result of the fact that in an ideal gas there are no intermolecular forces .
Note that this is true only for ideal gases ; the internal energy depends on pressure as well as on temperature for liquids , solids , and real gases .
In the isothermal compression of a gas there is work done on the system to decrease the volume and increase the pressure .
Doing work on the gas increases the internal energy and will tend to increase the temperature .
To maintain the constant temperature energy must leave the system as heat and enter the environment .
If the gas is ideal , the amount of energy entering the environment is equal to the work done on the gas , because internal energy does not change .
For details of the calculations , see calculation of work .
For an adiabatic process , in which no heat flows into or out of the gas because its container is well insulated , Q = 0 .
If there is also no work done , i.e. a free expansion , there is no change in internal energy .
For an ideal gas , this means that the process is also isothermal .
Thus , specifying that a process is isothermal is not sufficient to specify a unique process .
DETAILS FOR AN IDEAL GAS Section::::Details for an ideal gas .
For the special case of a gas to which Boyle 's law applies , the product pV is a constant if the gas is kept at isothermal conditions .
The value of the constant is nRT , where n is the number of moles of gas present and R is the ideal gas constant .
In other words , the ideal gas law pV
= nRT applies .
This means that holds .
The family of curves generated by this equation is shown in the graph in Figure 1 .
Each curve is called an isotherm .
Such graphs are termed indicator diagrams and were first used by James Watt and others to monitor the efficiency of engines .
The temperature corresponding to each curve in the figure increases from the lower left to the upper right .
Log(p¹v1 )
CALCULATION OF WORK Section::::Calculation of work .
In thermodynamics , the reversible work involved when a gas changes from state A to state B is For an isothermal , reversible process , this integral equals the area under the relevant pressure - volume isotherm , and is indicated in purple in Figure 2 for an ideal gas .
Again , p = applies and with T being constant ( as this is an isothermal process ) , the expression for work becomes : By convention , work is defined as the work on the system by its surroundings .
If , for example , the system is compressed , then the work is positive and the internal energy of the system increases .
Conversely , if the system expands , it does work on the surroundings and the internal energy of the system decreases .
It is also worth noting that for ideal gases , if the temperature is held constant , the internal energy of the system also is constant , and so ΔU = 0 .
Since the First Law of Thermodynamics states that ΔU =
Q + W ( IUPAC convention ) , it follows that Q = −W for the isothermal compression or expansion of ideal gases .
ENTROPY CHANGES
Section::::Entropy changes .
Isothermal processes are especially convenient for calculating changes in entropy since , in this case , the formula for the entropy change , ΔS , is simply where Q is the heat transferred reversibly to the system and T is absolute temperature .
This formula is valid only for a hypothetical reversible process ; that is , a process in which equilibrium is maintained at all times .
A simple example is an equilibrium phase transition ( such as melting or evaporation ) taking place at constant temperature and pressure .
For a phase transition at constant pressure , the heat transferred to the system is equal to the enthalpy of transformation , ΔH , thus Q = ΔH .
At any given pressure , there will be a transition temperature , T , for which the two phases are in equilibrium ( for example , the normal boiling point for vaporization of a liquid at one atmosphere pressure ) .
If the transition takes place under such equilibrium conditions , the formula above may be used to directly calculate the entropy change
Another example is the reversible isothermal expansion ( or compression ) of an ideal gas from an initial volume V and pressure P to a final volume V and pressure P.
As shown in Calculation of work , the heat transferred to the gas
is
This result is for a reversible process , so it may be substituted in the formula for the entropy change to obtain Since an ideal gas obey 's Boyle 's Law , this can be rewritten , if desired , as Once obtained , these formulas can be applied to an irreversible process , such as the free expansion of an ideal gas .
Such an expansion is also isothermal and may have the same initial and final states as in the reversible expansion .
Since entropy is a state function , the change in entropy of the system is the same as in the reversible process and is given by the formulas above .
Note that the result
Q = 0 for the free expansion can not be used in the formula for the entropy change since the process is not reversible .
The difference between the reversible and free expansions is found in the entropy of the surroundings .
In both cases , the surroundings are at a constant temperature , T , so that ΔS = − ; the minus sign is used since the heat transferred to the surroundings is equal in magnitude and opposite in sign to the heat , Q , transferred to the system .
In the reversible case , the change in entropy of the surroundings is equal and opposite to the change in the system , so the change in entropy of the universe is zero .
In the free expansion , Q = 0 , so the entropy of the surroundings does not change and the change in entropy of the universe is equal to ΔS for the system .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The adjective " isothermal " is derived from the Greek words ἴσος ( isos ) meaning " equal " , and θέρμη ( therme " ) meaning " heat . "
SEE ALSO
* Joule –
Thomson effect
* Joule expansion ( also called free expansion ) * Adiabatic process * Cyclic process
* Isobaric process
* Isochoric process
* Polytropic process REFERENCES