SALSA ( SAUCE )
Salsa is any one of several sauces typical of Mexican cuisine , also known as salsa fresca , hot salsa or salsa picante , particularly those used as dips .
Salsa is often tomato - based , and includes ingredients such as onions , chilies , an acid and herbs .
It is typically piquant , ranging from mild to extremely hot .
Though many different sauce preparations are called salsa in Spanish , in English , it generally refers to raw or near - raw sauces used as dips .
PRONUNCIATION AND ETYMOLOGY Section::::Pronunciation and etymology .
The word salsa entered the English language from the Spanish salsa ( " sauce " ) , which itself derives from the Latin salsus ( salted ) .
The native Spanish pronunciation is .
In American English it is pronounced , while in British English it is pronounced as .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Mexican salsas were traditionally produced using the mortar and pestle - like molcajete , although blenders are now more commonly used .
The Maya made salsa also , using a mortar and pestle .
Well - known salsas include : *
Salsa roja , " red sauce " , is used as a condiment in Mexican and Southwestern ( U.S. ) cuisines ; usually includes cooked tomatoes , chili peppers , onion , garlic , and fresh cilantro ( coriander ) .
* Pico de gallo ( " rooster 's beak " ) , also known as salsa fresca ( " fresh sauce " ) , salsa picada ( " chopped sauce " ) , or salsa mexicana ( " Mexican sauce " ) , is made with raw tomatoes , lime juice , chilies , onions , cilantro leaves , and other coarsely chopped raw ingredients .
* Salsa cruda , " raw sauce " , is an uncooked mixture of chopped tomatoes , onions , jalapeño chilies , and cilantro , or coriander leaf .
* Salsa verde , " green sauce " , in Mexican versions , is made with tomatillos , usually cooked .
* Salsa negra , " black sauce " is a Mexican sauce made from dried chilies , oil , and garlic .
* Salsa taquera , " taco sauce " : Made with tomatillos and morita chili .
In the U.S. , the most common version contains tomato puree , vinegar , and chili pepper .
* Salsa criolla is a South American salsa with a sliced - onion base .
* Salsa ranchera , " ranch - style sauce " : Made with roasted tomatoes , various chilies , and spices , it typically is served warm , and possesses a thick , soupy quality .
Though it contains none , it imparts a characteristic flavor reminiscent of black pepper .
* Creamy avocado salsa is a sauce made from avocado , lime , cilantro , jalapeño or serrano peppers , garlic , olive oil , cumin , and salt .
* Mango salsa is a spicy - sweet sauce made from mangoes , used as a topping for nachos .
It is often also used as a garnish on grilled chicken or grilled fish due to the sauce 's gamut of complementary flavors .
* Pineapple salsa is a spicy and sweet sauce made from pineapples , used as an alternative to the mango salsa .
*
Chipotle salsa is a smoky , spicy sauce made from smoked jalapeño chilies , tomatoes , garlic and spices .
* Habanero salsa is an extremely spicy salsa , where the piquancy comes from habanero chilies .
* Corn salsa is a chunky salsa made with sweetcorn and other ingredients , such as onions , and chiles ( either poblano , bell chilies , and/or jalapeños ) , made popular by the burrito chains for burritos , tacos , and quesadillas .
*
Carrot salsa is made with carrots as the base .
There are many other salsas , both traditional and nouveau , some are made with mint , pineapple , or mango .
Outside Mexico and Central America , the following salsas are common to each of the following regions ; in Argentina and the Southern Cone , chimichurri sauce is common .
Chimichurri is " a spicy vinegar - parsley sauce that is the salsa ( and leading condiment ) in Argentina and Uruguay , served with grilled meat .
It is made of chopped fresh parsley and onion , seasoned with garlic , oregano , salt , cayenne chilies and black pepper and bound with oil and vinegar . "
In Costa Rica , dishes are prepared with salsa Lizano , a thin , smooth , light brown sauce .
In Cuba and the Caribbean , a typical salsa is mojo .
Unlike the tomato - based salsas , mojo typically consists of olive oil , garlic , and citrus juice , and is used both to marinate meats and as a dipping sauce .
In Peru , a traditional salsa is peri peri or piri piri sauce : " The national condiment of Peru , peri - peri sauce is made in medium to hot levels of spiciness — the more chili , or the hotter variety of chile used , the hotter the sauce .
Original peri - peri uses the African bird 's eye chili
( the Swahili word for the chili is peri - peri ) .
Milder sauces may use only cayenne and serrano chilies .
To a base of vinegar and oil , garlic and lemon juice are added , plus other seasonings , which often include paprika or tomato paste for flavor and color , onions and herb — each company has its own recipe .
It is also used as a cooking sauce . "
PREPARED SALSA Section::::Prepared salsa .
Most jarred , canned , and bottled salsa and picante sauces sold in the United States in grocery stores are forms of salsa cruda or pico de gallo , and typically have a semi - liquid texture .
To increase their shelf lives , these salsas have been cooked to a temperature of , and are thus not truly cruda ( raw ) .
Some have added vinegar , and some use pickled peppers instead of fresh ones .
Tomatoes are strongly acidic by nature , which , along with the heat processing , is enough to stabilize the product for grocery distribution .
Picante sauce of the American type is often thinner in consistency than what is labelled as " salsa " .
Picante is a Spanish adjective meaning " piquant " , which derives from picar ( " to sting " ) , referring to the feeling caused by salsas on one 's tongue .
Many grocery stores in the United States and Canada also sell fresh refrigerated salsa , usually in plastic containers .
Fresh salsa is usually more expensive and has a shorter shelf life than canned or jarred salsa .
It may or may not contain vinegar .
Taco sauce is a condiment sold in American grocery stores and fast food Tex - Mex outlets .
Taco sauce is similar to its Mexican counterpart in that it is smoothly blended , having the consistency of thin ketchup .
It is made from tomato paste instead of whole tomatoes and lacks the seeds and chunks of vegetables found in picante sauce .
While some salsa fans do not consider jarred products to be real salsa cruda , their widespread availability and long shelf life have been credited with much of salsa 's enormous popularity in states outside the southwest , especially in areas where salsa is not a traditional part of the cuisine .
In 1992 , the dollar value of salsa sales in the United States exceeded those of tomato ketchup .
IMPORTANCE OF PROPER STORAGE Section::::Importance of proper storage .
The World Health Organization says care should be taken in the preparation and storage of salsas and any other types of sauces , since many raw - served varieties can act as growth media for potentially dangerous bacteria , especially when unrefrigerated .
In 2002 a study by the University of Texas – Houston , found sauces contaminated with E. coli in : * 66 % of the sauces from restaurants tested in Guadalajara , Jalisco , Mexico * 40 % of those from restaurants tested in Houston , Texas
In 2010 the CDC reported that 1 in 25 foodborne illnesses between 1998 and 2008 was traced back to restaurant sauces ( carelessly prepared or stored ) .
A 2010 paper on salsa food hygiene described refrigeration as " the key to safe " sauces .
This study also found that fresh lime juice and fresh garlic ( but not powdered garlic ) would prevent the growth of bacteria .
SEE ALSO
* List of condiments * List of dips * List of Mexican dishes
* Hot sauce *
Mole sauce
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * U.S. National Center for Home Food Preservation – Salsas
* Salsa Recipes