ALL ALONG THE WATCHTOWER
" All Along the Watchtower " is a song written and recorded by American singer - songwriter Bob Dylan .
The song initially appeared on his 1967 album John Wesley Harding , and it has been included on most of Dylan 's subsequent greatest hits compilations .
Since the late 1970s , he has performed it in concert more than any of his other songs .
Different versions appear on four of Dylan 's live albums .
Covered by numerous artists in various genres , " All Along the Watchtower " is strongly identified with the interpretation Jimi Hendrix recorded for Electric Ladyland with the Jimi Hendrix Experience .
The Hendrix version , released six months after Dylan 's original recording , became a Top 20 single in 1968 and was ranked 47th in Rolling Stone magazine 's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time .
BOB DYLAN 'S ORIGINAL BACKGROUND Section::::Bob Dylan 's original . Section::::Background .
Following a motorcycle accident in July 1966 , Dylan spent the next 18 months recuperating at his home in Woodstock and writing songs .
According to Clinton Heylin , all the songs for John Wesley Harding were written and recorded during a six - week period at the end of 1967 .
With one child born in early 1966 and another in mid-1967 , Dylan had settled into family life .
RECORDING
Section::::Recording .
Dylan recorded " All Along the Watchtower " on November 6 , 1967 , at Columbia Studio A in Nashville , Tennessee , the same studio where he had completed Blonde on Blonde in the spring of the previous year .
Accompanying Dylan , who played acoustic guitar and harmonica , were two Nashville veterans from the Blonde on Blonde sessions , Charlie McCoy on bass guitar and Kenneth Buttrey on drums .
The producer was Bob Johnston , who produced Dylan 's two previous albums , Highway 61 Revisited in 1965 and Blonde on Blonde in 1966 .
The final version of " All Along the Watchtower " resulted from two different takes during the second of three John Wesley Harding sessions .
The session opened with five takes of the song , the third and fifth of which were spliced to create the album track .
As with most of the album 's selections , the song is a dark , sparse work that stands in stark contrast with Dylan 's previous recordings of the mid-1960s .
ANALYSIS Section::::Analysis .
Several reviewers have pointed out that the lyrics in " All Along the Watchtower " echo lines in the Book of Isaiah , Chapter 21 , verses 5 - 9 : Commenting on the songs on his album John Wesley Harding , in an interview published in the folk music magazine Sing Out !
in October 1968 , Dylan told John Cohen and Happy Traum :
The unusual structure of the narrative was remarked on by English Literature professor Christopher Ricks , who commented that " All Along the Watchtower " is an example of Dylan 's audacity at manipulating chronological time :
" at the conclusion of the last verse , it is as if the song bizarrely begins at last , and as if the myth began again . "
Heylin described Dylan 's narrative technique in " Watchtower " as setting the listener up for an epic ballad with the first two verses , but then , after a brief instrumental passage , the singer cuts " to the end of the song , leaving the listener to fill in his or her own ( doom - laden ) blanks . "
Critics have described Dylan 's version as a masterpiece of understatement .
Andy Gill said " In Dylan 's version of the song , it 's the barrenness of the scenario which grips , the high haunting harmonica and simple forward motion of the riff carrying understated implications of cataclysm ; as subsequently recorded by Jimi Hendrix , ... that cataclysm is rendered scarily palpable through the dervish whirls of guitar . "
Dave Van Ronk , an early supporter and mentor of Dylan , disagreed with the majority view when he made the following criticism : PERFORMANCES AND SUBSEQUENT RELEASES Section::::Performances and subsequent releases .
John Wesley Harding was released at the end of 1967 , on December 27 , less than two months after the recording sessions .
The song was the second single from the album , released on November 22 , 1968 , but did not chart .
A live recording of " All Along the Watchtower " from the album Before the Flood appeared as the B side of " Most Likely You Go Your Way
( And I 'll Go Mine ) " in 1974 .
The recordings came from separate concerts earlier that year at the Forum outside Los Angeles , both with Dylan backed by The Band .
Dylan first performed the song live on January 3 , 1974 , in Chicago on the opening night of his ' comeback tour ' .
From this first live performance , Dylan has consistently performed the song closer to Hendrix 's version than to his own original recording .
In The Bob Dylan Encyclopedia , critic Michael Gray wrote that this is the most often performed of all of Dylan 's songs .
By Gray 's count , Dylan had performed the song in concert 1,393 times by the end of 2003 .
According to Dylan 's own website , through 2015 he had performed the song 2,257 times .
In recent years , Dylan in live performances has taken to singing the first verse again at the end of the song .
As Gray notes in his Bob Dylan Encyclopedia : Dylan possibly was following the lead of the Grateful Dead in concluding the song by repeating the first verse ; the Dead covered the song in this fashion , both with and without Dylan .
The original recording of " All Along the Watchtower " appears on most of Dylan 's " greatest hits " albums , as well as his two box set compilations , Biograph , released in 1985 , and Dylan , released in 2007 .
In addition , Dylan has released live recordings of the song on the following albums : Before the Flood ( recorded February 1974 ) ; Bob Dylan at Budokan ( recorded March 1978 ) ; Dylan & The Dead ( recorded July 1987 ) ; and MTV Unplugged ( recorded November 1994 ) .
PERSONNEL
* Bob Dylan – vocals , acoustic guitar , harmonica * Kenneth A. Buttrey – drums * Charlie McCoy – bass guitar
THE JIMI HENDRIX EXPERIENCE Section::::The Jimi Hendrix Experience .
The Jimi Hendrix Experience began to record their version of Dylan 's " All Along the Watchtower " on January 21 , 1968 , at Olympic Studios in London .
According to engineer Andy Johns , Jimi Hendrix had been given a tape of Dylan 's recording by publicist Michael Goldstein , who worked for Dylan 's manager Albert Grossman . "
( Hendrix ) came in with these Dylan tapes and we all heard them for the first time in the studio " , recalled Johns .
RECORDING
Section::::Recording .
According to Hendrix 's regular engineer Eddie Kramer , the guitarist cut a large number of takes on the first day , shouting chord changes at Dave Mason who had appeared at the session and played twelve - string guitar .
Halfway through the session , bass player Noel Redding became dissatisfied with the proceedings and left .
Mason then took over on bass .
According to Kramer , the final bass part was played by Hendrix himself .
Hendrix 's friend and Rolling Stones
multi - instrumentalist Brian Jones played the various percussion instruments on the track .
" That 's him playing the thwack you hear at the end of each bar in the intro , on an instrument called a vibraslap . "
Jones originally recorded a piano part that was later mixed out in place of the percussion instruments .
Kramer and Chas Chandler mixed the first version of " All Along the Watchtower " on January 26 , but Hendrix was quickly dissatisfied with the result and went on re - recording and overdubbing guitar parts during June , July , and August at the Record Plant studio in New York .
Engineer Tony Bongiovi has described Hendrix becoming increasingly dissatisfied as the song progressed , overdubbing more and more guitar parts , moving the master tape from a four - track to a twelve - track to a sixteen - track machine .
Bongiovi recalled , " Recording these new ideas meant he would have to erase something .
In the weeks prior to the mixing , we had already recorded a number of overdubs , wiping track after track .
[ Hendrix ] kept saying , ' I think I hear it a little bit differently . ' " RELEASE AND CHARTS Section::::Release and charts .
The completed version was released as a single in the US on September 21 , 1968 , almost a month prior to the album release on Electric Ladyland in October .
The single reached number five in the British charts , becoming the first UK stereo - only single to do so , and number 20 on the Billboard chart , Hendrix 's highest ranking American single . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Dylan has described his reaction to hearing Hendrix 's version : " It overwhelmed me , really .
He had such talent , he could find things inside a song and vigorously develop them .
He found things that other people would n't think of finding in there .
He probably improved upon it by the spaces he was using .
I took license with the song from his version , actually , and continue to do it to this day . "
In the booklet accompanying his Biograph album , Dylan said : " I liked Jimi Hendrix 's record of this and ever since he died I 've been doing it that way ...
Strange how when I sing it , I always feel it 's a tribute to him in some kind of way . "
Hendrix 's recording of the song appears at number 47 on Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Songs of All Time , and in 2000 , British magazine Total Guitar named it top of the list of the greatest cover versions of all time .
Hendrix 's guitar solo is included at number five on Guitar World 's list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Solos .
OTHER RECORDINGS
THE NASHVILLE TEENS
Section::::Other recordings .
Section::::The Nashville Teens .
The earliest recording of the song , other than by Dylan , was by British pop group the Nashville Teens , who had previously had a hit in 1964 with the song " Tobacco Road " .
Their recording of " All Along the Watchtower " , produced by Vic Smith , was released as a single in the UK and Europe on Decca Records in March 1968 , some six months before Hendrix 's version .
The recording was described by the NME as " both effective and commendable " , and by Record Mirror as a " reasonably strong song idea " , but failed to have any commercial success , and the band left the Decca label soon afterwards .
DAVE MATTHEWS BAND Section::::Dave Matthews Band .
Dave Matthews Band has played the song since the band 's inception in the early 1990s .
Their rendition maintains Dylan 's three chord structure and key signature but differs in style .
Dave Matthews typically begins the song slowly with just bass , vocals and acoustic guitar .
The band members come in after the line " the hour is getting late " , picking up the tempo and intensity .
The band 's members then take extended solos , culminating with the line , " No reason to get excited . "
" Watchtower " , as it is referred to by the band 's fans , is a concert staple , often performed as either a closer or as an encore .
In all , they have covered the song live more than 750 times , including solo performances by Matthews , and it has appeared on nine of their officially released live albums , though the band has never released a studio version .
In addition , the band has had numerous musicians guest with them while playing Watchtower including Carlos Santana , Neil Young , Warren Haynes from Gov't Mule and the Allman Brothers Band , Trey Anastasio from Phish , Zac Brown , Bela Fleck , Robert Randolph , Marcus Mumford and Gary Clark Jr.
U2 Section::::U2 .
Irish rock band U2 first played a cover of " All Along the Watchtower " during their Boy Tour in 1981 .
Years later , during the Joshua Tree Tour in 1987 , the cover was played for a second time , in San Francisco , California , with an additional verse added by Bono .
This performance was later included as a scene in U2 's 1988 rockumentary film , Rattle and Hum , and also appeared on the album of the same name .
The performance was impromptu , with the band learning the chords and lyrics within minutes of taking the stage , and as a result , there were problems in editing the soundtrack .
The song made its way into 47 live shows during the band 's 1989 Lovetown Tour .
NEIL YOUNG Section::::Neil Young .
Neil Young has performed numerous covers of the song , including a notable performance at Farm Aid in 1994 , with band Crazy Horse and Willie Nelson .
He also performed the song with Dave Matthews Band and with Booker T. and the M.G. 's at the Dylan 30th Anniversary Celebration at Madison Square Garden , a recording of which was issued in 1993 on The 30th Anniversary Concert Celebration album .
In 2000 , Young performed a live version with Chrissie Hynde of The Pretenders , which appeared on his album Road Rock Vol . 1 : Friends & Relatives .
In 2004 , he performed a version with Bruce Springsteen .
BRYAN
FERRY Section::::Bryan Ferry .
Bryan Ferry recorded this song as a demo with Robin Trower in the mid-1990s .
He completed the track during sessions in August 2006 for his Dylan tribute album Dylanesque released March 2007 .
It featured up - beat versions of Dylan 's greatest hits .
PEARL JAM Section::::Pearl Jam .
After performing the song live four times from 2004 to 2006 with Pearl Jam , lead singer Eddie Vedder was asked to record " All Along the Watchtower " with The Million Dollar Bashers for the soundtrack of the Dylan
biopic
I 'm Not There .
Named for Dylan 's song " Million Dollar Bash " , the group was formed by guitarist Lee Ranaldo of Sonic Youth .
Its other members included Steve Shelley on drums ; Television 's Tom Verlaine , Wilco 's Nels Cline , and Smokey Hormel on guitars ; John Medeski of Medeski Martin & Wood on keyboards ; and Dylan 's bassist Tony Garnier .
In 2008 , the song was played three times during Pearl Jam 's US East Coast Summer Tour , including the Bonnaroo Music Festival .
In 2009 , the band was joined by Ronnie Wood of The Rolling Stones to perform the song at the Shepherds Bush Empire in London , England .
BEAR MCCREARY / BATTLESTAR GALACTICA Section::::Bear McCreary / Battlestar Galactica .
Television composer Bear McCreary arranged a distinctive version with non - Western tonalities of " All Along the Watchtower " for use in the final scene of the Battlestar Galactica season three finale " Crossroads , Part II " .
A version with all the lyrics was included on the season 3 soundtrack .
OTHERS Section::::Others .
The song has been covered by many other artists , including : * Affinity * Brewer and Shipley * Chris de Burgh * Randy California *
Eric Clapton
*
The Dream Syndicate * Richie Havens * Jeff Healey
* Michael Hedges
* Indigo Girls
* Dave Mason * * Van Morrison
* Supertramp
* The Persuasions * June Tabor * T.S.O.L.
* Klopjag * Turtle Island String Quartet * Paul Weller * Bobby Womack * XTC * Envy on the Coast * Francis Cabrel , in a French translation titled " D'en haut de la tour du guet " , on his album " Viser le ciel " , 2012
* Devlin ft Ed Sheeran
*
John Waite * Widespread Panic * Dissipated Eight IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The song as originally recorded by Dylan was used in the 1999 film American Beauty .
Hendrix 's version was featured in the movies Withnail and I , Rush , Land of the Lost ( without Hendrix 's vocals ) , Private Parts , Forrest Gump , Clockers , A Bronx Tale , Blue Chips , Vegas Vacation , , the 2001 remake of Brian 's Song , Watchmen ( among others ) , and also in television shows such as The Simpsons , in episodes " Mother Simpson " and " My Mother the Carjacker " and appears in the announcement trailer and title screen for the video game Mafia III .
The Bob Dylan version appears as playable track in the video game Guitar Hero 5 .
The final verse of the song is referenced in Chapter 10 of the graphic novel Watchmen .
The song is one of seven Dylan songs of which its lyrics were reset for soprano and piano ( or orchestra ) by John Corigliano for his song cycle
Mr. Tambourine Man : Seven Poems of Bob Dylan .
The song is featured prominently in the re - imagined Battlestar Galactica , serving as a critical plot element of the show .
The lyrics are referenced in the dialogue multiple times , and the opening bars are a recurring theme throughout the show .
The show features a new arrangement by Bear McCreary during the season three finale , and Jimi Hendrix 's version during the series ' finale .
A cover was used in the Fox television show Lucifer , covered by Tom Ellis playing the titular role .
The Jimi Hendrix cover of the song is used in The Martian trailer .
A instrumental version of the song by Devlin features in the opening credits of the HBO series The Young Pope .
NOTES
REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
* Marqusee , M ( 2002 ) . , New Press EXTERNAL LINKS * Full audio of Jimi Hendrix 's version of the song on YouTube * Lyrics to the song
* " Reason to Rock " -
The lyrics explained