VERDICT
In law , a verdict is the formal finding of fact made by a jury on matters or questions submitted to the jury by a judge .
In a bench trial , the judge 's decision near the end of the trial is simply referred to as a finding .
In England and Wales , a coroner 's findings are called verdicts ( see ) .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The term " verdict " , from the Latin veredictum , literally means " to say the truth " and is derived from Middle English verdit , from Anglo - Norman : a compound of ver ( " true " , from the Latin vērus ) and dit ( " speech " , from the Latin dictum , the neuter past participle of dīcere , to say ) .
CRIMINAL LAW Section::::Criminal law .
In a criminal case , the verdict , which may be either " not guilty " or " guilty"—except in Scotland where the verdict of " not proven " is also available — is handed down by the jury .
Different counts in the same case may have different verdicts .
A verdict of guilty in a criminal case is generally followed by a judgment of conviction rendered by judge , which in turn be followed by sentencing .
In U.S. legal nomenclature , the verdict is the finding of the jury on the questions of fact submitted to it .
Once the court ( the judge ) receives the verdict , the judge enters judgment on the verdict .
The judgment of the court is the final order in the case .
If the defendant is found guilty , he can choose to appeal the case to the local Court of Appeals .
COMPROMISE VERDICT Section::::Compromise verdict .
A compromise verdict is a " verdict which is reached only by the surrender of conscientious convictions upon one material issue by some jurors in return for a relinquishment by others of their like settled opinion upon another issue and the result is one which does not command the approval of the whole panel " , and , as such , is not permitted .
DIRECTED VERDICT
Section::::Directed verdict .
In a jury trial , a directed verdict is an order from the presiding judge to the jury to return a particular verdict .
Typically , the judge orders a directed verdict after finding that no reasonable jury could reach a decision to the contrary .
After a directed verdict , there is no longer any need for the jury to decide the case .
A judge may order a directed verdict as to an entire case or only to certain issues .
In a criminal case in the United States , once the prosecution has closed its case , the defendant may move for a directed verdict .
If granted , the verdict will be " not guilty " .
The prosecution may never seek a directed verdict of guilty , as the defendant has a constitutional right to present a defense and rebut the prosecution 's case and have a jury determine guilt or innocence ( where a defendant has waived his / her right to a jury trial and allowed the judge to render the verdict , this still applies ) .
In the American legal system , the concept of directed verdict has largely been replaced by judgment as a matter of law .
GENERAL VERDICT
Section::::General verdict .
A general verdict is one in which the jury makes a complete finding and single conclusion on all issues presented to it .
First , the jury finds the facts , as proved by the evidence , then it applies the law as instructed by the court , and finally it returns a verdict in one conclusion that settles the case .
Such verdict is reported as follows : " We the Jury find the issues for the plaintiff ( or defendant , as the case may be ) and assess his damages at one hundred thousand dollars . "
SEALED
VERDICT
Section::::Sealed verdict .
A sealed verdict is a verdict put into a sealed envelope when there is a delay in announcing the result , such as waiting for the judge , the parties and the attorneys to come back to court .
The verdict is kept in the sealed envelope until court reconvenes and then handed to the judge .
This practice is virtually the default in many U.S. jurisdictions or may be the preference of the judge involved .
SPECIAL VERDICT Section::::Special verdict .
In English law , a special verdict is a verdict by a jury that makes specific factual conclusions rather than (
or in addition to ) the jury 's declaration of guilt or liability .
For example , jurors may write down a specific monetary amount of damages , or a finding of proportionality , in addition to the jury 's ultimate finding of liability .
In the words of William Blackstone , " The jury state the naked facts , as they find them to be proved , and pray the advice of the court thereon " .
Special verdicts are a jury control procedure intended to focus the jury 's attention on the important questions at hand .
The judge forced a special verdict in the famous 1884 case of R v. Dudley and Stephens , which established a precedent that necessity is not a defence to a charge of murder , but generally it is recommended that such verdicts should only be returned in the most exceptional cases .
Special verdict forms are common in civil cases .
However , many courts disfavour their use in criminal cases .
This is because juries traditionally have the power to issue a one- or two - word general verdict in criminal cases , simply pronouncing a defendant " guilty " or " not guilty " .
By this means , criminal juries are never required to explain their verdicts .
The right to issue a general verdict in criminal cases is thus considered one of the great protections of trial by jury .
The jury has an historic function of tempering rules of law by common sense brought to bear upon the facts of a specific case .
For this reason Justices Black and Douglas indicated their disapproval of special verdicts even in civil cases .
SEE ALSO
* Virtual jury research REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS