CAPITAL PUNISHMENT IN OREGON Capital punishment is a legal penalty in the U.S. state of Oregon .
In November 2011 , Governor John Kitzhaber announced a moratorium on executions in Oregon , canceling a planned execution and ordering a review of the death penalty system in the state .
Kitzhaber 's successor , Governor Kate Brown , affirmed her commitment to the moratorium .
LEGAL PROCESS Section::::Legal process .
Oregon is the only American state where someone can be convicted of a capital crime without a unanimous verdict from the jury : 11 jurors are enough to find the defendant guilty , unless the prosecution requests a unanimous verdict .
But if the prosecution seeks the death penalty , the sentence is decided by the jury and must always be unanimous .
In case of a hung jury during the penalty phase of the trial , a life sentence is issued , even if a single juror opposed death ( there is no retrial ) .
The Governor of Oregon has sole authority over clemency , including capital cases .
The method of execution is lethal injection .
The men 's death row is located , and executions are carried out , at the Oregon State Penitentiary in Salem .
Women on death row are held at Coffee Creek Correctional Facility until shortly before their execution .
CAPITAL CRIMES Section::::Capital crimes .
Aggravated murder is the only crime punishable by death in Oregon .
It is defined as murder involving any of the following circumstances :
* The defendant committed the murder pursuant to an agreement that the defendant receive money or other thing of value for committing the murder .
*
* The defendant solicited another to commit the murder and paid or agreed to pay the person money or other thing of value for committing the murder .
*
* The defendant committed murder after having been convicted previously in any jurisdiction of any homicide , the elements of which constitute the crime of murder or manslaughter as defined by Oregon statutes .
*
* There was more than one murder victim in the same criminal episode .
*
* The homicide occurred in the course of or as a result of intentional maiming or torture of the victim .
*
* The victim of the intentional homicide was a person under the age of 14 years .
*
* The victim was a police officer , correctional , parole and probation officer or other person charged with the duty of custody , control , or supervision of convicted persons , a member of the Oregon State Police , judicial officer , juror , or witness in a criminal proceeding , employee or officer of a court of justice , or a member of the State Board of Parole and Post - Prison Supervision and the murder was related to the performance of the victim 's duties in the justice system .
*
* The defendant committed murder by means of explosives .
*
*
The defendant personally and intentionally committed the homicide in course of furtherance of another specified felony such as rape .
*
* The murder was committed in an effort to conceal the commission of a crime , or to conceal the identity of the perpetrator of a crime .
*
* The murder was committed after the defendant had escaped from a state , county , or municipal penal or correctional facility and before recapture .
* EARLY HISTORY Section::::Early history .
The first death sentence carried out under the territorial government , apart from the hanging of the 5 Cayuse in 1850 , came on April 18 , 1851 , when William Kendall was hanged in Salem .
Kendall 's sentence was handed down by Judge William Strong of the Oregon Supreme Court .
Since 1904 , about 60 Five Cayuse Native American men were taken to Oregon City , tried and sentenced to hang .
Before their execution on June 3 , 1850 , the leader , Tiloukaikt , accepted Catholic last rites .
Tiloukaikt spoke on the gallows , " Did not your missionaries teach us that Christ died to save his people ?
So we die to save our people .
" Capital punishment was made explicitly legal by statute in 1864 , and executions have been carried out exclusively at the Oregon State Penitentiary in Salem since 1904 .
The death penalty was outlawed between 1914 and 1920 , again between 1964 and 1978 , and then again between a 1981 Oregon Supreme Court ruling and a 1984 ballot measure .
Oregon voters amended the Constitution in 1914 , to repeal the death penalty , by a margin of 50.04 % .
The repeal was an initiative of Governor Oswald West .
However , the death penalty was restored in 1920 with 56 % of voters favoring its use .
From 1864 to 1931 , executions were carried out by hanging .
However , beginning with the execution of LeRoy Hershel McCarthy , on January 30 , 1939 , Oregon began using lethal gas in gas - chamber executions .
The state executed seventeen men in this manner .
The last of these gas - inhalation executions took place on 20 August 1962 , with the execution of Leeroy Sanford McGahuey .
In 1964 voters passed Measure 1 , a constitutional amendment prohibiting capital punishment , with 60 % of voters approving .
Governor Mark Hatfield commuted the sentences of three death row inmates two days later .
REINSTALLMENT Section::::Reinstallment .
Voters reenacted the death penalty in the general election of 1978 , by statute ; Measure 8 required the death penalty in certain murder cases .
Measure 8 was overturned by the Oregon Supreme Court in 1981 , on the grounds that it denied defendants the right to be tried by a jury of their peers .
In 1984 , Measure 6 amended the state constitution to once more make the death penalty legal .
Measure 7 , a statutory measure passed in the same year , required a separate sentencing hearing before a jury in cases of aggravated murder .
In 1988 , the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Penry v. Lynaugh affected the Oregon death penalty , because Oregon 's law is based on the Texas law involved in the case .
Seventeen Oregon cases were remanded for resentencing following Penry ; eight convicts were re - sentenced to death .
In 2000 , the Benetton Group featured several inmates on Oregon 's death row in a controversial anti - death penalty advertising campaign .
Cesar Barone , Conan Wayne Hale , Jesse Caleb Compton , and Alberto Reyes Camarena were featured in the ad .
Between 1904 and 1994 , 115 people were sentenced to death in Oregon , and 58 of those were executed .
As of October 2018 there are 30 inmates on death row .
LIST OF INDIVIDUALS EXECUTED SINCE 1978 Section::::List of individuals executed since 1978 .
Two people have been executed in Oregon since the reinstatement of capital punishment in 1978 .
Both waived their appeals and asked that the execution be carried out . !
Name !
Date of execution !
Victim !
Governor 1 Douglas Franklin Wright September 6 , 1996 William Marks and 2 others rowspan="2"John Kitzhaber 2 Harry Charles Moore
May 16 , 1997 Thomas Lauri and Barbara Cunningham SEE
ALSO
* List of Oregon ballot measures * List of death row inmates in Oregon
* Crime in Oregon * Law of Oregon
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* History of Capital Punishment in Oregon from Oregon.gov * Death penalty in Oregon , from the Oregon Encyclopedia