MYOFIBRIL
A myofibril ( also known as a muscle fibril ) is a basic rod - like unit of a muscle cell .
Muscles are composed of tubular cells called myocytes , known as muscle fibers in striated muscle , and these cells in turn contain many chains of myofibrils .
They are created during embryonic development in a process known as myogenesis .
Myofibrils are composed of long proteins including actin , myosin , and titin , and other proteins that hold them together .
These proteins are organized into thick and thin filaments called myofilaments , which repeat along the length of the myofibril in sections called sarcomeres .
Muscles contract by sliding the thick ( myosin ) and thin ( actin ) filaments along each other .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
The filaments of myofibrils , myofilaments , consist of two types , thick and thin : * Thin filaments consist primarily of the protein actin , coiled with nebulin filaments .
Actin , when polymerized into filaments , forms the " ladder " along which the myosin filaments " climb " to generate motion
*
Thick filaments consist primarily of the protein myosin , held in place by titin filaments .
Myosin is responsible for force generation .
It is composed of a globular head with both ATP and actin binding sites , and a long tail involved in its polymerization into myosin filaments .
The protein complex composed of actin and myosin is sometimes referred to as " actinomyosin " .
In striated muscle , such as skeletal and cardiac muscle , the actin and myosin filaments each have a specific and constant length on the order of a few micrometers , far less than the length of the elongated muscle cell ( a few millimeters in the case of human skeletal muscle cells ) .
The filaments are organized into repeated subunits along the length of the myofibril .
These subunits are called sarcomeres .
The muscle cell is nearly filled with myofibrils running parallel to each other on the long axis of the cell .
The sarcomeric subunits of one myofibril are in nearly perfect alignment with those of the myofibrils next to it .
This alignment gives rise to certain optical properties which cause the cell to appear striped or striated .
In smooth muscle cells , this alignment is absent , hence there are no apparent striations and the cells are called smooth .
Exposed muscle cells at certain angles , such as in meat cuts , can show structural coloration or iridescence due to this periodic alignment of the fibrils and sarcomeres .
APPEARANCE Section::::Appearance .
The names of the various sub - regions of the sarcomere are based on their relatively lighter or darker appearance when viewed through the light microscope .
Each sarcomere is delimited by two very dark colored bands called Z - discs or Z - lines ( from the German zwischen meaning between ) .
These Z - discs are dense protein discs that do not easily allow the passage of light .
The T - tubule is present in this area .
The area between the Z - discs is further divided into two lighter colored bands at either end called the I - bands , and a darker , grayish band in the middle called the A band .
The I bands appear lighter because these regions of the sarcomere mainly contain the thin actin filaments , whose smaller diameter allows the passage of light between them .
The A band , on the other hand , contains mostly myosin filaments whose larger diameter restricts the passage of light .
A stands for anisotropic and I for isotropic , referring to the optical properties of living muscle as demonstrated with polarized light microscopy .
The parts of the A band that abut the I bands are occupied by the both actin and myosin filaments ( where they interdigitate as described above ) .
Also within the A band is a relatively brighter central region called the H - zone ( from the German helle , meaning bright ) in which there is no actin / myosin overlap when the muscle is in a relaxed state .
Finally , the H - zone is bisected by a dark central line called the M - line ( from the German mittel meaning middle ) .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
A study of the developing leg muscle in a 12-day chick embryo using electron microscopy proposes a mechanism for the development of myofibrils .
Developing muscle cells contain thick ( myosin ) filaments that are 160–170 Å in diameter and thin ( actin)filaments
that are 60–70 Å in diameter .
Young myofibers contain a 7:1 ratio of thin to thick filaments .
Along the long axis of the muscle cells in subsarcolemmal locations , free myofilaments become aligned and aggregate into hexagonally packed arrays .
These aggregates form regardless of the presence of Z band or M band material .
Aggregation occurs spontaneously because the tertiary structures of actin and myosin monomers contain all the " information " with the ionic strength and ATP concentration of the cell to aggregate into the filaments .
FUNCTION Section::::Function .
The myosin heads form cross bridges with the actin myofilaments ; this is where they carry out a ' rowing ' action along the actin .
When the muscle fibre is relaxed ( before contraction ) , the myosin head has ADP and phosphate bound to it .
When a nerve impulse arrives , Ca ions cause troponin to change shape ; this moves the troponin + tropomyosin complex away , leaving the myosin binding sites open .
The myosin head now binds to the actin myofilament .
Energy in the head of the myosin myofilament moves the head , which slides the actin past .
ADP is thereby released .
ATP presents itself ( as the presence of the calcium ions activates the myosin 's ATPase ) , and the myosin heads disconnect from the actin to grab the ATP .
The ATP is then broken down into ADP and phosphate .
Energy is released and stored in the myosin head to utilize for later movement .
The myosin heads now return to their upright relaxed position .
If calcium is present , the process is repeated .
When a muscle contracts , the actin is pulled along myosin toward the center of the sarcomere until the actin and myosin filaments are completely overlapped .
The H zone becomes smaller and smaller due to the increasing overlap of actin and myosin filaments , and the muscle shortens .
Thus when the muscle is fully contracted , the H zone is no longer visible .
Note that the actin and myosin filaments themselves do not change length , but instead slide past each other .
This is known as the sliding filament theory of muscle contraction .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
SEE ALSO
* Motor protein REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Muscle Physiology Primer
* Animation of sarcomere contraction