STENT
In medicine , a stent is a metal or plastic tube inserted into the lumen of an anatomic vessel or duct to keep the passageway open , and stenting is the placement of a stent .
There is a wide variety of stents used for different purposes , from expandable coronary , vascular and biliary stents , to simple plastic stents used to allow the flow of urine between kidney and bladder .
" Stent " is also used as a verb to describe the placement of such a device , particularly when a disease such as atherosclerosis has pathologically narrowed a structure such as an artery .
A stent should be differentiated from a shunt .
A shunt is a tube that connects two previously unconnected parts of the body to allow fluid to flow between them .
Stents and shunts can be made of similar materials but perform two different tasks .
STENT TYPES Section::::Stent types . !
Type and description !
Illustration ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
As Ariel Roguin describes in his paper " Stent : The Man and Word Behind the Coronary Metal Prosthesis " , the current acceptable origin of the word stent is that it derives from the name of a dentist , Charles Thomas Stent , notable for his advances in the field of denture - making .
He was born in Brighton , England , on October 17 , 1807 , was a dentist in London , and is most famous for improving and modifying the denture base of the gutta - percha , creating the Stent 's compounding that made it practical as a material for dental impressions .
The verb form " stenting " was used for centuries to describe the process of stiffening garments ( a usage long obsolete , per the Oxford English Dictionary ) and some believe this to be the origin .
According to the Merriam Webster Third New International Dictionary , the noun evolved from the Middle English verb stenten , shortened from extenten , meaning to stretch , which in turn came from Latin extentus , past participle of extendere , to stretch out .
Others attribute the noun " stent " to Jan F. Esser , a Dutch plastic surgeon who in 1916 used the word to describe a dental impression compound invented in 1856 by the English dentist Charles Stent ( 1807–1885 ) , whom Esser employed to craft a form for facial reconstruction .
The full account is described in the Journal of the History of Dentistry .
According to the author , from the use of Stent 's compound as a support for facial tissues evolved the use of a stent to hold open various bodily structures .
The first ( self - expanding ) " stents " used in medical practice in 1986 by Ulrich Sigwart in Lausanne were initially called " Wallstents " after its inventor , Hans Wallstén .
Julio
Palmaz et al .
created a balloon - expandable stent that is currently used .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first use of a coronary stent is typically attributed to Jacques Puel and Ulrich Sigwart when they implanted a stent into a patient in Toulouse , France , in 1986 .
It was used as a scaffold to prevent the vessel from closing and to avoid restenosis in coronary surgery — a condition where scar tissue grows within the stent and interferes with vascular flow .
Shortly thereafter , in 1987 , Julio Palmaz ( known for patenting a balloon - expandable stent ) and Richard Schatz implanted their similar stent into a patient in Germany .
Though several doctors have been credited with the creation of the stent , the first FDA - approved stent was invented by Cesare Gianturco and Gary S. Roubin and approved in 1993 .
To further reduce the incidence of restenosis , the drug - eluting stent was introduced in 2003 .
SEE ALSO * Bioresorbable stent
* Bronchoscopy * Colonoscopy
* Esophagogastroduodenoscopy * Grommet * Interventional radiology
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Coronary Stent * Drug - Eluting Stents — Angioplasty .
Org * Cardiovascular and Interventional Radiological Society of Europe *
The Cardiovascular Forum
* Stent for Life Initiative