LEATHERMAN Leatherman is an American brand of multitools and knives made by Leatherman Tool Group of Portland , Oregon , US .
The company was founded in July 1983 by Timothy S. Leatherman and Steve Berliner in order to market his idea of a capable , easily portable hand tool with multiple functions .
That same year Leatherman sold the first multitool , which was called the PST ( Pocket Survival Tool ) .
COMPANY HISTORY Section::::Company history .
Timothy S. Leatherman , a 1970 mechanical engineering graduate of Oregon State University , and his business partner , Steve Berliner , formed Leatherman Tool Group in 1983 .
Leatherman was inspired to design a " Boy Scout knife with pliers " while he and his wife traveled Europe and the Middle East in 1975 , often attempting to use a simple pocketknife to repair their repeatedly malfunctioning car and leaky hotel plumbing .
He spent several years perfecting the " Mr. Crunch " prototype and received his first U.S. patent ( 4,238,862 ) in 1980 .
After additional refinement , Leatherman 's first product was introduced in 1983 as the Pocket Survival Tool ( PST ) and initially sold through Early Winters ' and Cabela 's mail - order catalogs .
Leatherman sold nearly 30,000 tools in 1984 , fueling additional product development , and rapid growth both in the company and manufacturing capacity .
By the end of 2001 , the company had sales of $ 100 million annually and had sold more than 20 million tools .
Almost 10 % of the manufacturing facility area is concerned with the repairing and rebuilding of any tool that needs it , either domestically , or sent from distributors from around the world .
Their system is to replace and return any tool sent in with an equivalent item , reducing the time the owner is without the tool , unless the owner requests return of the same physical tool for sentimental reasons .
Folding knives were introduced into the Leatherman product line in 2005 .
In 2007 , the company opened its first retail store , located at its manufacturing facility , that has since relocated to a retail store at the Cascade Station shopping center near the facility and Cascades MAX Station in Northeast Portland .
The same year , Tim Leatherman was inducted into the Blade magazine Cutlery Hall of Fame in recognition of his design impact on the cutlery history .
In 2011 , the Leatherman Tool Group acquired German light manufacturer , LED Lenser .
The brands and companies are run separately , under the Leatherman Tool Group , Inc. umbrella .
Leatherman Tool Group also manufactures a line of multi - tools designed specifically for military and law enforcement personnel , as well as accessories for carrying and expanding the function of its tools . , Leatherman produced 50 products sold in 82 countries , with U.S. market share estimated at 55 percent .
Leatherman has a sponsorship deal with the Major League Soccer team Portland Timbers .
Specifically , the company is the shirt sponsor for the team 's mascot , " Timber Joey " .
PRODUCTS Section::::Products .
Leatherman 's primary products are multi - tools and knives .
Most Leatherman multi - tools are built around a pair of pliers , with up to 21 additional tools stored in the handles , including knives ( straight and serrated blades ) , screwdrivers ( flat , Phillips ) , saws , wire cutters and strippers , electrical crimper , bottle opener , and can opener .
Most models have a built - in safety mechanism that locks the active tool in the open position when fully unfolded .
Models range in weight from the 12.5 ounce ( 335 g )
Surge to 0.81 ounce ( 23 g ) Style .
Leatherman currently produces folding knives under the Crater name .
Models range from two tools ( knife blade and carabiner / bottle opener ) to four ( blade , carabiner / bottle opener , flat , and Phillips screwdrivers ) . !
Name ! !
Type ! !
Debut ! !
Retired ! !
# Tools SEE ALSO
* Gerber multitool *
Victorinox
* Wenger REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Portland Business Journal : Leatherman learns patent lessons the hard way