ICELANDIC NAME Icelandic names differ from most current Western family name systems by being patronymic or occasionally matronymic : they indicate the father ( or mother ) of the child and not the historic family lineage .
Iceland shares a common cultural heritage with the Scandinavian countries of Norway , Sweden , Denmark , and the Faroe Islands .
Icelanders , however , unlike other Nordics , have continued to use their traditional name system , which was formerly used by all Nordic countries except partly Finland .
The Icelandic system is thus not based on family names ( although some people do have family names and might use both systems ) .
Generally , a person 's second name indicates the first name of their father ( patronymic ) or in some cases mother ( matronymic ) .
According to Icelandic naming tradition , second names end in -son or -dóttir with few exceptions .
Some family names do exist in Iceland , most commonly adaptations from last name patronyms
Icelanders took up when living abroad , usually Denmark .
Notable Icelanders who have an inherited family name include former prime minister Geir Haarde , football star Eiður Smári Guðjohnsen , entrepreneur Magnús Scheving , film director Baltasar Kormákur Samper , actress Anita Briem and member of parliament ( and former news reporter )
Elín Hirst .
Before 1925 , it was legal to adopt new family names ; one Icelander to do so was the Nobel Prize - winning author Halldór Laxness , while another author , Einar Hjörleifsson and his brothers all chose the family name " Kvaran " .
Since 1925 , one can not adopt a family name unless one explicitly has a legal right to do so through inheritance .
( The law was amended in 1991 and 1996 . )
First names not previously used in Iceland must be approved by the Icelandic Naming Committee ( ) before being used .
The criterion for acceptance of names is whether they can be easily incorporated into the Icelandic language .
With some exceptions , they must contain only letters found in the Icelandic alphabet ( including þ and ð ) , and it must be possible to decline the name according to the language 's grammatical case system , which in practice means that a genitive form can be constructed in accordance with Icelandic rules .
Gender - inappropriate names are normally not allowed ; however , in January 2013 , a 15-year - old girl named Blær ( a masculine noun in Icelandic ) was allowed to keep this name in a court decision that overruled an initial rejection by the naming committee .
Her mother Björk Eiðsdóttir did not realize at the time that Blær was considered masculine ; she had read a novel by Halldór Laxness , The Fish Can Sing ( 1957 ) , that had an admirable female character named Blær , meaning " light breeze " , and had decided that if she had a daughter , she would name her Blær .
TYPICAL ICELANDIC
NAMING Section::::Typical Icelandic naming .
A man named Jón Einarsson has a son named Ólafur .
Ólafur 's last name will not be Einarsson like his father 's ; it will become Jónsson , literally indicating that Ólafur is the son of Jón
( Jóns + son ) .
The same practice is used for daughters .
Jón Einarsson 's daughter Sigríður 's last name would not be Einarsson but Jónsdóttir .
Again , the name literally means " Jón 's daughter " ( Jóns + dóttir ) .
In some cases , an individual 's surname is derived from a parent 's middle name instead of the first name .
For example , if Jón is the son of Hjálmar Arnar Vilhjálmsson he may either be named Jón Hjálmarsson ( Jón , son of Hjálmar ) or Jón Arnarsson ( Jón , son of Arnar ) .
The reason for this may be that the parent prefers to be called by the middle name instead of the first name ; this is fairly common .
It may also be that the parent 's middle name seems to fit the child 's first name better .
In cases where two people in the same social circle bear the same first name and the same father 's name , they have traditionally been distinguished by their paternal grandfather 's name ( avonymic ) , e.g. Jón Þórsson Bjarnarsonar ( Jón , son of Þór , son of Bjarni ) and Jón Þórsson Hallssonar ( Jón , son of Þór , son of Hallur ) .
This practice has now become less common ( the use of middle names having replaced it ) , but features conspicuously in the Icelandic sagas .
MATRONYMIC NAMING
AS
A CHOICE
Section::::Matronymic naming as a choice .
The vast majority of Icelandic last names carry the name of the father , but occasionally the mother 's name is used : e.g. if the child or mother wishes to end social ties with the father .
Some women use it as a social statement while others simply choose it as a matter of style .
In all of these cases , the convention is the same : Ólafur , the son of Bryndís , will have the full name of Ólafur Bryndísarson ( " the son of Bryndís " ) .
One well - known Icelander with a matronymic name is football player Heiðar Helguson ( " Helga 's son " ) , another is novelist Guðrún Eva Mínervudóttir ( " Minerva 's daughter " ) .
One medieval example is the poet Eilífr Goðrúnarson ( " Goðrún 's son " ) .
In the Icelandic film Bjarnfreðarson the title character 's name is the subject of some mockery for his having a woman 's name – as Bjarnfreður 's son – not his father 's .
In the film this is connected to the mother 's radical feminism and shame over his paternity , which form part of the film 's plot .
Some people have both a matronymic and a patronymic : for example , Dagur Bergþóruson Eggertsson ( " the son of Bergþóra and Eggert " ) , the current ( since 2014 ) mayor of Reykjavík .
Another example is the girl Blær mentioned above : her full name is Blær Bjarkardóttir Rúnarsdóttir ( " the daughter of Björk and Rúnar " ) .
CULTURAL RAMIFICATIONS Section::::Cultural ramifications .
In Iceland , listings such as the telephone directory are alphabetised by first name rather than surname .
To reduce ambiguity , the telephone directory goes further by also listing professions .
In Russia , where name - patronyms of similar style were historically used ( such as Ivan Petrovich ) , the much larger population necessitated the introduction of surnames , and delegated the patronymic to record - keeping middle - name and conversational honorific .
Icelanders formally address others by their first names .
By way of example , the former prime minister Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir would not be introduced as ' Ms Sigurðardóttir ' but either by her first name or her full name , and usually addressed by her first name only .
In the case of two people in the same group having the same given name , perhaps one named Jón Stefánsson and the other Jón Þorláksson , one could address Jón Stefánsson as " Jón Stefáns " and Jón Þorláksson as " Jón Þorláks " .
When someone holds a conversation with these two people at the same time , the appendage " son " would not need to be used ; in that case , the genitive form of the father 's name could be used like a nickname , although it is just as common in such cases to refer to people by their middle names ( having a middle name being nowadays the general rule for people with a common name like ' Jón ' ) .
While the name of Icelandic singer Björk is generally perceived as her stage name , it is actually simply her first name ( her full name is Björk Guðmundsdóttir ) .
Björk is how any Icelander would address her , whether formally or casually .
As a result of the vast majority of people using patronymics , a family will normally have a variety of last names : the children of ( married or unmarried ) parents Jón Einarsson and Bryndís Atladóttir could be named Ólafur Jónsson and Katrín Jónsdóttir .
With matronymics , the children in this example would be Ólafur Bryndísarson and Katrín Bryndísardóttir .
Patronymics thus have the formula ( genitive case of father 's name , usually adding -s , or if the name ends in -i , it will change to -a )
+ son / dóttir , whereas matronymics are ( genitive case of mother 's name , often -ar , or if the name ends in -a , it will change to -u )
+ son / dóttir .
OUTSIDE OF ICELAND Section::::Outside of Iceland .
The Icelandic naming system occasionally causes problems for families travelling abroad , especially with young children , since non - Icelandic immigration staff ( apart from those of other Nordic countries ) are usually unfamiliar with the practice and therefore expect children to have the same last names as that of their parents .
Icelandic footballers who work abroad similarly will be referred to by their patronymics , even though such use of the term is considered " improper " from a native Icelandic standpoint .
Aron Gunnarsson , for example , wears the name " Gunnarsson " on the back of his uniform in the Premier League , and is referred to as such by the British media and commentators .
Expatriate Icelanders or people of Icelandic descent who live in foreign countries , such as the significant Icelandic community in the Canadian province of Manitoba , usually abandon the traditional Icelandic naming system .
In most cases , they adapt to the naming conventions of their country of residence — most commonly by retaining the patronymic of their first ancestor to immigrate to the new country as a permanent family surname , much as other Nordic immigrants did before surnames became fully established in their own countries .
Alternatively , a permanent family surname may sometimes be chosen to represent the family 's geographic rather than patronymic roots ; for example , Canadian musician Lindy Vopnfjörð 's grandfather immigrated to Canada from the Icelandic village of Vopnafjörður .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Unlike the other Nordic countries , Iceland never formalized a system of family names .
A growing number of Icelanders — primarily those who had studied abroad — began to adopt family names in the second half of the 19th century .
In 1855 , there were 108 family names but by 1910 there were 297 .
In 1913 , the Althing legalized the adoption of family names .
The Icelanders who had family names tended to be upper - class and serve as government officials .
In 1925 , Althing banned the adoption of new family names .
Some of the common arguments against the usage of family names were : they were not authentically " Icelandic " ; the usage of -son in family names made it unclear if the name was actually a family name or patronymic ; and there were fears that low - class people would adopt the family names of well - known upper - class families .
Some of the common arguments for the usage of family names were : they made it easier to trace lineages ; they made it easier to distinguish individuals ( a problem in mid-19th century Iceland was that there were so many people named Jón — in fact , one in six Icelandic males were named Jón at the time ) ; and that Iceland ought to follow the lead of its Nordic neighbours .
SEE ALSO
* List of Icelanders *
Icelandic language
* Scandinavian family name etymology
* Germanic name
* Naming conventions that share similarities with Icelandic names : Ethiopian name , Mongolian name , Russian patronymics , Scottish Gaelic personal naming system ,
Malay name
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Information on Icelandic Surnames ( Ministry of the Interior ) * English translation of the Personal Names Act No . 45 of 17 May 1996 ( Ministry of the Interior )