THERMODYNAMIC SYSTEM
A thermodynamic system is a group of material and/or radiative contents .
Its properties may be described by thermodynamic state variables such as temperature , entropy , internal energy , and pressure .
The simplest state of a thermodynamic system is a state of thermodynamic equilibrium , as opposed to a non - equilibrium state .
The system can be separated from its surrounding by a wall or without a wall .
When the state of its content varies in space , the system can be considered as many systems located next to each other , each being a different thermodynamical system .
A thermodynamic system is subject to external interventions called thermodynamic operations ; these alter the system 's walls or its surroundings ; as a result , the system undergoes thermodynamic processes according to the principles of thermodynamics .
( This account mainly refers to the simplest kind of thermodynamic system ; compositions of simple systems may also be considered . )
The thermodynamic state of a thermodynamic system is its internal state as specified by its state variables .
In addition to the state variables , a thermodynamic account also requires a special kind of quantity called a state function , which is a function of the defining state variables .
For example , if the state variables are internal energy , volume and mole amounts , that special function is the entropy .
These quantities are inter - related by one or more functional relationships called equations of state , and by the system 's characteristic equation .
Thermodynamics imposes restrictions on the possible equations of state and on the characteristic equation .
The restrictions are imposed by the laws of thermodynamics .
According to the permeabilities of the walls of a system , transfers of energy and matter occur between it and its surroundings , which are assumed to be unchanging over time , until a state of thermodynamic equilibrium is attained .
The only states considered in equilibrium thermodynamics are equilibrium states .
Classical thermodynamics includes equilibrium thermodynamics .
It also considers :
( a ) systems considered in terms of cyclic sequences of processes rather than of states of the system ; such were historically important in the conceptual development of the subject ; and ( b ) systems considered in terms of processes described by steady flows ; such are important in engineering .
In 1824 Sadi Carnot described a thermodynamic system as the working substance ( such as the volume of steam ) of any heat engine under study .
The very existence of such thermodynamic systems may be considered a fundamental postulate of equilibrium thermodynamics , though it is only rarely cited as a numbered law .
According to Bailyn , the commonly rehearsed statement of the zeroth law of thermodynamics is a consequence of this fundamental postulate .
In equilibrium thermodynamics the state variables do not include fluxes because in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium all fluxes have zero values by postulation .
Equilibrium thermodynamic processes may involve fluxes but these must have ceased by the time
a thermodynamic process or operation is complete bringing a system to its eventual thermodynamic state .
Non - equilibrium thermodynamics allows its state variables to include non - zero fluxes , that describe transfers of mass or energy or entropy between a system and its surroundings .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
Thermodynamic equilibrium is characterized by absence of flow of mass or energy .
Equilibrium thermodynamics , as a subject in physics , considers macroscopic bodies of matter and energy in states of internal thermodynamic equilibrium .
It uses the concept of thermodynamic processes , by which bodies pass from one equilibrium state to another by transfer of matter and energy between them .
The term ' thermodynamic system ' is used to refer to bodies of matter and energy in the special context of thermodynamics .
The possible equilibria between bodies are determined by the physical properties of the walls that separate the bodies .
Equilibrium thermodynamics in general does not measure time .
Equilibrium thermodynamics is a relatively simple and well settled subject .
One reason for this is the existence of a well defined physical quantity called ' the entropy of a body ' .
Non - equilibrium thermodynamics , as a subject in physics , considers bodies of matter and energy that are not in states of internal thermodynamic equilibrium , but are usually participating in processes of transfer that are slow enough to allow description in terms of quantities that are closely related to thermodynamic state variables .
It is characterized by presence of flows of matter and energy .
For this topic , very often the bodies considered have smooth spatial inhomogeneities , so that spatial gradients , for example a temperature gradient , are well enough defined .
Thus the description of non - equilibrium thermodynamic systems is a field theory , more complicated than the theory of equilibrium thermodynamics .
Non - equilibrium thermodynamics is a growing subject , not an established edifice .
In general , it is not possible to find an exactly defined entropy for non - equilibrium problems .
For many non - equilibrium thermodynamical problems , an approximately defined quantity called ' time rate of entropy production ' is very useful .
Non - equilibrium thermodynamics is mostly beyond the scope of the present article .
Another kind of thermodynamic system is considered in engineering .
It takes part in a flow process .
The account is in terms that approximate , well enough in practice in many cases , equilibrium thermodynamical concepts .
This is mostly beyond the scope of the present article , and is set out in other articles , for example the article Flow process .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The first to create the concept of a thermodynamic system was the French physicist Sadi Carnot whose 1824 Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire studied what he called the working substance , e.g. , typically a body of water vapor , in steam engines , in regards to the system 's ability to do work when heat is applied to it .
The working substance could be put in contact with either a heat reservoir ( a boiler ) , a cold reservoir ( a stream of cold water ) , or a piston ( to which the working body could do work by pushing on it ) .
In 1850 , the German physicist Rudolf Clausius generalized this picture to include the concept of the surroundings , and began referring to the system as a " working body " .
In his 1850 manuscript On the Motive Power of Fire , Clausius wrote : The article Carnot heat engine shows the original piston - and - cylinder diagram used by Carnot in discussing his ideal engine ; below , we see the Carnot engine as is typically modeled in current use : In the diagram shown , the " working body " ( system ) , a term introduced by Clausius in 1850 , can be any fluid or vapor body through which
heat Q can be introduced or transmitted through to produce work .
In 1824 , Sadi Carnot , in his famous paper Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire , had postulated that the fluid body could be any substance capable of expansion , such as vapor of water , vapor of alcohol , vapor of mercury , a permanent gas , or air , etc .
Though , in these early years , engines came in a number of configurations , typically Q was supplied by a boiler , wherein water boiled over a furnace ; Q was typically a stream of cold flowing water in the form of a condenser located on a separate part of the engine .
The output work W was the movement of the piston as it turned a crank - arm , which typically turned a pulley to lift water out of flooded salt mines .
Carnot defined work as " weight lifted through a height " .
SYSTEMS IN EQUILIBRIUM Section::::Systems in equilibrium .
At thermodynamic equilibrium , a system 's properties are , by definition , unchanging in time .
Systems in equilibrium are much simpler and easier to understand than systems not in equilibrium .
In some cases , when analyzing a thermodynamic process , one can assume that each intermediate state in the process is at equilibrium .
This considerably simplifies the analysis .
In isolated systems it is consistently observed that as time goes on internal rearrangements diminish and stable conditions are approached .
Pressures and temperatures tend to equalize , and matter arranges itself into one or a few relatively homogeneous phases .
A system in which all processes of change have gone practically to completion is considered in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium .
The thermodynamic properties of a system in equilibrium are unchanging in time .
Equilibrium system states are much easier to describe in a deterministic manner than non - equilibrium states .
For a process to be reversible , each step in the process must be reversible .
For a step in a process to be reversible , the system must be in equilibrium throughout the step .
That ideal can not be accomplished in practice because no step can be taken without perturbing the system from equilibrium , but the ideal can be approached by making changes slowly .
WALLS
Section::::Walls .
+ Types of transfers permitted + by types of wall !
type of wall !
colspan="3"type of transfer !
Matter !
Work !
Heat !
permeable to matter align="center
" align="center " align="center " ! permeable to energy but impermeable to matter align="center " align="center " align="center " ! adiabatic align="center " align="center " align="center " ! adynamic and impermeable to matter align="center
" align="center " align="center " ! isolating align="center " align="center " align="center "
A system is enclosed by walls that bound it and connect it to its surroundings .
Often a wall restricts passage across it by some form of matter or energy , making the connection indirect .
Sometimes a wall is no more than an imaginary two - dimensional closed surface through which the connection to the surroundings is direct .
A wall can be fixed ( e.g. a constant volume reactor ) or moveable ( e.g. a piston ) .
For example , in a reciprocating engine , a fixed wall means the piston is locked at its position ; then , a constant volume process may occur .
In that same engine , a piston may be unlocked and allowed to move in and out .
Ideally , a wall may be declared adiabatic , diathermal , impermeable , permeable , or semi - permeable .
Actual physical materials that provide walls with such idealized properties are not always readily available .
The system is delimited by walls or boundaries , either actual or notional , across which conserved ( such as matter and energy ) or unconserved ( such as entropy ) quantities can pass into and out of the system .
The space outside the thermodynamic system is known as the surroundings , a reservoir , or the environment .
The properties of the walls determine what transfers can occur .
A wall that allows transfer of a quantity is said to be permeable to it , and a thermodynamic system is classified by the permeabilities of its several walls .
A transfer between system and surroundings can arise by contact , such as conduction of heat , or by long - range forces such as an electric field in the surroundings .
A system with walls that prevent all transfers is said to be isolated .
This is an idealized conception , because in practice some transfer is always possible , for example by gravitational forces .
It is an axiom of thermodynamics that an isolated system eventually reaches internal thermodynamic equilibrium , when its state no longer changes with time .
The walls of a closed system allow transfer of energy as heat and as work , but not of matter , between it and its surroundings .
The walls of an open system allow transfer both of matter and of energy .
This scheme of definition of terms is not uniformly used , though it is convenient for some purposes .
In particular , some writers use ' closed system ' where ' isolated system ' is here used .
Anything that passes across the boundary and effects a change in the contents of the system must be accounted for in an appropriate balance equation .
The volume can be the region surrounding a single atom resonating energy , such as Max Planck defined in 1900 ; it can be a body of steam or air in a steam engine , such as Sadi Carnot defined in 1824 .
It could also be just one nuclide ( i.e. a system of quarks ) as hypothesized in quantum thermodynamics .
SURROUNDINGS Section::::Surroundings .
The system is the part of the universe being studied , while the surroundings is the remainder of the universe that lies outside the boundaries of the system .
It is also known as the environment , and the reservoir .
Depending on the type of system , it may interact with the system by exchanging mass , energy ( including heat and work ) , momentum , electric charge , or other conserved properties .
The environment is ignored in analysis of the system , except in regards to these interactions .
CLOSED SYSTEM Section::::Closed system .
In a closed system , no mass may be transferred in or out of the system boundaries .
The system always contains the same amount of matter , but heat and work can be exchanged across the boundary of the system .
Whether a system can exchange heat , work , or both is dependent on the property of its boundary .
* Adiabatic boundary – not allowing any heat exchange : A thermally isolated system * Rigid boundary – not allowing exchange of work : A mechanically isolated system
One example is fluid being compressed by a piston in a cylinder .
Another example of a closed system is a bomb calorimeter , a type of constant - volume calorimeter used in measuring the heat of combustion of a particular reaction .
Electrical energy travels across the boundary to produce a spark between the electrodes and initiates combustion .
Heat transfer occurs across the boundary after combustion but no mass transfer takes place either way .
Beginning with the first law of thermodynamics for an open system , this is expressed as : where U is internal energy , Q is the heat added to the system , W is the work done by the system , and since no mass is transferred in or out of the system , both expressions involving mass flow are zero and the first law of thermodynamics for a closed system is derived .
The first law of thermodynamics for a closed system states that the increase of internal energy of the system equals the amount of heat added to the system minus the work done by the system .
For infinitesimal changes the first law for closed systems is stated by : If the work is due to a volume expansion by dV at a pressure P then : For a homogeneous system undergoing a reversible process , the second law of thermodynamics reads :
where T is the absolute temperature and S is the entropy of the system .
With these relations the fundamental thermodynamic relation , used to compute changes in internal energy , is expressed as :
For a simple system , with only one type of particle ( atom or molecule ) , a closed system amounts to a constant number of particles .
However , for systems undergoing a chemical reaction , there may be all sorts of molecules being generated and destroyed by the reaction process .
In this case , the fact that the system is closed is expressed by stating that the total number of each elemental atom is conserved , no matter what kind of molecule it may be a part of .
Mathematically : where N is the number of j - type molecules , a is the number of atoms of element i in molecule j and b is the total number of atoms of element i in the system , which remains constant , since the system is closed .
There is one such equation for each element in the system .
ISOLATED SYSTEM Section::::Isolated system .
An isolated system is more restrictive than a closed system as it does not interact with its surroundings in any way .
Mass and energy remains constant within the system , and no energy or mass transfer takes place across the boundary .
As time passes in an isolated system , internal differences in the system tend to even out and pressures and temperatures tend to equalize , as do density differences .
A system in which all equalizing processes have gone practically to completion is in a state of thermodynamic equilibrium .
Truly isolated physical systems do not exist in reality ( except perhaps for the universe as a whole ) , because , for example , there is always gravity between a system with mass and masses elsewhere .
However , real systems may behave nearly as an isolated system for finite ( possibly very long ) times .
The concept of an isolated system can serve as a useful model approximating many real - world situations .
It is an acceptable idealization used in constructing mathematical models of certain natural phenomena .
In the attempt to justify the postulate of entropy increase in the second law of thermodynamics , Boltzmann 's H - theorem used equations , which assumed that a system ( for example , a gas ) was isolated .
That is all the mechanical could be specified , treating the walls simply as mirror boundary conditions .
This inevitably led to Loschmidt 's paradox .
However , if the stochastic behavior of the molecules in actual walls is considered , along with the randomizing effect of the ambient , background thermal radiation , Boltzmann 's assumption of molecular chaos can be justified .
The second law of thermodynamics for isolated systems states that the entropy of an isolated system not in equilibrium tends to increase over time , approaching maximum value at equilibrium .
Overall , in an isolated system , the internal energy is constant and the entropy can never decrease .
A closed system 's entropy can decrease e.g. when heat is extracted from the system .
It is important to note that isolated systems are not equivalent to closed systems .
Closed systems can not exchange matter with the surroundings , but can exchange energy .
Isolated systems can exchange neither matter nor energy with their surroundings , and as such are only theoretical and do not exist in reality ( except , possibly , the entire universe ) .
It is worth noting that ' closed system ' is often used in thermodynamics discussions when ' isolated system ' would be correct -
i.e. there is an assumption that energy does not enter or leave the system .
SELECTIVE TRANSFER OF MATTER Section::::Selective transfer of matter .
For a thermodynamic process , the precise physical properties of the walls and surroundings of the system are important , because they determine the possible processes .
An open system has one or several walls that allow transfer of matter .
To account for the internal energy of the open system , this requires energy transfer terms in addition to those for heat and work .
It also leads to the idea of the chemical potential .
A wall selectively permeable only to a pure substance can put the system in diffusive contact with a reservoir of that pure substance in the surroundings .
Then a process is possible in which that pure substance is transferred between system and surroundings .
Also , across that wall a contact equilibrium with respect to that substance is possible .
By suitable thermodynamic operations , the pure substance reservoir can be dealt with as a closed system .
Its internal energy and its entropy can be determined as functions of its temperature , pressure , and mole number .
A thermodynamic operation can render impermeable to matter all system walls other than the contact equilibrium wall for that substance .
This allows the definition of an intensive state variable , with respect to a reference state of the surroundings , for that substance .
The intensive variable is called the chemical potential ; for component substance it is usually denoted .
The corresponding extensive variable can be the number of moles of the component substance in the system .
For a contact equilibrium across a wall permeable to a substance , the chemical potentials of the substance must be same on either side of the wall .
This is part of the nature of thermodynamic equilibrium , and may be regarded as related to the zeroth law of thermodynamics .
OPEN SYSTEM Section::::Open system .
In the most general case , the borders of a system allow an exchange not only of heat , but also substance .
In this general case , the system is named open .
It is named closed , if borders are impenetrable for substance , but allow transit of energy in the form of heat , and isolated , if there is no exchange of heat and substances .
The open system can not exist in the equilibrium state .
To describe deviation of the thermodynamic system from equilibrium , in addition to constitutive variables that was described above , a set of internal variables formula_7 that are called internal variables have been introduced .
The equilibrium state is considered to be stable .
and the main property of the internal variables , as measures of non - equilibrium of the system , is their trending to disappear ; the local law of disappearing can be written as relaxation equation for each internal variable where formula_8 is a relaxation time of a corresponding variables .
It is convenient to consider the initial value formula_9 are equal to zero .
The essential contribution to the thermodynamics of the open non - equilibrium systems was brought by Prigogine , when he and his collaborators investigated the systems of chemically reacting substances .
The stationary states of such systems exists due to exchange both particles and energy with the environment .
In section 8 of the third chapter of his book , Prigogine has specified three contributions to the variation of entropy of the considered open system at the given volume and constant temperature formula_10 .
The increment of entropy formula_11 can be calculated according to the formula
The first term on the right hand side of the equation presents a stream of thermal energy into the system ; the last term -- a stream of energy into the system coming with the stream of particles of substances formula_12 that can be positive or negative , formula_13 is chemical potential of substance formula_14 .
The middle term in ( 1 ) depicts energy dissipation ( entropy production ) due to the relaxation of internal variables formula_15 .
In the case of chemically reacting substances , which was investigated by Prigogine , the internal variables appear to be measures of incompleteness of chemical reactions , that is measures of how much the considered system with chemical reactions is out of equilibrium .
The theory can be generalized , to consider any deviation from the equilibrium state as an internal variable , so that we consider the set of internal variables formula_15 in equation ( 1 ) to consist of the quantities defining not only degrees of completeness of all chemical reactions occurring in the system , but also the structure of the system , gradients of temperature , difference of concentrations of substances and so on .
The Prigogine approach to the open system allow describing the growth and development of living odjects in thermodynamic terms .
ADIABATIC SYSTEM Section::::Adiabatic system .
An adiabatic system is the one which does n't allow any heat to be transferred into or out of the system .
formula_17 = constant equation is only valid for an adiabatic system which is also undergoing a reversible process provided it is a closed system having an ideal gas .
If it fails to satisfy any of these conditions then only formula_18 is true and it can not be represented in an equation like formula_17
= constant SEE ALSO
* Thermodynamic process
* Thermodynamic cycle * Isolated system * Physical system
* Mechanical system
* Quantum system * Two - state quantum system * Dynamical system
* Energy system REFERENCES
* Callen , H.B. ( 1960/1985 ) .
Thermodynamics and an Introduction to Thermostatistics , ( 1st edition 1960 )
2nd edition 1985 , Wiley , New York , .