MOTOR UNIT
A motor unit is made up of a motor neuron and the skeletal muscle fibers innervated by that motor neuron 's axonal terminals .
Groups of motor units often work together to coordinate the contractions of a single muscle ; all of the motor units within a muscle are considered a motor pool .
The concept was proposed by Charles Scott Sherrington .
All muscle fibres in a motor unit are of the same fibre type .
When a motor unit is activated , all of its fibres contract .
In vertebrates , the force of a muscle contraction is controlled by the number of activated motor units .
The number of muscle fibers within each unit can vary within a particular muscle and even more from muscle to muscle ; the muscles that act on the largest body masses have motor units that contain more muscle fibers , whereas smaller muscles contain fewer muscle fibers in each motor unit .
For instance , thigh muscles can have a thousand fibers in each unit , while extraocular muscles might have ten .
Muscles which possess more motor units ( and thus have greater individual motor neuron innervation ) are able to control force output more finely .
Motor units are organized slightly differently in invertebrates ; each muscle has few motor units ( typically less than 10 ) , and each muscle fiber is innervated by multiple neurons , including excitatory and inhibitory neurons .
Thus , while in vertebrates the force of contraction of muscles is regulated by how many motor units are activated , in invertebrates it is controlled by regulating the balance between excitatory and inhibitory signals .
RECRUITMENT Section::::Recruitment .
The central nervous system is responsible for the orderly recruitment of motor neurons , beginning with the smallest motor units .
Henneman 's size principle indicates that motor units are recruited from smallest to largest based on the size of the load .
For smaller loads requiring less force , slow twitch , low - force , fatigue - resistant muscle fibers are activated prior to the recruitment of the fast twitch , high - force , less fatigue - resistant muscle fibers .
Larger motor units are typically composed of faster muscle fibers that generate higher forces .
The central nervous system has two distinct ways of controlling the force produced by a muscle through motor unit recruitment : spatial recruitment and temporal recruitment .
Spatial recruitment is the activation of more motor units to produce a greater force .
Larger motor units contract along with small motor units until all muscle fibers in a single muscle are activated , thus producing the maximum muscle force .
Temporal motor unit recruitment , or rate coding , deals with the frequency of activation of muscle fiber contractions .
Consecutive stimulation on the motor unit fibres from the alpha motor neuron causes the muscle to twitch more frequently until the twitches " fuse " temporally .
This produces a greater force than singular contractions by decreasing the interval between stimulations to produce a larger force with the same number of motor units .
Using electromyography ( EMG ) , the neural strategies of muscle activation can be measured .
Ramp - force threshold refers to an index of motor neuron size in order to test the size principle .
This is tested by determining the recruitment threshold of a motor unit during isometric contraction in which the force is gradually increased .
Motor units recruited at low force ( low - threshold units ) tend to be small motor units , while high - threshold units are recruited when higher forces are needed and involve larger motor neurons .
These tend to have shorter contraction times than the smaller units .
The number of additional motor units recruited during a given increment of force declines sharply at high levels of voluntary force .
This suggests that , even though high threshold units generate more tension , the contribution of recruitment to increase voluntary force declines at higher force levels .
To test motor unit stimulation , electrodes are placed extracellularly on the skin and an intramuscular stimulation is applied .
After the motor unit is stimulated , its pulse is then recorded by the electrode and displayed as an action potential , known as a motor unit action potential ( MUAP ) .
When multiple MUAP 's are recorded within a short time interval , a motor unit action potential train ( MUAPT ) is then noted .
The time in between these pulses is known as the inter - pulse interval ( IPI ) .
In medical electrodiagnostic testing for a patient with weakness , careful analysis of the MUAP size , shape , and recruitment pattern can help in distinguishing a myopathy from a neuropathy .
MOTOR UNIT TYPES Section::::Motor unit types .
Motor units are generally categorized based upon the similarities between several factors : * Physiological * Contraction speed in Isometric contractions * Rate of rise of force * Time to peak of a twitch contraction ( response to a single nerve impulse )
* Biochemical * Histochemical ( the oldest form of biochemical fiber typing ) * Glycolytic enzyme activity ( e.g. glycerophosphate dehydrogenase ( GPD ) ) * Oxidative enzyme activity ( e.g. succinate dehydrogenase -SDH ) * Sensitivity of Myosin ATPase to acid and alkali *
Immunohistochemical ( a more recent form of fiber typing ) * Myosin Heavy Chain ( MHC ) * Myosin Light Chain — alkali ( MLC1 )
* Myosin Light Chain — regulatory ( MLC2 ) ! ! ! ! ! ! !
* Gene characterization of myosins
The typing of motor units has thus gone through many stages and reached a point where it is recognized that muscle fibers contain varying mixtures of several mysosin types that can not easily be classified into specific groups of fibers .
The three ( or four ) classical fiber types represent peaks in the distribution of muscle fiber properties , each determined by the overall biochemistry of the fibers .
Estimates of innervation ratios of motor units in human muscles : !
Muscle ! !
Number of Motor Axons ! !
Number of Muscle Fibers ! !
Innervation Ratio ! !
Reference SEE ALSO
* MYH1 , MYH2 , MYH3 , MYH4 , MYH6 , MYH7 , MYH7B , MYH8 , MYH9 , MYH10 ,
MYH11 , MYH13 ,
MYH14 , MYH15 , MYH16 * tetanic contraction * motor unit number estimation REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Neurons and Support Cells