RANCH DRESSING Ranch dressing is a type of salad dressing made of some combination of buttermilk , salt , garlic , onion , mustard , herbs ( commonly chives , parsley , and dill ) , and spices ( commonly black pepper , paprika , and ground mustard seed ) , mixed into a sauce based on mayonnaise , or another oil emulsion .
Sour cream and yogurt are sometimes used in addition to or as a substitute for buttermilk and mayonnaise .
Ranch dressing has been the best - selling salad dressing in the United States since 1992 , when it overtook Italian dressing .
It is also popular in the US as a dip and flavoring for chips and other foods .
In 2017 , forty percent of Americans named ranch as their favorite dressing .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In the early 1950s , Steve Henson developed what is now known as ranch dressing while working as a plumbing contractor for three years in the remote Alaskan bush .
In 1954 , he and his wife Gayle opened Hidden Valley Ranch , a dude ranch at the former Sweetwater Ranch on San Marcos Pass in Santa Barbara County , California , where they served it to customers .
It became popular , and they began selling it in packages for customers to take home , both as a finished product and as packets of seasoning to be mixed with mayonnaise and buttermilk .
As demand grew , they incorporated Hidden Valley Ranch Food Products , Inc. , and opened a factory to manufacture it in larger volumes , which they first distributed to supermarkets in the Southwest , and eventually , nationwide .
In October 1972 , the Hidden Valley Ranch brand was bought by Clorox for $ 8 million .
Kraft Foods and General Foods responded with similar dry seasoning packets labeled as " ranch style " .
As a result , they were both sued for trademark infringement by the Waples - Platter Companies , the Texas - based manufacturer of Ranch Style Beans ( now part of ConAgra Foods ) , even though Waples - Platter had declined to enter the salad dressing market itself out of fear that the tendency of such products to spoil rapidly would damage its brand .
The case was tried before federal judge Eldon Brooks Mahon in Fort Worth , Texas , in 1976 .
Judge Mahon ruled in favor of Waples - Platter in a lengthy opinion which described the various " ranch style " and " ranch " products then available , of which many had been created to compete against Hidden Valley Ranch .
Judge Mahon specifically noted that Hidden Valley Ranch and Waples - Platter had no dispute with each other ( though he also noted that Hidden Valley Ranch was simultaneously suing General Foods in a separate federal case in California ) .
The only issue before the Texas federal district court was that Waples - Platter was disputing the right of other manufacturers to compete against Hidden Valley Ranch by using the label " ranch style " .
Meanwhile , Clorox reformulated the Hidden Valley Ranch dressing several times to make it more convenient for consumers .
The first change was to include buttermilk flavoring in the seasoning so that it required adding standard milk rather than buttermilk .
In 1983 , Clorox developed a more popular non - refrigerated bottled formulation .
As of 2002 , Clorox subsidiary Hidden Valley Ranch Manufacturing LLC produces ranch packets and bottled dressings at two large factories , in Reno , Nevada , and Wheeling , Illinois .
During the 1980s , ranch became a common snack food flavor , starting with Cool Ranch Doritos in 1987 , and Hidden Valley Ranch Wavy Lay 's in 1994 .
During the 1990s , Hidden Valley had three kid - oriented variations of ranch dressing : pizza , nacho cheese , and taco flavors .
POPULARITY Section::::Popularity .
Ranch dressing is common in the United States as a dipping sauce for broccoli , carrots and celery as well as a dip for chips and " bar foods " such as french fries and chicken wings .
It is also a common dipping sauce for fried foods such as fried mushrooms , fried zucchini , fried pickles , jalapeno poppers , onion rings , chicken fingers , and hushpuppies .
In addition , ranch dressing is used on pizza , pickles , baked potatoes , wraps , tacos , pretzels , and hamburgers .
While popular in the United States and Canada , ranch dressing is mostly unknown in other parts of the world .
In Germany , Kühne produces a product labeled as Würziges Ranch - Dressing ( literally " spicy ranch dressing " ) .
It is based on the common recipe but contains additional tomatoes , red bell peppers , and red pepper .
Its color is not white but looks like cocktail sauce .
Ranch dressing is produced by many manufacturers , including Hidden Valley , Ken 's , Kraft , Litehouse , Marie 's , Newman 's Own , and Wish - Bone .
SEE ALSO
* List of dips
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Hidden Valley Ranch Dressing history