GROUND SQUIRREL
The ground squirrels are members of the squirrel family of rodents ( Sciuridae ) which generally live on or in the ground , rather than trees .
The term is most often used for the medium - sized ground squirrels , as the larger ones are more commonly known as marmots ( genus Marmota ) or prairie dogs , while the smaller and less bushy - tailed ground squirrels tend to be known as chipmunks .
Together , they make up the " marmot tribe " of squirrels , Marmotini , and the large and mainly ground squirrel subfamily Xerinae , and containing six living genera .
Well - known members of this largely Holarctic group are the marmots ( Marmota ) , including the American groundhog , the chipmunks , the susliks ( Spermophilus ) , and the prairie dogs ( Cynomys ) .
They are highly variable in size and habitus , but most are remarkably able to rise up on their hind legs and stand fully erect comfortably for prolonged periods .
They also tend to be far more gregarious than other squirrels , and many live in colonies with complex social structures .
Most Marmotini are rather short - tailed and large squirrels , and the alpine marmot ( Marmota marmota ) is the largest living member of the Sciuridae , at 53–73 cm in length and weighing 5–8 kg .
The chipmunks of the genus Tamias frequently spend time in trees .
Also closer to typical squirrels in other aspects , they are occasionally considered a tribe of their own ( Tamiini ) .
The ground squirrel is especially renowned for its tendency to rise up on its hind legs .
It does this whenever it senses nearby danger , or when it must see over tall grasses .
The squirrel then curls its paws flat against its chest and sends a screeching call to warn other family members about the presence of predators .
EVOLUTION AND SYSTEMATICS Section::::Evolution and systematics .
Palaeosciurus from Europe is the oldest known ground squirrel species , and it does not seem to be particularly close to any of the two to three living lineages ( subtribes ) of Marmotini .
The oldest fossils are from the Early Oligocene , more than 30 million years ago ( mya ) , but the genus probably persisted at least until the mid - Miocene , some 15 mya .
It is not clear where the Marmotini originated .
The subtribes probably diverged in the early to mid - Oligocene , as primitive marmots and chipmunks are known from the Late Oligocene of North America .
Unfortunately , the fossil record of the " true " ground squirrels is less well known , beginning only in the mid - Miocene , when modern susliks and prairie dogs are known to have inhabited their present - day range already .
Whether the Marmotini dispersed between North America and Eurasia via " island - hopping " across the Bering Straits or the Greenland region — which both at that time were temperate habitat — and from which continent they dispersed to which , or if both continents brought forth distinct subtribes which then spread to the other , is not known and would probably require more fossil material to be resolved .
In any case , that the fairly comprehensive fossil record of Europe — at the relevant time separated from Asia by the Turgai Sea — lacks ancient Marmotini except the indeterminate Palaeosciurus might be taken to indicate an East Asian or western North American origin with trans - Beringia dispersal is the slightly more satisfying hypothesis of it .
This is also supported by the enigmatic Chinese genus Sciurotamias , which may be the most ancient living lineage of this group , or — if the chipmunks are not included here — close to the common ancestor of the Tamiini and the Marmotini sensu stricto .
In any case , expansion of the Marmotini to Africa was probably prevented by competitive exclusion by their close relatives the Protoxerini and Xerini — the native terrestrial and palm squirrels of that continent — which must have evolved at the same time as the Marmotini did .
HABITAT Section::::Habitat .
Open areas including rocky outcrops , fields , pastures , and sparsely wooded hillsides .
Ground squirrels also live in grassy areas such as pastures , golf courses , cemeteries , and parks .
DIET Section::::Diet .
Ground squirrels are omnivorous , and will not only eat a diet rich in fungi , nuts , fruits , and seeds , but also occasionally insects , eggs , and other small animals .
They are known to eat rats and mice several times their size .
SUBTRIBES AND GENERA Section::::Subtribes and genera .
Basal and incertae sedis genera
* Palaeosciurus ( fossil ) * Sciurotamias ( Chinese rock squirrels ) Subtribe Tamiina : chipmunks ( might be full tribe )
* Eutamias * Neotamias * Nototamias ( fossil ) * Tamias Subtribe Marmotina : marmots
*
Arctomyoides ( fossil )
*
Miospermophilus ( fossil )
* Paenemarmota ( fossil ) * Palaearctomys ( fossil ) * Protospermophilus ( fossil ) * Marmota
* Ictidomys : Thirteen - lined ground squirrel and related species
Subtribe Spermophilina : true ground squirrels * Spermophilinus ( fossil ) *
Ammospermophilus * Cynomys ( Prairie Dogs )
*
Spermophilus CLADOGRAM Section::::Cladogram .
Below is a cladogram of ground squirrels ( tribe Marmotini ) derived from maximum parsimony analysis .
SEE ALSO
* Squirrel * Tree squirrel
* Richardson 's ground squirrel ( Urocitellus richardsonii )
FOOTNOTES REFERENCES
* ( 2004 ) : " Nuclear DNA phylogeny of the squirrels ( Mammalia : Rodentia ) and the evolution of arboreality from c - myc and RAG1 " .
Mol . Phyl .
Evol .
30(3 )
: 703–719 .
PDF fulltext
* ( 2005 ) : Family Sciuridae .
In : Mammal Species of the World — A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference : 754–818 .
Johns Hopkins University Press , Baltimore .
EXTERNAL LINKS * About California Ground Squirrels