LANGUAGES WITH OFFICIAL STATUS IN INDIA
The Constitution of India designates the official language of the Government of India as Hindi written in the Devanagari script , as well as English .
There is no national language as declared by the Constitution of India .
Hindi is used for official purposes such as parliamentary proceedings , judiciary , communications between the Central Government and a State Government .
States within India have the liberty and powers to specify their own official language(s ) through legislation and therefore there are 22 officially recognized languages in India of which Hindi is the most used .
The number of native Hindi speakers is about 25 % of the total Indian population ; however , including dialects of Hindi termed as Hindi languages , the total is around 44 % of Indians , mostly accounted from the states falling under the Hindi belt .
Other Indian languages are each spoken by around 10 % or less of the population .
States specify their own official language(s ) through legislation .
The section of the Constitution of India dealing with official languages therefore includes detailed provisions which deal not just with the languages used for the official purposes of the union , but also with the languages that are to be used for the official purposes of each state and union territory in the country , and the languages that are to be used for communication between the union and the states inter se .
During the British Raj , English was used for purposes at the federal level .
The Indian constitution adopted in 1950 envisaged that Hindi would be gradually phased in to replace English over a fifteen - year period , but gave Parliament the power to , by law , provide for the continued use of English even thereafter .
Plans to make Hindi the sole official language of the Republic met with resistance in some parts of the country .
Hindi continues to be used today , in combination with other ( at the central level and in some states )
State official languages at the state level .
The legal framework governing the use of languages for official purpose currently includes the Constitution , the Official Languages Act , 1963 , Official Languages ( Use for Official Purpose of the Union ) Rules , 1976 , and various state laws , as well as rules and regulations made by the central government and the states .
OFFICIAL LANGUAGES OF THE UNION
Section::::Official languages of the Union .
The Indian constitution , in 1950 , declared Hindi in Devanagari script to be the official language of the union .
Unless Parliament decided otherwise , the use of English for official purposes was to cease 15 years after the constitution came into effect , i.e. , on 26 January 1965 .
The prospect of the changeover , however , led to much alarm in the non Hindi - speaking areas of India , especially Dravidian - speaking states whose languages were not related to Hindi at all .
As a result , Parliament enacted the , In late 1964 , an attempt was made to expressly provide for an end to the use of English , but it was met with protests from states such as Maharashtra , Tamil Nadu , Punjab , West Bengal , Karnataka , Puducherry and Andhra Pradesh .
Some of these protests also turned violent .
As a result , the proposal was dropped , and the Act itself was amended in 1967 to provide that the use of English would not be ended until a resolution to that effect was passed by the legislature of every state that had not adopted Hindi as its official language , and by each house of the Indian Parliament .
The position was thus that the Union government continues to use English in addition to Hindi for its official purposes as a " subsidiary official language , " but is also required to prepare and execute a programme to progressively increase its use of Hindi .
The exact extent to which , and the areas in which , the Union government uses Hindi and English , respectively , is determined by the provisions of the Constitution , the Official Languages Act , 1963 , the Official Languages Rules , 1976 , and statutory instruments made by the Department of Official Language under these laws .
PARLIAMENTARY PROCEEDINGS AND LAWS Section::::Parliamentary proceedings and laws .
The Indian constitution draws a distinction between the language to be used in Parliamentary proceedings , and the language in which laws are to be made .
Parliamentary business , according to the Constitution , may be conducted in either Hindi or English .
The use of English in parliamentary proceedings was to be phased out at the end of fifteen years unless Parliament chose to extend its use , which Parliament did through the Official Languages Act , 1963 .
In addition , the constitution permits a person who is unable to express themselves in either Hindi or English to , with the permission of the Speaker of the relevant House , address the House in their mother tongue .
In contrast , the constitution requires the authoritative text of all laws , including Parliamentary enactments and statutory instruments , to be in English , until Parliament decides otherwise .
Parliament has not exercised its power to so decide , instead merely requiring that all such laws and instruments , and all bills brought before it , also be translated into Hindi , though the English text remains authoritative .
JUDICIARY Section::::Judiciary .
The constitution provides , and the Supreme Court of India has reiterated , that all proceedings in the Supreme Court ( the country 's highest court ) and the High Courts shall be in English .
Parliament has the power to alter this by law , but has not done so .
However , in many high courts , there is , with consent from the president , allowance of the optional use of Hindi .
Such proposals have been successful in the states of Rajasthan , Madhya Pradesh , Uttar Pradesh , and Bihar .
ADMINISTRATION Section::::Administration .
The Union government is required by law to progressively increase the use of Hindi in its official work , which it has sought to do through " persuasion , incentive and goodwill " .
The Official Language Act provides that the Union government shall use both Hindi and English in most administrative documents that are intended for the public .
The Official Languages Rules , in contrast , provide for a higher degree of use of Hindi in communications between offices of the central government ( other than offices in Tamil Nadu , to which the rules do not apply ) .
Communications between different departments within the central government may be in either Hindi or English , although a translation into the other language must be provided if required .
Communications within offices of the same department , however , must be in Hindi if the offices are in Hindi - speaking states , and in either Hindi or English otherwise with Hindi being used in proportion to the percentage of staff in the receiving office who have a working knowledge of Hindi .
Notes and memos in files may be in either Hindi or English , with the Government having a duty to provide a translation into the other language if required .
In addition , every person submitting a petition for the redress of a grievance to a government officer or authority has a constitutional right to submit it in any language used in India .
IMPLEMENTATION Section::::Implementation .
Various steps have been taken by the Indian government to implement the use and familiarisation of Hindi extensively .
Dakshina Bharat Hindi Prachar Sabha headquartered at Chennai was formed to spread Hindi in South Indian states .
Regional Hindi implementation offices at Bengaluru , Thiruvananthapuram , Mumbai , Kolkata , Guwahati , Bhopal , Delhi and Ghaziabad have been established to monitor the implementation of Hindi in Central government offices and PSUs .
Annual targets are set by the Department of Official Language regarding the amount of correspondence being carried out in Hindi .
A Parliament Committee on Official Language constituted in 1976
periodically reviews the progress in the use of Hindi and submits a report to the President .
The governmental body which makes policy decisions and established guidelines for promotion of Hindi is the Kendriya Hindi Samiti ( est . 1967 ) .
In every city that has more than ten central Government offices , a Town Official Language Implementation Committee is established and cash awards are given to government employees who write books in Hindi .
All Central government offices and PSUs are to establish Hindi Cells for implementation of Hindi in their offices .
In 2016 , the Modi government announced plans to promote Hindi in government offices in Southern and Northeast India .
The Indian constitution does not specify the official languages to be used by the states for the conduct of their official functions , and leaves each state free to , through its legislature , adopt Hindi or any language used in its territory as its official language or languages .
The language need not be one of those listed in the Eighth Schedule , and several states have adopted official languages which are not so listed .
Examples include Kokborok in Tripura and Mizo in Mizoram .
LEGISLATURE AND ADMINISTRATION Section::::Legislature and administration .
The constitutional provisions in relation to use of the official language in legislation at the State level largely mirror those relating to the official language at the central level , with minor variations .
State legislatures may conduct their business in their official language , Hindi or ( for a transitional period , which the legislature can extend if it so chooses ) English , and members who can not use any of these have the same rights to their mother tongue with the Speaker 's permission .
The authoritative text of all laws must be in English , unless Parliament passes a law permitting a state to use another language , and if the original text of a law is in a different language , an authoritative English translation of all laws must be prepared .
The state has the right to regulate the use of its official language in public administration , and in general , neither the constitution nor any central enactment imposes any restriction on this right .
However , every person submitting a petition for the redress of a grievance to an officer or authority of the state government has a constitutional right to submit it in any language used in that state , regardless of its official status .
In addition , the constitution grants the central government , acting through the President , the power to issue certain directives to the government of a state in relation to the use of minority languages for official purposes .
The President may direct a State to officially recognise a language spoken in its territory for specified purposes and in specified regions , if its speakers demand it and satisfy him that a substantial proportion of the State 's population desire its use .
Similarly , States and local authorities are required to endeavour to provide primary education in the mother tongue for all linguistic minorities , regardless of whether their language is official in that State , and the President has the power to issue directions he deems necessary to ensure that they are provided these facilities .
STATE JUDICIARY Section::::State judiciary .
States have significantly less freedom in relation to determine the language in which judicial proceedings in their respective High Courts will be conducted .
The constitution gives the power to authorise the use of Hindi , or the state 's official language in proceedings of the High Court to the Governor , rather than the state legislature , and requires the Governor to obtain the consent of the President of India , who in these matters acts on the advice of the Government of India .
The Official Languages Act gives the Governor a similar power , subject to similar conditions , in relation to the language in which the High Court 's judgments will be delivered .
Four states — Bihar , Uttar Pradesh , Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan — have been granted the right to conduct proceedings in their High Courts in their official language , which , for all of them , was Hindi .
However , the only non - Hindi state to seek a similar power — Tamil Nadu , which sought the right to conduct proceedings in Tamil in its High Court — had its application rejected by the central government earlier , which said it was advised to do so by the Supreme Court .
In 2006 , the law ministry said that it would not object to Tamil Nadu state 's desire to conduct Madras High Court proceedings in Tamil .
In 2010 , the Chief Justice of the Madras High Court allowed lawyers to argue cases in Tamil .
LIST OF OFFICIAL LANGUAGES BY STATES Section::::List of official languages by states .
List of official languages of states of India !
No .
State Official
language(s ) Additional official language(s ) List of official languages of Union Territories of India + Union territories !
No . Union territory Official language(s ) Additional official language(s ) } EIGHTH SCHEDULE TO THE CONSTITUTION Section::::Eighth Schedule to the Constitution .
The Eighth Schedule to the Indian Constitution contains a list of 22 scheduled languages .
At the time the constitution was enacted , inclusion in this list meant that the language was entitled to representation on the Official Languages Commission , and that the language would be one of the bases that would be drawn upon to enrich Hindi , the official language of the Union .
The list has since , however , acquired further significance .
The Government of India is now under an obligation to take measures for the development of these languages , such that " they grow rapidly in richness and become effective means of communicating modern knowledge . "
In addition , a candidate appearing in an examination conducted for public service at a higher level is entitled to use any of these languages as the medium in which he or she answers the paper .
Via the 92nd Constitutional amendment 2003 , four new languages – Dogri , Maithili , Santali and Bodo – were added to the 8th Schedule of the Indian Constitution .
The table below lists the 22 languages set out in the Eighth Schedule as of May 2008 , together with the regions where they are used .
Even though the English language is not included in the Eighth Schedule ( as it is a foreign language ) , it is one of the official languages of the Union of India . !
Language !
Family !
Speakers !
State(s )
Kannada Dravidian 43.7 Karnataka } Of the 22 official languages , 15 are Indic , four are Dravidian , two are Tibeto - Burman , and one is Munda .
Since 2003 , a government committee has been looking into the feasibility of treating all languages in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution as " Official Languages of the Union " .
UNION – STATE AND INTERSTATE COMMUNICATION Section::::Union – state and interstate communication .
The language in which communications between different states , or from the union government to a state or a person in a state , shall be sent is regulated by the Official Languages Act and , for states other than Tamil Nadu , by the Official Languages Rules .
Communication between states who use Hindi as their official language is required to be in Hindi , whereas communication between a state whose official language is Hindi and one whose is not , is required to be in English , or , in Hindi with an accompanying English translation ( unless the receiving state agrees to dispense with the translation ) .
Communication between the union and states which use Hindi as their official language ( classified by the Official Language Rules as " the states in Region A " ) , and with persons who live in those states , is generally in Hindi , except in certain cases .
Communication with a second category of states " Region B " , which do not use Hindi as their official language but have elected to communicate with the union in Hindi ( currently Gujarat , Maharashtra , and Punjab ) is usually in Hindi , whilst communications sent to an individual in those states may be in either Hindi or English .
Communication with all other states " Region C " , and with people living in them , is in English .
SEE ALSO
* Languages of India
* List of Indian languages by number of native speakers * Indian States by most popular languages NOTES REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Department of Official Language ( DOL ) –
Official webpage explains the chronological events related to Official Languages Act and amendments * Central Institute of Indian Languages – A comprehensive federal government site that offers complete info on Indian Languages
* Reconciling Linguistic Diversity :
The History and the Future of Language Policy in India by Jason Baldridge * Multi - lingualism and language policy in India
* Words and phrases in more than 30 Indian languages