E ( NEW YORK CITY SUBWAY SERVICE )
The E Eighth Avenue Local is a rapid transit service in the B Division of the New York City Subway .
Its route emblem , or " bullet " , is since it uses the IND Eighth Avenue Line in Manhattan .
The E operates at all times between Jamaica Center – Parsons / Archer in Jamaica , Queens , and World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan ; limited rush hour service originates and terminates at 179th Street instead of Jamaica Center .
Daytime service operates express in Queens and local in Manhattan ; late night service makes local stops along its entire route .
In its early years , the E train ran along the Rutgers Street Tunnel and IND Culver Line to Brooklyn , though this service pattern stopped by the 1940s .
Until 1976 , it ran to Brooklyn and Queens via the IND Fulton Street Line and IND Rockaway Line .
The E 's northern terminal was switched from 179th Street to Jamaica Center with the opening of the IND Archer Avenue Line in 1988 .
The E is one of the most heavily used services in the subway system , and operates over the operating guidelines during rush hours .
HISTORY Section::::History .
On August 19 , 1933 , E service officially began , running between Roosevelt Avenue – Jackson Heights and the Hudson Terminal ( current World Trade Center station ) .
The E would not yet run express via Queens Boulevard as the IND Crosstown Line did not yet fully open until Brooklyn , and the IND Queens Boulevard Line had not yet opened to Jamaica .
On January 1 , 1936 , the IND Sixth Avenue Line opened to East Broadway and the E was extended there .
E trains no longer served stations on the Eighth Avenue Line south of West Fourth Street .
On April 9 of the same year , the Sixth Avenue Line was extended through the Rutgers Street Tunnel to Jay Street – Borough Hall , and E trains were extended via this line and the IND Culver Line to Church Avenue , replacing the train .
E service was again extended when the Queens Boulevard Line was extended to Kew Gardens – Union Turnpike on December 31 , 1936 , and then to 169th Street on April 24 , 1937 .
E trains began running express between Continental Avenue and Queens Plaza on April 24 , 1937 , with off - peak service running as EE local trains .
On September 12 , 1938 , several weekday rush hour trains began terminating at Jay Street in the morning , and a few entered service at Smith – Ninth Streets in the evening .
Between 1939 and 1940 , select PM E trains ran to - and - from the Horace Harding Boulevard terminal at the 1939 New York World 's Fair , terminating at Hudson Terminal in Manhattan .
Service ended following the fair .
On December 15 , 1940 , service on the entire Sixth Avenue Line began .
The E was cut back to Broadway – Lafayette Street .
South of that station , it was replaced by the train .
On October 24 , 1949 , the E was extended during rush hours to Broadway – East New York running via Fulton Street Local to allow A trains to run express .
On December 10 , 1950 , the Queens Boulevard Line 's extension to 179th Street opened , allowing E trains to terminate there .
E trains ran express between Queens Plaza and 71st Avenue and local from 71st Avenue to 179th Street .
In 1953 , the platforms were lengthened to at 75th Avenue , Sutphin Boulevard , Spring Street , Canal Street , Ralph Avenue and Broadway – East New York so that E trains could run eleven - car trains .
The E began running eleven - car trains during rush hours on September 8 , 1953 .
The extra train car increased the total carrying capacity by 4,000 passengers .
Then , on October 30 , 1954 , E trains began running to Hudson Terminal during non - rush hours , and began running express in Manhattan during rush hours .
On June 28 , 1956 , the LIRR Rockaway Beach Branch re - opened as the IND Rockaway Line after being converted for subway service and E service was extended from East New York to Rockaway Park or Wavecrest during weekday rush hours .
During non - rush hours , service was provided by shuttle service between Euclid and Rockaway Park or Wavecrest .
On September 16 , 1956 , rush hour E service was cut back to Euclid Avenue when Rockaway service was replaced by the A train .
The A and E later switched southern terminals again , and on September 6 , 1958 , the E began running to the Rockaways during rush hours .
During off - peak hours on weekedays , separate shuttles operated to Far Rockaway and Rockaway Park .
During weekends and late nights round - robin service operated .
On September 8 , 1959 , the E began running express to Euclid Avenue , while the A became local ; however , in 1960 , the E train became an express in Brooklyn and was extended to the Rockaways , with some put - ins beginning at Euclid Avenue and later Lefferts Boulevard during rush hours .
Some E trains were extended to Lefferts Boulevard on June 6 of that year due to complaints .
In 1963–1964 , the E was extended to the Rockaways during rush hours , with some put - ins beginning at Euclid Avenue and later Lefferts Boulevard .
On March 23 , 1970 , southbound E trains , during rush hours , began stopping at the lower level of the 42nd Street station .
On January 2 , 1973 , the E train became the local in Brooklyn again , running to Rockaway Park – Beach 116th Street only .
Finally , on August 27 , 1976 , E service in Brooklyn was eliminated with all trains terminating at World Trade Center ( the local platform ) .
Brooklyn service was replaced by the CC local .
On December 11 , 1988 , the IND Archer Avenue Line opened .
E trains were rerouted via this branch , stopping at the upper level of the Sutphin Boulevard and Jamaica Center stations .
The E train now skipped 75th Avenue and Van Wyck Boulevard on weekdays . '
service was extended to 179th Street , replacing the E as the Hillside Avenue Local service , but this was later discontinued when the ' became the local .
A few rush hour trains continue to operate to 179th Street .
On March 23 , 1997 , the E service began stopping at 75th Avenue and Van Wyck Boulevard during evenings , nights and weekends .
On August 30 , 1997 , E service began running local in Queens during late nights .
During the early part of 2000 , because of the replacement of track switches at the World Trade Center station , the E was extended to Euclid Avenue at all times except late nights , when it operated to Canal Street .
Service on the E was again affected by the September 11 attacks in 2001 , as its terminal station , World Trade Center , was located at the northeastern corner of the World Trade Center site , so for a time , the E again operated to Euclid Avenue in Brooklyn as the local on the IND Fulton Street Line at all times except late nights , replacing the temporarily suspended ' service .
On September 24 , 2001 , ' service was restored , and E service was cut back to Canal Street , since World Trade Center would be closed until January 2002 .
On December 16 , 2001 , the connection from the IND 63rd Street Line to the Queens Boulevard Line opened , and trains were rerouted via this connector to travel between Manhattan and Queens .
Some rush hour E trains now ran to 179th Street , allowing passengers on Hillside Avenue east of Union Turnpike to have an express service to 53rd Street .
This was also due to the lack of capacity at Jamaica Center during rush hours .
EE SERVICE Section::::EE service .
The EE originally ran as an Eighth Avenue local between 71st – Continental Avenues and Chambers Street during off peak hours when the ' did n't run .
This service was discontinued when the IND Sixth Avenue Line opened on December 15 , 1940 .
However , the EE reappeared on November 26 , 1967 when it ran between 71st – Continental Avenues and Whitehall Street via the local tracks of the BMT Broadway Line , replacing the ' and ' .
This service was discontinued on August 30 , 1976 , and replaced by the ' .
The route of the EE to Whitehall Street is currently duplicated by the R service .
ROUTE SERVICE PATTERN Section::::Route .
Section::::Service pattern .
The following table shows the lines used by the E service , with shaded boxes indicating the route at the specified times : !
rowspan=2 Line !
rowspan=2 From !
rowspan=2 To !
rowspan=2 Tracks !
colspan=4
Times ! width=40
align = center rush hours ! width=40
align = center
week­days ! width=40
align = center evenings ,
week­ends ! width=40
align = center late nights Four E trips originate from 179th Street during the a.m. rush hour , three E trips originate from 179th Street during the p.m. rush hour , and four trips terminate at 179th Street during the p.m. rush hour .
STATIONS Section::::Stations .
For a more detailed station listing , see the articles on the lines listed above . !
width=3 % !
width=3 % ! width=28
% Stations !
width=3 % ! width=36
% Subway transfers ! width=30
% Connections / Other Notes
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * MTA NYC Transit – E Eighth Avenue
Local