LIST OF NHL FRANCHISE POST - SEASON DROUGHTS
This article is a list of the active and all - time National Hockey League ( NHL ) franchise post - season appearance , post - season series win , Stanley Cup Finals and Stanley Cup droughts up to and including the 2018 Stanley Cup playoffs .
Those teams which have never made it in franchise history are listed by the season that they entered the league , either as a new franchise or when they merged into the NHL from the defunct World Hockey Association ( WHA ) league .
Note : These lists do not include the cancelled 2004–05 NHL season .
Among the current 31 NHL teams , 12 have never won the Stanley Cup , including one ( the St. Louis Blues )
that is among the five oldest expansion teams .
Additionally , one of the Original Six franchises – the Toronto Maple Leafs – has a Stanley Cup drought that includes the entire expansion era ( 50 seasons and counting ) .
With the Vegas Golden Knights winning the Western Conference in 2018 , there are only four franchises that have never reached the Stanley Cup Finals .
Of those four , the oldest is the Arizona Coyotes ( previously the Winnipeg Jets ) ( 35 seasons ) , while the Maple Leafs and the Blues have even longer droughts ( 50 and 47 seasons , respectively ) .
The longest Stanley Cup championship drought in history was that of the New York Rangers , broken in 1994 after 53 seasons .
The Maple Leafs have the current longest active Stanley Cup championship drought ( and second - longest ) at 50 seasons and counting .
The Chicago Blackhawks had the third - longest ever Stanley Cup championship drought at 47 seasons , which was broken in 2010 .
The end of that drought was the first of three consecutive years in which one of the eleven longest such droughts was broken ( Chicago Blackhawks in 2010 , Boston Bruins in 2011 , and Los Angeles Kings in 2012 ) .
The Columbus Blue Jackets are the only team that have never won a playoff series , though they are just 17 seasons old ; one other franchise ( the Florida Panthers ) has a longer win drought ( 21 seasons ) .
The longest playoff droughts in history were by the Panthers and Edmonton Oilers at 10 seasons , which ended in 2012 and 2017 respectively .
LONGEST ACTIVE
DROUGHTS
POST - SEASON APPEARANCE DROUGHTS Section::::Longest active droughts .
Section::::Post - season appearance droughts .
A post - season appearance drought is continued by not making the NHL playoffs after the regular season .
Since the first round of the playoffs consists of 8 series ( 16 teams ) and there are 31 teams in the NHL , there will always be 15 teams that did not make the most recent playoffs on this list .
The other 16 teams – the Anaheim Ducks , Boston Bruins , Colorado Avalanche , Columbus Blue Jackets , Los Angeles Kings , Minnesota Wild , Nashville Predators , New Jersey Devils , Philadelphia Flyers , Pittsburgh Penguins , San Jose Sharks , Tampa Bay Lightning , Toronto Maple Leafs , Vegas Golden Knights , Washington Capitals and Winnipeg Jets – all qualified for the 2018 Stanley Cup playoffs POST - SEASON SERIES WIN DROUGHTS Section::::Post - season series win droughts .
A post - season series win drought is continued either by not making the playoffs in a season or by making the playoffs in a season but subsequently losing the first round series .
Since the first round of the NHL playoffs consist of 8 series ( 16 teams ) , there will always be 23 teams in this list – the 15 teams that do not qualify for the post - season , plus the 8 teams that lose their first round series .
The other 8 teams – the Boston Bruins , Nashville Predators , Pittsburgh Penguins , San Jose Sharks , Tampa Bay Lightning , Vegas Golden Knights , Washington Capitals and Winnipeg Jets – all won a post - season series in the 2018 Stanley Cup playoffs STANLEY CUP FINALS DROUGHTS Section::::Stanley Cup Finals droughts .
This is a list of the teams and the number of seasons since they have reached the Stanley Cup Finals .
This list does not include the two teams that made the 2018 Stanley Cup Finals : the Vegas Golden Knights and the Washington Capitals STANLEY CUP DROUGHTS Section::::Stanley Cup droughts .
This is a list of the teams and the number of seasons since they have won the Stanley Cup .
This list does not include the most recent Stanley Cup Champions : the Washington Capitals CLOSEST APPROACHES WITHOUT WINNING
LONGEST ALL - TIME DROUGHTS POST - SEASON
APPEARANCE
DROUGHTS POST - SEASON SERIES WIN DROUGHTS STANLEY CUP FINALS DROUGHTS STANLEY CUP DROUGHTS CITIES / REGIONS
AWAITING
FIRST STANLEY CUP Section::::Cities / regions awaiting first Stanley Cup .
This list only includes cities / regions currently hosting an NHL franchise . !
City / Region !
Seasons waiting !
Stanley CupFinals appearances !
Current NHL team
*
Although the Vancouver Canucks have not won a Stanley Cup in their 47 seasons of play ( inception of franchise in 1970–71 through to 2017–18 ) , Vancouver has one Stanley Cup to its credit - the Vancouver Millionaires of the Pacific Coast Hockey Association won the Stanley Cup in 1915 prior to the founding of the NHL in 1917 .
*
While the current Ottawa Senators have never won the Stanley Cup in their 25 seasons of play ( inception of franchise in 1992–93 through to 2017–18 ) , Ottawa celebrated 11 Stanley Cup championships with the original era Ottawa Senators , the last one in 1927 .
* While neither team called the Winnipeg Jets ever won the Stanley Cup in their combined 24 seasons playing in Winnipeg ( as of 2017–18 ) , the city celebrated three Stanley Cup championships by the Winnipeg Victorias , the last in 1902 , prior to the founding of the NHL in 1917 .
SEE ALSO
* List of National Hockey League ( NHL ) franchise post - season appearance streaks * List of Major League Baseball ( MLB ) franchise post - season droughts
* List of National Basketball Association ( NBA ) franchise post - season droughts
* List of National Football League ( NFL ) franchise post - season droughts