FLORIDA LEGISLATURE
The Florida Legislature is the Legislature of the U.S. State of Florida .
It is organized as a bicameral body composed of an upper chamber , the Senate , and a lower chamber , the House of Representatives .
Article III , Section 1 of the Florida Constitution , adopted in 1968 , defines the role of the Legislature and how it is to be constituted .
The Legislature is composed of 160 State Legislators ( 120 in the House and 40 in the Senate ) .
The primary purpose of the Legislature is to enact new laws and amend or repeal existing laws .
The Legislature meets in the Florida State Capitol building in Tallahassee .
TITLES Section::::Titles .
Members of the Senate are referred to as Senators and members of the House of Representatives are referred to as Representatives .
Because this shadows the terminology used to describe members of Congress , constituents and the news media , using The Associated Press Stylebook , often refer to Legislators as State Senators or State Representatives to avoid confusion with their Federal counterparts .
FLORIDA SENATE Section::::Florida Senate .
The Senate is the upper house of the State Legislature .
Its members are elected on a partisan basis for four - year terms .
The Senate consists of 40 members elected from single - member election districts .
Legislative districts are drawn on the basis of population figures through the federal decennial census .
Senators ' terms begin immediately upon their election .
The Senate Chamber is located in the State Capitol building .
As of 2018 , Republicans hold the majority in the State Senate with 23 seats ; Democrats are in the minority with 17 seats .
FLORIDA HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Section::::Florida House of Representatives .
The House of Representatives is the lower house of the State Legislature .
Its members are elected on a partisan basis for two - year terms .
The House of Representatives consists of 120 members who are elected from single - member election districts .
Legislative districts are drawn on the basis of population figures through the federal decennial census .
Representatives ' terms begin immediately upon their election .
The House of Representatives Chamber is located in the State Capitol building .
As of 2018 , Republicans hold the majority in the State House of Representatives with 73 seats , and Democrats hold 47 seats .
TERMS Section::::Terms .
Article III , of the Florida Constitution , defines the terms for State Legislators .
Legislators take office immediately , upon election .
SENATE Section::::Senate .
The Constitution requires State Senators from odd - numbered districts to be elected in the years that end in numbers of which are multiples of four .
Senators from even - numbered districts are required to be elected in even - numbered years the numbers of which are not multiples of four .
To reflect the results of the U.S. Census and the redrawing of district boundaries , all seats are up for election in redistricting years , with some terms truncated as a result .
Thus , senators in even - numbered districts were elected to two - year terms in 2012 ( following the 2010 Census ) , and senators in odd - numbered districts will be elected to two - year terms in 2022 ( following the 2020 Census ) .
All terms were truncated again in 2016 , with all 40 Senate seats up for election , due to court - ordered redistricting .
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Section::::House of Representatives .
Members of the House of Representatives shall be elected for terms of two years in each even - numbered year .
TERM LIMITS Section::::Term limits .
On November 3 , 1992 , almost 77 percent of Florida voters backed Amendment 9 , the Florida Term Limits Amendment , which amended the State Constitution , to enact eight year term limits on federal and state officials .
Under the Amendment , former members can be elected again after a two - year break .
In 1995 , the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that states could not enact congressional term limits , but ruled that the state level term limits remain .
QUALIFICATIONS Section::::Qualifications .
Each legislator shall be at least twenty - one years of age , an elector and resident of the District from which elected and shall have resided in the state for a period of two years prior to election .
LEGISLATIVE SESSION Section::::Legislative Session .
Each year during which the Legislature meets constitutes a new Legislative Session .
COMMITTEE WEEKS Section::::Committee weeks .
Legislators start Committee activity in September of the year prior to the Regular Legislative Session .
Because Florida is a part - time legislature , this is necessary to allow legislators time to work their bills through the Committee process , prior to the Regular Legislative Session .
REGULAR LEGISLATIVE SESSION Section::::Regular legislative session .
The Florida Legislature meets in a 60-day Regular Legislative Session each year .
Regular Legislative Sessions in odd - numbered years must begin on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March .
Under the State Constitution , as of 1998 , the Legislature can begin even - numbered year Regular Legislative Sessions on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in March , or such other date as may be fixed by law .
Prior to 1991 , the Regular Legislative Session began in April .
Senate Joint Resolution 380 ( 1989 ) proposed to the voters a Constitutional Amendment ( approved November 1990 )
that shifted the starting date of Regular Legislative Session from April to February .
Subsequently , Senate Joint Resolution 2606 ( 1994 ) proposed to the voters a Constitutional Amendment ( approved November 1994 ) shifting the start date to March , where it remains .
The reason for the " first Tuesday after the first Monday " requirement stems back to the time when Regular Legislative Session began in April .
Regular Legislative Session could start any day from April 2 through April 8 , but never on April 1 – April Fool 's Day .
In recent years , the Legislature has opted to start in January in order to allow lawmakers to be home with their families during school spring breaks , and to give more time ahead of the legislative elections in the Fall .
ORGANIZATIONAL SESSION Section::::Organizational session .
On the fourteenth day following each General Election , the Legislature meets for an Organizational Session to organize and select officers .
SPECIAL SESSION Section::::Special session .
Special Legislative Sessions may be called by the Governor , by a joint proclamation of the Senate President and House Speaker , or by a three - fifths vote of all Legislators .
During any Special Session the Legislature may only address legislative business that is within the purview of the purpose or purposes stated in the Special Session Proclamation .
POWERS AND PROCESS Section::::Powers and process .
The Florida Legislature is authorized by the Florida Constitution to create and amend the laws of the U.S. state of Florida , subject to the Governor 's power to veto legislation .
To do so , Legislators propose legislation in the forms of bills drafted by a nonpartisan , professional staff .
Successful legislation must undergo Committee review , three readings on the floor of each house , with appropriate voting majorities , as required , and either be signed into law by the Governor or enacted through a veto override approved by two - thirds of the membership of each legislative house .
Its statutes , called " chapter laws " or generically as " slip laws " when printed separately , are compiled into the Laws of Florida and are called " session laws " .
The Florida Statutes are the codified statutory laws of the state .
In 2009 , legislators filed 2,138 bills for consideration .
On average , the Legislature has passed about 300 bills into law annually .
In 2013 , the legislature filed about 2000 bills .
About 1000 of these are " member bills .
" The remainder are bills by committees responsible for certain functions , such as budget .
In 2016 , about 15 % of the bills were passed .
In 2017 , 1,885 lobbyists registered to represent 3,724 entities .
The Legislature also has the power to propose Amendments to the Florida Constitution .
LEADERSHIP Section::::Leadership .
The House of Representatives is headed by the Speaker of the House , while the Senate is headed by the Senate President .
The House Speaker and Senate President control the assignment of committees and leadership positions , along with control of the agenda in their chambers .
The two leaders , along with the Governor of Florida , control most of the agenda of state business in Florida .
* President of the Senate : Joe Negron ( R ) * President Pro Tempore of the Florida Senate : Anitere Flores ( R ) * Majority Leader of the Florida Senate : Wilton Simpson ( R ) * Minority Leader of the Florida Senate :
Oscar Braynon ( D ) * Speaker of the Florida House : Richard Corcoran ( R ) * Speaker Pro Tempore of the Florida House : Jeanette Núñez ( R ) * Majority Leader of the Florida House :
Ray Rodrigues ( R ) * Minority Leader of the Florida House : Janet Cruz ( D ) SEE ALSO * Florida Democratic Party * Florida House of Representatives
* Florida Senate
* Florida Senate Majority Office * Florida State Capitol
* Government of Florida * List of Presidents of the Florida Senate
* List of Speakers of the Florida House of Representatives
* Republican Party of Florida *
The Florida Channel EXTERNAL LINKS * Florida Legislature REFERENCES