E - ZPASS
E‑ZPass is an electronic toll collection system used on most tolled roads , bridges , and tunnels in the Midwestern and Eastern United States , as far south as Florida and as far west as Illinois .
The E - ZPass Interagency Group ( IAG ) consists of 39 member agencies in operation within 17 states , which use the same technology and allow travelers to use the same transponder on toll roads throughout the network .
Since its creation in 1987 , various independent systems that use the same technology have been folded into the E - ZPass system , including the I - Pass in Illinois and the NC Quick Pass in North Carolina .
Negotiations are ongoing for nation - wide interoperatibility in the United States ( see ) .
FUNCTIONALITY TECHNOLOGY Section::::Functionality .
Section::::Technology .
E‑ZPass tags are active RFID transponders , made exclusively by Kapsch TrafficCom ( formerly Mark IV Industries Corp — IVHS Division ) .
They communicate with reader equipment built into lane - based or open - road toll collection lanes by transmitting a unique radio signature .
The most common type of tag is an internal tag that can be mounted on the inside of the vehicle 's windshield in proximity to the rear - view mirror .
Though toll agencies advise adherence to the windshield with mounting strips ( usually 3 M 's Scotch brand " Dual Lock " fasteners ) , third - party options using trays with suction cups to adhere a pass to a windshield temporarily if used in multiple vehicles are available .
Some vehicles have windshields that block RF signals ; for those vehicles , historical vehicles , and customers who have aesthetic concerns , an external tag is offered , typically designed to attach to the vehicle 's front license plate mounting points .
Although a tag can be used with a motorcycle , there are usually no official instructions given for mounting due to the numerous variations between bike designs and the small area of a motorcycle windshield which could prove a hindrance if the transponder is attached following automobile instructions .
Transponders may be put in a shirt or jacket pocket , if necessary .
Most E‑ZPass lanes are converted manual toll lanes and must have fairly low speed limits for safety reasons ( between is typical ) , so that E‑ZPass vehicles can merge safely with vehicles that stopped to pay a cash toll and , in some cases , to allow toll workers to safely cross the E‑ZPass lanes to reach booths accepting cash payments .
In some areas , however ( typically recently built or retrofitted facilities ) , there is no need to slow down , because E‑ZPass users can utilize dedicated traffic lanes ( " Express E‑ZPass " ) that are physically separate from the toll - booth lanes .
Examples include : * Delaware Route 1 , * Hampton toll plaza on I‑95 in New Hampshire
* Hooksett toll plaza on I‑93 in New Hampshire * Interstate 78 Toll Bridge , * Newark Toll Plaza on the Delaware Turnpike ,
* Pocahontas Parkway in Virginia * Atlantic City Expressway , * Three locations on the New Jersey Turnpike ( near the Delaware Memorial Bridge ( Exit 1 ) , near Exit 18W , and the Pennsylvania Extension , which connects to the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( Exit 6 ) ) , * Garden State Parkway , *
Pennsylvania Turnpike 's Gateway , Warrendale , Neshaminy Falls and Mid - County ( I‑476 ) toll plazas , * New sections of the Mon – Fayette Expressway , * New York State Thruway at the Woodbury toll barrier
* Illinois Tollway system Each E - ZPass tag is specifically programmed for a particular class of vehicle ; while any valid working tag will be read and accepted in any E‑ZPass toll lane , the wrong toll amount will be charged if the tag 's programmed vehicle class does not match the vehicle .
This will result in a violation and possible large fine assessed to the tag holder , especially if a lower - class ( e.g. , passenger car ) tag is being used in a higher - class vehicle such as a bus or truck .
In an attempt to avoid this , E‑ZPass tags for commercial vehicles are blue in color , contrasting with the white tags assigned to standard passenger vehicles .
The blue E‑ZPass is also used in government employee vehicles .
In New York , an orange E‑ZPass tag is issued to emergency vehicles as well as to employees of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority , Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , and New York State Thruway Authority .
For purposes of interoperability , all agencies are connected to each other by a secure network ( the " reciprocity network " ) .
This network provides the means to exchange tag data and process toll transactions across the various agencies .
Tag data is exchanged among the agencies on a nightly basis .
This data can take up to 24 hours on the primary network the unit is issued by ( e.g. , the New York State Thruway or Illinois Tollway system ) , but may be delayed by as much as 72 hours on other networks .
TECHNOLOGY DETAILS
Section::::Technology details .
The E‑ZPass transponder works by listening for a signal broadcast by the reader stationed at the toll booth .
This 915 MHz signal is sent at 500 kbit / s using the TDM ( formerly IAG ) protocol in 256‑bit packets .
Transponders use active Type II read / write technology .
In April 2013 , Kapsch ( purchasers of Mark IV Industries ) made the protocol available to all interested parties royalty - free in perpetuity and is granting the right to sublicense the protocol .
RETAIL AVAILABILITY Section::::Retail availability .
Some issuing agencies offer a packaged E‑ZPass transponder preloaded with toll funds sold over - the - counter at a retail setting ( such as a supermarket or pharmacy service desk ) that is valid immediately .
A portion of the balance is available instantly ; customers can access the remaining balance when they register their transponders with the issuing E‑ZPass agency within several days of first using their E - ZPass .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
According to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , 83.4 % of vehicles crossing its six bridges and tunnels used E - ZPass for toll payment during all of 2016 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The notion of electronic tolling had been considered as early as the early 1990s in the New York metropolitan area .
The tolling agencies of New York , New Jersey , and Pennsylvania — which constitute two - thirds of the United States ' $ 3 billion - a - year toll industry — sought to create a compatible electronic - tolling technology that could be used on the toll roads and bridges of the three states , in an effort to reduce congestion on some of the busiest roadways and toll plazas in the United States .
In 1991 , the Interagency Committee was created to develop an interoperable system , and involved the participation and cooperation of seven independent toll agencies — the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , the New Jersey Turnpike Authority , the New Jersey Highway Authority ( which , at the time , operated the Garden State Parkway ) , the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority ( legally MTA Bridges and Tunnels ) , the New York State Thruway Authority , the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission , and the South Jersey Transportation Authority ( operator of the Atlantic City Expressway ) .
The E‑ZPass trademark , however , belongs to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey .
The Port Authority has been aggressive at protecting its trademark , including forcing the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority to rename the " EZ Pass " regional transit pass to " EZ transit pass " to protect its rights .
The seven agencies started making plans to test two possible technologies for E - ZPass in 1992 .
The technologies would be installed along the Garden State Parkway and the New York State Thruway .
E‑ZPass was first deployed on the Thruway at the Spring Valley toll plaza on August 3 , 1993 .
Over the following three and a half years , the New York State Thruway Authority ( NYSTA ) installed electronic toll - collection equipment , in stages , along the Thruway .
By February 6 , 1997 , E‑ZPass had been installed along the entire length of the corridor .
The Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority , which maintains all toll bridges and tunnels that begin and end in New York City , is the largest tolling agency by revenue in the United States ( $ 1.9 billion in 2017 ) .
It began its E - ZPass implementation in 1995 and completed it at all nine of its toll facilities by January 1997 .
E - ZPass was popular among motorists who frequently used TBTA crossings , and by August 1996 , nearly 2,000 motorists per day were signing up for E - ZPass .
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , which operates all bridges and tunnels between New York City and New Jersey , implemented E - ZPass at the George Washington Bridge in July 1997 , and at the Holland Tunnel and Lincoln Tunnel in October 1997 .
The Pennsylvania Turnpike had planned to adopt E - ZPass by 1998 ; however , implementation of the system was postponed until December 2 , 2000 , when E - ZPass debuted on the turnpike between Harrisburg West and the Delaware River Bridge .
By December 15 , 2001 , E - ZPass could be used on the entire length of the mainline Pennsylvania Turnpike .
Commercial vehicles were allowed to use the system beginning on December 14 , 2002 , and the entire Turnpike system was taking E - ZPass by 2006 .
On October 6 , 1998 , a U.S. patent for an " automated toll collection system " was issued to Fred Slavin and Randy J. Schafer .
Meanwhile , various other agencies began work on similar electronic toll collecting facilities .
This resulted in the emergence of other networks :
* The MassPass system used in Massachusetts , changed to the compatible Fast Lane in 1998 and rebranded E‑ZPass in 2012
*
The I - Pass system used in Illinois * The I - Zoom system used in Indiana , rebranded E‑ZPass in 2012
* The Smart Tag system used in Virginia , merged with E - ZPass in 2004 *
The TransPass system used in Maine , since replaced by the E‑ZPass system * The M‑Tag system used in Maryland , integrated into and rebranded E‑ZPass in 2001 *
The Quick Pass system used in North Carolina , partially integrated in 2013 and integrated into Florida 's SunPass system Originally , these systems were not interchangeable with E‑ZPass .
However , since most of them use the same technology ( or have since converted over to a compatible technology ) , all of them have been incorporated into the E‑ZPass network .
Though several still retain their own brand name for their own facilities , users of those systems can use E‑ZPass and vice versa .
As a result , all E - ZPass holders can use their transponders in any of the states that offer it .
The E‑ZPass system continues to expand .
The Indiana Toll Road Concessions Corporation has upgraded its toll plazas to include E‑ZPass functionality on the Indiana East – West Toll Road , while the Ohio Turnpike Commission has upgraded its toll plazas in October 2009 for the Ohio Turnpike ( I‑76 , I‑80 , I‑90 ) .
On December 16 , 2008 , Rhode Island joined the network by activating E‑ZPass lanes in the state 's only toll booth , at the Claiborne Pell Newport Bridge .
The Kentucky Transportation Cabinet , which had a toll road system predating the E - ZPass system which was ended in 2006 , announced at the end of July 2015 its entrance into the E - ZPass system as part of the financing for the Louisville - area Ohio River Bridges Project involving the new Abraham Lincoln ( paired with the retrofitted Kennedy ) and Lewis and Clark bridges .
On November 9 , 2017 , the Central Florida Expressway Authority ( CFX ) announced that is was joining the E - ZPass group .
CFX began accepting E - ZPass along its toll roads on September 1 , 2018 .
E‑ZPass ETC transponders do not work on all toll roads in the United States .
Currently , the E - ZPass electronic toll - collection system ( as well as the other ETC systems that are part of the E‑ZPass network ) are not compatible with most Florida systems ( including SunPass ) , California 's FasTrak , Kansas 's K‑Tag , Oklahoma 's Pikepass , Texas 's TxTag , Utah 's Express Pass , Puerto Rico 's AutoExpreso , Georgia 's Peach Pass and Cruise Card , or other ETC systems outside of E‑ZPass operating regions .
Under MAP-21 , passed in 2012 , all ETC facilities in the United States should reach some form of interoperability by October 1 , 2016 ; however , no funding was provided for this effort , nor were penalties established for failure to meet this deadline , and this has yet to be accomplished .
In 2009 an organization called the Alliance for Toll Interoperability stated that it was exploring the option of using high - speed cameras to take photographs of the cars passing through non - E‑ZPass lanes in other states .
The Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission , which has been studying going towards all - electronic tolling in order to cut costs , plans to implement such a system for non - E - ZPass users by 2018 .
E - ZPASS
IN CANADA Section::::E - ZPass in Canada .
Until 2005 , drivers crossing the Peace Bridge between Fort Erie , Ontario , and Buffalo , New York , paid a toll before crossing to Canada .
Following upgrades to the border crossings in 2005 , drivers instead pay a toll on the Canadian side of the Peace Bridge after clearing Canadian customs .
This is the first E‑ZPass toll gantry outside of the United States .
The toll goes to the Buffalo and Fort Erie Public Bridge Authority , a bi - national agency responsible for maintaining the international bridge .
On August 11 , 2014 , E - ZPass began to be accepted at the Lewiston – Queenston Bridge , Rainbow Bridge , and Whirlpool Rapids Bridge .
The toll for the Lewiston - Queenston Bridge is paid in Canada after clearing Canadian customs , whereas the toll is paid before leaving the United States at the other two bridges .
The toll from these three bridges goes to the Niagara Falls Bridge Commission .
VARIANTS E - ZPASS PLUS
Section::::Variants .
Section::::E - ZPass
Plus .
For E - ZPass subscribers who replenish their accounts with a major credit card , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey offers an E - ZPass option to pay for parking at three Port Authority airports — John F. Kennedy , LaGuardia , and Newark Liberty — through a program known as E - ZPass Plus .
This program is also available in New York at Albany International Airport in Albany ; Syracuse Hancock International Airport in Syracuse ; and the parking lots at the New York State Fair when the fair is in progress ; as well as in Atlantic City , New Jersey , at Atlantic City International Airport , the New York Avenue Parking Garage , and the Atlantic City Surface Lot .
The parking payment is debited from the prepaid E‑ZPass account if the parking fee is less than $ 20 .
If it is $ 20 or more , the amount is charged directly to the credit card used to replenish the E‑ZPass account .
The Port Authority reports that drivers save an average of 15 seconds by opting to pay for airport parking using E‑ZPass . Subscribers who replenish their E‑ZPass accounts with cash or check can not participate in this program .
Additionally , , this service is only available to customers of the DelDOT , Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission , Delaware River and Bay Authority , in Delaware ; of the New Hampshire DOT ; in Maryland ; in New Jersey and New York to customers of the PANYNJ , the New York MTA , or the NYS Thruway ; and to customers of the Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission . E - ZPASS FLEX Section::::E - ZPass Flex .
In late 2012 , the I‑495 HOT ( high occupancy toll ) lanes in Virginia started to support E‑ZPass Flex transponders .
These work similarly to regular transponders , but let the driver switch between HOV and toll - paying modes .
When a transponder is switched to HOV mode ( with three or more passengers in the vehicle ) , it is read by the HOT lane 's toll equipment but no toll is charged .
E - ZPass Flex also works like a standard E - ZPass on all other toll roads where E - ZPass is accepted , regardless of the position of the switch .
EFFECTS
REDUCED POLLUTION AND HEALTH IMPROVEMENT Section::::Effects .
Section::::Reduced pollution and health improvement .
A study published in the American Economic Journal : Applied Economics , " Traffic Congestion and Infant Health : Evidence from E - ZPass " , compared fetal health outcomes for mothers living near congested and uncongested toll plazas on three major highways in Pennsylvania and New Jersey .
The researchers focused on areas where toll plazas had instituted E - ZPass , which , because cars travel through more efficiently , diminishes congestion and pollution .
The study drew its conclusions by looking at the health outcomes of nearly 30,000 births among mothers who lived within two kilometers of an E - ZPass toll plaza .
The researchers state that their findings " suggest that the adoption of E - ZPass was associated with significant improvements of infant health .
" The study 's specific findings were : 1 ) In areas where E - ZPass was adopted , rates of infant prematurity decreased by between 6.7 % and 9.1 % ; this means that , out of the sample studied , 255 preterm births were likely avoided ; 2 ) Introduction of E - ZPass was correlated with a reduction in the incidence of low birth weight by between 8.5 % and 11.3 % ; that means 275 cases of low birth weight may have been avoided .
PRIVACY CONCERNS Section::::Privacy concerns .
Civil liberties and privacy rights advocates have expressed concern about how the position data gathered through E‑ZPass is used .
, several states that employ E‑ZPass had provided electronic toll information in response to court orders in civil cases , including divorces and other non - criminal matters .
Position data is collected by antennas at locations in addition to fee collection locations .
The New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) , for example , collect transponder information to provide real - time estimates of travel times between common destinations .
By subtracting the time when vehicles pass under the first sign from the current time , the sign can display the expected travel time between the sign and the destination point ahead .
This information is also used to determine the best times to schedule maintenance - related lane closures and for other traffic management purposes .
According to NYSDOT , the individual tag information is encrypted , is deleted as soon as the vehicle passes the last reader , and is never made available to the Department .
ACCOUNTS AND AGENCIES Section::::Accounts and agencies .
Within the IAG , each member agency has its own billing and customer service center , and each establishes its own fee and discount structures .
The agencies also set their own customer account policies .
Areas of variation include the refundable deposit or nonrefundable charge for a tag , periodic maintenance fees , paper statement fees , the low account threshold , and replenishment amounts .
E‑ZPass is usually offered as a debit account : tolls are deducted from prepayments made by the users .
Users may opt to have prepayments automatically deposited when their account is low , or they may submit prepayments manually , either by phone or a toll authority 's web portal , depending on the agency .
For commercial accounts , some agencies allow postpaid plans with a security deposit ( which effectively renders them prepaid accounts , with a different replenishment policy ) .
Some agencies have imposed periodic account maintenance fees on their subscribers .
After New Jersey began losing money with the E‑ZPass system , a monthly account fee of one dollar was implemented on July 15 , 2002 and is still in effect for both individual and business accounts .
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey also charges a monthly individual account fee of one dollar .
On July 1 , 2009 , the Maryland Transportation Authority began charging a fee of $ 1.50 a month to accountholders which , , only applies to non - residents and is waived if three Maryland E‑ZPass tolls were incurred during the previous month .
The Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority ( TBTA ) in New York City once imposed a monthly account fee starting on July 1 , 2005 , claiming to defray the administrative costs .
However , New York State Assembly Bill A06859A in 2005 and 2006 and Senate Bill S6331 in 2006 both considered such a fee threatening the efficiency to move traffic faster with lower tolls and sought to ban it .
When the New York State Law started to ban the monthly account fee , the TBTA repealed it on June 1 , 2006 , and those , especially New Jerseyans , seeking New York accounts and avoiding the monthly fee still imposed by New Jersey and Port Authority , would have to apply for the TBTA or the New York State Thruway accounts at an E‑ZPass New York Service Center .
Several agencies offer discounted tolls to E - ZPass customers .
The details vary widely , and can include general discounts for all E‑ZPass users , variable pricing discounts for off - peak hours , commuter plans with minimum usage levels , flat rate plans offering unlimited use for a period of time , carpool plans for high - occupancy vehicles , and resident plans for those living near particular toll facilities .
Many of these plans are available only to customers whose tags are issued by the agency that owns the toll facility in question ( reciprocity applies to tag acceptance , not to discounts ) .
Eight authorities in the Northeast ( Maine , the Massachusetts Turnpike , the New Hampshire Turnpike , Rhode Island , the New York TBTA , the New York State Thruway , the New Jersey Turnpike , DelDOT and Maryland ) restrict their general discounts to their own respective tagholders .
The Delaware Memorial Bridge restricts its discount plans to New Jersey tags despite its toll plaza being located in Delaware ( DelDOT - issued tags can not obtain the discount plans ) .
Some agencies charge a one - time fee between $ 20 and $ 30 for each new transponder , including the Delaware Department of Transportation , the New Hampshire Department of Transportation , and the Maine Turnpike Authority .
At least two agencies , the Delaware River and Bay Authority and the Maryland Transportation Authority , once charged multiple fees .
In a press release dated July 17 , 2007 , the DRBA stated : " Beginning January 1 , 2008 , all DRBA E - ZPass account holders will be charged an account management fee of $ 1.50 per month .
The transponder cost will also be passed on to E‑ZPass customers for each new transponder . "
E‑ZPass New York charges a monthly fee of 50 cents for each tag in connection with a business account .
The DRBA since merged its service center with New Jersey 's E - ZPass service center .
On July 1 , 2015 , a plan put forth by Governor Hogan eliminated Maryland 's monthly fee ( except accounts without a Maryland address , unless using Maryland toll facilities at least three times in the previous statement period ) along with decreasing some toll rates especially for Maryland - issued E - ZPass tags .
E‑ZPass users are not required to maintain their account with an agency in their home state .
Subscribers can open an E‑ZPass account with any member of the IAG regardless of residency .
This means that users have the option of choosing an agency based on the fees that it charges , effectively allowing them to circumvent transponder and account maintenance fees .
FEES AND DISCOUNTS
BY STATE Section::::Fees and discounts by state . !
State !
Monthly / annual fee(s ) !
Deposit !
Minimum balance !
Discounts
With special transponder obtained by application : Residents of Charlestown and Chelsea pay $ 0.15 on Tobin Bridge .
Residents of East Boston , South Boston , and the North End pay $ 0.20 at Sumner and Ted Williams tunnels .
At all Port Authority facilities , E‑ZPass discounts are available .
At MTA Bridges and Tunnels , E - ZPass discounts for tags issued by the New York E - ZPass Customer Service Center ( NY E - ZPass ) range from 32 % to 56 % .
At most facilities , NY E - ZPass tolls are $ 2.74 less than Tolls by Mail rates ( all of its facilities are open road cashless tolling ) .
NY E - ZPass rates are $ 5.48 off for a round - trip at the Verrazano - Narrows Bridge and a $ 2.09 discount at the Marine Parkway – Gil Hodges Memorial Bridge and Cross Bay Veterans Memorial Bridge .
At the Henry Hudson Bridge , NY E - ZPass gives a $ 3.36 discount .
At all New York State Thruway and New York State Bridge Authority facilities , E‑ZPass discounts apply .
Discount rates apply only to customer tags issued by a New York E - ZPass Customer Service Center ( discounts do n't apply to out - of - state E - ZPass holders ) .
NY now also offers a Pay - Per - Trip option for total tolls to transact on a daily basis directly via the checking account linked per tag .
It is optional ( yet recommended ) that a credit card be kept on file , but monthly balances are not required under this new payment option in New York .
$ 0.83 per car on the Claiborne Pell Newport Bridge toll for Rhode Island residents only ( as opposed to the normal $ 2 / axle )
Notes LIST OF PLACES
WHERE E - ZPASS IS ACCEPTED LIST OF AGENCIES Section::::List of places where E - ZPass is accepted .
Section::::List of agencies .
As listed on its website , the E - ZPass Interagency Group includes " 39 members in 17 states " .
* Buffalo and Fort Erie Public Bridge Authority ( New York / Ontario ) * Burlington County Bridge Commission ( New Jersey / Pennsylvania )
* Central Florida Expressway Authority
* Delaware Department of Transportation
* Delaware River and Bay Authority ( Delaware / New Jersey )
* Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission ( New Jersey / Pennsylvania )
* Delaware River Port Authority ( New Jersey / Pennsylvania ) * Illinois State Toll Highway Authority
* Indiana Toll Road Concession Company * Maine Turnpike Authority * Kentucky Public Transportation Infrastructure Authority ( see also Ohio River Bridges Project ) * Maryland Transportation Authority * Massachusetts Department of Transportation
* Metropolitan Transportation Authority Bridges and Tunnels ( New York )
* New Hampshire Department of Transportation
* New Jersey Turnpike Authority * New York State Bridge Authority
* New York State Thruway Authority * Niagara Falls Bridge Commission * North Carolina
Turnpike Authority * Ohio Turnpike and Infrastructure Commission
* Pennsylvania Turnpike Commission * Port Authority of New York and New Jersey ( New Jersey / New York )
* Rhode Island Turnpike and Bridge Authority * Skyway Concessions Company ( Illinois ) * South Jersey Transportation Authority ( New Jersey )
* Thousand Islands Bridge Authority ( New York ) – does not currently offer ETC , but plans to implement E - ZPass at an undetermined date in 2017
* Virginia Department of Transportation
* West Virginia Parkways Authority
Although the Virginia Department of Transportation is Virginia 's sole member of the E - ZPass Interagency Group , not all E - ZPass facilities in Virginia are operated by the Department of Transportation .
Each of the 17 E - ZPass states operates its own E - ZPass Service Center .
NJ E - ZPass manages accounts for the Burlington County Bridge Commission , Delaware River and Bay Authority , Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission and Delaware River Port Authority .
The E - ZPass New York Service Center operates accounts for the Buffalo and Port Erie Public Bridge Authority , the Niagara Falls Bridge Commission , and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey .
LIST OF ROADWAYS , BRIDGES , TUNNELS , AND AIRPORTS Section::::List of roadways , bridges , tunnels , and airports .
The following tolled roads , bridges , tunnels , and airports accept E‑ZPass .
Crossings between jurisdictions are listed in the state where the toll collection point is located , or linked to ( in the case of international border crossings ) .
DELAWARE
* Delaware Turnpike / Interstate 95 * Delaware Route 1 * Delaware Memorial Bridge /
Interstate 295 FLORIDA
* Florida State Road
408 east of Colonial Drive
* Florida State Road 414 * Florida State Road 417 between the Orange - Seminole county line and International Drive / World Center
Drive
* Florida State Road 429 between the Orange - Lake county line and Seidel Road
* Florida State Road 451 * Florida State Road 453
* Florida State Road 528 ( Beachline Expressway ) between McCoy Road and SR 520 ILLINOIS
* Chicago Skyway / Interstate 90 * Elgin - O'Hare Western Access / Illinois Route 390 * Jane Addams Memorial Tollway / Interstate 90 * Ronald Reagan
Memorial Tollway / Interstate 88 ( west )
* Tri - State Tollway / Interstate 80 , Interstate 94 , and Interstate 294 * Veterans Memorial Tollway
/ Interstate 355 INDIANA
* Indiana Toll Road / Interstate 80 , Interstate 90 KENTUCKY
* Lincoln & Kennedy Bridges /
Interstate 65 *
Lewis and Clark Bridge /
Interstate 265 MAINE * Maine Turnpike / Interstate 95 ( partial not full length of Interstate 95 but only between the New Hampshire line at Kittery and the junction with US 202 near Augusta )
MARYLAND * Baltimore Harbor Tunnel / Interstate 895 *
Fort McHenry Tunnel / Interstate 95 * Francis Scott Key Bridge /
Interstate 695
* Maryland Route 200 ( Intercounty Connector )
* John F. Kennedy Memorial Highway / Interstate 95 * William Preston Lane Jr. Memorial Bridge ( aka the Chesapeake Bay Bridge)/U.S. Route 50 and U.S. Route 301
* Governor Harry W. Nice Memorial Bridge / U.S. Route 301
* Thomas J. Hatem Memorial Bridge / U.S. Route 40 MASSACHUSETTS * Callahan Tunnel / Massachusetts Route 1A
* Massachusetts Turnpike / Interstate 90
* Boston Extension
* Sumner Tunnel / Massachusetts Route 1A
* Ted Williams Tunnel / Interstate 90
* Tobin Bridge / U.S. Route 1 NEW HAMPSHIRE
* Everett Turnpike / U.S. Route 3 , Interstate 293 , New Hampshire Route 3A , and Interstate 93
* New Hampshire Turnpike / Interstate 95 ( aka the Blue Star Turnpike )
* Spaulding Turnpike / New Hampshire Route 16 NEW JERSEY * Atlantic Avenue Parking Lot , Atlantic City *
Atlantic City Expressway
* Atlantic City International Airport * Benjamin Franklin Bridge /
Interstate 676 *
Betsy Ross Bridge / New Jersey Route 90 * Burlington - Bristol Bridge / New Jersey Route 413 and Pennsylvania Route 413 *
Commodore Barry Bridge / U.S. Route 322
* Easton – Phillipsburg Toll Bridge
/ U.S. Route 22 *
Garden State Parkway * George Washington Bridge / Interstate 95 *
Holland Tunnel / Interstate 78 * Lincoln Tunnel / New Jersey Route 495 , New York State Route 495
* New Jersey Turnpike / Interstate 95 and Interstate 78 * New York Avenue Garage , Atlantic City
* Newark Liberty International Airport
* Ocean Drive
* Tacony – Palmyra Bridge / New Jersey Route 73 and Pennsylvania Route 73 NEW YORK
* Albany International Airport * Bayonne Bridge / New Jersey Route 440 and New York Route 440 * Bear Mountain Bridge / U.S. Route 6 and U.S. Route 202
* Bronx – Whitestone Bridge / Interstate 678 * Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel
/ Interstate 478 * Cross Bay Veterans Memorial Bridge * Goethals Bridge /
Interstate 278 *
Henry Hudson Bridge / Henry Hudson Parkway and New York Route 9A
* International Bridges between New York State , US and Ontario , Canada * Peace Bridge * Lewiston – Queenston Bridge * Rainbow Bridge ( Niagara Falls ) * Whirlpool Rapids Bridge ( NEXUS Only ) * John F. Kennedy International Airport * Kingston – Rhinecliff Bridge / New York Route 199
* LaGuardia Airport * Marine Parkway – Gil Hodges Memorial Bridge * Mid - Hudson Bridge / U.S. Route 44 and New York Route 55 *
New England Thruway / Interstate 95 *
Newburgh – Beacon Bridge /
Interstate 84 and New York Route 52
* New York State Thruway / Interstate 87 , Interstate 287 , and Interstate 90 * Outerbridge Crossing / New Jersey Route 440 and New York Route 440 * Queens – Midtown Tunnel
/ Interstate 495 * Rip Van Winkle Bridge / New York
Route 23
* North Grand Island Bridge /
Interstate 190 * South Grand Island Bridge /
Interstate 190 * Syracuse Hancock International Airport * Tappan Zee Bridge /
Interstate 87 and Interstate 287 * Throgs Neck Bridge /
Interstate 295 * Robert F. Kennedy ( Triborough ) Bridge /
Interstate 278 * Verrazano - Narrows Bridge /
Interstate 278
NORTH CAROLINA
* Triangle Expressway OHIO
* Ohio Turnpike ( sections of Interstate 76 , Interstate 80 , and Interstate 90 ) PENNSYLVANIA * Amos K. Hutchinson
Bypass / PA Turnpike 66
* Delaware River - Turnpike Toll Bridge / Interstate 95 and Interstate 276 * Delaware Water Gap Toll Bridge /
Interstate 80 *
Interstate 78 Toll Bridge /
Interstate 78 * James E. Ross
Highway / Interstate 376 * Milford – Montague Toll Bridge / U.S. Route 206
* Mon – Fayette Expressway /
PA Turnpike 43
* New Hope – Lambertville Toll Bridge /
U.S. Route 202
* Findlay Connector / PA Turnpike 576 * Pennsylvania Turnpike
/ Interstate 76 , Interstate 70 ,
Interstate 276 ,
Interstate 476 , and Interstate 95 * Pittsburgh International Airport * Portland – Columbia Toll Bridge
* Trenton – Morrisville Toll Bridge
/ U.S. Route 1 * Walt Whitman Bridge /
Interstate 76 PUERTO RICO * Puerto Rico Highway 53 RHODE ISLAND
* Pell Bridge / Rhode Island Route 138 VIRGINIA
* Boulevard Bridge / Virginia State Route 161
* Dulles Toll Road / Virginia State Route 267
* Dulles Greenway / Virginia State Route 267 * 495
Express Lanes / Interstate 495 ( HOT Lanes )
* Powhite Parkway / Virginia State Route 76
* Downtown Expressway / Virginia State Route 195 * George P. Coleman Memorial Bridge / U.S. Route 17
* Chesapeake Expressway / Virginia State Route 168
* Chesapeake Bay Bridge - Tunnel / U.S. Route 13
* Pocahontas Parkway / Virginia State Route 895 * South Norfolk Jordan Bridge / Virginia State Route 337
* Downtown Tunnel / Interstate 264 * Midtown Tunnel / U.S. Route 58 * 95 Express Lanes on Interstate 95 ( HOT Lanes ) *
Dominion Boulevard Veterans Bridge / U.S. Route 17 *
Interstate 66 ( Inside the Beltway )
* 64 Express Lanes on Interstate 64 ( HOT Lanes )
WEST VIRGINIA
* West Virginia Turnpike / Interstate 64 , Interstate 77 OTHER NON - TOLL USES Section::::Other non - toll uses .
Although not part of the E‑ZPass - Plus program , E‑ZPass users may also pay for parking at Pittsburgh International Airport .
The E‑ZPass transponder is used for identification only .
The Southern Beltway , which also uses E - ZPass , has its western terminus at the airport .
E‑ZPass was tested in a since - discontinued program by some McDonald 's restaurants on Long Island , New York , at which drive - through customers were given the option to pay using their E‑ZPass accounts to test out cardless payment platforms .
In late 2013 , Wendy 's started a similar system called iDriveThru that is E - ZPass compatible , and is currently undergoing testing at five Staten Island Wendy 's locations .
In 2018 , a one - year pilot project with the startup Verdeva was announced to test drive - thru and gas station payments via separate accounts set up with the E - ZPass system .
The New York State Fair offered E‑ZPass Plus as a payment option at two of its parking lots for the first time in 2007 , and offered the service again for subsequent seasons .
The service was administered by the New York State Thruway Authority ( NYSTA ) , and motorists ' E‑ZPass accounts were charged the same $ 5 parking fee that cash customers were charged .
Unlike other E‑ZPass Plus implementations , the State Fair systems charged motorists at the parking lot entrances ; drivers opting to pay by
E‑ZPass Plus used dedicated " E‑ZPass Plus Only " lanes .
Since the lots only charge for parking during the twelve days of the State Fair , mobile , self - contained E - ZPass units were used to process vehicles .
The units were mounted on trailers with a collapsible gantry for the E‑ZPass antennas , used a cellular wireless connection to send transactions to the NYSTA backoffice system , and were powered by batteries that were kept replenished by photovoltaic solar panels , with a generator for backup .
E‑ZPass can be used to pay for parking at the Route 128 station in Westwood , Massachusetts ; this is available for Massachusetts customers only .
E - ZPass can also be used to pay for parking at John F. Kennedy International Airport and LaGuardia Airport in New York City .
E‑ZPass transponders are also used to monitor traffic .
A transponder reader is placed above the roadway at various intervals , and the time a particular tag takes between scans at each interval provides information about the speed of traffic between those points .
This transit time information is often relayed back to motorists via electronic signs on the roadway .
The individual tag data is not collected or used for ticketing purposes , as some sources have suggested .
TOLL FACILITIES
THAT DO NOT ACCEPT E - ZPASS IN E - ZPASS STATES AND PROVINCES Section::::Toll facilities that do not accept E - ZPass in E - ZPass states and provinces .
There are many toll facilities ,
mostly bridges run by independent authorities , that are not part of the E - ZPass network even though they are in a state that is in the E - ZPass region .
With Congress seeking a national electronic toll - collection system in place by mid-2016 for federal highways , E - ZPass officials are talking to other states that have electronic tolls " to find a common way to do business " .
FLORIDA
* Alligator Alley – Uses SunPass .
* Bob Sikes Bridge – Uses SunPass .
* Broad Causeway – Uses SunPass .
* Cape Coral Bridge – Uses SunPass and LeeWay .
* Card Sound Bridge - Uses SunPass
* Florida 's Turnpike Enterprise – Florida 's Turnpike , Homestead Extension , Sawgrass Expressway , Polk Parkway , Suncoast Parkway , Veterans Expressway , the northern end of the Seminole Expressway , the southern six miles ( 10 km ) of Southern Connector Extension , the southern of the Daniel Webster Western Beltway , the western eight miles ( 13 km ) of Beachline West Expressway .
Uses SunPass .
* Garcon Point Bridge – Uses SunPass .
* Gasparilla Bridge * I-4 / Selmon Expressway Connector – Uses SunPass .
* I-75 Express Lanes
– Uses SunPass .
* I-95 Express Lanes – Uses SunPass .
* I-595 Express Lanes – Uses SunPass .
* Lee Roy Selmon Expressway – Uses SunPass .
* Miami - Dade Expressway Authority – Gratigny Parkway , Airport Expressway , Dolphin Expressway , Don Shula Expressway , Snapper Creek Expressway , Venetian Causeway .
Uses SunPass .
* Mid - Bay Bridge – Uses SunPass .
* Midpoint Memorial Bridge – Uses SunPass and LeeWay .
* Orchard Pond Parkway
– Uses SunPass .
* Osceola Parkway – Uses SunPass and E - Pass .
* Pinellas Bayway – Uses SunPass .
* Poinciana Parkway – Uses SunPass and E - Pass .
* Rickenbacker Causeway – Uses SunPass .
* Sanibel Causeway – Uses SunPass and LeeWay .
* Sunshine Skyway Bridge – Uses SunPass .
OTHER STATES * Anderson Ferry ( Ohio / Kentucky ) * Atlantic Beach Bridge ( New York ) * Augusta Ferry ( Ohio / Kentucky ) * Cape May – Lewes Ferry ( Delaware / New Jersey ) * Downbeach Express ( New Jersey ) * Dingman 's Ferry Bridge ( New Jersey / Pennsylvania ) * Fort Madison Toll Bridge ( Illinois / Iowa ) * Memorial Bridge ( West Virginia / Ohio ) * Moseywood Road ( Lake Harmony , Pennsylvania ) – Toll paid upon entry to community .
Provides a shortcut to Lake Harmony from Pennsylvania Route 940 to Pennsylvania Route 903 *
Newell Toll Bridge ( West Virginia / Ohio ) – Privately owned , not operated by the Ohio Turnpike nor the West Virginia Parkways Authority * Ogdensburg - Prescott International Bridge ( New York / Ontario )
* Old Town Toll Bridge ( also known as the Low Water Toll Bridge ) ( Oldtown , Maryland to Green Spring , West Virginia )
* Seaway International Bridge ( New York / Ontario )
* St. Francisville Bridge – Old Wabash Cannonball Railroad ( Illinois - Indiana ) * Thousand Islands Bridge ( New York / Ontario ) – The Thousand Islands Bridge Authority will be upgrading their tolling facilities to accept E - ZPass , having already joined the E - ZPass Consortium .
* White 's Ferry ( Dickerson , Maryland to Leesburg , Virginia )
* Highways 407 , 412 , and 418 ( Ontario )
Section::::Other states .
None of the toll bridges or tunnels partially in or fully in Michigan
( Ambassador Bridge , Detroit - Windsor Tunnel , Blue Water Bridge , Mackinac Bridge , or International Bridge ) use E - ZPass even though Michigan is adjacent to two states ( Indiana and Ohio ) that use it for their toll roads .
SEE ALSO
* Drivewyze – weigh station bypassing of commercial vehicles at participating state highway locations
* List of electronic toll collection systems
* List of toll bridges * List of toll roads
* NORPASS – weigh station bypassing , partner of E - ZPass
* PrePass – weigh station bypassing , commercial vehicles at participating state highway locations
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* E - ZPass Group Official Website