XMAS Xmas is a common abbreviation of the word Christmas .
It is sometimes pronounced , but Xmas , and variants such as Xtemass , originated as handwriting abbreviations for the typical pronunciation .
The " X " comes from the Greek letter Chi , which is the first letter of the Greek word Χριστός , which in English is " Christ " .
The " -mas " part is from the Latin - derived Old English word for Mass.
There is a common misconception that the word Xmas stems from a secular attempt to remove the religious tradition from Christmas by taking the " Christ " out of " Christmas " , but its use dates back to the 16th century .
STYLE GUIDES AND ETIQUETTE Section::::Style guides and etiquette .
" Xmas " is deprecated by some modern style guides , including those at the New York Times , The Times , The Guardian , and the BBC .
Millicent Fenwick , in the 1948 Vogue 's Book of Etiquette , states that " ' Xmas ' should never be used " in greeting cards .
The Cambridge Guide to Australian English Usage states that the spelling should be considered informal and restricted to contexts where concision is valued , such as headlines and greeting cards .
The Christian Writer 's Manual of Style , while acknowledging the ancient and respectful use of " Xmas " in the past , states that the spelling should never be used in formal writing .
HISTORY USE IN ENGLISH Section::::History .
Section::::Use in English .
Early use of " Xmas " includes Bernard Ward 's History of St. Edmund 's college , Old Hall ( originally published circa 1755 ) .
An earlier version , " X'temmas " , dates to 1551 .
Around 1100 the term was written as " Xp̄es mæsse " in the Anglo - Saxon Chronicle . "
Xmas " is found in a letter from George Woodward in 1753 .
Lord Byron used the term in 1811 , as did Samuel Coleridge ( 1801 ) and Lewis Carroll ( 1864 ) .
In the United States , the fifth American edition of William Perry 's Royal Standard English Dictionary , published in Boston in 1800 , included in its list of " Explanations of Common Abbreviations , or Contraction of Words " the entry : " Xmas .
Christmas . "
Oliver Wendell Holmes , Jr. used the term in a letter dated 1923 .
Since at least the late 19th century , " Xmas " has been in use in various other English - language nations .
Quotations with the word can be found in texts first written in Canada , and the word has been used in Australia , and in the Caribbean .
Merriam - Webster 's Dictionary of English Usage stated that modern use of the term is largely limited to advertisements , headlines and banners , where its conciseness is valued .
The association with commerce " has done nothing for its reputation " , according to the dictionary .
In the United Kingdom , the former Church of England Bishop of Blackburn , Alan Chesters , recommended to his clergy that they avoid the spelling .
In the United States , in 1977 New Hampshire Governor Meldrim Thomson sent out a press release saying that he wanted journalists to keep the " Christ " in Christmas , and not call it Xmas — which he called a " pagan " spelling of Christmas .
USE OF " X " FOR " CHRIST " Section::::Use of " X " for " Christ " .
The abbreviation of Christmas as " Xmas " is a source of disagreement among Christians who observe the holiday .
The December 1957 News and Views published by the Church League of America , a conservative organization co - founded in 1937 by George Washington Robnett , attacked the use of Xmas in an article titled " X = The Unknown Quantity " .
The claims were picked up later by Gerald L. K. Smith , who in December 1966 claimed that Xmas was a " blasphemous omission of the name of Christ " and that " ' X ' is referred to as being symbolical of the unknown quantity . "
Smith further argued that Jews introduced Santa Claus to suppress the New Testament accounts of Jesus , and that the United Nations , at the behest of " world Jewry " , had " outlawed the name of Christ " .
There is , however , a well documented history of use of Χ ( actually a chi ) as an abbreviation for " Christ " ( Χριστός ) and possibly also a symbol of the cross .
The abbreviation appears on many Orthodox Christian religious icons .
Dennis Bratcher , writing for a website for Christians , states " there are always those who loudly decry the use of the abbreviation ' Xmas ' as some kind of blasphemy against Christ and Christianity " .
Among them are evangelist Franklin Graham and CNN journalist Roland S. Martin .
Graham stated in an interview : " for us as Christians , this is one of the most holy of the holidays , the birth of our savior Jesus Christ .
And for people to take Christ out of Christmas .
They 're happy to say merry Xmas .
Let 's just take Jesus out .
And really , I think , a war against the name of Jesus Christ .
"
Roland Martin likewise relates the use of " Xmas " to his growing concerns of increasing commercialization and secularization of one of Christianity 's highest holy days .
Bratcher posits that those who dislike abbreviating the word are unfamiliar with a long history of Christians using X in place of " Christ " for various purposes .
The word " Christ " and its compounds , including " Christmas " , have been abbreviated in English for at least the past 1,000 years , long before the modern " Xmas " was commonly used . "
Christ " was often written as " Xρ " or " Xt " ; there are references in the Anglo - Saxon Chronicle as far back as 1021 .
This X and P arose as the uppercase forms of the Greek letters χ ( Ch ) and ρ ( R ) used in ancient abbreviations for Χριστος ( Greek for " Christ " ) .
The Chi - Rho , an amalgamation of the two Greek letters rendered as ☧ , is a symbol often used to represent Christ in Catholic , Protestant , and Orthodox Christian Churches .
The Oxford English Dictionary ( OED ) and the OED Supplement have cited usages of " X- " or " Xp- " for " Christ- " as early as 1485 .
The terms " Xtian " and less commonly "
Xpian " have also been used for " Christian " .
The OED further cites usage of " Xtianity " for " Christianity " from 1634 .
According to Merriam - Webster 's Dictionary of English Usage , most of the evidence for these words comes from " educated Englishmen who knew their Greek " .
In ancient Christian art , χ and χρ are abbreviations for Christ 's name .
In many manuscripts of the New Testament and icons , Χ is an abbreviation for Χριστος , as is XC ( the first and last letters in Greek , using the lunate sigma ) ; compare IC for Jesus in Greek .
OTHER USES OF " X(T ) "
FOR " CHRIS(T)- " Section::::Other uses of " X(t ) " for " Chris(t)- " .
Other proper names containing the name " Christ " besides those mentioned above are sometimes abbreviated similarly , either as " X " or " Xt " , both of which have been used historically , e.g. , " Xtopher " or " Xopher " for " Christopher " , or " Xtina " or " Xina " for the name " Christina " .
In the 17th and 18th centuries , " Xene " and " Exene " were common spellings for the given name Christine .
The American singer Christina Aguilera has sometimes gone by the name " Xtina " .
Similarly , Exene Cervenka has been a noted American singer - songwriter since 1977 .
This usage of " X " to spell the syllable " kris " ( rather than the sounds " ks " ) has extended to " xtal " for " crystal " , and on florists ' signs to " xant " for " chrysanthemum " , even though these words are not etymologically related to " Christ " : " crystal " comes from a Greek word meaning " ice " ( and not even using the letter χ ) , and " chrysanthemum " comes from Greek words meaning " golden flower " , while " Christ " comes from a Greek word meaning " anointed " .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
In the animated television series Futurama , which is set in the 31st century , Xmas is the official name for the day formerly known as Christmas ( which , in the episode " Xmas Story " , is said to have become an " archaic pronunciation " ) .
In the American version of the board game Monopoly , players can draw a card from the Community Chest which reads : " Xmas fund matures .
Collect $ 100 " .
SEE ALSO * Christogram * Christmas controversies
* Labarum * Names and titles of Jesus
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* An icon of Christ featuring the abbreviations IC and XC in the upper corners * " Why get cross about Xmas ? "
( BBC , December 22 , 2004 )