MALE LACTATION
In zoology , male lactation is the production of milk from a male mammal 's mammary glands .
Such production is known as lactation .
It is well - documented in the Dayak fruit bat .
The term male lactation is not used in human medicine .
It has been used in popular literature , such as Louise Erdrich 's The Antelope Wife , to describe the phenomenon of male galactorrhea , which is a well - documented condition in humans , unrelated to childbirth or nursing .
Newborn babies of both sexes can occasionally produce milk ; this is called neonatal milk ( also known as " Witch 's milk " ) and not considered male lactation .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Male lactation was of some interest to Alexander von Humboldt , who reports in Voyage aux régions équinoxiales du Nouveau Continent of a citizen of the village
Arenas ( close to Cumana ) who allegedly nurtured his son for three months when his wife was ill , as well as Charles Darwin , who commented on it in The Descent of Man , and Selection in Relation to Sex ( 1871 ) :
Darwin later considered the nearly perfect function of male nipples in contrast to greatly reduced structures such as the vesicula prostatica , speculating that both sexes may have nursed young in early mammalian ancestors , and subsequently mammals evolved to inactivate them in males at an early age .
EVOLUTION AND BIOLOGY Section::::Evolution and biology .
Male mammals of many species have been observed to lactate under unusual or pathogenic conditions such as extreme stress , castration and exposure to phytoestrogens , or pituitary tumors .
Therefore , it is hypothesized that , while most male mammals could easily develop the ability to lactate , there is no selective advantage to male lactation .
While male mammals could , in theory , improve offspring 's survival rate through the additional nourishment provided by lactation , most have developed other strategies to increase the number of surviving offspring , such as mating with additional partners .
Presently , very few species are known where male lactation occurs and it is not well understood what evolutionary factors control the development of this trait .
NONHUMAN ANIMAL MALE LACTATION Section::::Nonhuman animal male lactation .
The phenomenon of male lactation occurs in some species , notably the Dayak fruit bat ( Dyacopterus spadiceus ) , and the lactating males may assist in the nursing of their infants .
In addition , male goats are known to lactate on occasion .
HUMAN MALE LACTATION Section::::Human male lactation .
Human male breastfeeding is possible , but production of the hormone prolactin is necessary to induce lactation , so male lactation does not occur under normal conditions .
Domperidone is a drug that can be used to increase lactation .
Male lactation has also been seen during recovery from starvation .
This may be because glands that produce hormones recover faster than the liver , which absorbs hormones , leading to high hormone levels .
Spontaneous production of milk not associated with childbirth , known as galactorrhea , can occur in males and females .
SEE ALSO
* Galactagogue * Milking the bull , a proverb which refers to the act of milking a male animal * Male egg * Male pregnancy
REFERENCES
FOOTNOTES GENERAL
REFERENCES
* Cr .
J. Covey , Francis , Charles M. , et al . ;
" Lactation in Male Fruit Bats , " Nature , 367:691 , 1994 .
* Fackelmann , K.A. ; Science News , 145:148 , 1994 .
* Anomalies and Curiosities of Medicine G.M. Gould and W.L. Pyles EXTERNAL LINKS
* Sri Lanka Man nurses Daughter * Male Lactation