BRUSSELS SPROUT
The Brussels sprout is a member of the Gemmifera Group of cabbages ( Brassica oleracea ) , grown for its edible buds .
The leafy green vegetables are typically 2.5–4.0 cm ( 1.0–1.6 in ) in diameter and look like miniature cabbages .
The Brussels sprout has long been popular in Brussels , Belgium , and may have gained its name there .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Although native to the Mediterranean region with other cabbage species , Brussels sprouts first appeared in northern Europe during the fifth century , later being cultivated in the 13th century near Brussels , from which they derived their name .
They may also be called brussels sprouts , Brussel sprouts , or brussel sprouts .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Forerunners to modern Brussels sprouts were probably cultivated in Ancient Rome .
Brussels sprouts as they are now known were grown possibly as early as the 13th century in what is now Belgium .
The first written reference dates to 1587 .
During the 16th century , they enjoyed a popularity in the southern Netherlands that eventually spread throughout the cooler parts of Northern Europe .
Brussels sprouts grow in temperature ranges of 7–24 ° C ( 45–75 ° F ) , with highest yields at 15–18 ° C ( 59–64 ° F ) .
Fields are ready for harvest 90 to 180 days after planting .
The edible sprouts grow like buds in helical patterns along the side of long , thick stalks of about in height , maturing over several weeks from the lower to the upper part of the stalk .
Sprouts may be picked by hand into baskets , in which case several harvests are made of five to 15 sprouts at a time , or by cutting the entire stalk at once for processing , or by mechanical harvester , depending on variety .
Each stalk can produce , although the commercial yield is about per stalk .
Harvest season in temperate zones of the northern latitudes is September to March , making Brussels sprouts a traditional winter - stock vegetable .
In the home garden , harvest can be delayed as quality does not suffer from freezing .
Sprouts are considered to be sweetest after a frost .
Brussels sprouts are a cultivar group of the same species as broccoli , cabbage , collard greens , kale , and kohlrabi ; they are cruciferous ( they belong to the Brassicaceae family ; old name Cruciferae ) .
Many cultivars are available ; some are purple in color , such as ' Ruby Crunch ' or ' Red Bull ' .
The purple varieties are hybrids between purple cabbage and regular green Brussels sprouts developed by a Dutch botanist in the 1940s , yielding a variety with some of the red cabbage 's purple colors and greater sweetness .
EUROPE Section::::Europe .
In Continental Europe , the largest producers are the Netherlands , at 82,000 metric tons , and Germany , at 10,000 tons .
The United Kingdom has production comparable to that of the Netherlands , but its crop is generally not exported .
NORTH AMERICA Section::::North America .
Production of Brussels sprouts in the United States began in the 18th century , when French settlers brought them to Louisiana .
The first plantings in California 's Central Coast began in the 1920s , with significant production beginning in the 1940s .
Currently , several thousand acres are planted in coastal areas of San Mateo , Santa Cruz , and Monterey counties of California , which offer an ideal combination of coastal fog and cool temperatures year - round .
The harvest season lasts from June through January .
Most U.S. production is in California , with a smaller percentage of the crop grown in Skagit Valley , Washington , where cool springs , mild summers , and rich soil abounds , and to a lesser degree on Long Island , New York .
Total U.S. production is around 32,000 tons , with a value of $ 27 million .
About 80 to 85 % of U.S. production is for the frozen food market , with the remainder for fresh consumption .
Once harvested , sprouts last 3 - 5 weeks under ideal near - freezing conditions before wilting and discoloring , and about half as long at refrigerator temperature .
U.S. varieties are generally in diameter .
NUTRIENTS , PHYTOCHEMICALS AND RESEARCH Section::::Nutrients , phytochemicals and research .
Raw Brussels sprouts are 86 % water , 9 % carbohydrates , 3 % protein , and contain negligible fat .
In a 100 gram reference amount , they supply high levels ( 20 % or more of the Daily Value , DV ) of vitamin C ( 102 % DV ) and vitamin K ( 169 % DV ) , with more moderate amounts of B vitamins , such as folate and vitamin B ( USDA nutrient table , right ) ; essential minerals and dietary fiber exist in moderate to low amounts ( table ) .
Brussels sprouts , as with broccoli and other brassicas , contain sulforaphane , a phytochemical under basic research for its potential biological properties .
Although boiling reduces the level of sulforaphane , neither steaming , microwave cooking , nor stir frying cause a significant loss .
Consuming Brussels sprouts in excess may not be suitable for patients taking anticoagulants , such as warfarin , since they contain vitamin K , a blood - clotting factor .
In one reported incident , eating too many Brussels sprouts precipitated hospitalization for an individual on blood - thinning therapy .
COOKING AND PREPARATION Section::::Cooking and preparation .
The most common method of preparing Brussels sprouts for cooking begins with cutting the buds off the stalk .
Any surplus stem is cut away , and any loose surface leaves are peeled and discarded .
Once cut and cleaned , the buds are typically cooked by boiling , steaming , stir frying , grilling , slow cooking , or roasting .
To ensure even cooking throughout , buds of a similar size are usually chosen .
Some cooks make a single cut or a cross in the center of the stem to aid the penetration of heat .
Overcooking renders the buds gray and soft , and they then develop a strong flavor and odor that some dislike for its garlic- or onion - odor properties .
The odor is associated with the glucosinolate sinigrin , a sulfur compound having characteristic pungency .
For taste , roasting Brussels sprouts is a common way to cook them to enhance flavor .
Common toppings or additions for Brussels sprouts include Parmesan cheese and butter , balsamic vinegar , brown sugar , chestnuts , or pepper .
Another way of cooking Brussels sprouts is to sauté them .
Brussels sprouts can be pickled as an alternative to cooking them .
GALLERY
REFERENCES EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Brassica oleracea gemmifera – Plants For a Future database entry