CREMASTER MUSCLE
The cremaster muscle is a muscle that covers the testis and the spermatic cord .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
In human males , the cremaster muscle is a thin layer of striated and smooth muscle found in the inguinal canal and scrotum between the external and internal layers of spermatic fascia , surrounding the testis and spermatic cord .
The cremaster muscle is a paired structure , there being one on each side of the body .
Anatomically , the lateral cremaster muscle originates from the internal oblique muscle , just superior to the inguinal canal , and the middle of the inguinal ligament .
The medial cremaster muscle , which sometimes is absent , originates from the pubic tubercle and sometimes the lateral pubic crest .
Both insert into the tunica vaginalis underneath the testis .
BLOOD SUPPLY Section::::Blood supply .
The cremaster muscle is supplied by the cremasteric artery which is a branch of inferior epigastric artery .
NERVE SUPPLY Section::::Nerve supply .
The cremaster muscle is innervated from the genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve .
It receives distinctly different innervation and vascular supply in comparison to the internal oblique .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The cremaster develops to its full extent only in males ; in females it is represented by only a few muscle loops .
In female humans , the cremaster muscle is smaller and is found on the round ligament .
In rats , it has been shown that cremaster muscles developed from the gubernacular bulb .
FUNCTION RETRACTION Section::::Function .
Section::::Retraction .
The cremaster muscle 's function is to raise and lower the testes in order to regulate scrotal temperature for optimal spermatogenesis and survival of the resultant spermatozoa .
It does this by increasing or decreasing the exposed surface area of the surrounding tissue , allowing faster or slower dissipation of body heat .
The cremaster muscle is an involuntary muscle and contraction can occur during arousal which can prevent injury to the testicles during sex .
Retraction can also occur during moments of extreme fear , possibly to help avoid injuring the testes while dealing with a fight or flight situation .
Clinically , a reflex arc termed the cremasteric reflex can be demonstrated by lightly stroking the skin of the inner thigh downwards from the hip towards the knee .
This stimulates the sensory fibers of the ilioinguinal nerve , which enters the spinal cord at L1 .
The sensory fibers stimulate the motor fibers of the genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve ( also at spinal level L1 ) , which provides innervation to the cremaster muscles causing the contraction of the muscle and elevation of the testes .
This causes the cremaster muscle on the same side to rapidly contract , raising the testicle .
The cremaster can also be contracted voluntarily , by performing Kegels ( which somehow contracts the cremaster ) , or by flexing and tightening the abdominal muscles .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
The cremaster muscle occasionally experiences painful spasms or cramps in adult males which can be chronic and debilitating .
Treatment for these spasms ranges from minor surgery to injection with botulinum - a toxin to the regular application of heat to relax the muscle .
Surgery , including the excision of the cremaster muscle , has apparently been able to provide complete relief from this condition without significant side effects .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The word is derived from the transitive Greek verb " I hang " ( ) .
ADDITIONAL IMAGES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* - " Inguinal Region , Scrotum and Testes : Layers of the Spermatic Cord "