CRYPTORCHIDISM Cryptorchidism is the absence of one or both testes from the scrotum .
The word is from the Greek κρυπτός , kryptos , meaning hidden , and ὄρχις , orchis , meaning testicle .
It is the most common birth defect of the male genital tract .
About 3 % of full - term and 30 % of premature infant boys are born with at least one undescended testis .
However , about 80 % of cryptorchid testes descend by the first year of life ( the majority within three months ) , making the true incidence of cryptorchidism around 1 % overall .
Cryptorchidism may develop after infancy , sometimes as late as young adulthood , but that is exceptional .
Cryptorchidism is distinct from monorchism , the condition of having only one testicle .
Though the condition may occur on one or both sides , it more commonly affects the right testis .
A testis absent from the normal scrotal position may be : * Anywhere along the " path of descent " from high in the posterior ( retroperitoneal ) abdomen , just below the kidney , to the inguinal ring
*
*
In the inguinal canal * * Ectopic , having " wandered " from the path of descent , usually outside the inguinal canal and sometimes even under the skin of the thigh , the perineum , the opposite scrotum , or the femoral canal * *
Undeveloped ( hypoplastic ) or severely abnormal ( dysgenetic ) *
* Missing ( also see anorchia ) .
* About two - thirds of cases without other abnormalities are unilateral ; most of the other third involve both testes .
In 90 % of cases , an undescended testis can be felt in the inguinal canal .
In a small minority of cases , missing testes may be found in the abdomen or appear to be nonexistent ( truly " hidden " ) .
Undescended testes are associated with reduced fertility , increased risk of testicular germ - cell tumors , and psychological problems when the boy is grown .
Undescended testes are also more susceptible to testicular torsion ( and subsequent infarction ) and inguinal hernias .
Without intervention , an undescended testicle will usually descend during the first year of life , but to reduce these risks , undescended testes can be brought into the scrotum in infancy by a surgical procedure called an orchiopexy .
Although cryptorchidism nearly always refers to congenital absence or maldescent , a testis observed in the scrotum in early infancy can occasionally " reascend " ( move back up ) into the inguinal canal .
A testis which can readily move or be moved between the scrotum and canal is referred to as retractile .
Cryptorchidism , hypospadias , testicular cancer , and poor semen quality make up the syndrome known as testicular dysgenesis syndrome .
SIGNS AND SYMPTOMS INFERTILITY Section::::Signs and symptoms .
Section::::Infertility .
Many men who were born with undescended testes have reduced fertility , even after orchiopexy in infancy .
The reduction with unilateral cryptorchidism is subtle , with a reported infertility rate of about 10 % , compared with about 6 % reported by the same study for the general population of adult men .
The fertility reduction after orchiopexy for bilateral cryptorchidism is more marked , about 38 % , or six times that of the general population .
The basis for the universal recommendation for early surgery is research showing degeneration of spermatogenic tissue and reduced spermatogonia counts after the second year of life in undescended testes .
The degree to which this is prevented or improved by early orchiopexy is still uncertain .
CANCER RISK Section::::Cancer risk .
One of the strongest arguments for early orchiopexy is reducing the risk of testicular cancer .
About one in 500 men born with one or both testes undescended develops testicular cancer , roughly a four- to 40-fold increased risk .
The peak incidence occurs in the third and fourth decades of life .
The risk is higher for intra - abdominal testes and somewhat lower for inguinal testes , but even the normally descended testis of a man whose other testis was undescended has about a 20 % higher cancer risk than those of other men .
The most common type of testicular cancer occurring in undescended testes is seminoma .
It is usually treatable if caught early , so urologists often recommend that boys who had orchiopexy as infants be taught testicular self - examination , to recognize testicular masses and seek early medical care for them .
Cancer developing in an intra - abdominal testis would be unlikely to be recognized before considerable growth and spread , and one of the advantages of orchiopexy is that a mass developing in a scrotal testis is far easier to recognize than an intra - abdominal mass .
Orchidopexy was originally thought to result in easier detection of testicular cancer , but did not lower the risk of actually developing cancer .
However , recent data have shown a paradigm shift .
The New England Journal of Medicine published in 2007 that orchidopexy performed before puberty resulted in a significantly reduced risk of testicular cancer than if done after puberty .
The risk of malignancy in the undescended testis is four to 10 times higher than that in the general population , and is about one in 80 with a unilateral undescended testis and one in 40 to one in 50 for bilateral undescended testes .
The peak age for this tumor is 15–45 years old .
The most common tumor developing in an undescended testis is a seminoma ( 65 % ) ; in contrast , after orchiopexy , seminomas represent only 30 % of testicular tumors .
PSYCHOLOGICAL CONSEQUENCES Section::::Psychological consequences .
A small body of research on the psychology of cryptorchidism attempts to determine whether this condition can cause lasting psychological problems .
It consists of only a few case reports and small studies .
This research also has serious methodological problems ; major variables are completely uncontrolled , such as the small physical stature of many cryptorchid boys , and the psychological effects of corrective surgery .
Existing research indicates that boys with undescended testicles do not tend to be gender - disordered , effeminate , or prehomosexual .
A disturbed self - image forms only when the family dynamics are destructive to developing male self esteem .
Such pathogenic attitudes were found in parents who focused on the boy 's genital defect as a sign of his presumed effeminacy .
However , when the cryptorchism is surgically corrected , a healthy masculinity becomes possible .
The basic sexual normality of these boys was confirmed in a small retrospective study that tested adolescent boys several years after their condition was surgically repaired .
They had developed into fairly well - adjusted teenagers without special sexual or gender problems , and with no distinctive traits of psychopathological relevance .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
In most full - term infant boys with cryptorchidism but no other genital abnormalities , a cause can not be found , making this a common , sporadic , unexplained ( idiopathic ) birth defect .
A combination of genetics , maternal health , and other environmental factors may disrupt the hormones and physical changes that influence the development of the testicles .
* Severely premature infants can be born before descent of testes .
Low birth weight is also a known factor .
* A contributing role of environmental chemicals called endocrine disruptors that interfere with normal fetal hormone balance has been proposed .
The Mayo Clinic lists " parents ' exposure to some pesticides " as a known risk factor .
* Risk factors may include exposure to regular alcohol consumption during pregnancy ( five or more drinks per week , associated with a three - fold increase in cryptorchidism , when compared to nondrinking mothers .
Cigarette smoking is also a known risk factor .
* Family history of undescended testicles or other problems of genital development
* Cryptorchidism occurs at a much higher rate in a large number of congenital malformation syndromes .
Among the more common are Down syndrome , Prader – Willi syndrome , and Noonan syndrome .
*
In vitro fertilization , use of cosmetics by the mother , and pre - eclampsia have also been recognized as risk factors for development of cryptorchidism .
In 2008 , a study was published that investigated the possible relationship between cryptorchidism and prenatal exposure to a chemical called phthalate ( DEHP ) , which is used in the manufacture of plastics .
The researchers found a significant association between higher levels of DEHP metabolites in the pregnant mothers and several sex - related changes , including incomplete descent of the testes in their sons .
According to the lead author of the study , a national survey found that 25 % of U.S. women had phthalate levels similar to the levels that were found to be associated with sexual abnormalities .
A 2010 study examined the prevalence of congenital cryptorchidism among offspring whose mothers had taken mild analgesics , primarily over - the - counter pain medications including ibuprofen ( e.g. Advil ) and paracetamol ( acetaminophen ) .
Combining the results from a survey of pregnant women prior to their due date in correlation with the health of their children and an ex vivo rat model , the study found that pregnant women who had been exposed to mild analgesics had a higher prevalence of baby boys born with congenital cryptorchidism .
New insight into the testicular descent mechanism has been hypothesized by the concept of a male programming window derived from animal studies .
According to this concept , testicular descent status is " set " during the period from 8 to 14 weeks of gestation in humans .
Undescended testis is a result of disruption in androgen levels only during this programming window .
MECHANISM NORMAL DEVELOPMENT Section::::Mechanism .
Section::::Normal development .
The testes begin as an immigration of primordial germ cells into testicular cords along the gonadal ridge in the abdomen of the early embryo .
The interaction of several male genes organizes this developing gonad into a testis rather than an ovary by the second month of gestation .
During the third to fifth months , the cells in the testes differentiate into testosterone - producing Leydig cells , and anti - Müllerian hormone - producing Sertoli cells .
The germ cells in this environment become fetal spermatogonia .
Male external genitalia develop during the third and fourth months of gestation and the fetus continues to grow , develop , and differentiate .
The testes remain high in the abdomen until the seventh month of gestation , when they move from the abdomen through the inguinal canals into the two sides of the scrotum .
Movement has been proposed to occur in two phases , under the control of somewhat different factors .
The first phase , movement across the abdomen to the entrance of the inguinal canal , appears controlled ( or at least greatly influenced ) by anti - Müllerian hormone ( AMH ) .
The second phase , in which the testes move through the inguinal canal into the scrotum , is dependent on androgens ( most importantly testosterone ) .
In rodents , androgens induce the genitofemoral nerve to release calcitonin gene - related peptide , which produces rhythmic contractions of the gubernaculum , a ligament which connects the testis to the scrotum , but a similar mechanism has not been demonstrated in humans .
Maldevelopment of the gubernaculum , or deficiency or insensitivity to either AMH or androgen can , therefore , prevent the testes from descending into the scrotum .
Some evidence suggests an additional paracrine hormone , referred to as descendin , may be secreted by the testes .
In many infants with inguinal testes , further descent of the testes into the scrotum occurs in the first 6 months of life .
This is attributed to the postnatal surge of gonadotropins and testosterone that normally occurs between the first and fourth months of life .
Spermatogenesis continues after birth .
In the third to fifth months of life , some of the fetal spermatogonia residing along the basement membrane become type A spermatogonia .
More gradually , other fetal spermatogonia become type B spermatogonia and primary spermatocytes by the fifth year after birth .
Spermatogenesis arrests at this stage until puberty .
Most normal - appearing undescended testes are also normal by microscopic examination , but reduced spermatogonia can be found .
The tissue in undescended testes becomes more markedly abnormal ( " degenerates " ) in microscopic appearance between 2 and 4 years after birth .
Some evidence indicates early orchiopexy reduces this degeneration .
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY Section::::Pathophysiology .
At least one contributing mechanism for reduced spermatogenesis in cryptorchid testes is temperature .
The temperature of testes in the scrotum is at least a few degrees cooler than in the abdomen .
Animal experiments in the middle of the 20th century suggested that raising the temperature could damage fertility .
Some circumstantial evidence suggests tight underwear and other practices that raise the testicular temperature for prolonged periods can be associated with lower sperm counts .
Nevertheless , research in recent decades suggests that the issue of fertility is more complex than a simple matter of temperature .
Subtle or transient hormone deficiencies or other factors that lead to a lack of descent also may impair the development of spermatogenic tissue .
The inhibition of spermatogenesis by ordinary intra - abdominal temperature is so potent that continual suspension of normal testes tightly against the inguinal ring at the top of the scrotum by means of special " suspensory briefs " has been researched as a method of male contraception , and was referred to as " artificial cryptorchidism " by one report .
An additional factor contributing to infertility is the high rate of anomalies of the epididymis in boys with cryptorchidism ( over 90 % in some studies ) .
Even after orchiopexy , these may also affect sperm maturation and motility at an older age .
DIAGNOSIS Section::::Diagnosis .
The most common diagnostic dilemma in otherwise normal boys is distinguishing a retractile testis from a testis that will not descend spontaneously into the scrotum .
Retractile testes are more common than truly undescended testes and do not need to be operated on .
In normal males , as the cremaster muscle relaxes or contracts , the testis moves lower or higher ( " retracts " ) in the scrotum .
This cremasteric reflex is much more active in infant boys than older men .
A retractile testis high in the scrotum can be difficult to distinguish from a position in the lower inguinal canal .
Though various maneuvers are used to do so , such as using a cross - legged position , soaping the examiner 's fingers , or examining in a warm bath , the benefit of surgery in these cases can be a matter of clinical judgment .
In the minority of cases with bilaterally nonpalpable testes , further testing to locate the testes , assess their function , and exclude additional problems is often useful .
Scrotal ultrasound or magnetic resonance imaging performed and interpreted by a radiologist can often locate the testes while confirming absence of a uterus .
At ultrasound , the undescended testis usually appears small , less echogenic than the contralateral normal testis and usually located in the inguinal region .
With color Doppler ultrasonography , the vascularity of the undescended testis is poor .
A karyotype can confirm or exclude forms of dysgenetic primary hypogonadism , such as Klinefelter syndrome or mixed gonadal dysgenesis .
Hormone levels ( especially gonadotropins and AMH ) can help confirm that hormonally functional testes are worth attempting to rescue , as can stimulation with a few injections of human chorionic gonadotropin to elicit a rise of the testosterone level .
Occasionally , these tests reveal an unsuspected and more complicated intersex condition .
In the even smaller minority of cryptorchid infants who have other obvious birth defects of the genitalia , further testing is crucial and has a high likelihood of detecting an intersex condition or other anatomic anomalies .
Ambiguity can indicate either impaired androgen synthesis or reduced sensitivity .
The presence of a uterus by pelvic ultrasound suggests either persistent Müllerian duct syndrome ( AMH deficiency or insensitivity ) or a severely virilized genetic female with congenital adrenal hyperplasia .
An unambiguous micropenis , especially accompanied by hypoglycemia or jaundice , suggests congenital hypopituitarism .
TREATMENT Section::::Treatment .
The primary management of cryptorchidism is watchful waiting , due to the high likelihood of self - resolution .
Where this fails , orchiopexy is effective if inguinal testes have not descended after 4–6 months .
Surgery is often performed by a pediatric urologist or pediatric surgeon , but in many communities still by a general urologist or surgeon .
When the undescended testis is in the inguinal canal , hormonal therapy is sometimes attempted and very occasionally successful .
The most commonly used hormone therapy is human chorionic gonadotropin ( hCG ) .
A series of hCG injections ( 10 injections over 5 weeks is common ) is given and the status of the testis / testes is reassessed at the end .
Although many trials have been published , the reported success rates range widely , from roughly 5 to 50 % , probably reflecting the varying criteria for distinguishing retractile testes from low inguinal testes .
Hormone treatment does have the occasional incidental benefits of allowing confirmation of Leydig cell responsiveness ( proven by a rise of the testosterone by the end of the injections ) or inducing additional growth of a small penis ( via the testosterone rise ) .
Some surgeons have reported facilitation of surgery , perhaps by enhancing the size , vascularity , or healing of the tissue .
A newer hormonal intervention used in Europe is the use of GnRH analogs such as nafarelin or buserelin ; the success rates and putative mechanism of action are similar to hCG , but some surgeons have combined the two treatments and reported higher descent rates .
Limited evidence suggests that germ cell count is slightly better after hormone treatment ; whether this translates into better sperm counts and fertility rates at maturity has not been established .
The cost of either type of hormone treatment is less than that of surgery and the chance of complications at appropriate doses is minimal .
Nevertheless , despite the potential advantages of a trial of hormonal therapy , many surgeons do not consider the success rates high enough to be worth the trouble , since the surgery itself is usually simple and uncomplicated .
In cases where the testes are identified preoperatively in the inguinal canal , orchiopexy is often performed as an outpatient and has a very low complication rate .
An incision is made over the inguinal canal .
The testis with accompanying cord structure and blood supply is exposed , partially separated from the surrounding tissues ( " mobilized " ) , and brought into the scrotum .
It is sutured to the scrotal tissue or enclosed in a " subdartos pouch " .
The associated passage back into the inguinal canal , an inguinal hernia , is closed to prevent reascent .
In patients with intra - abdominal maldescended testis , laparoscopy is useful to see for oneself the pelvic structures , position of the testis and decide upon surgery ( single or staged procedure ) .
Surgery becomes more complicated if the blood supply is not ample and elastic enough to be stretched into the scrotum .
In these cases , the supply may be divided , some vessels sacrificed with expectation of adequate collateral circulation .
In the worst case , the testis must be " autotransplanted " into the scrotum , with all connecting blood vessels cut and reconnected ( anastomosed ) .
When the testis is in the abdomen , the first stage of surgery is exploration to locate it , assess its viability , and determine the safest way to maintain or establish the blood supply .
Multistage surgeries , or autotransplantation and anastomosis , are more often necessary in these situations .
Just as often , intra - abdominal exploration discovers that the testis is nonexistent ( " vanished " ) , or dysplastic and not salvageable .
The principal major complication of all types of orchiopexy is a loss of the blood supply to the testis , resulting in loss of the testis due to ischemic atrophy or fibrosis .
OTHER ANIMALS
Section::::Other animals .
Cryptorchidism is seen in all domestic animals , most commonly in stallions , boars , and canines .
The prevalence of this condition can vary depending on species and breed .
Evidence of this condition is more likely in companion animals and swine than ruminants .
The cause of this condition can vary from a combination of genetics , environment , and epigenetics .
DOGS Section::::Dogs .
Cryptorchidism is common in male dogs , occurring at a rate up to 10 % .
This condition is one of the most common congenital defects in purebred dogs ( 1 - 11 % ) , with 14 % reported in Siberian Huskies .
Although the genetics are not fully understood , it is thought to be a recessive , and probably polygenetic , trait .
Some have speculated that it is a sex - limited autosomal recessive trait ; however , it is unlikely to be simple recessive .
Dog testes usually descend by 10 days of age
and it is considered to be cryptorchidism if they do not descend by the age of 8 weeks .
Cryptorchidism can be either bilateral ( causing sterility ) or unilateral , and inguinal or abdominal ( or both ) .
Because it is an inherited trait , affected dogs should not be bred and should be castrated .
The parents should be considered carriers of the defect and a breeder should thoughtfully consider whether to breed the carrier parent or not .
Littermates may be normal , carriers , or cryptorchid .
Castration of the undescended teste(s ) should be considered for cryptorchid dogs due to the high rate of testicular cancer , especially sertoli cell tumors .
The incidence of testicular cancer is 13.6 times higher in dogs with abdominally retained testicles compared with normal dogs .
Testicular torsion is also more likely in retained testicles .
Surgical correction is by palpation of the retained testicle and subsequent exploration of the inguinal canal or abdomen , but showing altered dogs is against AKC rules , making this correction pointless for breeding stock .
Orchiopexy is an option for pet dogs that will not be used for breeding .
Commonly affected breeds include : *
Alaskan Klee Kai
* Boxer * Chihuahua * Dachshund ( miniature ) * Bulldog * Maltese * Miniature Schnauzer
* Pekingese *
Pomeranian * Poodle ( toy and miniature )
*
Pug * Shetland Sheepdog
* Siberian Husky
* Whippet * Yorkshire Terrier CATS Section::::Cats .
Cryptorchidism is rarer in cats than it is in dogs .
In one study , 1.9 % of intact male cats were cryptorchid .
Persians are predisposed .
Normally , the testicles are in the scrotum by the age of 6 - 8 weeks .
Male cats with one cryptorchid testicle may still be fertile ; however , male cats with two cryptorchid testicles are most likely to be sterile .
Urine spraying is one indication that a cat with no observable testicles may not be neutered ; other signs are the presence of enlarged jowls , thickened facial and neck skin , and spines on the penis ( which usually regress within six weeks after castration ) .
Most cryptorchid cats present with an inguinal testicle .
Testicular tumors and testicular torsion are rare in cryptorchid cats , but castration is usually performed due to unwanted behavior such as urine spraying .
HORSES Section::::Horses .
In horses , cryptorchidism is sufficiently common that affected males ( ridglings ) are routinely gelded .
Rarely , cryptorchidism is due to the presence of a congenital testicular tumor such as a teratoma , which has a tendency to grow large .
REFERENCES