PASSIVE TRANSPORT Passive transport is a movement of ions and other atomic or molecular substances across cell membranes without need of energy input .
Unlike active transport , it does not require an input of cellular energy because it is instead driven by the tendency of the system to grow in entropy .
The rate of passive transport depends on the permeability of the cell membrane , which , in turn , depends on the organization and characteristics of the membrane lipids and proteins .
The four main kinds of passive transport are simple diffusion , facilitated diffusion , filtration , and/or osmosis .
DIFFUSION Section::::Diffusion .
Diffusion is the net movement of material from an area of high concentration to an area with lower concentration .
The difference of concentration between the two areas is often termed as the concentration gradient , and diffusion will continue until this gradient has been eliminated .
Since diffusion moves materials from an area of higher concentration to an area of lower concentration , it is described as moving solutes " down the concentration gradient " ( compared with active transport , which often moves material from area of low concentration to area of higher concentration , and therefore referred to as moving the material " against the concentration gradient " ) .
However , in many cases ( e.g. passive drug transport )
the driving force of passive transport can not be simplified to the concentration gradient .
If there are different solutions at the two sides of the membrane with different equilibrium solubility of the drug , the difference in degree of saturation is the driving force of passive membrane transport .
It is also true for supersaturated solutions which are more and more important owing to the spreading of the application of amorphous solid dispersions for drug bioavailability enhancement .
Simple diffusion and osmosis are in some ways similar .
Simple diffusion is the passive movement of solute from a high concentration to a lower concentration until the concentration of the solute is uniform throughout and reaches equilibrium .
Osmosis is much like simple diffusion but it specifically describes the movement of water ( not the solute ) across a selectively permeable membrane until there is an equal concentration of water and solute on both sides of the membrane .
Simple diffusion and osmosis are both forms of passive transport and require none of the cell 's ATP energy .
FACILITATED DIFFUSION
Section::::Facilitated diffusion .
Facilitated diffusion , also called carrier - mediated osmosis , is the movement of molecules across the cell membrane via special transport proteins that are embedded in the plasma membrane by actively taking up or excluding ions .
Active transport of protons by H ATPases alters membrane potential allowing for facilitated passive transport of particular ions such as potassium down their charge gradient through high affinity transporters and channels .
FILTRATION Section::::Filtration .
Filtration is movement of water and solute molecules across the cell membrane due to hydrostatic pressure generated by the cardiovascular system .
Depending on the size of the membrane pores , only solutes of a certain size may pass through it .
For example , the membrane pores of the Bowman 's capsule in the kidneys are very small , and only albumins , the smallest of the proteins , have any chance of being filtered through .
On the other hand , the membrane pores of liver cells are extremely large , but not forgetting cells are extremely small to allow a variety of solutes to pass through and be metabolized .
OSMOSIS Section::::Osmosis .
Osmosis is the movement of water molecules across a selectively permeable membrane .
The net movement of water molecules through a partially permeable membrane from a solution of high water potential to an area of low water potential .
A cell with a less negative water potential will draw in water but this depends on other factors as well such as solute potential ( pressure in the cell e.g. solute molecules ) and pressure potential ( external pressure e.g. cell wall ) .
There are three types of Osmosis solutions : the isotonic solution , hypotonic solution , and hypertonic solution .
Isotonic solution is when the extracellular solute concentration is balanced with the concentration inside the cell .
In the Isotonic solution , the water molecules still moves between the solutions , but the rates are the same from both directions , thus the water movement is balanced between the inside of the cell as well as the outside of the cell .
A hypotonic solution is when the solute concentration outside the cell is lower than the concentration inside the cell .
In hypotonic solutions , the water moves into the cell , down its concentration gradient ( from higher to lower water concentrations ) .
That can cause the cell to swell .
Cells that do n't have a cell wall , such as animal cells , could burst in this solution .
A hypertonic solution is when the solute concentration is higher ( think of hyper - as high ) than the concentration inside the cell .
In hypertonic solution , the water will move out , causing the cell to shrink .
SEE ALSO
* Active transport * Transport phenomena REFERENCES