HENRI CHARRIÈRE Henri Charrière
(; 16 November 1906 – 29 July 1973 ) was a French writer , convicted as a murderer by the French courts .
In jail he wrote the famous novel Papillon , a memoir of his incarceration in and escape from a penal colony in French Guiana .
While Charrière claimed that Papillon was largely true , modern researchers believe that much of the book 's material came from other inmates , rather than Charrière himself .
Charrière denied committing the murder , although he freely admitted to having committed various other petty crimes prior to his incarceration .
BIOGRAPHY
EARLY LIFE Section::::Biography .
Section::::Early life .
Charrière was born at Saint - Étienne - de - Lugdarès , Ardèche , France .
He had two older sisters .
His mother died when he was 10 .
At 17 in 1923 , he enlisted in the French Navy and served for two years .
After that , he became a member of the Paris underworld .
He later married and had a daughter .
IMPRISONMENT Section::::Imprisonment .
The version of his life presented in his semi - biographical novel , Papillon , claimed that Charrière was convicted on 26 October 1931 of the murder of a pimp named Roland Le Petit , a charge that he strenuously denied .
He was sentenced to life in prison and ten years of hard labour .
After a brief imprisonment at the transit prison of Beaulieu in Caen , France , he was transported in 1933 to the prison of St - Laurent - du - Maroni on the Maroni River , in the penal settlement of mainland French Guiana .
According to the book , he made his first escape on 28 November 1933 and was joined by fellow prisoners André Maturette and Joanes Clousiot , who would accompany him throughout much of his time on the run .
37 days later , the trio were shipwrecked near the village of Riohacha , northern Caribbean Region of Colombia , and were imprisoned .
Charrière subsequently escaped during a rainy night and fled to the La Guajira Peninsula , where he was adopted by an Indian tribe .
He spent several months living with the natives , but felt that he had to move on , which was a decision he would ultimately regret .
Upon returning to civilization , he was quickly recaptured and sent back to French Guiana to be put into solitary confinement for the next two years .
After his release from solitary confinement , he spent another 7 years in prison .
During this period he attempted to escape several more times , resulting in increasingly brutal responses from his captors .
He stated that he was then confined to Devil 's Island , a labour camp ( Devil 's Island was not a labour camp so much as an internment camp ) that , at the time , was notorious for being inescapable .
( French authorities later released penal colony records that contradicted this ; amongst other details , Charrière had never been imprisoned on Devil 's Island . )
However , he finally achieved his permanent liberation in 1941 , by using a bag of coconuts as a makeshift raft and riding the tide out from the island .
He sailed for miles and eventually arrived in Guyana , where he was imprisoned for one year in Wakenaam then released as a Guyanese citizen .
LATER LIFE Section::::Later life .
After Charrière 's final release in 1945 , he settled in Venezuela where he married a Venezuelan woman identified only as Rita .
He opened restaurants in Caracas and Maracaibo .
He was subsequently treated as a minor celebrity , even being invited frequently to appear on local television programmes .
He finally returned to France , visiting Paris in conjunction with the publication of his memoir Papillon ( 1969 ) .
The book sold over 1.5 million copies in France , prompting a French minister to attribute " the moral decline of France " to miniskirts and Papillon .
Charrière was pardoned of murder in 1970 .
Papillon was first published in the United Kingdom in 1970 , in a translation by the novelist Patrick O'Brian .
Charrière played the part of a jewel thief in a 1970 film called The Butterfly Affair .
He also wrote a sequel to Papillon entitled Banco , in which he describes his life after being released from prison .
On 29 July 1973 , Charrière died of throat cancer in Madrid , Spain .
PAPILLON
Section::::Papillon .
Charrière 's 1970 best - selling book Papillon , which he said was " 75 percent true , " details his alleged numerous escapes , attempted escapes , adventures and recaptures , from his imprisonment in 1932 to his final escape to Venezuela .
The book 's title is Charrière 's nickname , derived from a butterfly tattoo on his chest ( papillon being French for butterfly ) .
Modern researchers , however , believe that Charrière got much of his story material from other inmates , and , thus , see the work as more fictional than autobiographical .
In his book Les quatre vérités de Papillon , Georges Ménager , a former Paris Match reporter claims that Charrière was in fact a police informer and a pimp before his incarceration , and lived off the proceeds of his girlfriend 's prostitution and that he later tried to blame her for the murder of Roland Legrande .
Charrière claims to have been incarcerated in Saint Laurent and may have escaped from there , but according to French officials , he never served any time on Devil 's Island .
The book and movie both present Devil 's Island as having rocky cliffs , when in fact , though the entire island is rocky , it gently slopes into the surrounding sea .
A French justice ministry report said Charrière 's book included episodes that were imagined or involved others and " should be divided by at least 10 to get near the truth " .
In 2005 , a 104-year - old man in Paris , Charles Brunier , claimed to be the real Papillon .
He had also a butterfly tattoo on his left arm .
Critics tend to agree that Charrière 's depictions included events that happened to others and that Brunier was at the prison at the same time .
Critics claim that the heroic rescue of a guard 's young daughter from sharks , which Charrière describes graphically in his book , was in fact carried out by another convict named Alfred Steffen who lost both legs and subsequently died .
When some critics questioned the veracity of his story and said he erred on some of the dates , Charrière replied : " I did n't have a typewriter with me . "
French journalist Gerard de Villiers , author of Papillon Épinglé ( Butterfly Pinned ) maintains that " Only about 10 percent of Charrière 's book represents the truth . "
FILM ADAPTATIONS Section::::Film adaptations .
Papillon was adapted into the 1973 film Papillon , directed by Franklin J. Schaffner and starring Steve McQueen as Henri Charrière .
Dalton Trumbo was the screenwriter , and Charrière himself acted as a consultant on location .
There are scenes in the film that were not mentioned in the book , an example of which is when Papillon and his friend Louis Dega ( played by Dustin Hoffman ) were forced by the guards to catch a crocodile .
A 12-minute documentary , The Magnificent Rebel , also released in 1973 , covers the making of the film , and includes an interview with Charrière .
On August 24 , 2018 , a second film adaptation of the novel , also called Papillon , was released .
It was directed by Michael Noer , and Charrière was played by Charlie Hunnam .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS