U.S. ROUTE 20 U.S.
Highway 20
( US 20 ) is an east – west United States highway that stretches from the Pacific Northwest all the way to New England .
The " 0 " in its route number indicates that US 20 is a coast - to - coast route .
Spanning , it is the longest road in the United States , and particularly from Newport , Oregon to Boston , Massachusetts , the route is roughly parallel to that of the newer Interstate 90 ( I-90 ) , which is in turn the longest Interstate Highway in the U.S.
There is a discontinuity in the official designation of US 20 through Yellowstone National Park , with unnumbered roads used to traverse the park .
It and US 30 break the general U.S. Route numbering rules in Oregon , since US 30 actually starts north of US 20 and runs parallel to the north throughout the state .
The two run concurrently and continue in the correct positioning near Caldwell , Idaho .
This is because US 20 was not a planned coast - to - coast route while US 30 was .
US 20 originally ended at the eastern entrance of Yellowstone Park ; it was extended in 1940 .
The highway 's eastern terminus is in Boston , Massachusetts , at Kenmore Square , where it meets Route 2 .
Its western terminus is in Newport , Oregon , at an intersection with US 101 , within a mile of the Pacific Ocean .
ROUTE DESCRIPTION Section::::Route description .
The highway passes through the following states : OREGON Section::::Oregon .
US 20 begins at an intersection with US 101 in Newport , Oregon , and runs generally eastward towards Idaho .
On the way it goes over the Central Oregon Coast Range , through several Willamette Valley cities including Corvallis and Albany , climbs the Cascade Mountains over Santiam Pass , goes through Bend , and traverses the Oregon High Desert passing through Burns .
It eventually overlaps with US 26 in Vale , and the two roads continue concurrently to the Idaho border .
IDAHO Section::::Idaho .
US 20 crosses into Idaho from Oregon northwest of Parma .
It runs concurrently with US 26 and joins US 95 through Parma .
US 20 / US 26 leaves US 95 southeast of Parma and runs to Caldwell where US 20 / US 26 joins with I-84 and US 30 for a short time .
These four highways parallel each other ( on two roadways ) to Boise where US 20 / US 26 runs through downtown before joining with I-84 and US 30 again to Mountain Home , where it departs at exit 95 to head east , past Rattlesnake Station , Anderson Ranch Dam road , and cresting at Cat Creek summit at above mean sea level .
It continues into and across Camas County through Fairfield to Timmerman Junction , the intersection in Blaine County with State Highway 75 , the route to Sun Valley , Galena Summit , and Stanley .
US 20 continues east through Picabo and Carey , joined with US 26 and US 93 , to Craters of the Moon and Arco , where US 93 splits off and turns north - northwest to climb the Big Lost River valley .
US 20 / US 26 continues on through the Idaho National Laboratory , where the highways split just west of Atomic City ; US 26 heads to Blackfoot and US 20 to Idaho Falls , where it turns north - northeast to pass near Rexburg as a freeway .
US 20 then climbs through the communities of St. Anthony , Ashton , and Island Park , and crosses the Continental Divide at Targhee Pass at , entering Montana west of West Yellowstone .
MONTANA Section::::Montana .
In the state of Montana , US 20 runs for less than .
It runs from the Idaho state line to West Yellowstone , Montana , the western entrance to Yellowstone National Park .
US 20 is known as the Targhee Pass Highway in Montana .
WYOMING
Section::::Wyoming .
In the state of Wyoming , the eastern segment of US 20 starts at the eastern entrance to Yellowstone National Park along with the western termini of US 14 and US 16 .
These three routes run east to Greybull , where US 14 continues east and US 16 / US 20 turns south ; at Worland , US 16 turns east while US 20 continues south , passing through Wind River Canyon south of Thermopolis .
US 20 joins US 26 in Shoshoni , where it turns east .
In Casper it joins I-25 and US 87 .
These four routes stay combined to Orin , where US 20 turns east .
At its intersection with I-25 , US 18 begins .
US 18 and US 20 are concurrent from Orin to Lusk .
US 18 separates there and US 20 runs east into Nebraska .
NEBRASKA Section::::Nebraska .
In the state of Nebraska , US 20 runs from west of Harrison to South Sioux City on the Missouri River .
Portions overlap US 385 , US 83 , US 183 , US 275 , I-129 , and US 75 . IOWA Section::::Iowa .
US 20 enters Iowa at Sioux City via the Missouri River crossing with I-129 and US 75 .
After skirting the southeast side of Sioux City as a freeway with US 75 , US 20 continues east as an expressway to Moville .
From Moville through north of Early at the junction with U.S. Route 71 and Iowa Highway 471 , US 20 was reconstructed from a rural two - lane highway to a four - lane road .
This segment re - opened October 19 , 2018 and made it so that US 20 is a continuous four - lane highway during its entire time in Iowa .
Passing north of Early , Iowa and Sac City , where it has another interchange with the realigned U.S. Route 71 , then passing to the south of Fort Dodge and Webster City before intersecting I-35 near Williams .
A new segment of freeway between US
65 south of Iowa Falls and Iowa Highway 14 opened in 2003 creating a continuous four - lane route from Moorland to Dubuque .
The new segment shaved off US 20 's length in Iowa .
In the Waterloo / Cedar Falls area , the segment of US 20 overlapped by the Avenue of the Saints , which is also designated as Iowa Highway 27 .
US 20 passes Independence , Manchester , and Dyersville before reaching Dubuque .
At Dubuque , US 20 crosses into Illinois over the Julien Dubuque Bridge . ILLINOIS Section::::Illinois .
In the state of Illinois , US 20 begins in East Dubuque , following southeastward along the Mississippi River , and continues into the very hilly Driftless Area of northwest Illinois through Galena and Elizabeth .
The highway then transitions eastward from the Driftless Area to the Interior Plains near Stockton .
The road continues as a bypass north of Freeport , and then runs as a freeway along the southern fringe of Rockford .
From Rockford to Chicago , Illinois , US 20 is a mixture of four - lane expressway , four - lane limited access freeway , and winding two - lane surface road .
It is signed as " General U.S. Grant Highway " after Ulysses S. Grant .
U.S. 20 runs through the south side of Chicago as 95th Street .
US 20 exits Illinois along with US 12 and US 41 as Indianapolis Boulevard south of the Chicago Skyway .
INDIANA
Section::::Indiana .
In the state of Indiana , US 20 enters from the west beneath the Chicago Skyway with US 12 and US 41 .
US 20 passes through heavily industrialized northwestern Indiana and is the main east – west artery through Gary .
It then parallels US 12 to just west of Michigan City before running due east to South Bend .
US
20 travels around South Bend and Elkhart on the St. Joseph Valley Parkway , a four - lane limited access freeway , then returns to surface road east of Elkhart .
US 20 then passes through LaGrange and Angola , intersecting with I-69 before leaving Indiana just north of the eastern terminus of the Indiana Toll Road .
From Gary to South Bend , US 20 was built as the Dunes Relief Road .
During the 1930s and 1940s the Dunes Highway , US 12 , was becoming more crowded as housing lots and communities developed in the Indiana Dunes .
Today , there are numerous communities along US 20 and the lakefront , including Gary , Portage , Burns Harbor , Porter , Chesterton , Pines , and Michigan City .
Most notably , the route is one of the main access roads to the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore .
OHIO Section::::Ohio .
US 20 enters Ohio from Indiana just west of Columbia and traverses east through Pioneer and Alvordton to Fayette .
It continues east through Oakshade , Assumption and becomes five - lane , non - limited access roadway into Sylvania to Toledo , and then turns south until into the Toledo suburb of Maumee .
After Maumee , US 20 crosses Maumee River curving back east becoming 2 lanes through Perrysburg to Woodville , where it becomes a four - lane , non - limited access highway .
It bypasses Fremont while concurrent with US 6 , State Route 53 , and State Route 19 , and then travels through the northern edge of Clyde and the downtown area of Bellevue , where it is joined by State Route 18 .
From there the four - lane highway continues through Monroeville and bypasses Norwalk , then becomes a two - lane highway from there to Oberlin .
Continuing east , US 20 traverses through Elyria , North Ridgeville , Westlake , Rocky River , Lakewood and Cleveland , where it goes right through Public Square .
East of Cleveland US 20 follows the southern shore of Lake Erie , following Euclid Avenue from Public Square , and traverses Euclid , Wickliffe , where it intersects with I-90 , Mentor , Painesville , Madison , Geneva , Ashtabula and crosses into Pennsylvania just east of Conneaut .
PENNSYLVANIA
Section::::Pennsylvania .
US 20 runs for nearly across Erie County , Pennsylvania , most of that time just south of the CSX Amtrak railroad tracks .
US 20 appears as West Ridge Road eastward from the Ohio border through Springfield , Girard , Fairview and Millcreek townships .
At the intersection with Pennsylvania Route 832 , just outside the Erie city limits , it becomes West 26th Street .
After it reaches city center at the intersection with State Street , it becomes East 26th Street .
It turns sharply northward as Broad Street at the Bayfront Connector , then turns east again as Buffalo Road through Wesleyville and Harborcreek Township .
Buffalo Road turns sharply northward at the town of Harborcreek .
US 20 intersects with Pennsylvania Route 955 and resumes its eastward journey .
At North East Township , US 20 becomes West Main Road .
Within the town limits , it becomes West Main Street until it reaches the town center at its intersection with Pennsylvania Route 89 , where it becomes East Main Street .
Outside the town limits it becomes East Main Road until it reaches Pennsylvania 's border with New York .
NEW YORK Section::::New York .
In New York , US 20 runs roughly parallel to the New York State Thruway ( I-90 ) throughout the state .
The route runs concurrently with New York State Route 5 twice , with the second overlap extending across Western and Central New York from Avon to Auburn .
US 20 runs across the rural Cherry Valley Turnpike between Skaneateles and Albany .
US 20 was also known as the Boston - Buffalo highway prior to the construction of the New York Thruway and Massachusetts Turnpike .
MASSACHUSETTS Section::::Massachusetts .
In Massachusetts , US 20 runs near I-90 Mass Pike , intersecting it at exits 2 and 10A.
In part of Berkshire County , US 20 runs north – south as it shares the roadway with US 7 .
It is known as " Jacob 's Ladder " as it crosses the Berkshire Hills between Lee in Berkshire County and Chester in Hampden County .
From Chester to Westfield , US 20 and the Boston and Albany Railroad follow the Westfield River down to the broad valley of the Connecticut River .
In Shrewsbury , US 20 is called " Hartford Turnpike .
"
In Northborough , and Worcester it is called " Southwest Cutoff " , until it merges with the original Boston Post Road in Northborough ( Southwest Cutoff and West Main Street ) .
Southwest Cutoff was created at the turn of the century to bypass truck traffic around Shrewsbury center as well as connecting to the Boston and Worcester Turnpike .
In parts of eastern Massachusetts , US 20 follows the route of the old Boston Post Road and passes by Longfellow 's Wayside Inn , in Sudbury , the oldest continually operated Inn in America .
In 1926 , after engineers determined that heavy truck traffic on the Boston Post Road was damaging the foundations of the Inn , Henry Ford , then owner & proprietor , ordered the construction of the mile - and - a - half - long Route 20 bypass .
Upon its completion on December 11 , 1928 , he sold it to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts for $ 1 and never cashed the check .
According to the Boston Herald the by - pass cost Ford $ 288,000 .
The original route of US 20 is now called Wayside Inn Road .
US 20 continues from Sudbury through Wayland , Weston , Waltham , Watertown and then into Boston through Allston and Fenway – Kenmore .
U.S. Route 20 's official eastern terminus is in Kenmore Square at the intersection of Commonwealth Avenue , Beacon Street , and Brookline Avenue , where the alignment becomes Massachusetts Route 2 .
Route 2 continues for a short distance where it terminates at U.S. Route 3 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Before the U.S. Highway System , the route in New England and New York was designated as New England Interstate Route 5 ( NE-5 ) , part of the New England Interstate Route system that existed between 1922 and 1927 .
Around 1923 , from Springfield to Pittsfield , NE-5 was known as " Jacob 's Ladder " , and from Boston to Albany , the " Hubway " .
When US 20 was first commissioned , it took over the entirety of NE-5 .
HISTORIC TERMINI
Section::::Historic termini .
Until 1940 , the western endpoint of US 20 was the east entrance to Yellowstone National Park .
HISTORIC ROUTES Section::::Historic routes .
Between Fort Dodge , Iowa , and Dubuque , Iowa , the route has been upgraded to four lanes , the last link of this completed in 2003 .
Much of the old route is a few miles north of the present route except between I-35 and Waterloo .
There , the old route is farther north , going through Iowa Falls , Aplington , and the north side of Cedar Falls along what is now Iowa Highway 57 .
From just west of South Bend , Indiana , to the St. Joseph – Elkhart county line , the old route of US 20 through St. Joseph County is now Business US 20 .
In Elkhart County , its old route is now classified as a county road and is simply called Old US 20 .
The St. Joseph Valley Parkway is the present route of US 20 in the South Bend – Elkhart Area .
From 1930 to 1933 , US 20 followed what are now Massachusetts Route 67 and Massachusetts Route 9 from Worcester to Palmer via Shrewsbury and Northborough .
The 1953 Massachusetts Department of Public Works Master Plan would have relocated US 20 between Palmer , Massachusetts and either West Springfield , Massachusetts or Westfield , Massachusetts along the right - of - way now used by the Massachusetts Turnpike , but this was never implemented .
Until 1970–72 , US 20 followed an old route through downtown Springfield — Boston Road and State Street — crossing the Connecticut River via the older Memorial Bridge ( now Massachusetts Route 147 ) .
The construction of I-291 prompted a change .
US 20 now crosses from West Springfield at the North End Bridge , and is co - signed with I-291 until Page Boulevard , where it heads back to Boston Road via the former route of 20A. In 2012 , the Historic US Route 20 Association was formed to identify , promote and preserve the history of the route and original alignments that were once signed " Route 20 " from Boston to Newport .
HISTORIC NAMES
* The portion of US 20 eastward from Illinois generally follows the path of the Yellowstone Trail .
*
In Massachusetts , US 20 follows the Boston Post Road in Wayland and Sudbury .
*
In the state of New York , part of US 20 follows the old Cherry Valley Turnpike and is still referred to by that name in some places .
* From Buffalo westward to Cleveland , Ohio , US 20 follows the path of the Buffalo Stage Road .
* Between Fremont , Ohio and Perrysburg , Ohio , the road dates back to the late 1830s .
It was known then as the Maumee and Western Reserve Road .
Nicknamed " Mud Pike " and earned a reputation as " The worst road on the continent " for the mudholes that would trap wagon wheels and slow draft animals .
Travelers sometimes would take three days to travel .
It is still signed as Maumee St. in and near Angola , IN .
*
Through western Indiana , US 20 was built as the Dunes Relief Road , as it bypassed the heavily traveled Dunes Highway .
* Northwest of Chicago it is called Ulysses S. Grant Highway .
MAJOR INTERSECTIONS
Western segment
Oregon Idaho
Montana
Wyoming
Eastern segment Wyoming
Nebraska
Iowa Illinois
Indiana
Ohio
Pennsylvania New York
Massachusetts SEE ALSO * Massachusetts Route 20A * U.S. Route 20A in New York
* U.S. Route 20A in Ohio
*
U.S. Route 20 Business — Sioux City , Iowa ; also passes through South Sioux City , Nebraska
* U.S. Route 20 Business — Fort Dodge , Iowa * U.S. Route 120 , became Pennsylvania Route 120 in 1967
* U.S. Route 220
* U.S. Route 320 ( now decommissioned , was part of the old Route 26 )
* U.S. Route 420 ( part of U.S. Route 14 Alternate )
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Galena Bypass project homepage
* Illinois Highway Ends : US 20 *
Indiana Highway Ends : US 20
*
In Search of ...
U.S. Route 20 in Ohio by Michael G. Buettner , February 2006 * US 20 Travelogue in New York at Empire State Roads *
" On Route 20 , Where the Past Is Present " : August 11 , 2006 , article in The New York Times Escapes section .
* Flickr Group for photos taken along US 20 * Endpoints of US 20 at USends.com * Twenty West : The Great Road Across America — book about US 20
* Historic US Route 20 Association Site dedicated to the preservation and promotion of Historic US Route 20