BAYLOR COLLEGE OF MEDICINE Baylor College of Medicine ( BCM ) , located in the Texas Medical Center in Houston , Texas , US , is a health sciences university .
It includes a medical school , Baylor College of Medicine ; the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences ; the School of Allied Health Sciences ; and the National School of Tropical Medicine .
The school , located in the middle of the world 's largest medical center ( Texas Medical Center ) , is part owner of Baylor St. Luke 's Medical Center , part of the CHI St. Luke 's Health system , and has hospital affiliations with : Harris Health System , Texas Children 's Hospital , The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center , Memorial Hermann - The Institute for Rehabilitation and Research , Menninger Clinic , the Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center and Children 's Hospital of San Antonio .
The medical school has been consistently considered in the top tier of programs in the country , and is particularly noted for having the lowest tuition among all private medical schools in the US .
Its Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences is among the top 25 graduate schools in the United States .
Within the School of Allied Health Sciences , the Nurse anesthetist program ranks 2nd and the physician assistant program ranks 13th .
A program in Orthotics and Prosthetics began in 2013 , with 18 students in the first class .
The National School of Tropical Medicine is the only school in the nation dedicated exclusively to patient care , research , education and policy related to neglected tropical diseases .
On June 21 , 2010 , Dr. Paul Klotman was named as the President and CEO of the Baylor College of Medicine .
In January 2014 , the College and CHI St. Luke 's became joint owners of Baylor St. Luke 's Medical Center .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The school was formed in Dallas , Texas by a small group of Baylor University alumni physicians who aimed to improve medical practice in North Texas .
Originally called the University of Dallas Medical Department , the school opened its doors October 30 , 1900 , with 81 students .
Dr. Albert Ferdinand Beddoe , A.B. , M.D. was a co - founder , alongside Samuel Hollingsworth Stout , who served as its founding dean from 1902 to 1903 .
Meanwhile , Beddoe established the chair of Diseases of Children and became a professor .
He built up the free clinic in connection with Baylor hospital .
In 1903 , an alliance with Baylor University in Waco was formed and the name was changed to Baylor University College of Medicine .
By 1918 , Baylor University College of Medicine was the only private medical school in Texas .
The M.D. Anderson Foundation invited Baylor to join the newly formed Texas Medical Center in Houston in 1943 .
The school opened in the medical center July 12 , 1943 , in a converted Sears , Roebuck & Co. warehouse , with 131 students .
Four years later , Baylor moved to its present site in the Roy and Lillie Cullen Building , the first building completed in the Texas Medical Center .
In 1948 , Michael E. DeBakey joined the faculty as chair of the Department of Surgery , and the following year , the Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences was established .
Baylor 's rise in prominence began in the 1950s when DeBakey 's surgical techniques garnered international attention .
In the 1960s , the college underwent its first major expansion .
In 1969 , the college separated from Baylor University and became an independent institution , which allowed it access to federal research funding , changing its name to Baylor College of Medicine .
That same year , BCM negotiated with the Texas Legislature to double its class size in order to increase the number of physicians in Texas .
In 2005 , Baylor College of Medicine began building a hospital and clinic , to be called the Baylor Clinic and Hospital , slated to open in 2011 .
In 2009 , the college postponed construction for financial reasons , with the outer shell of the hospital completed but the interiors remaining unfinished .
In March 2012 , BCM decided to convert the building to an outpatient clinic center .
In 2009 , BCM entered into discussions with Rice University regarding a potential merger between the two Houston institutions .
After extensive meetings , the boards at both institutions decided that each school would remain an independent .
In 2010 , Baylor University entered into talks with BCM to strengthening ties to each other ; however , the merger did not occur .
In January 2014 , the BCM and CHI St. Luke 's announced they would become joint owners of Baylor St. Luke 's Medical Center , a hospital at the Texas Medical Center ( formerly known as St. Luke 's Episcopal Hospital , then St. Luke 's Medical Center after it was purchased by Catholic Health Initiatives in 2013 ) .
A partially completed hospital building on the BCM – McNair Campus is slated to open in 2015 and will become BCM 's acute - care hospital and main medical teaching facility .
MEDICAL SCHOOL Section::::Medical school .
Each year the medical school matriculates around 185 students , around 75 % of whom are Texas residents .
Baylor College of Medicine is the least expensive private medical school in the country .
It is also one of the few medical schools in the United States that is structured with an accelerated 1.5 year preclinical curriculum .
Baylor College of Medicine is also one of only 45 medical institutions in the United States to offer a Medical Scientist Training Program .
This federally sponsored and highly competitive program allows exceptionally well qualified students to study for a combined MD and PhD in a medical science to be earned in 7–9 total years .
Typically , 8–12 students matriculate into this program per year , and receive free tuition in addition to a stipend of $ 29,000 per academic year .
GRADUATE SCHOOL
Section::::Graduate school .
The Baylor College of Medicine Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences ranks 25th for best Ph.D. program in the biological sciences .
Overall , in 2013 BCM ranked 19th in terms of research funding from the National Institutes of Health based on rankings done by the Blue Ridge Institute .
Baylor also ranked in the top 20 in eight specialty areas , including number one in the nation for Genetics .
BCM 's research faculty includes seven members of the National Academy of Sciences , 14 members of the Institute of Medicine and three members of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute .
About 100 students join the graduate program each year , of which one half were women and one third were graduates from foreign schools .
Many departments of the graduate school collaborate with Rice University and other institutions within the Texas Medical Center .
Currently , 615 graduate students are enrolled in one of the thirteen different PhD programs .
These programs are :
* Biochemistry & Molecular Biology * Immunology * Molecular and Cellular Biology *
Molecular and Human Genetics * Molecular Physiology & Biophysics * Molecular Virology & Microbiology *
Neuroscience
* Pharmacology * Integrative Molecular and Biomedical Sciences * Molecular and Cellular Biology
* Developmental biology * Structural and Computational Biology & Molecular Biophysics * Translational Biology & Molecular Medicine * Clinical Scientist Training Program SCHOOL OF ALLIED
HEALTH SCIENCES Section::::School of Allied Health Sciences .
Baylor College of Medicine School of Allied Health Sciences is focused on educating allied health professionals to be leaders in the delivery of high - quality patient care ; advancing the knowledge of allied health education , healthcare delivery , and health promotion through research ; fostering healthy lifestyles among adults and children through innovative health education programs ; and augmenting patient care services provided through Baylor College of Medicine and our affiliated hospitals .
The School 's Physician Assistant Program which began in 1971 as a certificate program , was elevated to Bachelor of Science status in 1975 , and on to a Master of Science program in 1989 .
Today , this program ranks 13th among the nation 's physician assistant programs according to U.S. News & World Report .
The 2012 graduates of the Graduate Program in Nurse Anesthesia Program were the first to earn their doctorate of nursing practice from the Program .
Developed from a 1968 a certificate program that was offered by the Harris County Hospital District , now the Harris Health System , in 1983 , it became a Master of Science degree program under the auspices of Baylor .
This program ranks 5th in the nation among training programs in nurse anesthesia according to U.S. News & World Report .
The Master of Orthotics and Prosthetics Program welcomed its first students in June 2013 .
It is a 30-month program , where the first 12 months are dedicated to the didactic curriculum , and the following 18 months are spent on clinical rotations and research .
It Is the only program in the country to integrate a series of full - time clinical rotations exposing students to six core areas of expertise designed to meet the requirements of the NCOPE - approved residency .
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF TROPICAL MEDICINE Section::::National School of Tropical Medicine .
Baylor College of Medicine National School of Tropical Medicine is one of the first of its kind in North America devoted to education , healthcare delivery , research and policy related to the neglected diseases that disproportionately afflict " the bottom billion , " the world 's poorest people who live below the World Bank poverty level .
The School currently offers a Diploma in Tropical Medicine program as well as several non - degree courses and seminars for undergraduates , graduate students and professionals .
Plans are in development for masters and doctorate programs .
The School provides clinical services at the Tropical Medicine Clinic at Harris Health System 's Smith Clinic , which opened on October 6 , 2011 .
The mission of the Clinic is to prevent , diagnose , and treat common and neglected tropical diseases in the Houston metropolitan population and to improve occupational health for those working in regions where tropical diseases thrive .
Baylor Travel Medicine , an affiliate of the National School of Tropical Medicine , opened in May 10 , 2012 , offers medications , immunizations , counseling , and information customized for each patient 's health needs .
The National School of Tropical Medicine also conducts a comprehensive research and development program for producing a new generation of drugs , diagnostics and vaccines for the Neglected Tropical Diseases ( NTDs ) and Neglected Infections of Poverty ( NIoPs ) , as well as fundamental and applied research against these diseases .
RESIDENCY TRAINING Section::::Residency training .
Baylor College of Medicine sponsors Graduate Medical Education in more than 80 ACGME - accredited , and 40 Texas Medical Board ( TMB)-approved training programs .
At Baylor College of Medicine residents and fellows
learn from one of the most diverse patient populations anywhere in the country .
This is partially due to the diversity found within the city of Houston , which has no single majority ethnic group .
The hospitals of the Texas Medical Center and Houston 's status as a hub for international industry also draw patients from every corner of the globe .
Adding to this diversity are the many and varied settings in which residents and fellows have the opportunity to train , including Baylor St. Luke 's Medical Center and Baylor 's many affiliated hospitals .
BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH Section::::Biomedical research .
In 2013 , Baylor College of Medicine ranked 19th in terms of research funding from the National Institutes of Health based on rankings done by the Blue Ridge Institute .
Baylor also ranked in the top 20 in eight specialty areas , including number one in the nation for Genetics .
BCM 's research faculty includes seven members of the National Academy of Sciences , 14 members of the Institute of Medicine and three members of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute .
The College has dedicated more than of its space for laboratory research .
Housed within this research space are a number of centers and facilities , such as : * BCM 's Human Genome Sequencing Center * The Human Neuroimaging Lab * The Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center
* The Center for Cell and Gene Therapy
* The Huffington Center on Aging *
The Influenza Research Center * The National Center for Macromolecular Imaging * The W.M. Keck Center for Computational Biology
* The Epigenomics Data Analysis and Coordination Center
* Core facilities , including microscopy , DNA sequencing , microarray , and protein
sequencing
* One of the largest transgenic mouse facilities in the country HOSPITAL JOINT VENTURE Section::::Hospital joint venture .
BCM is a co - owner of Baylor St. Luke 's Medical Center , part of CHI St. Luke 's Health .
It serves as the primary private adult teaching hospital for the College and ranks among the best hospitals in the nation for cardiology and heart surgery , diabetes and endocrinology , gastroenterology and GI surgery , and pulmonology in U.S. News & World Report .
HOSPITAL AFFILIATION Section::::Hospital affiliation .
BCM is affiliated with many of the hospitals of the Texas Medical Center and in 2013 , began an affiliation with Children 's Hospital of San Antonio .
BCM 's affiliations include : * Texas Children 's Hospital * The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center * Michael E. DeBakey
Veterans Affairs Medical Center
* Ben Taub General Hospital * Memorial Hermann - The Institute for Rehabilitation and Research * Menninger Clinic * Children 's Hospital of San Antonio Cooperating Patient Care Institutions : * Community Health Centers
* Cullen Bayou Place * DePelchin Children 's Center * Houston Child Guidance Center * Jewish Family Service Cancer Center * Kelsey - Seybold Clinic * Park Plaza Hospital * Quentin Mease Hospital * Seven Acres Jewish Geriatric Center * Houston Shriners Hospital (
orthopedic )
* Thomas Street AIDS Clinic
* Woman 's Hospital of Texas BAYLOR INTERNATIONAL PEDIATRIC AIDS INITIATIVE Section::::Baylor International Pediatric AIDS Initiative .
The Baylor International Pediatric AIDS Initiative ( BIPAI ) at Baylor College of Medicine and Texas Children 's Hospital was established in 1996 , and has rapidly become the world 's largest university - based program dedicated to global pediatric and family HIV / AIDS care and treatment , health professional training and clinical research .
Baylor constructed and opened the world 's two largest centers for the care and treatment of HIV - infected children and families , the Romanian - American Children 's Center in Constanta , Romania in 2001 , and the Botswana - Baylor Children 's Clinical Center of Excellence in Gaborone , Botswana in 2003 , followed by Uganda , Lesotho , Swaziland , Malawi , and Tanzania , where it has entered into partnership with the Ministries of Health to scale up pediatric HIV / AIDS care and treatment , and build and open new Children 's Clinical Centers of Excellence .
BIPAI also has created the Pediatric AIDS Corps , a model program to place up to 250 American pediatricians and infectious disease specialists in its African centers to vastly expand capacity for pediatric HIV / AIDS care and treatment and health professional training .
Major funders of BIPAI 's activities include NIH , Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) , the Bristol - Myers Squibb Foundation , Abbott Laboratories , and numerous private and corporate foundations .
NOTABLE PHYSICIANS AND RESEARCHERS
* Arthur L. Beaudet , M.D. — Professor of Molecular and Human Genetics , and a member of the National Academy of Sciences .
* Hugo J. Bellen — noted developmental biologist ; Howard Hughes Medical Institute investigator .
* Malcolm Brenner , MD , PhD — Former Director , Center for Cell and Gene Therapy , Baylor College of Medicine
* William " Bill " R. Brinkley — American cell biologist and early contributor to discovery of mitotic spindle apparatus
* F. Charles Brunicardi , MD —
former Chair , DeBakey Department of Surgery .
Editor - in - Chief of Schwartz 's Principles of Surgery
* Selma Calmes — anesthesiologist and co - founder of the Anesthesia History Association * C. Thomas Caskey — American internist and prominent medical geneticist and biomedical entrepreneur .
* Denton Cooley — founder of the Texas Heart Institute and world - renowned cardiovascular surgeon .
Carried out the first successful implantation of an artificial heart .
* Michael E. DeBakey — award - winning cardiovascular surgeon
* Ralph Feigin — Former President , Baylor College of Medicine ; Chief of Pediatrics and President of Texas Children 's Hospital ; author , Textbook of Pediatric Infectious Diseases
* O. H. Frazier — Heart surgeon who has performed over 1,000 transplants .
* Richard A. Gibbs , PhD — pioneering geneticist .
* Bert W. O'Malley — National Medal of Science winner , member National Academy of Sciences for advances in hormone action and gene expression *
C. Kent Osborne , MD — Director , Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center .
* David Poplack , MD — Director , Texas Children 's Cancer Center , Professor of Pediatrics .
* Michael J. Reardon — Internationally known heart surgeon who developed first successful cardiac auto transplantation for cardiac sarcoma .
* Huda Zoghbi — Member of National Academy of Sciences ; Investigator of Howard Hughes Medical Institute ; Award - winning neuropsychiatrist ; Director of Jan and Duncan Neurological Research Institute , Houston , Texas .
IN CULTURE Section::::In culture .
The male Asian elephant calf born to Shanti at the Houston Zoo on May 4 , 2010 was named Baylor in honor of the college and their research on elephant herpesvirus .
AFFILIATED SCHOOLS
* Michael E. DeBakey High School for Health Professions
* Baylor College of Medicine Academy at Ryan
* Baylor College of Medicine Biotech Academy at Rusk REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website