POKÉMON STADIUM 2 Pokémon Stadium 2 is a strategy video game developed by Nintendo EAD and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo 64 .
It features all 251 Pokémon from the first and second generations of the franchise .
It was released on December 14 , 2000 , in Japan , March 26 , 2001 , in North America , and October 10 , 2001 , in Europe .
In Western regions it was titled Pokémon Stadium 2 , as it was the second Stadium game to be released outside Japan , in which it was the third game in the series .
It supports Dolby Surround sound .
Like its predecessor , Pokémon Stadium 2 is compatible with the Transfer Pak accessory , allowing players to use Pokémon trained in the three original Game Boy Pokémon games ( Pokémon Red , Blue , and Yellow ) and the three Game Boy Color games ( Pokémon Gold , Silver , and Crystal ) .
The majority of the game takes place inside the fictional White City , where various facilities for battling , organizing , researching , and playing with Pokémon are located .
The Japanese edition also featured the capability to use the Pokémon Mobile System from Pokémon Crystal .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
The success of Japan 's Pokémon Stadium 2 , released internationally as Pokémon Stadium , led to the development of a third entry .
Scheduled for a late 2000 release , the game was to be demonstrated publicly at the 2000 Nintendo Space World festival .
By July 20 , 2000 , the game 's title was changed from Pokemon Stadium 3 to Pokemon Stadium Gold / Silver .
Nintendo announced more information on October 3 , including the dates of Japanese release and official tournaments .
On October 25 , Nintendo set the game 's North American release date for March 26 , 2001 .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
Pokémon Stadium 2 does not have a storyline .
Progress can be made by winning trophies in the Stadium , a tournament mode consisting of four " Cups " , as well as completing the Gym Leader Castle , where the player earns badges by defeating Gyms specializing in different Pokémon types .
When all Stadium trophies have been won and the Gym Leader Castle is completed , the player 's rival will want to battle .
Defeating the rival will unlock Round 2 , in which the player must re - challenge the Stadium , Gym Leader Castle , and the Rival at a higher difficulty level .
Set in a new town called White City , the Stadium is home to the Poké Cup , Prime Cup , Challenge Cup , and Little Cup , each having its own rules and regulations .
With the exception of the Challenge Cup , the player first assembles a team of six Pokémon consisting of any combination of rental Pokémon or imported Pokémon from a Game Boy cartridge .
In the Challenge Cup , the parties of the player and opponents are chosen at complete random .
In the same fashion as the first Stadium , each combatant chooses only three of their six Pokémon to use in a battle before beginning .
In the Gym Leader Castle , the player is challenged to collect Gym badges by defeating trainers at the eight Johto League Gyms .
Pokémon battles follow the same three - on - three format as in the Stadium , and either imported or rental Pokémon may be used to construct a team of six .
Each Gym is known for using a specific type of Pokémon , but the Gym 's trainers can have Pokémon of a different type for balance .
The Elite Four can be battled after collecting all eight badges , and upon their defeat , a rival battle is unlocked .
Defeating the rival unlocks the Kanto Gym Leaders and subsequently the Pokémon Champion Red .
ADDITIONAL FEATURES
Section::::Additional features .
The Mini - Game Park is an area in White City where up to four players can play 12 different Pokémon - themed mini - games .
Though not required , Pokémon from the players ' inserted Game Boy cartridge can be used in certain mini - games .
In Free Battle mode , players may conduct practice battles .
Players can select rules from any of the tournament cups or use modified rules .
Up to four players may participate , using any combination of rental Pokémon and those imported via Transfer Pak .
Pikachu can say its name when you choose from the trainer icon from the Pokémon section screen .
At the Game Boy Tower , Pokémon Red , Blue , Yellow , Gold , Silver , and Crystal can be played on the Nintendo 64 .
Winning Stadium cups and completing the Gym Leader Castle will eventually unlock higher speed options .
In Japan , through use of the mobile phone adapter bundled with copies of Crystal , the player could access a " Mobile Stadium " game mode in which the player battled other players downloaded from the mobile phone service in a tournament .
It was also possible to play against friends through transferring the information across the mobile adapter .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Pokémon Stadium 2 received favorable reviews from critics .
While discussing the mixed quality of the Pokémon console games , Retronauts described it as " outstanding " .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Nintendo Japan Pocket Monsters ' Stadium Kin Gin site