THINGS FALL APART
Things
Fall
Apart is a novel written by Nigerian author Chinua Achebe .
Published in 1958 , its story chronicles pre - colonial life in the south - eastern part of Nigeria and the arrival of the Europeans during the late nineteenth century .
It is seen as the archetypal modern African novel in English , one of the first to receive global critical acclaim .
It is a staple book in schools throughout Africa and is widely read and studied in English - speaking countries around the world .
Achebe 's debut novel , it was first published by William Heinemann Ltd in the UK ; in 1962 , it was also the first work published in Heinemann 's African Writers Series .
The novel follows the life of Okonkwo , an Igbo ( " Ibo " in the novel ) man and local wrestling champion in the fictional Nigerian clan of Umuofia .
The work is split into three parts , with the first describing his family , personal history , and the customs and society of the Igbo , and the second and third sections introducing the influence of British colonialism and Christian missionaries on the Igbo community .
Things Fall
Apart was followed by a sequel , No Longer at Ease ( 1960 ) ,
originally written as the second part of a larger work along with Arrow of God ( 1964 ) .
Achebe states that his two later novels A Man of the People ( 1966 ) and Anthills of the Savannah ( 1987 ) , while not featuring Okonkwo 's descendants , are spiritual successors to the previous novels in chronicling African history .
PLOT
PART 1 Section::::Plot .
Section::::Part 1 .
The novel 's protagonist Okonkwo is famous in the villages of Umuofia for being a wrestling champion , defeating a wrestler nicknamed " the cat " ( because he never lands on his back ) .
Okonkwo is strong , hard - working , and strives to show no weakness .
He wants to dispel his father Unoka 's tainted legacy of unpaid debts , a neglected wife and children , and cowardice at the sight of blood .
Okonkwo works to build his wealth entirely on his own , as Unoka died a shameful death and left many unpaid debts .
He is also obsessed with his masculinity , and any slight compromise on this is swiftly destroyed .
As a result , he often beats his wives and children , and is unkind to his neighbours .
However , his drive to escape the legacy of his father leads him to be wealthy , courageous , and powerful among the people of his village .
He is a leader of his village , and he has attained a position in his society for which he has striven all his life .
Okonkwo is selected by the elders to be the guardian of Ikemefuna , a boy taken by the clan as a peace settlement between Umuofia and another clan after Ikemefuna 's father killed an Umuofian woman .
The boy lives with Okonkwo 's family and Okonkwo grows fond of him , although Okonkwo does n't show his fondness so as to not appear weak .
The boy looks up to Okonkwo and considers him a second father .
The Oracle of Umuofia eventually pronounces that the boy must be killed .
Ezeudu , the oldest man in the village , warns Okonkwo that he should have nothing to do with the murder because it would be like killing his own child – but to avoid seeming weak and feminine to the other men of the village , Okonkwo disregards the warning from the old man , striking the killing blow himself even as Ikemefuna begs his " father " for protection .
For many days after killing Ikemefuna , Okonkwo feels guilty and saddened .
Shortly after Ikemefuna 's death , things begin to go wrong for Okonkwo .
His sickly daughter Ezinma falls unexpectedly ill and it is feared she may die ; during a gun salute at Ezeudu 's funeral , Okonkwo 's gun accidentally explodes and kills Ezeudu 's son .
He and his family are sent into exile for seven years to appease the gods he has offended .
PART 2 Section::::Part 2 .
While Okonkwo is away in Mbanta , he learns that white men are living in Umuofia with the intent of introducing their religion , Christianity .
As the number of converts increases , the foothold of the white people grows and a new government is introduced .
The village is forced to respond with either appeasement or resistance to the imposition of the white people 's nascent society .
PART 3 Section::::Part 3 .
Returning from exile , Okonkwo finds his village changed by the presence of the white men .
After a convert commits a heinous act by unmasking an elder as he embodies an ancestral spirit of the clan , the village retaliates by destroying a local Christian church .
In return , the leader of the white government takes Okonkwo and several other native leaders prisoner and holds them for a ransom of two hundred cowries for a short while .
The white ruler further humiliates and insults the captives , doing things such as shaving their heads and whipping them .
As a result , the people of Umuofia finally gather for what could be a great uprising .
Okonkwo , a warrior by nature and adamant about following Umuofian custom and tradition , despises any form of cowardice and advocates war against the white men .
When messengers of the white government try to stop the meeting , Okonkwo beheads one of them .
Because the crowd allows the other messengers to escape , and does not fight alongside Okonkwo , he realizes with despair that the people of Umuofia are not going to fight to protect themselves — his society 's response to such a conflict , which for so long had been predictable and dictated by tradition , is changing .
When the local leader of the white government comes to Okonkwo 's house to take him to court , he finds that Okonkwo has hanged himself to avoid being tried in a colonial court .
Among his own people , Okonkwo 's actions have tarnished his reputation and status , as it is strictly against the teachings of the Igbo to commit suicide .
CHARACTERS
*
Okonkwo is the novel 's protagonist .
He has three wives and ten ( total ) children , and is a brave and rash Umuofia ( Nigerian ) warrior and clan leader .
Unlike most , he cares more for his daughter Ezinma than his son Nwoye whom he believes is weak .
Okonkwo is the son of the gentle and lazy Unoka , a man he resents for his weaknesses .
Okonkwo strives to make his way in a culture that traditionally values manliness .
As a young man he defeated the village 's best wrestler , earning him lasting prestige .
He therefore rejects everything for which he believes his father stood :
Unoka was idle , poor , profligate , cowardly , gentle , lazy , and interested in music and conversation .
Okonkwo consciously adopts opposite ideals and becomes productive , wealthy , brave , violent , and opposed to music and anything else that he regards as " soft , " such as conversation and emotion .
He is stoic to a fault .
He is also the hardest - working member of his clan .
Okonkwo 's life is dominated by fear of failure and of weakness — the fear that he will resemble his father .
Ironically , in all his efforts not to end up like his father , he commits suicide , becoming in his culture an abomination to the Earth and rebuked by the tribe as his father was ( Unoka died from swelling and was likewise considered an abomination ) .
* Ekwefi is Okonkwo 's second wife .
Although she falls in love with Okonkwo after seeing him in a wrestling match , she marries another man because Okonkwo is too poor to pay her bride price at that time .
Two years later , she runs away to Okonkwo 's compound one night and later marries him .
She receives severe beatings from Okonkwo just like his other wives ; but unlike them , she is known to talk back to Okonkwo .
She is the only one who has the audacity to knock on the door of his obi at dawn .
Having met with the grave misfortunes of the deaths of her first nine children , she is a devoted mother to Ezinma , whom she protects and loves dearly .
When Chielo , a priestess of Agbala , the Oracle of the Hills and Caves , says that the oracle wishes to see Ezinma , Ekwefi follows the priestess through the dark woods and even makes up her mind to enter the cave where Agbala resides and to die with her daughter if need be .
Okonkwo looks for them and goes to the mouth of the cave himself after waiting for a certain period , because he too was very worried about Ezinma and Ekwefi even though he had kept this worry to himself .
Upon finding Ekwefi , he was very relieved and they both waited for Ezinma .
*
Unoka is Okonkwo 's father , who lived a life in contrast to typical Igbo masculinity .
He loved language and music , the flute in particular .
He is lazy and miserly , neglecting to take care of his wives and children and even dies with unpaid debts .
Okonkwo spends his life trying not to become a failure like his father Unoka .
*
Nwoye is Okonkwo 's son , about whom Okonkwo worries , fearing that he will become like Unoka .
Similar to Unoka , Nwoye does not subscribe to the traditional Igbo view of masculinity being equated to violence ; rather , he prefers the stories of his mother .
Nwoye connects to Ikemefuna , who presents an alternative to Okonkwo 's rigid masculinity .
He is one of the early converts to Christianity and takes on the Christian name Isaac , an act which Okonkwo views as a final betrayal .
* Ikemefuna is a boy from the Mbaino tribe .
His father murders the wife of an Umuofia man , and in the resulting settlement of the matter , Ikemefuma is put into the care of Okonkwo .
By the decision of Umuofian authorities , Ikemefuna is ultimately killed , an act which Okonkwo does not prevent , and even participates in , lest he seem feminine and weak .
Ikemefuna became very close to Nwoye , and Okonkwo 's decision to participate in Ikemefuna 's death takes a toll on Okonkwo 's relationship with Nwoye .
*
Ezinma is Okonkwo 's favorite daughter , and the only child of his wife Ekwefi .
Ezinma , the Crystal Beauty , is very much the antithesis of a normal woman within the culture and Okonkwo routinely remarks that she would 've made a much better boy than a girl , even wishing that she had been born as one .
Ezinma often contradicts and challenges her father , which wins his adoration , affection , and respect .
She is very similar to her father , and this is made apparent when she matures into a beautiful young woman who refuses to marry during her family 's exile , instead choosing to help her father regain his place of respect within society .
* Obierika is Okonkwo 's best friend from Umuofia .
He is a strong and powerful man in Umuofia , but unlike Okonkwo , he is a reasoning man and is much less violent and arrogant .
Obierika often talks Okonkwo out of making rash decisions , and helps Okonkwo when he is on exile from Umuofia .
He fully understands the changes going on in their society , and that their clan no longer had the unity it did before the white man appeared in Umuofia .
Obierika 's son , Maduka , is greatly admired by Okonkwo for his wrestling prowess , which ( in Okonkwo 's opinion ) is something his own son , Nwoye lacks .
Obierika is considered the voice of reason in the book , and questions certain parts of their culture , such as the necessity to exile Okonkwo after he unintentionally kills a boy .
* Ogbuefi Ezeudu is one of the elders of Umuofia .
He is regarded as very wise , and gives Okonkwo good advice .
He is the one who brings Okonkwo the message from the Oracle that Ikemefuna should be killed , but he also warns Okonkwo not to participate in the boy 's execution , since Ikemefuna calls Okonkwo " father " , a warning Okonkwo does not heed .
At Ezeudu 's funeral , Okonkwo 's gun misfires , accidentally killing the dead elder 's son , for which Okonkwo and his family go into exile .
* Mr. Brown is a white man who comes to Umuofia .
Unlike most Europeans portrayed in the novel , he shows kindness and compassion towards the villagers , thereby earning their love and respect .
He eventually develops an illness that leads to his death .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Most of the story takes place in the fictional village of Iguedo , which is in the Umuofia clan .
Umuofia is located west of the actual city of Onitsha , on the east bank of the Niger River in Nigeria .
The events of the novel unfold in the 1890s .
The culture depicted , that of the Igbo people , is similar to that of Achebe 's birthplace of Ogidi , where Igbo - speaking people lived together in groups of independent villages ruled by titled elders .
The customs described in the novel mirror those of the actual Onitsha people , who lived near Ogidi , and with whom Achebe was familiar .
Within forty years of the arrival of the British , by the time Achebe was born in 1930 , the missionaries were well established .
He lived in the British culture but he refused to change his Igbo name Chinua to Albert .
Achebe 's father was among the first to be converted in Ogidi , around the turn of the century .
Achebe himself was an orphan raised by his grandfather .
His grandfather , far from opposing Achebe 's conversion to Christianity , allowed Achebe 's Christian marriage to be celebrated in his compound .
LANGUAGE CHOICE Section::::Language choice .
Achebe wrote his novels in English because the written standard Igbo language was created by combining various dialects , creating a stilted written form .
In a 1994 interview with The Paris Review , Achebe said , " the novel form seems to go with the English language .
There is a problem with the Igbo language .
It suffers from a very serious inheritance which it received at the beginning of this century from the Anglican mission .
They sent out a missionary by the name of Dennis .
Archdeacon Dennis .
He was a scholar .
He had this notion that the Igbo language — which had very many different dialects — should somehow manufacture a uniform dialect that would be used in writing to avoid all these different dialects .
Because the missionaries were powerful , what they wanted to do they did .
This became the law .
But the standard version can not sing .
There 's nothing you can do with it to make it sing .
It 's heavy .
It 's wooden .
It does n't go anywhere .
"
Achebe 's choice to write in English has caused controversy .
While both African and non - African critics agree that Achebe modelled Things Fall Apart on classic European literature , they disagree about whether his novel upholds a Western model , or , in fact , subverts or confronts it .
Achebe continued to defend his decision : " English is something you spend your lifetime acquiring , so it would be foolish not to use it .
Also , in the logic of colonization and decolonization
it is actually a very powerful weapon in the fight to regain what was yours .
English was the language of colonization itself .
It is not simply something you use because you have it anyway . "
Achebe is noted for his inclusion of and weaving in of proverbs from Igbo oral culture into his writing .
This influence was explicitly referenced by Achebe in Things
Fall Apart :
" Among the Igbo the art of conversation is regarded very highly , and proverbs are the palm - oil with which words are eaten . "
LITERARY SIGNIFICANCE AND RECEPTION Section::::Literary significance and reception .
Things Fall
Apart is a milestone in African literature .
It has come to be seen as the archetypal modern African novel in English , and is read in Nigeria and throughout Africa .
Of all of Achebe 's works , Things Fall Apart is the one read most often , and has generated the most critical response , examination , and literary criticism .
It is studied widely in Europe , India and North America , where it has spawned numerous secondary and tertiary analytical works .
It has achieved similar status and repute in India , Australia and Oceania .
Considered Achebe 's magnum opus , it has sold more than 20 million copies worldwide .
Time magazine included the novel in its TIME 100 Best English - language Novels from 1923 to 2005 .
The novel has been translated into more than 50 languages , and is often used in literature , world history , and African studies courses across the world .
Achebe is now considered to be the essential novelist on African identity , nationalism , and decolonization .
Achebe 's main focus has been cultural ambiguity and contestation .
The complexity of novels such as Things
Fall Apart depends on Achebe 's ability to bring competing cultural systems and their languages to the same level of representation , dialogue , and contestation .
Reviewers have praised Achebe 's neutral narration and have described Things Fall Apart as a realistic novel .
Much of the critical discussion about Things Fall
Apart concentrates on the socio - political aspects of the novel , including the friction between the members of Igbo society as they confront the intrusive and overpowering presence of Western government and beliefs .
Ernest N. Emenyonu commented that " Things Fall Apart is indeed a classic study of cross - cultural misunderstanding and the consequences to the rest of humanity , when a belligerent culture or civilization , out of sheer arrogance and ethnocentrism , takes it upon itself to invade another culture , another civilization . "
Achebe 's writing about African society , in telling from an African point of view the story of the colonization of the Igbo , tends to extinguish the misconception that African culture had been savage and primitive .
In Things Fall Apart , western culture is portrayed as being " arrogant and ethnocentric , " insisting that the African culture needed a leader .
As it had no kings or chiefs , Umuofian culture was vulnerable to invasion by western civilization .
It is felt that the repression of the Igbo language at the end of the novel contributes greatly to the destruction of the culture .
Although Achebe favours the African culture of the pre - western society , the author attributes its destruction to the " weaknesses within the native structure . "
Achebe portrays the culture as having a religion , a government , a system of money , and an artistic tradition , as well as a judicial system .
INFLUENCE AND LEGACY Section::::Influence and legacy .
The publication of Achebe 's Things Fall Apart helped pave the way for numerous other African writers .
Novelists who published after Achebe were able to find an eloquent and effective mode for the expression of the particular social , historical , and cultural situation of modern Africa .
Before Things Fall Apart was released , most of the novels about Africa had been written by European authors , portraying Africans as savages who were in need of western enlightenment .
Achebe broke from this outsider view , by portraying Igbo society in a sympathetic light .
This allows the reader to examine the effects of European colonialism from a different perspective .
He commented : " The popularity of Things Fall Apart in my own society can be explained simply ...
this was the first time we were seeing ourselves , as autonomous individuals , rather than half - people , or as Conrad would say , ' rudimentary souls ' . "
The language of the novel has not only intrigued critics but has also been a major factor in the emergence of the modern African novel .
Because Achebe wrote in English , portrayed Igbo life from the point of view of an African man , and used the language of his people , he was able to greatly influence African novelists , who viewed him as a mentor .
Achebe 's fiction and criticism continue to inspire and influence writers around the world .
Hilary Mantel , the Booker Prize - winning novelist in a 7 May 2012 article in Newsweek , " Hilary Mantel 's Favorite Historical Fictions " , lists Things Fall Apart as one of her five favourite novels in this genre .
A whole new generation of African writers – Caine Prize winners Binyavanga Wainaina ( current director of the Chinua Achebe Center at Bard College ) and Helon Habila ( Waiting for an Angel [ 2004 ] and
Measuring Time [ 2007 ] ) , as well as Uzodinma Iweala ( Beasts of No Nation [ 2005 ] ) , and Professor Okey Ndibe ( Arrows of Rain [ 2000 ] )
count Chinua Achebe as a significant influence .
Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie , the author of the popular and critically acclaimed novels Purple Hibiscus ( 2003 ) and Half of a Yellow Sun ( 2006 ) , commented in a 2006 interview : " Chinua Achebe will always be important to me because his work influenced not so much my style as my writing philosophy : reading him emboldened me , gave me permission to write about the things I knew well . "
Things
Fall
Apart was listed by Encyclopædia Britannica as one of " 12 Novels Considered the ' Greatest Book Ever Written ' " .
The 60th anniversary of the first publication of Things
Fall Apart was celebrated at the South Bank Centre in London , UK , on 15 April 2018 with live readings from the book by Femi Elufowoju Jr , Adesua Etomi , Yomi Sode , Lucian Msamati , Jennifer Nansubuga Makumbi , Chibundu Onuzo , Ellah Wakatama Allfrey , Ben Okri , and Margaret Busby .
FILM , TELEVISION , MUSIC AND THEATRICAL ADAPTATIONS Section::::Film , television , music and theatrical adaptations .
A radio drama called Okonkwo was made of the novel in April 1961 by the Nigerian Broadcasting Corporation .
It featured Wole Soyinka in a supporting role .
In 1970 , the novel was made into a film starring Princess Elizabeth of Toro by Hollywood lawyer Edward Mosk and his wife Fern , who wrote the screenplay .
In 1987 , the book was made into a very successful miniseries directed by David Orere and broadcast on Nigerian television by the Nigerian Television Authority .
It starred several established film actors , including Pete Edochie , Nkem Owoh and Sam Loco Efe .
In 1999 , the American hip - hop band The Roots released their fourth studio album Things Fall Apart as a tribute to Chinua Achebe 's novel .
In 2008 , a film adaptation of Things
Fall Apart was made by a Nigerian production company with an all - Nigerian cast .
Pete Edochie starred as Okonkwo .
PUBLICATION INFORMATION
*
Achebe , Chinua .
The African Trilogy .
( London : Everyman 's Library , 2010 ) .
Edited with an introduction by Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie .
The book collects Things Fall Apart , No Longer at Ease , and Arrow of God in one volume .
SEE ALSO
* Heart of Darkness *
Weep Not , Child * Death and the King 's Horseman REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
Achebe , Chinua .
Things Fall Apart .
New York : Anchor Books , 1994 .
* Baldwin , Gordon .
Strange Peoples and Stranger Customs .
New York :
W. W. Norton and Company Inc , 1967 .
* Booker , M. Keith .
The Chinua Achebe Encyclopedia .
Westport , Conn. :
Greenwood Press , 2003 .
* Booker , M. Keith .
Things Fall Apart , by Chinua Achebe [ Critical Insights ] .
Pasadena , Calif : Salem Press , 2011 .
* Frazer , Sir James George .
The Golden Bough : A Study in Magic and Religion .
New York :
The Macmillan Company , 1942 .
* Girard , Rene .
Violence and the Sacred .
Trans .
Patrick Gregory .
Baltimore : Johns Hopkins University Press , 1977 .
* Rhoads , Diana Akers ( September 1993 ) .
"
Culture in Chinua Achebe 's Things Fall Apart " .
African Studies Review .
36(2 ) : 61–72 .
* Roberts , J. M. A Short History of the World .
New York :
Oxford University Press , 1993 .
* Rosenberg , Donna .
World Mythology :
An Anthology of the Great Myths and Epics .
Lincolnwood , Illinois :
NTC Publishing Group , 1994 .
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Chinua Achebe discusses Things Fall Apart on the BBC World Book Club * Teacher 's Guide at Random House
* A " New English " in Chinua Achebe 's Things
Fall
Apart
* Study Resource for writing about Things Fall
Apart
* Study guide
* Words present in the novel used in past SATs .
Includes definitions , words in order from the book , and three different tests .
* Things Fall Apart Reviews
* Things Fall Apart on Wiki Summaries
* Things Fall
Apart study guide , themes , analysis , teacher resources *
Things Fall Apart Igbo Culture Guide , Igbo Proverbs
* Things Fall Apart Summary