CYCLOPIA Cyclopia ( also cyclocephaly or synophthalmia ) is a rare form of holoprosencephaly and is a congenital disorder ( birth defect ) characterized by the failure of the embryonic prosencephalon to properly divide the orbits of the eye into two cavities .
Its incidence is 1 in 16,000 in born animals and 1 in 200 in miscarried fetuses .
The US National Library of Medicine National Institutes of Health has published an article regarding Cyclopia .
PRESENTATION Section::::Presentation .
Typically , the nose is either missing or replaced with a non - functional nose .
This deformity ( called proboscis ) usually forms above the center eye or on the back , and is characteristic of a form of cyclopia called rhinencephaly or rhinocephaly .
Most such embryos are either naturally aborted or are stillborn upon delivery .
Although cyclopia is rare , several cyclopic human babies are preserved in medical museums ( e.g. The Vrolik Museum , Amsterdam , Trivandrum Medical College ) .
Some extreme cases of cyclopia have been documented in farm animals ( horses , sheep , pigs , and sometimes chickens ) .
In such cases , the nose and mouth fail to form , or the nose grows from the roof of the mouth obstructing airflow , resulting in suffocation shortly after birth .
CAUSES Section::::Causes .
Genetic defects or toxins can misdirect the embryonic forebrain - dividing process .
One highly teratogenic alkaloid toxin that can cause cyclopia is cyclopamine or 2-deoxyjervine , found in the plant Veratrum californicum ( also known as corn lily or false hellebore ) .
Grazing animals are most likely to ingest this plant and induce cyclopia in offspring .
The mistake of humans ingesting Veratrum californicum while pregnant is often due to hellebore , an unrelated plant with the same name , being recommended as a " natural " treatment for vomiting , cramps , and poor circulation , three conditions which may be present in the early stages of pregnancy .
Cyclopia occurs when certain proteins are inappropriately expressed , causing the brain to stay whole , rather than developing two distinct hemispheres .
This leads to the fetus having one optic lobe and one olfactory lobe , resulting in the eye and nose malformations of cyclopia .
The Sonic Hedgehog ( SHH ) gene regulator is involved in the separation of the single eye field into two bilateral fields .
Although not proven , it is thought that SHH emitted from the prechordal plate suppresses Pax6 , which causes the eye field to divide into two .
If the SHH gene is mutated , the result is cyclopia , a single eye in the center of the face ( Gilbert , 2000 ) .
NOTABLE CASES * A British description from 1665 of a colt apparently suffering from cyclopia reads :
First , That it had no sign of any Nose in the usual place , nor had it any , in any other place of the Head , unless the double Bagg CC that grew out of the midst of the forehead , were some rudiment of it .
Next , That the two Eyes were united into one Double Eye which was placed just in the middle of the Brow .
*
On 1 March 1793 , a 46-year - old woman in Boalts Torp , Glimåkra , Sweden gave birth to a child with cyclopia that died after 2 hours .
The child was 35 cm long , its face without nose and nostrils , and its lidless eye with no eyebrow sat raised on the middle of its forehead like a large blueberry .
The wrists were somewhat crooked as well as the right foot which was completely crooked and bent inwards .
It was not clear whether it was a boy or a girl , but it was believed to be the former .
*
On December 28 , 2005 , a kitten with cyclopia , " Cy " , was born in Redmond , Oregon , United States and died about one day after birth .
*
In 2006 , a baby girl in India with cyclopia was born .
Her only eye was in the center of her forehead .
She did not have a nose and her brain was fused into a single hemisphere .
The child died one day after her birth .
*
In 2011 a cyclops shark fetus was discovered in the body of a caught shark in Mexico , with no discernible nose and one giant eye .
The unborn fetus was turned over for medical studies .
*
On October 10 , 2012 , a small kitten was born .
Its eye was in the center of the forehead and there was no developed nose to be found .
The small cat died shortly after it was born .
It was nicknamed Cleyed the Cyclops .
*
On May 10th , 2017 , in Assam , India , a black goat was born with one eye and other cyclopia - related facial abnormalities .
It was reported to still be alive over a week later , which is unusual for this condition .
*
On September 13th , 2018 , in Mandailing Natal , North Sumatera , Indonesia .
A baby with cyclopia was born without nose and one eye with the weight of 2.4 kg and heart rate under 100 bpm .
The child died seven hours after birth .
SEE ALSO * Cephalic disorder
* Cyclops REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS