FORD KA
The Ford Ka is a small car manufactured by the American manufacturer , Ford Motor Company from 1996 to 2016 , as a city car , and from 2014 onwards as a subcompact car .
It entered its second generation in 2008 , being produced by Fiat in Tychy , Poland .
A third generation was introduced in 2014 .
The first two generations have a three - door hatchback body style , with the first generation also having a two - door convertible version that was marketed as the StreetKA , alongside a sporty hatch version , known as the SportKA .
There is also the Ford Ka NOW .
The third generation is produced as a five - door hatchback and as a four - door sedan .
It was initially only available in Brazil , later being introduced in India , Mexico , South Africa ( where it is marketed as the Ford Figo ) , Argentina and Europe .
PRONUNCIATION Section::::Pronunciation .
The name Ka has a number of possible pronunciations .
For example , with a long or short " a " , or with the letters pronounced separately .
Ford 's press office has used all three .
According to Auto Trader , Ford " top brass " have given the correct pronunciation as Ka ' like ' Cat ' . "
FIRST GENERATION ( 1996–2008 ) Section::::First generation ( 1996–2008 ) .
The car was introduced on September 11 , 1996 as a small and low - cost addition to the Ford range .
It was based on the Mark IV Ford Fiesta platform , but with a completely different exterior design .
The design borrowed a lot from Ghia 's " Saetta " show car , a roadster designed by Filippo Sapino .
The Ka evolved from concept vehicles to production with minor changes .
The large , one piece , moulded bumpers and wheel arches made the vehicle more durable and easier to repair .
The vehicle was manufactured on the existing Fiesta production line in Almussafes , Valencia , minimising new model investment costs .
The Chief Program Engineer was Kevin O'Neill .
The designer of the car was Chris Svensson of Sunderland , who had designed a similar - shaped car when at the Royal College of Art in 1992 .
When the Ka was first introduced to the public it provoked mixed reactions , due to its original and striking New Edge design , overseen by Jack Telnack and executed by Claude Lobo .
Besides the styling , the Ka , like its sister cars Fiesta and Puma ; was lauded in the motoring press for its handling .
Under Richard Parry - Jones ' supervision , the suspension and steering settings allowed for hard cornering and high levels of grip , providing strong handling characteristics .
At launch , the Ka was produced as a single model , with a number of production options including : air conditioning , power steering , height - adjustable driver 's seat , adjustable position rear seat with head restraints , passenger airbag , central locking and power windows .
An anti - lock braking system option was added in January 1997 .
Aside from corrosion , the main drawback was the 1,300 cc OHV four - cylinder Endura - E engine , a design dating to the 1950s Kent engine used in the Ford Anglia .
Although not very modern , it provided enough torque to allow relaxed if not spirited driving .
In 2002 , the Endura - E was replaced by the overhead cam Duratec engine , with claims of improved fuel efficiency and increased refinement , mostly caused by taller gearing on the non - air conditioned models .
For the first three years of production , all models had black plastic bumpers to minimise parking damage to paintwork in city environments .
These bumpers contained a stabiliser to prevent UV degradation which made them unsuitable for painting because the paint would not adhere properly .
However , it became clear that many owners wanted body - coloured bumpers , so they were introduced in 1999 using different bumper mouldings ( without the stabiliser ) .
The Ka has proved highly profitable for Ford despite its low selling price , largely due to low development costs .
In 2006 , Ford sold 17,000 examples of the Ka model per year in the United Kingdom .
As with other Ford models , insufficient anti - corrosion treatment during manufacture and the use of non - galvanised steel results in premature surface and structural corrosion becoming established on cars used in more northern , damp climates .
In Australia , the Ka was introduced in October 1999 and was on the market there until 2002 .
It was unsuccessful – fewer than 2,000 were sold per year .
This was partly due to the lack of an automatic transmission , which is preferred by a large proportion of Australian car buyers .
The Ka was also sold in New Zealand between 1999 - 2004 , and was replaced by the newer Fiesta .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
The Ka has been the best - selling car in its class in the United Kingdom for a number of years and commands around a fifth of the city car market .
The UK model range originally consisted of the base version , the Ka , and the higher specification Ka² which standardised a number of the options listed above .
The Ka² badge was fitted by dealers .
Ka³ was introduced later .
Power steering was added to the specification of the basic Ka after the first year .
Concurrent with the introduction of body - coloured bumpers Ka² and Ka³ were replaced by Ka Collection and the LuxuryKa ( later Ka Luxury ) .
The Luxury version came with a Quickclear heated windscreen , leather seats and interior trim as well as standard air conditioning .
A " Ka Blue " special edition was also launched in the UK with dark blue bumpers and a silvery - blue dashboard insert , rather than the standard models ' silver .
The Ka Sun Collection with a full - length fabric folding roof was also added to the range during the summer months .
Unique to the UK was the Ford Ka Van variant , produced exclusively for BT Group and featuring a bespoke flat plywood floor with rubber over - mat and white ply covers instead of rear windows .
A further line - up revision gave Ka the following trim levels in the United Kingdom : Studio , Style , Style Climate and Zetec Climate .
In 2005 , the Sublime model was introduced .
This featured special leather interior & features not found on other models .
This was only produced in very small numbers and is now one of the most sought after Ka 's .
SportKa was also added to the range ( see below ) .
With the car 's impending replacement , in May 2008 a Finale special edition with distinguishing features such as roof decal and black wing mirrors was made available .
STREETKA AND SPORTKA Section::::StreetKa and SportKa .
In 2003 , the Ka brand was diversified , with the addition of a new SportKa featuring a sporty body kit , wider track with stiffened suspension and redesigned 16 " ( 40 cm )
alloy wheels .
Both models came with slightly widened bumpers front and rear with integral fog lamps .
A convertible model called StreetKa also appeared , launched with the help of singer Kylie Minogue at the Paris Motor Show .
It featured a manually folding soft top or an optional detachable hardtop ( on the Winter Edition ) .
StreetKa was a Ford inhouse design built by Pininfarina ( the 2000 motor show concept was designed by Ghia , Turin ) in Italy and all StreetKas have sill plates inscribed " Pininfarina " .
Pininfarina produced 37,076 StreetKas between 2002 - 2005 .
StreetKa came in two equipment levels , basic and luxury .
Basic had cloth seats and air conditioning was an option .
Luxury featured leather seats with matching leather door card inserts , heated seats , a Thatcham approved alarm along with Ford 's PATS immobiliser , air conditioning and heated door mirrors .
Options included upgrading the single CD / radio to an in - dash 6 disc CD / radio and additional rear speakers beneath the roll over bars and a heated windscreen , standard on winter models .
All models featured remote control central locking with remote boot release , driver and passenger air bags with passengers air bag deactivation , electric windows and door mirrors , electric headlight aim adjustment , anti - lock brakes ,
power steering , front fog lights , racing Puma aluminium gear knob , electric hood cover release and a rev counter .
The engine used in StreetKa ( and SportKa ) is called a Duratec
but it is of South African origin where it is known as the Zetec Rocam .
StreetKa features MacPherson struts front and rear and uses unique wider front lower arms ( wishbones ) giving it exceptional handling .
The only exterior panel shared with Ka is the bonnet .
The front headlights are also shared with Ka but appear different due to the front bumper covering them partly to change their shape .
The interior shares most parts with Ka except StreetKa has its facia painted blue rather than silver .
Its seats are mounted lower than Ka 's and it has aluminium effect detailing .
In 2005 , all Ka models including SportKa and StreetKa received a slightly updated interior , bringing the cabin back up to date , while still retaining the look and feel of the original .
Both StreetKa and SportKa received a new 1.6-litre 8-valve Duratec petrol engine , whereas Ka , Ka Collection , and LuxuryKa retained the 1.3-litre Duratec petrol engine .
The SportKa was noted for its surprising advertising campaign , " The Ka 's Evil Twin " , denouncing the Ka 's traditionally perceived " cute " design .
StreetKa ceased to be officially on sale in late 2006 .
A pink version was produced to promote the new Thunderbirds film , and supplied by Ford to the movie producer .
The Thunderbird movie cars were unveiled at the Birmingham Motor Show .
Only eight Pink StreetKas were produced by Ford for the film , 5 RHD and 3 LHD .
All were signed by Sophia Myles ( Miss Lady Penelope ) .
The matching StreetKa dress designed by Bruce Oldfield of Ford was later sold in an auction during London Fashion Week to raise money for Barnados .
MOTORSPORT Section::::Motorsport .
A Ford KA rally championship was created in 1998 .
It has proved to be one of the most popular junior rally championships ( Ford Ka Rally Cup ) in the UK and Ireland .
In 2007 , Luke Pinder won the BRC Silverstone Tyre 1400 Championship in a Chris Birkbeck Ford KA .
KA RALLY CAR Section::::Ka
Rally Car .
Built by the Ford Motorsport
( Ford TeamRS ) works at Boreham , Essex ,
The Rally Ka was designed as an entry - level vehicle to compete in a one - make series as part of the British Mintex rally championship .
The Ka Championship in 1997 with just four cars in the debut Granite City Rally event .
In 1998 , fifteen competitors undertook the Mintex challenge .
Ford 's Boreham airfield facility provides a complete build service for competitors wishing to rally Ka .
Most of the parts supplied are concerned with strengthening the car for rallying .
Uprated engine mounts and suspension bushes are all included , as is a front strut brace .
Aluminium sump and fuel tank guards , OZ Rally wheels and a Safety Devices bolt - in roll cage are all either fitted by the Boreham works or supplied to individual teams .
Performance - enhancing modifications are limited to the addition of a Rally spec engine control unit , camshaft and 4-into-2-into-1 extractor set attached to a free - flowing exhaust .
This combination lifts power to , and to cope with it competitors are encouraged to fit the optional uprated drive shafts with larger CV joints .
A limited - slip differential and heavier clutch plate are also available .
A competition brake package consisting of Mintex pads gripping vented front brake rotors and stronger rear drums is homologated for Rally Ka .
Replacing the original shock absorbers is a set of four remote - reservoir Proflex coil - over struts adjustable for compression and rebound damping .
These are allied to a lowering kit and adjustable spring platforms to give Ka competitors a wide range of suspension settings including ride height .
Inside the Rally Ka is all business .
In true rally fashion gone are all but the essentials : the two central eyeball vents are replaced by a tachometer and auxiliary gauge .
Even the replacement panels in the dashboard which support the fire extinguisher button and extra switches and gauges required in a rally car are listed in the Boreham parts schedule .
A deeply dished rally steering wheel , competition seats and harnesses are all supplied from the kit and replacements are not allowed .
SECOND GENERATION ( 2008–2016 ) Section::::Second generation ( 2008–2016 ) .
In 2008 , the European Ka was replaced with a model developed and produced for Ford by
Fiat S.p .
A in conjunction with Fiat 's own 500 vehicle .
The car is built in Fiat 's Tychy , Poland , factory alongside the Fiat 500 , Fiat Panda and Lancia Ypsilon .
Despite the wholly different architecture underneath , the new Ka maintains the curved styling features of the original , while bringing the look in line with Ford 's Kinetic Design philosophy .
It retains the wheel - at - each - corner stance of the previous model .
Ford promises a cabin featuring ' expressive colours ' .
This mostly refers to the multichoice interior styling that is provided for the second time in Ford , right after the success of the Fiesta 's interior design .
In addition , the interior can be equipped with accessories such as a Bluetooth phone connection , wireless voice control , a USB port , a CD Radio , MP3 , an AUX connector , steering wheel audio controls and a speaker system consisting of six speakers , a subwoofer and an amplifier .
The new Ka comes with a choice of two engines , a 1.2-litre petrol with of power and of torque and a 1.3-litre TDCi diesel engine with of power and of torque .
Both engines come with sub-120 g / km CO emissions ( 119 for the petrol and 112 for the diesel ) .
Both engines are supplied from Fiat .
The main mechanical differentiator between the new Ka and its Fiat sibling is that the Ford has better shock absorption than the Fiat 500 .
Fitting a rear anti - roll bar enabled 30 percent softer springs and accordingly retuned dampers to improve ride performance over uneven road surfaces .
Some of these improvements were subsequently adopted on Fiat 500 Abarth and Fiat 500C models .
Changes were also made to the 500 's steering geometry for the Ka , although as the new Ka uses an electrically assisted steering system , it lacks the communication of its predecessor 's hydraulically assisted steering .
However , the electric steering system does make the steering much lighter and more energy efficient than its predecessor .
The new Ka has an overall Euro NCAP safety rating of 4 stars , with standard driver and passenger single - stage front airbags , ABS , immobiliser , hazard warning lights and remote central locking ( except Studio version in UK ) .
In addition , there are front side airbags and curtain airbags and ESP ( Electronic Stability Program ) with HBA ( Hydraulic Brake Assist ) and HLA ( Hill Launch Assist ) that come at an extra cost .
The new Ka made its debut in the 22nd James Bond film Quantum of Solace and was unveiled in October 2008 's Paris Motor Show .
In 2008 , there was some speculation that the Ka might be introduced to the North American market .
It has since been confirmed however that Ford consider the Ka too small for American tastes and will not be introducing the vehicle to this market .
KA INDIVIDUAL
Section::::Ka Individual .
There are also three " Ford Individual packs " with special characteristics each ( in both the interior and exterior design ) , called Tattoo , Grand Prix and Digital .
Tattoo was replaced in 2011 by Metal .
All Individual models are based on the Zetec .
THIRD GENERATION ( 2014–PRESENT )
Section::::Third generation ( 2014–present ) .
Developed by Ford Brazil , the Ford Ka Concept was unveiled in Brazil in November 2013 .
The production version of this new Ford Ka appeared in July 2014 , in hatchback and sedan body styles , with the first units arriving in Brazil in September and October 2014 respectively .
The next market where it was launched was India , where the sedan made its debut as the new Ford Figo Aspire in August 2015 , with the hatchback arriving ( as the new Ford Figo ) a month later .
It was launched in Europe ( as the Ka+ ) in June 2016 , with deliveries starting later that year .
The ' + ' in the name shows the fact how Ford sees this as a budget B - segment car ( such as the MG 3 or the Dacia Sandero ) , rather than an A - segment car ( like the Volkswagen Up or the Hyundai i10 ) .
The new model is based on Ford 's global B platform , sharing its underpinnings with the Fiesta supermini , and embodies Ford 's Kinetic 2.0 design theme .
The hatchback is a five - door only model and it is now longer than the previous model , with the wheelbase increased by .
The four - door sedan has the same wheelbase as the hatchback , but two length variants : a longer one in Brazil ( dubbed Ka+ ) , measuring , and a shorter one exclusively in India ( dubbed Aspire ) , measuring .
In Brazil , it is offered with a choice of two petrol engines : a 1.0-litre three - cylinder , developing and , or a 1.5-litre four - cylinder , developing and .
In India , the range consists of either a 1.2-litre four - cylinder petrol , developing and , a 1.5-litre four - cylinder diesel , developing and , or a 1.5-litre four - cylinder petrol , developing and .
The latter is paired with Ford 's six - speed automatic PowerShift transmission , while for the rest a five - speed manual option is available .
In Europe , the Ka+ comes with only one engine , a 1.2-litre unit , that comes with either , in the Studio or the Zetec trim levels , or , exclusively in the Zetec model .
It features equipment such as the Ford 's MyKey , MyDock and SYNC systems , steering mounted controls , automatic climate control , power - fold mirrors , keyless entry , electronic stability control , cruise control ( in Europe ) , up to six airbags and high - strength steel body structure .
In November 2015 , a Ka+ model with two standard front airbags and standard ABS with EBD was tested by Latin NCAP and was awarded four stars out of five .
It was considered that in the frontal impact the driver 's head and chest received adequate protection , the passenger 's head and chest received good protection , while the driver 's and passenger 's knee areas received marginal protection .
The bodyshell was rated as stable and was capable of withstanding further loading .
In March 2017 , Euro NCAP released the results of the tests performed on the Ka+ and it scored three out of five stars .
For the adult occupants it received a 73 % rating , for the child occupant a 61 % rating , for the pedestrian occupant a 57 % rating and for the safety assist category a 29 % rating .
The car 's performance in the tests was rated as " mediocre " , being criticized for lacking rear seatbelt pretensioners and load - limiters , poor chest protection in the full - width frontal crash test and the lack of autonomous braking technology .
It was subsequently launched in Mexico in September 2015 , and in South Africa one month later .
In March 2016 , it was also introduced in Argentina .
The new Ka is produced at Ford 's factories in Camaçari , Brazil ( from where it is exported to Argentina ) and in Sanand , Gujarat , India ( from where it is exported to Mexico , South Africa and Europe ) .
MARKETING IN THE AMERICAS Section::::Marketing in the Americas .
Over the years the Latin American Ka has become progressively different from the European Ka .
The first divergence was in 2003 , when the rear of the Latin American made Ka was significantly re - designed .
This was followed by a more complete divergence from the European Ka in 2007 , when the Latin American made Ka was relaunched with a completely new body over the original platform .
With the launch of the second generation European Ka , with a new body and the new Fiat platform , the separation of the European and Latin American Kas was complete .
They are now completely different cars .
From the year 2000 to the present , the Latin American Ka has been powered by either a Zetec Rocam 1.6-litre petrol engine or a Zetec Rocam 1.0-litre petrol engine .
Both are four - cylinder units .
A total of 63,766 units were sold in Brazil in 2011 , making it the 14th most sold car in Brazil that year .
SOUTH AMERICA 1997–2001 Section::::South America .
Section::::1997–2001 .
From the 1997 launch , and until 2001 , the Latin American Ka was substantially similar to the European Ka , differing only in levels of equipment and trim .
The main differences from the European model were the very short gearing for the manual gearbox ( the only transmission available ) and the lack of soundproofing , which had been gradually removed annually since 2000 as a way to cut down costs , following the practice of other Brazilian car makers at the time .
2001–2007
Section::::2001–2007 .
In 2001 , the Latin American Ka received a facelift which left it slightly different , externally , to the European model .
The most noticeable difference was at the rear , where the number plate was moved from the bumper to the boot ( trunk ) lid , and the rear lights were made much taller .
2008–2014 Section::::2008–2014 .
Ford presented the new Brazilian Ka on December 14 , 2007 .
Sales started in Brazil on January 2 , 2008 .
The car was exported to other markets in Latin America .
In comparison to the original Ka , this model has a longer rear overhang and a redesigned rear seat to accommodate a fifth passenger .
With a length of 3835 mmm , it now fits in the subcompact car class .
In 2011 , Ford presented a facelifted version following the Kinect concept car .
In Brazil , only the Sport version offers a 1.6-litre engine .
In 2008 , with the launch of the new European Ka based on the Fiat platform , the two lines of the Ka finally became completely separate .
2014–PRESENT
Section::::2014–present .
The new Ford Ka was introduced in the 2014 São Paulo Motor Show , becoming available on the market in August of that year and presented at the 2015 Buenos Aires Motor Show .
The Ford Ka adopts the " Kinetic " design , presenting a more aggressive style and it is slightly bigger than the previous model , adopting a 5-door body , occupying the site of the former Ford Ka and Ford Fiesta
One .
Also adds a new body variant 4-door sedan , called Ka+ .
The new Ford Ka offers two engines : a 1.0-liter , in - line 3-cylinder , 12-valve with TiVCT technology ( producing up to 85 advertised HP ) and the 1.5-liter in - line 4-cylinder 16-valve featured in the more basic versions of the Fiesta ( producing up to 110 advertised HP ) ; gearbox options are limited to the well known 5-speed IB5 + for both the 1000cc and the 1500cc variants .
According to local press , the current 1.0 L version of the new 2014 Ka is the most economical compact car without a turbocharged engine ( which title would be help by the VW up !
1.0 L TSI ) , achieving up to 12 kilometres inside the city of São Paulo with only one litre of E100 ( ethanol fuel ) .
E33 fuel ( Brazilian standard gasoline spec )
economy facts have not been publicized as of yet , although owners claim it does about 1 km / L to 2.5 km / L more than with E100 .
Its Sigma 1.5 L - equipped version has been well received by the Brazilian market due to its relatively vigorous launches and good torque in low and mid - range revs .
MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
In January 2008 , it was announced that the new Brazilian Ka would not be offered in the Mexican market .
This meant it was officially discontinued .
In 2015 , Brazilian Ka third generation was introduced as Ford Figo .
CONTROVERSY Section::::Controversy .
In 2006 , two commercials advertising the Ford SportKa in the UK proved controversial when they received complaints for their content .
The first commercial included a pigeon being hit and killed by the hood of the car while it was flying near the car .
The second advertisement saw the SportKa opening its sunroof to let a cat 's head in .
The sunroof then closed and beheaded the cat .
After many complaints , these advertisements were removed from air and not shown again .
NOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Ford Ka section on ford.co.uk