SERIAL COMMA
In English language punctuation , a serial comma or series comma ( also called an Oxford comma or a Harvard comma ) is a comma placed immediately before the coordinating conjunction ( usually and or or ) in a series of three or more terms .
For example , a list of three countries might be punctuated either as " France , Italy , and Spain " ( with the serial comma ) , or as " France , Italyand Spain " ( without the serial comma ) .
Opinions among writers and editors differ on whether to use the serial comma , and usage also differs somewhat between regional varieties of English .
In American English , not using a serial comma is often characterized as a journalistic style of writing , in contrast to a more academic or formal style .
A majority of American style guides mandate use of the serial comma , including APA style , The Chicago Manual of Style , The MLA Style Manual , Strunk and White 's Elements of Style , and the U.S. Government Printing Office Style Manual .
In contrast , the Associated Press Stylebook advises against it .
In Canada , the stylebook published by The Canadian Press advises against it .
It is used less often in British English , but a few British style guides require it , notably The Oxford Style Manual .
According to The Oxford Companion to the English Language , " Commas are used to separate items in a list or sequence …
Usage varies as to the inclusion of a comma before and in the last item … This practice is controversial and is known as the serial comma or Oxford comma , because it is part of the house style of Oxford University Press . "
Some use it only where necessary to avoid ambiguity , in contrast to such guides as Garner 's Modern American Usage , which advocate its routine use to avoid ambiguity .
ARGUMENTS
FOR AND AGAINST
Section::::Arguments for and against .
Common arguments for consistent use of the serial comma :
* Use of the comma is consistent with conventional practice .
*
*
It matches the spoken cadence of sentences better .
*
* It can resolve ambiguity ( see examples below ) .
*
*
Its use is consistent with other means of separating items in a list ( for example , when semicolons are used to separate items , a semicolon is consistently included before the last item even when and or or is present ) .
*
* Its omission can suggest a stronger connection between the last two items in a series than actually exists .
*
*
Its use can " prevent any misreading that the last item is part of the preceding one " .
* Common arguments against consistent use of the serial comma :
* Use of the comma is inconsistent with conventional practice .
*
* The comma may introduce ambiguity ( see examples below ) .
*
* Where space is at a premium , the comma adds unnecessary bulk to the text .
*
Many sources are against both systematic use and systematic avoidance of the serial comma , making recommendations in a more nuanced way ( see Usage and subsequent sections ) .
AMBIGUITY RESOLVING AMBIGUITY Section::::Ambiguity .
Section::::Resolving ambiguity .
The style that always uses the serial comma may be less likely to result in ambiguity .
Consider this apocryphal book dedication :
There is ambiguity about the writer 's parentage , because " Ayn Rand and God " can be read as in apposition to my parents , leading the reader to believe that the writer claims Ayn Rand and God are the parents .
A comma before and removes the ambiguity :
But lists can also be written in other ways that eliminate the ambiguity without introducing the serial comma , such as by changing the word order or by using other punctuation , or none , to introduce or delimit them ( though the emphasis may thereby be changed ) :
An example collected by Nielsen Hayden was found in a newspaper account of a documentary about Merle Haggard :
A serial comma following " Kris Kristofferson " would help prevent this being understood as Kris Kristofferson and Robert Duvall being the ex - wives in question .
Another example is : It is unclear whether the eggs are being grouped with the bacon or the toast .
Adding a serial comma removes this ambiguity .
Writers who normally avoid the serial comma often use one in these circumstances , although sometimes re - ordering the elements of such a list can help as well .
CREATING AMBIGUITY
Section::::Creating ambiguity .
In some circumstances using the serial comma can create ambiguity .
If the book dedication above is changed to the serial comma after Ayn Rand creates ambiguity about the writer 's mother because it uses punctuation identical to that used for an appositive phrase , leaving it unclear whether this is a list of three entities ( 1 , my mother ; 2 , Ayn Rand ; and 3 , God ) or of only two entities ( 1 , my mother , who is Ayn Rand ; and 2 , God ) .
UNRESOLVED AMBIGUITY
Section::::Unresolved ambiguity .
The Times once published an unintentionally humorous description of a Peter Ustinov documentary , noting that " highlights of his global tour include encounters with Nelson Mandela , an 800-year - old demigod and a dildo collector " .
This would still be ambiguous if a serial comma were added , as Mandela could still be mistaken for a demigod , although he would be precluded from being a dildo collector .
Or consider This is ambiguous because it is unclear whether " a maid " is an appositive describing Betty , or the second in a list of three people .
On the other hand , removing the final comma : leaves the possibility that Betty is both a maid and a cook ( with " a maid and a cook " read as a unit , in apposition to Betty ) .
So in this case neither the serial - comma style nor the no - serial - comma style resolves the ambiguity .
A writer who intends a list of three distinct people ( Betty , maid , cook ) may create an ambiguous sentence , regardless of whether the serial comma is adopted .
Furthermore , if the reader is unaware of which convention is being used , both versions are always ambiguous .
These forms ( among others ) would remove the ambiguity :
* One person
*
They went to Oregon with Betty , who was a maid and a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with Betty , both a maid and a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with Betty ( a maid and cook ) .
*
They went to Oregon with Betty , their maid and cook .
* Two people *
They went to Oregon with Betty ( a maid ) and a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with Betty a maid and a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with Betty , a maid , and with a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with the maid Betty and a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with a cook and Betty , a maid .
* Three people
*
They went to Oregon with Betty , as well as a maid and a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with Betty and a maid and a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with Betty , one maid and a cook .
*
They went to Oregon with a maid , a cook , and Betty .
*
They went with Betty to Oregon with a maid and a cook .
IN GENERAL
*
The list
x , y and z is unambiguous if y and z can not be read as in apposition to x.
*
Equally , x , y ,
and z is unambiguous if y can not be read as in apposition to x.
*
If neither y nor y [ , ] and z can be read as in apposition to x , then both forms of the list are unambiguous ; but if both y and y and z can be read as in apposition to x , then both forms of the list are ambiguous .
* x and y and z is unambiguous if x and y and y and z can not both be grouped .
USAGE Section::::Usage .
In her style guide Eats , Shoots & Leaves , Lynne Truss writes : " There are people who embrace the Oxford comma , and people who do n't , and I 'll just say this : never get between these people when drink has been taken . "
The lack of usage of a serial comma is often characterized as a journalistic style of writing , as contrasted with a more academic or formal style .
Journalists typically do not use the serial comma , possibly for economy of space .
Various journalistic style guides ( such as those published by The New York Times , The Los Angeles Times , the Associated Press , The Times newspaper in the United Kingdom , and the Canadian Press ) recommend against its use ( see below ) .
A key consideration can be whether its usage ( or lack of usage )
within a document is consistent or not .
Inconsistent usage can seem unprofessional .
The Chicago Manual of Style , Strunk and White 's Elements of Style , and the United States Government Printing Office require the use of the serial comma .
In Britain some authorities oppose its use , although others ( especially the Oxford University Press ) do recommend it .
In Australia , Canada and South Africa , the serial comma tends not to be used in non - academic publications unless its absence produces ambiguity .
The Australian Government Publishing Service 's Style Manual for Authors , Editors and Printers ( 6th edition , 2002 ) recommends against it , except " to ensure clarity " ( p. 102 ) .
INDIVIDUAL DISPUTES
MAINE LABOR DISPUTE Section::::Individual disputes .
Section::::Maine labor dispute .
In the U.S. state of Maine , the lack of a serial comma became the deciding factor in a $ 13 million lawsuit filed in 2014 that was eventually settled for $ 5 million in 2017 .
As the U.S. appeals judge David J. Barron wrote , " For want of a comma , we have this case . "
In the case known as O'Connor v. Oakhurst Dairy , a state appellate court was required to interpret a statute under which the " canning , processing , preserving , freezing , drying , marketing , storing , packing for shipment or distribution " of certain goods were activities exempted from the general requirement of overtime pay ; the question was whether this list included the distribution of the goods , or only the packing of the goods for distribution .
The lack of a comma suggested one meaning , while the omission of the conjunction or before " packing " and the fact that the Maine Legislative Drafting Manual advised against use of the serial comma suggested another .
It said " Although authorities on punctuation may differ , when drafting Maine law or rules , do n't use a comma between the penultimate and the last item of a series . "
In addition to the absence of a comma , the fact that the word chosen was " distribution " rather than " distributing " was also a consideration , as was the question of whether it would be reasonable to consider the list to be an asyndetic list ( a list in which the coordinating conjunction is absent ) .
Truck drivers demanded overtime pay , and the defense conceded that the expression was ambiguous , but said it should be interpreted as exempting distribution activity from overtime pay .
The lower court agreed with the defense and held that " distribution " was an exempt activity .
On appeal , however , the Circuit Court decided that the sentence was ambiguous and " because , under Maine law , ambiguities in the state 's wage and hour laws must be construed liberally in order to accomplish their remedial purpose " , adopted the drivers ' narrower reading of the exemption and ruled that those who distributed the goods were entitled to overtime pay .
Oakhurst Dairy settled the case by paying $ 5 million to the drivers , and the phrase in the law in question was later changed to use serial semicolons and " distributing " resulting in " canning ; processing ; preserving ; freezing ; drying ; marketing ; storing ; packing for shipment ; or distributing " .
The judge in the case said that 43 of the 50 U.S. states had mandated the use of a serial comma and that both chambers of the federal congress had warned against omitting it , in the words of the U.S. House Legislative Counsel 's Manual on Drafting Style , " to prevent [ ] any misreading that the last item is part of the preceding one " ; only 7 states " either do not require or expressly prohibited the use of the serial comma " .
RECOMMENDATIONS
BY
STYLE GUIDES
MAINLY AMERICAN STYLE GUIDES SUPPORTING MANDATORY OR
TYPICAL USE
The United States Government Printing Office 's Style Manual Wilson Follett 's Modern American Usage : A Guide ( Random House , 1981 ) , pp .
397–401 :
The Chicago Manual of Style , 16th edition ( University of Chicago Press , 2010 ) , paragraph 6.18
The Elements of Style ( Strunk and White , 4th edition 1999 ) , Rule 2
The American Medical Association Manual of Style , 9th edition ( 1998 )
Chapter 6.2.1
The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association , 6th edition ( 2010 )
Chapter 4.03
The CSE Manual for Authors , Editors , and Publishers ( Council of Science Editors , 7th edition , 2006 ) , Section 5.3.3.1 Garner 's Modern English Usage , 4th edition ( Oxford University Press , 2016 ) , " Punctuation , " § D , " Comma " , p. 748 MLA Style Manual and Guide to Scholarly Publishing ( Modern Language Association 2008 ) , paragraph 3.4.2.b AAMT Book of Style for Medical Transcription AIP Style Manual , American Institute of Physics , fourth edition , 1990
Plain English Handbook , Revised Edition ( McCormick - Mathers Publishing Co. , 1959 ) , § 483 , p. 78 MAINLY BRITISH STYLE GUIDES SUPPORTING MANDATORY OR TYPICAL USE
The Oxford Style Manual , 2002 MHRA Style Guide ( Modern Humanities Research Association ) , 3rd edition ( 2013 )
MAINLY BRITISH STYLE GUIDES OPPOSING TYPICAL USE
The Times style manual
The Economist Style Guide University of Oxford Public Affairs Directorate Writing and Style Guide
MAINLY BRITISH STYLE GUIDES
THAT CONSIDER IT GENERALLY UNNECESSARY BUT DISCRETIONARY
The Guardian Style Guide
The Cambridge Guide to English Usage
Fowler 's Dictionary of Modern English Usage , 4th edition , 2015
" New Hart 's Rules , 2014 MAINLY AMERICAN STYLE GUIDES OPPOSING TYPICAL USE
The New York Times stylebook
The AP Stylebook AUSTRALIAN STYLE GUIDES OPPOSING TYPICAL USE
The Australian Government Publishing Service 's Style Manual for Authors , Editors and Printers CANADIAN STYLE GUIDES
OPPOSING
TYPICAL
USE
Public Works and Government Services Canada Translation Bureau 's The Canadian Style : A Guide to Writing and Editing OTHER LANGUAGES
Section::::Other languages .
In the following languages , the serial comma is not the norm and may go against punctuation rules : * Bosnian / Croatian / Serbian / Montenegrin ( though it can be allowed for the purpose of emphasis , except in Croatian ) .
* Danish * Dutch * Finnish * French * German * Greek * Hebrew * Hungarian ( unless it is used with a conjunction other than " és " , " s " , " meg " , or " vagy " )
* Icelandic * Italian * Norwegian * Polish ( unless conjunction is repeated in enumeration )
* Portuguese * Romanian ( unless it is used as an adversative conjunction )
* Russian * Spanish ( There is a rule against the serial comma . )
* Swedish * Turkish SEE ALSO
* Syndeton , the conjunctive phrasing that may or may not contain a serial comma * Roger Casement , " hanged on a comma " due to contested non - punctuation in a law REFERENCES