SNICKERS Snickers is a brand name chocolate bar made by the American company Mars , Incorporated , consisting of nougat topped with caramel and peanuts that has been enrobed in milk chocolate .
The annual global sales of Snickers was $ 2 billion .
In the United Kingdom , the Isle of Man , and Ireland , Snickers was sold under the brand name Marathon until 1990 .
Snickers - brand Marathon energy bars have since been sold in some markets .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In 1930 , Mars introduced Snickers , named after the favorite horse of the Mars family .
The Snickers chocolate bar consists of nougat , peanuts , and caramel with a chocolate coating .
The bar was marketed under the name " Marathon " in the UK and Ireland until 1990 , when Mars decided to align the UK product with the global Snickers name ( Mars had marketed and discontinued an unrelated bar named Marathon in the United States during the 1970s ) .
There are also several other Snickers products such as Snickers mini , dark chocolate , ice cream bars , Snickers with almonds , Snickers with hazelnuts , Snickers peanut butter bars , Snickers protein and Snickers with Extra Caramel , as well as espresso , fiery , and sweet & salty versions .
SNICKERS DUO Section::::Snickers Duo .
A replacement for the king size Snickers bar was launched in the UK in 2004 , and designed to conform to the September 2004 Food and Drink Federation ( FDF )
" Manifesto for Food and Health " .
Part of the FDF manifesto was seven pledges of action to encourage the food and drink industry to be more health conscious .
Reducing portion size , clearer food labels , and reduction of the levels of fat , sugar , and salt were among the FDF pledges .
Mars Incorporated pledged to phase out their king - size bars in 2005 and replace them with shareable bars .
A Mars spokesman said : " Our king - size bars that come in one portion will be changed so they are shareable or can be consumed on more than one occasion .
The name king - size will be phased out . "
These were eventually replaced by the ' Duo ' , a double bar pack .
Though this change to Duos reduced the weight from , the price remained the same .
The packaging has step - by - step picture instructions of how to open a Duo into two bars , in four simple actions .
As Mars stated fulfillment of their promise , the Duo format was met with criticism by the National Obesity Forum and National Consumer Council .
AUSTRALIAN RECALL Section::::Australian recall .
In December 2000 , tens of thousands of Snickers and Mars Bars were removed from New South Wales store shelves due to a series of threatening letters which resulted in fears that the chocolate bars had been poisoned .
Mars received letters from an unidentified individual indicating that they planned to plant poisoned chocolate bars on store shelves .
The last letter sent included a Snickers bar contaminated with a substance which was later identified as rat poison .
The letters claimed that there were seven additional chocolate bars which had been tampered with and which were for sale to the public .
As a precautionary measure , Mars issued a massive recall .
Mars said that there had been no demand for money and complaints directed to an unidentified third party .
CALORIC VALUE
Section::::Caloric value .
The USDA lists the caloric value of a 2-ounce ( 57 gram )
Snickers bar as .
As of 2018 , the United Kingdom bar has a weight of 48 g , with 245 kcal , and the Canadian bar 52 g with 250 kcal . BAR WEIGHT Section::::Bar weight .
Over the years , the bar weight has decreased : Before 2009 , in the UK a single Snickers bar had a weight of 62.5 g .
This weight was subsequently reduced to 58 g in 2009 , and to 48 g in 2013 .
PRODUCTS CONTAINING SNICKERS
Section::::Products containing Snickers .
Containing approximately per bar , deep fried chocolate bars ( including Snickers and Mars bars ) became a specialty in fish and chips shops in Scotland in 1995 , and in the early 2000s , became popular at American state fairs .
In 2012 , the British Food Commission highlighted celebrity chef Antony Worrall Thompson 's " Snickers pie " , which contained five Snickers bars among other ingredients , suggesting it was one of the unhealthiest desserts ever ; one slice providing " over from sugar and fat alone " , more than half a day 's requirement for an average adult .
The pie had featured on his BBC Saturday programme some two years earlier and
the chef described it as an occasional treat only .
ADVERTISING
IT 'S
SO SATISFYING
Section::::Advertising .
Section::::It 's So Satisfying .
In 1980 , Snickers ( and Marathon ) ran ads which featured a variety of everyday people discussing why they like Snickers .
The ads featured a jingle that said " It 's so satisfying " and had the classic hand that would open and close showing a handful of peanuts converting to a Snickers bar . "
Packed with peanuts , Snickers really satisfies " was shown in the commercials .
1984
OLYMPICS Section::::1984 Olympics .
Mars paid $ 5 million to have Snickers and M&M 's named the " official snack " of the 1984 Summer Olympics , outraging nutritionists .
Sports promotions in international games continued to be a prominent marketing tool for Mars , that would keep Snickers as an international brand while also selling local bars in some markets .
NOT GOING ANYWHERE FOR A WHILE ?
( HUNGRY ?
GRAB
A SNICKERS!/WHY WAIT ? )
Section::::Not Going Anywhere For a While ?
( Hungry ?
Grab a Snickers!/Why Wait ? ) .
Beginning in 1995 , Snickers ran ads which featured someone making a self - inflicted mistake , with the voice - over saying " Not going anywhere for a while ?
Grab a Snickers ! "
The tag line at the end of each ad proclaimed , " Hungry ?
Why Wait ? "
One such ad had a player for a fictional American football team showing off his new tattoo of the team 's logo on his back to his teammates .
He then shows it to his head coach who , after complimenting the tattoo , immediately tells him that he 's been traded to Miami .
The player then goes to have his old team 's logo replaced with the new team 's logo .
Some of the ads were done in conjunction with the National Football League , with whom Snickers had a sponsorship deal at the time .
One ad featured a member of the grounds crew at Arrowhead Stadium painting the field for an upcoming Kansas City Chiefs game in hot , late - summer weather .
After finishing one of the end zones , and visibly exhausted , one of the Chiefs players walks up to him and says the field looks great , " but who are the Chefs ? " , showing that despite all the hard work the painter accidentally omitted the " i " in Chiefs .
Another had Marv Levy in the Buffalo Bills locker room lecturing his team that " no one 's going anywhere " until the Bills figure out how to actually win a Super Bowl .
SNICKERS FEAST Section::::Snickers Feast .
In 2007 , Snickers launched a campaign which featured Henry the VIII and a Viking among others who attend the " Snickers Feast " .
It consisted of various commercials of the gang and their adventures on the feast .
SUPER BOWL XLI
COMMERCIAL
Section::::Super Bowl XLI commercial .
On February 4 , 2007 , during Super Bowl XLI , Snickers commercials aired which resulted in complaints by gay and lesbian groups against the maker of the candy bar , Masterfoods USA of Hackettstown , New Jersey , a division of Mars , Incorporated .
The commercial showed a pair of auto mechanics accidentally touching lips while sharing a Snickers bar .
After quickly pulling away , one mechanic says , " I think we just accidentally kissed . " , and another mechanic exclaims , " Quick !
Do something manly ! "
and in three of the four versions , they do so mostly in the form of injury , including tearing out chest hair , striking each other with a very large pipe wrench , and drinking motor oil and windshield washer fluid .
In the fourth version , however , a third mechanic shows up and asks " Is there room for three in this Love Boat ? "
Complaints were lodged against Masterfoods that the ads were homophobic .
Human Rights Campaign president Joe Solmonese is quoted as saying"This type of jeering from professional sports figures at the sight of two men kissing fuels the kind of anti - gay bullying that haunts countless gay and lesbian school children on playgrounds all across the country . "
Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation ( GLAAD ) president Neil Giuliano said " That Snickers , Mars and the NFL would promote and endorse this kind of prejudice is simply inexcusable . "
Masterfoods has since pulled the ads and the website .
MR .
T Section::::Mr .
T.
In 2006 , Mr. T starred in a Snickers advert in the UK where he rides up in an army tank and shouts abuse at a football player who appears to be faking an injury , threatening to introduce him to his friend Pain .
Another advert featured Mr. T launching bars at a swimmer who appeared to refuse to get in a swimming pool because of the cold temperature of the water .
In 2008 , a European Snickers commercial in which Mr. T uses a Jeep - mounted Minigun to fire Snickers bars at a speedwalker for being a " disgrace to the man race " was pulled after complaints from a US pressure group that the advertisement was homophobic .
These adverts usually ended with Mr. T saying " Snickers : Get Some Nuts ! "
NASCAR
Section::::NASCAR .
In NASCAR racing ,
Snickers ( and the rest of the Mars affiliated brands ) sponsor Kyle Busch 's # 18 Toyota for Joe Gibbs Racing .
Prior to that the brand served as a primary sponsor for Ricky Rudd 's # 88 Robert Yates Racing Ford as well as an associate sponsor for the team 's # 38 car driven first by Elliott Sadler and then by David Gilliland , and an associate sponsor for the MB2 Motorsports # 36 Pontiac driven by Derrike Cope , Ernie Irvan , Ken Schrader , and others .
In 1990 , Bobby Hillin drove for Stavola Brothers Racing in the # 8 Snickers Buick , marking the candy 's first appearance as a sponsor ; it had since been driven by Rick Wilson and Dick Trickle .
FIFA WORLD CUP & UEFA EURO SPONSORSHIP Section::::FIFA World Cup & UEFA Euro Sponsorship .
Snickers was the Official Sponsor of the FIFA World Cup from 1990 until 1998 editions and the UEFA European Championship from 1996 until 2000 .
YOU'RE
NOT YOU
WHEN YOU'RE HUNGRY Section::::You're
Not You
When You 're Hungry .
In 2010 , a new advertising campaign was launched , usually based around people turning into different people ( usually celebrities ) as a result of hunger ( taking the new campaign 's name
" You 're Not You
When You 're Hungry " quite literally ) .
The tagline varied depending on the commercial 's location or what variety the commercial is showing .
In 2010 , Betty White and Abe Vigoda appeared in the first Snickers commercial in this campaign , playing American football .
The commercial was ranked by ADBOWL as the best advertisement of the year .
This commercial was also briefly spoofed in an episode of SportsNation on ESPN2 with Michelle Beadle playing the role instead of Betty White in 2011 .
Later that year , Snickers commercials featured singers Aretha Franklin and Liza Minnelli , and comedians Richard Lewis and Roseanne Barr .
A 2011 commercial featured actors Joe Pesci and Don Rickles .
In Latin America , the slogan was the same as in the UK version , except that men doing extreme sports turning into the Mexican singer Anahí as a result of hunger .
In 2013 , the late Robin Williams and Bobcat Goldthwait also appeared in a Snickers football commercial .
In March 2014 , a commercial featuring Godzilla was released to promote the 2014 Godzilla film .
In the commercial , Godzilla is shown hanging out with humans on the beach , riding dirt bikes , and water skiing ; he only begins rampaging once he 's hungry .
After being fed a Snickers bar , he resumes having fun with the humans .
In February 2015 , Snickers ' Super Bowl XLIX commercial featured a parody of a scene from an episode of The Brady Bunch entitled " Subject Was Noses . "
In the commercial , Carol and Mike try to calm down a hungry and angry Danny Trejo .
When the parents give Trejo a Snickers bar , he reverts into Marcia before an irate Jan ( played by Steve Buscemi ) rants upstairs and walks away .
In 2016 , for Super Bowl 50 , another Snickers commercial was made , featuring Willem Dafoe ( as Marilyn Monroe ) and Eugene Levy , where " Marilyn " complains about filming the iconic " subway grate " scene in The Seven Year Itch .
After being given a Snickers , Marilyn goes ahead with the scene , with Levy operating the fan below , commenting that the scene wo n't make the movie 's final cut , that nobody would want to see it .
In 2018 , Brazil World Cup winner Ronaldo is seen celebrating a goal for Argentina .
When he notices the confused faces around him , he eats a Snickers and returns to normal .
The UK version of the campaign usually used British celebrities and , up until 2018 , retained the slogan from the Mr. T. era .
In the initial advert , Joan Collins and Stephanie Beacham featured as locker room footballers who had turned into them due to being hungry .
In 2014 , Rowan Atkinson as Mr. Bean returned on television by appearing on several UK Snickers commercials and cinema spots , in place of a martial arts master who had turned into him as a result of hunger .
Later , in 2018 , Elton John appeared in a new advert where he substituted American rapper Boogie who had turned into him due to hunger ( the slogan appeared on a turntable in this advert ) .
WRESTLEMANIA
Section::::WrestleMania .
Snickers has been an official sponsor of WWE 's WrestleMania events , including WrestleMania 2000 , 22 , 32 , 33 and 34 , while its Cruncher variant sponsored WrestleMania X - Seven , XIX , XX and 21 .
Since then , Snickers has sponsored superstars such as Enzo Amore and Big Cass with their signature term , SAWFT , which is labelled at the back of the chocolate bar .
SIX FLAGS FRIGHT FEST Section::::Six Flags Fright Fest .
Since 2011 , Snickers has been the official sponsor of Six Flags ' annual Fright Fest event at its theme parks .
SEE ALSO
*
Curly Wurly * Snickers salad
* Snickers pie * List of chocolate bar brands * List of candies
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Official website * Snickers Latin America