FOUR - WHEEL DRIVE Four - wheel drive , also called 4×4 ( " four by four " ) or 4WD , refers to a two - axled vehicle drivetrain capable of providing torque to all of its wheels simultaneously .
It may be full - time or on - demand , and is typically linked via a transfer case providing an additional output drive - shaft and , in many instances , additional gear ranges .
A four - wheeled vehicle with torque supplied to both axles is described as " all - wheel drive " ( AWD ) .
However , " four - wheel drive " typically refers to a set of specific components and functions , and intended off - road application , which generally complies with modern use of the terminology .
DEFINITIONS Section::::Definitions .
4WD systems were developed in many different markets and used in many different vehicle platforms .
There is no universally accepted set of terminology to describe the various architectures and functions .
The terms used by various manufacturers often reflect marketing rather than engineering considerations or significant technical differences between systems .
SAE International 's standard J1952 recommends only the term All - Wheel - Drive with additional sub classifications which cover all types of AWD/4WD/4x4 systems found on production vehicles .
4X4
Section::::4x4 .
Four - by - four or 4x4 is frequently used to refer to a class of vehicles in general .
Syntactically , the first figure indicates the total number of wheels ( or more precisely : axle ends ) , and the second indicates the number that are powered .
So 4x2 means a four - wheel vehicle that transmits engine torque to only two axle - ends : the front two in front - wheel drive or the rear two in rear - wheel drive .
Similarly , a 6×4 vehicle has three axles , two of which provide torque to two wheel ends each .
If this vehicle were a truck with dual rear wheels on two rear axles , so actually having ten wheels , its configuration would still be formulated as 6x4 .
During World War II , the U.S. military would typically use spaces and a capital ' X ' – like " 4 X 2 " or " 6 X 4 " .
4WD
Section::::4WD .
Four - wheel drive ( 4WD ) refers to vehicles with two axles providing torque to four axle ends .
In the North American market the term generally refers to a system that is optimized for off - road driving conditions .
The term " 4WD " is typically designated for vehicles equipped with a transfer case which switches between 2WD and 4WD operating modes , either manually or automatically .
AWD Section::::AWD .
All - wheel drive ( AWD ) historically was synonymous with " four - wheel drive " on four - wheeled vehicles , and six - wheel drive on 6×6s , and so on , being used in that fashion at least as early as the 1920s .
Today in North America the term is applied to both heavy vehicles as well as light passenger vehicles .
When referring to heavy vehicles the term is increasingly applied to mean " permanent multiple - wheel drive " on 2×2 , 4×4 , 6×6 or 8×8 drive train systems that include a differential between the front and rear drive shafts .
This is often coupled with some sort of anti - slip technology , increasingly hydraulic - based , that allows differentials to spin at different speeds but still be capable of transferring torque from a wheel with poor traction to one with better .
Typical AWD systems work well on all surfaces , but are not intended for more extreme off - road use .
When used to describe AWD systems in light passenger vehicles , it refers to a system that applies torque to all four wheels ( permanently or on demand ) and/or is targeted at improving on - road traction and performance ( particularly in inclement conditions ) , rather than for off - road applications .
Some all - wheel drive electric vehicles solve this challenge using one motor for each axle , thereby eliminating a mechanical differential between the front and rear axles .
An example of this is the dual motor variant of the Tesla Model S , which on a millisecond scale can control the torque distribution electronically between its two motors .
IWD Section::::IWD .
Individual - wheel drive ( IWD ) is used to describe electric vehicles with each wheel being driven by its own electric motor .
This system essentially has inherent characteristics that would be generally attributed to four - wheel drive systems like the distribution of the available torque to the wheels .
However , because of the inherent characteristics of electric motors , torque can be negative , as seen in the Rimac Concept One and SLS AMG Electric .
This can have drastic effects , as in better handling in tight corners .
The term IWD can refer to a vehicle with any number of wheels .
For example , the Mars rovers are 6-wheel IWD .
SAE RECOMMENDED
PRACTICES Section::::SAE Recommended Practices .
Per the SAE International standard J1952 , AWD is the preferred term for all the systems described above .
The standard subdivides AWD systems into three categories .
Part - Time AWD systems require driver intervention to couple and decouple the secondary axle from the primarily driven axle and these systems do not have a center differential ( or similar device ) .
The definition notes that part - time systems may have a low range .
Full - Time AWD systems drive both front and rear axles at all times via a center ( inter - axle ) differential .
The torque split of that differential may be fixed or variable depending on the type of center differential .
This system can be used on any surface at any speed .
The definition does not address inclusion or exclusion of a low range gear .
On - Demand AWD systems drive the secondary axle via an active or passive coupling device or " by an independently powered drive system " .
The standard notes that in some cases the secondary drive system may also provide the primary vehicle propulsion .
An example is a hybrid AWD vehicle where the primary axle is driven by an internal combustion engine and secondary axle is driven by an electric motor .
When the internal combustion engine is shut off the secondary , electrically driven axle is the only driven axle .
On - demand systems function primarily with only one powered axle until torque is required by the second axle .
At that point either a passive or active coupling sends torque to the secondary axle .
In addition to the above primary classifications the J1952 standard notes secondary classifications resulting in a total of eight system designations : * Part - Time Non Synchro System * Part - Time Synchro System * Full - Time Fixed Torque System * Full - Time Variable Torque Passive System * Full - Time Variable Torque Active System * On - Demand Synchro Variable Torque Passive System * On - Demand Synchro Variable Torque Active System
* On - Demand Independently Powered Variable Torque Active System DESIGN
DIFFERENTIALS Section::::Design .
Section::::Differentials .
Two wheels fixed to the same axle turn at the same speed as a vehicle goes around curves .
This either forces one to slip , if possible , to balance the apparent distance covered , or creates uncomfortable and mechanically stressful wheel hop .
To prevent this the wheels are allowed to turn at different speeds using a mechanical or hydraulic differential .
This allows one driveshaft to independently drive two output shafts , axles that go from the differential to the wheel , at different speeds .
The differential does this by distributing angular force ( in the form of torque ) evenly , while distributing angular velocity ( turning speed ) such that the average for the two output shafts is equal to that of the differential ring gear .
When powered each axle requires a differential to distribute power between the left and right sides .
When power is distributed to all four wheels a third or ' center ' differential can be used to distribute power between the front and rear axles .
The described system handles extremely well , as it is able to accommodate various forces of movement and distribute power evenly and smoothly , making slippage unlikely .
Once it does slip , however , recovery is difficult .
If the left front wheel of a 4WD vehicle slips on an icy patch of road , for instance , the slipping wheel will spin faster than the other wheels due to the lower traction at that wheel .
Since a differential applies equal torque to each half - shaft , power is reduced at the other wheels , even if they have good traction .
This problem can happen in both 2WD and 4WD vehicles , whenever a driven wheel is placed on a surface with little traction or raised off the ground .
The simplistic design works acceptably well for 2WD vehicles .
It is much less acceptable for 4WD vehicles , because 4WD vehicles have twice as many wheels with which to lose traction , increasing the likelihood that it may happen .
4WD vehicles may also be more likely to drive on surfaces with reduced traction .
However , since torque is divided amongst four wheels rather than two , each wheel receives approximately half the torque of a 2WD vehicle , reducing the potential for wheel slip .
LIMITING SLIPPAGE
Section::::Limiting slippage .
Many differentials have no way of limiting the amount of engine power that gets sent to its attached output shafts .
As a result , if a tire loses traction on acceleration , either because of a low - traction situation ( e.g. , - driving on gravel or ice ) or the engine power overcomes available traction , the tire that is not slipping receives little or no power from the engine .
In very low traction situations , this can prevent the vehicle from moving at all .
To overcome this , there are several designs of differentials that can either limit the amount of slip ( these are called ' limited - slip ' differentials ) or temporarily lock the two output shafts together to ensure that engine power reaches all driven wheels equally .
Locking differentials work by temporarily locking together a differential 's output shafts , causing all wheels to turn at the same rate , providing torque in case of slippage .
This is generally used for the center differential , which distributes power between the front and the rear axles .
While a drivetrain that turns all wheels equally would normally fight the driver and cause handling problems , this is not a concern when wheels are slipping .
The two most common factory - installed locking differentials use either a computer - controlled multi - plate clutch or viscous coupling unit to join the shafts , while other differentials more commonly used on off - road vehicles generally use manually operated locking devices .
In the multi - plate clutch the vehicle 's computer senses slippage and locks the shafts , causing a small jolt when it activates , which can disturb the driver or cause additional traction loss .
In the viscous coupling differentials the shear stress of high shaft speed differences causes a dilatant fluid in the differential to become solid , linking the two shafts .
This design suffers from fluid degradation with age and from exponential locking behavior .
Some designs use gearing to create a small rotational difference that hastens torque transfer .
A third approach to limiting slippage is taken by a Torsen differential .
A Torsen differential allows the output shafts to receive different amounts of torque .
This design does not provide for traction when one wheel is spinning freely , where there is no torque , but provides excellent handling in less extreme situations .
A typical Torsen II differential can deliver up to twice as much torque to the high traction side before traction is exceeded at the lower traction side .
A fairly recent innovation in automobiles is electronic traction control .
Traction control typically uses a vehicle 's braking system to slow a spinning wheel .
This forced slowing emulates the function of a limited - slip differential , and , by using the brakes more aggressively to ensure wheels are being driven at the same speed , can also emulate a locking differential .
It should be noted that this technique normally requires wheel sensors to detect when a wheel is slipping , and only activates when wheel slip is detected .
Therefore , there is typically no mechanism to actively prevent wheel slip ( i.e. , you ca n't " lock the differential " in advance of wheel slip ) , rather the system is designed to expressly permit wheel slip to occur , and then attempt to send torque to the wheels with the best traction .
If preventing all - wheel slip is a requirement , this is a limiting design .
OPERATING MODES
Section::::Operating Modes .
The architecture of an AWD/4WD system can be described by showing its possible operating modes .
A single vehicle may have the ability to operate in multiple modes depending on driver selection .
The different modes are as follows : Two Wheel Drive ( 2WD ) Mode -
In this mode only one axle ( typically the rear axle ) is driven .
The drive to the other axle is disconnected .
The operating torque split ratio is 0:100 .
Four Wheel Drive ( 4WD ) Mode - Here ,
depending on the nature of torque transfer to the axles , three sub - modes ( below ) can be defined .
In addition to these basic modes there could be implementations that combine these modes .
The system could have a clutch across the center differential , for example , capable of modulating the front axle torque from a Full - time mode with the 30:70 torque split of the center differential to the 0:100 torque split of the 2WD mode HISTORY
LATE 1800S Section::::History .
Section::::Late 1800s .
In 1893 , before the establishment of a modern automotive industry in Britain , English engineer Bramah Joseph Diplock patented a four - wheel - drive system for a steam - powered traction engine , including four - wheel steering and three differentials , which was subsequently built .
The development also incorporated Bramah 's Pedrail wheel system in what was one of the first four - wheel - drive automobiles to display an intentional ability to travel on challenging road surfaces .
It stemmed from Bramagh 's previous idea of developing an engine that would reduce the amount of damage to public roads .
Ferdinand Porsche designed and built a four - wheel - driven electric vehicle for the k. u. k. Hofwagenfabrik Ludwig Lohner & Co. in Vienna in 1899 , presented to the public during the 1900 World Exhibition in Paris .
The vehicle was a series hybrid car , that used an electric hub motor at each wheel , powered by batteries , which were in turn charged by a gasoline - engine generator .
It was clumsily heavy and due to its unusual status
the so - called Lohner - Porsche is not frequently given its credit as the first four - wheel - driven automobile .
1900S-1920S Section::::1900s-1920s .
The world 's first four - wheel drive car directly powered by an internal combustion engine , and the first with a front - engine , four - wheel - drive layout was the Dutch Spyker 60 H.P. Commissioned for the Paris to Madrid race of 1903 , it was presented that year by brothers Jacobus and Hendrik - Jan Spijker of Amsterdam .
The two - seat sports car featured permanent four - wheel drive and was also the first car ever equipped with a six - cylinder engine , as well as four - wheel braking .
Later used as a hill - climb racer , it is now an exhibit in the Louwman Museum ( the former Nationaal Automobiel Museum ) in the Hague , the Netherlands .
Designs for four - wheel drive in America came from the Twyford Company of Brookville , Pennsylvania in 1905 , six were made there around 1906 ; one still exists and is displayed annually .
The Reynolds - Alberta Museum has a four - wheel - drive vehicle , named " Michigan " , from 1905 in an unrestored storage .
The first four - wheel drive vehicles to go into mass - production were built by ( what became ) the American Four Wheel Drive Auto Company ( FWD ) of Wisconsin , founded in 1908 ( not to be confused with the term " FWD " as an acronym for front - wheel drive ) .
Along with the 2-ton Nash Quad ( see below ) , the 3-ton FWD Model B became a standard military four - wheel - drive truck for the U.S. Army in World War I.
Some 16,000 FWD Model B trucks were built for the British and American armies during World War I – about half by FWD and the rest by other licensed manufacturers .
Only about 20 percent of the trucks built were four - wheel - drives , but the 4x4s were more often on the front lines .
Approximately 11,500 of the Jeffery / Nash Quad trucks were built for similar use between 1913 and 1919 .
The Quad not only came with four - wheel drive and four - wheel brakes , but also featured four - wheel steering .
The Quad was one of the first successful four - wheel drive vehicles ever to be made , and its production continued for 15 years with a total of 41,674 units made by 1928 .
Daimler - Benz also has a history in four - wheel drive .
After the Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft had built a four - wheel - driven vehicle called Dernburg - Wagen , also equipped with four - wheel steering , in 1907 , that was used by German colonial civil servant , Bernhard Dernburg , in Namibia ; Mercedes and BMW , in 1926 , introduced some rather sophisticated four - wheel drives , the G1 , the G4 and G4 following .
Mercedes and BMW developed this further in 1937 .
1930S
Section::::1930s .
The American Marmon - Herrington Company was founded in 1931 to serve a growing market for moderately priced four - wheel - drive vehicles .
Marmon - Herrington specialized in converting Ford trucks to four - wheel drive and got off to a successful start by procuring contracts for military and commercial aircraft refueling trucks , 4×4 chassis for towing light weaponry , and an order from the Iraqi Pipeline Company for what were the largest trucks ever built at the time .
The early Marmon - Herringtons proved to be the exception to the rule — 4WD cars and trucks developed in the 1930s were mainly going to be built for governments , with ( future ) warfare applications in mind .
Dodge developed its first four - wheel drive truck in 1934 — a military 1½ ton designated K-39-X-4(USA ) , of which 796 units were built for the U.S. Army in several configurations .
Timken supplied front axles and transfer - cases , added to militarized a civilian truck .
The Timken transfer case was the first part - time design , that allowed the driver to engage or disengage four - wheel drive using a lever inside the cabin .
In spite of the limited 1930s U.S. military budgets , the ' 34 truck was liked well - enough that a more modern 1½ tonner was developed , and 1,700 RF-40-X-4(USA ) trucks were produced in 1938 , and 292 TF-40-X-4(USA ) in 1939 .
Starting in 1936 , Japanese company Tokyu Kurogane Kogyo built approximately 4,700 four - wheel - drive roadsters , called the Kurogane Type 95 reconnaissance car , used by the Imperial Japanese Army from 1937 until 1944 , during the Second Sino - Japanese War .
Three different bodystyles were manufactured ; a 2-door roadster , a 2-door pickup truck and a 4-door phaeton , all equipped with a transfer case that engaged the front wheels , powered by a 1.3 litre , 2-cylinder , air - cooled OHV V - twin engine .
The 1937 Mercedes - Benz G5 and BMW 325 4×4 featured full - time four - wheel drive , four - wheel steering , three locking differentials , and fully independent suspension .
They were produced because of a government demand for a four - wheel - drive passenger vehicle .
The modern G - series / Wolf such as the G500 and G55 AMG still feature some of the attributes , with the exception of fully independent suspension since it can compromise ground clearance .
The Unimog is also a result of Mercedes 4x4 technology .
The first Russian produced four - wheel - drive vehicle , also in part for civilian use , was the GAZ-61 , developed in the Soviet Union in 1938 .
" Civilian use " may be a bit of a misnomer , as most if not all were used by the Soviet government and military ( as command cars ) , but the GAZ-61 - 73 version is the first four - wheel drive vehicle with a normal closed sedan body .
Elements of the chassis were used in subsequent military vehicles such as the 1940 GAZ-64 and the 1943 GAZ-67 , as well as the post - war GAZ-69 , and the properly civilian GAZ - M-72 , based on the rear - wheel drive GAZ-20 " Victory " and built from 1955 - 1958 .
Soviet civilian life did not allow the proliferation of civilian products such as the Jeep in North America , but through the 1960s the technology of Soviet 4×4 vehicles stayed on par with British , German , and American models , even exceeding it in some aspects , and for military purposes just as actively developed , produced and used .
WORLD WAR II —
A QUANTUM LEAP IN AWD
PROLIFERATION Section::::World War II — a quantum leap in AWD proliferation .
It was not until " go - anywhere " vehicles were needed for the military on a large scale , that four - wheel drive and all - wheel drive vehicles found their place .
The World War II Jeep , originally developed by American Bantam but mass - produced by Willys and Ford , became the best - known four - wheel - drive vehicle in the world during the war .
The American Dodge WC series and Chevrolet G506
4x4 variants were also produced by the hundred - thousands , as well as the Canadian Military Pattern trucks , of which 4x4s were by far the most prevalent of their various driveline configurations .
All totaled , North America built ca .
million 4x4 driven vehicles during the war , One deciding factor had to do with availability of certain critical components , like transfer cases and especially constant - velocity joints , not used much on commercial vehicles , but all - wheel drive vehicles all needed these ; plus additionally , they would use two or three times the amount of driven axles , meaning more gears to cut for all the differentials .
Produced up to the war by a few specialized firms with limited capacity , from spring 1942
Ford , Dodge and Chevrolet joined in fabricating these in a quantity more than a 100-fold greater than in 1939 .
Although Russia had their own jeep - like vehicle ( the GAZ-64 ) up and running in 1940 , a year earlier than the American jeep – in the early years of the war , they relied significantly on Lend - Lease vehicles , provided by the western allies .
In 1943 they launched a further developed version : the GAZ-67 .
By contrast , the Axis powers ' closest equivalent to the jeep , the VW Kübelwagen , of which only some 50,000 were built , though being equipped with portal gear hubs , only had rear - wheel drive .
1945 - 1960S Section::::1945 - 1960s .
Willys introduced the model CJ-2A in 1945 , the first full - production four - wheel drive vehicle for sale in the general marketplace .
Thanks to the ubiquitous World War II jeep 's success , its rugged utilitarianism set the pattern for many four - wheel drive vehicles to come .
Hot on its heels , Dodge also started production of the civilian 4WD Power Wagon trucks , for the 1946 model year .
Both the Willys and the Dodge were developed directly from their WW II predecessors .
Equally boxy to the Jeep , and also inline-4 powered , the Land Rover appeared at the Amsterdam Motor Show in 1948 .
Originally conceived as a stop - gap product for the struggling Rover car company , despite chronic under - investment it succeeded far better than their passenger cars .
Inspired by a Willys MB – the ubiquitous WWII " jeep " – that was frequently run off - road on the farm belonging to chief engineer Maurice Wilks , Land Rover developed the more refined yet still off - road capable luxury 4WD Range Rover in the 1970s .
With the acquisition of the " Jeep " name in 1950 Willys had cornered the brand .
Its successor , Kaiser Jeep , introduced a revolutionary 4WD wagon called the Wagoneer in 1963 .
Not only was it technically innovative , with independent front suspension and the first automatic transmission coupled to 4WD , it was equipped and finished as a regular passenger automobile .
In effect , it was the ancestor of the modern SUV .
The luxury Rambler or Buick V8s powered Super Wagoneer produced from 1966 to 1969 raised the bar even higher .
Jensen applied the Formula Ferguson ( FF ) full - time all - wheel - drive system to 318 units of their Jensen FF built from 1966 to 1971 , marking the first time 4WD was used in a production GT sports car .
While most 4WD systems split torque evenly , the Jensen split torque roughly 40 % front , 60 % rear by gearing the front and rear at different ratios .
1970S-1990S Section::::1970s-1990s .
American Motors ( AMC ) acquired Kaiser 's Jeep Division in 1970 and quickly upgraded and expanded the entire line of off - road 4WD vehicles .
With its added roadworthiness , the top range full - size Grand Wagoneer continued to compete with traditional luxury cars .
Partially hand - built , it was relatively unchanged during its production through 1991 , even after Chrysler 's buyout of AMC .
Subaru introduced the category - expanding Leone in 1972 , an inexpensive compact station wagon with a light - duty , part - time four - wheel drive system that could not be engaged on dry pavement .
In September AMC introduced Quadra Trac full - time AWD for the 1973 model year Jeep Cherokee and Wagoneer .
Thanks to full - time AWD , which relieved the driver of getting out to lock hubs and having to manually select between 2WD and 4WD modes , it dominated all other makes in FIA rally competition .
Gene Henderson and Ken Pogue won the Press - on - Regardless Rally FIA championship with a Quadra Trac equipped Jeep in 1972 .
American Motors introduced the innovative Eagle for the 1980 model year .
These were the first American mass production cars to use the complete front - engine , four - wheel drive system .
The AMC Eagle was offered as a sedan , coupe , and station wagon with permanent automatic all - wheel - drive passenger models .
The new Eagles combined Jeep technology with an existing and proven AMC passenger automobile platform .
They ushered a whole new product category of " sport - utility " or crossover SUV .
AMC 's Eagles came with the comfort and high - level appointments expected of regular passenger models and used the off - road technology for an extra margin of safety and traction .
The Eagle 's thick viscous fluid center differential provided quiet and smooth transfer of power that was directed proportionally to the axle with the greatest traction .
This was a true full - time system operating only in four - wheel drive without undue wear on suspension or driveline components .
There was no low range in the transfer case .
This became the forerunner of the designs that followed from other manufacturers .
The automobile press at the time tested the traction of the Eagles and described it as far superior to the Subaru 's and that it could beat many so - called off - road vehicles .
Four Wheeler magazine concluded that the AMC Eagle was " The beginning of a new generation of cars . "
The Eagles were popular ( particularly in the snowbelt ) , had towing capacity , and came in several equipment levels including sport and luxury trims .
Two additional models were added in 1981 , the sub - compact SX/4 and Kammback .
A manual transmission and a front axle - disconnect feature were also made available for greater fuel economy .
During 1981 and 1982 a unique convertible was added to the line .
The Eagle 's monocoque body was reinforced for the conversion and had a steel targa bar with a removable fiberglass roof section .
The Eagle station wagon remained in production for one model year after Chrysler acquired AMC in 1987 .
Audi also introduced a permanently all - wheel - driven road - going car , the Audi Quattro , in 1980 .
Audi 's chassis engineer , Jörg Bensinger , had noticed in winter tests in Scandinavia that a vehicle used by the German Army , the Volkswagen Iltis , could beat any high - performance Audi .
He proposed developing a four - wheel - drive car , that would also be used for rallying to improve Audi 's conservative image .
The Audi Quattro system became a feature on production cars .
In 1987 , Toyota also developed a car built for competition in rally campaigns .
A limited number of road - going FIA Homologation Special Vehicle Celica GT - Four ( known as Toyota Celica All - Trac Turbo in North America ) were produced .
The All - Trac system was later available on serial production Toyota Camry , Toyota Corolla , and Toyota Previa models .
Some of the earliest mid - engined four - wheel - drive cars were the various road - legal rally cars made for Group B homologation , such as the Ford RS200 made from 1984 to 1986 .
In 1989 , niche maker Panther Westwinds created a mid - engined four - wheel - drive , the Panther Solo 2 .
2000-PRESENT
Section::::2000-present .
In the United States , as of late 2013 , AWD vehicles comprised 32 per cent of new light vehicle sales , up five per cent since 2008 .
This is in large part due to the popularity of the crossover .
Most crossovers offer the popular technology , in spite of it increasing vehicle price and fuel consumption .
Car manufacturers have inundated consumers with marketing proclaiming AWD as a safety feature , although the advantage of AWD over FWD is in accelerating , not braking or steering .
Tests have shown that though AWD gives improved acceleration in wintery conditions , it does not help with braking .
In 2008 , Nissan introduced the GT - R featuring a rear - mounted transaxle .
The AWD system requires two drive shafts , one main shaft from the engine to the transaxle and differential and a second drive shaft from the transaxle to the front wheels .
USES ROAD RACING Section::::Uses .
Section::::Road racing .
Spyker is credited with building and racing the first ever four - wheel drive racing car , the Spyker 60 HP in 1903 .
Bugatti created a total of three four - wheel - drive racers , the Type 53 , in 1932 , but the cars were notorious for having poor handling .
Miller produced the first 4WD car to qualify for the Indianapolis 500 , the 1938 Miller Gulf Special .
Ferguson Research Ltd. built the front - engine P99 Formula One car that actually won a non - World Championship race with Stirling Moss in 1961 .
In 1968 , Team Lotus raced cars in the Indy 500 and three years later in Formula 1 with the Lotus 56 , that had both turbine engines and 4WD , as well as the 1969 4WD - Lotus 63 that had the standard 3-litre V8 Ford Cosworth engine .
Matra also raced a similar MS84 , and McLaren entered their M9A in the British Grand Prix , while engine manufacturers Ford - Cosworth produced their own version which was tested but never raced .
All these F1 cars were considered inferior to their RWD counterparts , as the advent of aerodynamic downforce meant that adequate traction could be obtained in a lighter and more mechanically efficient manner , and the idea was discontinued , even though Lotus tried repeatedly .
Nissan and Audi had success with all - wheel drive in road racing with the former 's advent of the Nissan Skyline GT - R in 1989 .
So successful was the car that it dominated the Japanese circuit for the first years of production , going on to bigger and more impressive wins in Australia before weight penalties eventually levied a de facto ban on the car .
Most controversially was the win pulled off at the 1990 Macau Grand Prix where the car led from start to finish .
Audi 's dominance in the Trans - Am Series in 1988 was equally controversial as it led to a weight penalty mid season and to a rule revision banning all - AWD cars , its dominance in Super Touring eventually led to a FIA ban on AWD system in 1998 .
New 24 Hours of Le Mans regulations may revive AWD/4WD in road racing , though such systems are only allowed in new hybrid - powered Le Mans Prototypes .
One example is the Audi R18 e - tron quattro ( winner of race , the first ever hybrid/4WD to win Le Mans ) , utilizing an electric motor in the front axle while combining the engine motor in the rear .
IN HEAVY TRUCKS Section::::In heavy trucks .
Medium - duty trucks and Heavy - duty trucks have recently adopted 4×4 drive - trains .
4×4 medium - duty trucks became common after Ford Motor Company began selling Ford Super Duty trucks .
The Super Duty trucks shared many parts between the light duty and medium duty , reducing production costs .
The Dana 60 front axle is used on both medium- and light - duty Super Duty trucks .
Furthermore , the Big Three share / shared parts between the companies reducing costs .
The Dana S 110 is currently being used for the rear drive , under Ford and Ram 's medium - duty trucks .
The Dana 110 was also used on
the General Motors 4×4s as well .
Ram Trucks began selling medium - duty trucks , 4×4 and 4×2 , in 2008 .
General Motors sold a 4×4 for model years 2005 - 2009 .
IN CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT Section::::In construction equipment .
Volvo introduced the Model 646 four - wheel drive backhoe loader in 1977 .
Case Corporation followed suit in the U.S. in 1987 .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
In engineering terms , " four - wheel drive " designates a vehicle with power delivered to four wheel ends spread over at least two axles .
The term 4×4 ( pronounced four by four ) was in use to describe North American military four - wheel - drive vehicles as early as the 1940s , with the first number indicating the number of wheel ends on a vehicle and the second indicating the number of driven wheels .
Trucks with dual tires on the rear axle and two driven axles are designated as 4×4s despite having six wheels because the paired rear wheels behave as a single wheel for traction and classification purposes .
True 6×6 vehicles which have three powered axles , and are classified as 6×6s regardless of how many wheels they have .
Examples of these with two rear , one front axle are the 6-wheeled Pinzgauer , which is popular with defense forces around the globe , and 10-wheeled GMC CCKW made famous by the U.S. Army in World War II .
4-wheeler ( or four - wheeler ) is a related term applying to all - terrain vehicles , and not to be confused with four - wheel drive .
The " four " in the instance referring to the vehicle having four wheels , not necessarily all driven .
UNUSUAL SYSTEMS
Section::::Unusual systems .
Prompted by a perceived need for a simple , inexpensive all - terrain vehicle for oil exploration in North Africa , the French motor manufacturer Citroën developed the 2CV Sahara in 1958 .
Unlike other 4×4 vehicles which use a conventional transfer case to drive the front and rear axle , the Sahara had two engines , each independently driving a separate axle , with the rear engine facing backwards .
The two throttles , clutches and gear change mechanisms could be linked , so the two engines could run together , or they could be split and the car driven solely by either engine .
Combined with twin fuel tanks and twin batteries ( which could be set up to run either or both engines ) , the redundancy of two separate drive trains meant that they could make it back to civilization even after major mechanical failures .
Only around 700 of these cars were built , and only 27 are known to exist today .
BMC experimented with a twin - engine Mini Moke ( dubbed the " Twini Moke " ) in the mid-1960s , but never put it into production .
This made advantage of the Mini 's ' power pack ' layout , with a transverse engine and the gearbox in the engine sump .
Simply by fitting a second engine / gearbox unit across the rear , a rudimentary 4×4 system could be produced .
Early prototypes had separate gear levers and clutch systems for each engine .
Later versions sent for evaluation by the British Army had more user - friendly linked systems .
In 1965 , A. J. M. Chadwick patented a 4WD system , GB 1113068 , that used hemispherical wheels for an all - terrain vehicle .
Twenty years later , B. T. E. Warne , patented , GB 2172558 , an improvement on Chadwick 's design that did not use differential gear assemblies .
By using near - spherical wheels with provision to tilt and turn each wheel co - ordinatively , the driven wheels maintain constant traction .
Furthermore , all driven wheels steer and , as pairing of wheels is not necessary , vehicles with an odd number of wheels are possible without affecting the system 's integrity .
Progressive deceleration is made possible by dynamically changing the front - to - rear effective wheel diameter ratios .
Suzuki Motors introduced the Suzuki Escudo Pikes Peak Edition in 1996 .
Earlier Suzuki versions were twin engined , from 1996 on the engine is a twin - turbocharged 2.0 L V6 , mated to a sequential 6-speed manual transmission .
Nissan Motors has developed a system called E-4WD .
It is designed for cars that are normally front - wheel drive ; however , the rear wheels are powered by electric motors .
This system was introduced in some variants of the Nissan Cube and Tiida .
( This is similar to the system used on the Ford Escape Hybrid AWD . )
Chrysler 's Jeep Division debuted the twin engine , Jeep Hurricane concept at the 2005 North American International Auto Show in Detroit .
This vehicle has a unique " crab crawl " capability , which allows it to rotate 360 ° in place .
This is accomplished by driving the left wheels as a pair and right wheels as a pair , as opposed to driving the front and rear pairs .
A central gearbox allows one side to drive in the opposite direction to the other .
It also has dual Hemi V8s .
Some hybrid vehicles such as the Lexus RX400h provide power to an AWD system through a pair of electric motors , one to the front wheels and one to the rear .
In the case of the AWD model version of the Lexus RX400h ( and its Toyota - branded counterpart , the Harrier hybrid ) , the front wheels can also receive drive power directly from the vehicle 's gasoline engine as well as via the electric motors , whereas the rear wheels derive power only from the second electric motor .
Transfer of power is managed automatically by internal electronics based on traction conditions and need , making this an all - wheel - drive system .
The 4RM system used in the Ferrari FF in 2011 is unique in that it has a rear transaxle with secondary front transaxle connected directly to the engine .
The car operates primarily as a rear - wheel drive vehicle .
Clutches in the front transaxle engage when the rear wheels slip .
Drive to the front wheels is transmitted through two infinitely - variable clutch packs which are allowed to ' slip ' to give the required road wheel speeds .
The front transaxle has three gears , two forward , and reverse .
The two forward gears of the front transmission match the lower four forward gears of the rear transmission .
It is not used in higher gears .
The connection between this gearbox and each front wheel is via independent haldex - type clutches , without a differential .
Due to the difference in ratios the clutches continually slip and only transmit , at most , 20 % of the engine 's torque .
INTRODUCTION TO OFF - ROADERS INTRODUCTION TO PASSENGER CARS SYSTEMS BY DESIGN TYPE CENTER DIFFERENTIAL WITH MECHANICAL LOCK
* Alfa Romeo 164 Q4 ( central viscous coupling , epicyclic unit and Torsen rear differential )
* Alfa Romeo 155 Q4 ( central epicyclic unit , Ferguson viscous coupling and Torsen rear differential ) * AMC Eagle ( central viscous coupling ) * Audi - Quattro Coupé , 80 , 90 , 100 & 200 ( locking center and rear differentials ) - up to 1987 * Audi Q7 -double pinion 50/50 with lockup clutch pack * BMW 3 series and 5 series in the 1980s - planetary center differential with a 37 - 63 ( front - back ) torque split and viscous lock ( also in rear differential but not front differential )
*
Chevrolet Rounded - Line K Fleetside , K Stepside , K Blazer , and K Suburban - permanent four - wheel drive ( 1973 - 1979 )
two - speed New Process 203 transfer case , center differential with 50:50 torque split and lock .
An Eaton Automatic Differential Lock was optional for the rear hypoid differential .
* Ford - Escort ( RS 2000 16v 4×4 models and RS Cosworth ) , Sierra Cosworth , Sierra and Granada 4×4 models , * Dodge Power Wagon - permanent four - wheel drive ( 1974 - 1979 )
two - speed New Process 203 transfer case , center differential with 50:50 torque split and lock .
* Ford Expedition ( 1997–present ) and Expedition EL / Max ( 2007–present ) - automatic ControlTrac four - wheel drive with two - speed dual range BorgWarner transfer case and intelligent locking center multi - disc differential
* Ford Explorer ( 1995–2010 ) - automatic ControlTrac four - wheel drive with two - speed dual range BorgWarner transfer case and intelligent locking center multi - disc differential
* Ford F - Series - permanent four - wheel drive ( 1974 - 1979 )
two - speed New Process 203 transfer case , center differential with 50:50 torque split and lock .
*
GMC Rounded - Line K Wideside , K Fenderside , K Jimmy , and K Suburban - permanent four - wheel drive ( 1973 - 1979 )
two - speed New Process 203 transfer case , center planetary differential with 50:50 torque split and lock .
An Eaton Automatic Differential Lock was optional for the rear hypoid differential .
* H1 & Humvee NVG 242HD AMG open center differential , locked center differential , Neutral , low range locked .
Also Torsen1 differential at the front and rear axle , The H1 moved to Torsen2 when ABS was added .
The H1 Alpha had optional locking differentials in place of torsens
* Hummer H2 , H3 40/60 planetary with lock * Jeep Grand Cherokee , Commander ( except models equipped with Quadra - Trac I ) * Jeep Liberty , Jeep Cherokee ( XJ ) , Dodge Durango ( Select - Trac )
- NV 242 transfer case- rear drive , open center differential , locked center differential , Neutral , low range
* Full size Jeeps with Borg Warner QuadraTrac : limited slip center differential , 50/50 locked center differential .
Low range could be used in locked or unlocked mode , allowing for use of low range on pavement .
* Land Rover Defender ( and Series III V8 models )
* Land Rover Discovery /
LR3
* Land Rover Freelander *
Lada Niva ( VAZ-2121 ) - full - time 4WD using open center differential .
Transfer case with high / low range and manual central diff lock .
Low range selectable in locked or unlocked mode , allowing use on pavement .
* Lexus RX300 -viscous coupling across the otherwise open center differential .
* Lincoln Navigator ( 1998–2006 ) - automatic ControlTrac four - wheel drive with two - speed dual range BorgWarner transfer case and intelligent locking center multi - disc differential * Navigator and Navigator L ( 2007–present ) use one - speed single range transfer case , no reduction gearing
* Mercedes - Benz Unimog ( locking center and rear with up to 10 low range gears ) .
* Mercedes - Benz G - Class ( locking center and lockers on both front- and rear axle )
* Mercedes - Benz GL - Class - 4Matic all - wheel - drive system * Mitsubishi Pajero ( also known as Montero or Shogun )
* Porsche Cayenne - 38/62 planetary with lockup clutch pack * Range Rover Classic 1970–1995 all full - time 4WD either plate LSD , manual lock or Ferguson viscous centre differential .
* Range Rover 2nd Gen. 1994–2002 full - time 4WD Ferguson viscous centre differential
* Suzuki Grand Vitara / Escudo ( 2005 and later models , excepting the XL-7 ) -full - time 4WD using limited - slip center differential , off - road 4WD with selectable center differential lock and low range transfer case 4 mode ( 4h , 4h lock , 4l n ) , traction control and electronic stability control * Subaru - manual transmissions come with 50/50 viscous - type center differential ; performance models include a planetary differential with computer regulated lockup ; automatic transmission models have an electronically controlled variable transfer clutch .
*
Toyota Land Cruiser *
Toyota Sequoia ( Multi - mode )
* Volkswagen Touareg -double pinion 50/50 with lockup clutch pack
TORSEN CENTER DIFFERENTIAL
* Alfa Romeo Q4s - with ( Torsen T-3 ) : * 156 Crosswagon and Sportwagon
* 159 * Brera , Spider * Audis with quattro - various iterations of Torsen , the T-3 starting from the 2007 B7 RS4
* 80 , 90 & Coupé (
Typ 89 )
* 100 & 200 * A4 , S4 , RS4
* A5 & S5
* A6 , S6 , RS6 * A8 , S8
* Q5 , Q7 * Bentley Continental GT , Bentley Continental Flying Spur ( 2005 )
initially Torsen T-2 ,
current have T-3 * Chevrolet Trailblazer SS Torsen
T-3 * Lexus GX470 , Toyota Land Cruiser
Prado 120
Torsen T-3 * Range Rover 3rd Gen. 2002–2009
* Toyota 4Runner ( only Limited V8 model & 2010 Limited V6 model )
Torsen T-3 with lock * Toyota FJ Cruiser ( only manual models ) Torsen T-3 with lock * Toyota Hilux Surf Torsen T-3 with lock * Toyota Land Cruiser 200/2008 / V8
Torsen T-3 with lock * Toyota Sequoia ( only 2005 - 07 Models ) * Volkswagen Passenger Cars with 4motion : * Volkswagen Passat Torsen
T-2 ( B5.5 model , not latest B6 model with transverse engine )
* Volkswagen Phaeton Torsen T-2 NON - LOCKING CENTER DIFFERENTIAL * BMW 3-series and X5 between 2001 and xDrive - planetary center differential with permanent 38 - 62 ( front - back ) torque split # * Cadillac Escalade , STS AWD , SRX AWD (
The first two generations had a viscous clutch on the center differential )
# * Chrysler 300C AWD # * Dodge Ramcharger 1974–1981 - NP203 FullTime 4WD Transfer Case * Dodge Magnum , Charger AWD # * GMC Yukon Denali , XL Denali ,
Sierra Denali # * Mercedes 4MATIC cars , R class , and ML class ( note some MLs had low range )
# * Plymouth Trailduster 1974–1981 - NP203 FullTime 4WD Transfer Case *
Toyota Highlander #
* Toyota Sienna AWD ( -2010 only )
# Section::::Systems by design type .
Section::::Non - locking center differential .
The above systems ending with " # " function by selectively using the traction control system ( via ABS ) to brake a slipping wheel .
MULTIPLE - CLUTCH SYSTEMS
* Acura RL , RDX ( SH - AWD )
Right and left axle shaft * Acura MDX SH - AWD & VTM4
* Ford Explorer - Ford 's full - time shift - on - the - fly Intelligent 4WD System ( I-4WD ) on the 2011 Explorer with Terrain Management System and RSC ( Roll Stability Control ) , Curve Control functionality , HDC ( Hill Descent Control ) and HAA ( Hill Ascent Assist ) .
* Honda Ridgeline * Honda Pilot * Infiniti FX ( ATTESA E - TS )
* Mercedes - Benz 1st generation 4MATIC
( normally rear - drive , automatic clutch in transfer case engages 4WD on demand )
* Mitsubishi GTO MR/3000GT
VR-4 * Mitsubishi Lancer
Evolution Series S - AWC
* 2010 Mitsubishi Outlander GT S - AWC * Mitsubishi Outlander ( 2003–2006 ) independent front and rear axle coupling , and Active Center Differential .
* Nissan GT - R ( ATTESA E - TS )
* Nissan Skyline GT - R ( ATTESA E - TS and ATTESA E - TS - PRO ) front axle coupling , rear differential locking
* Nissan Skyline GTS4 ( ATTESA E - TS )
* Nissan A31 Cefiro SE4 ( ATTESA E - TS )
* Porsche 959 PSK front axle coupling , rear differential locking
* Saab 9 - 3 , Saab 9 - 5 , Saab 9 - 4X ( Saab XWD ) . MULTI - PLATE CLUTCH COUPLING
* Audi A3 quattro , Audi S3 ,
Audi TT quattro , Audi R8 ( with Haldex Traction )
* BMW xDrive : latest 3 Series , latest 5 series , X3 , latest X5 series
* Chevrolet Equinox ( GMPCA )
* Chrysler Pacifica ( BorgWarner ITM3e ) ( on 2007 model )
* Dodge Nitro ( Quadra - Trac 1 )
* Dodge Caliber
* Ford : Escape , Freestyle , Edge , Fusion , Five Hundred ( Freestyle , FiveHundred Haldex Traction based )
( Escape Control Trac II , based )
* Honda CR - V , HR - V , Element * Hyundai Santa Fe , Hyundai Tucson Borg - Warner ITM 3e
magnetic multi - plate clutch coupling
* Hyundai Veracruz IMJ magnetic multi - plate clutch coupling
* Infiniti : G35x , M35x * Jeep Compass ( Freedom Drive )
* Jeep Grand Cherokee and SRT8 NVG 249 , 247
* Land Rover Freelander 2 / LR2 ( also Haldex Traction )
* Lamborghini : AWD variants VT series ( viscous traction )
* Lincoln : MKS , MKZ * Mazdaspeed6
( a power takeoff unit linked to clutch pack with torque sensitive rear differential )
* Mazda : Tribute , CX-7 , CX-9 ( tribute Control Trac II , based )
* Mercury : Milan , Montego , Mariner
( Montego Haldex Traction - based )
* Mitsubishi Outlander ( current generation )
* Nissan Murano automatic with manual lockup switch
* Porsche 911 AWD variants ( a version of BorgWarner ITM3e ) — excluding the 964-series Porsche 911 Carrera 4 31/69 planetary center differential * Pontiac Torrent ( GMPCA )
*
Subaru low powered automatic transmission models * Subaru Legacy , Outback , Impreza , Forester , Tribeca automatic transmission models : mechanical front drive , clutch coupled rear axle .
* Suzuki : SX4 , XL7 , Aerio , Swift / Cultus based Subaru Justy .
( viscous clutch )
* Toyota RAV4 - from 2005 ( third generation only ) * Toyota Sienna AWD ( 2011 and newer only )
* Volkswagen Golf 4motion , Volkswagen Jetta 4motion , Volkswagen Tiguan 4motion ,
Volkswagen Passat ( B6 ) 4motion ( initially viscous coupling , later with Haldex Traction )
* Volvo : S40 , S60 , S80 , V50 , V70 , XC70 , XC90 ( Visco system until 2003 ; then all Haldex Traction - based ) Section::::Multi - plate clutch coupling .
Note : the above all function like 2WD when multi - plate clutch coupling is not engaged ( with exception of Subaru models ) , and like 4WD highrange in a part - time 4WD system when the clutch is engaged ( usually by computer although some allow manual control ) .
Some in this category have varying degrees of control in the torque distribution between front and rear by allowing some of the clutches in a multi - plate clutch coupling to engage and slip varying amounts .
An example of a system like this is the BorgWarner i - Trac(TM ) system .
Note :
the Haldex Traction - based car list was created from the list on Haldex Traction corporate web site : Haldex Cars .
A version of the BorgWarner ITM3e system is used on 2006 and up Porsche 911TT 's .
The Borg - Warner ITM 3e is also used in the 2006-now Hyundai Santa Fe and the Hyundai Tucson .
In the Hyundais , the ITM 3e acts like a full - time AWD with 95:5 normal torque split .
In extreme conditions , the system can be locked in a 50:50 split via the 4WD LOCK button .
PART - TIME Section::::Part - time .
These are vehicles that have no center differential .
Since there is no center differential to allow for speed differences between the front and rear wheels when turning , a small amount of tire slippage must occur during turns .
When used on slick surfaces , this is not a problem , but when turning on dry pavement , the tires grip , then are forced to slip , then grip again , and so on , until the turn is completed .
This causes the vehicle to exhibit a ' hopping ' sensation .
Using an engaged part - time 4WD system on a hard surface is not recommended , as damage to the drive - line eventually occurs .
*
Chevrolet Rounded - Line K Fleetside , K Stepside , K Blazer , and K Suburban - conventional four - wheel drive ( 1973 - 1987 ) or shift - on - the - move four - wheel drive ( 1981 - 1987 )
two - speed New Process 205 or 208 transfer case .
0:100
torque split in Two High .
50:50 torque split lock in Four High and Four Low .
An Eaton Automatic Differential Lock was optional for the rear hypoid differential .
Note Rounded - Line " K " Pickups and Utilities were temporarily renamed to " V " for 1987
* Chevrolet Tahoe , Trailblazer ( LT1 and LT3 models only ) , Tracker , Suburban , Silverado , Avalanche , Colorado , S-10 series , K5 Blazer * Dodge Power Wagon ( a Ram version with front and rear differential locks )
* Dodge Ram , Dakota * Dodge Nitro ( Quadra - Trac 2 )
* Ford F series
* Ford Explorer ( 1991 - 1994 ) & Sport Trac
* Ford Ranger
* Geo Tracker * GMC Rounded - Line K Wideside , K Fenderside , K Jimmy , and K Suburban - conventional four - wheel drive ( 1973 - 1987 ) or shift - on - the - move four - wheel drive ( 1981 - 1987 )
two - speed New Process 205 or 208 transfer case .
0:100
torque split in Two High .
50:50 torque split lock in Four High and Four Low .
An Eaton Automatic Differential Lock was optional for the rear hypoid differential .
Note Rounded - Line " K " Pickups and Utilities were temporarily renamed to " V " for 1987
* GMC Envoy , Yukon , Sierra , Jimmy , Sonoma * Infiniti QX56 ( All - mode 4WD )
Auto - engages 4WD with slip * Isuzu i - series , Isuzu Wizard *
Jeep Cherokee ( Quadra - Trac 2 )
* Jeep Cherokee ( XJ ) , Jeep Comanche , Jeep Grand Cherokee ( ZJ ) , Jeep Liberty ( Command - Trac )
* Jeep Wrangler ( Rubicon model has locking front and rear differentials )
* Kia Sorento ( some 2002 - 2009 models with 2WD/4HI/4LO - mostly LX )
* Land Rover Series
I , II & III ( except V8 models )
*
Lincoln Mark LT * Mazda B - series
* Mercedes - Benz G - Class * Mitsubishi Raider * Nissan Patrol
*
Nissan Terrano II
* Nissan Armada , Pathfinder ( All - mode 4WD )
Auto - engages 4WD with slip * Nissan Titan , Xterra , Frontier ( rear locker an option ) * Subaru Loyale , GL / DL , BRAT Front/4wd/4wd lo , Justy 4WD * Suzuki Sidekick ( pre-2005 models , and XL-7 ) , Jimny , Vitara
*
Toyota Hilux
*
Toyota Tacoma ( rear locking differential optional )
* Toyota Tundra TRD * Toyota FJ Cruiser ( automatic transmission models ) ( also locking rear differential )
* Toyota 4Runner ( only SR5 and pre 2010 Limited V6 models , 2010 Trail edition V6 models ) ( also locking rear differential on 2010 V6 ) SEE ALSO * Four - wheel drive in Formula One *
Limited slip differential * Off - road vehicle
* Sport utility vehicle
*
Dune bashing
* Rock crawling
* 4WS * Transfer case FOOTNOTES
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS