PLUS - MINUS Plus−minus
( + /− , ± , plus / minus ) is a sports statistic used to measure a player 's impact on the game , represented by the difference between their team 's total scoring versus their opponent 's when the player is in the game .
In ice hockey , it measures a player 's goal differential .
When an even - strength goal or shorthanded goal is scored , the plus – minus statistic is increased by one ( " plus " ) for those players on the ice for the team scoring the goal ; the plus – minus statistic is decreased by one ( " minus " ) for those players on the ice for the team allowing the goal .
Power play or penalty shot goals are excluded .
An empty net does not matter for the calculation of plus – minus .
The statistic is sometimes called the plus−minus rating .
A player 's plus−minus statistic is calculated for each game played , to provide a more meaningful measure over a full season .
The statistic is directly affected by overall team performance , influenced by both the offensive and defensive performance of the team as a whole .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The NHL 's Montreal Canadiens were the first team to track the plus−minus of its players , starting sometime in the 1950s .
Other teams followed in the early 1960s , and the NHL started officially compiling the statistic for the season .
While Emile Francis is often credited with devising the system , he only popularized and adapted the system in use by the Canadiens .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The NHL awarded the NHL Plus - Minus Award each year to the player with the highest plus−minus statistic during the regular season from to .
The Western Hockey League ( WHL ) awards the WHL Plus - Minus Award each year to one of its players .
NOTABLE PLAYERS ( NHL ) Section::::Notable players ( NHL ) .
Only four players have been multiple single - season leaders for the plus−minus statistic : defenseman Bobby Orr led the league six times , Wayne Gretzky led the league four times , while John LeClair and Chris Pronger were two - time leaders .
One player on the career top five list , Ray Bourque , was never a single - season leader , while all - time career leader Larry Robinson only set the single - season mark once .
Two players on the season top five list , defensemen Bobby Orr and Dallas Smith , achieved their high mark playing as a defense tandem on the same Boston Bruins team .
Since the NHL started tracking the plus−minus statistic in the season , the top achievements have been : Top 5 :
Season high * Bobby Orr , , +124 * Larry Robinson , , +120
* Wayne Gretzky , , +100
* Dallas Smith 1970–71 , +98
* Guy Lafleur , 1976–77 , +89
* Steve Shutt , 1976 - 77 +89 Top 5 :
Career high * Larry Robinson , career , +722
* Bobby Orr , career , +582
* Ray Bourque , career , +527
* Wayne Gretzky , career , +520
* Bobby Clarke , career , +507 Top 3 :
Season low * Bill Mikkelson , , −82 * Jack Lynch , 1974–75 , −69 * Greg Joly , 1974–75 , −68 Top 3 : Career low * Bob Stewart , career , −257
* Don Lever , career , −248
* Gary Croteau , career , −234 Top 2 :
Single game high
* Tom Bladon , Dec 11 , 1977 , +10
* Theoren Fleury , Feb 10 , 1993 , +9 BASKETBALL Section::::Basketball .
Although the statistic was pioneered in the sport of hockey , it has found its way into use in other sports and areas of life .
For instance , the NBA 's Houston Rockets first utilized a modified version of the stat , which helped reveal the unheralded effectiveness of light - scoring Shane Battier .
It is now in regular use throughout the NBA .
ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL Section::::Association football .
A plus−minus statistic has been used in sports economics to analyze the degree of competitive balance over time in association football .
REFERENCES