THE BERKSHIRES
The Berkshires ( ) are a highland geologic region located in the western parts of Massachusetts and Connecticut .
The term " Berkshires " is normally used by locals in reference to the portion of the Vermont - based Green Mountains that extends south into western Massachusetts ; the portion extending further south into northwestern Connecticut is locally referred to as either the Northwest Hills or Litchfield Hills .
Also referred to as the Berkshire Hills , Berkshire Mountains , and Berkshire Plateau , the region enjoys a vibrant tourism industry based on music , arts , and recreation .
Geologically , the mountains are a range of the Appalachian Mountains .
The Berkshires were named among the 200 Last Great Places by The Nature Conservancy .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
The term " The Berkshires " has overlapping but non - identical political , cultural , and geographic definitions .
POLITICAL Section::::Political .
Politically , Berkshire County , Massachusetts , was formed as a governing body in 1761 ; it includes the western extremity of the state , with its western boundary bordering New York and its eastern boundary roughly paralleling the watershed divide separating the Connecticut River watershed from the Housatonic River - Hoosic River watersheds .
CULTURAL Section::::Cultural .
Culturally , the term " Berkshires " includes all of the highland region in western Massachusetts west of the Connecticut River and lower Westfield River , and ( under the name " Litchfield Hills " ) all of northwest Connecticut from the Farmington River valley in the northern part of the state in a diagonal arc west to Winsted and Litchfield , then southwest to Lake Candlewood on the New York border and ending in Ridgefield , Connecticut .
The cultural region also includes the Taconic Mountains bordering New York , which are geologically distinct from the Berkshires orogeny .
Southwest Vermont and the Taconic region of New York are occasionally grouped with the Berkshires cultural region .
Sir Francis Bernard , the royal governor ( in office 1760 - 1769 ) , named the area " Berkshire " to honor his home county in England .
GEOGRAPHIC Section::::Geographic .
Geologically and physically , the Berkshires are the southern continuation of the Green Mountains of Vermont , distinct from them only by their lower average elevation and by virtue of what side of the border they fall on .
In physical geography , the Berkshires extend from the Housatonic River and Hoosic River valleys in western Massachusetts , to the Connecticut River valley in north - central Massachusetts , and to the foot of the lower Westfield River valley in south - central Massachusetts .
In Connecticut , where they are referred to as the Litchfield Hills , they extend from the upper Housatonic River valley in the northwest part of the state , south along the western border of the state , east to the Farmington River valley in north - central Connecticut , south to the Quinnipiac River valley in central Connecticut , then southwest to the Housatonic River valley in southwest Connecticut .
Geologically , the Berkshires are bordered on the west by the Taconic Mountains , the marble valleys of the Hoosic River and Housatonic River and , further south , by the Hudson Highlands ; to the east , they are bordered by the Metacomet Ridge geology .
They are on the average lower and less prominent than the Green Mountains of Vermont , and form a broad , dissected plateau punctuated by hills and peaks and cut by river valleys .
The Berkshires topography gradually diminishes in profile and elevation from west to east and from north to south , except where rivers have cut deep gorges and sharp bluff faces into the Berkshire plateau .
FORMATION Section::::Formation .
The Berkshires and related Green Mountains formed over half a billion years ago when Africa collided with North America , pushing up the Appalachian Mountains and forming the bedrock of the Berkshires .
Erosion over hundreds of millions of years wore these mountains down to the hills that we see today .
ELEVATION Section::::Elevation .
The average regional elevation of the Berkshires ranges from about .
One of the high points is Spruce Mountain , at .
The highest point in the Berkshires physiographic region is Crum Hill , , in the town of Monroe ; however , nearby Mount Greylock of the Taconic Mountains , at the highest point in the state of Massachusetts , is considered the high point of the Berkshires cultural region .
RIVERS Section::::Rivers .
The Housatonic River , Hoosic River , Westfield River , and Deerfield River
watersheds drain the Berkshires region in Massachusetts ; in Connecticut the main river drainages are the Farmington River , the Naugatuck River , the Shepaug River , and the Housatonic River .
COUNTIES Section::::Counties .
The Berkshire mountain range runs through :
* Berkshire County , Massachusetts ( all towns )
* Hartford County , Connecticut ( Hartland , Granby )
* Franklin County , Massachusetts ( western part ) * Hampden County , Massachusetts ( Tolland , Chester , Granville , Blandford )
* Hampshire County , Massachusetts ( western part ) * Litchfield County , Connecticut ( all towns ) MUNICIPALITIES Section::::Municipalities .
The largest municipalities associated with the Berkshires cultural region include Pittsfield , North Adams , Great Barrington , Williamstown , Stockbridge , Lee , and Lenox , Massachusetts .
HISTORY Section::::History .
During the American Revolution a Continental Army force under Henry Knox brought captured cannons from Fort Ticonderoga by ox - drawn sleds south along the west bank of the Hudson River from the fort to Albany , where he then crossed the Hudson .
Knox and his men continued east through the Berkshires and finally arrived in Boston .
This feat , known as the " Noble train of artillery " , was accomplished in the dead of winter , 1775 - 1776 .
ECOLOGY Section::::Ecology .
The Berkshires lie within the New England / Acadian forests ecoregion .
Similarly , the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in Massachusetts ( Griffith et al . 1994 ) has defined six ecoregions within this area : Taconic Mountains , Western New England Marble Valleys , Lower Berkshire Hills , Berkshire Highlands , Vermont Piedmont , and Berkshire Transition .
Each region is distinct from the others , providing a unique habitat assemblage .
Much of the Hoosic and Housatonic River valleys have underlying bedrock limestone and marble which contribute to calcareous wetlands unique in Massachusetts .
The alkaline pH waters support a diversity of plants and animals intolerant of more acidic waters , some of which are state - listed rare or endangered .
Combined with the rich mesic forests ranging from the northern hardwood to the taiga or sub - alpine , the Berkshires have a valuable , biologically diverse ecosystem .
The classic study of the vegetation of the Berkshire Highlands was Egler 's 1940 monograph , covering the flora of an area stretching roughly from Pittsfield , Massachusetts , in the west to Hatfield , Massachusetts , in the east , and from Goshen , Connecticut , in the south to the Vermont border in the north .
Today , efforts are being made by many organizations to preserve and manage this region for biological diversity and sustainable human development .
See also : Natural History of the Berkshires .
TOURISM Section::::Tourism .
The Berkshires have numerous trails , including part of the Appalachian Trail , large tracts of wilderness and parks like Kent Falls , the tallest waterfall in Connecticut , Berkshire Botanical Garden and Hebert Arboretum
The area includes Bash Bish Falls , the tallest waterfall in Massachusetts .
The Berkshire region is noted as a center for the visual and performing arts ; its art museums include the Norman Rockwell Museum , the Clark Art Institute , the Massachusetts Museum of Contemporary Art ( Mass MoCA ) , and the Williams College Museum of Art ( WCMA ) .
Performing - arts institutions in the Berkshires include Tanglewood Music Center and Boston University Tanglewood Institute in Lenox , the summer home of the Boston Symphony Orchestra ; the Bang on a Can Summer Festival for contemporary music in North Adams ; Shakespeare & Company in Lenox ; summer stock theatre festivals such as the Williamstown Theatre Festival in Williamstown , Barrington Stage Company in Pittsfield , and the Berkshire Theatre Festival in Stockbridge ; and America 's first and longest - running dance festival , Jacob 's Pillow , in the town of Becket .
SEE ALSO
* BerkShares
* Famous Berkshire Cottages :
* Naumkeag * Edith Wharton 's The Mount * Ventfort Hall * Litchfield Hills * Taconic Mountains
* Geography of Massachusetts * List of mountains in Massachusetts
* Berkshire , England REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Berkshire Visitors Bureau * Massachusetts State Parks in the Berkshires