STUDIO CITY , LOS ANGELES Studio City is a neighborhood in the city of Los Angeles , California , in the San Fernando Valley .
It is named after the studio lot that was established in the area by film producer Mack Sennett in 1927 , now known as CBS Studio Center .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Originally known as Laurelwood , the area Studio City occupies was formerly part of Rancho Ex - Mission San Fernando .
This land changed hands several times during the late 19th Century and was eventually owned by James Boon Lankershim ( 1850–1931 ) , and eight other developers who organized the Lankershim Ranch Land and Water Company .
In 1899 , however , the area lost most water rights to Los Angeles and therefore subdivision and sale of land for farming became untenable .
Construction of the Los Angeles Aqueduct began in 1908 and water reached the San Fernando Valley in November , 1913 .
Real estate boomed , and a syndicate led by Harry Chandler , business manager of the Los Angeles Times , with Hobart Johnstone Whitley , Isaac Van Nuys , and James Boon Lankershim acquired the remaining of the southern half of the former Mission lands — everything west of the Lankershim town limits and south of present - day Roscoe Boulevard excepting the Rancho Encino .
Whitley platted the area of present - day Studio City from portions of the existing town of Lankershim as well as the eastern part of the new acquisition .
In 1927 , Mack Sennett began building a new studio on 20 acres donated by the land developer .
The area around the studio was named Studio City .
In 1955 , Studio City 's Station 78 became the first racially integrated station in the Los Angeles City Fire Department .
POPULATION Section::::Population .
The 2000 U.S. census counted 34,034 residents in the 6.31-square - mile Studio City
neighborhood—5,395 people per square mile , among the lowest population densities for the city but about average for the county .
In 2008 , the city estimated that the resident population had increased to 37,201 .
In 2000 , the median age for residents , 38 , was considered old for city and county neighborhoods ; the percent of residents age 19 and older were among the county 's highest .
The neighborhood was considered " not especially diverse " ethnically , with a high percent of White residents .
The breakdown was whites , 78 % ; Latinos , 8.7 % ; Asians , 5.4 % ; blacks , 3.7 % ; and others , 4.1 % .
Iran ( 7 % ) and the United Kingdom ( 6.7 % ) were the most common places of birth for the 21.1 % of the residents who were born abroad — a low percentage for Los Angeles .
The median yearly household income in 2008 dollars was $ 75,657 , considered high for the city .
The percent of households earning $ 125,000 and up was high for Los Angeles County .
The average household size of 1.9 people was low when compared to the rest of the city and the county .
Renters occupied 55.9 % of the housing stock and house- or apartment - owners held 44.1 % .
In 2000 , there were 837 families headed by single parents , the rate of 11.2 % being low for the city of Los Angeles .
There were 2,591 veterans , 8.8 % of the population , a high figure for the city .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
According to the Mapping L.A. project of the Los Angeles Times , Studio City is bordered on the north by Valley Village , on the east by Toluca Lake and Universal City , on the south by Hollywood Hills West , on the southwest by Beverly Crest and on the west by Sherman Oaks .
NEARBY PLACES
Section::::Nearby places .
Relation of Studio City to nearby places , not necessarily contiguous : NOTABLE PEOPLE FILM AND TELEVISION MUSIC
LITERATURE
* Elizabeth Forsythe Hailey , journalist and playwright * Lorin Morgan - Richards , author and illustrator , primarily of children 's books .
* Jerry Pournelle , science - fiction author and blogger * Israel Regardie , occultist OTHER * Zack Greinke , Major League Baseball * Peter Hurkos , allegedly manifested extra - sensory perception
* James B. Potter , Jr. , Los Angeles City Council member * Jerome Vered , record - setting contestant on the game show Jeopardy !
* Joel Wachs , Los Angeles City Council member
* Sam Yorty , mayor of Los Angeles EDUCATION Section::::Education .
Almost half of Studio City residents aged 25 and older ( 49.4 % ) had earned a four - year degree by 2000 , a high percentage for both the city and the county .
The percentage of those residents with a master 's degree was also high for the county .
SCHOOLS
Section::::Schools .
Schools within the Studio City boundaries are : * Harvard - Westlake School , private , 10 - 12 , 3700 Coldwater Canyon .
* Campbell Hall School , private , K-12 , 4533 Laurel Canyon Boulevard
* Walter Reed Middle School , LAUSD , 4525 Irvine Avenue * Bridges Academy , private , 3921 Laurel Canyon Boulevard
* ABC Little School , private elementary , 11728 Moorpark Street * Oakwood Elementary School , private , 11230 Moorpark Street * St. Charles Borromeo , private elementary , 10850 Moorpark Street * Berenece Carlson Home Hospital , LAUSD special education , 10952 Whipple Street * Rio Vista Elementary School , LAUSD , 4243 Satsuma Avenue * Carpenter Community Charter , 3909 Carpenter Avenue
*
Morning Star Christian Academy , private , 11000 Ventura Boulevard PUBLIC
LIBRARY
* Los Angeles Public Library operates the Studio City branch .
PARKS AND RECREATION Section::::Parks and recreation .
The Studio City Recreation Center ( also known as Beeman Park ) is in Studio City .
It has an auditorium , barbecue pits , a lighted baseball diamond , an outdoor running and walking track , lighted outdoor basketball courts , a children 's play area , picnic tables , unlighted tennis courts , and many programs and classes including the second - largest youth baseball program in the public parks .
Moorpark Park , an unstaffed pocket park in Studio City , has a children 's play area and picnic tables .
Woodbridge Park on the eastern border of Studio City has a children and toddler 's play area .
Wilacre Park , an unstaffed park , is in Studio City .
In addition , Studio City has the Studio City Mini - Park , an unstaffed pocket park .
NOTABLE PLACES
* CBS Studio Center
* Dr. Betty Berzon Place ( a street )
* Fryman Canyon Park * Wilacre Park * Los Angeles River walk
* Exterior of Brady Bunch house * Several buildings by Rudolph Michael Schindler LOCAL GOVERNMENT Section::::Local government .
Studio City is part of the city of Los Angeles and sits entirely within City Council District 2 , which is represented by Los Angeles City Councilman Paul Krekorian .
Studio City is represented to the city of Los Angeles by the Studio City Neighborhood Council , one of 90 such Neighborhood Councils in the city created and funded by the city of Los Angeles .
The area is also represented by Los Angeles County District 3 Supervisor Sheila Kuehl , State Senator Robert Hertzberg , Studio City is located in the new 18th District covering most of the Eastern San Fernando Valley , California state Assemblyman Adrin Nazarian and U.S. Rep. Brad Sherman .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Studio City Neighborhood Council
* Studio City Residents Association
* Studio City Chamber of Commerce
* Comments about living in Studio City * Studio City crime map and statistics