HOOK ( FILM )
Hook is a 1991 American fantasy adventure film directed by Steven Spielberg and written by James V. Hart and Malia Scotch Marmo .
It stars Robin Williams as Peter Banning / Peter Pan , Dustin Hoffman as Captain Hook , Julia Roberts as Tinker Bell , Bob Hoskins as Smee , Maggie Smith as Wendy , Caroline Goodall as Moira Banning , and Charlie Korsmo as Jack Banning .
It acts as a sequel to J. M. Barrie 's 1911 novel Peter and Wendy focusing on an adult Peter Pan who has forgotten all about his childhood .
In his new life , he is known as Peter Banning , a successful but unimaginative and workaholic corporate lawyer with a wife ( Wendy 's granddaughter ) and two children .
However , when Captain Hook , the enemy of his past , kidnaps his children , he returns to Neverland in order to save them .
Along the journey , he reclaims the memories of his past and becomes a better person .
Spielberg began developing the film in the early 1980s with Walt Disney Productions and Paramount Pictures , which would have followed the storyline seen in the 1924 silent film and 1953 animated film .
It entered pre - production in 1985 , but Spielberg abandoned the project .
James V. Hart developed the script with director Nick Castle and TriStar Pictures before Spielberg decided to direct in 1989 .
It was shot almost entirely on sound stages at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City , California .
It received mixed reviews from critics , and while it was a commercial success , its box office take was lower than expected .
It was nominated in five categories at the 64th Academy Awards .
It also spawned merchandise , including video games , action figures , and comic book adaptations .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Peter Banning is a successful corporate lawyer living in San Francisco .
Though he loves his family , his workaholic lifestyle causes him to spend little time with his wife , Moira , and children , 12-year - old Jack and 7-year - old Maggie , and even miss Jack 's Little League Baseball game , which is straining his relationships with them .
They fly to London to visit Moira 's grandmother , Wendy Darling .
Wendy is ostensibly the true creator of the Peter Pan stories , with J. M. Barrie , her childhood neighbor , merely having transcribed the tales .
During their stay , Peter angrily yells at the children when their playing disturbs his important call , leading to an audacious argument with Moira , who throws his cellphone out of the window .
Peter , Moira and Wendy go out to a charity dinner honoring Wendy 's long life of charitable service to orphans .
Upon their return , they discover the house has been ransacked and the children have been abducted .
A cryptic ransom note , signed Captain James Hook , has been pinned to the playroom door with a dagger .
Wendy confesses to Peter that the stories of Peter Pan are true and that Peter himself is Pan , having lost all of his childhood memories when he fell in love with Moira .
In disbelief , he gets drunk up in the playroom , but Tinker Bell appears and takes him to Neverland to rescue his children from Hook .
Hook and his pirates confront Peter but become frustrated when they realize he does not remember his former life and identity .
Tinker Bell makes a deal with Hook that Peter will regain his memories in three days for a climactic battle .
He is reacquainted with the Mermaids and meets the new generation of Lost Boys , led by Rufio , who refuse to believe that he is the real Peter Pan .
They help him train and in the process , he regains his imagination and lost youth .
One of them , Thud Butt , gives him marbles that were left behind by Tootles , who is now an old man living with Wendy .
Elsewhere , Smee talks Hook into manipulating Jack and Maggie into loving him to break Peter 's will .
While Maggie refuses to be taken in , Jack comes to view Hook as a father figure .
Hook arranges a makeshift baseball game for Jack and Peter watches as Hook treats Jack like his own son .
Horrified at seeing Jack be receptive to it , Peter runs off and tries to fly , but is led to the old treehouse of the Lost Boys by his own shadow .
Tinker Bell helps him remember his childhood , how he fell in love with Moira , and he realizes his happy thought is being a father .
He flies up into the sky , returning as Peter Pan , and Rufio surrenders his sword and leadership back to him .
The child - minded Peter returns to Tinker Bell who grows human - sized and kisses him romantically , confessing her unrequited love for him and reminding him of his reason for being in Neverland .
On the third day , he and the Lost Boys attack the pirates as promised , leading to a lengthy battle .
He rescues Maggie and promises to be a better father to both her and Jack .
Rufio fights a duel with Hook but is mortally wounded and dies in Peter 's arms .
Peter and Hook duel , leading to Peter 's victory .
Refusing to leave honorably , Hook attacks Peter one last time , but the stuffed crocodile , whom Hook once feared , springs to life and his mouth falls on top of him , eating Hook .
Peter gives his sword to Thud Butt , promoting him the new leader of the Lost Boys , and leaves Neverland for good .
He awakens in Kensington Gardens , meeting a sweeper who bears a strong resemblance to Smee and bidding farewell to a tearful Tinker Bell .
He climbs up the drain pipe of Wendy 's house , reuniting and reconciling with his family and returning Tootles ' marbles to him .
Tootles discovers the bag contains pixie dust , and he flies out the window to return to Neverland .
Wendy wonders if Peter 's adventures are over , but he replies , " To live would be an awfully big adventure " and Tootles flies away .
CAST
* Robin Williams as Peter Banning / Peter Pan * Ryan Francis as teenage
Peter Pan * Max Hoffman as young Peter Pan * Matthew Van Ginkel as baby Peter Pan * Dustin Hoffman as Captain James Hook * Julia Roberts as Tinker Bell * Lisa Wilhoit as Tinker Bell in a flashback in which Peter is a baby * Bob Hoskins as Mr. Smee * Charlie Korsmo as Jack Banning * Amber Scott as Maggie Banning * Maggie Smith as Wendy Darling
* Gwyneth Paltrow as teenage Wendy Darling * Caroline Goodall as Moira Banning * Dante Basco as Rufio * Jasen Fisher as Ace * Raushan Hammond as Thud Butt * Isaiah Robinson as Pockets * James Madio as Do n't Ask * Arthur Malet as the older Tootles * Laurel Cronin as Liza ,
Wendy 's maid
* Phil Collins as Inspector Good , the British police detective
* Thomas Tulak as Too Small * Alex Zuckerman as Latchboy * Ahmad Stoner as No
Nap
* Kelly Rowan as Peter Pan 's mother
* David Crosby as Tickles , a member of Hook 's pirate crew * Tony Burton and Nick Tate as Bill Jukes and Noodler , members of Hook 's pirate crew who serve as his security entourage * Glenn Close as Gutless , a male pirate who is punished by Hook * Jimmy Buffett ( uncredited ) as the pirate who attempts to steal Peter 's shoes * George Lucas and Carrie Fisher ( both uncredited ) as the kissing couple on the bridge who are sprinkled with pixie dust as Tinker Bell carries Peter to Neverland
PRODUCTION INSPIRATION Section::::Production .
Section::::Inspiration .
Spielberg found close personal connection to the Peter Pan story from his own childhood .
The troubled relationship between Peter and Jack in the sequel echoed Spielberg 's relationship with his own father .
Previous Spielberg films that explored a dysfunctional father - son relationship included E.T. the Extra - Terrestrial and Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade .
Peter 's " quest for success " paralleled Spielberg starting out as a film director and transforming into a Hollywood business magnate .
" I think a lot of people today are losing their imagination because they are work - driven .
They are so self - involved with work and success and arriving at the next plateau that children and family almost become incidental .
I have even experienced it myself when I have been on a very tough shoot
and I 've not seen my kids except on weekends .
They ask for my time and I ca n't give it to them because I 'm working . "
Like Peter at the beginning of the film , Spielberg has a fear of flying .
He feels that Peter 's " enduring quality " in the storyline is simply to fly . "
Anytime anything flies , whether it 's Superman , Batman , or E.T. , it 's got to be a tip of the hat to Peter Pan , " Spielberg reflected in a 1992 interview . "
Peter Pan was the first time I saw anybody fly .
Before I saw Superman , before I saw Batman , and of course before I saw any superheroes , my first memory of anybody flying is in Peter Pan . "
PRE - PRODUCTION Section::::Pre - production .
J. M. Barrie considered writing a story in which Peter Pan grew up ; his 1920 notes for the latest stage revival of Peter Pan included possible titles for another play :
The Man Who Could n't Grow Up or The Old Age of Peter Pan .
The genesis of the film started when Spielberg 's mother often read him Peter and Wendy as a bedtime story .
He explained in 1985 , " When I was eleven years old I actually directed the story during a school production .
I have always felt like Peter Pan .
I still feel like Peter Pan .
It has been very hard for me to grow up , I 'm a victim of the Peter Pan syndrome . "
In the early 1980s , Spielberg began to develop a film with Walt Disney Pictures that would have closely followed the storyline of the 1924 silent film and 1953 animated film .
He also considered directing it as a musical with Michael Jackson in the lead .
Jackson expressed interest in the part , but was not interested in Spielberg 's vision of an adult Peter Pan who had forgotten about his past .
The project was taken to Paramount Pictures , where James V. Hart wrote the first script with Dustin Hoffman already cast as Captain Hook .
It entered pre - production in 1985 for filming to begin at sound stages in England .
Elliot Scott had been hired as production designer .
With the birth of his first son , Max , in 1985 , Spielberg decided to drop out .
" I decided not to make Peter Pan when I had my first child , " Spielberg commented .
" I did n't want to go to London and have seven kids on wires in front of blue screens .
I wanted to be home as a dad . "
Around this time , he considered directing Big , which carried similar motifs and themes with it .
In 1987 , he " permanently abandoned " it , feeling he expressed his childhood and adult themes in Empire of the Sun .
Meanwhile , Paramount and Hart moved forward on production with Nick Castle as director .
Hart began to work on a new storyline when his son , Jake , showed his family a drawing .
" We asked Jake what it was and he said it was a crocodile eating Captain Hook , but that the crocodile really did n't eat him , he got away , " Hart reflected . " As it happens , I had been trying to crack Peter Pan for years , but I did n't just want to do a remake .
So I went , ' Wow .
Hook is not dead .
The crocodile is .
We 've all been fooled ' .
In 1986 our family was having dinner and Jake said , ' Daddy , did Peter Pan ever grow up ? '
My immediate response was , ' No , of course not ' .
And Jake said , ' But what if he did ? '
I realized that Peter did grow up , just like all of us baby boomers who are now in our forties .
I patterned him after several of my friends on Wall Street , where the pirates wear three - piece suits and ride in limos . "
FILMING Section::::Filming .
By 1989 , Ian Rathbone changed the title to Hook , and took it from Paramount to TriStar Pictures , headed by Mike Medavoy , who was Spielberg 's first talent agent .
Robin Williams signed on , but he and Hoffman had creative differences with Castle .
Medavoy saw the film as a vehicle for Spielberg and Castle was dismissed , but paid a $ 500,000 settlement .
Dodi Fayed , who owned certain rights to make a Peter Pan film , sold his interest to TriStar in exchange for an executive producer credit .
Spielberg briefly worked together with Hart to rewrite the script before hiring Malia Scotch Marmo to rewrite Captain Hook 's dialog and Carrie Fisher for Tinker Bell 's .
The Writers Guild of America gave Hart and Marmo screenplay credit , while Hart and Castle were credited with the story .
Fisher went uncredited .
Filming began on February 19 , 1991 , occupying nine sound stages at Sony Pictures Studios in Culver City , California .
Stage 30 housed the Neverland Lost Boys playground , while Stage 10 supplied Captain Hook 's ship cabin .
Hidden hydraulics were installed to rock the setpiece to simulate a swaying ship , but the filmmakers found the movement distracted the dialogue , so the idea was dropped .
Stage 27 housed the full - sized Jolly Roger and the surrounding Pirate Wharf .
Industrial Light & Magic provided the visual effects sequences .
This marked the beginning of Tony Swatton 's career , as he was asked to make weaponry for the film .
It was financed by Amblin Entertainment and TriStar Pictures , with TriStar distributing it .
Spielberg brought on John Napier as a " visual consultant " , having been impressed with his work on Cats .
The original production budget was set at $ 48 million , but ended up between $ 60–80 million .
The primary reason for the increased budget was the shooting schedule , which ran 40 days over its original 76-day schedule .
Spielberg explained , " It was all my fault .
I began to work at a slower pace than I usually do . "
Spielberg 's on - set relationship with Julia Roberts was troubled , and he later admitted in an interview with 60 Minutes , " It was an unfortunate time for us to work together . "
In a 1999 Vanity Fair interview , Roberts said that Spielberg 's comments " really hurt my feelings .
" She " could n't believe this person that I knew and trusted was actually hesitating to come to my defense . . .
it was the first time that I felt I had a turncoat in my midst . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film score was composed and conducted by John Williams .
He was brought in at an early stage when Spielberg was considering making the film as a musical .
Accordingly , he wrote around eight songs for the project at this stage .
The idea was later abandoned .
Most of his song ideas were incorporated into the instrumental score , though two songs survive as songs in the finished film : " We Do n't Wanna Grow Up " and " When You 're Alone " , both with lyrics by Leslie Bricusse .
The original 1991 issue was released by Epic Records .
In 2012 , a limited edition of the soundtrack , called Hook : Expanded Original Motion Picture Soundtrack , was released by La - La Land Records and Sony Music .
It contains almost the complete score with alternates and unused material .
It also contains liner notes that explain the film 's production and score recording .
Commercial songs from film , but not on soundtrack
* " Pick'em Up " – Music by John Williams and lyrics by Leslie Bricusse
* " Take Me Out to the Ball Game " – Written by Jack Norworth and Albert Von Tilzer VIDEO GAMES
Section::::Video games .
A video game based on the film and bearing the same name was released for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System in 1991 .
The game was released for additional game consoles in 1992 .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Spielberg , Williams , and Hoffman did not take salaries for the film .
Their deal called for them to split 40 % of TriStar Pictures ' gross revenues .
They were to receive $ 20 million from the first $ 50 million in gross theatrical film rentals , with TriStar keeping the next $ 70 million in rentals before the three resumed receiving their percentage .
The film was released in North America on December 11 , 1991 , earning $ 13,522,535 in its opening weekend .
It went on to gross $ 119,654,823 in North America and $ 181,200,000 in foreign countries , accumulating a worldwide total of $ 300,854,823 .
It is the sixth - highest - grossing " pirate - themed " film , behind all five films in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series .
In North America totals , it was the sixth - highest - grossing film in 1991 , and fourth - highest - grossing worldwide .
It ended up making a profit of $ 50 million for the studio , yet it was still declared a financial disappointment , having been overshadowed by the release of Disney 's Beauty and the Beast and a decline in box - office receipts compared to the previous years .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 28 % of critics have given the film a positive review , based on 43 reviews , with an average rating of 4.5/10 .
The site 's consensus states : " The look of Hook is lively indeed but Steven Spielberg directs on autopilot here , giving in too quickly to his sentimental , syrupy qualities . "
On Metacritic , the film has a 52 out of 100 rating , based on reviews from 19 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times stated that " The sad thing about the screenplay for Hook is that it 's so correctly titled : This whole construction is really nothing more than a hook on which to hang a new version of the Peter Pan story .
No effort is made to involve Peter 's magic in the changed world he now inhabits , and little thought has been given to Captain Hook 's extraordinary persistence in wanting to revisit the events of the past .
The failure in Hook is its inability to re - imagine the material , to find something new , fresh or urgent to do with the Peter Pan myth .
Lacking that , Spielberg should simply have remade the original story , straight , for this generation . "
Peter Travers of Rolling Stone magazine felt it would " only appeal to the baby boomer generation " and highly criticized the sword - fighting choreography .
Vincent Canby of The New York Times felt the story structure was not well balanced , feeling Spielberg depended too much on art direction .
Hal Hinson of The Washington Post was one of few who gave it a positive review .
Hinson elaborated on crucial themes of children , adulthood , and loss of innocence .
However , he observed that Spielberg " was stuck too much in a theme park world " .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
The film was nominated for five categories at the 64th Academy Awards .
This included Best Production Design ( Norman Garwood , Garrett Lewis ) ( lost to Bugsy ) , Best Costume Design ( lost to Bugsy ) , Best Visual Effects ( lost to ) , Best Makeup ( lost to Terminator 2 : Judgment Day ) and Best Original Song ( " When You 're Alone " , lost to Beauty and the Beast ) .
It lost the Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film to Aladdin , in which Williams co - starred , while cinematographer Dean Cundey was nominated for his work by the American Society of Cinematographers .
Hoffman was nominated for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy ( lost to Williams for The Fisher King ) .
John Williams was given a Grammy Award nomination for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media ; Julia Roberts received a Golden Raspberry Award nomination for Worst Supporting Actress ( lost to Sean Young as the dead twin in A Kiss Before Dying ) .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
In 2011 , Spielberg told Entertainment Weekly : " There are parts of Hook I love .
I 'm really proud of my work right up through
Peter being hauled off in the parachute out the window , heading for Neverland .
I 'm a little less proud of the Neverland sequences , because I 'm uncomfortable with that highly stylized world that today , of course , I would probably have done with live - action character work inside a completely digital set .
But we did n't have the technology to do it then , and my imagination only went as far as building physical sets and trying to paint trees blue and red . "
Spielberg gave a more blunt assessment in a 2013 interview on Kermode & Mayo 's Film Review Show : "
I wanna see Hook again because I so do n't like that movie , and I 'm hoping someday
I 'll see it again and perhaps like some of it . "
In 2018 , Spielberg told Empire , " I felt like a fish out of water making Hook ...
I did n't have confidence in the script .
I had confidence in the first act
and I had confidence in the epilogue .
I did n't have confidence in the body of it . "
He added , " I did n't quite know what I was doing
and I tried to paint over my insecurity with production value , " admitting " the more insecure I felt about it , the bigger and more colorful the sets became . "
SEE ALSO
* List of films featuring miniature people
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL
LINKS
*
Sony Imagesoft 's * Ocean 's