THE LITTLE MERMAID II : RETURN TO THE SEA
The Little Mermaid II :
Return to the Sea is a 2000 American animated direct - to - video musical adventure film and a sequel to the 1989 animated film The Little Mermaid .
Directed by Jim Kammerud and Brian Smith , the story of the film takes place 12 years after the original , and focuses on Ariel and Eric 's daughter Melody , a human princess who longs to swim in the ocean despite her parents ' law that the sea is forbidden to her .
The film features the voices of Jodi Benson as Ariel , Tara Charendoff as Melody , and Pat Carroll as Morgana , the film 's new villain .
In 2008 , Disney released a third film in the Little Mermaid series , , which is a prequel to the original film .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Ariel and Eric celebrate the birth of their newborn daughter Melody on a ship at sea .
Ariel 's father King Triton presents Melody with a magic locket .
The party is interrupted by Ursula 's sister Morgana , who threatens to have Melody fed to her pet tiger shark , Undertow , unless Triton surrenders his trident to her .
Morgana then announces her plan to use the trident to avenge Ursula and take over the ocean .
Ariel and Eric work together to foil Morgana 's plan , and Triton shrinks Undertow to the size of a piranha .
Morgana escapes , eluding the attempts of King Triton 's forces to capture her and declaring that she will someday exact her revenge on both Ariel and Triton and avenge Ursula 's death .
Fearing Morgana and remembering Ursula , Ariel decides that , until Morgana is captured , they will have to withhold all knowledge of the sea world and her heritage from Melody in order to protect her .
Triton tosses the locket into the ocean , and a massive wall is built to separate the royal castle from the sea .
Triton assigns Sebastian to watch over Melody like he did with Ariel in the first film .
12 years later , Melody remains unaware of her mother 's mermaid heritage and is forbidden from ever going into the sea .
However , she has been sneaking out of the castle regularly to swim , and one day finds the locket .
Seeing her name on the locket , Melody questions her mother about it , but Ariel furiously confronts Melody and forbids her to go into the sea .
Frustrated with her mother 's refusal to answer her questions , Melody steals a small boat and sails away from home .
Melody is discovered by Undertow , who leads her straight to Morgana .
In a panic , Sebastian confesses to Ariel and Eric that Melody went out to the sea .
Meanwhile , Melody meets Morgana , who reveals that Melody 's background is marine , and uses the remains of Ursula 's magic to transform Melody into a mermaid .
Triton prepares search parties , and is convinced by Ariel and Eric to use his trident to transform Ariel back into a mermaid in order to help in the search for Melody .
Ariel searches the sea for Melody , regretting not sharing her heritage with her , while Melody explores her newfound abilities as a mermaid , and has a strong feeling that she was meant to be part of the sea .
Melody visits Morgana to thank her , only for Morgana to tell Melody that the spell was only temporary , and that she can only make the spell permanent if Melody retrieves the trident from Triton , which Morgana claims he stole from her .
Melody decides to get the trident , and during her search befriends Tip and Dash , a penguin and walrus duo who join her .
Melody succeeds in stealing the trident , and returns to Morgana , but before Melody can hand the trident over to Morgana , Ariel arrives and pleads for Melody not to give Morgana the trident .
Melody refuses to listen to Ariel , having been angered by Ariel 's decision to lie to her , and gives Morgana the trident .
With the trident in her power , Morgana reveals her true intentions , then reveals to Melody that she stole from her grandfather and throws her against the wall , trapping her in a cave by sealing the entrance with a thick layer of ice and informing her that her time as a mermaid is about to expire .
Soon afterward , Morgana 's spell on Melody wears off , causing her to revert into a human and nearly drown .
Tip and Dash manage to free her and drag her to the shore .
Morgana uses the trident 's magic to lord over the ocean , rising to the surface to gloat .
Scuttle , Triton , Sebastian , and Eric arrive , and a battle ensues against Morgana and her minions .
Melody manages to grab the trident and throws it back to Triton , who encases Morgana in a block of ice , which sinks underwater .
Melody reunites with her family , and Triton offers his granddaughter the choice of becoming a mermaid permanently .
Instead , Melody uses the trident to disintegrate the wall separating her home from the sea , reuniting the humans and the merpeople .
VOICE CAST
* Jodi Benson as Ariel
* Tara Charendoff as Melody
* Samuel E. Wright as Sebastian * Pat Carroll as Morgana
* Rob Paulsen as Prince Eric * Kenneth Mars as King Triton
* Cam Clarke as Flounder
* Buddy Hackett as Scuttle * Clancy Brown as Undertow
* Max Casella as Tip
* Stephen Furst as Dash
* René Auberjonois as Chef Louie * Edie McClurg as Carlotta * Kay E. Kuter as Grimsby
* Frank Welker as Max the Sheepdog
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film was released directly - to - video on September 19 , 2000 .
On November 6 , 2006 , the film was released in a bundle together with the original film in the Region 2 release .
The original DVD release was later discontinued and a special edition DVD with a deleted song , " Gon na Get My Wish , " and a new game was released on December 16 , 2008 .
A package called The Little Mermaid Trilogy , which includes all three Little Mermaid films , was released on the same day .
This film , along with , was released in a 2-Movie collection on DVD and Blu - ray on November 19 , 2013 .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The film received mixed to negative reviews from film critics .
The film holds a 33 % " rotten " rating on Rotten Tomatoes .
In 2011 , Total Film ranked it as 27th among the 50 worst children 's films ever made .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The film 's official soundtrack was released on September 19 , 2000 , and again on October 31 , 2000 in a special edition double pack with the original film 's soundtrack .
Additionally , two limited edition two - tracked CD samples were released as a promotion for the soundtrack .
* Note : * These tracks were originally recorded for the album .
The film 's ending credits play a new recording of Part of Your World , performed by country singer Chely Wright .
Another version of the song , performed by Ann Marie Boskovich , was used in some international releases of the film .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS