MINI - ITX Mini - ITX is a motherboard , developed by VIA Technologies in 2001 .
They are commonly used in small - configured computer systems .
Originally , they were a niche product , designed for fan - less cooling with a low power consumption architecture , which made them useful for home theater PC systems , where fan noise can detract from the cinema experience .
The four mounting holes in a Mini - ITX board line up with four of the holes in ATX - specification motherboards , and the locations of the backplate and expansion slot are the same ( though one of the holes used was optional in earlier versions of the ATX spec ) .
Mini - ITX boards can therefore often be used in cases designed for ATX , micro - ATX and other ATX variants if desired .
The design provides one expansion slot .
Earlier motherboards conventionally have a standard 33 MHz 5V 32-bit PCI slot .
Many older case designs use riser cards and some even have two - slot riser cards , although the two - slot riser cards are not compatible with all boards .
Some boards based around non - x86 processors have a 3.3V PCI slot , and the Mini - ITX
2.0 ( 2008 ) boards have a PCI - Express ×16 slot ; these boards are not compatible with the standard PCI riser cards supplied with older ITX cases .
HISTORY Section::::History .
In March 2001 , the chipset manufacturer VIA Technologies released a reference design for an ITX motherboard , to promote the low power C3 processor they had bought from Centaur Technology , in combination with their chipsets .
Designed by Robert Kuo , VIA 's chief R&D expert , the 215×191 mm VT6009 ITX Reference Board was demonstrated in " Information PC " and set - top box configurations .
He later designed the Mini - ITX specification .
At that point , few manufacturers took up the ITX design , but Shuttle , Jetway , etc .
produced many ITX based cube computers .
Other manufactures instead produced smaller boards based on the very similar 229×191 mm FlexATX configuration .
In October 2001 , VIA announced their decision to create a new motherboard division , to provide standardized infrastructure for lower - cost PC iterations , and focus on embedded devices .
The result was the November 2001 release of the VT6010 Mini - ITX reference design , once again touted as an " Information PC " , or low cost entry level x86 computing platform .
Manufacturers were still reluctant , but customer response was much more receptive , so VIA decided to manufacture and sell the boards themselves .
In April 2002 the first Mini - ITX motherboards — VIA 's EPIA 5000 ( fanless 533 MHz Eden processor ) and EPIA 800 ( 800 MHz C3)—were sold to industrial customers .
Enthusiasts soon noticed the advantages of small size , low noise and power consumption , and started to push the boundaries of case modding into something else — building computers into nearly every object imaginable , and sometimes even creating new cases altogether .
Hollowed out vintage computers , humidors , toys , electronics , musical instruments , and even a 1960s - era toaster have become homes to relatively quiet , or even silent Mini - ITX systems , capable of many of the tasks of a modern desktop PC .
Mini - ITX boards primarily appeal to the industrial and embedded PC markets , with the majority sold as bulk components or integrated into a finished system for single - purpose computing applications .
They are produced with a much longer sales life - cycle than consumer boards ( some of the original EPIAs are still available ) , a quality that industrial users typically require .
Manufacturers can prototype using standard cases and power supplies , then build their own enclosures if volumes get high enough .
Typical applications include playing music in supermarkets , powering self - service kiosks , and driving content on digital displays .
VIA continues to expand its Mini - ITX motherboard line .
Some earlier generations included the original PL133 chipset boards ( dubbed the " Classic " boards ) , CLE266 chipset boards ( adding MPEG-2 acceleration ) , and CN400 boards ( which added MPEG-4 acceleration ) .
Second generation boards featured the EPIA M , MII , CL , PD , TC and MS — all tailored to slightly different markets .
Legacy VIA boards use their x86-compatible CPUs — the C3 , C7 or low - power Eden variants , with newer boards featuring the VIA Nano CPU , launched in May 2008 .
Other manufacturers have also produced boards designed around the same layout , using VIA , but also Intel , AMD , Transmeta and PowerPC technology .
Intel introduced a line of Mini - ITX boards for the Atom CPU , which demonstrates a significant increase in processing performance ( but without added power consumption ) over older VIA C3 and C7 offerings and helps make the design viable for personal computers .
Other manufacturers saw the potential of the design , and followed suit , some even not limiting themselves to the Atom , as evidenced by Zotac GeForce 9300-ITX board that supports Core 2 Duo CPUs with FSB frequencies up to 1333 MHz , two separate - channeled 800 MHz memory slots and fully functional PCI Express 2.0 x16 slot that could connect through SLI to the onboard video .
This new wave of offerings made Mini - ITX much more popular among home users , hobbyists , and even overclockers .
Intel is currently one of few Mini - ITX mainboard manufacturers that list mechanical dimensions in their manuals .
INTEL - BASED
PRODUCTS
ONBOARD CPU Section::::Intel - based products .
Section::::Onboard CPU .
A number of manufacturers have released
Intel Mini - ITX motherboards that feature embedded CPUs , often mobile or low - TDP versions .
These Intel processors are designed to draw minimal power resulting in lower TDP ideal for fanless ( passively cooled ) configurations and embedded applications .
SOCKETED CPU Section::::Socketed CPU .
Starting from LGA 775 , socketed Intel Mini - ITX motherboards have been released by Intel and Zotac .
This was followed by LGA 1156 motherboards Starting from LGA 1155 , Mini - ITX motherboards have started to become mainstream , with many different manufacturers releasing products .
This is partly because almost all Sandy Bridge and Ivy Bridge Intel Celeron , Pentium and Core series CPUs have integrated processor graphics , eliminating the need for motherboard graphics or discrete graphics cards .
This trend continues with LGA 1150 and LGA 1151 CPUs .
Due to the limitations of the Mini - ITX design , and the physical size of the LGA 2011 socket , Mini - ITX motherboards with the socket only support a single PCI Express expansion slot , and they require using the narrow - ILM version of the LGA 2011 socket .
Despite this , manufacturers have released LGA 2011 based Mini - ITX motherboards .
Also , Mini - ITX motherboards with the LGA 2066 socket have been released , with four SODIMM slots .
AMD - BASED PRODUCTS Section::::AMD - based products .
A number of manufacturers have released several socketed AMD Mini - ITX motherboards , supporting Socket AM2 , Socket AM2 + , Socket AM3 , Socket FM1 , Socket FM2 , Socket FM2
+ , Socket AM1 and Socket AM4 CPUs .
Socket AM2
+
and AM3 ITX motherboards have integrated motherboard graphics , while discrete graphics or processor integrated graphics are required for other platforms .
Mini - ITX motherboards with integrated AMD CPUs are also released .
These motherboards often use mobile CPUs and passive cooling , and feature more powerful integrated graphics compared to their Intel counterparts , which makes them suitable for HTPC .
TRANSMETA - BASED PRODUCTS Section::::Transmeta - based products .
IBASE made the first Transmeta - based Mini - ITX motherboard , the MB860 .
The board uses Transmeta ™ Efficeon ™ processors that run at up to 1.2 GHz .
It supports SO - DIMM DDR modules with capacities up to 1 GB .
An onboard 16 MB ATI M7 graphics controller supports 3D games and graphical intensive programs .
It provides four USB 2.0 ports , a Realtek 8100C 10/100 BaseT Ethernet and an optional 8110S Gigabit Ethernet controller .
POWERPC - BASED PRODUCTS Section::::PowerPC - based products .
The first PowerPC motherboards were produced by Eyetech in 2005 but they stopped any activity in 2005 .
So company ACube Systems made a new board , the Sam440ep , primarily for the AmigaOS market .
ARM - BASED
PRODUCTS Section::::ARM - based products .
Cadia Networks developed a Mini ITX ARM board , which comes with an ARM Cortex - A8 Freescale i .
MX53 series CPU .
According to the official website , the board " offers an ultra - low power SoC with a variety of I / O and OS support for
Android / Linux2.6 / Windows Embedded Compact 7 " .
Kontron also developed a mini ITX ARM board .
According to the website , it features an " ARM Cortex - A9 Quad Core 900MHz Processor with NEON Technology " , an Nvidia graphics processor , 2 GB of RAM , and a targeted power consumption of < 7W for the entire board .
AppliedMicro offers the XC-1 Server Development Platform motherboard , which uses the X - Gene ARMv8 system on a chip with 8 2.4 GHz CPU cores , supports 128 GB DDR3 DRAM using 16 GB DIMMs , and has a baseboard management controller .
POWER Section::::Power .
The Mini - ITX standard does not define a standard for the computer power supply , though it suggests possible options .
Conventionally Mini - ITX boards use a 20- or 24-pin " original ATX " power connector .
This is usually connected to a DC - DC converter board , which connects to an external power adapter .
Generally , vendors provide both power adapter and DC - DC board with the case .
Some boards have built in DC - DC converters and converters have also been made to plug directly into the ATX connector ( e.g. the PicoPSU ) , either of these options avoids the need to mount a separate DC - DC converter into the case , saving space and design effort .
Boards using full - power Intel or AMD CPUs typically use ATX12V 2.x connections and require a case with appropriate power supply and cooling for these more power - hungry chips .
Defined by the ATX specification , power supplies with ATX12V connector on a separate 12 volts rail must not idle that 12 volts rail .
SEE ALSO * EPIA , Mini - ITX , Nano - ITX and Pico - ITX motherboards from VIA * Home Theater PC * Mini ATX , form factor developed by AOpen * Mobile - ITX
* Nano - ITX
* Pico - ITX * Plug computer REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * VIA Website - VIA Spearhead Initiative - Mini - ITX Mainboard
Design * Logic Supply - Mini - ITX Advantages