APPLICATION SOFTWARE Application software ( app for short ) is computer software designed to perform a group of coordinated functions , tasks , or activities for the benefit of the user .
Examples of an application include a word processor , a spreadsheet , an accounting application , a web browser , a media player , an aeronautical flight simulator , a console game or a photo editor .
The collective noun application software refers to all applications collectively .
This contrasts with system software , which is mainly involved with running the computer .
Applications may be bundled with the computer and its system software or published separately , and may be coded as proprietary , open - source or university projects .
Apps built for mobile platforms are called mobile apps .
TERMINOLOGY Section::::Terminology .
In information technology , an application is a computer program designed to help people perform an activity .
An application thus differs from an operating system ( which runs a computer ) , a utility ( which performs maintenance or general - purpose chores ) , and a programming tool ( with which computer programs are created ) .
Depending on the activity for which it was designed , an application can manipulate text , numbers , audio , graphics , or a combination of these elements .
Some application packages focus on a single task , such as word processing ; others , called integrated software include several applications .
User - written software tailors systems to meet the user 's specific needs .
User - written software includes spreadsheet templates , word processor macros , scientific simulations , audio , graphics and animation scripts .
Even email filters are a kind of user software .
Users create this software themselves and often overlook how important it is .
The delineation between system software such as operating systems and application software is not exact , however , and is occasionally the object of controversy .
For example , one of the key questions in the United States v.
Microsoft Corp. antitrust trial was whether Microsoft 's Internet Explorer web browser was part of its Windows operating system or a separable piece of application software .
As another example , the GNU / Linux naming controversy is , in part , due to disagreement about the relationship between the Linux kernel and the operating systems built over this kernel .
In some types of embedded systems , the application software and the operating system software may be indistinguishable to the user , as in the case of software used to control a VCR , DVD player or microwave oven .
The above definitions may exclude some applications that may exist on some computers in large organizations .
For an alternative definition of an app : see Application Portfolio Management .
METONYMY Section::::Metonymy .
The word " application " , once used as an adjective , is not restricted to the " of or pertaining to application software " meaning .
For example , concepts such as application programming interface ( API ) , application server , application virtualization , application lifecycle management and portable application apply to all computer programs alike , not just application software .
APPS AND KILLER APPS Section::::Apps and killer apps .
Some applications are available in versions for several different platforms ; others only work on one and are thus called , for example , a Geography application for Windows , or an Android application for education , or a Linux game .
Sometimes a new and popular application arises which only runs on one platform , increasing the desirability of that platform .
This is called a killer application or killer app .
For example , VisiCalc was the first modern spreadsheet software for the Apple II and helped selling the then - new personal computers into offices .
For Blackberry it was their email software .
In recent years , the shortened term " app " ( coined in 1981 or earlier ) has become popular to refer to applications for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets , the shortened form matching their typically smaller scope compared to applications on PCs .
Even more recently , the shortened version is used for desktop application software as well .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
There are many different and not alternative ways in order to order and classify application software .
By the legal point of view , application software is mainly classified with a black box approach , in relation to the rights of its final end - users or subscribers ( with eventual intermediate and tiered subscription levels ) .
Software applications are also classified in respect of the programming language in which the source code is written or executed , and respect of their purpose and outputs .
BY PROPERTY AND USE RIGHTS Section::::By property and use rights .
Application software is usually distinguished among two main classes : closed source vs open source software applications , and among free or proprietary software applications .
Proprietary software is placed under the exclusive copyright , and a software license grants limited usage rights .
The open - closed principle states that software may be " open only for extension , but not for modification " .
Such applications can only get add - on by third - parties .
Free and open - source software shall be run , distributed , sold or extended for any purpose , and -being open- shall be modified or reversed in the same way .
FOSS software applications released under a free license may be perpetual and also royalty - free .
Perhaps , the owner , the holder or third - party enforcer of any right ( copyright , trademark , patent , or ius in re aliena ) are entitled to add exceptions , limitations , time decays or expiring dates to the license terms of use .
Public - domain software is a type of FOSS , which is royalty - free and - openly or reservedly- can be run , distributed , modified , reversed , republished or created in derivative works without any copyright attribution and therefore revocation .
It can even be sold , but without transferring the public domain property to other single subjects .
Public - domain SW can be released under an ( un)licensing legal statement , which enforces those terms and conditions for an indefinite duration ( for a lifetime , or forever ) .
BY
CODING LANGUAGE
Section::::By
coding language .
Since the development and near - universal adoption of the web , an important distinction that has emerged , has been between web applications — written with HTML , JavaScript and other web - native technologies and typically requiring one to be online and running a web browser , and the more traditional native applications written in whatever languages are available for one 's particular type of computer .
There has been a contentious debate in the computing community regarding web applications replacing native applications for many purposes , especially on mobile devices such as smartphones and tablets .
Web apps have indeed greatly increased in popularity for some uses , but the advantages of applications make them unlikely to disappear soon , if ever .
Furthermore , the two can be complementary , and even integrated .
BY PURPOSE AND OUTPUT Section::::By purpose and output .
Application software can also be seen as being either horizontal or vertical .
Horizontal applications are more popular and widespread , because they are general purpose , for example word processors or databases .
Vertical applications are niche products , designed for a particular type of industry or business , or department within an organization .
Integrated suites of software will try to handle every specific aspect possible of , for example , manufacturing or banking worker , or accounting , or customer service .
There are many types of application software : *
An application suite consists of multiple applications bundled together .
They usually have related functions , features and user interfaces , and may be able to interact with each other , e.g. open each other 's files .
Business applications often come in suites , e.g. Microsoft Office , LibreOffice and iWork , which bundle together a word processor , a spreadsheet , etc . ; but suites exist for other purposes , e.g. graphics or music .
*
Enterprise software addresses the needs of an entire organization 's processes and data flows , across several departments , often in a large distributed environment .
Examples include enterprise resource planning systems , customer relationship management ( CRM ) systems and supply chain management software .
Departmental Software is a sub - type of enterprise software with a focus on smaller organizations or groups within a large organization .
( Examples include travel expense management and IT Helpdesk . )
*
Enterprise infrastructure software provides common capabilities needed to support enterprise software systems .
( Examples include databases , email servers , and systems for managing networks and security . )
* Information worker software lets users create and manage information , often for individual projects within a department , in contrast to enterprise management .
Examples include time management , resource management , analytical , collaborative and documentation tools .
Word processors , spreadsheets , email and blog clients , personal information system , and individual media editors may aid in multiple information worker tasks .
* Content access software is used primarily to access content without editing , but may include software that allows for content editing .
Such software addresses the needs of individuals and groups to consume digital entertainment and published digital content .
( Examples include media players , web browsers , and help browsers . )
* Educational software is related to content access software , but has the content or features adapted for use in by educators or students .
For example , it may deliver evaluations ( tests ) , track progress through material , or include collaborative capabilities .
* Simulation software simulates physical or abstract systems for either research , training or entertainment purposes .
* Media development software generates print and electronic media for others to consume , most often in a commercial or educational setting .
This includes graphic - art software , desktop publishing software , multimedia development software , HTML editors , digital - animation editors , digital audio and video composition , and many others .
* Product engineering software is used in developing hardware and software products .
This includes computer - aided design ( CAD ) , computer - aided engineering ( CAE ) , computer language editing and compiling tools , integrated development environments , and application programmer interfaces .
* Entertainment Software can refer to video games , screen savers , programs to display motion pictures or play recorded music , and other forms of entertainment which can be experienced through use of a computing device .
Applications can also be classified by computing platform such as a particular operating system , delivery network such as in cloud computing and Web 2.0 applications , or delivery devices such as mobile apps for mobile devices .
The operating system itself can be considered application software when performing simple calculating , measuring , rendering , and word processing tasks not used to control hardware via command - line interface or graphical user interface .
This does not include application software bundled within operating systems such as a software calculator or text editor .
INFORMATION
WORKER SOFTWARE * Accounting software
* Data management * Contact manager
* Spreadsheet * Database software *
Documentation * Document automation
* Word processor
* Desktop publishing software * Diagramming software * Presentation software * Email
* Blog software * Enterprise resource planning * Day trading software * Banking software * Clearing systems * arithmetic software * Field service management * Workforce management software
* Project management software * Calendaring software * Employee scheduling software *
Workflow software * Reservation systems ENTERTAINMENT SOFTWARE
* Screen savers
* Video games
*
Arcade games * Console games
* Mobile games
* Personal computer games EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE
* Classroom management * Reference software
* Sales readiness software
* Survey management ENTERPRISE INFRASTRUCTURE
SOFTWARE
*
Business workflow software
* Database management system ( DBMS ) * Digital asset management ( DAM ) software
* Document management software
* Geographic information system ( GIS )
SIMULATION
SOFTWARE
* Computer simulators * Scientific simulators
* Social simulators
*
Battlefield simulators * Emergency simulators
* Vehicle simulators * Flight simulators
* Driving simulators *
Simulation games
* Vehicle simulation games MEDIA DEVELOPMENT
SOFTWARE
* 3D computer graphics software * Animation software
* Graphic art software * Raster graphics editor
* Vector graphics editor *
Image organizer *
Video editing software *
Audio editing software * Digital audio workstation * Music sequencer * Scorewriter * HTML editor
* Game development tool PRODUCT ENGINEERING SOFTWARE
* Hardware engineering *
Computer - aided engineering * Computer - aided design ( CAD )
* Finite element analysis SOFTWARE ENGINEERING * Compiler software * Integrated development environment * Compiler * Linker * Debugger * Version control
* Game development tool
* License manager SEE ALSO
* Software development REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS