CREAM SODA Cream soda ( also known as creme soda ) is a sweet carbonated soft drink .
Traditionally flavored with vanilla and raspberry and based on the taste of a classic soda , a wide range of variations can be found worldwide .
HISTORY AND DEVELOPMENT Section::::History and development .
A recipe for cream soda — written by E. M. Sheldon and published in Michigan Farmer in 1852—called for water , cream of tartar ( tartaric acid ) , Epsom salts , sugar , egg , and milk , to be mixed , then heated , and when cool mixed with water and a quarter teaspoonful of baking soda ( sodium bicarbonate ) to make an effervescent drink .
It was suggested as a temperance drink preferable to those of " Uncle Bacchus " and in compliance with the recently introduced Maine law .
Alexander C. Howell , of Vienna , New Jersey , was granted a patent for " cream soda - water " on June 27 , 1865 .
Howell 's cream soda - water was made with sodium bicarbonate , water , sugar , egg whites , wheat flour , and " any of the usual flavoring materials — such as oil of lemon , extracts of vanilla , pine - apple , to suit the taste " before drinking , the cream soda water was mixed with water and an acid such as tartaric acid or citric acid .
In Canada , James William Black of Berwick , Nova Scotia was granted a U.S. patent on December 8 , 1885 , and a Canadian patent on July 5 , 1886 , for " ice - cream soda " .
Black 's ice - cream soda , which contained whipped egg whites , sugar , lime juice , lemons , citric acid , flavoring , and bicarbonate of soda , was a concentrated syrup that could be reconstituted into an effervescent beverage by adding ordinary ice water .
INTERNATIONAL VARIATIONS
NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA
UNITED STATES
Section::::International variations .
Section::::North and South America .
Section::::United States .
In the United States , cream soda is often vanilla - flavored and is either clear or colored a light golden brown in appearance ; but red , pink , orange , and blue are also relatively common color variants .
In addition , in some places in the U.S. where the drink is made on location , especially in cafes , cream soda consists of soda water , vanilla syrup , and cream or half and half .
Popular brands include : *
Americana Honey Cream Soda *
AriZona Soda Shaq * A - Treat Cream
Soda * A&W Vanilla Cream Soda * Barq 's Red Creme Soda
* Big Red * Blue Sky
* Boylan 's Creme Vanilla
* Big Shot Cream Soda ( New Orleans area )
* Canfield 's Swiss Creme ( mainly in the Chicago area )
* Dad 's Cream Soda * Dr. Brown 's ( mainly in the New York City area , but also kosher delicatessens across the country )
* Faygo * Foxon Park ( mainly in Connecticut )
* Hosmer Mountain ( mainly in Connecticut )
* Henry Weinhard 's Cream Soda
* IBC * Jones Soda *
Jelly Belly French Vanilla Cream Soda
* Mug Cream Soda *
Original New York Seltzer Vanilla Cream
Soda
* Polar Beverages Cream Soda *
Shasta Creme Soda
* SodaStream Cream Soda Syrup
*
Sprecher Brewery
* Stewart 's * Vess ( Old St. Louis variety that is a deep pink )
* Virgil 's Cream Soda * Wegmans Cream Soda * White Rock Beverages
* Zevia Another variety is referred to as Italian cream soda .
Despite the name , this drink originated in the US , not in Italy .
The name is due to it being a form of Italian soda .
Italian cream soda is usually a mixture of carbonated water , vanilla syrup , and added half and half or cream .
Ratios vary widely , but the taste is usually that of sweetened , flavored milk .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , cream soda is mostly pink ( except in Quebec and Newfoundland , where it is sold clear ) and tastes like grenadine .
Some brands , such as Fanta , market a colourless version .
Many brands have a long - lasting , foamy head .
Brands include : *
Big 8 Cream Soda *
Cott Cream Soda
* Crush ( Canada only )
* Fanta * Jones Soda * Kiri Cream Soda – colourless
* Life Brand
*
The Pop Shoppe * President 's Choice ( Loblaws ) * Walmart Canada – US - style vanilla flavour
Some American brands are available in Canada as imports .
CARIBBEAN AND LATIN AMERICA Section::::Caribbean and Latin America .
Cream soda is usually served as a " red pop " , particularly Fanta 's Red Cream Soda .
* Colombiana ( Colombia ) - orange in color * Crema Soda ( El Salvador ) * DG Soft Drink Cream Soda ( Jamaica )
*
Frescolita ( Venezuela ) - a bubble gum - flavored soda * Solo Beverage Company ( Trinidad ) * ToniCol ( Mexico ) – a naturally flavored vanilla soda
OCEANIA
AUSTRALIA
Section::::Oceania .
Section::::Australia .
In Australia , cream soda , creamy soda , or creaming soda generally refers to a pink or red soft drink with fruit and berry flavors produced by Kirks , Bundaberg , and Bickford 's , among other brands .
Another local variant produced by Golden Circle is vanilla and fruit - flavored , and colored yellow to distinguish it from existing brands .
More traditional brown varieties are also available , but less common .
Brands include Kirks ' Sno Drop ( only available in South Australia , Victoria , and the Northern Territory ) , Tarax , River Port , and Schweppes , which also produce a red variety as part of its " Traditionals " range .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
This is known as creaming soda , ice cream soda , chill drink , or cream soda , though the flavor changes are negligible .
It is usually a bright yellow color or a white opaque .
It is one of the many flavors sold by Foxton Fizz .
It is also one of the many carbonated drink - flavors offered by Golden Circle .
EUROPE NETHERLANDS Section::::Europe .
Section::::Netherlands .
The Netherlands has only one brand , called Frizz , which is caramel - colored .
However , Asian ( especially Chinese ) supermarkets also sell Schweppes Cream Soda , which are imported from Hong Kong .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
Ireland has a brand of cream soda called Country Spring .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the UK , A.G. Barr , Ben Shaw 's ( a Cott brand ) , and DG Jamaica manufacture their own brands of cream soda , and many supermarkets sell it under their respective own brands .
Pakola , a Pakistani brand of ice cream soda , is also available .
ASIA Section::::Asia .
In Hong Kong , the Swire Coca Cola Company markets a yellow Schweppes Cream Soda .
Some people enjoy cream soda in a 1:1 ratio with fresh milk .
In India , one major brands that is still selling cream soda is Cottons .
In Japan , " cream soda " is a term used for an ice cream float made with melon - flavored soda topped with a scoop of vanilla ice cream .
In Malaysia , the F&N or Fraser and Neave brand makes a clear ice cream soda .
Pakistan 's popular brand is Pakola Ice Cream Soda , which is green in color .
In Sri Lanka , Elephant House Cream Soda is the most popular soft drink .
Meanwhile , Coca - Cola Beverages Sri Lanka launched their newest flavor , Fanta Cream Soda , in July 2009 .
In Thailand , Hale 's Trading produces Hale 's Blue Boy Brand Cream Soda Flavoured Syrup , a green colored , rose / floral flavored cordial .
This is mixed 1 part to 4 parts water / soda water to get a cream soda drink , very similar to the South African Creme Soda , or is used as a flavoring in their shaved - ice deserts .
This syrup is sold worldwide in some Asian food stores .
Additionally , PepsiCo 's division in Thailand produces a green , cream - flavored soda under their brand name Mirinda .
In some Arabian countries , Canada Dry offers a cream soda flavor .
AFRICA Section::::Africa .
In South Africa , Swaziland , and Zimbabwe , cream soda is sold under the label Sparletta Creme Soda , a product of the Coca - Cola company .
It is green in color .
In South Africa , cream soda is often referred to as the " green ambulance " or " creme sober " ( predominantly by students ) , as it is believed to alleviate the effects of hangovers .
Cream soda is also used as a mixer with cane spirit ( an inexpensive alcoholic beverage distilled from fermented sugarcane ) .
This is commonly known as a " John Deer " ( cf .
John Deere and its green logo ) , " the cane train " , " scream soda " or " green mamba " .
Cane spirit is chosen due its ability to go relatively unnoticed .
SEE ALSO
* List of brand name soft drinks products
* List of soft drink flavors REFERENCES