BROWN RICE Brown rice is whole - grain rice with the inedible outer hull removed ; white rice is the same grain with the hull , bran layer , and cereal germ removed .
Red rice , gold rice , and black rice ( also called purple rice ) are all whole rices , but with differently pigmented outer layers .
Any type of rice may be eaten whole .
Whole rice has a mild , nutty flavour , and is chewier .
NUTRITIONAL CONTENT
Section::::Nutritional content .
Brown rice and white rice have similar amounts of calories and carbohydrates .
Brown rice is a whole grain and a good source of magnesium , phosphorus , selenium , thiamine , niacin , vitamin B6 , and manganese , and is high in fiber .
White rice , unlike brown rice , has the bran and germ removed , and therefore has different nutritional content .
Brown rice is whole rice from which only the husk ( the outermost layer ) is removed .
To produce white rice , the next layers underneath the husk ( the bran layer and the germ ) are removed , leaving mostly the starchy endosperm .
Several vitamins and dietary minerals are lost in this removal and the subsequent polishing process .
Among these are : oil in the bran , which is removed along with the bran layer , dietary fiber , small amounts of fatty acids , and magnesium .
A part of these missing nutrients , such as vitamins B and B , and iron , are sometimes added back into the white rice .
In the US the result is called " enriched rice " and must comply with Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) regulations for this name to be used .
One mineral not added back into white rice is magnesium ; one cup ( 195 g ) of cooked long grain brown rice contains 84 mg of magnesium , while one cup of white rice contains 19 mg .
It has been found that germinated grains in general have nutritional advantages .
Germinated brown rice ( GBR ) , developed during the International Year of Rice , is brown rice that has been soaked for 4–20 hours in warm water before cooking .
This stimulates germination , which activates various enzymes in the rice , giving rise to a more complete amino acid profile , including GABA .
Cooked brown rice tends to be chewy ; cooked GBR is softer , and preferred particularly by children .
COOKING TIME
Section::::Cooking time .
Brown rice generally needs longer cooking times than white rice , unless it is broken or flourblasted ( which perforates the bran without removing it ) .
MODIFICATIONS Section::::Modifications .
Parboiled rice is a modified process that forces into the kernel some of the vitamins found in the hull before the hull is removed .
The process provides more nutrition than white rice while shortening the time necessary for final meal preparation .
Some white rices are also fortified STORAGE
Section::::Storage .
Brown rice has a shelf life of approximately 6 months , but hermetic storage , refrigeration or freezing can significantly extend its lifetime .
Freezing , even periodically , can also help control infestations of Indian meal moths .
ARSENIC Section::::Arsenic .
Rice plants accumulate arsenic , and there have been concerns over excessive arsenic levels in rice .
There is more arsenic in the bran , so brown rice contains more arsenic .
The European Union has introduced regulations on arsenic in rice , but the United States has not .
Natural arsenic levels in groundwater and soils vary .
Rice grown in some regions contains less arsenic than others .
Arsenic from pesticides and poultry fertilizer may be taken up by rice .
A 2012 report from the US publication Consumer Reports found measurable levels of arsenic in nearly all of the 60 varieties of rice and rice products it tested in the US .
Consumer Reports states that brown rice has 80 percent more inorganic arsenic on average than white rice of the same type , because the arsenic tends to accumulate in the outer layers of the grain .
Its 2013 analysis found that rice cereal and pasta can possess significantly more inorganic arsenic than the 2012 data showed ; Consumer Reports said just one serving of rice cereal or pasta could place children over the maximum amount of rice it recommended for their weekly allotment , due to arsenic content .
One study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ( US ) journal found a median level of arsenic that was 56 % higher in the urine of women who had eaten rice .
SEE ALSO
* Brown rice
tea
* Brown rice green tea * Genmaicha REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS