CALIFORNIA POLYTECHNIC STATE UNIVERSITY California Polytechnic State University ( also known as California Polytechnic State University , San Luis Obispo , Cal Poly San Luis Obispo , or Cal Poly , ) is a public university located in San Luis Obispo , California .
It is one of two polytechnics in the California State University system .
The university is organized into six colleges offering 64 bachelor 's and 32 master 's degrees .
Cal Poly San Luis Obispo primarily focuses on undergraduate education with 20,425 undergraduate and 881 graduate students .
The university is located in San Luis Obispo , California , often noted as one of the happiest cities in the United States , with many alumni in Silicon Valley .
The university participates in the Big West Conference in athletics .
HISTORY OVERVIEW Section::::History .
Section::::Overview .
Cal Poly San Luis Obispo was established as the California Polytechnic School in 1901 when Governor Henry T. Gage signed the California Polytechnic School Bill after a campaign by journalist Myron Angel .
The polytechnic school held its first classes on October 1 , 1903 to 20 students , offering secondary level courses of study , which took three years to complete .
The school continued to grow steadily , except during a period from the mid 1910s to the early 1920s when World War I led to drops in enrollment and drastic budget cuts forced fewer class offerings .
In 1924 , Cal Poly San Luis Obispo was placed under the control of the California State Board of Education .
In 1933 , the Board of Education changed Cal Poly San Luis Obispo into a two - year technical and vocational school .
The institution began to offer Bachelor of Arts degrees in 1940 , with the first baccalaureate exercises held in 1942 .
The school was renamed the California State Polytechnic College in 1947 to better reflect its higher education offerings , and in 1949 , a Master of Arts degree in education was added .
In 1960 , control of Cal Poly San Luis Obispo and all other state colleges was transferred from the State Board of Education to an independent Board of Trustees , which later became the California State University system .
The college was authorized to offer Master of Science degrees in 1967 , and from then to 1970 , the school 's curriculum was reorganized into different units , such as the School of Science and Math , the School of Agriculture and Natural Resources , and the School of Architecture .
Cal Poly San Luis Obispo 's FM radio station , KCPR , began as a senior project in 1968 .
The state legislature changed the school 's official name again in 1971 to California Polytechnic State University , and since the 1970s the university has seen steady enrollment growth and building construction .
Cal Poly San Luis Obispo celebrated its centennial in 2001 and kicked off a $ 225 million fundraising campaign , the largest fund - raising effort undertaken in CSU history .
The Centennial Campaign raised over $ 264 million from over 81,000 donors , more than tripling the university 's endowment from $ 43 million to over $ 140 million .
Cal Poly 's $ 190.3 million endowment in 2016 was ranked 308th out of 815 colleges and universities in the United States and Canada .
RELATIONSHIP WITH CAL POLY POMONA Section::::Relationship with Cal Poly Pomona .
Cal Poly Pomona began as a satellite campus of Cal Poly San Luis Obispo in 1938 when a completely equipped school and farm were donated by Charles Voorhis and his son Jerry Voorhis of Pasadena , California , and was initially called the Voorhis Unit .
The W.K. Kellogg Foundation then donated an horse ranch in Pomona , California to Cal Poly San Luis Obispo in 1949 .
Located about one mile ( 1.6 km ) from the Voorhis campus , the two became known as Cal Poly Kellogg - Voorhis .
Cal Poly Kellogg - Voorhis broke off from Cal Poly in 1966 , becoming the fully independent university , California State Polytechnic University , Pomona ( Cal Poly Pomona ) .
Since 1949 , the two campuses have cooperated on creating a float for the Rose Parade .
Today , the long - running float program still boasts floats designed and constructed entirely by students year - round on both campuses .
1960
FOOTBALL TEAM PLANE
CRASH Section::::1960 football team plane crash .
On October 29 , 1960 , a chartered plane carrying the Cal Poly San Luis Obispo football team , hours after a loss to Bowling Green State University , crashed on takeoff at the Toledo Express Airport in Toledo , Ohio .
Twenty - two of the 48 people on board were killed , including 16 players .
FEMALE ADMISSIONS Section::::Female admissions .
In 1903 , Cal Poly San Luis Obispo opened as a coeducational school with 20 students enrolled , 16 new male students and 4 new female students .
In 1930 , Cal Poly San Luis Obispo banned women from the entire school until 1956 when it once again began admitting female students .
The university remains coeducational today , with women constituting 46.7 % of the Fall 2015 total student population .
NAME Section::::Name .
The university 's style guide indicates its official names are " California Polytechnic State University " and " Cal Poly .
" When necessary to distinguish between Cal Poly and its former satellite campus , Cal Poly Pomona , the lengthier " Cal Poly at San Luis Obispo " is occasionally used .
The California State University system 's style guide identifies the university as " California Polytechnic State University , San Luis Obispo " and the elided " Cal Poly San Luis Obispo . "
DIRECTORS AND PRESIDENTS
* Leroy Anderson , 1902–1907 * Leroy Burns Smith , 1908–1914
* Robert Weir Ryder , 1914–1921 * Nicholas Ricciardi , 1921–1924
* Margaret Chase ( Acting ) , 1924 * Benjamin Ray Crandall , 1924–1933
* Julian A. McPhee , 1933–1966
* Dale W. Andrews ( acting ) , 1966–1967
* Robert E. Kennedy , 1967–1979 * Warren J. Baker , 1979–2010
* Robert Glidden ( Acting ) , 2010–2011
* Jeffrey D. Armstrong , 2011–present CAMPUS Section::::Campus .
Cal Poly has one of the largest college campuses in the United States .
It owns 9,678 acres and is the second largest land - holding university in California .
The lands are used for student education and include the main campus , two nearby agricultural lands , and two properties in Santa Cruz County .
Part of the Cal Poly property is the Swanton Pacific Ranch , a ranch located in Santa Cruz County , California , outside the town of Davenport .
The ranch provides educational and research opportunities , encompasses rangeland , livestock , and forestry operations for the College of Agriculture , Food , and Environmental sciences , and fosters Cal Poly 's Learn by Doing teaching philosophy of with emphasis on sustainable management of agricultural practices with a mix of laboratory experiments .
EXPANSION Section::::Expansion .
The Cal Poly Master Plan calls to increase student population from approximately 17,000 students to 20,900 students by the year 2020–2021 .
To maintain the university 's Learn by Doing philosophy and low class sizes , the master plan calls for an increase in classrooms , laboratories , and professors .
CURRENT CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Current construction .
Student Housing South :
Cal Poly Student Housing South project is a dormitory style student community located at the corner of Slack Street and Grand Avenue .
The project will consist of seven 3- to 5-story concrete framed freshman residence hall buildings with 1,475 beds and an adjacent four - level parking structure .
Additional community space for the housing complex and the campus will wrap the parking structure on three sides .
These spaces will include a small café , community room , game room , mail room , welcome center , offices , and maintenance shop .
Site improvements will include a large open space in the center of the project for activities and group events , volleyball and basketball courts , and outdoor gathering spaces at each building .
Webcor Builders and Valerio Dewalt Train Associates is the Design Build Team .
Projected construction completion is Summer 2018 .
RECENT CONSTRUCTION Section::::Recent construction .
The Warren J. Baker Center for Science and Mathematics was dedicated November 1 , 2013 .
It replaced the aging " spider " Science Building 52 , built in the 1950s , with a new structure .
The $ 119 million , six - story building was made possible by voter - approved state education bonds and $ 18 million in private donations .
The Center adds new laboratories , classrooms , and offices for the physics , chemistry and soil science programs , as well as an open area and terraces for student study and meeting places .
The top floor of the Center houses labs and offices for the school 's Western Coatings Technologies Center and the Environmental Biotechnology Institute .
It is the second largest and most technologically advanced structure on campus .
In the space between the remaining wings of the old " Spider Building " and the new Center is Centennial Park , a landscaped central green .
PLANNED CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Planned construction .
The Academic Center and Library Building Project : A program planning for an expanded Library and Academic Center began in 2007 .
Current plans call for a design phase to begin in 2013 , with a two - year construction phase projected to begin in 2015 or earlier .
The new Academic Center will be a LEED - certified building of nearly 113,000 gsf , connected with the original Kennedy Library by a broad , above ground concourse .
Formal and informal meeting spaces , including ample collaborative spaces , will encourage interactions among students , faculty , and staff from across the entire campus and community .
The J.G. Boswell Agricultural Research Center :
The Agricultural Research Center was announced in May 2014 with a $ 8 million gift from the James G. Boswell Foundation .
The research center will include laboratories to support sensory , food safety , plant pathology , enology and genomics .
The Boswell Center will be built on the current site of the remaining portion of the " spider " science building .
COMMUTING
Section::::Commuting .
Campus parking is limited .
In its most recent survey of available parking spaces on campus , the Cal Poly University Police reported 2,892 general purpose parking spaces , 3,492 dorm resident spaces , and 8,648 total spaces .
In its facilities Master Plan , the university admits that while more parking spots will be added , the actual ratio of parking to students will decrease since enrollment is expected to increase sharply .
To resolve the disparity , the Master Plan calls on the university to reduce the demand for individual vehicle parking .
As part of that plan , the university has constructed additional dorms and has tried to make campus life more desirable .
In addition , Cal Poly Commuter and Access Services has successfully promoted alternatives to commuting in single occupancy vehicles : in the past 10 years , bus use has more than doubled and the use of bicycles has close to quadrupled .
Currently , there are over 6,500 bike rack spaces and 224 secure bike lockers available on campus ; 57 % of students and 33 % of faculty / staff live within 5 miles of the Cal Poly campus , an easy bike commute .
The city 's SLO Transit bus system provides service to and from campus .
Cal Poly financially supports SLO Transit with funding from parking citation revenue ( not from state general funds nor from student tuition ) , so faculty , staff , and students ride for free .
Bus service throughout the county is provided by SLO Regional Transit Authority .
Discounted passes are available to the Cal Poly community .
ACADEMICS COLLEGES Section::::Academics .
Section::::Colleges .
The university currently offers bachelor 's degrees and master 's degrees in six colleges :
* College of Agriculture , Food and Environmental Sciences * College of Architecture and Environmental Design
* Orfalea College of Business
* College of Engineering * College of Liberal Arts * College of Science and Mathematics BACHELOR 'S
PROJECTS Section::::Bachelor 's projects .
All undergraduate students at Cal Poly are required to complete a senior project .
The senior project is intended to be a capstone experience for students receiving a baccalaureate degree by integrating theory and application from across a student 's undergraduate educational experiences .
The senior project consists of one or more of the following : a design or construction experience , an experiment , a self - guided study or research project , a presentation , a report based on internship , co - op , or service learning experience , and/or a public portfolio display or performance .
Senior projects have often led to students obtaining jobs or recognition for their work .
In July 2011 , a company created from a Senior Project , Punchd , was acquired by Google .
Jamba Juice , founded as " Juice Club " , was inspired by the Senior Project idea , but was founded after the founders had graduated .
ADMISSIONS Section::::Admissions .
Cal Poly 's admissions process is " more selective " according to U.S. News & World Report .
For students admitted Fall 2017 , 16,695 freshmen were accepted out of 48,571 applicants , a 34.4 % acceptance rate .
Fall 2017 admitted students have an average GPA of 4.04 , average ACT score of 30 , and average SAT score of 1391 .
For Fall 2017 admitted transfer students ,
Cal Poly accepted 1,758 of 8,348 applicants , a 21.0 % acceptance rate .
Fall 2017 admitted transfer students have an average college GPA of 3.41 .
For Fall 2016 students , the average high school GPA was 3.92 .
The middle 50 % range of SAT scores for the Fall 2016 enrolled freshmen was 560–660 for critical reading and 590–700 for math , while the ACT Composite range was 26–31 .
Men constituted 50.3 % of the incoming class of 2020 , women 49.7 % .
Cal Poly requires students to declare a major when applying for admission , and the university then admits the most competitive applicants within each major based on GPA and SAT or ACT scores .
As a result , changing majors at the university is not guaranteed .
Each major has a specific change of major plan which includes required classes to be taken while maintaining a certain GPA ( usually between 2.5–2.75 ) in order to be considered as a candidate .
In some cases students wishing to change majors transfer to other universities .
RANKINGS Section::::Rankings .
Cal Poly ranked 32nd in the nation on PayScale 's 2016 " College ROI Report , " which ranked 1,343 colleges and universities .
According to PayScale 's projections , Cal Poly has a 20-year net return on investment of $ 698,000 .
This ROI is the highest in the California State University system and is higher than all of the University of California schools except UC Berkeley .
Washington Monthly ranked Cal Poly 40th in the " National Universities - Masters " category in 2016 based on its contribution to the public good in three broad categories : social mobility , research , and service .
Cal Poly is ranked 83rd in the nation in The Daily Beast 's 2014 " Guide to the Best Colleges " , which evaluated nearly 2,000 colleges and universities .
In 2016 , Forbes magazine rated Cal Poly No . 167 out of the 660 best private and public colleges and universities in America .
In 2008 , the first year of the list , Cal Poly was ranked No . 369 out of 569 .
Money magazine ranked Cal Poly 131st in the country out of 705 schools evaluated for its 2016 " Best Value College Rankings .
" For 2017 , Kiplinger ranked Cal Poly 21st out of the top 100 best - value public colleges and universities in the nation , and 5th in California .
The Wall Street Journal 's rankings by major placed Cal Poly 18th for engineering majors and 22nd for business or economics majors in 2010 .
In the 2016 edition of " America 's Best Architecture & Design Schools " published by the architecture and design journal DesignIntelligence , Cal Poly was ranked the No . 2 undergraduate architecture program in the nation .
The landscape architecture program was ranked 6th in the country and 1st in the Western region .
Cal Poly 's Orfalea College of Business was named to BusinessWeek magazine 's list of the nation 's top undergraduate business colleges , ranked No . 70 on the 2014 list .
Cal Poly 's graduate program in City and Regional Planning ranked No . 1 in the Planetizen 2011 Guide to Graduate Urban Planning Programs in the U.S. for programs whose highest degree is a Master 's .
In 2009 , the magazine Diverse Issues in Higher Education placed Cal Poly among the top 10 of its " Top 100 Degree Producers 2009 " ranking .
This places the university in the top 10 schools in the nation in granting degrees to Hispanic , Asian and other minority students in agriculture , architecture and engineering .
Cal Poly was ranked the 37th top college in the United States by the Social Mobility Index college rankings .
According to U.S. News & World Report 's 2017
" America 's Best Colleges " report , Cal Poly is ranked 1st in the Western United States for regional public schools whose highest degree is a Master 's , and tied for 9th overall ( including private schools ) .
The same report ranked the College of Engineering tied for 5th of undergraduate engineering schools in the U.S. whose highest degree is a Master 's , with national program rankings of : * Environmental / Environmental Health engineering :
1st * Civil Engineering : 3rd * Electrical Engineering : tied for 4th * Mechanical Engineering :
5th FINANCIAL
TUITION Section::::Financial .
Section::::Tuition .
Due to continued reductions in state funding , Fall 2011 fees for the average student reached approximately $ 2,600 per quarter .
For comparison , the Spring 2002 fees for the average student were $ 760 per quarter .
While total yearly fees for an in - state student were just $ 2,976 in 2002 , students entering in fall 2011 faced an annual fee of over $ 7,900 .
Of the students enrolled in fall 2014 , 61.6 % of undergraduates and 70.0 % of first - time freshmen received some form of financial aid in 2014–15 .
The amount of financial aid awarded in 2014–15 totaled $ 151.5 million , of which 64.3 % came from federal funds , 11.9 % came from state funds and 17.5 % came from institutional funds .
Loans comprised 55.6 % of the financial aid , 31.2 % came in the form of grants , and 10.2 % in scholarships .
ENDOWMENT
Section::::Endowment .
Cal Poly 's endowment more than tripled during its Centennial Campaign from $ 43.1 million to $ 140.1 million .
Growth is attributed to gifts and prudent stewardship .
However , since 2007 , the university 's endowment has fluctuated dramatically , going from $ 181.7 million in 2007 to $ 130.9 million in 2009 , before rebounding to $ 190.3 million in 2016 .
On May 3 , 2017 , Cal Poly received one of the largest endowment towards public education to be received in California from Cal Poly alumnus William L. and Linda Frost in the amount of $ 110 million .
STUDENT LIFE
RESIDENCE
HALLS
Section::::Student life .
Section::::Residence halls .
Cal Poly 's on - campus student housing of 6,239 spaces is the largest student housing program in the California State University system .
Cal Poly housed 35.9 % of fall 2015 undergraduates in 28 dorms on campus , and 98.7 % of first - time freshmen lived on campus .
In addition , 28.7 % of Cal Poly sophomores lived on campus in fall 2015 .
There are five distinct groups of residence halls on the Cal Poly campus .
The five North Mountain halls , constructed in the 1950s , are the oldest on campus still used for residential purposes .
The six " red - brick " halls were completed shortly afterward in 1959 .
The Sierra Madre and Yosemite halls were finished by 1968 , and the Cerro Vista Apartments were completed in 2003 .
The Poly Canyon Village housing complex , with a similar style as the Cerro Vista apartments , was completed in 2009 at a cost of $ 300 million , making it the California State University system 's largest construction project to date .
Each of the residence halls represent a different living community on campus .
The six red - brick halls are the Living - Learning Program halls for the different colleges of Cal Poly .
The five North Mountain halls are organizationally a part of the engineering Living - Learning Program .
The Sierra Madre and Yosemite halls are the First - Year Connection Program halls and focus on freshman - oriented transition programs .
All buildings house students of all majors .
The Cerro Vista Apartments is the Transitions community for first - year and second - year students .
Poly Canyon Village is the Sophomore Success Program community , which is open to primarily to sophomores , but also juniors and seniors , and helps students transition into independent living .
GREEK LIFE
Section::::Greek life . !
colspan="2 " Fraternities !
colspan="2 " Sororities * Alpha Epsilon Pi
* Alpha Gamma Rho * Alpha Sigma Phi
* Beta Theta Pi *
Delta Chi
* Delta Upsilon * Kappa Sigma * Lambda Chi Alpha
* Phi Kappa Psi *
Phi Sigma Kappa * Pi Kappa Phi *
Sigma Nu
* Sigma Pi *
Tau Kappa Epsilon
* Theta Chi
* Zeta Beta Tau
* Alpha Chi Omega
* Alpha Gamma Delta
* Alpha Epsilon Phi * Alpha Omicron Pi
* Alpha Phi
* Chi Omega * Delta Gamma
* Gamma Phi Beta * Kappa Alpha Theta
* Kappa Kappa Gamma
* Sigma Kappa Greek organizations have been at Cal Poly since 1949 .
The Greek community consists of three governing councils at Cal Poly : United Sorority and Fraternity Council ( USFC ) , Interfraternity Council ( IFC ) , and Panhellenic Association ( PHA ) .
Cal Poly also offers Greek organizations based on academic fields of study .
, Greek Life has been suspended indefinitely by the university following a number of racial controversies , the most recent of which being the 2018 Cal Poly Blackface Incident .
WEEK OF WELCOME
ORIENTATION
PROGRAM
Section::::Week of Welcome orientation program .
The Week of Welcome program , more commonly known as " WOW " , serves as a volunteer - based orientation program for new students during the first week after move - in during the beginning of the school year in September .
Its purpose is to introduce students to the campus and the community and prepare them for a successful college career .
Freshmen are placed in a group with 10–12 other new students while transfer students are in groups of 40 - 60 ; each group is led by two current Cal Poly student orientation leaders .
The " WOW " groups participate in an array of orientation events in addition to activities both on- and off - campus .
In 2010 , the awareness section of the program won the 2010 National Orientation Directors Association ( NODAC ) Media & Publications Showcase Award in the Emerging Technologies .
The awareness section was entirely developed by student volunteers .
The program started in 1956 and is now the largest volunteer orientation program in the nation .
CLUBS AND INDEPENDENT STUDENT ORGANIZATIONS Section::::Clubs and independent student organizations .
Cal Poly has many recognized clubs and independent student organizations operating on campus .
Included ( a full list available on the Associated Students , Incorporated website ) are over 150 groups , including , among many others , cultural clubs and exchanges , mathematics and science clubs , religious and atheistic groups , service organizations , engineering research and development clubs , professional development organizations , a perennial Rose Parade Float design program , LGBTQ+ and Multicultural groups , competitive and social athletic teams , and academic honors clubs .
Especially impressive are the engineering clubs and independent student organizations on campus such as Prove Lab , PolySat , CubeSat , and QL+ . RACIAL AND ECONOMIC DIVERSITY OF STUDENT BODY Section::::Racial and economic diversity of student body .
+ Demographics of student body ( Fall 2015 ) ! ! !
All students !
African American !
Asian American !
Hawaiian / Pacific Islander !
Hispanic American ( of any race ) !
Multi - Racial !
Native American !
Non - resident Alien !
White American !
Ethnicity unknown / other !
Male !
Female , Cal Poly San Luis Obispo has the least racially diverse student population of all California State University and University of California campuses , though it is still far more diverse than the surrounding community it serves .
President Armstrong has been working to increase the percentage of non - white students on campus , boasting a drop of white students as a share of the university student body from 63 % to 55 % .
The city of San Luis Obispo is 84.5 % white .
About 84.2 % of the students attending California Polytechnic State University - San Luis Obispo come from within California .
The Los Angeles Times reported that the university " was ranked one of the nation 's worst seven institutions for Latino student success . "
The Education Trust lists the university as an " Engine of Inequality " because " very few students come from working - class and low - income families .
" It 's one among 20 public institutions in the U.S. with this negative distinction .
RELATIONS
WITH LOCAL COMMUNITY Section::::Relations with local community .
Though generally regarded as a positive for the area due to the economic impact , Cal Poly has received criticism for both the behavior of students upsetting the community , and the effects on local housing market .
Parties and gatherings have gotten wilder due to an increased student body size and social media presence , leading to the university being named the # 9 party school in California by Niche .
In 2017 , the median home price in San Luis Obispo was $ 530,000 .
In May 2018 , Zillow estimated that the median home value has increased to $ 694,027 .
While the city has been building hundreds of single family housing on the south end of town , large areas of the north end in older neighborhoods have been converted to rental student housing because of a major increase in the number of students admitted to and attending the university and the lack of university supplied housing .
The university is currently building housing on campus to attempt to house up to 65 % of students and plans to cap enrollment at 25,000 , meaning that 11,250 students must find off - campus housing .
This has created an affordability crisis for the city itself , as most apartments that would generally be occupied by lower income families and individuals are now occupied solely by Cal Poly students , reducing supply and pushing low - income residents outside of the city .
Approximately 27 % of the residents live below the poverty line , a similar percentage to Cleveland , Ohio .
ATHLETICS Section::::Athletics .
Cal Poly fields 21 varsity sports ( 10 for men and 11 for women ) and participates in the NCAA 's Division I. Cal Poly competes in the Big West Conference , except for football and wrestling ( neither of which are sponsored by the Big West ) .
Cal Poly 's football team competes in the Big Sky Conference ; the wrestling team is a member of the Pac-12 Conference .
Prior to joining Division I in 1994 , the school won 35 NCAA Division II national team championships and competed in the NCAA Division II California Collegiate Athletic Association ( CCAA ) .
Cal Poly has two mascots .
The character represented in costume or cartoon is named Musty the Mustang .
The live mascot , a living mustang , is named Chase , after Margaret Chase , the university 's second president .
Cal Poly also offers various non varsity sports .
The Mustangs play college rugby in the California conference of Division 1-A.
The Mustangs are often ranked in the Top 25 nationwide , and their rugby sevens team has been ranked as high as 7th .
The Mustangs finished 8th in the nation at the 2011 USA Rugby Sevens Collegiate National Championships , and 12th at the 2012 competition .
INCIDENTS AND CONTROVERSIES POLY ROYAL RIOTS Section::::Incidents and controversies .
Section::::Poly Royal Riots .
On April 29 , 1990 , San Luis Obispo police responded to a call of a bicyclist down at around 11 pm .
The activity drew heavily intoxicated crowds that began to get unruly .
After unsuccessfully attempting to disperse the crowd , a mob began looting the nearby Campus Bottle Shoppe .
The next day , dumpsters were set on fire during more rioting and 127 people were arrested .
DISAPPEARANCE OF KRISTIN SMART Section::::Disappearance of Kristin Smart .
On May 25 , 1996 , Cal Poly student Kristin Smart disappeared without a trace after a birthday party .
The university and sheriff 's department have been investigating leads , including excavating the land around the Cal Poly " P " on an adjoining hill .
, the excavation of the area surrounding has been completed with articles found , however the sheriff 's department has not yet released what the findings are .
CROPS HOUSE INCIDENT
Section::::Crops House incident .
In 2008 , a university - owned house ( known as Crops House ) where agriculture students were given subsidized lodging in exchange for work on the school 's farms displayed a racist sign posted during a party which read : " No niggers , " along with a similar slur against gays .
At a later date , the house displayed a confederate flag tacked above the entrance to the house , draped near a hangman 's noose while a large Confederate flag laid painted on a table in front of the house .
PI KAPPA ALPHA FRATERNITY SUSPENSION Section::::Pi
Kappa Alpha fraternity suspension .
In 2015 , the Pi Kappa Alpha fraternity was suspended for six years following a report of sexual assault , unsafe alcohol consumption and other conduct policy violations at a party in October , 2014 .
In December , 2017 , the chapter voted to surrender its national charter , officially dissolving the chapter .
BLACKFACE INCIDENT
Section::::Blackface incident .
In 2018 , the Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity was suspended following a photo surfacing that showed a student wearing blackface .
In response to further protests , President Armstrong suspended all Greek Life on campus indefinitely .
This was followed with protests during Open House events for incoming freshmen .
On May 4 , 2018 , President Armstrong announced yet another blackface incident that was mocking the prior incident .
The incident is being investigated by the state .
ADMINISTRATIVE ORGANIZATION
FOUR ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISIONS
Section::::Administrative organization .
Section::::Four administrative divisions .
The university is organized administratively into four divisions : Academic Affairs , Student Affairs , Administration and Finance , and University Advancement .
The academic division is organized into six colleges , each with its own dean .
Academic Affairs also includes the Library , Research and Graduate Programs , and Information Technology Services .
CAL POLY CORPORATION Section::::Cal Poly Corporation .
The Cal Poly Corporation is a public - benefit , nonprofit corporation and university auxiliary .
It provides commercial services , fiscal services , and key support services to assist and promote the educational mission of Cal Poly and the California State University System ( CSU ) .
The Corporation engages only in those activities ancillary to state operation that are requested by Cal Poly 's President and approved by the CSU .
The corporation was founded in 1940 and was known as the Cal Poly Foundation until February 1 , 2006 .
CAL POLY FOUNDATION Section::::Cal Poly Foundation .
The Cal Poly Foundation is an auxiliary organization and IRC 501(c)(3 )
public charity that accepts and administers tax deductible gifts to the university .
The Cal Poly Foundation leads campus philanthropic activity by supporting fundraising activities and investing and managing the campus endowments .
CAL POLY EXTENDED
EDUCATION Section::::Cal Poly Extended Education .
The Cal Poly Extended Education provides access to degree , certificate , and professional development programs and services of the university to the citizens of San Luis Obispo , Santa Barbara , and Monterey Counties and through distance learning technologies to students across the country .
ASSOCIATED STUDENTS INC .
Section::::Associated Students Inc ..
The Associated Students Inc. ( ASI ) is a 501(c)(3 ) nonprofit corporation owned and operated by Cal Poly student leaders .
ASI has an annual operating budget in excess of $ 12 million .
ASI provides co - curricular experiences for students , faculty , and staff , including events , speakers , concerts , intramural sports , fitness programs , aquatics , outdoor adventure trips , craft center enrichment courses , club services , and child development .
ASI manages the University Union , Recreation Center , Sports Complex , and Children 's Center , totaling more than of campus facilities .
ALUMNI ASSOCIATION Section::::Alumni Association .
The Cal Poly Alumni Association seeks to engage and serve alumni ; to foster a lifelong connection between the University and its alumni ; and to foster goodwill and support for the University .
The association includes 15 regional and special interest chapters .
NOTABLE ALUMNI Section::::Notable alumni .
Cal Poly has more than 170,000 alumni living and working everywhere from New York to Washington D.C. to Wisconsin to Idaho to Hawaii .
Alumni include Peter Oppenheimer , Chief Financial Officer of Apple Inc. ; Farzad Nazem , Chief Technology Officer of Yahoo ; Linda Ozawa , founder of Jamba Juice ; Richard Bergquist , founder of PeopleSoft ; Gary Erickson , founder of Clif Bar ; Jason Neubauer , founder of The Santa Claus Affect ; Noel Lee , founder of Monster Cable ; William Swanson , CEO and founder of Raytheon ; Burt Rutan , aerospace pioneer ; Weird Al Yankovic , comedic musician ; and John Madden , NFL Hall of Fame coach , David Nwaba , shooting guard for the Chicago Bulls , and Ozzie Smith , Baseball Hall of Fame Major League Baseball player , NASA Astronaut Victor Glover .
, and Tory Bruno , CEO of space launch company , United Launch Alliance ( ULA ) ; Taylor Spivey , member of USA Triathlon National Team SEE
ALSO
* California Master Plan for Higher Education
* Leaning Pine Arboretum , north campus
REFERENCES
NOTES CITATIONS
SOURCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Cal Poly Athletics website