BLASTOCYST
The blastocyst is a structure formed in the early development of mammals .
It possesses an inner cell mass ( ICM ) which subsequently forms the embryo .
The outer layer of the blastocyst consists of cells collectively called the trophoblast .
This layer surrounds the inner cell mass and a fluid - filled cavity known as the blastocoele .
The trophoblast gives rise to the placenta .
The name " blastocyst " arises from the Greek βλαστός blastos ( " a sprout " ) and κύστις kystis ( " bladder , capsule " ) .
In humans , blastocyst formation begins about 5 days after fertilization , when a fluid - filled cavity opens up in the morula , a ball of cells .
The blastocyst has a diameter of about 0.1–0.2 mm and comprises 200–300 cells following rapid cleavage ( cell division ) .
About 1 day after blastocyst formation ( 5–6 days post - fertilization ) , which is when the blastocyst usually reaches the uterus , the blastocyst begins to embed into the endometrium of the uterine wall where it will undergo further developmental processes , including gastrulation .
Embedding of the blastocyst into the endometrium requires that it hatches from the zona pellucida , which prevents adherence to the oviduct as the pre - embryo makes its way to the uterus .
The blastocyst is completely embedded in the endometrium only 11–12 days after fertilization .
The use of blastocysts in in vitro fertilization ( IVF ) involves culturing a fertilized egg for five days before implanting it into the uterus .
It can be a more viable method of fertility treatment than traditional IVF .
The inner cell mass of blastocysts is the source of embryonic stem cells .
DEVELOPMENT CYCLE Section::::Development cycle .
During human embryogenesis , approximately 5–6 days after fertilization , the cells of the morula begin to undergo cell differentiation , and the morula changes into the blastocyst .
In the uterus the zona pellucida surrounding the blastocyst breaks down , allowing it to implant into the uterine wall approximately 6 days after fertilization .
Implantation marks the end of the germinal stage of embryogenesis .
BLASTOCYST FORMATION Section::::Blastocyst formation .
The zygote develops by mitosis , and when it has developed into 16 cells becomes known as the morula .
In many animals , though not in humans , the morula then develops by cavitation to become the blastula .
Cellular differentiation then develops the blastula 's cells into two types : trophoblast cells that surround the blastocoel and an inner mass of cells ( the embryoblast ) .
The conceptus is then known as the blastocyst .
The side of the blastocyst where the inner cellular mass forms is called the animal pole , and the opposite side is the vegetal pole .
The outer layer of trophoblast cells , resulting from compaction , pumps sodium ions into blastocyst , which causes water to enter through osmosis and form the internal fluid - filled blastocyst cavity ( blastocoel ) .
The blastocoel , trophoblast cells and inner cell mass cells are hallmarks of the blastocyst .
IMPLANTATION
Section::::Implantation .
Implantation is critical to the survival and development of the early human embryo .
It establishes a connection between the mother and the early embryo which will continue through the remainder of the pregnancy .
Implantation is made possible through structural changes in both the blastocyst and endometrial wall .
The zona pellucida surrounding the blastocyst breaches , referred to as hatching .
This removes the constraint on the physical size of the embryonic mass and exposes the outer cells of the blastocyst to the interior of the uterus .
Furthermore , hormonal changes in the mother , specifically a peak in luteinizing hormone ( LH ) , prepare the endometrium to receive and envelop the blastocyst .
Once bound to the extracellular matrix of the endometrium , trophoblast cells secrete enzymes and other factors to embed the blastocyst into the uterine wall .
The enzymes released degrade the endometrial lining , while autocrine growth factors such as human chorionic gonadotropin ( hCG ) and insulin - like growth factor ( IGF ) allow the blastocyst to further invade the endometrium .
Implantation in the uterine wall allows for the next step in embryogenesis , gastrulation , which includes formation of the placenta from trophoblastic cells and differentiation of the inner cell mass into the amniotic sac and epiblast .
STRUCTURE
Section::::Structure .
There are two types of blastomere cells :
* The inner cell mass , also known as the embryoblast , gives rise to the primitive endoderm and the epiblast .
*
The primitive endoderm develops into the amniotic sac which forms the fluid - filled cavity that the embryo resides in during pregnancy .
*
The epiblast gives rise to the three germ layers of the developing embryo during gastrulation ( endoderm , mesoderm , and ectoderm ) .
* The trophoblast is a layer of cells forming the outer ring of the blastocyst that combines with the maternal endometrium to form the placenta .
Trophoblast cells also secrete factors to make the blastocoel .
*
After implantation , cytotrophoblast is the inner layer of the trophoblast , composed of stem cells which give rise to cells comprising the chorionic villi , placenta , and syncytiotrophoblast .
*
After implantation , syncytiotrophoblast is the outermost layer of the trophoblast .
These cells secrete proteolytic enzymes to break down the endometrial extracellular matrix to allow for implantation of the blastocyst in the uterine wall .
The blastocoel fluid cavity contains amino acids , growth factors , and other molecules necessary for cellular differentiation .
CELL SPECIFICATION Section::::Cell specification .
Multiple processes control cell lineage specification in the blastocyst to produce the trophoblast , epiblast , and primitive endoderm .
These processes include gene expression , cell signaling , cell - cell contact and positional relationships , and epigenetics .
Once the ICM has been established within the blastocyst , this cell mass prepares for further specification into the epiblast and primitive endoderm .
This process of specification is determined in part by fibroblast growth factor ( FGF ) signaling which generates a MAP kinase pathway to alter cellular genomes .
Further segregation of blastomeres into the trophoblast and inner cell mass are regulated by the homeodomain protein , Cdx2 .
This transcription factor represses the expression of Oct4 and Nanog transcription factors in the trophectoderm .
These genomic alterations allow for the progressive specification of both epiblast and primitive endoderm lineages at the end of the blastocyst phase of development preceding gastrulation .
Trophoblasts express integrin on their cell surfaces which allow for adhesion to the extracellular matrix of the uterine wall .
This interaction allows for implantation and triggers further specification into the three different cell types , preparing the blastocyst for gastrulation .
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS
PREGNANCY TESTS Section::::Clinical implications .
Section::::Pregnancy tests .
Level of human chorionic gonadotropin secreted by the blastocyst during implantation is the factor measured in a pregnancy test .
HCG can be measured in both blood and urine to determine whether a woman is pregnant .
More hCG is secreted in a multiple pregnancy .
Blood tests of hCG can also be used to check for abnormal pregnancies .
IN VITRO FERTILIZATION Section::::In vitro fertilization .
In vitro fertilization ( IVF ) is an alternative to traditional in vivo fertilization for fertilizing an egg with sperm and implanting that embryo into a female 's womb .
For many years the embryo was inserted into the uterus two to three days after fertilization .
However at this stage of development it is very difficult to predict which embryos will develop best , and several embryos were typically implanted .
Several implanted embryos increased the likelihood of a developing fetus but also led to the development of multiple fetuses .
This was a major problem and drawback for using embryos to IVF .
A recent breakthrough for in vitro fertilization is the use of blastocysts .
A blastocyst is implanted five to six days after the eggs have been fertilized .
After five or six days it is much easier to determine which embryos will result in healthy live births .
Knowing which embryos will succeed allows just one blastocyst to be implanted , cutting down dramatically on the health risk and expense of multiple births .
Now that the nutrient requirements for embryonic and blastocyst development have been determined , it is much easier to give embryos the correct nutrients to sustain them into the blastocyst phase .
Blastocyst implantation through in vitro fertilization is a painless procedure in which a catheter is inserted into the vagina , guided through the cervix via ultrasound , and into the uterus where the blastocysts are inserted into the womb .
Blastocysts also offer an advantage because they can be used to genetically test the cells to check for genetic problems .
There are enough cells in a blastocyst that a few trophectoderm cells can be removed without disturbing the developing blastocyst .
These cells can be tested for chromosome aneuploidy using preimplantation genetic screening ( PGS ) .
SEE ALSO
* Developmental biology
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Blastocyst transfer and fertility treatment
* Risks of blastocyst transfer * Blastocyst photos at different stages of development
* Diagram at weber.edu * Is Blastocyst Culture
The Way To Go ?
–
Fertility Road