AIR FORCE ( SHOE )
The Air Force is a range of athletic shoes made by Nike , Inc. that began with the Air Force 1 and went on to include the Air Force 2 , Air Force 3 , Air Force STS , Air Force 5 , Air Force XXV and Air Force 09 .
The Air Force 1 was created by designer Bruce Kilgore and was the first basketball shoe to use the Nike Air technology .
The shoe is offered in low , mid and high - top .
AIR FORCE 1 Section::::Air Force 1 .
The Air Force 1 ( or AF1 or AF-1 ) was originally called simply the Air Force .
The name is a reference to Air Force One , the plane that carries the President of the United States .
The shoes are sold in three different styles , low , mid and high .
The mid comes with a connected strap .
The high - top Air Force 1s come with a velcro - securable strap ; the mid - top strap is secured to the shoe while the high - top 's strap is movable and removable on some versions .
Although the shoe comes in different colors and color schemes , the most common Air Force 1s sold are solid white ( also referred to as " white on white " ) , the second most common being solid black ( " black on black " ) .
Another identifying characteristic of an Air Force 1 shoe is a small medallion secured to the bottom of the laces but with holes on either side so it can be removed by sliding it off the shoe lace .
The medallion is engraved with the inscription " AF-1 " , with the year " ' 82 " inscribed beside it , and has historically been made out of a silver - colored metal ( perhaps pewter ) .
Its original design was more circular , but after a redesign the Air Force 1 's 25th anniversary in 2007 the medallion is now rectangular .
( The redesign also involved encasing the inscription in white plastic ; that was discarded in favor of the original medallion material . )
The Air Force 1 was produced in 1982 and discontinued in 1984 .
It was re - released in 1986 with the modern italic Nike logo with a Swoosh on the bottom on the back of the shoe .
Little has changed to the Air Force One since its creation in 1982 , although the original stitching on the side panels is no longer present in modern versions of the shoe .
Since then , over 1,700 color variations have been produced , bringing in an estimated 800 million USD / year in revenue .
The selling of the Air Force Ones online by certain retailers used to be prohibited by Nike who had restricted supply of the sneaker .
Nike now allows retailers to offer the shoe for sale online .
As a performance shoe , the AF1 is still used for street play as well as for professional play .
NBA players Jerry Stackhouse ( who now wears Adidas ) and Rasheed Wallace have worn AF1s on court .
Nike Air Force 1s were originally considered the favored shoe of inner - city youth , especially in Harlem , New York ; hence the nickname " Uptowns " .
Rapper Nelly and his group , St. Lunatics , collaborated on a 2002 single entitled " Air Force Ones " about the shoes .
The shoe is also a focus of the 2007 single " Classic ( Better Than I 've Ever Been ) " , a collaboration between Kanye West , Nas , Rakim and KRS - One , that was produced by DJ Premier
The Air Force One has become a favorite of sneaker collectors , often referred to as sneakerheads .
Certain rare styles can command several times their retail value .
LITIGATION Section::::Litigation .
Nike has vigorously defended the Air Force 1 in U.S. courts .
In one case , it sued an alleged infringer of its trademark in the Air Force 1 , Already LLC , dba YUMS , who responded by filing a counterclaim to invalidate the Air Force 1 trademark .
Several months later , apparently fearful that the defendant 's counterclaim could succeed , Nike dismissed all its claims with prejudice and gave HBO a " Covenant Not To Sue " and stating the following : " NIKE for and on behalf of itself , its parents , subsidiaries , divisions , related companies , affiliated companies , licensees , independent contract manufacturers , assigns , and/or other related business entities , as well as any of their predecessors , successors , directors , officers , employees , agents , distributors , attorneys , representatives , and employees of such entities , hereby unconditionally and irrevocably covenants to refrain from making any claim(s ) or demand(s ) , or from commencing , causing , or permitting to be prosecuted any action in law or equity , against Already or any of its parents , subsidiaries , divisions , related companies , affiliated companies , licensees , independent contract manufacturers , assigns , and/or other related business entities , as well as any of their predecessors , successors , directors , officers , employees , agents , distributors , attorneys , representatives , and employees of such entities and all customers of each of the foregoing ( whether direct or indirect ) , on account of any possible cause of action based on or involving trademark infringement , unfair competition , or dilution , under state or federal law in the United States relating to the NIKE Mark based on the appearance of any of Already 's current and/or previous footwear product designs , and any colorable imitations thereof , regardless of whether that footwear is produced , distributed , offered for sale , advertised , sold , or otherwise used in commerce before or after the Effective Date of this Covenant . " The issue that went up on appeal was whether Nike 's tactics had thereby rendered the entire dispute moot , meaning there was no longer an active case , so that the United States federal court had been deprived of jurisdiction to hear the defendant 's counterclaim .
On January 9 , 2013 , the Supreme Court of the United States unanimously ruled in Nike 's favor .
However , Already LLC dba YUMS now owns the right to manufacture and market the elements of the Nike Air Force trademark as it wishes .
LATER VERSIONS Section::::Later versions .
The Air Force 2 shoe introduced in 1987 is a newer variation of the original .
The shoe is a typical flat - soled , casual - wear sneaker that can be made in many different variations of colors .
Also , Air Force 2s were re - released internationally in the early 2000s .
They can be made in either the low - cut or high - top style .
The shoe can be custom made in any color , but typically it has either a white or black based background with almost any color used to fill in the Nike Swoosh and back heel .
The Air Force 3 introduced in 1988 was the most popular version of Air Force series .
It was worn by many basketball players at the time .
The Air Force III was more rugged looking and more durable than the previous two versions .
The original colorway was white / medium grey / black , however several other colors were introduced shortly after .
An actual " Air FORCE " logo was introduced on this model as well , with an image of half of a basketball on the tongue .
This logo would be used on the rest of the Air Force series .
The Air Force III was re - issued in 2006 in a very limited edition of colorways of the high top , and several colorways for the low top version .
The Air Force STS ( also known as Air Force 4 or Air Force IV ) was introduced in 1989 .
It was regularly worn by David Robinson in his rookie year .
The Air Force STS features leopard print and is also slightly higher than the first three versions of the Air Force series .
The Air Force 5 was introduced in 1990 .
The Air Force V was the first model to make the airbag visible on the side heels of the shoe .
The most popular colorway was white / medium grey / black / orange .
Just like the previous version it was slightly higher than the first three versions .
This was also the last original Air Force model to be made .
RETRO VERSIONS Section::::Retro versions .
In 2007 , for the 25th anniversary of the original Air Force 1 , Nike created the Air Force XXV , which took inspiration from the original Air Force 1 invented in 1982 .
This version featured a mismatched set of medallions to commemorate its twenty fifth anniversary ; one being from the original Air Force 1s with the other from the Air Force 25s .
Since its introduction , many different Air Force 1 signed or inspired by celebrities and athletes .
Also in 2007 , to further commemorate the 25th anniversary of the Air Force One , two high - end makes of the shoe were introduced .
They were hand - crafted in Italy , one from crocodile leather and the other from anaconda leather , and both were adorned with gold - tipped laces .
They were sold in extremely limited quantities and had a list price of $ 2000 , making them some of the most expensive sneakers ever to enter the marketplace .
In 2009 , Nike created Air Force 09 , an update of the original shoe .
The shoe comes in a solid black or white .
In 2010 , Nike commissioned DJ Clark Kent to design a Nike Air Force 1 Low pack of special limited edition Air Force 1 shoes .
In 2016 , Quicksilver ( played by actor Evan Peters ) uses a custom silver - colored Air Force 1 in the movie X - Men :
Apocalypse , which is very appropriate for its 80 's setting .
In 2017 , Nike partnered with Don C , Kareem " Biggs " Burke , Errolson Hugh , Travis Scott and Virgil Abloh for the 35th anniversary of the shoe .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * of the Nike Air Force 1