CALIFORNIA GRIZZLY BEAR
The California grizzly bear ( Ursus arctos californicus ) is an extinct subspecies of the grizzly bear , the very large North American brown bear .
" Grizzly " could have meant " grizzled " ( that is , with golden and grey tips of the hair ) or " fear - inspiring " ( this is actually spelled " grisly " ) .
Nonetheless , after careful study , naturalist George Ord formally classified it in 1815 – not for its hair , but for its character – as Ursus horribilis ( " terrifying bear " ) .
Genetically , North American grizzlies are closely related ; in size and coloring , the California grizzly bear was much like the grizzly bear of the southern coast of Alaska .
In California , it was particularly admired for its beauty , size and strength .
The grizzly became a symbol of the Bear Flag Republic , a moniker that was attached to the short - lived attempt by a group of American settlers to break away from Mexico in 1846 .
Later , this rebel flag became the basis for the state flag of California , and then California was known as the " Bear State . "
NOMENCLATURE Section::::Nomenclature .
A 1953 researcher stated , " The specific status of North American brown bears ( or grizzly bears ) is one of the most complex problems of mammalian taxonomy .
The difficulty stems directly from the work of Merriam ( 1918 ) , who concluded that there are 86 forms of grizzlies ( and brown bears ) in North America . "
North American grizzlies were taxonomically grouped as a species apart from other bear species , until DNA testing revealed that they should properly be grouped in the same species as the other brown bears .
Grizzlies living in California had been classified by Merriam into many subspecies , but the only genetically anomalous grouping in North America is the ABC Islands bears .
HISTORY AND EXTINCTION Section::::History and extinction .
Prior to Spanish settlement in the second half of the 1700s , it is estimated that 10,000 grizzly bears inhabited what is modern day California .
It is thought that the bears lived across almost the entirety of the state , save its most southeastern and northeastern corners .
The bears ate a diverse diet from California 's varied climates , ranging from plant sources like grasses , seeds , and berries , to animal sources such as deer , fish , and carrion — including beached whale carcasses .
Europeans ' first recorded encounters with California grizzly bears are found in diaries kept by several members of the 1769 Portola expedition , the first European land exploration of what is now the state of California .
Several place names that include the Spanish word for bear ( oso ) trace their origins back to that first overland expedition ( e.g. Los Osos ) .
As the settled frontier of New Spain was extended northward , settlers began to populate California and establish large cattle herds as the main industry .
The ranchers ' domesticated livestock were easy prey for the grizzly bears roaming freely across the state .
By eating their livelihood and scaring them , the grizzlies became enemies of the rancheros .
Vaqueros hunted the grizzlies , often roping and capturing them to be pitted against other animals in public battles .
These bear - baiting events flourished as popular spectacles in 19th century California .
Bloody fights that bears pitted against bulls often inspired betting as to whether the bear or the bull would win .
One persistently popular , but false phrase origin story related to these fights stems from famous 19th century newspaper man Horace Greeley .
While visiting California Greeley allegedly witnessed such a fight , and supposedly gave the modern stock market its " bear " and " bull " nicknames based on the fighting styles of the two animals : the bear swipes downward while the bull hooks upward .
In truth , the phrase 's origins predate Greeley 's 1859 journey to California by at least 100 years , but the myth of the California connection persists .
In 1866 , a grizzly bear described as weighing as much as was killed in what is present day Valley Center , California .
The incident was recalled in 1932 by Catherine E. Lovett Smith , and it was biggest bear ever found in California .
Lovett Smith witnessed the bear 's killing on her family 's ranch when she was six years old .
( Other sources confirm her account of the bear , but differ as to its exact size . )
Her telling of that bear is part of the oral history of " Bear Valley , " the original name for Valley Center .
Less than 75 years after the discovery of gold in 1848 , almost every grizzly bear in California had been tracked down and killed .
One prospector in Southern California , William F. Holcomb ( nicknamed " Grizzly Bill " Holcomb ) , was particularly well known for hunting grizzly bears in what is now San Bernardino County .
The last hunted California grizzly bear was shot in Tulare County , California , in August 1922 , although no body , skeleton or pelt was ever produced .
Two years later in 1924 , what was thought to be
a grizzly was spotted in Sequoia National Park for the last time and thereafter , grizzlies were never seen again in California .
REINTRODUCTION Section::::Reintroduction .
California still has habitat for about 500 grizzlies .
In 2014 , the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service received and rejected a petition to reintroduce grizzly bears to California .
In 2015 , the Center for Biological Diversity launched a petition aimed at the California state legislature to reintroduce the grizzly bear to the state .
The California grizzly bear has been considered as a possible candidate for attempts at de - extinction , through the proposed use of back - breeding , cloning and genetic engineering to recreate extinct species .
SYMBOLISM Section::::Symbolism .
The California grizzly bear is one of the state 's most visible and enduring symbols , adorning both the state flag and seal .
The Bear Flag first flew in 1846 as a symbol of the short - lived California Republic .
A second version was adopted as the state flag by the state legislature in 1911 .
The bear symbol became a permanent part of the state seal in 1849 .
The California grizzly bear was designated the official state animal in 1953 .
The bear is celebrated in name and as mascot of the sports teams of the University of California , Berkeley ( the California Golden Bears ) , and of the University of California , Los Angeles ( the UCLA Bruins ) and in the mascot of University of California , Riverside ( Scottie the Bear , dressed in a Highland kilt ) .
The California Maritime Academy operates a training ship named " Golden Bear " .
SEE ALSO
* Caniformia REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Shaggy God – Topic :
Ursus arctos californicus Merriam , 1896
* The Monarch Bear Institute * Bring Back the California Grizzly
* Grizzly Bear National Monument ( proposed )