SEMOLINA
Semolina is the coarse , purified wheat middlings of durum wheat mainly used in making pasta and couscous .
The word semolina can also refer to sweet dessert made from semolina and milk .
The term semolina is also used to designate coarse middlings from other varieties of wheat , and from other grains , such as rice and maize .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
Semolina is derived from the Italian word semola , meaning ' bran ' .
This is derived from the ancient Latin simila , meaning ' flour ' ,
itself a borrowing from Greek σεμίδαλις ( semidalis ) , " groats " .
The words simila , semidalis , groat , and grain may all have similar proto - Indo - European origins as two Sanskrit terms for wheat , samita and godhuma , or may be loan words from the Semitic root smd – to grind into groats ( cf . ) .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Modern milling of wheat into flour is a process that employs grooved steel rollers .
The rollers are adjusted so that the space between them is slightly narrower than the width of the wheat kernels .
As the wheat is fed into the mill , the rollers flake off the bran and germ while the starch ( or endosperm ) is cracked into coarse pieces in the process .
Through sifting , these endosperm particles , the semolina , are separated from the bran .
The semolina is then ground into flour .
This greatly simplifies the process of separating the endosperm from the bran and germ , as well as making it possible to separate the endosperm into different grades because the inner part of the endosperm tends to break down into smaller pieces than the outer part .
Different grades of flour can thus be produced .
TYPES Section::::Types .
Semolina made from durum wheat is yellow in color .
Semolina is often used as the base for dried products such as couscous , which is made by mixing roughly 2 parts semolina with 1 part durum flour ( finely ground semolina ) .
Broadly speaking , meal produced from grains other than wheat may also be referred to as semolina , e.g. rice semolina , or corn semolina ( more commonly known as grits in the U.S. ) .
When semolina comes from softer types of wheats , it is white in color .
In this case , the correct name is flour , not semolina .
In the United States , coarser meal coming from softer types of wheats is known also as farina .
It is lower grade ( lower protein ) and does not hold shape as well as durum .
DISHES SAVORY Section::::Dishes .
Section::::Savory .
In Germany , Austria , Hungary , Bosnia , Bulgaria , Serbia , Slovenia , Romania and Croatia , semolina is known as Grieß ( a word related to " grits " ) and is mixed with egg to make Grießknödel , which can be added to soup .
The particles are fairly coarse , between 0.25 and 0.75 millimeters in diameter .
In South India , semolina is used to make savory foods , like Rava dosa and Upma .
It is sometimes also used to coat slices of fish before it is pan - fried in oil , to give it a crispy coating .
In much of North Africa , durum semolina is made into the staple couscous .
Semolina is a common food in West Africa , especially among Nigerians .
It is eaten as either lunch or dinner with stew or soup .
It is prepared just like eba ( cassava flour ) or fufu with water and boiled for 5 to 10 minutes .
SWEET Section::::Sweet .
In the US , semolina ( specifically farina ) is boiled to produce a porridge ; a popular brand of this is Cream of Wheat .
In Austria , Hungary , Bosnia , Bulgaria , Slovenia , Serbia , Romania , Croatia and the Czech Republic semolina is cooked with water or milk and sweetened with squares of chocolate to make the breakfast dish Grießkoch or Grießbrei .
The German Grießbrei and the Dutch griesmeelpap usually do n't contain chocolate and are rather served as a dessert than a breakfast dish .
In English this kind of dessert is commonly known as semolina pudding .
In Slovakia , Sweden , Estonia , Finland , Lithuania , Latvia , Poland , Romania , Ukraine , Belarus , Israel , and Russia , it is eaten as breakfast porridge , sometimes mixed with raisins and served with milk .
In Swedish it is known as mannagrynsgröt , or boiled together with blueberries , as blåbärsgröt .
In Sweden , Estonia , Finland and Latvia , for a dessert usually eaten in summer , semolina is boiled together with juice from berries and then whipped into a light , airy consistency to create klappgröt ( Swedish name ) , also known as vispipuuro ( Finnish name ) or mannavaht ( Estonian name ) or uzpūtenis ( Latvian name ) .
On the Indian subcontinent , semolina ( called Suji ) is used for such confection or sweetmeat [ Halwa ] ] .
Such a preparation is also a popular dessert in Greece ( halvas ) and Cyprus ( halvas ) .
In Greece , the dessert galaktoboureko is made by making a custard from the semolina and then wrapping it in phyllo sheets .
In Cyprus , the semolina may be mixed also with almond cordial to create a light , water - based pudding .
In Turkey ( " Helva " ) , Bulgaria ( " Halva " ) , Iran ( " Halva " ) , India ( " Halva " ) , Bangladesh ( " Halua " ) , Palestine ( " Khalwa " ) , and Arab countries , halawa is sometimes made with semolina scorched with sugar , butter , milk , and pine nuts .
In Nepal , semolina is called Suji and is used for preparing sweet dishes like Haluwa ( Nepali equivalent of Indian and Pakistani Halwa .
IN BAKING Section::::In baking .
As an alternative to corn meal , semolina can be used to flour the baking surface to prevent sticking .
In bread making , a small proportion of durum semolina added to the usual mix of flour is said to produce a tasty crust .
SEE ALSO
* Bombay rava REFERENCES