FINANCIAL DISTRICT , MANHATTAN
The Financial District of Lower Manhattan , also known as FiDi , is a neighborhood located on the southern tip of Manhattan Island , where the City of New York itself originated in 1624 .
The district comprises the offices and headquarters of many of the city 's major financial institutions , including the New York Stock Exchange and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York .
Anchored on Wall Street in the Financial District , New York City has been called both the most financially powerful city and the leading financial center of the world , and the New York Stock Exchange is the world 's largest stock exchange by total market capitalization .
Several other major exchanges have or had headquarters in the Financial District , including the New York Mercantile Exchange , NASDAQ , the New York Board of Trade , and the former American Stock Exchange .
The neighborhood roughly overlaps with the boundaries of the New Amsterdam settlement in the late 17th century .
The population of the Financial District has grown to an estimated 61,000 residents as of 2018 , up from 43,000 as of 2014 , which in turn was nearly double the 23,000 recorded at the 2000 Census .
DESCRIPTION AND HISTORY Section::::Description and history .
The Financial District encompasses roughly the area south of City Hall Park in Lower Manhattan but excludes Battery Park and Battery Park City .
The former World Trade Center complex was located in the neighborhood until the September 11 , 2001 attacks ; the neighborhood includes the successor One World Trade Center .
The heart of the Financial District is often considered to be the corner of Wall Street and Broad Street , both of which are contained entirely within the district .
The northeastern part of the financial district ( along Fulton Street and John Street ) was known in the early 20th century as the Insurance District , due to the large number of insurance companies that were either headquartered there , or maintained their New York offices there .
Until the late 20th and early 21st century , the neighborhood was considered to be primarily a destination for daytime traders and office workers from around New York City and the surrounding areas .
The neighborhood now has a growing number of full - time residents , to an estimated 61,000 residents as of 2018 , over double the 23,000 recorded at the 2000 Census , with many buildings being converted from office space to apartments and condominiums after the September 11 , 2001 attacks .
Although the term is sometimes used as a synonym for Wall Street , the latter term is often applied metonymously to the financial markets as a whole ( and is also a street in the district ) , whereas " the Financial District " implies an actual geographical location .
The Financial District is part of Manhattan Community Board 1 , which also includes five other neighborhoods ( Battery Park City , Civic Center , Greenwich South , Seaport , and Tribeca ) .
POINTS OF INTEREST Section::::Points of interest .
Federal Hall National Memorial , on the site of the first U.S. Capitol and the first inauguration of George Washington as the first President of the United States , is located at the corner of Wall Street and Nassau Street .
The Financial District has a number of tourist attractions such as the adjacent South Street Seaport Historic District , the New York City Police Museum , and Museum of American Finance .
Bowling Green is the starting point of traditional ticker - tape parades on Broadway , where here it is also known as the Canyon of Heroes .
The Museum of Jewish Heritage and the Skyscraper Museum are both in adjacent Battery Park City which is also home to the Brookfield Place ( formerly World Financial Center ) .
TALLEST BUILDINGS
Section::::Tallest buildings . !
Name ! class="unsortable
" Image !
Height !
Floors !
Year !
Notes align = left Is the sixth - tallest building in the world and the tallest building in the United States since its topping out on May 10 , 2013 .
It is also the tallest building in the Western Hemisphere and the tallest all - office building in the world .
align =
left Third - tallest building at the rebuilt World Trade Center and in the Financial District .
The building opened to tenants in 2013 .
align =
left 22nd - tallest building in the United States ; formerly known as the American International Building and the Cities Service Building 70 Pine is being transformed into a residential skyscraper with 644 rental residences , 132 hotel rooms and 35,000 square feet of retail align =
left 26th - tallest in the United States ; was world 's tallest building for less than two months in 1930 ; formerly known as the Bank of Manhattan Trust Building ; also known as 40 Wall Street align = left Also known as Goldman Sachs World Headquarters
align =
left Also known as Deutsche Bank Building align =
left Formerly known as the U.S. Steel Building align =
left Formerly known as the City Bank - Farmers Trust Building align =
left Also known as Three World Financial Center
align =
left Also known as Marine Midland Building align =
left Also known as Bank of New York Mellon Building align =
left Also known as Two World Financial Center
GALLERY
SEE ALSO * Economy of New York City REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Photographs of Financial District * Wikipages Financial District , a wiki - based business directory for New York 's Financial District .