CUTTHROAT ( POOL ) Cutthroat or cut - throat is a typically three - player or team pocket billiards game , played on a pool table , with a full standard set of pool balls ( 15 numbered s and a ) ; the game can not be played with three or more players with an unnumbered reds - and - yellows ball set , as used in blackball .
Each player is commonly assigned a set of five consecutively numbered object balls , though the number of balls will vary by number of players .
The object of the game is to be the last player with at least one ball of their group remaining on the table .
The name " cutthroat " is not unique to pool , but is used to refer to other games played with three or more players in which all players must fend for themselves , e.g. cutthroat bridge and cutthroat American handball .
GAMEPLAY
Section::::Gameplay .
When the fifteen balls for cutthroat , the 1 ball is placed on the and the 6 ball and 11 ball are placed on the other two corners of the billiards rack .
In cutthroat , there are ( usually ) three sets of balls .
Balls 1–5 are called the " low " balls , the " mid " balls are 6–10 , and the " high " balls are 11–15 .
Each of the three players will eventually " own " one of these sets of five balls .
Winning is accomplished by legally ( ) all of the other players ' balls .
Whether each shot must be is determined before the game .
Each set of five balls is initially unclaimed – the ball sets remain " open " until at least one ball from two sets have been pocketed .
For example , if the breaking player pockets the 6 then the 9 , that player definitely does not own the 6–10 group , but does not yet clearly own either 1–5 or 11–15 .
If the player had pocketed the 6 then the 2 , the player would definitely be group 11–15 .
A foul break thus includes the possibility that the fouling breaker may eventually be assigned a group from which a ball was pocketed on the foul break shot .
However , if there was a foul on the break , no set can be claimed and the table is still open , no matter what balls may have been pocketed .
A player 's turn continues so long as he legally pockets one or more object balls with each shot .
A shooter can even knock in his own ball , allowing him to continue a turn in exchange for his now - weakened position .
This circumstance is called " cutting one 's own throat " .
If a player sinks his own last ball ( intentionally or otherwise ) , he must sit out the rest of the game , except as noted below .
FOULS Section::::Fouls .
A ( knocking the cue ball into a pocket or off the table ) is subject to special penalties , covered below , and results in the incoming player receiving .
The general rules of pocket billiards apply , including typical fouls , such as striking the cue ball twice on the same shot , striking an object ball instead of the cue ball with the cue stick , knocking an object ball off the table , etc .
Such fouls end the shooter 's turn without further penalty .
The incoming player does not have cue ball in - hand , but takes the table as it lies ( after balls are spotted ) .
WINNING
Section::::Winning .
The object is to be the last player with at least one object ball left on the table .
When a player has no balls on the table , he is said to be " out " ( eliminated ) and his turn is skipped in the player rotation .
Under normal rules ( where balls are retrieved on a scratch – see below ) , being " out " may be a temporary condition .
SPOTTING Section::::Spotting .
The consequence of a ( knocking the cue ball into a pocket or off the table ) is that all of the shooter 's opponents are rewarded by taking one of their balls ( if any have been pocketed ) out of a pocket
and it back onto the table ( with the next shooting player 's ball placed in front of the other 's ball ) .
Thus , a player who is " out " returns to the game , with one of their balls back in play , when any then - surviving player scratches .
If a scratch occurs after first pocketing an opponent 's ball on the same turn , still only one ball per opponent is returned to the table , as the penalty is intended not to nullify the effects of the scratch , but to punish the offender and reward the other players evenly .
In the uncommon case that the final shot leaves only the cue ball on the table ( the shooting player has pocketed both the final opponent 's last ball the shooter 's own last ball ) , one ball of player will be spotted in their order of shooting .
The shooting player continues unless the last shot was not made legally .
An object ball knocked off the table is spotted , unless it is the shooters own , in which case it is pocketed .
VARIATIONS ALTERNATIVE GROUP
SELECTION Section::::Variations .
Section::::Alternative group selection .
A common variation is that the first shooter to legally pocket a ball without a ( ) gets to claim any set that he wants to be his own .
If the shooter pockets any ball ( without fouling ) , he can claim any set , and continues shooting .
The next shooter who legally pockets a ball during his turn gets to claims ownership of one of the two remaining sets .
In the advent of a foul break , the first successive shooter to legally pocket a ball gets to claim any set , and the next shooter who legally pockets a ball claims one of the remaining sets .
A less common variation ( because it involves risk to the breaker ) is that the sets are assigned before the start of play : the breaking shooter has 1–5 , the second player has 6–10 , and the third has 11–15 .
ALTERNATIVE SCRATCH AND SPOTTING
RULES Section::::Alternative scratch and spotting rules .
In the event of a cue - ball scratch , each of the fouling player 's opponents who was still in the game before the foul may return one of their pocketed balls to the table .
Players who were already " out " before that shot remain out .
In this version , if the shooter pockets both the last remaining opponent object ball and the shooter 's own final object ball ( i.e. all balls are down but the cue ball ) , then only a player who was still in the game ( typically the shooter and the final opponent ) before that last shot may spot a ball ; eliminated players do not return to the game .
The same shooter continues .
Another variation ( regardless of the above spotting rule ) that is common in North America is that the incoming player after a scratch receives cue ball in - hand behind the ( ) only , not in - hand anywhere on the table .
MORE PLAYERS Section::::More players .
Team play can be pairs ( or more ) of
players being assigned to each of the three sets of balls and taking alternating turns or ( in format ) alternating shots during their turn .
The game generally is also playable by five players ( or teams ) , with each owning three balls rather than five .
Variant ball sets ( with smaller and more numerous balls , and a custom rack for them ) have also been manufactured for a larger number of players .
The game is possible with any number of players from two to 15 .
Because some combinations would result in not all of the players having the same number of balls , sometimes one or more must be taken out of the rack , and sometimes ra .
* Two players : seven balls each * Three players : five balls
each * Four or five players : three balls each * Six or seven players : two balls
each * Eight to 15 players : one ball each Eagle Pool Balls manufactures a ball set using colored rather than numbered groups of balls , with which three- to five - player cutthroat can be played .
It makes use of different sizes and shapes of racks : a standard triangle rack of three groups of five balls each for three players ; a custom , large diamond rack of four groups of four balls each for four players ; and a standard triangle rack of five groups of three balls each for five players .
MULTI - GAME SCORING Section::::Multi - game scoring .
Various point systems may be used to play matches or sets , rather than just one game .
With its uniqueness as a three player game , counting games won is possible but does not give credit for finishing second .
One system is awarding three points for a win , plus an additional one point for each of the winner 's remaining balls at the end of each game .
The player last eliminated receives two points , the first eliminated player none .
There may also be a bonus awarded for playing a perfect game , sinking both opponents ' sets of 5 balls while having all 5 of yours remaining ( Usually 2 points , making a perfect game worth 10 points total : 3 for the win , 5 for remaining balls , plus 2 bonus ) .
This system emphasizes strategy regarding whom to eliminate first as the match goes on , often creating alliances of the two trailing players to catch the leader in points .
The match may be won by reaching a set number of points , or reaching a set deadline in time .
COIN - OPERATED TABLE PLAY Section::::Coin - operated table play .
When played on coin - operated tables ( such that balls can not be returned to play at will once pocketed , only after paying for another game ) a player who scratches selects one of his or her own balls to be pocketed immediately , in lieu of opponents ' balls returning to the table .
In the event that a scratch occurs on the same shot that an opponent 's ball is pocketed , the affected opponent is permitted to select a ball belonging to the offender which is to be removed instead of the player that scratched choosing the ball to be pocketed .
In either case , this can result in the scratching player being " out " .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The game is referenced by Rick Danko of The Band in the opening scene of the classic rock film The Last Waltz .
REFERENCES