DOUBLE STOP
In music , a double stop refers to the technique of playing two notes simultaneously on a stringed instrument such as a violin , a guitar , a cello , or a double bass .
In performing a double stop , two separate strings are bowed or plucked simultaneously .
Although the term itself suggests these strings are to be fingered ( stopped ) , in practice one or both strings may be open .
A triple stop is the same technique applied to three strings ; a quadruple stop applies to four strings .
Double , triple , and quadruple stopping are collectively known as multiple stopping .
Early extensive examples of the double - stop and string chords appear in Carlo Farina 's Capriccio Stravagante from 1627 , and in certain of the sonatas of Biagio Marini 's op . 8 of 1629 .
BOWING
Section::::Bowing .
On instruments with a curved bridge , it is difficult to bow more than two strings simultaneously .
Early treatises make it clear that composers did not expect three notes to be played at once , even though the notes may be written in a way as to suggest this .
Playing four notes at once is almost impossible .
The normal way of playing three or four note chords is to sound the lower notes briefly and allow them to ring while the bow plays the upper notes ( a broken chord ) .
This gives the illusion of a true triple or quadruple stop .
In forte , however , it is possible to play three notes at once , especially when bowed toward the fingerboard .
With this technique more pressure than usual is needed on the bow , so this can not be practiced in softer passages .
This technique is mainly used in music with great force , such as the cadenza - like solo at the beginning of the last movement of Tchaikovsky 's violin concerto .
BACH BOW Section::::Bach bow .
An invention called the " Bach bow " with an arched back uses a system of levers to slacken or tighten bow hair immediately while playing so as to ( according to its advocates ) facilitate the performance of polyphonic music .
Such a bow was conceived early in the 20th century by Arnold Schering and Albert Schweitzer and constructed by Rolf Schröder in 1933 .
A similar device called the " Vega bow " was built in 1954 under the sponsorship of the violinist Emil Telmányi .
Neither of these bows bears any particular relation to historical Baroque bows and neither has ever been widely employed .
NOTATION Section::::Notation .
In longer three - note or four - note chords , either the top note or the top two notes are sustained after the lower notes have been played as grace notes .
Sometimes the noteheads for the lower notes are filled in to show they are of short duration while the noteheads for the notes to be held are left open .
This notation occurs , for example , at the beginning of the fourth movement of Beethoven 's fifth symphony .
Simultaneous notes in a single part for an orchestral string section may played as multiple stops or the individual notes may be distributed among the players within the section .
Where the latter is intended , divisi or div .
is written above the staff .
SEE ALSO
* Music terminology SOURCES