ENDER 'S GAME ( SERIES )
The Ender 's Game series ( often referred to as the Ender saga and also the Enderverse ) is a series of science fiction books written by American author Orson Scott Card .
The series started with the novelette Ender 's Game , which was later expanded into the novel of the same title .
It currently consists of sixteen novels , thirteen short stories , 47 comic issues , an audioplay , and a film .
The first two novels in the series , Ender 's Game and Speaker for the Dead , each won both the Hugo and Nebula Awards , and were among the most influential fiction novels of the 1980s .
The series is set in a future where mankind is facing annihilation by an aggressive alien society , an insect - like race known formally as " Formics " , but more colloquially as " Buggers " .
The series protagonist , Andrew " Ender " Wiggin , is one of the child soldiers trained at Battle School ( and eventually Command School ) to be the future leaders for the protection of Earth .
ENDERVERSE ENDER SERIES Section::::Enderverse .
Section::::Ender series .
Starting with Ender 's Game , five novels ( also known as the " Ender Quintet " ) have been released that tell the story of Ender .
Card first wrote Ender 's Game as a novelette , but went back and expanded it into a novel so that he could use Ender in another novel , Speaker for the Dead .
That novel takes place three thousand and two years after Ender 's Game , although , due to relativistic space travel , Ender himself ( now using his full name Andrew ) is only 36 , making him only 25 years older than he was at the end of the Formic Wars .
While the first novel concerned itself with armies and space warfare , the novels in the Speaker trilogy ( Speaker for the Dead and its two sequels Xenocide and Children of the Mind ) are more philosophical in nature .
They deal with the difficult relationship between the humans and the " Piggies " ( or " Pequeninos " ) , and Andrew 's ( Ender 's ) attempts to stop another xenocide from happening .
A prequel to Speaker for the Dead named Ender in Exile was released in November 2008 .
It involves Ender 's journey to the first colony ( and thus serves as a replacement for the last chapter of Ender 's Game and as a sequel to the remainder of the novel ) , as well as his meeting a character from the parallel Shadow saga ( effectively wrapping up a remaining plotline in the parallel series ) .
SHADOW SAGA Section::::Shadow saga .
Starting with Ender 's Shadow , five more novels have been released that tell the story of the people whom Ender left behind – this has been dubbed the Shadow saga ( also known as the " Shadow Quintet " ) .
Ender 's Shadow is a parallel novel to Ender 's Game , telling many of the same events from the perspective of Bean , a mostly peripheral character in Ender 's Game , while the first three sequels , Shadow of the Hegemon , Shadow Puppets and Shadow of the Giant tell the story of the struggle for world dominance after the Bugger War .
This involves the Battle School children , as well as Ender 's brother , Peter Wiggin , and Petra Arkanian going up against Achilles de Flandres ( from Poke 's crew ) .
A sequel novel to Shadow of the Giant named Shadows in Flight further introduces three of Bean 's children , those who also have Anton 's key turned .
Shadows Alive , a future sequel , takes place after both Children of the Mind and Shadows in Flight , tying up the two series , and explaining some unanswered questions .
FORMIC WARS
THE FIRST FORMIC WAR Section::::Formic Wars .
Section::::The First Formic War .
Card and Aaron Johnston wrote a trilogy to cover the events of the First Formic War .
Chronologically , this series comes before all other books in the Ender 's Game series .
Earth Unaware was released on July 17 , 2012 .
Earth Afire , was released on June 4 , 2013 , and Earth Awakens on June 10 , 2014 .
THE SECOND FORMIC WAR Section::::The Second Formic War .
On November 4 , 2013 , Johnston confirmed work on a second trilogy of novels covering the Second Formic War , with the manuscript for the first book due in 2014 .
The planned titles of the novels are ( in order )
The Swarm , The Hive , and The Queens .
The Swarm , continuing the stories of Victor Delgado , Mazer Rackham , and Bingwen , was released on August 2 , 2016 .
The release of The Hive is scheduled for June 11 , 2019 .
FLEET SCHOOL Section::::Fleet School .
According to an interview with Orson Scott Card at Southern Virginia University , Fleet School is " a new set of sequels to Ender 's Game .
It 's for a young adult audience .
It 's what happens to Battle School after the International Fleet loses its purpose of war .
It becomes what is called Fleet School , and it prepares kids to become commanders / explorers in the colonies that are going to be forming .
We get to see that as the school administrators repurpose the school , the Battle Room is still there , but it 's a whole different kind of education . "
On November 12 , 2015 , Orson Scott Card announced the title of the series and its first novel , Children of the Fleet was released on October 10 , 2017 .
PUBLICATIONS NOVELS IN THE SERIES Section::::Publications .
Section::::Novels in the series .
To date , there are six novels in the Ender 's Game series , five novels in the Shadow Saga and 4 novels in the Formic Wars series .
According to Card , there is no strictly preferred order of reading them , except that Xenocide should be read right before Children of the Mind .
The books can be read in the order in which they were originally written or in chronological order .
PUBLICATION DATE Section::::Publication date . !
# ! !
Title ! !
Series ! !
Words ! !
Release ! !
Awards / Notes ! ! !
Total ! ! ! !
1,858,030 ! ! ! !
CHRONOLOGICAL ORDER
* Earth Unaware * * Earth Afire * * Earth Awakens
* * The Swarm * * The Hive ( TBA ) * * The Queens ( TBA ) *
* Ender 's Game *
* Ender 's Shadow ( Note : The events of Ender 's Game and Ender 's Shadow take place in roughly the same time period . )
* * A War of Gifts ( Note : This takes place during Ender 's Game / Ender 's Shadow . )
* * Children of the Fleet * * Shadow of the Hegemon * * Shadow Puppets
* * Shadow of the Giant
* * Ender in Exile ( Note : Beginning takes place during Shadow of the Hegemon and through Shadow of the Giant )
*
* Shadows in Flight * * Speaker for the Dead * * Xenocide * * Children of the Mind
* * Shadows Alive ( TBA ) * SHORT STORIES IN THE SERIES FIRST MEETINGS Section::::Short stories in the series .
Section::::First Meetings .
First Meetings is a collection of short stories whose settings range from before Ender 's Game until after Shadows in Flight and was first released in 2002 .
COMIC BOOKS IN THE SERIES Section::::Comic books in the series .
Comic books in the Ender Universe are currently being published by Marvel Comics .
GAME Section::::Game .
In 2008 it was announced an Ender 's Game video game was in the works .
It was to be known as Ender 's Game : Battle Room and was a planned digitally distributed video game for all viable downloadable platforms .
It was under development by Chair Entertainment , which also developed the Xbox Live Arcade games Undertow and Shadow Complex .
Chair had sold the licensing of Empire to Card , which became a best - selling novel .
Little was revealed about the game , save its setting in the Ender universe and that it would have focused on the Battle Room .
In December , 2010 , it was announced that the video game development had stopped and the project put on indefinite hold .
Orson Scott Card and Amaze Entertainment also came to an agreement about a game adaption of the Ender 's Game novel but the plans never became a reality .
MANGA
Section::::Manga .
In 2014 , Satō Shūhō 's manga , Ender 's Game ( Jp Ender no Game ) appeared .
AUDIOPLAY FILM Section::::Film .
The film Ender 's Game was released in the UK on October 25 , 2013 and in the USA on November 1 , 2013 .
The first script was based on two installments of the Ender series , Ender 's Game and Ender 's Shadow , when optioned by Warner Brothers , but was adapted to focus exclusively on Ender 's Game when purchased by Lionsgate .
The cast includes Harrison Ford , Abigail Breslin , Ben Kingsley , and Asa Butterfield as Ender Wiggin .
The film was directed by Gavin Hood . "
RELATED THE AUTHORIZED ENDER COMPANION Section::::Related .
Section::::The Authorized Ender Companion .
Written by Jake Black ,
The Authorized Ender Companion is " the indispensable guide to the universe of Ender 's Game . "
Sections in this book include : The Ender Encyclopedia , Ender 's Timeline , Ender 's Family Tree by Andrew Lindsay , Getting Ender
Right :
A Look at the Ender 's Game Screenplay Development by Aaron Johnston , and The Technology of Ender 's Game by Stephen Sywak .
The majority of the book consists of encyclopedia references to the events , characters , locations , and technology found in the Ender 's Game series up to the publication of Ender in Exile .
The book is notable for having new and behind the scenes information on certain topics such as Battle School Slang , The Look of the Formics , The History of Hyrum Graff , Ender and Valentine 's Travels , and Mazer Rackham 's Spaceship .
ENDER 'S WORLD : FRESH PERSPECTIVES ON THE SF CLASSIC ENDER 'S GAME Section::::Ender 's World : Fresh Perspectives on the SF Classic Ender 's Game .
Ender 's World contains 14 essays from Science Fiction and Young Adult writers , as well as military strategists and others about various aspects of Ender 's Game .
The book includes an introduction by Orson Scott Card , who edited Ender 's World and answers from many fan - submitted Enderverse questions from the Smart Pop Books Website .
These essays are included in the compilation : * " How It Should Have Ended " by Eric James Stone *
" The Monster 's Heart " by John Brown *
" The Cost of Breaking the Rules " by Mary Robinette Kowal
* " Winning and Losing in Ender 's Game " by Hilari Bell
* " Parallax Regained " by David Lubar , Alison S. Myers
* " Mirror , Mirror " by Alethea Kontis
* " Size Matters " by Janis Ian *
" Rethinking the Child Hero " by Aaron Johnston * " A Teenless World " by Mette Ivie Harrison *
" Ender on Leadership " by Colonel Tom Ruby
* " Ender Wiggin , USMC " by John F. Schmitt * " The Price of Our Inheritance " by Neal Shusterman *
" If the Formics Love Their Children Too " by Ken Scholes
* " Ender 's Game : A Guide to Life " by
Matt Nix SEE ALSO
* Ender 's Game ( film )
* List of characters in the Ender 's Game series
* List of works by Orson Scott Card REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
The official Orson Scott Card website *
The Ender Quartet , Ender 's Shadow , and Ender series pages at Tor Books
*
The Ender Saga