MONEY ORDER
A money order is a payment order for a pre - specified amount of money .
As it is required that the funds be prepaid for the amount shown on it , it is a more trusted method of payment than a check .
The money order system was established by a private firm in Great Britain in 1792 , and was expensive and not very successful .
Around 1836 it was sold to another private firm which lowered the fees , significantly increasing the popularity and usage of the system .
The Post Office noted the success and profitability , and it took over the system in 1838 .
Fees were further reduced and usage increased further , making the money order system reasonably profitable .
The only draw - back was the need to send an advance to the paying Post Office before payment could be tendered to the recipient of the order .
This drawback was likely the primary incentive for establishment of the Postal Order System on 1 January 1881 .
USING MONEY ORDERS Section::::Using money orders .
A money order is purchased for the amount desired .
In this way it is similar to a certified cheque .
The main difference is that money orders are usually limited in maximum face value to some specified figure ( for example , the United States Postal Service limits domestic postal money orders to US $ 1,000.00 ) while certified cheques are not .
Money orders typically consist of two portions : the negotiable cheque for remittance to the payee , and a receipt or stub that the customer retains for his / her records .
The amount is printed by machine or checkwriter on both portions , and similar documentation , either as a third hard copy or in electronic form and retained at the issuer and agent locations .
DRAWBACKS OF MONEY
ORDERS Section::::Drawbacks of money orders .
Money orders have limited acceptance in the insurance and brokerage industry because of concerns over money laundering .
Because of provisions within the USA PATRIOT Act and the Bank Secrecy Act , money orders have far more regulatory processing requirements than personal cheques , cashier 's cheques , or certified cheques .
MONEY ORDERS
AROUND
THE WORLD
INDIA
Section::::Money orders around the world .
Section::::India .
In India , a money order is a service provided by the Indian Postal Service .
A payer who wants to send money to a payee pays the amount and a small commission at a post office and receives a receipt for the same .
The amount is then delivered as cash to the payee after a few days by a postal employee , at the address specified by the payer .
A receipt from the payee is collected and delivered back to the payer at his address .
This is more reliable and safer than sending cash in the mail .
It is commonly used for transferring funds to a payee who is in a remote , rural area , where banks may not be conveniently accessible or where many people may not use a bank account at all .
Money orders are the most economical way of sending money in India for small amounts .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , money orders are typically sold by third parties such as the United States Postal Service , grocery stores , and convenience stores .
Some financial service companies such as banks and credit unions may not charge for money orders to their clients .
Money orders remain a trusted financial instrument .
However , just because a particular business can issue a money order does not necessarily mean that they will cash them .
The U.S. Postal Service issues money orders for a small charge at any location .
The United States Postal Service began selling money orders as an alternative to sending currency through the postal system in order to reduce post office robberies , an idea instituted by Montgomery Blair who was Postmaster - General 1861 - 1864 .
Money orders were later offered by many more vendors than just the postal service as a means to pay bills and send money internationally where there were not reliable banking or postal systems .
Companies that now offer money orders include 7 - 11 , QuikTrip , Cumberland Farms , Safeway , Western Union , MoneyGram , CVS , Wal - Mart , and 3 T Solutions .
Obtaining a money order in the United States is simple , as they can be purchased with any form of money at any post office , and are sold at many other locations .
The US Postal Service 's international money orders are accepted in 29 countries .
ANTI - COUNTERFEITING FEATURES Section::::Anti - counterfeiting features .
Postal money orders ( PMOs ) are generally regarded as one of the most difficult financial documents to counterfeit .
Security features include : * Watermarks .
Telltale watermark when held up to the light should reveal images of Benjamin Franklin , repeated on the left side ( top to bottom ) .
* Dark security strip running alongside the watermark ( top to bottom ) , just to the right .
If held to the light , a microfiber strip will show tiny letters " USPS " along its length , facing backward and forward .
* Rainbow of inked patterns and tones .
* PMOs are printed on crisp , clean , textured paper stock .
* Maximum value of $ 1,000 for domestic ( US ) postal money orders , and $ 700 for international postal money orders .
* Denominations appear in two locations .
If the denomination amounts are discolored , that indicates that they have been erased .
*
Ultraviolet features include the above - mentioned micro - fiber strip that glows red , and the PMO number on the reverse side and the bottom which will also appear red under UV light .
COUNTERFEITING
Section::::Counterfeiting .
Due to the increased public awareness of fraudulent US Postal Money Orders , counterfeiters are using these US Postal and other companies ' ( see above ) money orders to dupe their victims .
By obtaining their " mark 's " postal zip code , they will draft bogus money orders based on whichever franchises will most likely be in their victim 's home area as the familiarity of the store 's name offers a sense of security .
Furthermore , money orders are subject to erasing the name and writing in somebody else 's name .
Money order fraud is specifically not reimbursed by Western Union and the victim is required to go through local police to attempt to recover lost funds .
In response , the perpetrator who cashed the money order can simply claim " identity theft " to the investigating detective .
INTERNATIONAL MONEY ORDERS Section::::International money orders .
An international money order is very similar in many aspects to a regular money order except that it can be used to make payments abroad .
With it , a buyer can easily pay a seller for goods or services if he or she resides in another country .
International money orders are often issued by a buyer 's bank and bought in the currency that the seller accepts .
International money orders are thought to be safer than sending currency through the post because there are various forms of identification required to cash an international money order , often including a signature and a form of photo identification .
When purchasing an international money order , it is important to ensure that the specific type of money order is acceptable in the destination country .
Several countries are very strict that the money order be on pink and yellow paper and bear the words " international postal money order .
" In particular , the Japan Post ( one of the largest banking institutions in the world ) requires these features .
Most other countries have taken this as a standard when there is any doubt of a document 's authenticity .
ALTERNATIVES TO MONEY ORDERS Section::::Alternatives to money orders .
In the last decade , a number of electronic alternatives to money orders have emerged and have , in some cases , supplanted money orders as the preferred cash transmission method .
Many of these alternatives use the ubiquitous Visa / MasterCard payment systems to settle transactions .
In Japan , the konbini system enables cash to cash transfers and is available at many of the thousands of convenience stores located in the country .
In Italy , the PostePay system is offered through the Italian post office .
In Ireland , 3V is offered through mobile top - up locations .
In the United States , PaidByCash is offered at 60,000 grocery and convenience stores .
In Bangladesh , mobile banking services enable electronic transfer of money as well as retail transactions .
In the United Kingdom , a number of credit card providers have started to provide pre - paid credit cards .
These cards can be " topped - up " at any location that uses the Pay - Point system and also at the Post Office for the Post Office card .
PayPal has their own branded pre - paid card which can be " topped - up " using a PayPal account or Pay - Points .
SEE ALSO * Internet fraud * Money transfer ( other systems of transferring money )
* United States postal notes – a payment system developed out of fractional currency in the US * Postal Order – similar instrument in the United Kingdom REFERENCES