CORN STARCH Corn starch or maize starch is the starch derived from the corn ( maize ) grain .
The starch is obtained from the endosperm of the kernel .
Corn starch is a common food ingredient , used in thickening sauces or soups , and in making corn syrup and other sugars .
It is versatile , easily modified , and finds many uses in industry as adhesives , in paper products , as an anti - sticking agent , and textile manufacturing .
It has medical uses , such as to supply glucose for people with glycogen storage disease .
Like many products in dust form , it can be hazardous in large quantities due to its flammability .
When mixed with a fluid , cornstarch can rearrange itself into a non - Newtonian fluid .
For example , adding water transforms cornstarch into a material commonly known as Oobleck while adding oil transforms cornstarch into an electrorheological ( ER ) fluid .
The concept can be explained through the mixture termed " cornflour slime " .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Cornstarch was discovered in 1840 by Thomas Kingsford , superintendent of a wheat starch factory in Jersey City , New Jersey .
Until 1851 , corn starch was used primarily for starching laundry and other industrial uses .
USES Section::::Uses .
Although mostly used for cooking and as a household item , cornstarch is used for many purposes in several industries , ranging from its use as a chemical additive for certain products , to medical therapy for certain illnesses .
CULINARY Section::::Culinary .
Cornstarch is used as a thickening agent in liquid - based foods ( e.g. , soup , sauces , gravies , custard ) , usually by mixing it with a lower - temperature liquid to form a paste or slurry .
It is sometimes preferred over flour alone because it forms a translucent , rather than opaque mixture .
As the starch is heated , the molecular chains unravel , allowing them to collide with other starch chains to form a mesh , thickening the liquid ( Starch gelatinization ) .
It is usually included as an anti - caking agent in powdered sugar ( 10X or confectioner 's sugar ) .
A common substitute is arrowroot , which replaces the same amount of cornstarch .
Food producers reduce production costs by adding varying amounts of cornstarch to foods , for example to cheese and yogurt .
Chicken nuggets with a thin outer layer of cornstarch allows increased oil absorption and crispness after the latter stages of frying .
NON - CULINARY Section::::Non - culinary .
Baby powder may include cornstarch among its ingredients .
Cornstarch can be used to manufacture bioplastics and may be used in the manufacture of airbags .
MEDICAL Section::::Medical .
Cornstarch is the preferred anti - stick agent on medical products made from natural latex , including condoms , diaphragms , and medical gloves .
Cornstarch has properties enabling supply of glucose to maintain blood sugar levels for people with glycogen storage disease .
Cornstarch can be used starting at age 6–12 months allowing glucose fluctuations to be deterred .
MANUFACTURE
Section::::Manufacture .
The corn is steeped for 30 to 48 hours , which ferments it slightly .
The germ is separated from the endosperm and those two components are ground separately ( still soaked ) .
Next the starch is removed from each by washing .
The starch is separated from the corn steep liquor , the cereal germ , the fibers and the corn gluten mostly in hydrocyclones and centrifuges , and then dried .
( The residue from every stage is used in animal feed and to make corn oil or other applications . )
This process is called wet milling .
Finally , the starch may be modified for specific purposes .
RISKS Section::::Risks .
Like many other powders , cornstarch is susceptible to dust explosions .
It is believed that overheating of a cornstarch - based powder on June 27 , 2015 , initiated the Formosa Fun Coast explosion in Taiwan , despite warnings on the packaging indicating that the material is flammable .
NAMES AND VARIETIES
* Called cornstarch in the United States and Canada .
The term corn flour then refers to cornmeal that is very finely milled .
*
Although not a flour as such , called cornflour in the United Kingdom , Ireland , Israel and some Commonwealth countries .
Distinct in these countries from cornmeal .
SEE ALSO
*
Amylomaize , high amylose starch
* Bird 's Custard , the English custard based on cornflour , invented in 1837 * Waxy corn , waxy maize starch * Corn sauce
* Corn syrup * Corn ethanol * Modified starch
* Potato starch
* Tapioca starch
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * American Corn Refiners Association