POST - NOMINAL LETTERS Post - nominal letters , also called post - nominal initials , post - nominal titles or designatory letters , are letters placed after a person 's name to indicate that that individual holds a position , academic degree , accreditation , office , military decoration , or honour , or is a member of a religious institute or fraternity .
An individual may use several different sets of post - nominal letters , but in some contexts it may be customary to limit the number of sets to one or just a few .
The order in which post - nominals are listed after a name is based on rules of precedence and what is appropriate for a given situation .
Post - nominal letters are one of the main types of name suffix .
In contrast , pre - nominal letters precede the name rather than following it .
TYPES Section::::Types .
For a list of types of post - nominal letters see the following link : * List of post - nominal letters USAGE ORDER IN WHICH QUALIFICATIONS / AWARDS AND HONOURS ARE LISTED Section::::Usage .
Section::::Order in which qualifications / awards and honours are listed .
The order in which post - nominal letters are listed after a person 's name is dictated by standard practice , which may vary by region and context .
ORDER OF POST - NOMINALS IN THE UNITED STATES Section::::Order of post - nominals in the United States .
In the United States , standard protocol is to list post - nominal letters in the following order : * Religious institutions
* * Theological degrees * * Military Decorations * * Academic degrees * * Honorary degrees , honors , decorations
* * Professional licenses , certifications and affiliations * * Retired uniformed service .
* Active duty services personnel do not use any post - nominals other than , if applicable , Staff Corps affiliation ( Navy only ) followed by a comma and then their branch of service .
Names are bracketed by the appropriate pre - nominal and post - nominal , e.g. LCDR John Q. Public , MC , USN .
ORDER OF POST - NOMINALS IN THE UK
CIVIL USAGE IN THE UK Section::::Order of post - nominals in the UK .
Section::::Civil usage in the UK .
In the United Kingdom various sources have issued guidance on the ordering of styles and titles for British citizens , including the Ministry of Justice , Debrett 's and A & C Black 's Titles and Forms of Address ; these are generally in close agreement , with the exception of the position of MP , etc . , in the listing :
* Bt / Bart or Esq ;
* *
In the UK , " Esq . " may be used to refer to any gentleman in place of the pre - nominal Mr or Dr ;
* British Orders and decorations ( e.g. OBE ; in descending order of precedence ) ; * * Crown Appointments , i.e. : * * University degrees : *
*
According to Debrett 's , DD , MD and MS degrees are always given ; other doctorates , other medical degrees , and other divinity degrees are sometimes given ; and other degrees are seldom shown , with BA and MA never used socially ( although formal lists may include them ) ; * * *
* * According to Debrett 's and Black 's : Member of Parliament ( MP ) , etc .
( Black 's also includes Writers to the Signet here ) ; * * Membership of the Armed Forces ( e.g. RAF , RN , VR , RM , RMP ) ( not included by Black 's ) .
*
In addition , British citizens who have received honours from Commonwealth countries are usually given permission from the Queen to use the postnominals for that honour ACADEMIC USAGE IN THE UK Section::::Academic usage in the UK .
The Oxford University Style Guide and the University of Nottingham Style Guide give the alternative ordering :
* Civil Honours * * Military Honours * * QC * * Degrees in the order :
* * Bachelor 's *
* Master 's *
* Doctorates *
* Postdoctoral * * Diplomas * * Certificates * * Membership of academic or professional bodies *
This differs from the civil ordering in that it omits appointments except for QC , includes diplomas and certificates in addition to degrees , merges medical qualifications , fellowships of learned societies , royal academicians , and membership of professional bodies into a single item , and omits membership of the armed forces .
Loughborough University gives a very similar ordering , but with " Appointments ( e.g MP , QC ) " replacing item 3 ( QC ) and " Higher Education awards ( in ascending order , commencing with undergraduate ) " replacing items 4–6 ( Degrees , Diplomas and Certificates ) .
This restores the Appointments section from the civil list omitted by Oxford and Nottingham , although the other differences remain .
Nottingham Trent University gives essentially the same ordering as Oxford and Nottingham , but without specifying the order in which degrees should be given .
Nottingham Trent , Oxford and Loughborough recommend degree abbreviations be given in mixed case without stops between the letters ( e.g. BA , not B.A. ; PhD , not Ph.D. ) , as does Cambridge .
Imperial College London , however , uses all small caps for post - nominals ( e.g. , not PhD ) .
Where all degrees are shown , as in university calendars , most universities will give these in ascending order .
However , advice on the precise ordering varies : * The Oxford University Calendar Style Guide places degrees in the order : bachelor 's degrees ( including postgraduate bachelor 's degrees such as the Oxford BCL ) and other first degrees ; master 's degrees ( including those that are first degrees , such as MPhys ) ; doctorates ; higher doctorates in order of academic precedence .
Degrees at the same level are ordered alphabetically by awarding institution and multiple degrees from the same institution are grouped , with position determined by the lowest degree in the grouping .
Certificates and diplomas are listed after degrees ( no mention is made of foundation degrees ) .
Oxford recommends giving institution names separated by a space from the degree , not enclosed in parentheses , and that degrees from the same institution be separated by spaces only , with commas between degrees from different institutions .
*
Loughborough University advises listing all higher education awards in ascending order starting from undergraduate , so MPhys would come before BCL and postgraduate certificates and diplomas would come between undergraduate and postgraduate degrees .
The examples given do not include institution names .
IN EUROPEAN FRATERNITIES Section::::In European fraternities .
Going back to the mid 17th century , today 's classical European fraternities such as the German Student Corps are using post - nominal symbols and letters to allow their members to indicate their fraternity membership and honorary positions held in their signature .
The German word for the symbol is " Zirkel " , literally " circle " , referring to the hand - written symbol representing the fraternity which is commonly composed by combining letters from an acronym such as " vivat , crescat , floreat " ( Latin : grow , bloom , prosper ) followed by the first letter of the fraternity .
The word " Zirkel " became a synonym in the late Middle Ages representing the entire group of close brothers .
An example was Schiller 's use of the sentence " Schließt den heil'gen Zirkel dichter " ( literally : closer draw the holy circle [ of brothers ] )
in the original version of the Ode to the Joy .
IN AUSTRALIA Section::::In Australia .
The University of Sydney Style Guide and the Australian Government Style Manual give the ordering :
* National and Royal honours
* * Degrees before diplomas , in order of conferral * * Fellowships then memberships of professional bodies and learned societies
*
* Parliamentary designations
* The University of Technology Sydney adds QC between honours and degrees and specifies that honours should be in order of precedence .
IN CANADA Section::::In Canada .
The Canadian government 's The Canadian Style specifies that no more than two sets of post - nominal letters should normally be given , unless all are to be given either for information or for reasons of protocol , and that these should be the two highest of different types .
The types and the order in which they are given are : * Distinctions conferred directly by the Crown
* * University degrees *
* Memberships of societies and other distinctions * ETIQUETTE FOR HIGHER EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS HIGHER EDUCATION QUALIFICATIONS IN THE US Section::::Etiquette for higher educational qualifications .
Section::::Higher education qualifications in the US .
In academia and research , all degrees may be listed .
In general , however , it is normal to only list those relevant to the circumstance .
For example , if Jane Doe had a BS , MS , and PhD in computer science as well as an MBA , then if working in management in a retail company she would write " Jane Doe , MBA " , but if working in an IT company she might write " Jane Doe , PhD " , and if working in academia she could write " Jane Doe , BS , MS , MBA , PhD " .
The Gregg Reference Manual recommends placing periods between the letters of post - nominals ( e.g. B.S. , Ph.D. ) , however The Chicago Manual of Style recommends writing degrees without periods ( e.g. BS , PhD ) .
If post - nominals are given , the full name should be used , without Dr. , Mr. , Ms. , Mrs. , or
Miss. Other prefixes ( e.g. Professor ) may be used .
HIGHER EDUCATION QUALIFICATIONS IN THE UK Section::::Higher education qualifications in the UK .
In the UK , it is usual to list only doctorates , degrees in medicine , and degrees in divinity .
In particular , when a person has letters indicating Crown honours or decorations , only the principal degree would normally be given .
The University of Oxford Style Guide advises writers : " Remember that you do not need to list all awards , degrees , memberships etc held by an individual – only those items relevant to your writing . "
In an academic context , or in formal lists , all degrees may be listed in ascending order of academic status , which may not be the same as the order in which they were obtained ( although see notes on medical qualifications , below ) .
The Oxford style is to list qualifications by their title starting with bachelor 's degrees , then master 's degrees , then doctorates .
Postgraduate Certificates and Diplomas are listed after doctorates , but before professional qualifications , with a similar ordering being used by other universities .
In this style , foundation degrees and other sub - bachelor qualifications are not shown .
An alternative style is to give all higher education qualifications , starting from undergraduate , ordered by their level rather than their title .
In this style , one might list a Certificate or Diploma of Higher Education first , then foundation degrees , first degrees at bachelor level , first degrees at master level ( integrated master 's degrees and first degrees in medicine ) , postgraduate degrees at master level ( including postgraduate bachelor 's degrees such the Oxford BCL ) , and doctorates .
In this style , postgraduate certificates and diplomas could be shown either before postgraduate degrees at master 's level ( as in the table given by Loughborough University ) or before first degrees at master 's level ( reflecting their position in the Frameworks for Higher Education Qualifications of UK Degree - Awarding Bodies ) .
Strictly speaking , both the Debrett 's and Ministry of Justice lists only allow for the inclusion of degrees , not non - degree academic awards .
For someone with a substantive doctorate , it is usual either to give " Dr " as the title ( without a stop as per normal British usage ) or to list their degrees post - nominally , e.g. " Dr John Smith " or " John Smith , PhD " but not " Dr John Smith , PhD " .
Postnominals may be used with other titles , e.g. " Mr John Smith , PhD " , " Sir John Smith , PhD " , or " The Rev John Smith , PhD " .
In the case of a BA from Oxford , Cambridge or Dublin who proceeds to be an MA of those universities ( which is taken without further study ) , the MA replaces the BA and thus only the MA should be listed .
Oxford has said that there is no risk of confusion between their MA and " earned " MAs as the Oxford MA is denoted " MA ( Oxon ) " rather than simply MA .
However , Debrett 's has advised using just " MA " to describe a Cambridge Master of Arts .
Graduates from British and Irish universities sometimes add the name of the university that awarded their degree after the post - nominals for their degree , either in parentheses or not , depending on preferred style .
University names are often abbreviated and sometimes given in Latin , e.g . "BA , MA ( Dunelm ) , PhD ( Ebor ) " ; a list of abbreviations used for university names can be found at Universities in the United Kingdom#Post - nominal abbreviations .
Where the same degree has been granted by more than one university , this can be shown by placing the names or abbreviations in a single bracket after the degree name , e.g. " , Mus .
D. ( Oxon . , Cantab . , Dunelm .
et Yale , U.S.A. ) , LL.D.
( Leeds , Aberdeen , and W. University , Pennsylvania . ) " .
Honorary degrees , if shown , can be indicated either by " Hon " before the post - nominals for the degree or " hc " ( for honoris causa ) after the post - nominals , e.g. " Professor Evelyn Algernon Valentine Ebsworth CBE , PhD , MA , ScD , DCL hc , FRSC , FRSE " ( emphasis added ) ; "
Professor Stephen Hawking Hon .
ScD , CH , CBE , FRS " ( emphasis added ) .
The Oxford University Calendar Style Guide recommends not giving honorary degrees in post - nominals .
ETIQUETTE FOR LISTING MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS MEDICAL QUALIFICATIONS IN THE UK Section::::Etiquette for listing medical qualifications .
Section::::Medical qualifications in the UK .
In contrast to the style for academic qualifications , medical qualifications are listed in descending order , i.e. : doctorates , master 's degrees , bachelor 's degrees , postgraduate diplomas , and qualifying diplomas .
Letters indicating doctorates , master 's degrees and fellowships of royal colleges are always given , while bachelor 's degrees , memberships and qualifying diplomas are only shown for people with no higher qualifications .
In all but formal lists , only three medical qualifications are normally given .
Where someone holds qualifications in multiple fields , they are normally given in the order : medicine , surgery ( except for MRCS , which is considered a qualifying diploma ) , obstetrics , gynaecology and other specialities .
These are followed by qualifying diplomas and other diplomas .
Note that the academic style guides do not have a separate section for medical qualifications , so if following one of these guides , medical degrees should be listed with other degrees , medical diplomas with other diplomas , and fellowships and memberships of royal colleges with other fellowships and memberships of professional bodies .
ETIQUETTE FOR LISTING FELLOWSHIPS OR MEMBERSHIPS OF LEARNED SOCIETIES , ROYAL ACADEMIES OR PROFESSIONAL INSTITUTIONS LEARNED SOCIETIES , ROYAL ACADEMIES AND PROFESSIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN THE UK Section::::Etiquette for listing fellowships or memberships of learned societies , royal academies or professional institutions .
Section::::Learned societies , royal academies and professional institutions in the UK .
In the UK there is , according to Debrett 's , no defined order of precedence for placing designatory letters for fellowships of learned societies and memberships of professional bodies within their respective groups .
Debrett 's suggests that " In practice , where one society is indisputably of greater importance than another the letters are usually placed in that order .
Alternatively , the fellowship of the junior society may be omitted .
If such precedence can not be determined , the letters may be placed in order of conferment .
Where this is not known , they may be placed in alphabetical order . "
Earlier guidance that " Strictly speaking , they should be arranged according to date of foundation or incorporation of the societies concerned " has now been removed .
Only postnominals indicating honorific fellowships ( e.g. FRS , FBA ) are normally used socially .
For professional bodies it is usual to list those most relevant to a person 's profession first , or those most relevant to the particular circumstances .
It is common to omit fellowships ( except honorific fellowships ) and memberships that are not relevant in a given situation .
Debrett 's notes that although Royal Academicians are listed after fellows of learned societies ( and before members of professional bodies ) , they do not yield to them in precedence , " In practice the two lists do not coincide .
"
It should also be noted that the distinction between a learned society and a professional body is not well defined .
Many organisations ( e.g. the Royal Society of Chemistry ) claim to be both learned societies and professional bodies .
However , it is clear from both the Ministry of Justice and Debrett 's that only fellowships of learned societies are listed , while fellowships and memberships may be listed for professional bodies .
EXAMPLES Section::::Examples .
Examples of post - nominal letters : * A Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire is authorised to use the post - nominal KBE , e.g. " Sir Terry Wogan KBE DL " ( DL indicating he was Deputy Lieutenant of Buckinghamshire ) .
* A Fellow of the Royal Society uses the post - nominal FRS and a Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh FRSE , e.g. " Professor Malcolm Longair CBE , FRS , FRSE " ( CBE indicating he is also a Commander of the Order of the British Empire ) .
* A Doctor of Philosophy may use the post - nominal PhD or DPhil ( according to the usage of the awarding institution ) , or the pre - nominals Dr or Dr. , e.g. Indiana Jones could be styled " Dr. Henry Walton Jones ,
Jr. " or " Henry Walton Jones , Jr. , PhD " , but not " Dr. Henry Walton Jones , Jr. , PhD " .
* A Postgraduate Diploma is indicated by the post - nominals PgDip .
Someone with a BA , MA and postgraduate diploma could write " BA PgDip MA " or ( following the Oxford Calendar 's style ) "
BA MA PgDip " .
* Commonly seen postnominals for religious orders include OFM for the Franciscans ( Order of Friars Minor ) , SJ for the Jesuits ( Society of Jesus ) , e.g. " Jorge Bergoglio , SJ , and OP for the Dominicans ( Order of Preachers ) ; most other Catholic religious institutes have specific post - nominal letters .
* A BA graduate of the Open University could indicate the university from which they got their degree using " BA ( Open ) " or " BA Open " .
* Someone with a BSc from Cardiff , an MSc from London and a PhD from Cardiff could write " BSc PhD Card , MSc Lond " , or " BSc Card , MSc Lond , PhD Card " ; alternatively they could choose to omit the lower degrees and simply write " PhD Card " ( " London " may be substituted for " Lond " and " Cardiff " for " Card " , and institution names could be enclosed in parentheses ) .
If not indicating the awarding universities , they would write " BSc MSc PhD " , or simply " PhD " .
* A member of the British parliament may use the postnominals " MP " , e.g. " Caroline Lucas MP " .
Note the post - nominals MP may not be used once someone ceases to be a Member of Parliament , including after Parliament has been dissolved for an election .
* A peer who is a member of the Privy Council may use the postnominals " PC " ; for non - peers , the pre - nominal " Right Honourable " , abbreviated " Rt Hon " , identifies them as members .
Thus : " The Rt Hon David Cameron MP " , but " The Rt Hon Earl Grey KG PC " ( KG indicating he was also a Knight of the Garter ) .
* Chartered status is shown before the relevant professional membership , e.g. " Prof. Dame Carole Jordan DBE FRS CPhys FInstP " , where DBE indicates Dame of the Order of the British Empire , FRS Fellow of the Royal Society , CPhys Chartered Physicist , and FInstP Fellow of the Institute of Physics , the awarding body for CPhys .
*
In the UK , someone who earned a BA , MA and BSc in that order would normally write " BA , BSc , MA " , but in Australia they would normally write " BA , MA , BSc " .
* " Reverend Canon Mark Tanner MA ( Oxon ) , BA ( Hons ) , MTh " demonstrates : 1 ) the use of ' ( Oxon ) ' to indicate an Oxbridge MA ( to avoid confusion with an earned MA ) ; 2 ) the use of ' ( Hons ) ' to indicate an honours degree ; 3 ) ordering of degrees by date gained .
SEE ALSO
* List of post - nominal letters
* Pre - nominal letters
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Letters after the name , Debrett 's ( UK usage ) * How to Use Post - Nominal Abbreviations , Robert Hickey ( US usage )