TRADER JOE 'S
Trader Joe 's is an American chain of grocery stores based in Monrovia , California .
By 2015 , it was a competitor in " fresh format " grocery stores in the United States .
As of October 12 , 2017 , Trader Joe 's had 474 stores nationwide in 43 states and in Washington , D.C.
The first Trader Joe 's store was opened by founder Joe Coulombe in 1967 in Pasadena , California .
Starting in 1979 , it was owned by German entrepreneur Theo Albrecht , until his death in 2010 , when ownership passed to his heirs .
Trader Joe 's is a subsidiary of German supermarket chain ALDI Nord .
The company has offices in Monrovia , California , and Boston , Massachusetts .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Trader Joe 's is named after its founder , Joe Coulombe .
The chain began in 1958 as a Greater Los Angeles area chain of Pronto Market convenience stores .
The original Pronto Markets were so similar to 7-Eleven that Coulombe felt the competition with 7-Eleven would be disastrous .
Coulombe is said to have developed the idea of the Trader Joe 's South Seas motif while on vacation in the Caribbean .
The Tiki culture fad of the 1950s and 1960s was fresh in the cultural memory , and Trader Vic 's was at its height with 25 locations worldwide .
He had noticed that Americans were traveling more and returning home with tastes for food and wine they had trouble satisfying in supermarkets of the time .
The first store branded as " Trader Joe 's " opened in 1967 .
This store , on Arroyo Parkway in Pasadena , California , remains in operation to this day .
In the first few decades since opening , some of the stores offered fresh meats provided by butchers who leased space in the stores .
Trader Joe 's at one time had sandwich shops , freshly cut cheese and freshly squeezed orange juice all in - store .
Germany 's Theo Albrecht ( owner and CEO of Aldi Nord ) bought the company in 1979 as a personal investment for his family .
Coulombe was succeeded as CEO by John Shields in 1987 .
Under his leadership the company expanded beyond California , moving into Arizona in 1993 and into the Pacific Northwest two years later .
In 1996 , the company opened its first stores on the East Coast in Brookline and Cambridge , both just outside Boston .
Shields retired from his position in 2001 .
Dan Bane succeeded him as CEO after working as President of the Western Division .
When Bane became CEO in 2001 , there were 156 stores in 15 states .
BusinessWeek reported that Trader Joe 's quintupled the number of its stores between 1990 and 2001 , and multiplied its profits by ten .
Supermarket News estimated Trader Joe 's sales for 2015 at $ 13 billion , and placed Trader Joe 's 21st on the list of " SN 's Top 75 Retailers for 2016 . "
In February 2008 , BusinessWeek reported that the company had the highest sales per square foot of any grocer in the United States .
Two - and - a - half years later and in 2016 , Fortune magazine estimated sales to be $ 1,750 in merchandise per square foot — more than double the sales generated by Whole Foods .
In February 2016 , due to customer feedback , Trader Joe 's announced their goal " to have all the eggs they sell in western states ( CA , OR , WA , AZ , NM and CO ) come from cage - free suppliers by 2020 and all the eggs we sell nationally to come from cage - free suppliers by 2025 . "
The May 2009 issue of Consumer Reports ranked Trader Joe 's the second - best supermarket chain in the United States ( after Wegmans ) .
In June 2009 , MSN Money released its third annual Customer Service Hall of Fame survey results .
Trader Joe 's ranked second in customer service .
Although Ethisphere magazine listed Trader Joe 's among its most ethical companies in the United States from 2008 to 2010 , Trader Joe 's did not make the list in 2011 .
In 2014 , Consumer Reports again ranked Trader Joe 's a top - scoring supermarket chain .
LOCATIONS Section::::Locations .
, Trader Joe 's had 474 stores in the United States with stores being added regularly .
In 2017 , Trader Joe 's opened 14 new stores nationwide .
Most locations averaged between 10,000 and .
Each location is designed to represent its respective area .
Every store has its own crew members that create artwork to represent the surrounding neighborhood .
Some store locations have their own " find the mascot " and kids can obtain a prize when they tell a crew where it is " hiding " .
Trader Joe 's is a tiki - nautical themed establishment but locational stores may include props to blend into the local area ; for example , a surf theme for a store near the beach .
Up until the early 2000s , Trader Joes advertised their toll - free hotline , 1 - 800-SHOP - TJS in their radio ads , to help customers find their nearest store .
As of 2018 , this number is no longer in service , and the ability to find the nearest store has been supplanted by more modern technology such as their web site .
PRODUCTS Section::::Products .
While a typical grocery store may carry 50,000 items , Trader Joe 's stocks about 4,000 items , 80 % of which bear one of its own brand names .
Trader Joe 's describes itself as " your neighborhood grocery store " .
Products include gourmet foods , organic foods , vegetarian foods , unusual frozen foods , imported foods , domestic and imported wine and beer ( where local law permits ) , " alternative " food items , and staples such as bread , cereal , eggs , dairy , coffee , and produce .
Non - food items include personal hygiene products , household cleaners , vitamins , pet food , plants , and flowers .
Many of the company 's products are environmentally friendly .
In October 2007 , amid customer concerns , Trader Joe 's began to phase out foods imported from China , and from February to April 2008 , Trader Joe 's phased out single - ingredient products from China because of customer concerns .
Between 2012 and 2013 , Trader Joe 's moved from 15th on Greenpeace 's CATO ( Carting Away the Oceans ) scale to third by removing six unsustainable species of fish from its shelves and getting involved in efforts to protect the Bering Sea Canyons .
Trader Joe 's discontinues individual products based on customer reactions more often than larger grocery chains to free up space for new items .
Some products are exclusive to certain regions ( e.g. , midwest , east coast ) of the United States depending on availability and popularity .
Trader Joe 's sells many items under its own private labels , at a significant discount to brand - name equivalents , and requires its brand - name suppliers not to publicize this business relationship .
Trader Joe 's labels are sometimes named in accordance with the ethnicity of the food in question , such as " Trader Jose 's " ( Mexican food ) , " Baker Josef 's " ( flour and bagels ) , " Trader Giotto 's " ( Italian food ) , " Trader Joe - San 's " ( Japanese food ) , " Trader Ming 's " ( Asian food ) , " JosephsBrau " ( beer ) , and " Trader Jacques ' " ( French food and soaps ) .
By selling almost all of its products under its own labels , Trader Joe 's " skips the middle man " and buys directly from both local and international small - time vendors .
Trader Joe 's is the exclusive retailer of Charles Shaw wine , popularly known as " Two Buck Chuck " because of its original $ 1.99 price tag in California ( local prices vary ) .
Of the wine selection at Trader Joe 's , Coloumbe has said , " We built Trader Joe 's on wine first , then food .
I tasted 100,000 wines , and most were n't wonderful .
They were submitted to us by desperate vintners " .
Along with Charles Shaw , Trader Joe 's is known for stocking a very large selection of California and New World wines .
Trader Joe 's has said its private - label products contain no artificial flavors , no artificial preservatives , no colors derived from anything other than naturally available products , no genetically modified ingredients , no partially hydrogenated oils ( adding trans fat ) , and no MSG .
In addition , its private label dairy products use milk from cows not given the artificial growth hormone rBST .
Trader Joe 's also has a " Fearless Flyer " that showcases new products or highlighted products of the month .
The flyer is sent out periodically to homes upon request with no charge , and is available in - store .
The company sends out " E - Flyers " that are only accessible online .
Both flyers include stories about new products , a description , and even recipes .
On May 1 , 2018 , Trader Joe 's launched their first podcast , " Inside Trader Joe 's " .
This podcast has five episodes and features crew members , store captains and executives .
Listeners can learn about the way the retailer does business , where and how they discover new products , get answers to frequently asked questions , and more .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
From an article titled " Trader Joe 's Gets it Easy ? " :
* The retailer has been characterized as " notoriously secretive " and has been criticized for a lack of transparency by management about the sources of products such as organic milk .
*
In September 2013 , in response to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) , Trader Joe 's explained that it would require part - time employees to work an average of 30 hours per week to qualify for medical insurance ( with free coverage for basic dental and vision care still available for all Crew Members who work an average of 15 hours or more per week ) .
Part - time employees not qualifying would now be eligible for plans available under the ACA ( but available only to those whose employers do not offer them an insurance plan ) .
Those working full - time were unaffected .
*
In June 2017 , Trader Joe 's launched the " puff dog " , a roll of spiced sausage meat wrapped in puff pastry , which it claimed to have invented .
Social media and British and Commonwealth media pointed out that the sausage roll was a traditional British savory snack , where bakery - chain Greggs sells around 2.5 million sausage rolls per week .
SEE ALSO
* Pirate Joe 's * 2018 Trader Joe 's hostage incident
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Meet the original Joe " , Fortune Magazine , August 23 , 2010