POINT BREAK Point Break is a 1991 American buddy cop action crime thriller film directed by Kathryn Bigelow , starring Patrick Swayze , Keanu Reeves , Lori Petty and Gary Busey .
The title refers to the surfing term " point break , " where a wave breaks as it hits a point of land jutting out from the coastline .
Reeves stars as rookie FBI agent Johnny Utah , who is investigating a string of bank robberies possibly being committed by surfers .
Johnny goes undercover to infiltrate the surfing community and develops a complex friendship with Bodhi ( Swayze ) , the charismatic leader of a gang of surfers .
The film was a box office success upon its release , with an $ 83.5 million gross and a budget of $ 24 million , and has since gained cult status .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Former Ohio State Buckeyes quarterback and rookie FBI Agent Johnny Utah assists experienced agent and veteran Angelo Pappas in investigating a string of bank robberies by the " Ex - Presidents " : a gang of robbers who wear face - masks depicting former US presidents Ronald Reagan , Richard Nixon , Lyndon B. Johnson , and Jimmy Carter to disguise their true identities .
They raid only the cash drawers in banks — never going for the vault — and are always out within 90 seconds .
Pursuing Pappas 's theory that the criminals are surfers
, Utah goes undercover to infiltrate the surfing community .
He fabricates a personal family tragedy to persuade orphaned surfer Tyler Endicott to teach him to surf , after she saves him from drowning during his first attempt at surfing .
Through her , he meets Bodhi , the charismatic leader of a gang of surfers consisting of Roach , Grommet , and Nathaniel .
The group are initially wary of Utah , but accept him when Bodhi recognizes him as the former college football star .
As he masters surfing , Utah finds himself increasingly drawn to the surfers ' adrenaline - charged lifestyle , Bodhi 's philosophies , and Tyler .
Following a clue retrieved by analyzing toxins found in the hair of one of the bank robbers , Utah and Pappas lead an FBI raid on another gang of surfers , resulting in the deaths of two of them .
Despite their criminal records , these surfers turn out to not be the Ex - Presidents and the raid inadvertently ruins a DEA undercover operation .
Watching Bodhi 's group surfing , Utah begins to suspect that they are the " Ex - Presidents , " noting how close a group they are and the way one of them moons everyone in the same manner one of the robbers does when leaving a bank .
Utah and Pappas stake out a bank and the Ex - Presidents appear .
While wearing a Reagan mask , the gang leader ( implied to be Bodhi ) leads Utah on a foot chase through the neighborhood , which ends when Utah causes an old knee injury to flare up again after jumping into an aqueduct .
Despite having a clear shot , Utah does not shoot and the leader escapes .
At a campfire that night , it is confirmed that Bodhi and his gang are the Ex - Presidents .
Tyler discovers Utah 's FBI badge and angrily terminates their relationship .
Shortly afterwards , Bodhi aggressively recruits Utah into going skydiving with the group and he accepts .
After the jump , Bodhi reveals that he knows Utah is an FBI agent and has arranged for his friend Rosie , a non - surfing thug , to hold Tyler hostage .
Utah is thus blackmailed into participating in the Ex - Presidents last bank robbery of the summer .
As a result , Grommet , along with an off - duty police officer and a bank guard — who both attempt to foil the robbery — are killed .
Outraged by Grommet 's death , Bodhi knocks Utah out and leaves the scene .
Defying their senior officer who arrests Utah for armed robbery , Pappas and Utah head to the airport where Bodhi , Roach , and Nathaniel are about to leave for Mexico .
During a shootout , Pappas and Nathaniel are killed , whereas Roach is seriously wounded .
With Roach aboard , Bodhi forces Utah onto the plane at gunpoint .
Once airborne and over their intended drop zone , Bodhi and Roach put on their parachutes and jump from the plane , leaving Utah to take the blame again .
With no other parachutes available , Utah jumps from the plane with Bodhi 's gun and intercepts him .
After landing safely , Utah 's knee gives out again , allowing Bodhi to escape Utah 's grasp .
Bodhi meets with Rosie and releases Tyler , who reunites with Utah .
Roach dies of his wounds , and Bodhi and Rosie leave with the money .
Nine months later , Utah tracks Bodhi at Bells Beach in Victoria , Australia , where a record storm is producing lethal waves .
This is an event Bodhi had talked about experiencing , calling it the " 50-Year Storm .
" Utah attempts to bring Bodhi into custody , but Bodhi refuses .
During a brawl in the surf , Utah manages to handcuff himself to Bodhi , who begs Utah to release him so he can ride the once - in - a - lifetime wave .
Knowing Bodhi will not come back alive , Utah releases him , bids him farewell , and sees him step towards the wave .
While the authorities watch Bodhi surf to his death , Utah walks away , throwing his FBI badge into the ocean .
CAST * Patrick Swayze as Bodhi/"Ronald Reagan " * Keanu Reeves as FBI Agent Johnny Utah
* Gary Busey as FBI Agent Angelo Pappas
* Lori Petty as
Tyler Endicott
* John C. McGinley as FBI Director Ben Harp
* James LeGros as Roach/"Richard Nixon " * John Philbin as Nathaniel/"Jimmy Carter " * Lee Tergesen as Rosie * Bojesse Christopher as Grommet/"Lyndon B. Johnson " * Julian Reyes as FBI Agent Alvarez * Daniel Beer as FBI Agent Babbit
* Vincent Klyn as Warchild
* Chris Pedersen as Bunker Weiss * Dave Olson as Archbold * Anthony Kiedis as Tone * Christopher Pettiet as 15 * Sydney Walsh as Miss Deer
* Peter Phelps as Australian surfer * Galyn Gorg as Margarita
* Tom Sizemore as DEA Agent Deets ( uncredited ) PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
The film came close to production in 1986 , with Matthew Broderick , Johnny Depp , Val Kilmer and Charlie Sheen all considered to star in Point Break playing the character Johnny Utah with Ridley Scott directing .
However production fell through .
Four years later , after acquiring the screenplay , the producers of Point Break began looking for a director .
At the time , executive producer James Cameron was married to director Kathryn Bigelow , who had just completed Blue Steel and was looking for her next project .
Only W. Peter Iliff is credited for the screenplay , but James Cameron has said that he did a considerable amount of writing with Bigelow for the final film .
Point Break was originally called Johnny Utah when Keanu Reeves was cast in the title role .
The studio felt that this title said very little about surfing and by the time Patrick Swayze was cast , the film had been renamed Riders on the Storm after the famous rock song by The Doors .
However , Jim Morrison 's lyrics had nothing to do with the film and so that title was also rejected .
It was not until halfway through filming that Point Break became the film 's title because of its relevance to surfing .
Reeves and Swayze had appeared together once before , in the 1986 film Youngblood .
Reeves liked the name of his character , as it reminded him of star athletes like Johnny Unitas and Joe Montana .
He described his character as a " total control freak and the ocean beats him up and challenges him .
After a while everything becomes a game ...
He becomes as amoral as any criminal .
He loses the difference between right and wrong . "
Swayze felt that Bodhi was a lot like him and that they both shared " that wild - man edge . "
Two months before filming , Lori Petty , Reeves and Swayze trained with former world - class professional surfer Dennis Jarvis on the Hawaiian island of Kauai .
Jarvis remembers , " Patrick said he 'd been on a board a couple of times , Keanu definitely had not surfed before , and Lori had never been in the ocean in her life . "
Shooting the surfing sequences proved to be challenging for all three actors , with Swayze cracking four of his ribs .
For many of the surfing scenes , he refused to use a stunt double as he never had one for fight scenes or car chases .
He also did the skydiving scenes himself and
the film 's aerial jump instructor Jim Wallace found that the actor was a natural and took to it right away .
The actor ended up making 55 jumps for the film .
Swayze actually based aspects of his character after one of his stunt doubles , Darrick Doerner , a top big wave surfer .
After learning to surf for the film , Reeves took a liking to it and took it up as a hobby .
Parts of the film were shot at Lake Powell in Utah as well as Ecola State Park and Wheeler , Oregon , and Malibu , Manhattan Beach , Santa Monica , Venice , and Fox Hills Mall in California .
Although the final scene of the film is set at Bells Beach , Victoria , Australia , the scene was not filmed there .
Bells Beach is a straight stretch and
the beach in the film is a cove with spruce trees atop a hill .
The actual location of the film was a beach called Indian Beach , in Ecola State Park , located in Cannon Beach , Oregon , USA .
SOUNDTRACK
* Ratt – " Nobody Rides for Free " * Concrete Blonde – "
I Want You " * The Jimi Hendrix Experience – "
If 6 Was 9 " * School of Fish – " Rose Colored Glasses " * Public Image Ltd. – " Criminal " * Shark Island – " My City " * Love – " 7 and 7 Is " * Loudhouse – " Smoke on the Water " * Westworld – "
So Long Cowboy " * Little Caesar – "
Down to the Wire " * L.A. Guns – " Over the Edge " * Liquid Jesus – " 7 and 7 Is " * Wire Train – " I Will Not Fall " * Ice - T – " Original Gangster " * Mark Isham – " Foot Chase " * Sheryl Crow – " Hundreds of Tears " Score album
On February 7 , 2008 , a score release for Point Break was released by La - La Land Records , featuring composer Mark Isham 's score .
This edition was limited to 2,000 units and features 65 minutes of score with liner notes by Dan Goldwasser that incorporate comments from both Bigelow and Isham .
It is now out of print .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Point Break was released on July 12 , 1991 in 1,615 theaters , grossing $ 8.5 million on its opening weekend , behind s ( directed by Bigelow 's then husband , James Cameron ) second weekend and the openings of the re - issue of 101 Dalmatians and Boyz n
the Hood .
With a budget of $ 24 million , the film went on to make $ 43.2 million in North America and $ 40.3 million internationally for a worldwide total of $ 83.5 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film received mixed to positive reviews from critics .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film holds a 68 % rating based on 57 reviews , with an average rating of 6.1/10 .
Metacritic reports a 58 out of 100 rating based on 20 reviews , indicating " mixed or average reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " B+ " on an A+ to F scale .
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun - Times gave the film three - and - a - half stars out of four and wrote " Bigelow is an interesting director for this material .
She is interested in the ways her characters live dangerously for philosophical reasons .
They are n't men of action , but men of thought who choose action as a way of expressing their beliefs . "
In her review for The New York Times , Janet Maslin praised Reeves ' performance : " A lot of the snap comes , surprisingly , from Mr. Reeves , who displays considerable discipline and range .
He moves easily between the buttoned - down demeanor that suits a police procedural story and the loose - jointed manner of his comic roles . "
Entertainment Weekly gave the film a " C+ " rating and Owen Gleiberman wrote " Point Break makes those of us who do n't spend our lives searching for the ultimate physical rush feel like second - class citizens .
The film turns reckless athletic valor into a new form of aristocracy . "
In his review for The Washington Post , Hal Hinson wrote " A lot of what Bigelow puts up on the screen bypasses the brain altogether , plugging directly into our viscera , our gut .
The surfing scenes in particular are majestically powerful , even awe - inspiring .
Bigelow 's picture is a feast for the eyes , but we watch movies with more than our eyes .
She seduces us , then asks us to be bimbos . "
Rolling Stone magazine 's Peter Travers wrote , " Bigelow ca n't keep the film from drowning in a sea of surf - speak .
But without her , Point Break would be no more than an excuse to ogle pretty boys in wet suits . "
USA Today gave the film two out of four stars and Mike Clark wrote " Its purely visceral material ( surf sounds , skydiving stunt work , a tough indoor shootout midway through ) are first - rate .
As for the tangibles that matter even more ( script , acting , directorial control , credible relationships between characters ) , Break defies belief .
Dramatically , it rivals the lowest surf yet this year .
"
Time magazine 's Richard Corliss wrote , " So how do you rate a stunningly made film whose plot buys so blithely into macho mysticism that it threatens to turn into an endless bummer ?
Looks 10 , Brains 3 . "
Critics have commented on the central ' buddy ' relationship of Bodhi and Johnny , and on the unusually equal dynamic in the romantic relationship of Tyler and Johnny ( which Bigelow changed Peter Iliff 's original script to create ) ; Tyler is a " muscled , brash waitress with an androgynous name ( Tyler ) and physical features , " and Johnny 's " feminine edges nudge in nicely to her masculine ones .
In nearly every scene they share , they are portrayed by the camera as equals . "
In 2006 , a special edition was released on DVD ( In DVD was released in May 22 , 2001 ) .
Entertainment Weekly gave it a " B " rating and wrote , " The making - of docs ( at their best discussing Swayze 's extracurricular skydiving — that really is him doing the Adios , amigo fall ) will leave you hanging .
" It was first released on Blu - ray as a special " Pure Adrenaline Edition " on July 1 , 2008 , but that was later discontinued .
Point Break was re - released on Blu - ray by Warner Home Video on June 14 , 2011 .
ACCOLADES Section::::Accolades .
At the 1992 MTV Movie Awards , Point Break was nominated for three awards including " Most Desirable Male " ( Keanu Reeves ) , " Most Desirable Male " ( Patrick Swayze ) , and " Best Action Sequence " for the second jump from the plane .
In it , Utah jumps out of a plane without a parachute to catch Bodhi and rescue Tyler .
Utah catches up with Bodhi and holds a gun to his head .
However , Bodhi refuses to pull the rip cord and Utah must decide between dropping his gun ( so he can hold on and pull the rip cord ) or letting the two fall to the ground .
The film ultimately won " Most Desirable Male " for Keanu Reeves .
CULT STATUS Section::::Cult status .
In 2015 The AV Club referred to the film as a ' cult favorite ' , and mentioned the ' wild mish - mash ' of acting styles and the homoerotic undertones .
In 2016 The Daily Telegraph wrote that the film " certainly qualified as a cult favourite . "
In 2018 Rolling Stone called Point Break ' the greatest female - gaze action movie ever ' , citing the condition of Reeves and Swayze in the film .
It also referred to it as a ' wet Western ' .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
Point Break was listed in the VH1 series I Love the 90s on the episode " 1991 " .
Many celebrities , including Dominic Monaghan , Mo Rocca , Michael Ian Black , Hal Sparks , and Chris Pontius commented about the film and why it deserved to be included in the episode .
Entertainment Weekly ranked Point Break as having one of the " 10 Best Surfing Scenes " in cinema .
The film inspired a piece of cult theater , Point Break Live ! , in which the role of Johnny Utah is played by an audience member chosen by popular acclamation after a brief audition .
The new " Keanu " reads all of his ( or her ) lines from cue - cards for the duration of the show , " to capture the rawness of a Keanu Reeves performance even from those who generally think themselves incapable of acting . "
Point Break was referenced in Hot Fuzz , where the scene of Utah emptying his magazine into the sky in frustration is watched by the lead characters and later re - enacted by Nick Frost 's character .
The scene in which Utah jumps after Bodhi without a parachute was ranked seventh in Empire magazine 's Top 10 Crazy Action Sequences .
The scene was also tested by the Discovery Channel series MythBusters .
It was determined that Utah and Bodhi would not have been able to free - fall for 90 seconds ( as in the film ) , nor would they have been able to hold a conversation in mid - air .
However , it was determined that , by streamlining his body , Utah could have conceivably caught up with Bodhi after jumping from the plane .
Point Break has been referenced in Marvel Cinematic Universe films twice , in The Avengers and , by Tony Stark calling Thor " Point Break " in reference to his long , blond hairstyle , similar to Swayze 's character 's .
Point Break is referenced on the CBS television program Numb3rs , at the end of the episode entitled " Charlie Do n't Surf " ( 05.7 ) .
In a discussion on the benefits of surfing and the connection of surfers to the universe , the character Dr. Larry Fleinhardt quotes Timothy Leary .
In response , the character Colby Granger retorts : " It 's dancing with the universe . "
Confused , Fleinhardt asks who said that , to which Granger replies : " Bodhi ... Patrick Swayze? ... from Point Break ... ?
"
REMAKE Section::::Remake .
Alcon Entertainment and Warner Bros. released a remake of the film in 2015 entitled Point Break , which received mostly negative reviews .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS Section::::External links .