ATLANTIC WHITE - SIDED DOLPHIN
The Atlantic white - sided dolphin ( Lagenorhynchus acutus ) is a distinctively coloured dolphin found in the cool to temperate waters of the North Atlantic Ocean .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
The Atlantic white - sided dolphin was named by John Edward Gray in 1828 .
The specific name acutus comes from the Latin for ' pointed ' and refers to the sharply pointed dorsal fin .
L. acutus is one of six oceanic dolphins in the genus Lagenorhynchus .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The dolphin is slightly larger than most other oceanic dolphins .
It is just over a meter in length at birth , growing to about ( males ) and ( females ) at maturity .
It weighs once fully - grown .
Females reach sexual maturity at between 6 and 12 years , and males between 7 and 11 years .
The gestation period is 11 months and lactation lasts for about a year and a half — both typical figures for dolphins .
Individuals are known to live for up to 22 years ( males ) and 27 years ( females ) .
The key distinguishing feature is the white to pale yellow patch found behind the dorsal fin of the dolphin on each side .
This colour variation is unique amongst the mixtures of white , greys and blues of other pelagic cetaceans .
The rest of the body 's coloration is well demarcated : the chin , throat and belly are white ; the flippers , dorsal fin and back are dark grey to black with the exception of the yellow patch ; there is a further white patch below the dorsal fin , lying above a light grey stripe that runs from the beak , above the eye and down to the tail stock .
Dolphin group sizes vary by location , with groups averaging 60 in number close to the Newfoundland shores , but rather smaller east of Iceland .
From the analysis of the stomach contents of stranded animals , fish such as herring and mackerel and squid appear to form the species ' main diet .
The Atlantic white - sided dolphin is fairly acrobatic and keen to interact with boats , however it is not as wildly gregarious as the white - beaked and common dolphins .
BEHAVIOR Section::::Behavior .
Like all species of the dolphin family , Atlantic white - sided dolphins are very social animals .
Often traveling in large pods and display aerial behaviors as they travel .
Despite being docile creatures , even known to interact with various species of cetecean in a nonviolent manner , most notably with the long - finned pilot whale ( Globicephala melas ) , they have also been known to display violent behavior towards harbor porpoises , attacking them until they eventually succumb to their wounds , a similar behavior observed in bottlenose dolphins .
Atlantic white - sided dolphin calves are known to swim in the echelon position with their mothers .
A case of a female Atlantic white - sided dolphin raising two calves was observed back in the summer of 2002 , the causes of this behavior are still unknown .
While these animals are not seen in captivity all when compared to species like the bottlenose dolphin , behaviors in aquarium setting have been observed .
After being studied for over a period of 42 hours , the study revealed that these lesser known species of dolphin display a high number of social behaviors . POPULATION AND DISTRIBUTION Section::::Population and distribution .
The species is endemic to the North Atlantic Ocean .
Areas of particularly high population density include the shores of Newfoundland and Cape Cod , the triangular area of sea between the United Kingdom , Iceland and Greenland and the North Sea .
The total population is believed to be 200 - 300,000 individuals .
In 2008 , sightings of Atlantic white - sided dolphins as well as the Melon - headed whale were documented in South Carolina after a few stranding had taken place in the area at the time .
HUMAN INTERACTION Section::::Human interaction .
Historically , Atlantic white - sided dolphins were killed in drives conducted from Norway and Newfoundland .
These have ceased in recent years , although they still occur to a lesser extent from the Faroe Islands , where the meat and blubber are in high regard as food .
Reported catches in the years from 1995 to 1998 were 157 , 152 , 350 , and 438 , respectively ( Bloch and Olsen 1998 , 1999 ; Bloch et al .
1997 , 2000 ) .
In 2002 , the number reported killed was 774 .
Most years , no dolphins are killed , only to have individual years suddenly stand out , such as 2017 when several small pods were killed , after an 11-year period with no dolphins killed north of the southernmost island .
CONSERVATION Section::::Conservation .
The North and Baltic Sea populations of the Atlantic white - sided dolphin are listed on Appendix II of the Convention on the Conservation of Migratory Species of Wild Animals ( CMS ) .
They are listed on Appendix II as they have an unfavourable conservation status or would benefit significantly from international co - operation organised by tailored agreements .
These species of dolphin are known to fall victims to in a polluted environment , a study from 1997 confirmed that the British and Irish populations of Atlantic white - sided dolphins to succumb to these effects .
In addition , the Atlantic white - sided dolphin is covered by the Agreement on the Conservation of Small Cetaceans of the Baltic , North East Atlantic , Irish and North Seas ( ASCOBANS ) .
SEE ALSO
* List of whale and dolphin species
* Marine biology
REFERENCES
* Atlantic white - sided Dolphin by Frank Cipriano , Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals pp49–51
* National Audubon Society : Guide to Marine Mammals of the World * Encyclopedia of Marine Mammals EXTERNAL LINKS *
Atlantic white - sided Dolphin at ARKive