THE LAST HOUSE ON THE LEFT ( 1972 FILM )
The Last House on the Left is a 1972 American exploitation horror film written , edited , and directed by Wes Craven and produced by Sean S. Cunningham .
The film stars Sandra Peabody , Lucy Grantham , David A. Hess , Fred Lincoln , Jeramie Rain , and Marc Sheffler .
The plot revolves around two teenage girls who are taken into the woods and tortured by a gang of murderous thugs .
The story is inspired by the 1960 Swedish film The Virgin Spring , directed by Ingmar Bergman , which in turn is based on a Swedish ballad , " Töres döttrar i Wänge " .
Craven 's directorial debut , the film was made on a modest budget of $ 87,000 , and was filmed in New York City and rural Connecticut in 1971 .
It was released theatrically in the United States on August 30 , 1972 , and was a major box office success , grossing over $ 3 million domestically .
Although its confrontational violence resulted in its being heavily censored and sometimes banned in other countries , the film was generally well received by critics .
The film was remade under the same title in 2009 .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
Mari Collingwood plans to attend a concert with her friend , Phyllis Stone , for her seventeenth birthday .
Her parents , Estelle and John , express their concern about the band and her friendship with Phyllis , but let her go and give her a peace symbol necklace .
Phyllis and Mari head into the city for the concert .
On the way , they hear a news report on the car radio of a recent prison escape involving criminals Krug Stillo , a sadistic rapist and serial killer ; his heroin - addicted son , Junior ; Sadie , a promiscuous psychopath and sadist ; and Fred " Weasel " Podowski , a child molester , peeping Tom , and murderer .
Before the concert , Mari and Phyllis encounter Junior when trying to buy marijuana .
He leads them to an apartment where they are trapped by the criminals .
Phyllis tries to escape and tries to reason with them , but she fails and is gang - raped by Krug , Weasel and Sadie .
Meanwhile , Mari 's unsuspecting parents prepare a surprise party for her .
The next morning , Mari and Phyllis are bound , gagged and put in the trunk of their car and transported to the woods by the criminals .
Mari recognizes that the road is near her home with a look of horror .
Mari and Phyllis are forced to perform sexual acts on each other and Sadie attempts to perform oral sex on a weeping Mari .
Phyllis distracts the kidnappers to give Mari an opportunity to escape but is chased by Sadie and Weasel , while Junior stays behind to guard Mari .
Mari tries gaining Junior 's trust by giving him her necklace and instead names him " Willow " .
Phyllis stumbles across a cemetery in the woods where she is cornered by Krug with a machete and stabbed in the back by Weasel .
After they take turns kicking her , she crawls to a nearby tree and is stabbed by Weasel and Sadie multiple times .
As she dies , Sadie digs her hand into the center of Phyllis ' belly where her belly button is and pulls out her intestines .
Mari convinces Junior to let her go , but her escape is halted by Krug .
Sadie and Weasel present Phyllis 's severed hand as Mari screams in horror .
Krug carves his name into her chest , then rapes her .
She vomits , quietly says a prayer and walks into a nearby lake to clean herself , but Krug fatally shoots her , leaving her body floating in the lake .
Krug , Sadie and Weasel clean up and change out of their bloody clothes .
In their new attire , the gang goes to the Collingwoods ' home , masquerading as travelling salesmen .
Mari 's parents let them stay overnight , but Junior exposes their identity and orders them to leave .
The gang finds photos of Mari and discovers that it is Mari 's home .
Later that night Junior , in the midst of a heroin withdrawal , is heaving in the bathroom ; Estelle enters to check on him .
She gasps as she sees that he is wearing Mari 's peace symbol necklace .
She eavesdrops while the gang is spending the night in Mari 's bedroom and finds blood - soaked clothing in their luggage .
She overhears about the death of her daughter and disposal of the corpse in nearby lake .
She and her husband rush into the woods where they find Mari 's body on the bank of the lake .
They carry Mari 's body back to the house and exact revenge against the crooks .
Estelle seduces Weasel and performs fellatio on him that turns deadly when she bites off his penis and leaves him to bleed to death .
Mari 's father John takes his shotgun into the room where two of the criminals are asleep and shoots at them .
Krug escapes into the living room and overpowers John , before being confronted by Junior , brandishing a revolver and threatening to kill him .
Krug manipulates Junior into committing suicide by shooting himself .
Using this distraction to his advantage , John runs into the basement to fetch a chainsaw .
Krug attempts to shoot him with the shotgun but finds it is empty .
Krug attempts to flee but is incapacitated by an electrocution booby - trap set earlier by John .
Sadie rushes outside where she is tackled by Estelle , but she escapes and falls into the backyard swimming pool where Estelle slits her throat with a knife .
The sheriff arrives just as John kills Krug with the chainsaw .
The deputy then brings Estelle into the living room before removing the chainsaw from John 's hands .
CAST * Sandra Peabody as Mari Collingwood
* Lucy Grantham as Phyllis Stone * David A. Hess as Krug Stillo * Fred Lincoln as Fred " Weasel " Podowski * Jeramie Rain as Sadie
* Marc Sheffler as Junior Stillo * Cynthia Carr as Estelle Collingwood
* Gaylord St. James as Dr. John Collingwood
* Marshall Anker as Sheriff * Martin Kove as Deputy * Ada Washington as Ada * Steve Miner ( uncredited ) as Hippie taunting
Deputy PRODUCTION SCREENPLAY Section::::Production .
Section::::Screenplay .
Sean S. Cunningham made his directorial debut with the white coater film The Art of Marriage .
His film grossed $ 100,000 and attracted the company Hallmark Releasing ( unaffiliated with Hallmark Cards Inc. ) .
Cunningham made the film Together as a " better version " of film .
Wes Craven , who had no money at the time , was put on the job of synchronizing dailies for Cunningham 's re - shoot .
He soon began editing the film with Cunningham and they became good friends .
Hallmark Releasing bought the film for $ 10,000 and it was considered a " hit . "
Hallmark Releasing wanted them to do another film with a bigger budget and gave them $ 90,000 to shoot a horror film .
Cunningham served as producer and Craven served as writer and director on the project .
Written by Craven in 1971 , the original script was intended to be a graphic " hardcore " film , with all actors and crew being committed to filming it as such .
However , after shooting began , the decision was made to edit the script into a much softer film .
This script , written under the title Night of Vengeance , has never been released ; only a brief glimpse is visible in the featurette Celluloid Crime of the Century ( a 2003 documentary on the making of the film ) .
The crux of the plot is based on the Swedish ballad " Töres döttrar i Wänge , " which itself was the basis of Ingmar Bergman 's The Virgin Spring ( 1960 ) , of which Craven was an admirer .
Craven envisioned a film in which the violence would be shown in detail onscreen ; he felt that many popular films of the era , such as Westerns , glamorized violence and the " vigilante hero , " and gave the public a misleading representation of death in the wake of Vietnam War .
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
The majority of the cast of The Last House on the Left were inexperienced or first - time actors .
Cunningham and Craven held casting calls for the film at Cunningham 's office in Midtown Manhattan in late 1971 .
Sandra Peabody and Lucy Grantham were cast in the roles of the doomed Mari and Phyllis .
The role of the lead villain , Krug Stillo , was given to David Hess , also a musician and songwriter .
Jeramie Rain , who was twenty - one at the time , was playing Susan Atkins in an Off - Broadway production based on the Manson family murders ; despite the fact that the original script called for an actress in her forties , Rain was awarded the part of Sadie .
Fred Lincoln , who had appeared in pornographic films , was cast as Krug 's criminal partner , while Mark Sheffler was given the role of Krug 's heroin - addicted son .
According to Lincoln , he and Peabody were acquaintances prior to filming and had the same agent at the time .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
The film was shot on location for seven days in New York City , as well as Long Island , followed by shoots in rural locations outside of Westport , Connecticut .
While filming in Connecticut , the cast and crew spent much time at producer Cunningham 's family 's home .
According to Craven , the lake sequence was shot in the town reservoir of Weston , Connecticut .
Craven sought a " documentary"-style appearance for the film , marked by close - up shots and single - cut takes .
Cunningham later described the film shoot as being " guerrilla - style " with the crew spontaneously filming at locations and being forced to leave due to lack of permits ; in retrospect , Lincoln said that " nobody knew what [ they ] were doing . "
Much of the special effects in the film were achieved practically , some at Lincoln 's suggestion : For example , the sequence in which Phyllis is disemboweled , Lincoln helped craft fake intestines with condoms filled with fake blood and sand .
For the murder sequence of Sadie in the swimming pool , Rain had a pouch full of fake blood attached underneath her shirt as well as blood capsules in her mouth , which she manually punctured .
Lucy Grantham recalled during the scene in which Hess 's character tells her to " piss her pants , " that she in fact urinated in her jeans .
Steve Miner , who would later become a director himself , served as a production assistant on the film .
Hess recalled that much of the cast bonded heavily during the filming process being that they were mostly inexperienced actors .
Lincoln , Rain , and Sheffler recalled similar memories in a 2003 documentary titled Celluloid Crime of the Century , which recounted the making of the film .
However , both Hess and director Craven recalled the on - set relationship between Hess and Peabody to be turbulent .
Hess often remained in character on the set , and Peabody was purportedly frightened of him , to the point that Craven recalled there " not being much acting " during the shooting of the film 's more violent scenes .
Sheffler admitted during a one - on - one sequence with Peabody that he threatened to push her over a cliff if she failed to hit her marks .
MUSIC Section::::Music .
The film 's soundtrack was written by Stephen Chapin and David Hess ( who also played the main antagonist , Krug ) .
Chapin wrote all the incidental music for the movie ; he also did all the arrangements and orchestration as well as all the contracting and producing musicians .
The music is particularly notable for being heavily contrasted with the events on screen .
For example , as the gang drives the two girls out into the countryside , the upbeat , almost comical tune " Baddies Theme " plays and , after the rape scene , a soothing ballad plays .
This counterpointing was also used elsewhere in the film , with the slapstick antics of the two police officers occurring in between scenes of torture .
The soundtrack was released commercially around the same time as the film .
In 1999 the soundtrack was re - released on compact disc by Hess on Rock Bottom Rules Records .
In 2013 the soundtrack had a re - release on vinyl , compact disc , cassette and digital download on One Way Static Records .
It was also re - issued on a limited hand numbered picture disc for Record Store Day 2014 .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
The film underwent multiple title changes , with its investors initially titling it Sex Crime of the Century .
However , after test screenings were completed , it was decided to change the title to Krug and Company ; however , this title was found to have little draw during test screenings .
A marketing specialist who was an acquaintance of Cunningham 's proposed the title The Last House on the Left .
Craven initially thought the title was " terrible .
"
The film was released under this title on August 30 , 1972 .
Like many films during the era , it had a regional expansion to cinemas and drive - in theaters over the course of the next several months , opening in various U.S. cities between September and November 1972 .
Due to its graphic content , the film sparked protests from the public throughout the fall of 1972 who called for its removal from local theaters .
The Paris Cinema , a movie theater in Pittsfield , Massachusetts , issued an open letter to these criticisms in September 1972 , in which it was noted : Promotional material capitalized on the film 's graphic content and divisive reception , featuring the tagline : " To avoid fainting , keep repeating ' It 's only a movie ' ... " advertising campaign .
Under the Last House ...
title , the film proved to be a hit .
Anecdotes as to where the advertising campaign originated vary somewhat .
Cunningham claims that marketing specialist who devised the Last House ...
title was watching a cut of the film with his wife , who continually covered her eyes , prompting him to tell her that it was " only a movie " .
Other origins have been suggested , however , as it had been used twice before : first for H.G. Lewis 's 1964 splatter film Color Me Blood Red and then for William Castle 's Strait - Jacket the following year .
The tagline was so successful that many other exploitation films later used it , sometimes with their own spin .
The film 's title was also imitated , as in the case of Last House on Dead End Street .
Newspaper advertisements featured lengthy statements issued by the film 's producers defending it against claims that it sensationalized violence , one of which noted : " You will hate the people who perpetrate these outragesand you should !
But if a movieand it is only a moviecan arouse you to such extreme emotion then the film director has succeeded ...
The movie makes a plea for an end to all the senseless violence and inhuman cruelty that has become so much a part of the times in which we live . "
Promotional artwork for the film accompanying such producer 's statements included a warning that the film was " not recommended for persons under 30 .
"
The film continued to screen throughout the United States into 1973 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE CONTEMPORANEOUS
Section::::Critical response .
Section::::Contemporaneous .
Critical response to The Last House on the Left upon its original release was largely centered on its depictions of violence .
Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune derided the film , writing : " My objection to The Last House on the Left is not an objection to the graphic representations of violence per se , but to the fact that the movie celebrates violent acts , particularly adult male abuse of young women ...
I felt a professional obligation to stick around to see if there was any socially redeeming value in the remainder of the movie and found none . "
Howard Thompson of The New York Times wrote that he walked out of the theater during a screening : " When I walked out , after 50 minutes ( with 35 to go ) , one girl had just been dismembered with a machete .
They had started in on the other with a slow switch blade .
The party who wrote this sickening tripe and also directed the inept actors is Wes Craven .
It 's at the Penthouse Theater , for anyone interested in paying to see repulsive people and human agony . "
Edward Blank of the Pittsburgh Press called the film a " cheap - jack movie of no discernible merit " and " riddled with awkward , self - conscious performances . "
Roger Ebert , however , gave the film three and a half stars out of four , and described it as " about four times as good as you 'd expect .
"
The Christian Science Monitor News Service referred to the film as a " desperately sordid melodrama " and a " vulgarized " version of The Virgin Spring and drew comparisons to Sam Peckinpah 's Straw Dogs ( 1971 ) .
Brian Nelson of The Daily Dispatch deemed it the worst film of the year , writing : " Producer Sean S. Cunningham has somehow managed to make what is possibly 1972 's most worthless general release film and , with a sensational and overblown advertising campaign , parlay it into a major moneymaker .
In doing so , he may be in line for the Cy Dung Award for the movie most offensive to the intelligence of an audience .
"
The Lubbock Avalanche - Journals Bill Towery suggested the film should have received an X rating , adding in his review : " Films such as these give the movie ratings system a bad name .
But if your cup of tea is assault , murder , maiming , revenge , and violence , the movie is going to be perfect . "
An editor for The News - Press similarly deemed the film " pornographic " and wrote that it was " without a doubt the most disgusting movie I have ever seen . "
MODERN ASSESSMENT Section::::Modern assessment .
Author and film critic Leonard Maltin awarded the film one and a half out of a possible four stars .
In his review on the film , Maltin called the film " cheap " , and " [ a ] repellent but admittedly powerful and ( for better or worse ) influential horror shocker .
" The film was nominated for AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills .
The film has a 61 % approval rating on the internet review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , based on 36 reviews .
CENSORSHIP
UNITED STATES Section::::Censorship .
Section::::United States .
Though the film passed with an R - rating by the Motion Picture Association of America , director Craven claimed that on several occasions , horrified audience members would demand that theater projectionists destroy the footage , sometimes stealing the film themselves .
John Saco , a British film archivist , recalled discussing the film with American theater owners : " Projectionists were so offended , they would just cut up the film as they were watching it .
I 'd ask people , ' How cut is your version ? '
They 'd say , ' It 's not as cut as some of the others I 've seen ' – that 's hardly what you want to hear ! "
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Last House on the Left was refused a certificate for cinema release by the British Board of Film Censors in 1974 , due to scenes of sadism and violence .
During the early 1980s home video boom , the film was released uncut ( save for an incidental , gore - free scene with the comedy cops , and the end credit roll ) as a video that did not fall under the BBFC 's remit at the time .
This changed when the " video nasty " scare which started in 1982 led to the Video Recordings Act 1984 .
The movie landed on the Department of Public Prosecutions list of " video nasties " , and was banned .
The film remained banned throughout the remainder of the 1980s and into the 1990s .
However , it had built a cult reputation in the UK , and critics such as Mark Kermode began to laud the film as an important piece of work .
In 2000 , the film was again presented to the BBFC for theatrical certification and it was again refused .
The independent film label Blue Underground toured an uncut print around Britain without a BBFC certificate ; Southampton City Council granted it its own " 18 " certificate .
The film was granted a license for a one - off showing in Leicester in June 2000 , after which the BBFC again declared that it would not receive any form of certification .
In June 2002 the BBFC prevailed against an appeal made to the Video Appeals Committee by video distributor Blue Underground Limited .
The BBFC had required 16 seconds of cuts to scenes of sexual violence before it would grant the video an " 18 " certificate .
Blue Underground Limited refused to make the cuts , and the BBFC therefore rejected the video .
The distributor then appealed to the VAC , who upheld the BBFC 's decision .
During the appeal , film critic Kermode was called in as a horror expert to make a case for the film 's historical importance .
However , after his report , the committee not only upheld the cuts , but demanded additional ones .
The film was eventually given an " 18 " certificate , on July 17 , 2002 , with 31 seconds of cuts , and was released in the UK on DVD in May 2003 .
The cut scenes were viewable as a slideshow extra on the disc , and there was a link to a website where the cut scenes could be viewed .
The BBFC finally classified the uncut film for video release on March 17 , 2008 .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Contrary to popular belief , the film was never banned in Australia on its initial release – rather , it was never picked up for distribution in the country due to the censorship issues that it would have created at the time .
The film was submitted to the censorship board in 1987 for VHS release by Video Excellence under the alternative title Krug and Company , but it was rejected because of its violent and sexual content .
In October 1991 , The Last House on the Left was part of a package of fifteen tapes that was seized by the Australian Customs Service .
The package of tapes was forwarded to the Australian Classification Board ( then known as the Office of Film and Literature Classification ) who declared them " prohibited pursuant to Regulation 4A(1A)(a)(iii ) of the Customs ( Prohibited Imports ) Regulations " .
The film was eventually classified " R " by the OFLC for its DVD premiere on November 15 , 2004 .
It had a theatrical screening that same month at the Australian Centre for the Moving Image in Melbourne .
RARE OR LOST
SCENES Section::::Rare or lost scenes .
Many different versions of the film exist on various DVD and VHS releases struck from different cuts of the film , many of them from different countries .
To get a completely uncut version is difficult as even some cinema machinists cut footage from prints of the movie before screening it during the 1970s ; many copies were cut or " hacked to pieces " and because of this some scenes have become rarities .
Some incomplete scenes are : * " Lesbian rape scene " – One scene long thought lost , except as a photographic still , is the two female victims forced to commit sexual acts on each other in the woods .
This forced lesbian rape scene was included as an outtake with no sound on the Metrodome Three - Disc DVD Ultimate Edition and on the 2011 Blu - ray release .
*
" Mari in her room " – There are photographic stills showing a nude Mari in her room reading birthday cards in the beginning of the movie ; this scene no longer exists .
*
" Mari raped by Sadie " –
Footage of Sadie committing sexual acts against Mari in the woods is often removed , even from some DVDs that have been labeled as " uncut " .
In the Krug and Company cut , Mari is still alive when her parents find her .
She tells her parents what happened to her and Phyllis before dying in front of them .
HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
The Last House on the Left has been released multiple times on home media in the United States ; Metro - Goldwyn - Mayer ( MGM ) released a DVD version on August 27 , 2002 , which featured outtakes , a making - of documentary , and " Forbidden Footage , " a featurette exploring the film 's most violent shocking sequences .
On February 1 , 2011 , a Blu - ray was released by MGM and 20th Century Fox Home Video , which featured multiple featurettes and making - of documentaries , two audio commentary tracks , never - before - seen footage , and cast and crew interviews .
A limited edition Blu - ray box set is due to be released in the United States and United Kingdom on July 3 , 2018 , which features three different cuts of the film each restored in 2 K from the original film elements , a double - sided poster , lobby card reproductions , a book featuring writings on the film , a CD soundtrack , various archival bonus materials , and new interviews with cast , crew , and associates of Craven .
RELATED WORKS
SEQUEL
Section::::Related works .
Section::::Sequel .
In the 1980s , Vestron Pictures hired Danny Steinmann to write and direct a sequel , though the film fell apart in pre - production due to rights issues .
Mario Bava 's film Twitch of the Death Nerve was also released under the titles Last House on the Left – Part II , Last House – Part II and New House on the Left .
REMAKE Section::::Remake .
In August 2006 , Rogue Pictures finalized a deal to remake The Last House on the Left with original writer and director Wes Craven as a producer .
The company intended to preserve the storyline of the original film .
Craven described his involvement with the remake : " I 'm far enough removed from these films that the remakes are a little like having grandchildren .
The story , about the painful side effects of revenge , is an evergreen .
The headlines are full of people and nations taking revenge and getting caught up in endless cycles of violence . "
Craven formed Midnight Pictures , a shingle of Rogue , to remake The Last House on the Left as its first project .
Production was slated for early 2007 .
Screenwriter Adam Alleca was hired to write the script for the remake .
In May 2007 , Rogue entered negotiations with director Dennis Iliadis to direct the film .
The film was released to theaters in the U.S. and Canada on March 13 , 2009 .
SEE ALSO
* List of American films of 1972 * List of films featuring home invasions
* List of incomplete or partially lost films NOTES REFERENCES WORKS CITED EXTERNAL LINKS