WHIPPED - CREAM CHARGER
A whipped cream charger ( sometimes colloquially called a whippit , whippet , nossy , nang , Johnson or charger ) is a steel cylinder or cartridge filled with nitrous oxide ( NO ) that is used as a whipping agent in a whipped cream dispenser .
The narrow end of a charger has a foil covering which is broken to release the gas .
This is usually done by a sharp pin inside the whipped cream dispenser .
The nitrous oxide in chargers is also used as an oxidizer in hybrid model rocket engines .
It is also a popular recreational drug .
The associated kitchen appliance which receives the charger is commonly known as a whipping siphon .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The cylinders are about 6.3 cm ( 2.5 inches ) long and 1.8 cm ( 0.7 inches ) wide , and they are rounded at one end with a narrow tip at the other end .
The chargers ' walls are about 2 mm ( about 1/16 inch ) thick to withstand the great pressure of the gas contained within .
Their interior volume is 10 cm and most brands contain 8 g of NO under pressure .
Used chargers are non - refillable , but 100 % recyclable where steel recycling programs exist .
PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
In Europe , where production and use of whip cream chargers originated , there are presently three factories involved in its production .
Standard size for whipped cream chargers is eight grams of nitrous oxide per cartridge .
Whipped cream chargers are intended for low - volume or occasional use , such as home kitchens , restaurants , and coffee shop applications .
For very high volume commercial use , there do exist regulated tank systems for filling much larger containers and dispensing more whipped cream .
These are more desirable if volume is in excess of a production level of ten liters per hour .
Whipped cream chargers are designed to be opened with a device that punctures the thin metal seal at the narrow end of the tube ; whipped cream dispensers have this integrated into the device 's cap .
USES CULINARY Section::::Uses .
Section::::Culinary .
Nitrous oxide is used because it migrates easily into the cream , and does not cause the cream to oxidize while it is in the can .
Cream must have a minimum fat content of 28 % to produce whipped cream with a dispenser .
To use a whipped cream dispenser , one starts by following a recipe — typically one cup of heavy cream , 2–3 tablespoons of sugar , and any flavorings / colorings as desired .
The device is capped and one or two chargers are discharged into the unit , depending on its size .
These pressurize the device with nitrous oxide and cause the fat - soluble gas to dissolve into the cream , just like carbon dioxide dissolves into water to create soda water .
Shaking the dispenser a few times helps the gas dissolve .
The dispenser is then ready for use .
When the cream dispenser 's valve is opened , the cream is forced out of the nozzle by the high pressure .
However , when the pressure is released , the dissolved gas turns to bubbles and comes out of the solution — just as opening a soda bottle results in the formation of a head of bubbles .
These expanding bubbles instantly transform the cream into a frothy , whipped state .
Nitrous oxide is bacteriostatic ( inhibits bacteria growth ) and a charged cream dispenser can be kept in the refrigerator for up to two weeks .
RECREATIONAL DRUG
Section::::Recreational drug .
Because of their availability , chargers are usually the method of choice for users seeking to use nitrous oxide recreationally .
Tanks of medical grade nitrous are difficult to obtain , and auto - grade nitrous contains substances such as sulfur dioxide to prevent human consumption .
Chargers are cheaply available in many stores and online .
To inhale from a charger , users either fill a balloon using a cracker , or fill an empty whipped cream dispenser and inhale from it - inhaling directly from a cracker is particularly dangerous due to the risk of developing frost - bite on the inside of the mouth or oesophagus .
The 8 gram nitrous oxide aluminium cylinder charger when discharged into an empty whipped cream dispenser ( Mosa Corp , Taiwan ) creates a pressure of 30 pounds per square inch ( 200kPa ) and delivers 3.24 litres of nitrous oxide gas .
A cracker is a small device , usually made from metal , which contains two halves .
The bottom half is where the charger is placed , and the top half has a pin which pierces the foil of the charger .
The top half screws onto the bottom half , and then releases the gas out the top .
Using a balloon with the cracker is important because when the gas is released from the charger it is extremely cold and can cause frostbite in the lips , tongue , throat , and lungs , so the gas is allowed to warm up inside the balloon before inhaling .
MODEL ROCKETRY Section::::Model rocketry .
Whipped cream chargers are also used by model rocket enthusiasts for micro hybrid engines , where it acts as an oxidizer for solid fuels such as polyethylene or HTPB .
SEE ALSO
*
Powerlet REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Microscale Gas Chemistry : Experiments with Nitrous Oxide