ANTIPODES
In geography , the antipode ( ) of any spot on Earth is the point on Earth 's surface diametrically opposite to it ; the antipodes of a region similarly represent the area opposite it .
A pair of points antipodal ( ) to each other are situated such that a straight line connecting the two would pass through Earth 's center .
Such points are as far away from each other as possible , a great - circle distance of up to on the equator .
In the Northern Hemisphere , " the Antipodes " may be used to refer to Australia and New Zealand , and " Antipodeans " to their inhabitants .
Geographically , the antipodes of Britain and Ireland are in the Pacific Ocean , south of New Zealand .
This gave rise to the name of the Antipodes Islands of New Zealand , which are close to the antipode of London at about .
The antipodes of Australia are in the North Atlantic Ocean , while parts of Spain , Portugal , and Morocco are antipodal to New Zealand .
Approximately 15 % of land territory is antipodal to other land , representing approximately 4.4 % of the Earth 's surface .
The largest antipodal land masses are the Malay Archipelago , antipodal to the Amazon Basin and adjoining Andean ranges ; east China and Mongolia , antipodal to Chile and Argentina ; and Greenland and the Canadian Arctic Archipelago , antipodal to East Antarctica .
There is a general paucity of antipodal land because the Southern hemisphere has fairly little land , and of that , the antipodes of Australia are in the North Atlantic Ocean , while the antipodes of Africa are in the Pacific Ocean .
GEOGRAPHY
Section::::Geography .
The antipode of any place on the Earth is the place that is diametrically opposite it , so a line drawn from the one to the other passes through the centre of the Earth and forms a true diameter .
For example , the antipodes of New Zealand 's lower North Island lie in Spain .
Most of the Earth 's land surfaces have ocean at their antipodes , this being a consequence of most land being in the land hemisphere .
The singular antipode is a back - formation ( c. 1540 - 50 CE ) from the plural antipodes , which in Greek is the plural of the singular antipous .
The antipode of any place on Earth is distant from it by 180 ° of longitude and as many degrees to the north of the Equator as the original is to the south ( or vice versa ) ; in other words , the latitudes are numerically equal , but one is north and the other south .
The maps shown here are based on this relationship ; they show a Lambert azimuthal equal - area projection of the Earth , in yellow , overlaid on which is another map , in blue , shifted horizontally by 180 ° of longitude and inverted about the Equator with respect to latitude .
Noon at one place is midnight at the other ( ignoring daylight saving time and irregularly shaped time zones ) and , with the exception of the tropics , the longest day at one point corresponds to the shortest day at the other , and midwinter at one point coincides with midsummer at the other .
Sunrise and sunset do not quite oppose each other at antipodes due to refraction of sunlight .
MATHEMATICAL DESCRIPTION
Section::::Mathematical description .
If the geographic coordinates ( latitude and longitude ) of a point on the Earth 's surface are ( φ , θ ) , then the coordinates of the antipodal point are ( −φ , θ ± 180 ° ) .
This relation holds true whether the Earth is approximated as a perfect sphere or as a reference ellipsoid .
In terms of the usual way these geographic coordinates are given , this transformation can be expressed symbolically as that is , for the latitude ( the North / South coordinate ) the magnitude of the angle remains the same
but N is changed to S and vice versa , and for the longitude ( the East / West coordinate ) the angle is replaced by its supplementary angle while E is exchanged for W. For example , the antipode of the point in China at ( a few hundred kilometres from Beijing ) is the point in Argentina at ( a few hundred kilometres from Buenos Aires ) .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word antipodes comes from the Greek : ἀντίποδες ( antípodes ) , plural of ἀντίπους ( antipous ) , " with feet opposite ( ours ) " , from ἀντί ( antí , " opposite " )
+ πούς ( poús , " foot " ) .
The Greek word is attested in Plato 's dialogue Timaeus , already referring to a spherical Earth , explaining the relativity of the terms " above " and " below " : The term is taken up by Aristotle ( De caelo 308a.20 ) , Strabo , Plutarch and Diogenes Laertius , and was adopted into Latin as antipodes .
The Latin word changed its sense from the original " under the feet , opposite side " to " those with the feet opposite " , i.e. a bahuvrihi referring to hypothetical people living on the opposite side of the Earth .
Medieval illustrations imagine them in some way " inverted " , with their feet growing out of their heads , pointing upward .
In this sense , Antipodes first entered English in 1398 in a translation of the 13th century De Proprietatibus Rerum by Bartholomeus Anglicus , translated by John of Trevisa : HISTORICAL SIGNIFICANCE Section::::Historical significance .
Pomponius Mela , the first Roman geographer , asserted that the earth had two habitable zones , a North and South one , but that it would be impossible to get into contact with each other because of the unbearable heat at the Equator .
From the time of St Augustine , the Christian church was skeptical of the notion .
Augustine asserted that " it is too absurd to say that some men might have set sail from this side and , traversing the immense expanse of ocean , have propagated there a race of human beings descended from that one first man . "
In the Early Middle Ages , Isidore of Seville 's widely read encyclopedia presented the term " antipodes " as referring to antichthones ( people who lived on the opposite side of the Earth ) , as well as to a geographical place ; these people came to play a role in medieval discussions about the shape of the Earth .
In 748 , in reply to a letter from Saint Boniface , Pope Zachary declared the belief " that beneath the earth there was another world and other men , another sun and moon " to be heretical .
In his letter , Boniface had apparently maintained that Vergilius of Salzburg held such a belief .
The antipodes being an attribute of a spherical Earth , some ancient authors used their perceived absurdity as an argument for a flat Earth .
However , knowledge of the spherical Earth was widespread during the Middle Ages , only occasionally disputed — the medieval dispute surrounding the antipodes mainly concerned the question whether people could live on the opposite side of the earth : since the torrid clime was considered impassable , it would have been impossible to evangelize them .
This posed the problem that Christ told the apostles to evangelize all mankind ; with regard to the unreachable antipodes , this would have been impossible .
Christ would either have appeared a second time , in the antipodes , or left the damned irredeemable .
Such an argument was forwarded by the Spanish theologian Alonso Tostado as late as the 15th century and
" St. Augustine doubts " was a response to Columbus 's proposal to sail westwards to the Indies .
The author of the Norwegian book Konungs Skuggsjá , from around 1250 , discusses the existence of antipodes .
He notes that ( if they exist ) they will see the sun in the north in the middle of the day and that they will have seasons opposite those of the Northern Hemisphere .
The earliest surviving account by a European who had visited the Southern Hemisphere is that of Marco Polo ( who , on his way home in 1292 , sailed south of the Malay Peninsula ) .
He noted that it was impossible to see the star Polaris from there .
The idea of dry land in the southern climes , the Terra Australis , was introduced by Ptolemy and appears on European maps as an imaginary continent from the 15th century .
In spite of having been discovered relatively late by European explorers , Australia was inhabited very early in human history ; the ancestors of the Indigenous Australians reached it at least 50,000 years ago .
TRUE TRIP "
AROUND
THE WORLD " Section::::True trip " around the world " .
To make the longest distance trip around the planet a traveler would have to pass through a set of antipodal points .
All meridians can be crossed in one hemisphere -- indeed , by walking around one of the poles -- but such trips are shorter than a maximum circumnavigation .
On the other hand , the greatest straight line distance that could in theory be covered is a trip exactly on the Equator .
The Earth 's equatorial bulge makes this slightly longer than one north - south around the world along a set of meridian lines , or on any other closed great circle route traveling at an angle .
In any of these cases after half the world is passed every subsequent point will be antipodal to one already visited .
AIR TRAVEL BETWEEN ANTIPODES Section::::Air travel between antipodes .
There are no non - stop scheduled flights between any two antipodal locations by commercial airline service — or anything even close .
There is currently no commercial aircraft capable of travelling between antipodes at full load non - stop .
( The current record holder Boeing 777 - 200LR 's maximum range is rated at . )
There are also regulations regarding pilot 's work time , so relief crewmembers would be needed .
The longest non - stop scheduled flight was the Singapore Airlines Flight 21 between Newark , New Jersey and Singapore , covering about in about 17 hours and 52 minutes of flight time , and this was far from a journey between nearly antipodal locations .
Among flights with fuel stop and crew - change stop but still same flight number , Air New Zealand has one of the longest , Auckland – Los Angeles – London , at over Los Angeles ( directly ) .
A hypothetically perfect antipode flight would be Tangier Ibn Battouta Airport , Morocco ( IATA : TNG ) to Whangarei Aerodrome , New Zealand ( IATA : WRE ) , whose designated locators are 10,800 nautical miles ( 20,001 km )
apart , the maximum possible distance , but their actual runways cross in projection .
However , with only a length of , Whangarei 's runway is too short to accommodate any current ( ) commercial jet airliner , especially one with the required range .
Traveling between them would presently need at least three plane changes , e.g. Paris – Los Angeles – Auckland .
Taipei and Asuncion are apart ; Santiago and Xian are apart ; Madrid and Auckland are apart ; Buenos Aires and Beijing are apart ; Johannesburg and Honolulu are apart ; New York City and Perth are apart .
LIST OF ANTIPODES EARTH Section::::List of antipodes .
Section::::Earth .
Around 71 % of the Earth 's surface is covered by oceans , and seven - eighths of the Earth 's land is confined to the land hemisphere , so the majority of locations on land do not have land - based antipodes .
The two largest human inhabited antipodal areas are located in East Asia ( mainly eastern China ) and South America ( mainly northern Argentina and Chile ) .
The Australian mainland is the largest landmass with its antipodes entirely in ocean , although some locations of mainland Australia and Tasmania are close to being antipodes of islands ( Bermuda , Azores , Puerto Rico ) in the North Atlantic Ocean .
The largest landmass with antipodes entirely on land is the island of Borneo , whose antipodes are in the Amazon rainforest .
CITIES Section::::Cities .
Exact or almost exact antipodes :
* Christchurch ( New Zealand ) — A Coruña ( Spain )
* Levin ( New Zealand ) - Ávila ( Spain )
* Hamilton ( New Zealand ) — Córdoba ( Spain ) * Hong Kong — La Quiaca ( Argentina )
* Lianyungang ( China ) —
Junín ( Argentina )
* Madrid ( Spain ) — Weber ( New Zealand )
* Mangawhai ( New Zealand ) — Rock of Gibraltar ( Overseas British Territory )
* Masterton ( New Zealand ) — Segovia ( Spain ) * Nelson ( New Zealand ) — Mogadouro ( Portugal ) * Padang ( Indonesia ) — Esmeraldas ( Ecuador )
* Palembang ( Indonesia ) — Neiva ( Colombia )
* Pekanbaru ( Indonesia ) — Machachi ( Ecuador )
* Tauranga ( New Zealand ) — Jaén ( Spain )
* Ulan Ude ( Russia ) — Puerto Natales ( Chile )
* Wellington ( capital of New Zealand ) — Alaejos ( Valladolid , Spain ) * Whangarei ( New Zealand ) — Tangier ( Morocco )
* Wuhai ( China ) — Valdivia ( Chile )
* Wuhu ( China ) — Rafaela ( Argentina )
To within , with at least one major city ( population of at least 1 million ) : *
Auckland ( New Zealand ) —
Seville and Málaga ( Andalusia , Spain )
* Beijing ( China ) — Bahía Blanca ( Argentina )
* Nanjing ( China ) —
Rosario ( Argentina )
* Shanghai ( China ) — Salto ( Uruguay )
* Taipei ( Taiwan ) —
Asunción ( Paraguay )
* Tianjin ( China ) — Bahía Blanca ( Argentina ) * Xi'an ( China ) — Santiago , or more precisely Rancagua or San Bernardo ( Chile ) Taiwan ( formerly called Formosa ) is partly antipodal to the province of Formosa in Argentina .
Other major cities or capitals close to being antipodes : * Rio de Janeiro ( Brazil ) —
Tokyo ( Japan ) ; the host cities of successive Summer Olympic Games ( 2016 and 2020 ) ,
~ * Beijing ( China ) — Buenos Aires ( Argentina ) ; both cities have populations in the millions , and have been twinned since 1983 , ~ * Shanghai ( China ) — Buenos Aires ( Argentina ) ; Buenos Aires is actually closer ( ~ ) to the antipode of Shanghai ( Salto , Uruguay ) than to the antipode of Beijing ( Bahía Blanca )
* Tongchuan ( China ) — Licantén ( Chile ) * Bogotá ( Colombia ) — Jakarta ( Indonesia ) , ~ * Guayaquil ( Ecuador ) — Medan ( Indonesia ) , ~ * Phnom Penh ( Cambodia ) —
Lima ( Peru ) , ~ * Dili ( Timor - Leste ) — Paramaribo ( Suriname ) , ~ * Irkutsk ( Russia ) — Punta Arenas ( Chile ) *
Suva ( Fiji ) — Timbuktu ( Mali ) * Melbourne and Canberra ( Australia )
- Azores , Atlantic Ocean ( Portugal )
* Cherbourg ( France ) — Antipodes Islands ( New Zealand ) * Pago Pago ( American Samoa ) — Zinder ( Niger )
* Barranquilla ( Colombia ) — Christmas Island ( Australia )
* Doha ( Qatar ) — Pitcairn Island ( Overseas British Territory ) * Hué and Da Nang ( Vietnam ) —
Arequipa ( Peru )
* Manila ( Philippines ) — Cuiabá ( Brazil )
* Kuala Lumpur ( Malaysia ) —
Cuenca ( Ecuador ) * San Juan ( Puerto Rico ) — Karratha ( Australia )
* Limerick ( Ireland ) — Campbell Islands ( New Zealand ) * Arrecife , Lanzarote ( Canary Islands ) — Norfolk Island * Sharm el Sheikh ( Egypt ) — Rapa Iti ( French Polynesia ) * Bangkok ( Thailand ) —
Lima ( Peru )
* Quito ( Ecuador ) — Singapore * Perth ( Australia ) — Hamilton ( Bermuda ) * Montevideo ( Uruguay ) — Gwangju ( South Korea ) CITIES AND GEOGRAPHIC FEATURES Section::::Cities and geographic features .
Gibraltar is approximately antipodal to Te Arai Beach about north of Auckland , New Zealand .
This illustrates the old yet correct saying that the sun never sets on the British Empire ; the sun still does not set on the Commonwealth of Nations .
The northern part of New Caledonia , an overseas territory of France , is antipodal to some thinly populated desert in Mauritania , a part of the former French West Africa .
Portions of Suriname , a former Dutch colony , are antipodal to Sulawesi , an Indonesian island spelled Celebes when it was part of the Netherlands East Indies .
Luzon , the largest island of the Philippines , is antipodal to eastern Bolivia .
As with the British Empire , the sun set neither on the French Empire , the Dutch Empire , nor the Spanish Empire at their peaks .
Santa Vitória do Palmar , the most southerly town of more than 10,000 people in Brazil , is antipodal to Jeju Island , the southernmost territory of South Korea .
The Big Island of Hawaii is antipodal to the Okavango Delta in Botswana , with the island 's largest city , Hilo , antipodal to Nxai Pan National Park .
Easter Island is antipodal to Desert National Park , from Jaisalmer , India .
Kiritimati , the largest island of Kiribati and the largest coral atoll in the world , is antipodal to Salonga National Park , which is the largest national park of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the largest tropical rainforest reserve in Africa .
Serra da Estrela Natural Park , the largest natural park of Portugal , is antipodal to Kahurangi National Park , the second largest national park of New Zealand .
Desolate Kerguelen Island is antipodal to an area of thinly inhabited plains on the border between the Canadian provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan and the US state of Montana .
The Heard Island and McDonald Islands , an uninhabited Australian territory , is antipodal to an area in central Saskatchewan , including the towns of Leask and Shellbrook .
Tigres Island , the largest uninhabited island of Angola , is approximately antipodal to Johnston atoll , which is the third largest uninhabited island of the United States .
St. Paul Island and Amsterdam Island are antipodal to thinly populated parts of the eastern part of the US state of Colorado .
South Georgia Island is antipodal to the northernmost part of Sakhalin Island .
Lake Baikal is partially antipodal to the Straits of Magellan .
The Russian Antarctic research base Bellingshausen Station is antipodal to a land location in Russian Siberia .
Rottnest Island , off the coast of Western Australia , is approximately antipodal to Bermuda .
Cocos
( Keeling ) Islands , an Australian external territory in the Indian Ocean , is almost antipodal to Nicaragua 's Corn Islands .
Flores Island , the westernmost island of the Azores , is nearly antipodal to Flinders Island between Tasmania and the Australian mainland .
Point Nemo , the point in the South Pacific Ocean most distant from any other land , is precisely opposite a desolate piece of desert in western Kazakhstan .
By definition , the North Pole and the South Pole are antipodes .
Null Island , , at the intersection of the prime meridian and the equator , has its antipodes at , at the intersection of the antimeridian and the equator .
This point lies northeast of Nikunau in the Gilbert Islands and southwest of Baker Island , a United States territory .
As can be seen on the purple / blue map , the Pacific Ocean is so large that it stretches halfway around the world ; parts of the Pacific off the coast of Peru are antipodal to parts of the same ocean off the coast of Southeast Asia .
For example , the island of Ko Chang - which is the second or third largest island in Thailand - is nearly antipodal to San Lorenzo Island , which is the largest island of Peru .
COUNTRIES
Section::::Countries .
The following countries are opposite more than one other country .
( Antarctica is considered separately from any territorial claims . ) !
Country !
No . of antipodal countries ! class="unsortable
" Antipodal countries Japan align="center " 2 ( Ryukyu ) Brazil , Paraguay Countries matching up with just one other country are Morocco , Spain , Chad , Libya , Cameroon ( with the Cook Islands of New Zealand ) ; Egypt , Eritrea , Ethiopia ( with French Polynesia ) ;
Senegal ( Vanuatu ) ; the UAE ( Pitcairn ) ; Ghana , Ivory Coast ( Tuvalu ) ; Burkina Faso ( Rotuma in Fiji ) ; Guinea ( Solomon Islands ) ; India ( Easter Island ) ; Laos , Cambodia , Vietnam , and Thailand ( all with Peru ) ; Singapore ( Ecuador ) ; Brunei , Palau , Micronesia ( all with Brazil ) ; Venezuela and Suriname ( Indonesia ) .
Of these , the larger countries which are entirely antipodal to land are the Philippines , Malaysia , Taiwan , Fiji , Vanuatu , Brunei , and Samoa .
Chile was as well prior to its expansion into the Atacama with the War of the Pacific .
EXTRATERRESTRIAL EXAMPLES
Section::::Extraterrestrial examples .
In a number of cases on extraterrestrial bodies in the Solar System , unusual geologic features ( e.g. , jumbled terrain or unique volcanic constructs ) are located antipodal to major impact basins .
It has been hypothesized that this results from focusing of some of the seismic waves ( p - waves and surface waves ) produced by an impact at its antipode .
* Caloris Basin - " Weird Terrain " ( Mercury ) * Mare Orientale - Mare Marginis ( The Moon ) * Mare Imbrium - Mare Ingenii ( The Moon )
* Hellas Planitia - Alba Mons ( Mars ) * Isidis Planitia - Noctis Labyrinthus ( Mars )
* Kerwan - Ahuna Mons ( Ceres )
IN POPULAR CULTURE
LITERATURE
* New Zealand writer Mark Price undertook a tour in 2005–06 of the length of New Zealand and its land
antipodes in Morocco and Spain , from Kerikeri ( near Larache and Lixus , Morocco ) to Cathedral Square , Christchurch ( near Foz , Spain ) .
TELEVISION
* A gag in American animated television series was " digging all the way to China " .
*
On the popular TV show Angel ,
the Deeper Well is a hole that goes through the world , with its entrance in the Cotswolds in England and its antipode in New Zealand .
* The May 19 , 2008 , official Lost audio podcast gave credence to a theory that the Island ( where the show is set ) is located at Tunisia 's antipode , in the south Pacific east of New Zealand .
* " The Gathering " , a episode of Torchwood , refers to Shanghai and Buenos Aires as being antipodes of each other .
The tenth and final episode notes more precisely that they are " perfect antipodes " while acknowledging that is only accurate " give or take a hundred miles or so . "
*
At the closing ceremonies of the Rio 2016 Olympics , they used the antipodes as a tool to invite viewers to the Tokyo 2020 Olympics .
There was an image of the video game character Mario using his pipes to travel between Tokyo and Rio , arriving at the closing ceremonies .
FILM
*
In the 2012 film Total Recall , a gravity train called " The Fall " goes through the center of the Earth to allow people to commute between Western Europe and Australia .
WEBCASTS
*
In 2006 , Ze Frank challenged viewers of his daily webcast the show with zefrank to create an " Earth sandwich " by simultaneously placing two pieces of bread at antipodal points on the Earth 's surface .
The challenge was successfully completed by viewers in Spain and New Zealand .
SEE ALSO
* Antichthones * Antipodal hotspot *
Antipodal point
* Antipodes Islands *
Clime
* Pole of inaccessibility * Spherical Earth NOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
Antipodes Map Interactive map which draws a tunnel to the other side of the world .
* findLatitudeAndLongitude , interactive tool to show antipodes * 3D dual globe schematic 3D representation of the earth and the anti - earth on the same place .
*
Map Tunneling Tool Tunnel to the Other Side of the Earth
* Calculate the other side of the world * Antipodes An online and photographic project which pairs webcam images from places on opposite sides of the globe .
* Map Tunneller Find out what part of the earth is directly below you using the interactive maps
* Antipodal hotspots and bipolar catastrophes : Were oceanic large - body impacts the cause ?
* Antipode Finder Tool to find the opposite side of the world by city or country .