OVER THE RAINBOW " Over the Rainbow " is a ballad composed by Harold Arlen with lyrics by Yip Harburg .
It was written for the movie
The Wizard of Oz and was sung by actress Judy Garland in her starring role as Dorothy Gale .
It won the Academy Award for Best Original Song and became Garland 's signature song .
About five minutes into the film , Dorothy sings the song after failing to get Aunt Em , Uncle Henry , and the farm hands to listen to her story of an unpleasant incident involving her dog , Toto , and the town spinster , Miss Gulch ( Margaret Hamilton ) .
Aunt Em tells her to " find yourself a place where you wo n't get into any trouble " .
This prompts her to walk off by herself , musing to Toto , " Some place where there is n't any trouble .
Do you suppose there is such a place , Toto ?
There must be .
It 's not a place you can get to by a boat , or a train .
It 's far , far away .
Behind the moon , beyond the rain ... " , at which point she begins singing .
THE WIZARD OF OZ Section::::The Wizard of Oz .
The " Over the Rainbow " and Kansas scenes were directed by the uncredited King Vidor .
The song was deleted from the film after a preview in San Luis Obispo because MGM chief executive Louis B. Mayer and producer Mervyn LeRoy thought it " slowed down the picture " and sounded " like something for Jeanette MacDonald , not for a little girl singing in a barnyard " .
But the song was returned to the film due to the persistence of associate producer Arthur Freed and Roger Edens , who was Judy Garland 's vocal coach and mentor .
At the start of the film , part of the song is played by the MGM orchestra over the opening credits .
A reprise of it was deleted after being filmed .
An additional chorus was to be sung by Dorothy while she was locked in the Witch 's castle , helplessly awaiting death as the hourglass ran out .
However , although the visual portion of that reprise is presumably lost , the soundtrack of it survives and was included in the 2-CD Deluxe Edition of the film 's soundtrack released by Rhino Entertainment in 1995 .
In that intense rendition , Dorothy cries her way through it , unable to finish , concluding with , " I 'm frightened , Auntie Em , I 'm frightened ! "
This phrase was retained in the film and is followed immediately by Aunt Em 's brief appearance in the crystal ball , where she is soon replaced by the visage of the witch ( Hamilton ) , mocking and taunting Dorothy before turning toward the camera to cackle .
Another instrumental version is played in the underscore in the final scene and over the closing credits .
RECORDINGS BY JUDY GARLAND Section::::Recordings by Judy Garland .
On October 7 , 1938 , Judy Garland recorded the song on the MGM soundstage with an arrangement by Murray Cutter .
In September 1939 , a studio recording of the song , not from the film soundtrack , was recorded and released as a single for Decca .
In March 1940 , that same recording was included on a Decca 78 four - record studio cast album entitled The Wizard of Oz .
Although this is n't the version that appeared in the film , Decca continued to release the " cast album " into the 1960s after it was reissued on disc , a 33 album .
The film version of " Over the Rainbow " was unavailable to the public until the soundtrack was released by MGM in 1956 to coincide with the television premiere of The Wizard of Oz .
The soundtrack version has been re - released several times over the years , including a deluxe edition by Rhino in 1995 .
After The Wizard of Oz appeared in 1939 , " Over the Rainbow " became Garland 's signature song .
She performed it for thirty years , singing it as she had for the film .
She said she wanted to remain true to the character of Dorothy and to the message of being somewhere over the rainbow .
OTHER LYRICS
Section::::Other lyrics .
An introductory verse ( " When all the world is a hopeless jumble ... " ) that was omitted from the film is sometimes used in theatrical productions of The Wizard of Oz and is included in the piano sheet music from the film .
It was also used in versions by Tony Bennett , Al Bowlly , Doris Day , Ella Fitzgerald , Frank Sinatra , Sarah Vaughan , and Norma Waterson .
Judy Garland sang the introductory verse only once , on a 1948 radio broadcast of The Louella Parsons Show .
Lyrics for a second verse ( " Once by a word only lightly spoken ... " ) appeared in the British edition of the sheet music .
AWARDS AND HONORS Section::::Awards and honors .
In March 2017 , " Over the Rainbow " sung by Judy Garland was entered in the National Recording Registry by the Library of Congress as music that is " culturally , historically , or artistically significant " .
The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) and the National Endowment for the Arts ( NEA ) ranked it number one on their Songs of the Century list .
The American Film Institute named it best movie song on the AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs list .
" Over the Rainbow " was given the Towering Song Award by the Songwriters Hall of Fame and was sung at its dinner on June 12 , 2014 , by Jackie Evancho .
In April 2005 , the United States Postal Service issued a commemorative stamp honoring Yip Harburg that includes a lyric .
It was sent as an audio wakeup call to astronauts about the STS-88 space shuttle mission on Flight Day 4 , dedicated to astronaut Robert D. Cabana by his daughter Sara .
CHART ACTIVITY AND SALES Section::::Chart activity and sales .
" Over the Rainbow " reached number 12 on the Billboard Hot Digital Tracks chart during the week of January 31 , 2004 ( for the survey week ending January 18 , 2004 ) .
In the U.S. , it was certified Platinum for 1,000,000 downloads sold .
As of October 2014 it had sold over 4.2 million digital copies .
In the UK , " Over the Rainbow " was released as a single under the title " Somewhere Over the Rainbow " .
It entered the UK Official Singles Chart in April 2007 at number 68 .
In Germany , the single also returned to the German Singles Chart in September 2010 .
After two weeks on that chart , it received gold status for selling 150,000 copies .
In October 2010 , it reached number one on the German charts .
In 2011 was certified 5x gold for selling over 750,000 copies .
It stayed 12 non - consecutive weeks at the top spot and was the most successful single in Germany in 2010 .
In March 2010 it was the second best - selling download in Germany with digital sales between 500,000 and 600,000 .
In France , it debuted at number four in December 2010 and reached number one .
In Switzerland , it received Platinum status for 30,000 copies sold .
" Over the Rainbow " has been used in commercials , films and television programs , including 50 First Dates , Charmed , Cold Case , ER , Finding Forrester , Horizon , Life on Mars , Meet Joe Black , Scrubs , Snakes on a Plane , Son of the Mask , and the television series South Pacific .
The Kamakawiwo'ole version was sung by the cast of Glee on the season one finale " Journey " and included on , charting at number 30 in the UK , 31 in Canada and Ireland , 42 in Australia , and 43 in the U.S. INTERNATIONAL VERSIONS
Section::::International versions .
The first German version in the English language was recorded by the Swing Orchestra Heinz Wehner ( 1908–1945 ) in March 1940 in Berlin .
Wehner , at this time an international well - known German Swing Artist , also took over the vocals .
The first German version in German language was sung by Inge Brandenburg ( 1929–1999 ) in 1960 .
ISRAEL KAMAKAWIWOʻOLE VERSION Section::::Israel Kamakawiwoʻole version .
On the album Facing Future ( 1993 ) , Israel Kamakawiwo'ole included " Over the Rainbow " in a ukulele medley with " What a Wonderful World " by Louis Armstrong .
Israel called the recording studio at 3 am .
He was given 15 minutes to arrive by Milan Bertosa .
Bertosa said , " And in walks the largest human being I had seen in my life .
Israel was probably like 500 pounds .
And the first thing at hand is to find something for him to sit on . "
A security guard gave Israel a large steel chair .
"
Then I put up some microphones , do a quick sound check , roll tape , and the first thing he does is ' Somewhere Over the Rainbow . '
He played and sang , one take , and it was over . "
EVA CASSIDY
VERSION Section::::Eva Cassidy version .
Eva Cassidy recorded a version of the song for The Other Side ( 1992 ) .
After her death in 1996 , it was included on the posthumous compilation Songbird ( 1998 ) and released as a single in 2001 .
It debuted at number 88 on the UK Singles Chart in February 2001 and climbed to number 42 in May , becoming Cassidy 's first single to chart in the United Kingdom .
In Scotland , it reached number 36 , giving Cassidy her first top 40 hit in that region .
It was her highest - charting song in the United Kingdom until 2007 , when " What a Wonderful World " reached number one .
The song also reached number 27 in Ireland in December , becoming her only top 40 hit in that country .
Cassidy 's recording was selected by the BBC for its Songs of the Century album in 1999 .
Her performance at Blues Alley appeared on the album Simply Eva ( 2011 ) .
TRACK LISTINGS Section::::Track listings .
Single *
" Over the Rainbow " * * " Dark End of the Street " * CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
Chart ( 2001 ) !
Peakposition DANIELLE HOPE VERSION
Section::::Danielle Hope version .
Danielle Hope , the winner of the BBC talent show Over the Rainbow , released a cover version of the song as a digital download on May 23 , 2010 and a single on May 31 , 2010 .
As it was recorded before a winner was announced , runners - up Lauren Samuels and Sophie Evans also recorded versions .
The single was a charity record that raised money for the BBC Performing Arts Fund and Prostate UK .
TRACK LISTINGS Section::::Track listings .
UK digital download *
" Over the Rainbow " – 2:58 * CD single * " Over the Rainbow " * * " The Wizard of Oz medley " – Sophie Evans , Danielle Hope and Lauren Samuels
* CHARTS Section::::Charts . !
Chart ( 2010 ) !
Peakposition ARIANA GRANDE VERSION Section::::Ariana Grande version .
American singer Ariana Grande released a version of the song on June 6 , 2017 to raise money at her benefit concert One Love Manchester after 22 people were killed in the Manchester Arena bombing at Grande 's concert on May 22 , 2017 .
Grande sang the single for the first time on TV at the One Love Manchester benefit concert on June 4 , 2017 .
CHART PERFORMANCE Section::::Chart performance . ! scope="col " Chart ( 2017 ) !
scope="col " Peak position !
scope="row " UK Singles ( Official Charts Company ) 60 OTHER VERSIONS ON ALBUMS AND SINGLES
* Jeff Beck – Emotion & Commotion ( 2010 )
* Dave Brubeck – Jazz at Storyville ( 1952 )
* Ray Charles – Ingredients in a Recipe for Soul ( 1963 ) * Nicholas David , a contestant on the third season of The Voice , recorded a version that went to number 96 on the Billboard Hot 100 in 2012 with sales of 48,000 copies .
*
The Demensions recorded a version that reached number 16 on the Billboard Hot 100 in 1960 .
* Keith Jarrett , La Scala ( 1995 )
* Stanley Jordan , Stolen Moments ( 1990 )
* Katharine McPhee ( 2006 )
* Glenn Miller ( 1939 )
* Bud Powell ( 1951 )
* Boyd Raeburn ( 1946 ) * Art Tatum , The Art Tatum Solo Masterpieces Volume 6 ( 1953 )
* Billy Thorpe and the Aztecs 's version topped the Australian music charts in 1965 .
Another version charted in 1974 after Thorpe 's blues - based revival of the song at the 1973 Sunbury Pop Festival .
*
Hibari Misora released a Japanese language version of the song titled Niji
no Kanata Ni ( 虹の彼方に ) .
Section::::Other versions .
Section::::On albums and singles .
German producer Marusha made a happy hardcore version of the track in 1994 .
This version reached No . 3 on the German charts .
ON FILM AND TELEVISION
* James Stewart sings the song while carrying a drunken Katharine Hepburn in The Philadelphia Story .
* Vincent Price sings the song to ironic effect at the very end of his 1972 cult classic fantasy - horror film , Dr. Phibes Rises Again .
*
The song appeared at the end of the Scrubs episode " My Way Home " .
*
Mandy ( Grey DeLisle - Griffin ) sings the song at the talent show in The Grim Adventures of Billy & Mandy season five episode " My Fair Mandy " * The original Garland recording of the song can be featured in the 2009 animated film 9 .
* Lady Gaga briefly sings it in the 2018 version of A Star Is Born .
It is also featured on the standard version of the soundtrack .
SEE ALSO
* Musical selections in The Wizard of Oz
* List of 1930s jazz standards
* List of best - selling singles
* List of best - selling singles in the United States REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS *
The Judy Garland Online Discography