BROOKS ROBINSON Brooks Calbert Robinson Jr. ( born May 18 , 1937 ) is an American former professional baseball player .
He played his entire 23-year major league career for the Baltimore Orioles ( 1955–1977 ) .
He batted and threw right - handed , though he was a natural left - hander .
Nicknamed " The Human Vacuum Cleaner " or " Mr. Hoover " , he is considered one of the greatest defensive third basemen in major league history .
He won 16 consecutive Gold Glove Awards during his career , tied with pitcher Jim Kaat for the second - most all - time for any player at any position .
Robinson was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1983 .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Robinson was born in Little Rock , Arkansas , to Brooks Calbert and Ethel Mae ( née Denker )
Robinson .
His father worked for Colonial Bakery in Little Rock and later became a captain with the Little Rock Fire Department .
His mother worked for Sears Roebuck & Company and then in the controller 's office at the state capitol .
His father played second base for a semi - pro team .
Young Brooks Robinson Jr. , delivered the Arkansas Gazette on his bicycle and also operated the scoreboard and sold soft drinks at Lamar Porter Field .
After he graduated from Little Rock High School on May 27 , 1955 , where he was scouted for the Arkansas Razorbacks baseball program in Fayetteville , he played in South America in 1955 and in Cuba in 1957 .
In the offseason of 1956–1957 , and then again in 1958 , he attended two winter semesters at Little Rock University , majoring in business .
He went into the army in 1959 , joining the Arkansas National Guard right before he was to be drafted into the United States Army .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Robinson was signed by the Orioles as an amateur free agent in 1955 .
He made his first appearance on September 17 , 1955 at Memorial Stadium against the Washington Senators , batting 6th in the lineup .
He went 2-for-4 with an RBI , singling in the 4th off Chuck Stobbs for his first hit while driving in a run on a single in the eighth inning in the 3 - 1 win .
In 1964 , Robinson had his best season offensively , hitting for a .318 batting average with 28 home runs and led the league with 118 runs batted in , winning the American League Most Valuable Player Award .
In the American League MVP voting , he received 18 of the 20 first - place votes , with Mickey Mantle finishing second .
In 1966 , he was voted the All - Star Game Most Valuable Player , and finished second to teammate Frank Robinson in the American League Most Valuable Player Award voting , as the Orioles went on to win the 1966 World Series against the Los Angeles Dodgers .
In the 1970 post - season , Robinson hit for a .583 batting average in the 1970 American League Championship Series against the Minnesota Twins .
In the 1970 World Series against the Cincinnati Reds , Robinson had a .429 batting average with 2 home runs ; however , it was his defensive prowess at third base that stood out , making several impressive plays during the series that robbed the Reds of apparent base hits .
His performance won him the World Series MVP Award presented by SPORT , as well as the Hickok Belt as top professional athlete of the year .
After the 1970 World Series , Cincinnati Reds manager Sparky Anderson quipped , " I 'm beginning to see Brooks in my sleep .
If I dropped this paper plate , he 'd pick it up on one hop and throw me out at first . "
In his playing career , Robinson was selected for the All - Star team in 15 consecutive years ( -74 ) and played in four World Series .
He compiled a .267 career batting average with 2,848 hits , 268 home runs and 1357 runs batted in .
Robinson led the American League in fielding percentage a record 11 times , and at the time of his retirement , his .971 career fielding average was the highest ever for a third baseman .
His totals of 2870 games played at third base , 2697 career putouts , 6205 career assists , 8902 career total chances and 618 double plays were records for third basemen at the time of his retirement .
Robinson 's 23 seasons with one team set a new major league record , since tied by Carl Yastrzemski .
Only Yastrzemski ( 3308 ) , Hank Aaron ( 3076 ) and Stan Musial ( 3026 ) played more games for one franchise .
Robinson , a slow baserunner , also hit into four triple plays during his career , a major league record .
He commented , " I would n't mind seeing someone erase my record of hitting into four triple plays . "
He is the first player to start two triple plays in one season , as he did in 1973 .
Robinson made his final batting appearance on August 5 , 1977 at Anaheim Stadium , pinch hitting for Mark Belanger in the top of the eighth inning .
He lined out in his one appearance before being replaced by Kiko Garcia .
Robinson made his last appearance in the majors eight days later at Memorial Stadium against the Oakland Athletics .
He entered as a pinch hitter for Al Bumbry , only to be pinch hit for Tony Muser .
RETIREMENT Section::::Retirement .
When the Orioles started their team Hall of Fame , Brooks and Frank Robinson were the first two men inducted .
Following his retirement as a player , Brooks began a successful career as a color commentator for the Orioles ' television broadcasts .
In 1982 , local television WMAR 's on - air news team in Baltimore , Maryland went on strike and picketed the WMAR headquarters for the two months approaching the baseball season .
When Robinson refused to cross the picket line , WMAR management reopened the negotiations and the strike ended the next day .
HONORS Section::::Honors .
At the conclusion of his final season in 1977 , his jersey number 5 was retired by the Orioles .
Robinson was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1983 , one of only 16 players to have been honored on the first ballot ( not including the five charter members chosen in the first election in 1936 ) .
Considered among the greatest all - time Orioles , Robinson and the man usually considered the greatest Baltimore Colts football player , Johnny Unitas , had plaques in their honor in the lobby of Baltimore 's Memorial Stadium .
When the Orioles played their last game there on October 6 , 1991 , Robinson and Unitas were invited to throw out the ceremonial first balls .
( Unitas threw a football . )
After the conclusion of the game , 119 former Oriole players took the field in the uniforms of their time and stood at their old positions on the field .
Robinson was chosen to be the first player to come out .
In 1999 , he ranked Number 80 on The Sporting News list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players , and was elected to the Major League Baseball All - Century Team .
A longtime supporter of Scouting
, Robinson served for many years on the executive board of the Baltimore Area Council , Boy Scouts of America and is a recipient of the Silver Beaver Award .
On December 5 , 2006 he was recognized for his accomplishments on and off of the field when he received the Bobby Bragan Youth Foundation Lifetime Achievement Award .
On May 16 , 2007 , Radio Tower Drive , a road in Pikesville , Maryland , was renamed Brooks Robinson Drive in honor of Robinson 's 70th birthday .
On July 2 , 2008 , the minor league team in York , Pennsylvania , where Robinson got his start , held a ceremony honoring him for being voted as a member on the All - Time Rawlings Gold Glove Team .
The award was created by Rawlings and voted by fans to celebrate the golden anniversary of the award .
On October 22 , 2011 , a statue was unveiled on Washington Boulevard in downtown Baltimore depicting Robinson preparing to throw out a runner at first base .
Robinson was present for the unveiling of the statue and commented that it " gave him more hair than he deserved " .
The statue weighs more than 1,500 pounds , is dark gray in color with the exception of a gold colored fielders 's baseball glove , and is located about 300 yards away from the Camden Yards statue of Babe Ruth .
On September 29 , 2012 , the Orioles unveiled a larger - than - life bronze sculpture of Robinson at Oriole Park at Camden Yards as part of the Orioles Legends Celebration Series during the 20th anniversary of the ballpark .
The unveiling had been previously scheduled to be on May 12 , 2012 , but had to be rescheduled due to Brooks still slowly recovering after falling off a stage on January 27 , 2012 .
In 2015 , Robinson was selected as one of the Orioles Franchise - Four , recognizing the four greatest players in Orioles history , along with Jim Palmer , Frank Robinson and Cal Ripken Jr. OTHER Section::::Other .
Robinson serves as president of the Major League Baseball Players Alumni Association , an organization that assists players and fans to interact off the field .
MLB legends Bob Boone , George Brett , Robin Yount , Rusty Staub , Carl Erskine and Al Kaline
preside as vice presidents .
The organization assists former major league players through its wholly owned for - profit organizations MLAM ( Major League Alumni Marketing ) , and MLAS ( Major League Alumni Services ) .
MLAM 's goals include implementing a player pool and gaining compensation for former players through appearances and endorsements while protecting the names and likenesses of former players from unauthorized uses .
Robinson is one of the investors in the Opening Day Partners group , which owns four teams in the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball .
The group named Brooks Robinson Plaza at the entrance of PeoplesBank Park in York , Pennsylvania , in his honor .
In the 1970s , Robinson published an autobiography , Third Base is My Home .
He met his future wife , Constance Louise " Connie " Butcher , on an Orioles team flight from Kansas City to Boston in July 1959 , where she was working as a flight attendant for United Airlines .
He was so smitten with her that he kept ordering iced teas from her .
Some of his teammates encouraged him to go talk to her .
After drinking his third glass , he returned it to her in the galley .
There he told her : " I want to tell you something .
If any of these guys , the Baltimore Orioles , ask you for a date , tell 'em you do n't date married men .
Understand ?
I 'm the only single guy on the team .
" Before the plane landed in Boston the two had made a date to go out .
He was not the only bachelor on the flight .
Brooks and Constance were married in her hometown of Windsor , Ontario , Canada on October 8 , 1960 .
Raised a Methodist , in 1970 Robinson converted to Catholicism , his wife 's faith .
On March 31 , 2011 , Robinson was admitted to Greater Baltimore Medical Center for emergency surgery after he developed an infection and fever .
In the two weeks he spent in the hospital , he received an outpouring of letters and well - wishes from fans around the country .
He was also successfully treated for prostate cancer in 2009 .
In April 2014 it was reported that Robinson was seeking a multimillion - dollar settlement with the Seminole Indian tribe related to injuries he suffered after a 2012 fall from a stage at the Hard Rock casino .
SEE ALSO
* List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders * List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career doubles leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders * List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders
* List of Major League Baseball players to hit for the cycle
* List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders
* List of Major League Baseball players who spent their entire career with one franchise REFERENCES FURTHER READING
* Brooks Robinson archive at The Baltimore Sun ( July 14 , 2012 ) EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website , or Retrosheet