LUCKY STRIKE Lucky Strike is an American brand of cigarettes owned by the British American Tobacco groups .
Individual cigarettes of the brand are often referred to colloquially as " Luckies . "
Lucky Strike was the top - selling cigarette brand in the United States during the 1930s .
NAME Section::::Name .
The Lucky Strike brand was introduced as chewing tobacco in the United States in 1871 by the company R.A. Patterson .
The brand 's founder was inspired by the era 's rush for gold searching .
Only some of the gold diggers ( about four out of each 1000 ) were fortunate enough to find gold and this was often referred to as a " lucky strike " .
By choosing this expression as the product 's name , it implied consumers who were choosing the brand were lucky , as they were choosing a top - quality blend .
Despite originally being a brand of chewing tobacco , by the early 1900s , Lucky Strike had evolved into a cigarette .
A well - circulated myth is that the name " Lucky Strike " refers to the fact that some cigarette packs contained marijuana , thus getting a " lucky strike " in receiving one of these .
This , according to Snopes , is considered simply an urban legend , and not true .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The brand was first introduced by R.A. Patterson of Richmond , Virginia , in 1871 as cut - plug chewing tobacco and later a cigarette .
In 1905 , the company was acquired by the American Tobacco Company ( ATC ) .
In 1917 , the brand started using the slogan , " It 's Toasted " , to inform consumers about the manufacturing method in which the tobacco is toasted rather than sun - dried , a process touted as making the cigarettes taste delicious .
In the late 1920s , the brand was sold as a route to thinness for women , one typical ad said , " Reach for a Lucky instead of a sweet .
" Sales of Lucky Strikes increased by more than 300 % during the first year of the advertising campaign .
Sales went from 14 billion cigarettes in 1925 to 40 billion in 1930 , making Lucky Strike the leading brand nationwide .
Lucky Strike 's association with radio music programs began during the 1920s on NBC .
By 1928 , the bandleader and vaudeville producer B. A. Rolfe was performing on radio and recording as " B.A. Rolfe and his Lucky Strike Orchestra " for Edison Records .
In 1935 , ATC began to sponsor Your Hit Parade , featuring North Carolina tobacco auctioneer Lee Aubrey " Speed " Riggs ( later , another tobacco auctioneer from Lexington , Kentucky , F.E. Boone , was added ) .
The weekly radio show 's countdown catapulted the brand 's success , remaining popular for 25 years .
The shows capitalized on the tobacco auction theme and each ended with the signature phrase " Sold , American " .
The company 's advertising campaigns generally featured a theme that stressed the quality of the tobacco purchased at auction for use in making Lucky Strike cigarettes and claimed that the higher quality tobacco resulted in a cigarette with better flavor .
American engaged in a series of advertisements using Hollywood actors as endorsers of Lucky Strike , including testimonials from Douglas Fairbanks , concerning the cigarette 's flavor , often described as delicious due to the tobacco being toasted .
Beginning in the Fall of 1944 , Lucky Strike was also a sponsor of comedian Jack Benny 's radio and TV show , The Jack Benny Program , which was also introduced as The Lucky Strike Program .
The brand 's signature dark - green pack was changed to white in 1942 .
In a famous advertising campaign that used the slogan " Lucky Strike Green has gone to war " , the company claimed the change was made because the copper used in the green color was needed for World War II .
American Tobacco actually used chromium to produce the green ink , and copper to produce the gold - colored trim .
A limited supply of each was available , and substitute materials made the package look drab .
The white package actually was introduced to modernize the label and to increase the appeal of the package among female smokers ; market studies showed that the green package was not found attractive by women , who had become important consumers of tobacco products .
The war effort became a convenient way to make the product more marketable while appearing patriotic at the same time .
Famed industrial designer Raymond Loewy was challenged by company president George Washington Hill to improve the existing green and red package , with a $ 50,000 bet at stake .
Loewy changed the background from green to white , making it more attractive to women , as well as cutting printing costs by eliminating the need for green dye .
He also placed the Lucky Strike target logo on both sides of the package , a move that increased both visibility and sales .
Hill paid off the bet .
The message " L.S./M.F.T. " ( " Lucky Strike means fine tobacco " ) was introduced on the package in 1945 .
Lucky Strike was one of the brands included in the C - rations provided to US combat troops during the Second World War .
Each C ration of the time included , among other items , nine cigarettes of varying brands because at the time , top military brass thought that tobacco was essential to the morale of soldiers fighting on the front lines .
The other cigarette brands included in the C - rations were Camel , Chelsea , Chesterfield , Craven " A"-Brand , Old Gold , Philip Morris , Player 's , Raleigh , and Wings .
The practice of including cigarettes in field rations continued during the Korean and Vietnam Wars , ending around 1975 or 1976 with the growing knowledge that smoking caused various kinds of health problems .
POST
WORLD WAR II
Section::::Post World War II .
In 1978 and 1994 , export and US rights were purchased by Brown & Williamson .
In the 1960s , filtered styles were launched in addition to a mentholated version called " Lucky Strike Green " .
This time " Green " was referring to menthol and not to the overall package color .
In late 2006 , both the Full Flavored and Light filtered varieties of Lucky Strike cigarettes were discontinued in North America .
However , Lucky Strike continued to have marketing and distribution support in territories controlled by BAT as a global brand .
In addition , R. J. Reynolds continues to market the original , nonfilter Lucky Strikes in the United States .
Lucky Strike currently has a small base of smokers .
In 2007 , a new packaging of Lucky Strikes was released , with a two - way opening which split seven cigarettes from the rest .
In the same year , the company used the world 's smallest man , He Pingping , in their ad campaigns .
In 2009 , Lucky Strike Silver ( the brand marketed as lighter ) changed their UK packs from the quintessential red design to blue , albeit with a red teaser outer covering the packet .
SPORT SPONSORSHIP Section::::Sport sponsorship .
From 1972 until the team 's departure in 1975 , Lucky Strike sponsored the Scuderia Scribante team , which were also known as " Neville Lederle " and " Lucky Strike Racing " .
The cars , driven by Neville Lederle and Dave Charlton , were some of the first to be sponsored by a major tobacco company after the Lotus Team got sponsored by Gold Leaf in 1968 , and Marlboro started sponsoring British Racing Motors in 1972 and later McLaren in 1974 .
The team mainly participated in the South African Grand Prix in Kyalami , but during the 1972 Formula One season , the team also participated in the French Grand Prix in Circuit de Charade , the British Grand Prix in Brands Hatch and the German Grand Prix at the old Nürburgring .
After the retirement of the team , it would take more than 20 years before Lucky Strike would participate in Formula 1 again with the British American Racing team .
As a result of British American Tobacco ( BAT ) buying out American Tobacco Company in 1976 , Lucky Strike came under control of BAT .
The company acquired Formula 1 's Tyrrell Racing team in 1997 and rebranded it as British American Racing the following year , sponsoring the team with its Lucky Strike and stablemate 555 brands .
The team was bought outright by partners Honda by 2006 , though Lucky Strike continued to sponsor the team until the end of that year .
Lucky Strike was also the prime sponsor of the Suzuki MotoGP team from the 1990 season until the 1997 season .
American motorcycle racer Kevin Schwantz became the 1993 world champion riding the Lucky Strike sponsored Suzuki RGV500 , with riders such as Doug Chandler , Alex Barros and Daryl Beattie taking various podiums and wins on the Lucky Strike Suzuki as well .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The cigarette brand is referenced in many modern forms of media .
IN ART
* American Colonial - Cubist artist Stuart Davis represented the brand in his 1921 painting , Lucky Strike .
IN
MUSIC * Minneapolis indie rock band Howler based the artwork of their debut album America Give Up on a pack of Lucky Strikes .
*
A song named after the cigarettes appears on the Maroon 5 album , Overexposed .
*
A song named after the cigarettes appears on the Troye Sivan album , Bloom .
IN TELEVISION
*
In the AMC television series Mad Men , Lucky Strike is a major client for the fictional advertising agency Sterling Cooper .
A fictitious plot is also presented for the birth of the slogan
" It 's Toasted , " in the series ' pilot episode , " Smoke Gets in Your Eyes .
"
The main character , Don Draper , is often seen smoking Lucky Strikes .
CIGARETTE CAMP Section::::Cigarette camp .
" Lucky Strike " was the name of one of a number of temporary U.S. Army " tent cities " known as Cigarette Camps situated around the French port of Le Havre following its capture in the wake of the Allied D - Day invasion in mid-1944 .
SEE ALSO
* Tobacco smoking
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Collection of mid - twentieth century advertising featuring Lucky Strike cigarettes from The TJS Labs Gallery of Graphic Design .
* " Lucky Strikes ? "
by Barbara Mikelson at snopes.com ( June 12 , 2006 )