BROWSER WARS
A browser war is competition for dominance in the usage share of web browsers .
The First Browser War was Microsoft 's Internet Explorer against Netscape 's Navigator during the late 1990s .
Browser wars continued with the decline of Internet Explorer 's market share since 2003 and the increasing popularity of other browsers including Firefox , Google Chrome , Safari , and Opera .
With the introduction of HTML5 and CSS 3 , a new generation of browser war began , this time adding extensive client - side scripting to the World Wide Web , as well as more widespread use of smartphones and other mobile devices for browsing the web .
These newcomers have ensured that browser battles continue among enthusiasts , while the average web user is less affected by their choice of browser .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
The World Wide Web is an Internet - based hypertext system invented in the late 1980s and early 1990s by Tim Berners - Lee .
Berners - Lee wrote the first web browser WorldWideWeb , later renamed Nexus , and released it for the NeXTstep platform in 1991 .
By the end of 1992 other browsers had appeared , many of them based on the libwww library .
These included Unix browsers such as Line Mode Browser , ViolaWWW , Erwise , and MidasWWW , and MacWWW / Samba for the Mac .
Even though these browsers tended to be simple HTML viewers , relying on external helper applications to view multimedia content , they provided choice to users both in browsers and platforms .
MOSAIC WARS Section::::Mosaic Wars .
Further browsers were released in 1993 , including Cello , Arena , Lynx , tkWWW , and Mosaic .
The most influential of these was Mosaic , a multiplatform browser developed at National Center for Supercomputing Applications ( NCSA ) .
By October 1994 , Mosaic was " well on its way to becoming the world 's standard interface " , according to Gary Wolfe of Wired .
Several companies licensed Mosaic to create their own commercial browsers , such as AirMosaic and Spyglass Mosaic .
One of the Mosaic developers , Marc Andreessen , co - founded the Mosaic Communications Corporation and created a new web browser named Mosaic Netscape .
To resolve legal issues with NCSA , the company was renamed Netscape Communications Corporation and the browser Netscape Navigator .
The Netscape browser improved on Mosaic 's usability and reliability and was able to display pages as they loaded .
By 1995 , helped by the fact that it was free for non - commercial use , the browser dominated the emerging World Wide Web .
Other browsers launched during 1994 included IBM Web Explorer , Navipress , SlipKnot , MacWeb , and Browse .
In 1995 , Netscape faced new competition from OmniWeb , WebRouser , UdiWWW , and Microsoft 's Internet Explorer 1.0 , but continued to dominate the market .
FIRST BROWSER WAR : 1995 - 2001
Section::::First Browser War : 1995 - 2001 .
By mid-1995 the World Wide Web had received a great deal of attention in popular culture and the mass media .
Netscape Navigator was the most widely used web browser and Microsoft had licensed Mosaic to create Internet Explorer 1.0 , which it had released as part of the Microsoft Windows 95 Plus ! pack in August .
Internet Explorer 2.0 was released as a free download three months later .
Unlike Netscape Navigator , it was available to all Windows users free of charge , this also applying to commercial companies .
Other companies later followed suit and released their browsers free of charge .
Both Netscape Navigator and competitor products like InternetWorks , Quarterdeck Browser , InterAp , and WinTapestry were bundled with other applications to full Internet suites .
New versions of Internet Explorer and Netscape ( branded as Netscape Communicator ) were released at a rapid pace over the following few years .
Development was rapid and new features were routinely added , including Netscape 's JavaScript ( subsequently replicated by Microsoft as JScript ) and proprietary HTML tags such as codice_1 and codice_2 .
Internet Explorer began to approach feature parity with Netscape with version 3.0 ( 1996 ) , which offered scripting support and the market 's first commercial Cascading Style Sheets ( CSS ) implementation .
In October 1997 , Internet Explorer 4.0 was released .
The release party in San Francisco featured a ten - foot - tall letter " e " logo .
Netscape employees showing up to work the following morning found the logo on their front lawn , with a sign attached that read " From the IE team ...
" The Netscape employees promptly knocked it over and set a giant figure of their Mozilla dinosaur mascot atop it , holding a sign reading " Netscape 72 , Microsoft 18 " representing the market distribution .
Internet Explorer 4 changed the tides of the browser wars .
It was integrated into Microsoft Windows , which gave it a large installation base .
During these releases , it was common for web designers to display ' best viewed in Netscape ' or ' best viewed in Internet Explorer ' logos .
These images often identified a specific browser version and were commonly linked to a source from which the stated browser could be downloaded .
These logos generally recognized the divergence between the standards supported by the browsers and signified which browser was used for testing the pages .
In response , supporters of the principle that web sites should be compliant with World Wide Web Consortium standards and hence viewable with any browser started the " Viewable With Any Browser " campaign , which employed its own logo similar to the partisan ones .
Most mainstream web sites , however , specified one of Netscape or IE as their preferred browser while making some attempt to support minimal functionality on the other .
INTERNET
EXPLORER 5 AND 6 Section::::Internet Explorer 5 and 6 .
Microsoft had three strong advantages in the browser wars .
One was resources : Netscape began with about 80 % market share and a good deal of public goodwill , but as a relatively small company deriving the great bulk of its income from what was essentially a single product ( Navigator and its derivatives ) , it was financially vulnerable .
Netscape 's total revenue never exceeded the interest income generated by Microsoft 's funds that were readily available for use .
Microsoft 's resources allowed them to make Internet Explorer available without charge , as the revenues from Windows were used to fund its development and marketing .
Netscape was commercial software for businesses , but was provided free for home and educational use ; Internet Explorer was provided free for all Windows and Macintosh users , cutting off a significant revenue stream ; as it was told by Jim Barksdale , President and CEO of Netscape Communications : " Very few times in warfare have smaller forces overtaken bigger forces ... " .
Another advantage was that Microsoft Windows had over 90 % share of the desktop operating system market .
Internet Explorer was bundled with every copy of Windows , therefore Microsoft was able to obtain an advantage the market share more easily than Netscape , as customers had Internet Explorer as the default browser .
In this time period , many new computer purchases were first computer purchases for home users or offices , and many of the users had never extensively used a web browser before .
Consequently , the buyer did not have anything else to compare with and little motivation to consider alternatives ; the set of abilities they had gained with access to the Internet and the World Wide Web made any difference in browser features or ergonomics pale in comparison .
During the United States Microsoft antitrust case in 1998 , government witness and Intel vice president Steven McGeady testified that a senior executive at Microsoft told him in 1995 of his company 's intention to " cut off Netscape 's air supply " , although a Microsoft attorney rejected McGeady 's testimony as not credible .
That same year , Netscape , the company , was acquired by America Online for US$ 4.2 billion .
Internet Explorer became the new dominant browser , attaining a peak of about 96 % of the web browser usage share during 2002 .
The first browser war ended with Internet Explorer having no remaining serious competition for its market share .
This also brought an end to the rapid innovation in web browsers ; until 2006 there was only one new version of Internet Explorer since version 6.0 had been released in 2001 .
Internet Explorer 6.0 Service Pack 1 was developed as part of Windows XP Service Pack 1 and was also integrated into Windows Server 2003 .
Further enhancements were made to Internet Explorer in Windows XP Service Pack 2 ( released in 2004 ) , including a pop - up blocker and stronger default security settings regarding the installation of ActiveX controls .
SECOND BROWSER WAR :
2004 - 2018 Section::::Second Browser War : 2004 - 2018 .
At the start of Netscape Navigator 's decline , Netscape open - sourced their browser code , and later entrusted it to the newly formed non - profit Mozilla Foundation — a primarily community - driven project to create a successor to Netscape .
Development continued for several years with little widespread adoption until a stripped - down browser - only version of the full suite , which included new features such as a separate search bar ( which had previously only appeared in the Opera browser ) , was created .
The browser - only version was initially named Phoenix , but because of trademark issues that name was changed , first to Firebird , then to Firefox .
This browser became the focus of the Mozilla Foundation 's development efforts and Mozilla Firefox 1.0 was released on November 9 , 2004 .
It then continued to gain an increasing share of the browser market until a peak in 2010 .
In 2003 , Microsoft announced that Internet Explorer 6 Service Pack 1 would be the last standalone version of its browser .
Future enhancements would be dependent on Windows Vista , which would include new tools such as the WPF and XAML to enable developers to build web applications .
In response , in April 2004 , the Mozilla Foundation and Opera Software joined efforts to develop new open technology standards which add more capability while remaining backward - compatible with existing technologies .
The result of this collaboration was the WHATWG , a working group devoted to the fast creation of new standard definitions that would be submitted to the W3C for approval .
The growing number of device / browser combinations in use , legally - mandated web accessibility , as well as the expansion of expected web functionality to essentially require DOM and scripting abilities , including AJAX , made web standards of increasing importance during this era .
Instead of touting their proprietary extensions , browser developers began to market their software based on how closely it adhered to the behavior as specified by the standard .
UPDATED BROWSERS RELEASED AND THE RISE OF MOBILE USE Section::::Updated browsers released and the rise of mobile use .
On February 15 , 2005 , Microsoft announced that Internet Explorer 7 would be available for Windows XP SP2 and later versions of Windows by mid-2005 .
The announcement introduced the new version of the browser as a major upgrade over Internet Explorer 6 SP1 .
Opera had been a long - time small player in the browser wars , known for introducing innovative features such as tabbed browsing and mouse gestures , as well as being lightweight but feature - rich .
The software , however , was commercial , which hampered its adoption compared to its free rivals until 2005 , when the browser became freeware .
On June 20 , 2006 , Opera Software released Opera 9 including an integrated source viewer , a BitTorrent client implementation , and widgets .
It was the first Windows browser to pass the Acid2 test .
Opera Mini , a mobile browser , has significant mobile market share .
Editions of Opera are also available for the Nintendo DS and the Wii .
Microsoft released Internet Explorer 7 on October 18 , 2006 .
It included tabbed browsing , a search bar , a phishing filter , and improved support for web standards ( including full support for PNG)—all features already long familiar to Opera and Firefox users .
Microsoft distributed Internet Explorer 7 to genuine Windows users ( WGA ) as a high - priority update through Windows Update .
Typical market share analysis showed only a slow uptake of Internet Explorer 7 and Microsoft decided to drop the requirement for WGA and made Internet Explorer 7 available to all Windows users in October 2007 .
Throughout the two following years , Microsoft worked on Internet Explorer 8 .
On December 19 , 2007 , the company announced that an internal build of that version had passed the Acid2 CSS test in " IE8 standards mode"—the last of the major browsers to do so .
Internet Explorer 8 was released on March 19 , 2009 .
New features included accelerators , improved privacy protection , a compatibility mode for pages designed for older browsers , and improved support for various web standards .
It was the last version of Internet Explorer to be released for Windows XP .
Internet Explorer 8 scored 20/100 in the Acid3 test , which was much worse than all major competitors at the time .
On October 24 , 2006 , Mozilla released Mozilla Firefox 2.0 .
It included the ability to reopen recently closed tabs , a session restore feature to resume work where it had been left after a crash , a phishing filter , and a spell - checker for text fields .
Mozilla released Firefox 3.0 on June 17 , 2008 , with performance improvements and other new features .
Firefox 3.5 followed on June 30 , 2009 , with further performance improvements , native integration of audio and video , and more privacy features .
Apple created forks of the open - source KHTML and KJS layout and JavaScript engines from the KDE Konqueror browser in 2002 .
They explained that those provided a basis for easier development than other technologies by virtue of being small ( fewer than 140,000 lines of code ) , cleanly designed , and standards - compliant .
The resulting layout engine became known as WebKit and it was incorporated into the Safari browser that first shipped with Mac OS X v10.3 .
On June 13 , 2003 , Microsoft said it was discontinuing Internet Explorer on the Mac platform and on June 6 , 2007 , Apple released a beta version of Safari for Microsoft Windows .
On April 29 , 2010 , Steve Jobs wrote open letter regarding his Thoughts on Flash , and the place it would hold on Apple 's iOS devices and web browsers .
Web developers were tasked with updating their web sites to be mobile friendly , and while many disagreed with Steve Jobs 's assessment on Adobe Flash , history would soon prove his case in point with notable mentions of poor performance of Flash on Android devices .
HTML4 and CSS2 were the standard in most browsers in 2006 .
However , new features being added to browsers from HTML5 and CSS3 specifications were quickly making their mark by 2010 , especially in the emerging mobile browser market where new ways of animating and rendering for various screen sizes were to become the norm .
Accessibility would also become a key player for the mobile web .
On December 28 , 2007 , Netscape announced that support for its Mozilla - derived Netscape Navigator would be discontinued on February 1 , 2008 , suggesting its users migrate to Mozilla Firefox .
However , on January 28 , 2008 , Netscape announced that support would be extended to March 1 , 2008 , and mentioned Flock alongside Firefox as alternatives to its users .
Google released the Chrome browser for Microsoft Windows on December 11 , 2008 , using the same WebKit rendering engine as Safari and a faster JavaScript engine called V8 .
Shortly after , an open - sourced version for the Windows , OS X , and Linux platforms was released under the name Chromium .
According to Net Applications , Chrome had gained a 3.6 % usage share by October 2009 .
After the release of the beta for Mac OS X and Linux , the market share had increased rapidly .
During December 2009 and January 2010 , StatCounter reported that its statistics indicated that Firefox 3.5 was the most popular browser when counting individual browser versions , passing Internet Explorer 7 and 8 by a small margin .
This was the first time a global statistic has reported that a non - Internet Explorer browser version had exceeded the top Internet Explorer version in usage share since the fall of Netscape Navigator .
However , this feat , which GeekSmack called the " dethroning of Microsoft and its Internet Explorer 7 browser , " could largely be attributed to the fact that it came at a time when version 8 was replacing version 7 as the dominant Internet Explorer version ; no more than two months later Internet Explorer 8 had established itself as the most popular browser and version , a position which it still held as of March 2011 .
Other major statistics , such as Net Applications , never reported any non - Internet Explorer browser having a higher usage share than Internet Explorer if each version of each browser was looked at individually : for example Firefox 3.5 was reported as the third most popular browser version from December 2009 to February 2010 and seceded by Firefox 3.6 since April 2010 , each ahead of Internet Explorer 7 but behind Internet Explorer 6 and 8 .
HTML5 BEGINNINGS , PRESTO RENDERING ENGINE DEPRECATION AND CHROME
'S
DOMINANCE Section::::HTML5 beginnings , Presto rendering engine deprecation and Chrome 's dominance .
On January 21 , 2010 , Mozilla released Mozilla Firefox 3.6 , which allows support for a new type of theme display , ' Personas ' , which allows users to change Firefox 's appearance with a single click .
Version 3.6 also improves JavaScript performance , overall browser responsiveness , and startup times .
In October 2010 , StatCounter reported that Internet Explorer had for the first time dropped below 50 % market share to 49.87 % in their figures .
Also , StatCounter reported Internet Explorer 8 's first drop in usage share in the same month .
Google released Google Chrome 9 on February 3 , 2011 .
New features introduced included support for WebGL , Chrome Instant , and the Chrome Web Store .
The company created another seven versions of Chrome that year , finishing with Chrome 16 on December 15 , 2011 .
The first version of Chrome available to the public in 2012 was Chrome 17 , which was released on February 15 , 2012 .
In April 2012 , Google browsers ( Chrome and Android ) became the most used browsers on Wikimedia Foundation sites .
By May 21 , 2012 , StatCounter reported Chrome narrowly overtaking Internet Explorer as the most used browser in the world .
However , troughs and peaks in the market share between Internet Explorer and Chrome meant that Internet Explorer was slightly ahead of Chrome on weekdays up until July 4 .
At the same time , Net Applications reported Internet Explorer firmly in first place , with Google Chrome almost overtaking Firefox as the second .
In 2012 , responding to Chrome 's popularity , Apple discontinued Safari for Windows .
Microsoft released Internet Explorer 9 on March 14 , 2011 .
It featured a revamped interface , support for the basic SVG feature set , and partial HTML5 video support , among other new features .
It only runs on Windows Vista , Windows 7 , and Windows Phone 7 .
The company later released Internet Explorer 10 along with Windows 8 and Windows Phone 8 in 2012 , and an update compatible with Windows 7 followed in 2013 .
This version drops Vista and Phone 7 support .
The release preview of Internet Explorer 11 was released on September 17 , 2013 .
It supports the same desktops as its predecessor .
The concept of rapid releases established by Google Chrome prompted Mozilla to do the same for its Firefox browser .
On June 21 , 2011 , Firefox 5.0 was the first rapid release for this browser , finished a mere six weeks after the previous edition .
Mozilla created four more whole - number versions throughout the year , finishing with Firefox 9 on December 20 , 2011 .
For those desiring long term support , Mozilla made an Extended Support Release ( ESR ) version of Firefox 10 on January 31 , 2012 .
Contrary to the regular version , a Firefox ESR receives regular security updates plus occasional new features and performance updates for approximately one year , after which a 12-week grace period is given before discontinuing that version number .
Those who continued to use the rapid releases with an active Internet connection were automatically updated to Firefox 11 on March 15 , 2012 .
By the end of 2011 however Chrome overtook Firefox to become world 's most used browser , and the competition between Chrome and Firefox intensified .
During this era , all major web browsers implemented support for HTML5 video .
Supported codecs , however , varied from browser to browser .
Current versions of Android , Chrome , and Firefox support Theora , H.264 , and the VP8 version of WebM. Older versions of Firefox omitted H.264 due to it being a proprietary codec , but it was made available beginning in version 17 for Android and version 20 for Windows .
Internet Explorer and Safari support H.264 exclusively , but the Theora and VP8 codecs can be manually installed on the desktop versions .
Given the popularity of WebKit for mobile browsers , Opera Software discontinued its own Presto engine in February 2013 .
The Opera 12 series of browsers were the last to use Presto with its successors using WebKit instead .
In 2015 , Microsoft discontinued production of newer versions of Internet Explorer .
By this point Chrome overtook all other browsers as the browser with the highest usage share .
Starting in 2015 with the release of Windows 10 , Microsoft shifted from Internet Explorer to Microsoft Edge .
However the new browser has failed to capture much popularity as of 2018 .
By 2017 usage shares of Opera , Firefox and Internet Explorer fell well below 5 % each , while Google Chrome had expanded to over 60 % worldwide .
In May 26 , 2017 Andreas Gal , former Mozilla CTO publicly stated that Google Chrome won the Second Browser War .
As of July 2018 , combining all types of devices using the internet , Google Chrome remains the most used browser across the world by a wide margin .
SEE ALSO
* After the Software Wars
* Comparison of web browsers * Usage share of web browsers REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY
* DOJ / Antitrust : U.S. Department of Justice Antitrust Division .
Civil Action No .
98 - 1232
( Antitrust ) Complaint , United States of America v. Microsoft Corporation .
May 18 , 1998 .
Press release : Justice Department Files Antitrust Suit Against Microsoft for Unlawfully Monopolizing Computer Software Markets
EXTERNAL LINKS
* A March 1998 Interview with Marc Andreessen about Microsoft antitrust litigation and browser wars
* The Roads and Crossroads of Internet History : Chapter 4 .
Birth of the World Wide Web by Gregory R. Gromov
* Browser Statistics – Month by month comparison spanning from 2002 and onward displaying the usage share of browsers among web developers * Browser Stats –
Chuck Upsdell 's Browser Statistics * Browser Stats – Net Applications ' Browser Statistics * StatCounter Global Stats – tracks the market share of browsers including mobile from over 4 billion monthly page views
* Browser war , RIA and future of web development * Browser Wars II : The Saga Continues – an article about the development of the browser wars * Web Browsers ' War – 2012 –
An article about web browsers ' war in 2012
* Thomas Haigh , " Protocols for Profit : Web and Email Technologies as Product and Infrastructure " in The Internet & American Business , eds .
Ceruzzi & Aspray , MIT Press , 2008 – business & technological history of web browsers , online preprint * stephenbrooks.org – browserwars – a multiplayer browser game , shows the logo of the browsers used * Browser Market Share – current market share of browsers and their versions , desktop and mobile