WHIRLPOOL
A whirlpool is a body of rotating water produced by the meeting of opposing currents .
The vast majority of whirlpools are not very powerful and
very small whirlpools can be easily seen when a bath or a sink is draining .
More powerful ones in seas or oceans may be termed maelstroms .
Vortex is the proper term for any whirlpool that has a downdraft .
In oceans , in narrow straits with fast flowing water , whirlpools are normally caused by tides ; there are few stories of large ships ever being sucked into such a maelstrom , although smaller craft are in danger .
Smaller whirlpools also appear at the base of many waterfalls and can also be observed downstream from manmade structures such as weirs and dams .
In the case of powerful waterfalls , like Niagara Falls , these whirlpools can be quite strong .
NOTABLE
WHIRLPOOLS SALTSTRAUMEN Section::::Notable whirlpools .
Section::::Saltstraumen .
The Maelstrom of Saltstraumen is the Earth 's strongest maelstrom , and is located close to the Arctic Circle , round the bay on the Highway 17 , south - east of the city of Bodø , Norway .
The strait at its narrowest is in width and water " funnels " through the channel four times a day .
It is estimated that of water passes the narrow strait during this event .
The water is creamy in colour and most turbulent during high tide , which is witnessed by thousands of tourists .
It reaches speeds of , with mean speed of about .
As navigation is dangerous in this strait only a small slot of time is available for large ships to pass through .
Its impressive strength is caused by the world 's strongest tide occurring in the same location during the new and full moon .
A narrow channel of length connects the outer Saltfjord with its extension , the large Skjerstadfjord , causing a colossal tide which in turn produces the Saltstraumen maelstrom .
MOSKSTRAUMEN Section::::Moskstraumen .
Moskstraumen is an unusual system of whirlpools in the open seas in the Lofoten Islands off the Norwegian coast .
It is the second strongest whirlpool in the world with flow currents reaching speeds as high as .
It finds mention in several books and movies .
The Moskstraumen is formed by the combination of powerful semi - diurnal tides and the unusual shape of the seabed , with a shallow ridge between the Moskenesøya and Værøy islands which amplifies and whirls the tidal currents .
The fictional depictions of the Maelstrom by Edgar Allan Poe , Jules Verne , and Cixin Liu describe it as a gigantic circular vortex that reaches the bottom of the ocean , when in fact it is a set of currents and crosscurrents with a rate of .
Poe described this phenomenon in his short story A Descent into the Maelstrom , which in 1841 was the first to use the word " maelstrom " in the English language ; in this story related to the Lofoten Maelstrom , two fishermen are swallowed by the maelstrom while one survives miraculously .
CORRYVRECKAN
Section::::Corryvreckan .
The Corryvreckan is a narrow strait between the islands of Jura and Scarba , in Argyll and Bute , on the northern side of the Gulf of Corryvreckan , Scotland .
It is the third - largest whirlpool in the world .
Flood tides and inflow from the Firth of Lorne to the west can drive the waters of Corryvreckan to waves of over , and the roar of the resulting maelstrom , which reaches speeds of , can be heard away .
Though it was initially classified as non - navigable by the British navy it was later categorized as " extremely dangerous " .
A documentary team from Scottish independent producers Northlight Productions once threw a mannequin into the Corryvreckan ( " the Hag " ) with a life jacket and depth gauge .
The mannequin was swallowed and spat up far down current with a depth gauge reading of with evidence of being dragged along the bottom for a great distance .
OTHER NOTABLE MAELSTROMS AND WHIRLPOOLS
Section::::Other notable maelstroms and whirlpools .
Old Sow whirlpool is located between Deer Island , New Brunswick , Canada , and Moose Island , Eastport , Maine , USA .
It is given the epithet " pig - like " as it makes a screeching noise when the vortex is at its full fury and reaches speeds of up to .
The smaller whirlpools around this Old Sow are known as " Piglets .
The Naruto whirlpools are located in the Naruto Strait near Awaji Island in Japan , which have speeds of .
Skookumchuck Narrows is a tidal rapids that develops whirlpools , on the Sunshine Coast , Canada with current speeds exceeding .
French Pass ( ) is a narrow and treacherous stretch of water that separates D'Urville Island from the north end of the South Island of New Zealand .
In 2000 a whirlpool there caught student divers , resulting in fatalities .
There was a short - lived whirlpool that sucked in a portion of the 1300 acre ( ~530 hectares )
Lake Peigneur in Louisiana , United States
after a drilling mishap in November 1980 .
This was not a naturally occurring whirlpool , but a man - made disaster caused by underwater drillers breaking through the roof of a salt mine .
The lake then drained into the mine until the mine filled and the water levels equalized but the ten - foot deep lake was now 1,300 feet deep .
This mishap resulted in destruction of five houses , loss of nineteen barges and eight tug boats , oil rigs , a mobile home , and most of a botanical garden .
The adjacent settlement of Jefferson Island was reduced in area by 10 % .
A crater 0.5-mile ( ~1 km ) across was left behind .
Nine of the barges which had sunk floated back .
A more recent example of a man - made whirlpool that received significant media coverage was in early June 2015 , when an intake vortex formed in Lake Texoma , on the Oklahoma – Texas border , near the floodgates of the dam that forms the lake .
At the time of the whirlpool 's formation , the lake was being drained after reaching its highest level ever .
The Army Corps of Engineers , which operates the dam and lake , expected that the whirlpool would last until the lake reached normal seasonal levels by late July .
DANGERS Section::::Dangers .
Powerful whirlpools have killed unlucky seafarers , but their power tends to be exaggerated by laymen .
There are virtually no stories of large ships ever being sucked into a whirlpool .
Tales like those by Paul the Deacon , Edgar Allan Poe , and Jules Verne are entirely fictional .
However , temporary whirlpools caused by major engineering disasters are capable of submerging large ships .
A prominent example is the drilling disaster that occurred on November 20 , 1980 , in Lake Peigneur .
A drilling platform , eleven barges , several trees , and multiple acres of the surrounding terrain were submerged by the resulting whirlpool .
Days after the disaster , once the water pressure equalized , nine of the eleven sunken barges popped out of the whirlpool and refloated on the lake 's surface .
IN LITERATURE AND POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In literature and popular culture .
Apart from Poe and Verne other literary source is of the 1500s , of Olaus Magnus , a Swedish Bishop , who had stated that the maelstrom which was more powerful than The Odyssey destroyed ships which sank to the bottom of the sea , and even whales were sucked in .
Pytheas , the Greek historian , also mentioned that maelstroms swallowed ships and threw them up again .
Charybdis in Greek mythology was later rationalized as a whirlpool , which sucked entire ships into its fold in the narrow coast of Sicily , a disaster faced by navigators .
In the 8th century , Paul the Deacon , who had lived among the Belgii , described tidal bores and the maelstrom for a Mediterranean audience unused to such violent tidal surges : Three of the most notable literary references to the Lofoten Maelstrom date from the nineteenth century .
The first is the Edgar Allan Poe short story " A Descent into the Maelström " ( 1841 ) .
The second is 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea ( 1870 ) , the famous novel by Jules Verne .
At the end of this novel , Captain Nemo seems to commit suicide , sending his Nautilus submarine into the Maelstrom ( although in Verne 's sequel Nemo and the Nautilus were seen to have survived ) .
The " Norway maelstrom " is also mentioned in Herman Melville 's Moby - Dick .
In the ' Life of St Columba ' , the author , Adomnan of Iona ' , attributes to the saint miraculous knowledge of a particular bishop who ran into a whirlpool off the coast of Ireland .
In Adomnan 's narrative , he quotes Columba saying ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
One of the earliest uses in English of the Scandinavian word ( malström or malstrøm ) was by Edgar Allan Poe in his short story " A Descent into the Maelström " ( 1841 ) .
In turn , the Nordic word is derived from the Dutch maelstrom , modern spelling maalstroom , from malen ( to grind ) and stroom ( stream ) , to form the meaning grinding current or literally " mill - stream " , in the sense of milling ( grinding ) grain .
SEE ALSO
* Coriolis effect
* Eddy ( fluid dynamics )
* Rip current REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
Baron PA , Willeke K ( 1986 )
Respirable droplets from whirlpools : measurements of size distribution and estimation of disease potential .
Environ Res 39 , 8–18 . EXTERNAL LINKS
* Research articles on whirlpools and related topics by Hubert Chanson , Department of Civil Engineering , The University of Queensland