BROOKLYN – BATTERY TUNNEL
The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel , officially known as the Hugh L. Carey Tunnel , is a toll tunnel in New York City that connects Red Hook in Brooklyn with Battery Park in Manhattan .
The tunnel consists of twin tubes that each carry two traffic lanes under the mouth of the East River .
Although it passes just offshore of Governors Island , the tunnel does not provide vehicular access to the island .
With a length of 9,117 feet ( 2,779 m ) , the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel is the longest continuous underwater vehicular tunnel in North America .
Plans for the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel date to the 1920s .
Official plans to build the tunnel were submitted in 1930 , but were initially not carried out .
The New York City Tunnel Authority , created in 1936 , was tasked with constructing the tunnel .
After unsuccessful attempts to secure federal funds , New York City Parks Commissioner Robert Moses proposed a Brooklyn – Battery Bridge .
However , the public opposed the bridge plan , and the Army Corps of Engineers rejected the plan several times , concerned that the bridge would impede shipping access to the Brooklyn Navy Yard .
This prompted city officials to reconsider plans for a tunnel .
The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel started construction on October 28 , 1940 , but its completion was delayed due to World War II - related material shortages .
The tunnel opened on May 25 , 1950 .
The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel is part of the Interstate Highway System , carrying the unsigned Interstate 478 ( I-478 ) since 1971 .
Formerly , it carried New York State Route 27A ( NY 27A ) .
The tunnel was officially renamed after former New York Governor Hugh Carey in 2012 .
It is operated by MTA Bridges and Tunnels as one of the MTA 's nine tolled crossings .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The Brooklyn –
Battery Tunnel consists of two 2-lane tubes , one in each direction .
They pass underneath the East River , connecting the Battery at the southern tip of Manhattan to the neighborhood of Red Hook in Brooklyn .
Although the tubes do not pass directly under Governors Island , that island contains a ventilation building for the tunnel .
Vehicles over and wider than are prohibited from using the tubes .
The tubes stretch from portal to portal , making them the longest continuous underwater vehicular tunnels in North America .
At the time of its opening , the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was the longest underwater vehicular tunnel in the United States and the second - longest in the world , behind the Queensway Tunnel under the River Mersey in England .
The tunnel was originally commissioned by the New York City Tunnel Authority , whose chief engineer Ole Singstad created the tunnel 's original designs .
Halfway through construction , the Tunnel Authority was merged into the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority ( TBTA ) , whose chief engineer Ralph Smillie took over the design process .
The " Battery " in the tunnel 's name refers to an artillery battery originally located at that site during New York City 's earliest days .
The tunnel was officially renamed after former Governor Hugh L. Carey in 2012 , since he had lived in Brooklyn .
The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel is owned and operated by the TBTA 's successor MTA Bridges and Tunnels , an affiliate agency of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority ( MTA ) .
Until 2017 , the agency collected tolls at a tollbooth on the Brooklyn side .
The tollbooths have been demolished and replaced with electronic toll gantries on the Manhattan side .
, the tunnel is used by 54,076 vehicles on an average weekday .
ASSOCIATED STRUCTURES
Section::::Associated structures .
The Brooklyn –
Battery Tunnel has a total of four ventilation buildings : two in Manhattan , one in Brooklyn , and one on Governors Island .
One of the Manhattan ventilation buildings is granite - faced and designed like a monument , due to objections to the building 's design during the construction process .
The Governors Island ventilation structure , designed by McKim , Mead & White , is an octagonal building located over the midpoint of the tunnel 's route , at its lowest point .
According to the MTA , the ventilation buildings can completely replace the tunnel 's air every ninety seconds .
During construction , tunnel engineers touted the ventilation system as being so efficient that the ventilation towers could blow 25,000 tons of clean air into the tunnel every hour .
The system consists of 53 fans that each had a diameter of .
At the Manhattan end , a 2,126-space parking garage sits above the approach to the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel from the West Side Highway .
When the garage opened in 1950 , it had 1,050 spaces across seven levels , which were constructed at a cost of $ 3.5 million .
The parking facility was expanded in 1965–1968 due to its popularity among motorists .
The garage was the city 's first publicly owned parking lot .
TRANSPORTATION
Section::::Transportation .
The tunnel carries 26 express bus routes that connect Manhattan with Brooklyn or Staten Island .
The MTA Bus Company operates the BM1 , BM2 , BM3 , and BM4 between Manhattan and Brooklyn .
MTA New York City Transit operates the SIM1 , SIM1C , SIM2 , SIM3 , SIM3C , SIM4 , SIM4C , SIM4X , SIM5 , SIM6 , SIM7 , SIM9 , SIM10 , SIM15 , SIM31 , SIM32 , SIM33 , SIM34 , and SIM35 routes between Manhattan and Staten Island , and the X27 , X28 , X37 , and X38 between Manhattan and Brooklyn .
HISTORY PLANNING Section::::History .
Section::::Planning .
A vehicular tunnel under the East River between Manhattan and Brooklyn was proposed by the New York Board of Trade and Transportation in 1925 , in response to growing truck traffic congestion in Lower Manhattan .
The tunnel would have been located between the Manhattan Bridge and the Brooklyn Bridge .
A tunnel that specifically connected the Battery in Manhattan with Red Hook in Brooklyn , passing underneath the East River and Governors Island south of both the Manhattan and Brooklyn Bridges , was first proposed by Brooklyn Borough president J. J. Byrne in 1926 .
However , this plan initially did not receive support .
Albert Goldman , the New York City Commissioner of Plant and Structures , brought up the plan again in January 1929 .
In February 1930 , the city publicized plans for a six - lane vehicular tunnel from West Street , Manhattan , to Hamilton Avenue , Brooklyn .
At the time , ferry service along that path was slow and unreliable .
Real - estate speculators believed that land prices along Hamilton Avenue would appreciate as a result of the tunnel 's construction , and that freight shipments could be delivered to Manhattan faster .
The tunnel proposal also entailed widening Hamilton Avenue to and building a large bridge over the Gowanus Canal , south of the proposed tunnel 's entrance .
In May 1930 , the Terminal Bridge Corporation petitioned the New York City Board of Estimate for permission to build and operate a tunnel under the East River .
In November of that year , the Board of Estimate referred the Brooklyn - Manhattan tunnel plan to the New York City Board of Transportation , who was tasked with surveying the site of the tunnel .
At the time , the tunnel would have cost $ 75 million , including land acquisition , if it included two 3-lane tunnels .
The tunnels itself would have cost $ 58 million if they were three lanes , or $ 50 million if two lanes .
The next year , the Board of Transportation announced that the construction the proposed tunnel was estimated to cost $ 60 million , assuming that the tunnels were in diameter with roadways and a clearance .
In October 1933 , the Board of Estimate approved funding for the tunnel in the city 's capital outlay budget for 1934 .
Two months later , the Board of Estimate approved the Brooklyn - Manhattan tunnel in conjunction with a Staten Island - Brooklyn tunnel under the Narrows .
The city was set to ask for $ 50 million in federal funding , but this request was dropped from the final vote .
Mayor Fiorello H. La Guardia set up a public - works authority in February 1935 so the city could apply for loans from the federal Public Works Administration ( PWA ) .
This authority was set to receive $ 60 million in funds for the Brooklyn - Manhattan tunnel .
The same month , city officials hired temporary workers to survey sites for the proposed tunnel , so that they could create a report for the PWA application .
Civic groups and Brooklyn politicians petitioned the city to commence construction immediately so traffic congestion could be reduced .
However , President Franklin D. Roosevelt had stipulated that PWA funding only be given to projects that could be finished within a year of the grant being awarded .
Since the Brooklyn - Manhattan tunnel project would take longer , it and other New York City highway projects were ineligible for PWA funding .
In January 1936 , the New York State Legislature created the New York City Tunnel Authority to oversee the construction of a tunnel between Midtown Manhattan and Queens .
The bill also provided the authority with the power to build the Brooklyn - Manhattan tunnel if funds became available .
By this time , the construction cost of the Brooklyn - Manhattan tunnel was now projected to be $ 58 million .
Detailed plans for the tunnel were released in May 1936 .
The project now consisted of a $ 60.3 million twin - tube bore from Red Hook , Brooklyn , to the Battery , Manhattan , as well as a $ 2.3 million bridge over the Gowanus Canal .
The city approved these plans in January 1936 .
One civic group wanted to plan for future traffic volumes , so it asked the city to conduct further studies of the Brooklyn - Manhattan tunnel project .
The tunnel was officially renamed the " Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel " in July 1936 .
In November of that year , Brooklyn Borough President Raymond Ingersoll and New York City Parks commissioner Robert Moses revealed a plan to connect the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel to Long Island 's parkway system via a new Gowanus Parkway and Circumferential ( Belt ) Parkway .
The planned tunnel was also part of the Regional Plan Association 's proposed parkway system around New York City .
The next month , the New York City Tunnel Authority advertised for bids to create test bores for the tunnel .
Copies of the plans for the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel were submitted to La Guardia 's mayoral administration in February 1937 .
Two tunnels , one in each direction , would connect to the West Side Highway and the East River Drive on the Manhattan side , and to Hamilton Avenue on the Brooklyn side .
In the future , the West Side Elevated Highway would be extended from the north , connecting to the new tunnel .
There would be a ventilation tower at the midpoint on Governors Island because the tunnels would stretch between the two portals , and it was thought that the ventilation towers at either end might not pull in sufficient air .
The tunnels would be designed to carry a maximum of 15 million vehicles per year , but it was projected that only 9 million would use the tunnels during their first year of operation , and that the tunnels would not reach their full capacity for another sixteen years .
The cost of the project had increased to $ 70 million , and La Guardia wanted a $ 30 million federal grant so construction could start quickly .
A toll of 25 cents per motorist , collected at the Brooklyn end , would help finance the rest of the tunnel and make it profitable .
The tunnel would also halve travel time between southern Brooklyn and lower Manhattan , since at the time , there was no direct route for traffic between these two areas .
This , in turn , was expected to expedite cargo deliveries between these areas , thereby reviving Brooklyn 's declining cargo industry .
The route between Hamilton Avenue and the West Side Highway was determined to be the cheapest route that could be constructed .
Although preliminary borings were set to start in February 1937 , United States Army Corps of Engineers ( USACE ) officers on Governors Island opposed the placement of a ventilation tunnel there .
The Tunnel Authority let contracts for borings in April 1938 .
The United States Army , which held a hearing for public opinions on the tunnel proposal , gave its permission to the tunnel plan in September 1938 .
The Tunnel Authority suggested that federal funding could be used to pay for the tunnel , and that private financing could also be provided if it was needed .
In June 1938 , the city requested a $ 70.9 million PWA grant for the construction of the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel .
The next month , La Guardia met with PWA chairman Harold L. Ickes and Reconstruction Finance Corporation ( RFC ) chairman Jesse H. Jones , to convince them to help fund the tunnel because the project could now be completed within a year .
The city government then published a new financial plan in September 1938 , wherein the cost of the tunnel would increase to $ 77.3 million .
The city would reduce its request from the PWA by $ 19.82 million and raise that money by selling bonds instead , and it would also apply for $ 45 million from the RFC .
Manhattan Borough President Stanley M. Isaacs objected to the tunnel plan because he thought the proposal would not be able to adequately handle traffic on the Manhattan side .
In response , Parks Commissioner Moses asked Isaacs to think of a better idea to deal with the traffic .
Ickes later rejected the city 's request for PWA funds , saying that there were " tremendous financial and practical obstacles " for any further PWA involvement .
These impediments included a lack of money , because although the PWA had given the city an appropriation for the Belt Parkway , the money had been used up .
Due to the PWA 's refusal to grant a loan for the Battery Tunnel 's construction , the project was temporarily put on hold .
BRIDGE PROPOSAL Section::::Bridge proposal .
In January 1939 , after the failure to allocate federal funds to the tunnels , Moses ( now the chairman of the Triborough Bridge Authority ) proposed a Brooklyn - Battery bridge .
He stated that constructing a bridge would be cheaper , faster , and more efficient than building a tunnel .
The bridge would consist of a six - lane tandem suspension bridge span with two back - to - back suspension bridges , and it could be built in 27 months , compared to 46 months for a tunnel .
One of the other benefits , in Moses 's opinion , was that the $ 41 million bridge would not require any federal money .
Isaacs stated that a bridge would cause as much congestion as a tunnel
would , so he did not favor the bridge plan .
The Tunnel Authority also opposed the Brooklyn - Battery bridge because a bridge would lower property values .
In response , Moses predicted that the Tunnel Authority 's Queens - Midtown Tunnel would not be profitable , and that the Tunnel Authority should organize its existing affairs before deciding to build a new tunnel .
Moses was able to garner support for the bridge from influential city and state politicians , including four of five borough presidents , Mayor La Guardia , and U.S. Senator Robert F. Wagner .
In early March 1939 , the New York City Planning Commission endorsed plans for the Battery Bridge , and a bill for the bridge was moved to a vote in the state legislature .
The bill was proposed for a vote in the City Council , but this was blocked due to concerns that the bridge 's connection to the East River Drive would not be able to accommodate future traffic volumes .
The American Institute of Architects asked that the city reconsider the bridge , as it would obstruct the dramatic view of the Manhattan skyline , reduce Battery Park to minuscule size , and destroy what was then the New York Aquarium at Castle Clinton .
There was significant opposition from the public , and so the City Council Committee on State Legislation did not approve the plan .
In response , Moses changed the Brooklyn - Battery bridge plans to include landscaping work at Battery Park .
La Guardia believed that if this revised plan were passed , Ickes would finally allocate a PWA grant to the bridge project .
On March 28 , the City Council voted to approve the bridge project , with 19 members in favor and 6 opposed .
Two days later , both chambers of the New York State Legislature passed bills that permitted the construction of the Brooklyn - Battery bridge , and Governor Herbert H. Lehman signed the bills within the week .
Moses quickly sought to obtain approval from the United States Department of War , which needed to approve the plan .
He also started looking for PWA and RFC financing so the bridge could be completed by July 1941 .
As part of the approval process , the United States Army held a public hearing to solicit opinions on the bridge plan .
Seventeen civic groups formed a committee to solidify their opposition to the bridge plans , and the Municipal Art Society criticized the proposed bridge as an act of " vandalism " toward the city 's public parks .
Opponents claimed that the bridge would block naval traffic , a suggestion that La Guardia and Moses refuted .
The Department of War ultimately declined to endorse the Brooklyn - Battery Bridge .
In May 1939 Robert Woodring , the United States Secretary of War , blocked the construction of the bridge due to concerns over the span 's potential to become a naval obstruction during a war , since the Brooklyn Navy Yard was located shoreward of the proposed bridge .
In response , Moses submitted a revised plan for the bridge and asked the Department of War to reconsider .
Moses and Brooklyn politicians declared that they would not accept anything other than an endorsement of the second plan .
However , in July , the War Department also rejected the second plan , since the new plan would also pose a wartime hazard .
Advocates for the bridge called the rejection a " setback to business " .
They also discounted the decision as hypocritical since numerous other bridges ( including the Manhattan Bridge and Brooklyn Bridge , which stood between the proposed bridge and the Navy Yard ) would also constitute wartime hazards by the Army 's reasoning .
Moses continued to support the bridge , praising it as less intrusive and cheaper than a tunnel , despite great public opposition to a bridge .
In October , in a last effort to garner official acceptance for the Battery Bridge plan , Moses and La Guardia appealed directly to President Roosevelt to form an independent committee to study the proposal .
Moses again revised the plan , adding a ramp to Governors Island so the Army forces could also use the bridge , in a fashion similar to the San Francisco – Oakland Bay Bridge 's connection to the Army reservation on Yerba Buena Island in California .
However , Roosevelt upheld the Department of War 's decision and declined to create such a committee .
TUNNEL PLANS FINALIZED Section::::Tunnel plans finalized .
In July 1939 , after the bridge plan was canceled , the proposal for the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was revisited .
Around this time , Roosevelt 's administration was considering loosening PWA requirements and lowering interest rates so that the Battery Tunnel could qualify for these funds .
By November , La Guardia was arranging to obtain financing for the tunnel , even if it had to come from private sources .
After a meeting with La Guardia , RFC Chairman Jones announced that there were no obstacles to granting a $ 70 million loan toward the tunnel project .
The city was expecting to start construction once the loan was received .
The tunnel plans were completed and sent to federal agencies for approval that month .
The New York City Tunnel Authority announced in March 1940 that it would start construction within forty days .
Preliminary construction and land acquisition for the Brooklyn approach was already underway .
The Army had already approved the tunnel , but due to a minor change in the plan , had to hold another hearing , and the Army was expected to uphold the permit .
In May , La Guardia signed a preliminary contract to start construction .
Moses stated that he wanted to complete the tunnel , a crucial link in the Circumferential Parkway System , as soon as possible .
The RFC granted the city $ 57 million for the tunnel project later that month .
Ole Singstad , the chief engineer of the New York City Tunnel Authority , was commissioned to design the tunnel .
As a cost - saving measure , the Tunnel Authority briefly considered constructing the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel by digging a trench under the East River and then covering it up .
In summer 1940 , 400 Brooklyn residents living in the tunnel 's right - of - way were evicted .
On the Manhattan side , a large part of Little Syria , a mostly Christian Syrian / Lebanese neighborhood centered around Washington Street , was razed to create the entrance ramps for the tunnel .
Many of the shops and residents of Little Syria later moved to Atlantic Avenue in Brooklyn .
The city ultimately spent $ 4 million on land acquisition .
CONSTRUCTION STARTS
Section::::Construction starts .
The Brooklyn –
Battery Tunnel 's groundbreaking ceremony was supposed to be held on October 8 , 1940 , with President Roosevelt in attendance .
At the time , the president was in the final weeks of his re - election campaign for the 1940 presidential election , and he was expected to campaign at several places around New York City .
The groundbreaking was ultimately pushed back to October 28 .
At the ceremony , Roosevelt extolled the benefits of a tunnel as opposed to a bridge , while Mayor La Guardia invited the president to return for the opening ceremony in four years .
Three days later , the city approved a motion to widen Hamilton Avenue from to make way for the Brooklyn tunnel approach , as well as awarded a contract for the tunnel 's lining to Bethlehem Steel .
The start of actual tunneling was delayed due to dispute between a dockworkers ' union , which was commissioned to dig the tunnel , and a sandhogs ' union , which claimed that its members were entitled to work on the project because the sandhogs specialized in building tunnels .
This disagreement turned into a violent protest and multi - day strike in February 1941 .
The next year , some union sandhog workers were banned from working on the Battery Tunnel project due to a disagreement with their union 's parent union .
Another issue arose when it was revealed that the New York Aquarium at Castle Clinton , in Battery Park on the Manhattan side , would need to be demolished to make way for the tunnel .
The aquarium considered moving to Coney Island on the southern shore of Brooklyn .
To expedite construction of the tunnel , the city closed the New York Aquarium and moved its fish to other aquariums in September 1941 .
Moses advocated for the demolition of Castle Clinton , but preservationists who opposed Moses 's proposed action asked federal judge to grant an injunction to prevent demolition .
Even though Moses initially had the injunction dismissed , the federal government later designated the castle a U.S. historic monument , which prohibited him from demolishing the castle .
The tunnel project would also require demolishing two acres of Battery Park in order to build a seawall , and as a result of the downsizing of Battery Park , an architect was hired to study the redesign of the park .
This , in turn , led to a public competition for potential park redesigns .
In August 1940 , the city filed plans for two drawbridges across the Gowanus Canal as part of the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel approach project .
The U.S. Army officially approved plans for the Gowanus Canal bridge in October , just before the tunnel was set to begin construction .
The Gowanus bridge 's contract was awarded in December 1940 .
A contract for the Gowanus Parkway approach to the tunnel and bridge was awarded the next month .
In mid-1941 , planners realized that Hicks Street , on the Brooklyn side , would also need to be widened so that traffic from the north could enter the tunnel , whose Brooklyn portal faced southeast .
By May 1942 , the Gowanus Parkway was completed between Hicks Street and the Belt Parkway .
The parkway also included a bridge over the Gowanus Canal , a fixed span rising above the waterway before descending to Hicks Street .
Construction on an extension of the highway along Hicks Street did not start until 1946 .
A new plan for the Manhattan approaches was released in mid-1941 .
This plan , which would reduce traffic congestion , consisted of extending the West Side Elevated Highway south to the Battery with a ramp from the southbound highway leading directly into the tunnel .
The Battery Park Underpass would be built between the West Side Highway and the East River Drive .
As a result , the approaches to the tunnel would only need to connect to the west side of the Battery , and traffic accessing the North River piers on the West Side would not be interrupted by tunnel traffic .
However , this was not the case for traffic from Brooklyn , which would have to go through a traffic light before accessing the ramp for the elevated highway .
The tunnel - boring project consisted of digging two separate bores from each end .
Bids for digging the tunnel 's shafts from the Brooklyn side were advertised and let the same month .
Contracts for boring the tunnels from the Manhattan side were opened in May 1941 .
The Manhattan contract was awarded to Mason Hangar in October of the same year .
A contest for designing the Governors Island ventilation building was also held , and the contract was ultimately given to the architectural firm McKim , Mead & White .
The last tunneling project , a contract to dig in either direction from Governors Island until the tubes connected to each other , was advertised in December 1941 .
CONSTRUCTION HALTS AND RESTARTS Section::::Construction halts and restarts .
The tunnel was originally expected for completion by 1944 .
La Guardia had promised that during World War II , the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel would be given priority status over other construction projects , due to its importance to the Brooklyn economy .
However , the Battery Tunnel project was not deemed a high - importance destination for steel , so the tunnel 's priority status for the receipt of steel was revoked in February 1942 .
Although digging work continued , the tunnel could not be finished until after the war .
In October 1942 , Moses recommended that tunnel work be halted completely to conserve steel and other metals that were needed for the war .
At this time , the federal War Production Board ( WPB ) released an order to stop work on the Brooklyn end , although digging from the Manhattan side was allowed to continue , because that work consisted solely of digging through solid rock .
By the end of the month .
the WPB ordered a halt to all construction work on the tunnel 's Manhattan end as well .
Due to opposition over potentially firing the sandhogs , they were allowed to continue working until a final review of the WPB 's action was conducted .
At the time , the bores from Manhattan and Brooklyn were in various stages of completion .
By September 1944 , the war was winding down and Mayor La Guardia was petitioning the U.S. government to allow the manufacture of washers , nuts , and screws for the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel construction effort .
The federal government gave its permission the next month .
During the war , the tunnel shafts had flooded , so they had to be drained first before construction could continue .
In mid-1945 , after the war ended , the Triborough Bridge Authority was merged with the Tunnel Authority , allowing the new Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority ( TBTA ) to take over the project .
Moses , the TBTA head , promptly fired Singstad and replaced him with TBTA Chief Engineer Ralph Smillie , who designed the remainder of the tunnel .
The WPB approved the resumption of tunnel work in September of that year .
The TBTA advertised for bids to construct the Brooklyn toll plaza in May 1946 .
Because of objections to the proposed Manhattan ventilation building 's design , the TBTA changed the plans so that the tower would look like a granite monument rather than a simple ventilation tower .
Moses directed the tunnel be finished with a different method for finishing the tunnel walls .
This resulted in leaking and , according to Moses biographer Robert Caro , the TBTA fixed the leaks by using a design almost identical to Singstad 's original .
Singstad later claimed that Smillie had caused " excessive " leakage by not using Singstad 's experimental caulking design to prevent leaks .
Smillie denied that the leakage was excessive and that Singstad 's caulking method had been replaced because that method was actually the cause of the leak .
Workers from both sides continued working on the tunnel , mining caverns until the tubes from each side connected with each other .
In July 1947 , the eastern tube for future northbound traffic was the first to be holed - through , with workers from each side shaking hands as a small pipe was passed through from one side to another .
The pipe was then removed , and the openings covered up , to prevent drastic changes in pressure at either end of the tube .
The tunnels from Manhattan and Brooklyn had connected at a point under Governors Island , with an error of , and work continued until there was enough assurances that the tunnels had equal pressure readings .
After the tunnel was holed through , the TBTA awarded contracts for the construction of the Governors Island ventilation building .
Construction on this ventilation building started in January 1949 .
The plans for the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel also included a seven - story parking garage alongside the Manhattan portal , which broke ground in August 1948 .
The garage was slated to be the first publicly owned parking complex in the city , and so the city government proposed offering lower parking rates compared to privately - owned garages .
The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was slated to be connected with several parkways and highways on either side , which were built in tandem with the tunnel .
On the Brooklyn side , the Brooklyn - Queens Expressway was under construction , providing a connector to the tunnel from the north .
Although it was substantially complete by December 1948 , the expressway could not open until the tunnel was complete .
On the Manhattan side , the southernmost section of the West Side Elevated Highway , which connected to Battery Park and the future tunnel , opened in November 1948 .
An extension of the East River Drive ( by now renamed the FDR Drive ) to the future Battery Park Underpass and Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was approved in 1949 .
Eventually , the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was also slated to connect to the Narrows Bridge to Staten Island .
However , the Battery Park Underpass was not expected to be completed until 1952 , and the FDR Drive extension would take even longer to be completed .
Additionally , although a direct ramp from the Brooklyn - bound tunnel to the northbound Brooklyn - Queens Expressway was planned , construction was being delayed due to the difficulty of evicting tenants within the path of the ramp .
Moreover , the Narrows Bridge could not be financed , let alone started , until the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was completed .
Due to extra costs caused by delays and striking sandhogs , the authority petitioned the RFC for $ 14 million in funds in August 1947 , and in December of the same year , asked for another $ 2 million .
In February 1948 , the RFC agreed to extend another $ 28 million toward the completion of the tunnel .
By mid-1948 , the tunnel was 70 % complete , despite material shortages and cost overruns , and was expected to open to traffic in early 1950 .
Work on the tunnel progressed , and the tunnel was 94 % complete by late 1949 .
A reporter for the Brooklyn Daily Eagle made an unsanctioned drive between the two ends of the tunnel , noting that tiles , lighting , and a road surface had yet to be added , although the bores themselves were complete .
The tubes included four fluorescent - lighting installations with a total of 5,776 bulbs .
At the time , it comprised the world 's largest continuous fluorescent installation in the world , and was the first crossing in the city to have fluorescent lights .
The strips of clay tiles on the tubes ' ceilings were advertised as the United States ' longest continuous uses of clay tiles .
OPENING Section::::Opening .
The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel opened to traffic on May 25 , 1950 , with a ceremony officiated by Mayor William O'Dwyer .
Part of the Brooklyn - Queens Expressway , along Hicks Street from the Battery Tunnel north to Atlantic Avenue , opened the same day .
At the time , the Brooklyn Daily Eagle described the Battery Tunnel as " the nation 's largest , most modern underwater vehicular tunnel " , which took three minutes to traverse from end to end .
The Eagle also estimated that the tunnel cost $ 736 for every linear inch that was built .
With a cost of $ 80 million , the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was also dubbed the most expensive tunnel in the United States .
It was expensive enough that the TBTA had been forced to look around the world for a company that could cover the tunnel 's $ 33.5 million insurance policy .
However , the cost was expected to be counterbalanced , in part , through the 35-cent tolls and the time savings afforded .
Truckers at Bush Terminal , located south of the tunnel 's portal , predicted that they would save 35 minutes a day and $ 1 million a year by driving through the tunnel .
Within the first five and a half hours of its opening , 10,563 motorists had paid a toll to use the tunnel .
Forty thousand motorists used the tunnel within the first day , and at that rate , it was estimated that the tunnel might see 14 million vehicles per year , 40 % more than originally estimated .
This was in spite of the fact that traffic speeds were limited to , which reduced throughput .
The 1,050-spot garage above the tunnel 's northern portal opened a little more than a month after the tunnel opened .
During the Battery Tunnel 's first year of operation , the tunnel grossed nearly $ 5.5 million in toll revenues , and according to Caro , exceeded its 15-million - annual - vehicle capacity .
Another analysis by the Brooklyn Daily Eagle found that 13.86 million vehicles had used the tunnel in its first year ; this was lower than Caro 's estimate , but higher than both the TBTA 's initial estimate of 10 million vehicles per year , and expert forecasts of 8 million annual vehicles .
Some road infrastructure projects at both ends of the tunnel were completed shortly after the tunnel opened .
The first associated project to be completed was the Battery Park Underpass on the Manhattan side , which opened in April 1950 .
Two months later , officials opened a ramp on the Brooklyn side , which led from the southbound tunnel lanes to the northbound Brooklyn - Queens Expressway .
The Battery Park Underpass was connected to the East River Drive elevated viaduct , and thus to the FDR Drive , in May 1954 .
The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel project also entailed the restoration of Battery Park , which reopened in 1952 after a 12-year shutdown .
LATER YEARS
Section::::Later years .
The tubes were designed for two lanes in each direction .
This was changed in 1956 , when the Brooklyn - bound western tube was changed to handle bidirectional traffic during morning rush hours , owing to heavy rush - hour traffic congestion .
A northbound high - occupancy vehicle lane was later added during the morning rush hours .
It led from Staten Island to Manhattan via the Verrazano - Narrows Bridge , the Gowanus Expressway , and the Battery Tunnel .
A large volume of tunnel drivers also used the garage on the Manhattan side , so in 1965 , plans were made to expand the garage .
The expanded garage , which was completed in 1968 , had 2,126 spots .
The city also built a new 278-spot garage nearby for short - term parking .
In 1957 , workers performing maintenance on the tunnel observed that the tiled ceiling in the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was leaking .
About of the of ceiling was found to have corroded .
The TBTA restored the tubes ' ceilings starting in 1959 at a cost of $ 250,000 .
In 1971 , the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was designated Interstate 478 in preparation for the " Westway " project , which would reconstruct the West Side Highway to Interstate Highway standards .
Although the project was canceled in 1985 , the I-478 designation still exists and is contiguous with the entirety of the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel .
However , I-478 is not posted on any public signage .
The Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was closed completely after the September 11 , 2001 , attacks , due to the proximity of the Manhattan portal to the World Trade Center site .
Although many major crossings within the city were also closed following the attacks , they reopened relatively quickly , albeit with high - occupancy vehicle restrictions during rush hours .
The western tube of the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel was the first part of the tunnel to reopen , in October 2001 , and carried only southbound traffic .
However , the West Side Highway was closed to traffic south of Canal Street , some 30 blocks north of the tunnel portal , and part of the highway had been destroyed during the attacks .
Consequently , it was feared that traffic in the tunnel would be backed up at least 40 blocks if the highway was reopened .
As a result , work started on a temporary roadway leading from the highway to the tunnel .
The eastbound tube , which reopened in March 2002 , was the last crossing into Manhattan to reopen .
In 2010 , New York State legislators voted to rename the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel after former Governor Hugh Carey .
The tunnel was officially renamed the Hugh L. Carey Tunnel on October 22 , 2012 .
Less than a week after the tunnel was officially renamed , it was closed in preparation for Hurricane Sandy , marking the first - ever weather - related - closure for the tunnel .
It was subsequently flooded after a severe storm surge .
The Hugh L. Carey Tunnel reopened on November 13 following a cleanup process that included the removal of an estimated .
It had been the last New York City river crossing to reopen .
The flooding resulting from Hurricane Sandy demonstrated how flood - prone the tunnel was , since the sea level around the tunnel had risen since its opening in 1951 , and the portals were located on very low land to begin with .
The MTA subsequently began testing inflatable dams at the tunnel 's portals .
In October 2017 , a pair of 25-ton floodgates were installed on the Manhattan - side openings of the Hugh L. Carey Tunnel .
The Manhattan floodgates were supposed to be accompanied by a pair on the Brooklyn side , as well as a seawall .
This combined project was 63 % complete .
In 2017–2018 , the tiled walls in the Queens – Midtown and Brooklyn – Battery Tunnels were replaced due to damage suffered during Hurricane Sandy .
The re - tiled white walls have gold - and - blue stripes , representing the official state colors of New York .
Controversy arose over the cost of re - tiling the tunnels , which cost a combined $ 30 million , because of the ongoing transit crisis at the time .
TOLLS Section::::Tolls .
, drivers pay $ 8.50 per car or $ 3.50 per motorcycle for tolls by mail .
E‑ZPass users with transponders issued by the New York E‑ZPass Customer Service Center pay $ 5.76 per car or $ 2.51 per motorcycle .
All E - ZPass users with transponders not issued by the New York E - ZPass CSC will be required to pay Toll - by - mail rates .
Open - road cashless tolling started on January 4 , 2017 .
The tollbooths were dismantled , and drivers were no longer allowed to pay cash at the tunnel .
Instead , cameras mounted onto overhead gantries located on the Manhattan side take photos of license plates of cars that do not have E - ZPass transponders , and tolls are mailed to them .
For E - ZPass users , sensors detect their transponders wirelessly .
HISTORICAL TOLLS
Section::::Historical tolls .
+ History of passenger cash tolls for the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel !
Years ! !
Toll ! !
Toll equivalentin align = center $ – align = center $
– align = center $ – align = center $
– align = center $ – align = center $
– align = center $ – align = center $
– align = center $ – align = center $
– align = center $ – align = center $
– align = center $ – align = center $
– align = center $ – align = center $
– align = center $ 8.50 INTERSTATE 478 Section::::Interstate 478 .
state
= NY route=478 type =
I maint = MTA Bridges and Tunnels length_mi=2.14 length_round=2 length_ref= established=1971 direction_a =
South terminus_a={{Jctstate = NYI278 } } in Brooklyn direction_b =
North terminus_b={{Jctstate = NYNY9A } } in Manhattan previous_type =
NY
previous_route=474 next_type = I next_route=481 I-478 is the official route designation for the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel and its approaches , although it is not signed as such .
I-478 's south end is at the tunnel 's south end , I-278 in Brooklyn , and the highway extends { { Convert2.14mikm } } to the tunnel 's north end at NY 9A ( West Side Highway ) in Lower Manhattan .
The entirety of I-478 is concurrent with the tunnel .
Before receiving the I-478 designation , the tunnel had been part of New York State Route 27A from the 1950s to 1970 .
NY 27A still exists , but since 1970 , it only runs within eastern Long Island .
The I-478 number was originally considered for other routes .
In 1958 , the I-478 route number was proposed for the Lower Manhattan Expressway branch along the Manhattan Bridge .
This highway would have run between I-78 ( which would have split to another branch that used the Williamsburg Bridge ) and I-278 .
After the Lower Manhattan Expressway project was canceled in March 1971 , the I-478 designation was also briefly proposed for an upgrade of the Grand Central Parkway between I-278 and I-678 , as part of an effort to upgrade the Belt Parkway with truck lanes .
This proposal was also canceled in May 1971 .
The Westway project was proposed in early 1971 as part of an effort to replace the West Side Elevated Highway , a narrow and dangerously obsolete structure on Manhattan 's west side.{{Rp10 } } By mid-1971 , the , I-478 designation had been moved over to the Westway project .
As originally planned , I-478 would have continued north to I-78 at the Holland Tunnel and I-495 at the Lincoln Tunnel via the Westway project.{{Rp10 } }
An extension to I-95 at the George Washington Bridge via the Henry Hudson Parkway was initially considered .
This was ultimately dropped from the final plan due to a state law that prohibited the conversion of the Henry Hudson Parkway to an Interstate Highway.{{Rp10 } } The project was approved by the U.S. government in 1977 .
If fully completed , I-478 would have run along the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel and West Side Highway , completing the portion of the Interstate Highway System within New York City .
However , the Westway project was officially abandoned in 1985 after a series of lawsuits from environmental advocates .
Although the I-478 designation was formally withdrawn from all public signage and plans , the route number still applies to the Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel , albeit as an unsigned highway that is not marked on public signs .
MAJOR INTERSECTIONS Section::::Major intersections .
county =
Kings cspan=4 borough =
Brooklyn location =
Red Hook
lspan=4 mile=0.0 notes =
Exit 25 on I-278 mile=0.1 type =
HOV road =
HOV3 + to Verrazzano Bridge / Belt Parkway
notes =
Southbound exit evenings ,
northbound entrance mornings mile=0.2 road =
Hamilton Avenue ( I-278 Alternate east ) notes = Exit 26 on I-278 mile=0.4 type =
incomplete notes
= Southbound exit only river =
East River
mile=0.5 mile2=2.2 type =
etc
place =
Hugh L. Carey Tunnel ( toll gantry in Manhattan )
county =
New York
cspan=2 borough =
Manhattan location =
Battery Park City
lspan=2 mile=2.3 type =
incomplete road =
Trinity Place notes =
Northbound exit and southbound entrance mile=2.4 notes =
At - grade intersection except southbound entrance ramp ; exit 2 on NY 9A / West Street SEE ALSO * { { Portal - inlineU.S. Roads } } * { { Portal - inlineNew York Roads } } * { { Portal - inlineNew York } } * { { Portal - inlineNew York City } } REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* " Sandhogs Toughest Job " , September 1947 , Popular Science * Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel Construction Scenes ( 1947)—from the MTA 's YouTube web link ( 1:18 video clip )
* Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel : Sixty Years — from the MTA 's YouTube web link ( 6:13 video clip )
Section::::External links .
structure =
Crossings place
= East River bridge =
Brooklyn – Battery Tunnel bridge signs =
upstream =
Joralemon Street Tunnel downstream = Verrazzano
- Narrows Bridge
( New York Harbor )
downstream signs =