WEDDING DRESS
A wedding dress or wedding / bridal gown is the clothing worn by a bride during a wedding ceremony .
Color , style and ceremonial importance of the gown can depend on the religion and culture of the wedding participants .
In Western cultures , brides often choose white wedding dress , which was made popular by Queen Victoria in the 19th century .
In eastern cultures , brides often choose red to symbolize auspiciousness .
WESTERN CULTURE Section::::Western culture .
Weddings performed during and immediately following the Middle Ages were often more than just a union between two people .
They could be a union between two families , two businesses or even two countries .
Many weddings were more a matter of politics than love , particularly among the nobility and the higher social classes .
Brides were therefore expected to dress in a manner that cast their families in the most favorable light and befitted their social status , for they were not representing only themselves during the ceremony .
Brides from wealthy families often wore rich colors and exclusive fabrics .
It was common to see them wearing bold colors and layers of furs , velvet and silk .
Brides dressed in the height of current fashion , with the richest materials their families ' money could buy .
The poorest of brides wore their best church dress on their wedding day .
The amount and the price of material a wedding dress contained was a reflection of the bride 's social standing and indicated the extent of the family 's wealth to wedding guests .
The first documented instance of a princess who wore a white wedding dress for a royal wedding ceremony is that of Philippa of England , who wore a tunic with a cloak in white silk bordered with squirrel and ermine in 1406 , when she married Eric of Pomerania .
Mary , Queen of Scots , wore a white wedding dress in 1559 when she married her first husband , Francis , the Dauphin of France , because it was her favorite color , although white was then the color of mourning for French Queens .
This was not a widespread trend , however : prior to the Victorian era , a bride was married in any color , black being especially popular in Scandinavia .
White became a popular option in 1840 , after the marriage of Queen Victoria to Albert of Saxe - Coburg , when Victoria wore a white gown trimmed with Honiton lace .
Illustrations of the wedding were widely published , and many brides opted for white in accordance with the Queen 's choice .
Even after that , for a period , wedding dresses were adapted to the styles of the day .
In the early 1900s , clothing included a lot of decorations , such as lace or frills .
This was also adopted in wedding dresses , where decorative frills and lace was common .
For example , in the 1920s , they were typically short in the front with a longer train in the back and were worn with cloche - style wedding veils .
This tendency to follow current fashions continued until the late 1960s , when it became popular to revert to long , full - skirted designs reminiscent of the Victorian era .
Today , Western wedding dresses are usually white , though " wedding white " includes shades such as eggshell , ecru and ivory .
Later , many people assumed that the color white was intended to symbolize virginity , though this was not the original intention : it was the color blue that was connected to purity , piety , faithfulness , and the Virgin Mary .
CURRENT FASHION
Section::::Current fashion .
About 75 percent of wedding dresses on the market are strapless dresses or sleeveless , in part because such dresses require less skill from the designers and are easier to alter to fit correctly .
However , the sleeved wedding gown as well as wedding gowns with straps have both become more popular in recent years .
EASTERN CULTURE Section::::Eastern culture .
Many wedding dresses in China , India ( wedding sari ) , Pakistan ( heavily embroidered shalwar qameez or lehngas ) and Vietnam ( in the traditional form of the Ao dai ) are red , the traditional colour of good luck and auspiciousness .
Nowadays , many women choose other colours besides red .
In modern mainland Chinese weddings , the bride may opt for Western dresses of any colour , and later don a traditional costume for the official tea ceremony .
In modern Taiwanese weddings , the bride generally picks red ( following Chinese tradition ) or white ( more Western ) silk for the wedding gown material , but most will wear the red traditional garment for their formal wedding banquets .
Traditionally , the father of the bride is responsible for the wedding banquet hosted on the bride 's side and the alcohol ( specifically called " xi - jiu , " confusingly the same as what the wedding banquet itself is called ) consumed during both banquets .
While the wedding itself is often based on the couple 's choices , the wedding banquets are a symbolic gesture of " thanks " and appreciation , to those that have raised the bride and groom ( such as grandparents and uncles ) and those who will continue to be there to help the bride and groom in the future .
Thus out of respect for the elders , wedding banquets are usually done formally and traditionally .
Red wedding saris are the traditional garment choice for brides in Indian culture .
Sari fabric is also traditionally silk .
Over time , colour options and fabric choices for Indian brides have expanded .
Today fabrics like crepe , Georgette , charmeuse , and satin are used , and colors have been expanded to include gold , pink , orange , maroon , brown , and yellow as well .
Indian brides in Western countries often wear the sari at the wedding ceremony and change into traditional Indian wear afterwards ( lehnga , choli , etc . ) .
A Japanese wedding usually involves a traditional pure white kimono for the formal ceremony , symbolizing purity and maidenhood .
The bride may change into a red kimono for the events after the ceremony for good luck .
The Javanese people of Indonesia wear a kebaya , a traditional kind of blouse , along with batik .
In the Philippines , variations of the Baro't saya adapted to the white wedding tradition are considered to be wedding attire for women , along with the Barong Tagalog for men .
Various tribes and Muslim Filipinos don other forms of traditional dress during their respective ceremonies .
NATIVE AMERICAN
CULTURE Section::::Native American culture .
The indigenous peoples of the Americas have varying traditions related to weddings and thus wedding dresses .
A Hopi bride traditionally had her garments woven by the groom and any men in the village who wished to participate .
The garments consisted of a large belt , two all - white wedding robes , a white wedding robe with red stripes at top and bottom , white buckskin leggings and moccasins , a string for tying the hair , and a reed mat in which to wrap the outfit .
This outfit also served as a shroud , since these garments would be necessary for the trip through the underworld .
A Pueblo bride wore a cotton garment tied above the right shoulder , secured with a belt around the waist .
In the traditions of the Delaware , a bride wore a knee - length skirt of deerskin and a band of wampum beads around her forehead .
Except for fine beads or shell necklaces , the body was bare from the waist up .
If it was a winter wedding , she wore deerskin leggings and moccasins and a robe of turkey feathers .
Her face was painted with white , red and yellow clay .
The tribes of Northern California ( which include the Klamath , the Modoc and the Yurok ) had a traditional bridal dress woven in symbolic colors : white for the east , blue for the south , yellow ( orange ) for the west ; and black for the north .
Turquoise and silver jewelry were worn by both the bride and the groom in addition to a silver concho belt .
Jewelry was considered a shield against evils including hunger , poverty and bad luck .
GALLERY HISTORICAL EUROPEAN WEDDING DRESSES WEDDING DRESSES FROM DIFFERENT AREAS OF THE WORLD
MIDDLE EASTERN
DRESSES EAST ASIAN DRESSES
SOUTH ASIAN
DRESSES
MODERN WESTERN - STYLE
DRESSES
SEE ALSO
* Bridal crown * Contemporary Western Wedding Dress
* Wedding dress of Lady Diana Spencer
* Wedding dress of Sarah Ferguson
* Wedding dress of Kate Middleton
* Wedding dress of Meghan Markle
* Wedding dress of Queen Victoria * Wedding dress of Jacqueline Bouvier
* Wedding dress of Grace Kelly
* Wedding dress of Wallis Warfield
* Wedding dress of Princess Elizabeth * Wedding dress of Princess Margaret
* Wedding dress of Camilla Parker Bowles * Wedding dress of Princess Mary of Teck
* Wedding dress of Princess Anne
* Wedding dress of Princess Alexandra of Denmark
* Wedding dress of Sophie Rhys - Jones
* Wedding dress of Victoria , Princess Royal NOTES EXTERNAL LINKS * Fashion Plates of Wedding Dresses from 1820 - 1929 from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries
* Wedding Dresses at Chicago History Museum Digital Collections
* Wedding dress , 1900 , in the Staten Island Historical Society Online Collections Database
* Wedding dress , 1951 , in the Staten Island Historical Society Online Collections Database