WISDOM TOOTH
A wisdom tooth or third molar is one of the three molars per quadrant of the human dentition .
It is the most posterior of the three .
Wisdom teeth generally erupt between the ages of 17 and 25 .
Most adults have four wisdom teeth , one in each of the four quadrants , but it is possible to have none , fewer , or more , in which case the extras are called supernumerary teeth .
Wisdom teeth commonly affect other teeth as they develop , becoming impacted .
They are often extracted when or even before this occurs .
STRUCTURE
VARIATION
Section::::Structure . Section::::Variation .
Agenesis of wisdom teeth differs by population , ranging from practically zero in Aboriginal Tasmanians to nearly 100 % in indigenous Mexicans ( see research paper with world map showing prevalence ) .
The difference is related to the PAX9 , and MSX1 gene ( and perhaps other genes ) . FUNCTION Section::::Function .
Wisdom teeth are vestigial third molars that helped human ancestors to grind plant tissue .
It is thought that the skulls of human ancestors had larger jaws with more teeth , which possibly helped to chew foliage to compensate for a lack of ability to efficiently digest the cellulose that makes up a plant cell wall .
After the advent of agriculture over 10,000 years ago , soft human diets became the norm , including carbohydrate and high energy foods .
Such diets typically result in jaws growing with less forward growth than our paleolithic ancestors and not enough room for the wisdom teeth .
CLINICAL SIGNIFICANCE
Section::::Clinical significance .
Wisdom teeth ( often notated clinically as M3 for third molar ) have long been identified as a source of problems and continue to be the most commonly impacted teeth in the human mouth .
The oldest known impacted wisdom tooth belonged to a European woman of the Magdalenian period ( 18,000–10,000 BCE ) .
A lack of room to allow the teeth to erupt results in a risk of periodontal disease and dental cavities that increases with age .
Less than 2 % of adults age 65 years or older maintain the teeth without cavities or periodontal disease and 13 % maintain unimpacted wisdom teeth without cavities or periodontal disease .
Impacted wisdom teeth are classified by the direction and depth of impaction , the amount of available space for tooth eruption and the amount soft tissue or bone that covers them .
The classification structure allows clinicians to estimate the probabilities of impaction , infections and complications associated with wisdom teeth removal .
Wisdom teeth are also classified by the presence of symptoms and disease .
Treatment of an erupted wisdom tooth is the same as any other tooth in the mouth .
If impacted , treatment can be localized to the infected tissue overlying the impaction , extraction or coronectomy .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Although formally known as third molars , the common name is wisdom teeth because they appear so late – much later than the other teeth , at an age where people are presumably " wiser " than as a child , when the other teeth erupt .
The term probably came as a translation of the Latin dens sapientiae .
Their eruption has been known to cause dental issues for millennia ; it was noted at least as far back as Aristotle : Nonetheless , molar impaction was relatively rare prior to the modern era .
With the Industrial Revolution , the affliction became ten times more common , owing to the new prevalence of soft , processed , and sugary foods .
SEE ALSO REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * National Institute of Clinical Health and Excellence Guideline to Wisdom teeth removal
*
Wisdom tooth extraction WebMD article