MUNG BEAN
The mung bean ( Vigna radiata ) , alternatively known as the green gram , maash , or moong Sanskrit मुद्ग / mudga , is a plant species in the legume family .
The mung bean is mainly cultivated in India , Pakistan , Bangladesh , Nepal , Sri Lanka , China , Taiwan , Korea , South Asia and Southeast Asia .
It is used as an ingredient in both savory and sweet dishes .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The mung bean is an annual vine with yellow flowers and fuzzy brown pods .
The English word mung correctly pronounced as ' Moong ' originated ( and used as is ) from Hindi word मूंग moong which is derived from the Sanskrit word मुद्ग ( mudga ) .
Moong is called in Tamil as " Paasi Payaru " , பாசி பயறு .
TAXONOMY Section::::Taxonomy .
Mung beans are one of many species recently moved from the genus Phaseolus to Vigna .
The species is still often incorrectly cited as Phaseolus aureus or Phaseolus radiatus .
USES Section::::Uses .
Mung beans are commonly used in cuisines across Asia .
WHOLE BEANS AND PASTE Section::::Whole beans and paste .
Whole cooked mung beans are generally prepared from dried beans by boiling until they are soft .
Mung beans are light yellow in colour when their skins are removed .
Mung bean paste can be made by dehulling , cooking , and pulverizing the beans to a dry paste .
SOUTH ASIA Section::::South Asia .
Although whole mung beans are also occasionally used in Indian cuisine , beans without skins are more commonly used ; but in Maharashtra , Gujarat , Kerala and Tamil Nadu , whole mung beans ( called pachai payaru பச்சை பயறு in Tamil ) are commonly boiled to make a dry preparation often served with rice gruel ( kanji கஞ்ஞி ) .
Dehulled mung beans can also be used in a similar fashion as whole beans for the purpose of making sweet soups .
Mung beans in some regional cuisines of India are stripped of their outer coats to make mung dal .
In Bangladesh and West Bengal the stripped and split bean is used to make soup - like dal known as Moog dal(মুগ ডাল ) .
In the South Indian States of Karnataka , Tamil Nadu , Telangana and Andhra Pradesh , and also in Maharashtra steamed whole beans are seasoned with spices and fresh grated coconut in a preparation called " Pesalu " పెసలు in Telugu or Usli in Kannada or Sundal சுண்டல்
in Tamil or
" Usal " उसळ in Marathi .
EAST ASIA Section::::East Asia .
In Chinese cuisine , whole mung beans are used to make a tángshuǐ , or dessert , otherwise literally translated , " sugar water " , called lǜdòu tángshuǐ , which is served either warm or chilled .
In Hong Kong , dehulled mung beans and mung bean paste are made into ice cream or frozen ice pops .
Mung bean paste is used as a common filling for Chinese mooncakes in East China and Taiwan .
Also in China , the boiled and shelled beans are used as filling in glutinous rice dumplings eaten during the dragon boat festival ( 端午節 ) .
The beans may also be cooked until soft , blended into a liquid , sweetened , and served as a beverage , popular in many parts of China .
In Korea , skinned mung beans are soaked and ground with some water to make a thick batter .
This is used as a basis for the Korean pancakes called Bindae - tteok ( 빈대떡 ) .
SOUTHEAST ASIA Section::::Southeast Asia .
In the Philippines , ginisáng monggó ( sautéed mung bean stew ) , also known as monggó guisado or balatong , is a savoury stew of whole mung beans with prawns or fish .
It is traditionally served on Fridays of Lent , when the majority Roman Catholic Filipinos traditionally abstain from meat .
Variants of ginisáng monggó may also be made with chicken or pork .
Mung bean paste is also a common filling of pastries known as hopia ( or bakpia ) popular in Indonesia , the Philippines and further afield in Guyana ( where it is known as black eye cake ) .
In Indonesia , mung beans are also made into a popular dessert snack called es kacang hijau , which has the consistency of a porridge .
The beans are cooked with sugar , coconut milk , and a little ginger .
MIDDLE EAST
Section::::Middle East .
A staple diet in some parts of the Middle East is Mung beans and rice .
Both are cooked together like a pilaf rice dish called maash wa ruzz which means mung beans and rice .
BEAN SPROUTS Section::::Bean sprouts .
Mung beans are germinated by leaving them in water for four hours of daytime light and spending the rest of the day in the dark .
Mung bean sprouts can be grown under artificial light for four hours over the period of a week .
They are usually simply called " bean sprouts " .
However , when bean sprouts are called for in recipes , it generally refers to mung bean or soybean sprouts .
Mung bean sprouts are stir - fried as a Chinese vegetable accompaniment to a meal , usually with garlic , ginger , spring onions , or pieces of salted dried fish to add flavour .
Uncooked bean sprouts are used in filling for Vietnamese spring rolls , as well as a garnish for phở .
They are a major ingredient in a variety of Malaysian and Peranakan cuisine , including char kway teow , hokkien mee , mee rebus , and pasembor .
In Korea , slightly cooked mung bean sprouts , called sukjunamul ( hangul : 숙주나물 ) , are often served as a side dish .
They are blanched ( placed into boiling water for less than a minute ) , immediately cooled in cold water , and mixed with sesame oil , garlic , salt , and often other ingredients .
In the Philippines , mung bean sprouts are made into lumpia rolls called lumpiang togue .
In India , mung bean sprouts are cooked with green chili , garlic , and other spices in the state of Gujarat .
In Indonesia the food are often used as fillings like Tahu Isi ( stuffed tofu ) and complementary ingredient in many dishes such as rawon and soto .
In northern China and Korea , soybean sprouts , called kongnamul ( hangul : 콩나물 ) in Korean , are more widely used in a variety of dishes .
The " blue sprouts " are toxic since they contain small quantities of hydrogen cyanide , like potato sprouts do .
STARCH Section::::Starch .
Mung bean starch , which is extracted from ground mung beans , is used to make transparent cellophane noodles ( also known as bean thread noodles , bean threads , glass noodles , fensi ( 粉絲 ) , tung hoon ( 冬粉 ) , miến , bún tàu , or bún tào ) .
Cellophane noodles become soft and slippery when they are soaked in hot water .
A variation of cellophane noodles , called mung bean sheets or green bean sheets , are also available .
In Korea , a jelly called nokdumuk ( hangul : 녹두묵 ; also called cheongpomuk ; hangul : 청포묵 ) is made from mung bean starch ; a similar jelly , colored yellow with the addition of gardenia coloring , is called hwangpomuk ( hangul : 황포묵 ) .
In northern China , mung bean jelly is called liangfen ( 涼粉 , meaning chilled bean jelly ) , which is a very popular food during summer .
Jidou liangfen is another flavor of mung bean jelly food in Yunnan , in southern China .
Mung batter is used to make crepes named pesarattu in Andhra Pradesh , India and pancakes named Bindaetteok in Korea .
HISTORY OF DOMESTICATION AND CULTIVATION Section::::History of domestication and cultivation .
The mung bean was domesticated in Persia ( Iran ) , where its progenitor ( Vigna radiata subspecies sublobata ) occurs wild .
Carbonized mung beans have been discovered in many archeological sites in India .
Areas with early finds include the eastern zone of the Harappan civilization in Punjab and Haryana , where finds date back about 4,500 years , and South India in the modern state of Karnataka where finds date back more than 4,000 years .
Some scholars therefore infer two separate domestications in the northwest and south of India .
In South India there is evidence for evolution of larger - seeded mung beans 3,500 to 3,000 years ago .
By about 3500 years ago mung beans were widely cultivated throughout India .
Cultivated mung beans later spread from India to China and Southeast Asia .
Archaeobotanical research at the site of Khao Sam Kaeo in southern Thailand indicates that mung beans had arrived in Thailand by at least 2,200 years ago .
Finds on Pemba Island indicate that during the era of Swahili trade , in the 9th or 10th century , mung beans also came to be cultivated in Africa .
SEE ALSO
* Black bean paste
*
Douzhi * Mung bean nuclease
* Mungbean yellow mosaic virus REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS