DISCOVER CARD Discover is a credit card brand issued primarily in the United States .
It was introduced by Sears in 1985 .
When launched , Discover did not charge an annual fee and offered a higher - than - normal credit limit , features that were disruptive to the existing credit card industry .
A subsequent innovation was " Cashback Bonus " on purchases .
Most cards with the Discover brand are issued by Discover Bank , formerly the Greenwood Trust Company .
Discover transactions are processed through the Discover Network payment network .
In 2005 , Discover Financial Services acquired Pulse , an electronic funds transfer network , allowing it to market and issue debit and ATM cards .
In February 2006 , Discover Financial Services announced that it would begin offering Discover Debit cards to other financial institutions , made possible by the acquisition of Pulse .
Discover is the fourth largest credit card brand in the U.S. , behind Visa , MasterCard and American Express , with nearly 44 million cardholders .
HISTORY Section::::History .
At the time Discover was introduced , Sears was the largest retailer in the United States .
It had purchased the Dean Witter Reynolds brokerage organization and Coldwell , Banker & Company ( real estate ) in 1981 as an attempt to add financial services to its portfolio of customer services .
Ray Kennedy , Sr , father of country singer Ray Kennedy and the credit manager for Sears , conceived the card .
The actual launch was pushed through by Philip J. Purcell and Mitchell M. Merin , the company 's senior vice president for corporate administration and manager of financial analysis , respectively .
Together with the Discover Card ( and its issuing bank , the Greenwood Trust Company , owned by Sears ) , this was named the Sears Financial Network .
Early Discover cards bore a small embossed symbol representing the Sears Tower , then the company 's headquarters .
Discover was part of Dean Witter , and
then Morgan Stanley , until 2007 , when Discover Financial Services became an independent company .
Novus was once the major processing center that partnered with the company .
The Novus logo was retired , replaced by the Discover Network logo .
Unlike other attempts at creating a credit card to rival MasterCard and Visa , such as Citibank 's Choice card , Discover gained a large national consumer base .
It carried no annual fee , which was uncommon at the time , and offered a typically higher credit limit than similar cards .
Cardholders could also earn a " Cashback Bonus , " in which a percentage of the amount spent would be refunded to the account ( from 1 % to 5 % ) , depending on how much the card was used .
A 1989 study found that Discover had strong consumer adoption in the U.S. ; the number of households with Discover cards increased by 2.1 million , or 14 percent , in 1989 .
Discover was also noteworthy for being the only credit card accepted by the U.S. Customs Service to pay customs duty , effective Feb. 19 , 1987 .
Since it did not charge a percentage fee to retailers , unlike Visa , MasterCard , and American Express , Discover was also the only credit card accepted at Sam 's Club ; the retailer has since started to accept MasterCard and American Express ( see below ) .
The plan to create a one - stop financial - services center in Sears stores was not as successful as Sears had hoped , and its promotion of Discover was thought both to hurt Sears turnover and to restrict the card 's potential .
Other retailers resisted it , as they believed they would be helping their competitor .
Sears began to face difficulties in the late 1980s in light of these developments , and with strong competition both from Walmart and from so - called category killers such as Toys " R " Us .
Discover 's introduction was costly ; Sears 's Discover credit card operations accounted for a loss of $ 22 million in the fourth quarter of 1986 , and a loss of $ 25.8 million in the first quarter of 1987 .
Sears sold its financial businesses in 1993 and began to accept MasterCard and Visa in addition to its store credit card and Discover .
Discover became part of the Dean Witter financial services firm .
Dean Witter Discover merged with Morgan Stanley in 1997 .
DISCOVER BANK Section::::Discover Bank .
The Greenwood Trust Company was founded in 1911 and is based in Greenwood , Delaware .
It was acquired by Discover Financial Services in 1985 and renamed Discover Bank in 2000 .
The first and original location of Greenwood Trust Co. on East Market Street is still operating and remains the only banking location of Discover Bank .
GLOBAL ALLIANCE Section::::Global alliance .
Starting around 2005 , to increase acceptance around the world , Discover has formed several agreements with other payment networks internationally .
This allows Discover cardholders to perform transactions while traveling abroad .
Some major examples include : * Diners Club International worldwide * BC Card in South Korea * JCB in Japan
* RuPay in India * TROY in Turkey
* UnionPay in China * Verve in Nigeria In 2015 , due to the growth of Chinese card processor UnionPay , Discover became the world 's most widely accepted card .
BUSINESS DEVELOPMENTS Section::::Business developments .
In October 2004 , the Supreme Court upheld a ruling in Discover 's favor that challenged exclusionary policies of Visa and MasterCard .
Before this ruling , Visa and MasterCard would not allow banks to issue a Discover ( or American Express ) card if they issued a Visa or MasterCard .
Within days of the court ruling , Discover filed a lawsuit in federal court seeking damages from Visa and MasterCard .
Shortly after the 2004 Supreme Court ruling , Discover struck its first deal to have its cards issued by another financial institution , GE Consumer Finance , which began to issue credit cards for retailer Wal - Mart and its wholesale warehouse stores , Sam 's Club .
Transactions were processed on the Discover Network .
Sam 's Club exclusively accepted Discover for many years ; since November 2006 , it has also accepted MasterCard for purchases .
In April 2014 , Walmart announced that they were ending their relationship with Discover and would begin converting all Discover - branded cards to Mastercard beginning in June 2014 .
HSBC has issued Discover - branded credit cards processed through the Discover Network since its acquisition of card issuer Metris in late 2005 .
Metris had originally signed an agreement with Discover in September 2005 , three months prior to the HSBC acquisition .
Morgan Stanley had long desired to sell Discover , and in April 2005 , announced that it would divest Discover Financial Services as an independent company within six months .
By June , industry sources reported that Morgan Stanley was reassessing its plan to spin off Discover .
In August 2005 , the company confirmed it would not sell Discover .
In yet another reversal , in December 2006 , Morgan Stanley announced it would spin off Discover as a standalone company by the end of August 2007 .
The spin off was finalized ahead of schedule , on June 30 , 2007 .
In September 2012 , Discover was ordered to pay over $ 200 million in fines and customer reimbursements to settle accusations by U.S. federal regulators that it had engaged in deceptive telemarketing tactics .
ADVERTISING Section::::Advertising .
From 1998 to 2007 , Discover Card owned a billboard at One Times Square , just above the flagpole where the Times Square Ball is placed , until Toshiba bought the space .
As a result , its logo could be seen on national television during New Year 's Eve , while the ball dropped .
Discover also sponsored the ball drop itself .
From its opening in 2001 to 2012 , Sugarloaf Mills Mall in Lawrenceville , Georgia was named Discover Mills in a naming rights partnership with Discover Card .
The slogan for the mall was " Where Discover Card is the Smart Choice .
" It was the first shopping mall to have granted naming rights to interested companies .
SEE ALSO
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Official Website