COPPER(II ) SULFATE Copper(II ) sulfate , also known as cupric sulfate , or copper sulphate , is the inorganic compound with the chemical formula
CuSO(HO ) , where x can range from 0 to 5 .
The pentahydrate ( x = 5 ) is the most common form .
Older names for this compound include blue vitriol , bluestone , vitriol of copper , and Roman vitriol .
The pentahydrate ( CuSO·5HO ) , the most commonly encountered salt , is bright blue .
It exothermically dissolves in water to give the aquo complex [ Cu(HO ) ] , which has octahedral molecular geometry .
The structure of the solid pentahydrate reveals a polymeric structure wherein copper is again octahedral but bound to four water ligands .
The Cu(II)(HO ) centers are interconnected by sulfate anions to form chains .
Anhydrous copper sulfate is a white powder .
PREPARATION AND OCCURRENCE Section::::Preparation and occurrence .
Copper sulfate is produced industrially by treating copper metal with hot concentrated sulfuric acid or its oxides with dilute sulfuric acid .
For laboratory use , copper sulfate is usually purchased .
Copper sulfate can also be produced by slowly leaching low grade copper ore in air ; bacteria may be used to hasten the process .
Commercial copper sulfate is usually about 98 % pure copper sulfate , and may contain traces of water .
Anhydrous Copper sulfate is 39.81 percent copper and 60.19 percent sulfate by mass , and in its blue , hydrous form , it is 25.47 % copper , 38.47 % sulfate ( 12.82 % sulfur ) and 36.06 % water by mass .
Four types of crystal size are provided based on its usage : large crystals ( 10–40 mm ) , small crystals ( 2–10 mm ) , snow crystals ( less than 2 mm ) , and windswept powder ( less than 0.15 mm ) .
CHEMICAL PROPERTIES
Section::::Chemical properties . Copper(II ) sulfate pentahydrate decomposes before melting .
It loses two water molecules upon heating at , followed by two more at and the final water molecule at .
Dehydration proceeds by decomposition of the tetraaquacopper(2 + ) moiety , two opposing aqua groups are lost to give a diaquacopper(2 + ) moiety .
The second dehydration step occurs when the final two aqua groups are lost .
Complete dehydration occurs when the final unbound water molecule is lost .
At , copper(II ) sulfate decomposes into copper(II )
oxide ( CuO ) and sulfur trioxide ( SO ) .
Copper sulfate reacts with concentrated hydrochloric acid to give tetrachlorocuprate(II ) : CHEMISTRY EDUCATION Section::::Chemistry education .
Copper sulfate is commonly included in children 's chemistry sets .
It is often used to grow crystals in schools and in copper plating experiments , despite its toxicity .
Copper sulfate is often used to demonstrate an exothermic reaction , in which steel wool or magnesium ribbon is placed in an aqueous solution of CuSO .
It is used to demonstrate the principle of mineral hydration .
The pentahydrate form , which is blue , is heated , turning the copper sulfate into the anhydrous form which is white , while the water that was present in the pentahydrate form evaporates .
When water is then added to the anhydrous compound , it turns back into the pentahydrate form , regaining its blue color , and is known as blue vitriol .
Copper(II )
sulfate pentahydrate can easily be produced by crystallization from solution as copper(II )
sulfate is quite hygroscopic .
In an illustration of a " single metal replacement reaction " , iron is submerged in a solution of copper sulfate .
Iron reacts producing iron(II ) sulfate and copper precipitates .
In high school and general chemistry education , copper sulfate is used as electrolyte for galvanic cells , usually as a cathode solution .
For example , in a zinc / copper cell , copper ion in copper sulfate solution absorbs electron from zinc and forms metallic copper .
USES
AS A FUNGICIDE AND HERBICIDE Section::::Uses .
Section::::As
a fungicide and herbicide .
Copper sulfate pentahydrate is used as a fungicide .
However , some fungi are capable of adapting to elevated levels of copper ions .
Bordeaux mixture , a suspension of copper(II ) sulfate ( CuSO ) and calcium hydroxide ( Ca(OH ) ) , is used to control fungus on grapes , melons , and other berries .
It is produced by mixing a water solution of copper sulfate and a suspension of slaked lime , a suspension of copper(II ) hydroxide Cu(OH ) and calcium sulfate , which is used to control fungus on grapes , melons , and other berries .
Cheshunt compound , a commercial mixture of copper sulfate and ammonium carbonate ( discontinued ) , is used in horticulture to prevent damping off in seedlings .
As a non - agricultural herbicide , is it used to control invasive aquatic plants and the roots of plants situated near water pipes .
It is used in swimming pools as an algicide .
A dilute solution of copper sulfate is used to treat aquarium fishes for parasitic infections , and is also used to remove snails from aquariums .
Copper ions are highly toxic to fish , however .
Most species of algae can be controlled with very low concentrations of copper sulfate .
ANALYTICAL
REAGENT Section::::Analytical reagent .
Several chemical tests utilize copper sulfate .
It is used in Fehling 's solution and Benedict 's solution to test for reducing sugars , which reduce the soluble blue copper(II )
sulfate to insoluble red copper(I ) oxide .
Copper(II )
sulfate is also used in the Biuret reagent to test for proteins .
Copper sulfate is used to test blood for anemia .
The blood is tested by dropping it into a solution of copper sulfate of known specific gravity – blood which contains sufficient hemoglobin sinks rapidly due to its density , whereas blood which does not sink or sinks slowly has insufficient amount of hemoglobin .
In a flame test , its copper ions emit a deep green light , a much deeper green than the flame test for barium .
ORGANIC SYNTHESIS
Section::::Organic synthesis .
Copper sulfate is employed at a limited level in organic synthesis .
The anhydrous salt is used as a dehydrating agent for forming and manipulating acetal groups .
The hydrated salt can be intimately mingled with potassium permanganate to give an oxidant for the conversion of primary alcohols .
NICHE USES Section::::Niche uses .
Copper(II
) sulfate has attracted many niche applications over the centuries .
In industry copper sulfate has multiple applications .
In printing it is an additive to book binding pastes and glues to protect paper from insect bites ; in building it is used as an additive to concrete to provide water resistance and disinfectant qualities .
Copper sulfate can be used as a coloring ingredient in artworks , especially glasses and potteries .
Copper sulfate is also used in firework manufacture as a blue coloring agent , but it is not safe to mix copper sulfate with chlorates when mixing firework powders .
It corrects copper deficiencies in the soil and animals and stimulates farm animals ' growth .
In decoration , copper sulfate adds color to cement , metals and ceramic .
Some batteries , electrodes and wire contain copper sulfate .
It is used in printing ink and hair dye .
Copper sulfate was once used to kill bromeliads , which serve as mosquito breeding sites .
Copper sulfate is used as a molluscicide to treat bilharzia in tropical countries .
Copper sulfate is used as an anti - fungal agent to protect seeds against fungus and to protect horse hooves from infection .
It inhibits growth of bacteria such as Escherichia coli .
In electronics , copper sulphate solution is often used as the resistive element in Liquid resistors .
ART Section::::Art .
In 2008 , the artist Roger Hiorns filled an abandoned waterproofed council flat in London with 75,000 liters of copper sulfate solution .
The solution was left to crystallize for several weeks before the flat was drained , leaving crystal - covered walls , floors and ceilings .
The work is titled Seizure .
Since 2011 , it has been on exhibition at the Yorkshire Sculpture Park .
ETCHING
Section::::Etching .
Copper sulfate is used to etch zinc or copper plates for intaglio printmaking .
It is also used to etch designs into copper for jewelry , such as for Champlevé .
DYEING
Section::::Dyeing .
Copper sulfate can be used as a mordant in vegetable dyeing .
It often highlights the green tints of the specific dyes .
MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH ISSUES
Section::::Medical and public health issues .
Copper sulfate was used in the past as an emetic .
It is now considered too toxic for this use .
It is still listed as an antidote in the World Health Organization 's Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System .
OTHER FORM OF COPPER SULFATES
Section::::Other form of copper sulfates .
Anhydrous copper(II ) sulfate is a white solid .
It can be produced by dehydration of the normally available pentahydrate copper sulfate .
In nature , it found as the very rare mineral known as chalcocyanite .
The pentahydrate also occurs in nature as chalcanthite .
Two other copper sulfates comprise the remaining of these rare minerals : bonattite ( trihydrate ) and boothite ( heptahydrate ) .
TOXICOLOGICAL EFFECTS Section::::Toxicological effects .
Copper sulfate is an irritant .
The usual routes by which humans can receive toxic exposure to copper sulfate are through eye or skin contact , as well as by inhaling powders and dusts .
Skin contact may result in itching or eczema .
Eye contact with copper sulfate can cause conjunctivitis , inflammation of the eyelid lining , ulceration , and clouding of the cornea .
Upon oral exposure , copper sulfate is moderately toxic .
According to studies , the lowest dose of copper sulfate that had a toxic effect on humans is 11 mg / kg .
Because of its irritating effect on the gastrointestinal tract , vomiting is automatically initiated in case of the ingestion of copper sulfate .
However , if copper sulfate is retained in the stomach , the symptoms can be severe .
After 1–12 grams of copper sulfate are swallowed , such poisoning signs may occur as a metallic taste in the mouth , burning pain in the chest , nausea , diarrhea , vomiting , headache , discontinued urination , which leads to yellowing of the skin .
In cases of copper sulfate poisoning , injury to the brain , stomach , liver , or kidneys may also occur .
ENVIRONMENTAL TOXICITY
Section::::Environmental toxicity .
Copper sulfate is highly soluble in water and therefore is easily distributed in the aquatic environments .
Too much copper in water damage marine and freshwater organisms such as algae , fish and molluscs .
Copper in the soil may come from industry , motor vehicle , and architectural materials .
Copper released from the dissolution of copper sulfate exists mainly in the surface soil and tends to bind to organic matter .
The more acidic the soil is , the less binding occurs .
SEE ALSO
* Chalcanthum
REFERENCES
BIBLIOGRAPHY
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* National Pollutant Inventory – Copper and compounds fact sheet