BENZALKONIUM CHLORIDE Benzalkonium chloride , also known as BZK , BKC , BAC , alkyldimethylbenzylammonium chloride and ADBAC , is a type of cationic surfactant .
It is an organic salt classified as a quaternary ammonium compound .
It has three main categories of use : as a biocide , a cationic surfactant , and as a phase transfer agent .
ADBACs are a mixture of alkylbenzyldimethylammonium chlorides , in which the alkyl group has various even - numbered alkyl chain lengths .
SOLUBILITY AND PHYSICAL PROPERTIES Section::::Solubility and physical properties .
Depending on purity , benzalkonium chloride ranges from colourless to a pale yellow ( impure ) .
Benzalkonium chloride is readily soluble in ethanol and acetone .
Dissolution in water is slow .
Aqueous solutions should be neutral to slightly alkaline .
Solutions foam when shaken .
Concentrated solutions have a bitter taste and a faint almond - like odour .
Standard concentrates are manufactured as 50 % and 80 % w / w solutions , and sold under trade names such as BC50 , BC80 , BAC50 , BAC80 , etc .
The 50 % solution is purely aqueous , while more concentrated solutions require incorporation of rheology modifiers ( alcohols , polyethylene glycols , etc . ) to prevent increases in viscosity or gel formation under low temperature conditions .
CATIONIC SURFACTANT
Section::::Cationic surfactant .
Benzalkonium chloride also possesses surfactant properties , dissolving the lipid phase of the tear film and increasing drug penetration , making it a useful excipient .
* Laundry detergents and treatments
* Softeners for textiles
PHASE TRANSFER AGENT Section::::Phase transfer agent .
Benzalkonium chloride is a mainstay of phase - transfer catalysis , an important technology in the synthesis of organic compounds , including drugs .
BIOACTIVE AGENTS Section::::Bioactive agents .
Especially for their antimicrobial activity , benzalkonium chloride is an active ingredient in many consumer products :
* Pharmaceutical products such as eye , ear and nasal drops or sprays , as a preservative * Personal care products such as hand sanitizers , wet wipes , shampoos , deodorants and cosmetics * Skin antiseptics , such as Bactine and Dettol .
* Throat lozenges and mouthwashes , as a biocide
* Spermicidal creams * Over - the - counter single - application treatments for herpes , cold - sores , and fever blisters , such as RELEEV and Viroxyn * Burn and ulcer treatment
* Spray disinfectants for hard surface sanitization
* Cleaners for floor and hard surfaces as a disinfectant , such as Lysol
* Algaecides for clearing of algae , moss , lichens from paths , roof tiles , swimming pools , masonry , etc .
Benzalkonium chloride is also used in many non - consumer processes and products , including as an active ingredient in surgical disinfection .
A comprehensive list of uses includes industrial applications .
An advantage of benzalkonium chloride , not shared by ethanol - based antiseptics or hydrogen peroxide antiseptic , is that it does not cause a burning sensation when applied to broken skin ..
However , prolonged or repeated skin contact may cause dermatitis .
MEDICINE Section::::Medicine .
Benzalkonium chloride is a frequently used preservative in eye drops ; typical concentrations range from 0.004 % to 0.01 % .
Stronger concentrations can be caustic and cause irreversible damage to the corneal endothelium .
Avoiding the use of benzalkonium chloride solutions while contact lenses are in place is discussed in the literature .
ADVERSE EFFECTS Section::::Adverse effects .
Although historically benzalkonium chloride has been ubiquitous as a preservative in ophthalmic preparations , its ocular toxicity and irritant properties , in conjunction with consumer demand , have led pharmaceutical companies to increase production of preservative - free preparations , or to replace benzalkonium chloride with preservatives which are less harmful .
Many mass - marketed inhaler and nasal spray formulations contain benzalkonium chloride as a preservative , despite substantial evidence that it can adversely affect ciliary motion , mucociliary transport , nasal mucosal histology , human neutrophil function , and leukocyte response to local inflammation .
Although some studies have found no correlation between use of benzalkonium chloride in concentrations at or below 0.1 % in nasal sprays and drug - induced rhinitis , others have recommended that benzalkonium chloride in nasal sprays be avoided .
In the United States , nasal steroid preparations that are free of benzalkonium chloride include budesonide , triamcinolone acetonide , dexamethasone , and Beconase and Vancenase aerosol inhalers .
Benzalkonium chloride is irritant to middle ear tissues at typically used concentrations .
Inner ear toxicity has been demonstrated .
Occupational exposure to benzalkonium chloride has been linked to the development of asthma .
In 2011 , a large clinical trial designed to evaluate the efficacy of hand sanitizers based on different active ingredients in preventing virus transmission amongst schoolchildren was re - designed to exclude sanitizers based on benzalkonium chloride due to safety concerns .
Benzalkonium chloride has been in common use as a pharmaceutical preservative and antimicrobial since the 1940s .
While early studies confirmed the corrosive and irritant properties of benzalkonium chloride , investigations into the adverse effects of , and disease states linked to , benzalkonium chloride have only surfaced during the past 30 years .
Benzalkonium chloride is classed as a Category III antiseptic active ingredient by the United States Food and Drug Administration .
Ingredients are categorised as Category III when " available data are insufficient to classify as safe and effective , and further testing is required " .
Benzalkonium chloride is excluded from the current United States Food and Drug Administration review of the safety and effectiveness of consumer antiseptics and topical antimicrobial over - the - counter drug products , meaning it will remain a Category III ingredient .
There is acknowledgement that more data are required on its safety , efficacy and effectiveness , especially with relation to : * Human pharmacokinetic studies , including information on its metabolites
* Studies on animal absorption , distribution , metabolism , and excretion
* Data to help define the effect of formulation on dermal absorption
* Carcinogenicity * Studies on developmental and reproductive toxicology
* Potential hormonal effects
* Assessment of the potential for development of bacterial resistance TOXICOLOGY Section::::Toxicology .
RTECS lists the following acute toxicity data : !
Organism ! !
Route of exposure ! !
Dose ( LD )
Benzalkonium chloride is a human skin and severe eye irritant .
It is a suspected respiratory toxicant , immunotoxicant , gastrointestinal toxicant and neurotoxicant .
Benzalkonium chloride formulations for consumer use are dilute solutions .
Concentrated solutions are toxic to humans , causing corrosion / irritation to the skin and mucosa , and death if taken internally in sufficient volumes .
0.1 % is the maximum concentration of benzalkonium chloride that does not produce primary irritation on intact skin or act as a sensitizer .
Poisoning by benzalkonium chloride is recognised in the literature .
A 2014 case study detailing the fatal ingestion of up to 8.1 oz ( 240ml ) of 10 % benzalkonium chloride in a 78-year - old male also includes a summary of the currently published case reports of benzalkonium chloride ingestion .
While the majority of cases were caused by confusion about the contents of containers , one case cites incorrect pharmacy dilution of benzalkonium chloride as the cause of poisoning of two infants .
Benzalkonium chloride poisoning of domestic pets has been recognised as a result of direct contact with surfaces cleaned with disinfectants using benzalkonium chloride as an active ingredient .
As many as 20 people were killed in Japan , by a nurse injecting this .
BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITY
Section::::Biological activity .
The greatest biocidal activity is associated with the C12 dodecyl & C14 myristyl alkyl derivatives .
The mechanism of bactericidal / microbicidal action is thought to be due to disruption of intermolecular interactions .
This can cause dissociation of cellular membrane lipid bilayers , which compromises cellular permeability controls and induces leakage of cellular contents .
Other biomolecular complexes within the bacterial cell can also undergo dissociation .
Enzymes , which finely control a wide range of respiratory and metabolic cellular activities , are particularly susceptible to deactivation .
Critical intermolecular interactions and tertiary structures in such highly specific biochemical systems can be readily disrupted by cationic surfactants .
Benzalkonium chloride solutions are fast - acting biocidal agents with a moderately long duration of action .
They are active against bacteria and some viruses , fungi , and protozoa .
Bacterial spores are considered to be resistant .
Solutions are bacteriostatic or bactericidal according to their concentration .
Gram - positive bacteria are generally more susceptible than gram - negative bacteria .
Its activity depends on the surfactant concentration and also on the bacterial concentration ( inoculum ) at the moment of the treatment .
Activity is not greatly affected by pH , but increases substantially at higher temperatures and prolonged exposure times .
In a 1998 study using the FDA protocol , a non - alcohol sanitizer with benzalkonium chloride as the active ingredient met the FDA performance standards , while Purell , a popular alcohol - based sanitizer , did not .
The study , which was undertaken and reported by a leading US developer , manufacturer and marketer of topical antimicrobial pharmaceuticals based on quaternary ammonium compounds , found that their own benzalkonium chloride - based sanitizer performed better than alcohol - based hand sanitizer after repeated use .
Advancements in the quality and efficacy of benzalkonium chloride in current non - alcohol hand sanitizers has addressed the CDC concerns regarding gram negative bacteria , with the leading products being equal if not more effective against gram negative , particularly New Delhi metallo - beta - lactamase 1 and other antibiotic resistant bacteria .
Newer formulations using benzalkonium blended with various quaternary ammonium derivatives can be used to extend the biocidal spectrum and enhance the efficacy of benzalkonium based disinfection products .
Formulation techniques have been used to great effect in enhancing the virucidal activity of quaternary ammonium - based disinfectants such as Virucide 100 to typical healthcare infection hazards such as hepatitis and HIV .
The use of appropriate excipients can also greatly enhance the spectrum , performance and detergency , and prevent deactivation under use conditions .
Formulation can also help minimise deactivation of benzalkonium solutions in the presence of organic and inorganic contamination .
DEGRADATION Section::::Degradation .
Benzalkonium chloride degradation follows consecutive debenzylation , dealkylation , and demethylation steps producing benzyl chloride , alkyl dimethyl amine , dimethyl amine , long chain alkane , and ammonia .
The intermediates , major , and minor products can then be broken down into CO , HO , NH , and Cl .
The first step to the biodegradation of BAC is the fission or splitting of the alkyl chain from the quaternary nitrogen as shown in the diagram .
This is done by abstracting the hydrogen from the alkyl chain by using a hydroxyl radical leading to a carbon centered radical .
This results in benzyl dimethyl amine as the first intermediate and dodecanal as the major product .
From here , benzyl dimethyl amine can be oxidized to benzoic acid using the Fenton process .
The trimethyl amine group in dimethylbenzylamine can be cleaved to form a benzyl that can be further oxidized to benzoic acid .
Benzoic acid uses hydroxylation ( adding a hydroxyl group ) to form p - hydroxybenzoic acid .
Benzyldimethylamine can then be converted into ammonia by performing demethylation twice , which removes both methyl groups , followed by debenzylation , removing the benzyl group using hydrogenation .
The diagram represents suggested pathways of the biodegradation of BAC for both the hydrophobic and the hydrophilic regions of the surfactant .
Since Stearalkonium chloride is a type of BAC , the biodegradation process should happen in the same manner .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
In September 2016 , the FDA announced a ban on nineteen ingredients in consumer antibacterial soaps citing a lack of evidence for safety and effectiveness .
A ban on three additional ingredients , including benzalkonium chloride , was deferred to allow ongoing studies to be completed .
SEE ALSO
* Stearalkonium chloride
* Polyaminopropyl biguanide , an alternative preservative for contact lens solutions * Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
* Triclosan * Thiomersal REFERENCES
FURTHER
READING
*
Thorup I : Evaluation of health hazards by exposure to Quaternary ammonium compounds , The Institute of Food Safety and Toxicology , Danish Veterinary and Food Administration , http://www2.mst.dk/common/Udgivramme/Frame.asp?http://www2.mst.dk/udgiv/publications/2000/87-7944-210-2/html/kap04_eng.htm EXTERNAL LINKS
* International Programme on Chemical Safety , International Chemical Safety Card ( ICSC ) - Benzalkonium Chloride * National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health ( NIOSH ) , International Chemical Safety Card ( ICSC )
- Benzalkonium Chloride * International Programme on Chemical Safety , Poisons Information Monograph ( PIMs )
- Benzalkonium Chloride
* Haz - Map Category Details - Benzalkonium Chloride * ToxNet Human Safety Database - Benzalkonium Chloride Compounds * Recognition and Management of Pesticide Poisonings , United States Environmental Protection Agency , Office of Pesticide Programs , Sixth Edition , 2013 * CDC Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee ( HICPAC ) , Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities , 2008
* Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Inc. MSDS * Spectrum Labs "
Clear Bath " Algae Inhibitor MSDS
* Nile Chemicals MSDS
* TCI America MSDS * Sciencelab.com , Inc. MSDS
* Nasal Saline Sprays - The Additives May Be the Problem