COTTON CANDY Cotton candy ( also known as fairy floss in Australia and candy floss in the Ireland , New Zealand , South Africa , India and Sri Lanka ) is a form of spun sugar .
The confection is mostly sugar , with small amounts of either flavoring or food coloring often being added .
Cotton candy is made by heating and liquefying sugar and spinning it out through minute holes .
It resolidifies in minutely thin strands of " sugar glass " ..
The final cotton candy contains mostly air , with a typical serving weighing around 1 ounce or 28 grams .
It is often served at fairs , circuses , carnivals , and Japanese festivals , and sold on a stick or in a plastic bag .
Similar light halva confections include the Indian sohan papdi and pootharekulu , the Persian pashmak , and the Turkish pişmaniye , although the latter is made with flour and water in addition to sugar .
Tatar cuisine has similar flour - honey sweet sawdust talqysh - kalava .
Similar sweets include Chinese dragon's - beard candy and Korean honey skein kkul - tarae .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Several places claim the origin of cotton candy , with some sources tracing it to a form of spun sugar found in Europe in the 19th century .
At that time , spun sugar was an expensive , labor - intensive endeavor and was not generally available to the average person .
Others suggest versions of spun sugar originated in Italy as early as the 15th century .
Machine - spun cotton candy was invented in 1897 by dentist William Morrison and confectioner John C. Wharton , and first introduced to a wide audience at the 1904 World 's Fair as " Fairy Floss " with great success , selling 68,655 boxes at 25¢ per box ( equivalent to $ 6 per box today ) .
Joseph Lascaux , a dentist from New Orleans , Louisiana , invented a similar cotton candy machine in 1921 .
In fact , the Lascaux patent named the sweet confection " cotton candy " and the " fairy floss " name faded away , although it retains this name in Australia .
In the 1970s , an automatic cotton candy machine was created which made the product and packaged it .
This made it easier to produce and available to sell at carnivals , fairs , and stores in the 1970s and on .
Tootsie Roll of Canada Ltd. , the world 's largest cotton - candy manufacturer , makes a bagged , fruit - flavored version called Fluffy Stuff .
The United States declared National Cotton Candy Day to be on December 7 .
PRODUCTION
Section::::Production .
Typical machines used to make cotton candy include a spinning head enclosing a small " sugar reserve " bowl into which a charge of granulated , colored sugar ( or separate sugar and food coloring ) is poured .
Heaters near the rim of the head melt the sugar , which is squeezed out through tiny holes by centrifugal force .
Colored sugar packaged specially for the process is milled with melting characteristics and a crystal size optimized for the head and heated holes ; granulated sugar used in baking contains fine crystals which spin out unmelted , while rock sugar crystals are too large to properly contact the heater , slowing the production of cotton candy .
The molten sugar solidifies in the air and is caught in a larger bowl which totally surrounds the spinning head .
Left to operate for a period , the cotton - like product builds up on the inside walls of the larger bowl , at which point machine operators twirl a stick or cone around the rim of the large catching bowl , gathering the sugar strands into portions which are served on stick or cone , or in plastic bags .
As the sugar reserve bowl empties , the operator recharges it with more feedstock .
The product is sensitive to humidity , and in humid summer locales , the process can be messy and sticky .
Modern innovations in cotton - candy equipment include vending machines which automatically produce single servings of the product , developed in Taiwan , and lighted or glowing sticks .
FLAVORING
Section::::Flavoring .
The source material for candy mesh is usually both colored and flavored .
When spun , cotton candy is first white because it is made from sugar , but adding dye or coloring can transform the color .
Originally , cotton candy was just white .
In the US , so - called ' floss sugar ' is available in a wide variety of flavors , but two flavor - blend colors predominate – ' blue raspberry ' and ' pink vanilla ' , both originally formulated by the Gold Medal brand ( which uses the names ' Boo Blue ' and ' Silly Nilly ' ) .
Cotton candy also comes out purple , when mixed , making a significant favorite at fairs .
Cotton candy machines were notoriously unreliable until Gold Medal 's invention of a sprung base in 1949 , and since then , they have manufactured nearly all commercial cotton - candy machines and much of the floss sugar in the US .
Typically , once spun , cotton candy is only marketed by color .
Absent a clear name other than ' blue ' , the distinctive taste of the blue raspberry flavor mix has gone on to become a compound flavor that some other foods ( gum , ice cream , rock candy , fluoride toothpaste ) occasionally borrow ( " cotton - candy flavored ice cream " ) to invoke the nostalgia of cotton candy that people typically only get to experience on vacation or holidays .
Pink bubble gum went through a similar transition from specific branded product to a generic flavor that transcended the original confection , and ' bubble gum flavor ' often shows up in the same product categories as ' cotton candy flavor ' .
MACHINES
Section::::Machines .
In 1978 , the first automated machine was used for the production of cotton candy .
Since then , the creations and innovations of this machine have become greater and greater .
They range in sizes from counter - top accessible to party and carnival size .
Modern machines that are made for commercial use can hold up to of sugar and have compartments for storage of extra flavors .
The rotating bowl at the top spins at 3,450 revolutions per minute .
GALLERY SEE ALSO
* Dragon 's beard candy
* Candy making REFERENCES FURTHER READING
*
The complete Confectioners , pastry , Cook And Baker by M. Sanderson ( Lippincott : Philadelphia )
* Cotton Candy Express , .
" History of Cotton Candy . " Cotton Candy Express .
N.p . , n.d . Web .
Sep 14 , 2011 .
* Cotton Candy .
N.p . , Aug 11 , 2010 .
Web .
Sep 14 , 2011 .