MYSTIC PIZZA Mystic Pizza is a 1988 American coming - of - age film directed by Donald Petrie and starring Annabeth Gish , Julia Roberts , and Lili Taylor .
The film has gained a large cult following since its release and has received relatively positive reviews from critics , who praised the performances by the three lead actresses .
It marked Matt Damon 's film debut .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The film is about the coming of age of two sisters and their friend through the romantic lives of the three main characters : Kat Araújo ( Annabeth Gish ) , Daisy Araújo ( Julia Roberts ) , and Jojo Barbosa ( Lili Taylor ) , who are waitresses at Mystic Pizza owned by Leona ( Conchata Ferrell ) in Mystic , Connecticut .
In the film , Mystic is represented as a fishing town with a large Portuguese - American population .
The film also touches on an Old World work ethic .
Kat and Daisy are sisters and total opposites .
Kat studies astronomy , works at the planetarium in the famous Whaling Museum of The Mystic Seaport , and having been accepted to attend Yale University on a partial scholarship , works at the restaurant at night and as a nanny by day to obtain the rest of the money for school .
Daisy just wants to find lust while trying to get out of Mystic .
Kat is the apple of her Portuguese mother 's eye , while Daisy is not because her mother feels she is more wild and is not as goal - oriented as her younger sister .
Daisy meets a handsome young man named Charles ( Adam Storke ) at a bar .
The two are immediately attracted to each other and begin a relationship , much to her mother 's dismay believing that the relationship will prevent her from becoming like Kat .
However , at a family dinner , his relatives unintentionally make insensitive comments about her ethnicity , and Charles overreacts .
Daisy breaks up with him , believing that his family 's remarks were harmless and that he was simply using her to show up his parents .
There is chemistry between Kat and her Anglo - American employer , Tim ( William R. Moses ) , a father who has hired her to look after his young daughter , Phoebe , while his wife is away .
A relationship develops between them that consummates in sex she believes is love .
However , it results in heartache for Kat when the wife returns and her illusion of love with Tim is shattered .
Daisy and Kat bond when Kat is devastated after Tim 's and her evening together and Daisy comforts her baby sister .
Jojo wants to have sex with her boyfriend Bill ( Vincent D'Onofrio ) , whom she attempted to marry at the beginning of the movie , but fainted after deciding she could n't go through with it .
However , Bill refuses to have sex with her until they are married , which is something she still is n't ready for .
Seeing how she tries to look for every chance to have sex with him , Bill believes that Jojo does n't love him like he does her , and is only after him for sex , and breaks up with her .
Later , a famous TV food critic nicknamed " The Fireside Gourmet " ( Louis Turenne ) visits to the pizzeria to sample a pizza .
Not showing any emotion towards the pizza that he eats , he leaves after eating only a few bites , leaving the girls in suspense since his approval can do wonders for the restaurant .
However , a few days later the critic gives the pizzeria his highest rating , calling it " superb . "
In the end , Kat receives her last paycheck from Tim which covers the money necessary for her tuition .
She tears it up and accepts a check from Leona instead .
Jojo finally agrees to marry Bill and at their wedding , Daisy and Charles reconcile .
The film ends with the three girls together overlooking the water from the balcony of the restaurant , reminiscing about their time together .
CAST * Annabeth Gish as Katherine " Kat " Araújo * Julia Roberts as Daisy Araújo * Lili Taylor as Jojo Barbosa
* Vincent D'Onofrio as Bill Montijo
* William R. Moses as Tim Travers * Adam Storke as Charles Gordon Windsor , Jr. * Conchata Ferrell as Leona
* Joanna Merlin as Mrs. Araújo
* Porscha Radcliffe as Phoebe Travers * Louis Turenne as Hector
" The Fireside Gourmet " Freshette * Janet Zarish as Nicole " Nikki " Travers * Arthur Walsh as Manny
* John Cunningham as Charles Gordon Windsor , Sr .
* Ann Flood as Polly Windsor * Suzanne Shepherd as Aunt Tweedy
* Gene Amoroso as Mr. Barbosa * Sheila Ferrini as Mrs. Barbosa * John Fiore as Jake * Lauren O'Brien as Serena * Matt Damon as Steamer
* Jack Ringstad as Uncle Ned * Jody Raymond as Teresa * Dennis Paiva as himself ( Portuguese - American wedding singer ) PRODUCTION AND FILMING LOCATIONS Section::::Production and filming locations .
The title of the film was inspired by a pizza shop that caught the eye of Hollywood screenwriter Amy Holden Jones : Mystic Pizza restaurant located in Mystic , Connecticut , which has been popular among both locals and tourists since 1973 .
The film 's plot is set in Mystic , but most of the filming locations were in neighboring towns .
The building used for the pizza restaurant was a converted home in Stonington Borough at 70 Water St.
After the film 's release , the real - life Mystic Pizza building in downtown Mystic was renovated to resemble the movie set .
The Windsor family home , the wedding reception restaurant , the Peg Leg Pub pool hall , and the fishing docks were also filmed in Stonington Borough .
The hitchhiking incident takes place on North Main Street in Stonington Town .
The Araújo home is in Pawcatuck , Connecticut ; the lobster business and the wedding church are in Noank , Connecticut .
Tim Travers ' home and the Windsors ' country club are in Watch Hill , Rhode Island .
The most notable scenes that take place in Mystic were filmed at the Mystic Seaport planetarium and at the Mystic River Bascule Bridge .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film opened on October 21 , 1988 , to mostly favorable reviews , with a Rotten Tomatoes score of 77 % for its VHS release .
The film received " two thumbs up " from popular film critics Siskel and Ebert , giving particular praise to the three female leads , including Gish , whom Ebert likened to a " young Katharine Hepburn " .
He also noted that the film " may someday become known for the movie stars it showcased back before they became stars . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
On January 13 , 2009 , Mystic Pizza and Say Anything ... were released as a double feature on DVD .
On April 5 , 2011 , Mystic Pizza was released on Blu - ray .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS