SERENITY PRAYER
The Serenity Prayer is the common name for a prayer written by the American theologian Reinhold Niebuhr ( 1892–1971 ) .
The best - known form is : God , grant me the serenity to accept the things I can not change , Courage to change the things I can , And wisdom to know the difference .
Niebuhr , who first wrote the prayer for a sermon at Heath Evangelical Union Church in Heath , Massachusetts , used it widely in sermons as early as 1934 and first published it in 1951 in a magazine column .
The prayer spread through Niebuhr 's sermons and church groups in the 1930s and 1940s and was adopted and popularized by Alcoholics Anonymous and other twelve - step programs .
VERSIONS Section::::Versions .
The prayer has appeared in many versions .
Reinhold Niebuhr 's versions of the prayer were always printed as a single prose sentence ; printings that set out the prayer as three lines of verse modify the author 's original version .
The most well - known form is a late version , as it includes a reference to grace not found before 1951 : God , give me grace to accept with serenity the things that can not be changed , Courage to change the things which should be changed , and the Wisdom to distinguish the one from the other .
Living one day at a time , Enjoying one moment at a time ,
Accepting hardship as a pathway to peace , Taking , as Jesus did , This sinful world as it is , Not as I would have it , Trusting that You will make all things right , If I surrender to Your will , So that I may be reasonably happy in this life , And supremely happy with You forever in the next .
Amen .
A version ( apparently quoted from memory ) appeared in the " Queries and Answers " column in The New York Times Book Review , July 2 , 1950 , p. 23 , asking for the author of the quotation .
A reply in the same column in the issue for August 13 , 1950 , p. 19 , attributed the prayer to Niebuhr , quoting it as follows : O God and Heavenly Father , Grant to us the serenity of mind to accept that which can not be changed ; courage to change that which can be changed , and wisdom to know the one from the other , through Jesus Christ our Lord , Amen .
Some twelve - step recovery programs use a slightly different version :
God grant me the serenity to accept the things I can not change , Courage to change the things I can , and the Wisdom to know the difference .
EARLY HISTORY
Section::::Early history .
The earliest recorded reference to the prayer is a diary entry from 1932 by Winnifred Crane Wygal , a pupil and collaborator of Reinhold Niebuhr , quoting the prayer and attributing it to Niebuhr .
Several versions of the prayer then appeared in newspaper articles in the early 1930s written by , or reporting on talks given by , Wygal .
In 1940 , Wygal included the following form of the prayer in a book on worship , attributing it to Niebuhr :
O God , give us the serenity to accept what can not be changed , the courage to change what can be changed , and the wisdom to know the one from the other .
Wygal was a longtime YWCA official and all early recorded usages were from women involved in volunteer or educational activities connected to the YWCA .
The earliest printed reference , in 1936 , mentions that during a speech , a Miss Mildred Pinkerton " quotes the prayer , " as if to indicate it was already in a circulation known to the reporter , or that Pinkerton relayed it as a quote , without mentioning its authorship .
A 1937 Christian student publication attributed the prayer to Niebuhr in the following form , which matches the other earliest published forms in requesting " courage to change " before petitioning for serenity : Father , give us courage to change what must be altered , serenity to accept what can not be helped , and the insight to know the one from the other .
Various other authors also cited Niebuhr as the source of the prayer from 1937 on .
The Federal Council of Churches ( NCC ) included the prayer in a book for army chaplains and servicemen in 1944 and the USO circulated the prayer ( with Niebuhr 's permission ) to soldiers on printed cards during World War Two .
In 1950 , in response to questions about the already quite widely known prayer 's provenance , Niebuhr wrote that the prayer " may have been spooking around for years , even centuries , but I do n't think so .
I honestly do believe that I wrote it myself . "
He confirmed this in 1967 .
His daughter , Elisabeth Sifton , thought that Niebuhr had first written it in 1943 , while Niebuhr 's wife Ursula believed it had been written in 1941 or ' 42 , adding that it may have been used in prayers as early as 1934 .
The Serenity Prayer will be listed under Niebuhr 's name in the next edition of the Yale Book of Quotations , whose author Fred R. Shapiro had first raised doubts about , but was later instrumental in confirming Niebuhr 's authorship .
PRECURSORS Section::::Precursors .
Numerous statements of more or less similar sentiments by other authors have been identified and it is likely that more will be found .
The prayer has also been falsely attributed to a variety of other authors .
GENUINE PRECURSORS
Section::::Genuine precursors .
Epictetus wrote : " Make the best use of what is in your power , and take the rest as it happens .
Some things are up to us [ eph ' hêmin ] and some things are not up to us .
Our opinions are up to us , and our impulses , desires , aversions — in short , whatever is our own doing .
Our bodies are not up to us , nor are our possessions , our reputations , or our public offices , or , that is , whatever is not our own doing . "
The 8th - century Indian Buddhist scholar Shantideva of the ancient Nalanda University suggested : If there 's a remedy when trouble strikes , What reason is there for dejection ?
And if there is no help for it , What use is there in being glum ?
The 11th - century Jewish philosopher Solomon ibn Gabirol wrote :
And they said : At the head of all understanding – is realizing what is and what can not be , and the consoling of what is not in our power to change .
The philosopher W.W. Bartley juxtaposes without comment Niebuhr 's prayer with a Mother Goose rhyme ( 1695 ) expressing a similar sentiment :
For every ailment under the sun
There is a remedy , or there is none ; If there be one , try to find it ; If there be none , never mind it .
Friedrich Schiller advocated the first part in 1801 : " Blessed is he , who has learned to bear what he can not change , and to give up with dignity , what he can not save . "
SPURIOUS ATTRIBUTIONS
Section::::Spurious attributions .
The prayer has been variously attributed ( without evidence ) to Thomas Aquinas , Cicero , Augustine , Boethius , Marcus Aurelius , Francis of Assisi , and Thomas More , among others . , a professor of education at the University of Kiel , published a German version of the prayer under the pseudonym " Friedrich Oetinger " .
Wilhelm 's plagiarized version of the prayer became popular in West Germany , where it was widely but falsely attributed to the 18th - century philosopher Friedrich Christoph Oetinger .
USE
BY TWELVE - STEP RECOVERY PROGRAMS Section::::Use by twelve - step recovery programs .
The prayer became more widely known after being brought to the attention of Alcoholics Anonymous in 1941 by an early member , who came upon it in a caption in a " routine New York Herald Tribune obituary " .
AA 's co - founder and staff liked the prayer and had it printed in modified form and handed around .
It has been part of Alcoholics Anonymous ever since , and has also been used in other twelve - step programs .
" Never had we seen so much A.A. in so few words , " noted founder Bill Wilson .
Grapevine , The International Journal of Alcoholics Anonymous , identified Niebuhr as the author ( January 1950 , pp .
6–7 ) , and the AA web site continues to identify Niebuhr as the author .
The original text for this adapted prayer was : Father , give us courage to change what must be altered , serenity to accept what can not be helped , and the insight to know the one from the other .
A slightly different version of the prayer has been widely adopted by twelve - step groups :
God grant us the serenity to accept the things we can not change , the courage to change the things we can , and the wisdom to know the difference .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* The Essential Reinhold Niebuhr : Selected Essays and Addresses , editor : Robert McAfee Brown *
" Transcending and Transforming the World , " in , especially pages 179–81 .
* Elisabeth Sifton , The Serenity Prayer : Faith and Politics in Times of Peace and War , New York , Norton , 2003 .
Elizabeth Sifton is Reinhold Niebuhr 's daughter .
* The Serenity Prayer : Faith in Times of Peace and War , National Public Radio interview with Elisabeth Sifton ( 20 mins ) January 14 , 2005 .
* Archives of Grapevine : * Full documentation ( in German ) of false claims of authorship * The Serenity Prayer origin at Alcoholics Anonymous ; same text also at The Origin of our Serenity Prayer at Alcoholics Anonymous * A Buddhist version of the Serenity Prayer