A WALK IN THE WOODS ( BOOK )
A Walk in the Woods :
Rediscovering America on the Appalachian Trail is a 1998 autobiographical book by travel writer Bill Bryson , describing his attempt to walk the Appalachian Trail with his friend " Stephen Katz " .
The book is written in a humorous style , interspersed with more serious discussions of matters relating to the trail 's history , and the surrounding sociology , ecology , trees , plants , animals and people .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
The book starts with Bryson explaining his curiosity about the Appalachian Trail near his house .
He and his old friend Stephen Katz start hiking the trail from Georgia in the south , and stumble in the beginning with the difficulties of getting used to their equipment ; Bryson also soon realizes how difficult it is to travel with his friend , who is a crude , overweight recovering alcoholic , and even less prepared for the ordeal than he is .
Overburdened , they soon discard much extra food and equipment to lighten their loads .
After hiking for what seemed to him a large distance , they realize they have still barely begun while in Gatlinburg , Tennessee , and that the whole endeavor is simply too much for them .
They skip a huge section of the trail , beginning again in Roanoke , Virginia .
The book recounts Bryson 's desire to seek easier terrain as well as " a powerful urge not to be this far south any longer " .
This section of the hike finally ends ( after nearly 800 miles ( 1,300 km ) of hiking ) with Bryson going on a book tour and Katz returning to Des Moines , Iowa , to work .
In the following months Bryson continues to hike several smaller parts of the trail , including a visit to Centralia , Pennsylvania , the site of a coal seam fire , and eventually reunites with Katz to hike the Hundred - Mile Wilderness in Maine , which again proves too daunting .
The fact that Bryson did not complete the trail is not surprising , since fewer than 25 % of through - hike attempts are successful ; he quotes the older figure of 10 % .
At the time of his attempt to hike the Appalachian Trail , Bryson was in his forties .
FILM ADAPTATION Section::::Film adaptation .
In 2005 , Robert Redford announced , and later confirmed , that he would star in and produce an adaptation of Bryson 's book into a film , and that he would play Bryson .
He also hoped that his erstwhile co - star and friend , Paul Newman , would team up with him to play the role of Katz , although he jokingly expressed doubt as to whether the health - conscious Newman would consider putting on enough weight to accurately portray the rotund Katz ( Newman retired from acting in May 2007 and died in 2008 ) .
In February 2007 , Chris Columbus , director of Home Alone and the first two Harry Potter films , was reported to have agreed to direct the adaptation .
However , in January 2008 , the Hollywood Reporter , while noting that the script was delayed due to the Hollywood writers ' strike , reported that Barry Levinson , the Academy Award – winning director of Rain Man , was in talks to direct .
Redford has said of the project
In February 2012 , it was reported that novelist Richard Russo , during a speech at Union College , confirmed that he was working on the screenplay .
By November 2013 , Nick Nolte had been cast to costar as Katz .
Larry Charles ( of Borat and Brüno ) was briefly attached as director , but eventually the job went to Ken Kwapis , whose most recent film was Big Miracle and who was a key figure on the U.S. television series The Office .
The screenplay was by Michael Arndt , credited as Rick Kerb , and Bill Holderman , who is a producer at Redford 's Wildwood Enterprises .
Shooting began in spring 2014 .
The movie was largely filmed at Amicalola Falls State Park , in Dawsonville , Georgia , including scenes at The Lodge at Amicalola Falls .
The film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival on January 23 , 2015 , and was released in theaters on September 2 , 2015 , by Broad Green Pictures . RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
A Walk In the Woods was named by CNN as the funniest travel book ever written .
A review in the New York Times stated that readers , " may find themselves turning the pages with increasing amusement and anticipation as they discover that they 're in the hands of a satirist of the first rank .
"
The New Yorker described the book as a " wry , well - researched account . " EDITIONS * .
Hardback .
Published by Broadway Books , on May 4 , 1998 .
* . Paperback .
Published by Broadway Books , on May 4 , 1999 .
REFERENCES