EUREKA TOWER Eureka Tower is a skyscraper located in the Southbank precinct of Melbourne , Victoria , Australia .
Construction began in August 2002 and the exterior completed on 1 June 2006 .
The plaza was finished in June 2006 and the building was officially opened on 11 October 2006 .
The project was designed by Melbourne architectural firm Fender Katsalidis Architects and was built by Grocon ( Grollo Australia ) .
The developer of the tower was Eureka Tower Pty Ltd , a joint venture consisting of Daniel Grollo ( Grocon ) , investor Tab Fried and one of the Tower 's architects Nonda Katsalidis .
It was the world 's tallest residential tower when measured to its highest floor , until surpassed by Ocean Heights and the HHHR Tower in Dubai .
It is the second tallest building in Australia , behind Q1 , Queensland , and is the tallest to roof ( excluding spire ) .
As of 2016 it was the 15th tallest residential building in the world .
DESIGN AND FEATURES Section::::Design and features .
Eureka Tower is named after the Eureka Stockade , a rebellion during the Victorian gold rush in 1854 .
This has been incorporated into the design , with the building 's gold crown representing the gold rush and a red stripe representing the blood spilt during the revolt .
The blue glass cladding that covers most of the building represents the blue background of the stockade 's flag and the white lines also represent the Eureka Stockade flag .
The white horizontal stripes also represent markings on a surveyor 's measuring staff .
At the base of the tower is an art installation containing bees inside a white box , resembling a manmade beehive .
There are two regular sized bees outside the box , and one queen bee on the top .
The gold colour of the bees complements the gold at the top of the tower .
The installation was created by Richard Stringer and Nonda Katsalidis , and was complete in December 2007 .
When measured either by the height of its roof , or by the height of its highest habitable floor , Eureka Tower was the tallest residential building in the world when completed .
It is also currently the building with the most floors available for residential occupancy in the world .
The building stands in height , with 91 storeys above ground plus one basement level .
It is one of only seven buildings in the world with 90 or more storeys and is the equal 77th tallest building in the world .
It is also the second - tallest building in Australia and the tallest building in Melbourne .
The single level basement and first 9 floors contain car parking .
The building 's proximity to the water table as well as the Yarra River made the construction of a basement car park uneconomical .
In all , there are 84 floors of apartments ( including some floors shared between car parking and apartments ) , with the remainder being used for building facilities and the observation deck .
According to the ranking system developed by the U.S.-based Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat , the Eureka Tower qualifies as the tallest building in three of the four categories in which heights are ranked , namely height to the floor of the highest occupied floor of the building .
For comparison , the Q1 apartment tower on the Gold Coast has its highest habitable floor ( the observation deck ) , reaching a height of , some lower than Eureka Tower 's highest habitable floor .
Q1 's highest penthouse apartment is whilst Eureka 's penthouse is high .
However , the spire attached to the top of Q1 exceeds the Eureka Tower in the other two categories , namely " Height to the tip of spire , pinnacle , antenna , mast or flag pole " – in this case , spire – and height to architectural top of the building .
SPECIFICATIONS
* 556 apartments
* 13 lifts travelling up to * of windows
* 3,680 stairs * of concrete * of reinforced steel
* Building weighs Section::::Specifications .
Floors 82 to 87 , marketed as Summit Levels , contain only one apartment per floor , each with an original price of A$ 7 million for the unfurnished floor space alone .
The highest floors of the tower house an observation deck ( level 88 ) , restaurant ( level 89 ) , communications room and balcony ( 90 ) and water tanks ( 90 and 91 ) .
A system of pumps constantly moves water between the two 300,000 litre tanks to counteract wind - induced oscillations .
OBSERVATION DECK ( EUREKA SKYDECK 88 )
Section::::Observation deck ( Eureka Skydeck 88 ) .
The observation deck ( Eureka Skydeck 88 ) occupies the entire 88th floor of the Eureka Tower and is the highest public vantage point in a building in the Southern Hemisphere at .
It opened to the public on 15 May 2007 .
An entry fee applies to access the Skydeck .
The Skydeck features thirty viewfinders that help visitors to pinpoint numerous significant landmarks around all parts of Melbourne , along with several free binoculars .
There is a small outside area called The Terrace which is closed in high winds .
There is also a glass cube called The Edge , which extends itself from the building to hang over the edge of the tower and add to the viewing experience .
On 10 January 2005 , Grocon , the firm building Eureka Tower , proposed adding a communications mast / observation tower .
The proposal is currently before the local planning commission .
This mast would be a significant structure , used for providing an adventure climb to the tip of the summit .
On 16 April 2006 , a new proposal was announced that the construction company and developers were considering options for the building to have a " skywalk " that would take daring people up high .
The proposed structure may also include a communications tower .
THE EDGE Section::::The Edge .
Skydeck 88 features The Edge – a glass cube which projects out from the building with visitors inside , suspended almost above the ground .
When one enters , the glass is opaque as the cube moves out over the edge of the building .
Once fully extended over the edge , the glass becomes clear .
AIR PLANT EXPERIMENT Section::::Air plant experiment .
From June 2013 , Grant Harris , environmental scientist , Stu Jones structural engineer , and Lloyd Godman , an ecological artist , carried out an experiment by placing Tillandsia plants on four locations on the tower .
Two different species were placed at four levels : 56 , 65 , 91 , and on top at level 92 .
These plants grow with no soil or watering / nutrient system and on Eureka Tower were exposed to the elements where they proved to grow through winter , salt winds over and a hot dry summer .
The plants were checked over a 12-month period , grew and even flowered .
As far as can be ascertained this is the highest building with plants on and the experiment paved the way for utilizing Tillandsia on high - rise buildings .
CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Construction .
Construction began August 2002 and took 4 years and 2 months .
The tower was built using reinforced concrete using a slipform method .
Eureka Tower 's lift core superseded the height of Rialto Towers on 9 November 2004 .
On 23 May 2006 , the crane on top of the tower was dismantled by a smaller crane , which was dismantled by a smaller crane that could be taken down the service elevator .
Eureka Tower has 24 carat ( 99.9 % ) gold plated glass windows on the top 10 floors of the building .
Installation of the gold glass was completed in March 2006 .
Apartment owners and tenants had taken up residence in the building between Ground Level and Level 80 as of July 2006 .
On 11 October 2006 , the tower was officially opened by then Premier of Victoria , Steve Bracks .
CONSTRUCTION METHODS Section::::Construction methods .
A 2-floor Grocon - Lubeca jumpform system was used to halve work time , concrete and joints required in the core , as well as increasing structural integrity .
Grocon purchased the Singapore company Lubeca in 2000 , and then did more R&D to design the 2-floor jumpform system .
EUREKA CLIMB Section::::Eureka Climb .
Since 2012 the Eureka Climb event has been held annually .
Participants climb 1642 steps to the observation deck .
The current record is 7 minutes to climb up 88 floors .
GALLERY SEE ALSO * List of tallest buildings in Melbourne * List of tallest buildings in Australia
* Australia 108 REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Eureka Tower Observation Deck Website * Eureka Tower on CTBUH Skyscraper Center
* Eureka Tower apartments
* Emporis Page
* Eureka Tower , Melbourne , Victoria - Design Build Network