THE BOY WHO CRIED WOLF
The Boy Who Cried Wolf is one of Aesop 's Fables , numbered 210 in the Perry Index .
From it is derived the English idiom " to cry wolf " , defined as " to give a false alarm " in Brewer 's Dictionary of Phrase and Fable and glossed by the Oxford English Dictionary " as meaning to make false claims , with the result that subsequent true claims are disbelieved .
THE FABLE Section::::The fable .
The tale concerns a shepherd boy who repeatedly tricks nearby villagers into thinking wolves are attacking his flock .
When a wolf actually does appear and the boy again calls for help , the villagers believe that it is another false alarm and the sheep are eaten by the wolf .
In later English - language poetic versions of the fable , the wolf also eats the boy .
This happens in Fables for Five Year Olds ( 1830 ) by John Hookham Frere , in William Ellery Leonard 's Aesop & Hyssop ( 1912 ) , and in his interpretation of Aesop 's Fables ( 1965 ) by Louis Untermeyer .
The moral stated at the end of the Greek version is , " this shows how liars are rewarded : even if they tell the truth , no one believes them " .
It echoes a statement attributed to Aristotle by Diogenes Laërtius in his The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers , in which the sage was asked what those who tell lies gain by it
and he answered " that when they speak truth they are not believed " .
William Caxton similarly closes his version with the remark that " " .
FABLE 'S HISTORY
Section::::Fable 's history .
The story dates from Classical times , but , since it was recorded only in Greek and not translated into Latin until the 15th century , it only began to gain currency after it appeared in Heinrich Steinhöwel 's collection of the fables and so spread through the rest of Europe .
For this reason , there was no agreed title for the story .
Caxton titles it " " ( 1484 ) , Hieronymus Osius "
The boy who lied " ( " " , 1574 ) , Francis Barlow " Of the herd boy and the farmers " ( " " , 1687 ) , Roger L'Estrange " A boy and false alarms " ( 1692 ) , and George Fyler Townsend
" The shepherd boy and the wolf " ( 1867 ) .
It was under the final title that Edward Hughes set it as the first of ten " Songs from Aesop 's fables " for children 's voices and piano , in a poetic version by Peter Westmore ( 1965 ) .
Teachers have used the fable as a cautionary tale about telling the truth , but an educational experiment in the first decade of the 21st century suggested that reading " The Boy Who Cried Wolf " increased children 's likelihood of lying .
On the other hand , reading a book on George Washington and the cherry tree decreased this likelihood dramatically .
The suggestibility and favourable outcome of the behaviour described , therefore , seems the key to moral instruction of the young .
However , when dealing with the moral behaviour of adults , Samuel Croxall asks , referencing political alarmism , " when we are alarmed with imaginary dangers in respect of the public , till the cry grows quite stale and threadbare , how can it be expected we should know when to guard ourselves against real ones ? "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Laura Gibbs ' gallery of 15th–20th century book illustrations of the fable