NUCLEAR PROPULSION Nuclear propulsion includes a wide variety of propulsion methods that fulfill the promise of the Atomic Age by using some form of nuclear reaction as their primary power source .
The idea of using nuclear material for propulsion dates back to the beginning of the 20th century .
In 1903 it was hypothesised that radioactive material , radium , might be a suitable fuel for engines to propel cars , boats , and planes .
H. G. Wells picked up this idea in his 1914 fiction work
The World Set Free .
SURFACE SHIPS , SUBMARINES , AND TORPEDOES Section::::Surface ships , submarines , and torpedoes .
Nuclear - powered vessels are mainly military submarines , and aircraft carriers .
Russia and America are the only countries that currently have nuclear - powered civilian surface ships , including icebreakers and Aircraft carriers .
America currently ( as of July 2018 ) has 11 Aircraft carriers in service , and all are powered by nuclear reactors .
They use nuclear reactors as their power plants .
For more detailed articles see : CIVILIAN MARITIME USE * Nuclear marine propulsion for civil use
* List of civilian nuclear ships MILITARY MARITIME USE
* Nuclear navy
* List of United States Naval reactors
* Soviet naval reactors
* Nuclear submarine
TORPEDO
Section::::Torpedo .
Russia 's Channel One Television news broadcast a picture and details of a nuclear - powered torpedo called Status-6 on about 12 November 2015 .
The torpedo was stated as having a range of up to 10,000 km , a cruising speed of 100 knots , and operational depth of up to 1000 metres below the surface .
The torpedo carried a 100-megaton nuclear warhead .
One of the suggestions emerging in the summer of 1958 from the first meeting of the scientific advisory group that became JASON was for " a nuclear - powered torpedo that could roam the seas almost indefinitely " .
AIRCRAFT AND MISSILES Section::::Aircraft and missiles .
Research into nuclear - powered aircraft was pursued during the Cold War by the United States and the Soviet Union as they would presumably allow a country to keep nuclear bombers in the air for extremely long periods of time , a useful tactic for nuclear deterrence .
Neither country created any operational nuclear aircraft .
One design problem , never adequately solved , was the need for heavy shielding to protect the crew from radiation sickness .
Since the advent of ICBMs in the 1960s the tactical advantage of such aircraft was greatly diminished and respective projects were cancelled .
Because the technology was inherently dangerous it was not considered in non - military contexts .
Nuclear - powered missiles were also researched and discounted during the same period .
Aircraft * Convair X-6 * Myasishchev M-50 - Aviation Week hoax
* Aircraft Nuclear Propulsion - General Electric 's project to build a nuclear - powered bomber *
Tupolev Tu-95LAL
Missiles
* Project Pluto - which developed the SLAM missile , that used a nuclear - powered air ramjet for propulsion
*
Burevestnik nuclear - powered cruise missile announced by Vladimir Putin in 2018 .
SPACECRAFT Section::::Spacecraft .
Many types of nuclear propulsion have been proposed , and some of them ( e.g. NERVA ) tested for spacecraft applications .
NUCLEAR PULSE
PROPULSION
* Project Orion , first engineering design study of nuclear pulse ( i.e. , atomic explosion ) propulsion * Project Daedalus , 1970s
British Interplanetary Society study of a fusion rocket * Project Longshot , US Naval Academy - NASA nuclear pulse propulsion design
* AIMStar , a proposed Antimatter - catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion craft that uses clouds of antiprotons to initiate fission and fusion within fuel pellets * ICAN - II , a proposed manned interplanetary spacecraft that used the Antimatter - catalyzed nuclear pulse propulsion engine as its main form of propulsion * External Pulsed Plasma Propulsion ( EPPP ) , a propulsion concept by NASA that derives its thrust from plasma waves generated from a series of small , supercritical fission / fusion pulses behind an object in space .
NUCLEAR
THERMAL ROCKET
* Bimodal Nuclear Thermal Rockets conduct nuclear fission reactions similar to those safely employed at nuclear power plants including submarines .
The energy is used to heat the liquid hydrogen propellant .
Advocates of nuclear - powered spacecraft point out that at the time of launch , there is almost no radiation released from the nuclear reactors .
The nuclear - powered rockets are not used to lift off the Earth .
Nuclear thermal rockets can provide great performance advantages compared to chemical propulsion systems .
Nuclear power sources could also be used to provide the spacecraft with electrical power for operations and scientific instrumentation .
* NERVA - NASA 's Nuclear Energy for Rocket Vehicle Applications , a US nuclear thermal rocket program
* Project Rover - an American project to develop a nuclear thermal rocket .
The program ran at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratory from 1955 through 1972 .
* Project Timberwind 1987 - 1991
RAMJET * Bussard ramjet , a conceptual interstellar fusion ramjet named after Robert W. Bussard .
DIRECT NUCLEAR
* Fission fragment rocket
* Fission sail * Fusion rocket
* Gas core reactor rocket
* Nuclear salt - water rocket * Radioisotope rocket *
Nuclear photonic rocket
NUCLEAR ELECTRIC
* Nuclear electric rocket
* Project Prometheus , NASA development of nuclear propulsion for long - duration spaceflight , begun in 2003 RUSSIAN FEDERAL SPACE AGENCY DEVELOPMENT Section::::Russian Federal Space Agency development .
Anatolij Perminov , head of the Russian Federal Space Agency , announced that it is going to develop a nuclear - powered spacecraft for deep space travel .
Preliminary design was done by 2013 , and 9 more years are planned for development ( in space assembly ) .
The price is set at 17 billion rubles ( 600 million dollars ) .
The nuclear propulsion would have mega - watt class , provided necessary funding , Roscosmos Head stated .
This system would consist of a space nuclear power and a matrix of ion engines . " ...
Hot inert gas temperature of 1500 ° C from the reactor turns turbines .
The turbine turns the generator and compressor , which circulates the working fluid in a closed circuit .
The working fluid is cooled in the radiator .
The generator produces electricity for the same ion ( plasma ) engine ... "
According to him , the propulsion will be able to support human mission to Mars , with cosmonauts staying on the Red planet for 30 days .
This journey to Mars with nuclear propulsion and a steady acceleration would take six weeks , instead of eight months by using chemical propulsion – assuming thrust of 300 times higher than that of chemical propulsion .
VEHICLES CARS Section::::Vehicles .
Section::::Cars .
The idea of making cars that used radioactive material , radium , for fuel dates back to at least 1903 .
Analysis of the concept in 1937 indicated that the driver of such a vehicle might need a 50-ton lead barrier to shield them from radiation .
In 1941 Dr R M Langer , a Caltech physicist , espoused the idea of a car powered by uranium-235 in the January edition of Popular Mechanics .
He was followed by William Bushnell Stout , designer of the Stout Scarab and former Society of Engineers president , on 7 August 1945 in the New York Times .
The problem of shielding the reactor continued to render the idea impractical .
In December 1945 , a John Wilson of London , announced he had created an atomic car .
This created considerable interest .
The Minister of Fuel and Power along with a large press contingent turned out to view it .
The car did not show and Wilson claimed that it had been sabotaged .
A later court case found that he was a fraud and there was no nuclear - powered car .
Despite the shielding problem , through the late 1940s and early 1950s debate continued around the possibility of nuclear - powered cars .
The development of nuclear - powered submarines and ships , and experiments to develop a nuclear - powered aircraft at that time kept the idea alive .
Russian papers in the mid-1950s reported the development of a nuclear - powered car by Professor V P Romadin , but again shielding proved to be a problem .
It was claimed that its laboratories had overcome the shielding problem with a new alloy that absorbed the rays .
In 1958 at the height of the 1950s American automobile culture there were at least four theoretical nuclear - powered concept cars proposed , the American Ford Nucleon and Studebaker Packard Astral , as well as the French Simca Fulgur designed by Robert Opron and the Arbel .
Apart from these concept models , none were built and no automotive nuclear power plants ever made .
Chrysler engineer C R Lewis had discounted the idea in 1957 because of estimates that an engine would be required by a car .
His view was that an efficient means of storing energy was required for nuclear power to be practical .
Despite this , Chrysler 's stylists in 1958 drew up some possible designs .
In 1959 it was reported that Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company had developed a new rubber compound that was light and absorbed radiation , obviating the need for heavy shielding .
A reporter at the time considered it might make nuclear - powered cars and aircraft a possibility .
Ford made another potentially nuclear - powered model in 1962 for the Seattle World 's Fair , the Ford Seattle - ite XXI .
This also never went beyond the initial concept .
In 2009 , for the hundredth anniversary of General Motors ' acquisition of Cadillac , Loren Kulesus created concept art depicting a car powered by thorium .
OTHER Section::::Other .
The Chrysler TV-8 was an experimental concept tank designed by Chrysler in the 1950s .
The tank was intended to be a nuclear - powered medium tank capable of land and amphibious warfare .
The design was never mass - produced .
The Mars rover Curiosity is powered by a radioisotope thermoelectric generator ( RTG ) , like the successful Viking 1 and Viking 2 Mars landers in 1976 .
SEE ALSO
* Safe Affordable Fission Engine * Electrically powered spacecraft propulsion
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* S. K. Borowski et al . , " Nuclear Thermal Rocket / Vehicle Design Options for Future NASA Missions to the Moon and Mars " , U. S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration , NASA - TM-0107071 , September 1993 .
* W. E. Moeckel , " Propulsion Systems for Manned Exploration of the Solar System , " U. S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration , NASA TM X-1864 , August 1969 .
* G. R. Schmidt , J. A. Bonometti and P. J. Morton , "
Nuclear Pulse Propulsion :
Orion and Beyond , " Am .
Inst .
Aero .
Astro . , AIAA 2000 - 3856 , July 2000 .
* RKA home page in English
* RKA home page in Russian * 2006 - 2015 RKA Fundamental Space Research Program
* Russian Space Program * Atomic Rockets -- Realistic Designs ten speculative concepts from NASA * RW Bussard , An advanced fusion energy system for outer - planet space propulsion , 2003
* A Survey of Nuclear Propulsion Technologies for Space Applications , A. Micks , March 15 , 2013
* Dreams of Nuclear Flight - The NEPA and ANP programs