EASTERN TIME ZONE
The Eastern Time Zone ( ET ) is a time zone encompassing part or all of 22 states in the eastern part of the contiguous United States , parts of eastern Canada , the state of Quintana Roo in Mexico , Panama in Central America , and the Caribbean Islands .
Places that use Eastern Standard Time ( EST ) when observing standard time ( autumn / winter ) are 5 hours behind Coordinated Universal Time ( ) .
Eastern Daylight Time ( EDT ) , when observing daylight saving time DST ( spring / summer ) is 4 hours behind Coordinated Universal Time ( ) .
In the northern parts of the time zone , on the second Sunday in March , at 2:00 a.m. EST , clocks are advanced to 3:00 a.m. EDT leaving a one - hour " gap " .
On the first Sunday in November , at 2:00 a.m. EDT , clocks are moved back to 1:00 a.m. EST , thus " duplicating " one hour .
Southern parts of the zone ( Panama and the Caribbean ) do not observe daylight saving time .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The boundaries of the Eastern Time Zone have moved westward since the Interstate Commerce Commission took over time - zone management from railroads in 1938 .
For example , the easternmost and northernmost counties in Kentucky were added to the zone in the 1940s , and in 1961 most of the state went Eastern .
In 2000 , Wayne County , on the Tennessee border , switched from Central to Eastern .
In March 2018 , the Florida Legislature passed a bill requesting authorization from Congress for year - round daylight savings time , which would effectively put Florida on Atlantic Standard Time year - round ( except for west of the Apalachicola River , which would be on Eastern Standard Time year - round ) .
DAYLIGHT SAVING TIME
Section::::Daylight Saving Time .
The Uniform Time Act of 1966 ruled that daylight saving time would run from the last Sunday of April until the last Sunday in October in the United States .
The act was amended to make the first Sunday in April the beginning of daylight saving time as of 1987 .
The Energy Policy Act of 2005 extended daylight saving time in the United States beginning in 2007 .
So local times change at 2:00 a.m. EST to 3:00 a.m. EDT on the second Sunday in March and return at 2:00 a.m. EDT to 1:00 a.m. EST on the first Sunday in November .
In Canada , the time changes as it does in the United States .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In Canada , the following provinces and territories are part of the Eastern Time Zone :
* Ontario , most of * Quebec , most of
* Nunavut , most of All observe Daylight Saving Time in sync with the United States , with very localized exceptions .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The boundary between time zones is set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations , with the boundary between the Eastern and Central Time Zones being specifically detailed at 49 CFR 71 .
Seventeen states and Washington , D.C. are located entirely within the Eastern Time Zone .
They are : *
Connecticut * Delaware *
Georgia
* Maine * Maryland * Massachusetts * New Hampshire * New Jersey * New York * North Carolina
* Ohio
* Pennsylvania * Rhode Island * South Carolina
* Vermont * Virginia
*
West Virginia
Five states are partly in the Eastern Time Zone , with the remaining portions in the Central Time Zone .
They are : * Florida - peninsula and Big Bend regions east of the Apalachicola River along with portions of Gulf County south of the Intracoastal Waterway .
* Indiana - all except for northwest ( Gary ) and southwest ( Evansville ) regions * Kentucky - eastern 60 %
* Michigan : all , except for the four counties that border Wisconsin : Gogebic , Iron , Dickinson , and Menominee
* Tennessee :
East Tennessee
* Alabama : Phenix City and surrounding areas .
( unofficial )
Eastern Time is also used somewhat as a de facto official time for all of the United States because it includes the capital city ( Washington D.C. ) , the most populous city ( New York City ) , and half of the country 's population .
For this reason , media organizations will often report when events happened or are scheduled to happen in Eastern Time even if they occurred in another time zone , and TV schedules are also almost always posted in Eastern Time .
In the United States , all nationally televised morning programs ( except Good Morning America Weekend Edition which some ABC affiliates on the east coast air on a tape - delay ) , some daytime talk shows , evening newscasts , most talent and awards shows , and any other nationally televised event that airs live on American television during prime time and on the weekends ( such as sports television ) are broadcast live in the Eastern Time Zone .
Major professional sports leagues also post all game times in Eastern time , even if both teams are from the same time zone , outside of Eastern Time .
For example , a game time between two teams from Pacific Time Zone will still be posted in Eastern time ( for example , one may see " Seattle at Los Angeles " with " 10:00 p.m. " posted as the start time for the game , often without even clarifying the time is posted in Eastern time ) .
Most cable television and national broadcast networks advertise airing times in Eastern time .
National broadcast networks ( ABC , CBS , The CW , FOX , NBC ) generally have two primary feeds , an eastern feed for Eastern and Central time zones , and a tape - delayed western feed for the Pacific Time Zone .
The prime time is set on Eastern and Pacific at 8:00 p.m. , with the Central time zone stations receiving the eastern feed at 7:00 p.m. local time .
Mountain Time Zone stations receive a separate feed at 7:00 p.m. local time .
As Arizona does not observe daylight saving time , during the summer months , it has its own feed at 7:00 p.m. local time .
Cable channels with a separate western feed ( such as HBO , whose western feed is called " HBOW " ) generally air the same programming as the eastern feed delayed by three hours .
Other cable networks such as the Discovery family of networks repeat their prime time programming three hours later ; this allows for the same show to be advertised as airing at " 8:00 p.m. E / P " ( that is , " 8:00 p.m. Eastern and Pacific time " ) .
Networks specializing in the airing of sports events , such as ESPN , advertise all of their programming in Eastern and Pacific , incorporating the 3-hour time difference ( as in " 8:00 p.m. Eastern/5:00 p.m. Pacific " ) and leaving viewers in the remaining time zones to calculate start time in their own areas .
MEXICO
*
Quintana Roo : this eastern state followed CST for an almost-17-year period ( 1982 to some time in 1998 ) .
After more than two years of lobbying by a coalition of local hotel owners with the backing of the state 's government , the Federal government approved the change to Quintana Roo 's time zone , moving it from Central Standard Time ( CST ) to Eastern Standard Time ( EST ) .
The time change took effect on February 1 , 2015 .
CARIBBEAN ISLANDS Section::::Caribbean Islands .
The Bahamas officially observe both Eastern Standard Time during the winter months and Eastern Daylight Time during the summer months .
Cuba generally follows the U.S. with Eastern Standard Time in the winter , and Eastern Daylight Time in the summer , but the exact day of change varies year to year .
Cayman Islands , Barbados , Haiti , and Jamaica use Eastern Standard Time year - round .
The Turks and Caicos Islands used to follow eastern time with daylight saving but switched in 2015 to the Atlantic Time Zone .
CENTRAL AND SOUTH
AMERICA Section::::Central and South America .
The Central American countries from Guatemala to Costa Rica use Central Standard Time year - round .
Panama in Central America uses Eastern Standard Time year - round .
The state of Acre and the southwest part of the state of Amazonas ( both in Brazil ) , along with Colombia , Ecuador ( except for the Galápagos Islands , which uses Central Standard Time ) , and Peru in South America also use EST year - round .
SEE ALSO * Effects of time zones on North American broadcasting
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official U.S. time in the Eastern time zone * North American Time Zone border data and images * World time zone map * U.S. time zone map * History of U.S. time zones and UTC conversion
* Canada time zone map
* Time zones for major world cities
* Official times across Canada * Federal Regulations defining time zones