COWPEA
The cowpea ( Vigna unguiculata ) is an annual herbaceous legume from the genus Vigna .
Due to its tolerance for sandy soil and low rainfall
it is an important crop in the semi - arid regions across Africa and other countries .
It requires very few inputs , as the plant 's root nodules are able to fix atmospheric nitrogen , making it a valuable crop for resource - poor farmers and well - suited to intercropping with other crops .
The whole plant is used as forage for animals , with its use as cattle feed likely responsible for its name .
Four subspecies of cowpea are recognised , of which three are cultivated .
There is a high level of morphological diversity found within the species with large variations in the size , shape and structure of the plant .
Cowpeas can be erect , semi - erect ( trailing ) or climbing .
The crop is mainly grown for its seeds , which are extremely high in protein , although the leaves and immature seed pods can also be consumed .
Cultivated cowpeas are known by the common names black - eyed pea , southern pea , yardlong bean , catjang , and crowder pea .
They were domesticated in Africa and are one of the oldest crops to be farmed .
A second domestication event probably occurred in Asia , before they spread into Europe and the Americas .
The seeds are usually cooked and made into stews and curries , or ground into flour or paste .
Most cowpeas are grown on the African continent , particularly in Nigeria and Niger which account for 66 % of world production .
A 1997 estimate suggests that cowpeas are cultivated on , have a worldwide production of 3 million tonnes and are consumed by 200 million people on a daily basis .
Insect infestation is a major constraint to the production of cowpea , sometimes causing losses of over 90 % loss in yield .
The legume pod borer Maruca vitrata is the main pre - harvest pest of the cowpea and the cowpea weevil Callosobruchus maculatus the main post - harvest pest .
TAXONOMY AND ETYMOLOGY Section::::Taxonomy and etymology .
Vigna unguiculata is a member of the Vigna ( peas and beans ) genus .
Unguiculata is Latin for " with a small claw " , which reflects the small stalks on the flower petals .
All cultivated cowpeas are found within the universally accepted V. unguiculata subspecies unguiculata classification , which is then commonly divided into four cultivar groups : Unguiculata , Biflora , Sesquipedalis , and Textilis .
Some well - known common names for cultivated cowpeas include black - eye pea , southern pea , yardlong bean , catjang , and crowder pea .
The classification of the wild relatives within V. unguiculata is more complicated , with over 20 different names having been used and between 3 and 10 subgroups described .
The original subgroups of stenophylla , dekindtiana and tenuis appear to be common in all taxonomic treatments , while the variations pubescens and protractor were raised to sub - species level by a 1993 charactisation .
The first written reference of the word ' cowpea ' appeared in 1798 in the United States .
The name was most likely acquired due to their use as a fodder crop for cows .
Black - eyed pea , a common name used for the unguiculata cultivar group , describes the presence of a distinctive black spot at the hilum of the seed .
Black - eyed peas were first introduced to the southern states in the United States and some early varieties had peas squashed closely together in their pods , leading to the other common names of southern pea and crowder - pea .
Sesquipedalis in Latin means " foot and a half long " , and this subspecies which arrived in the United States via Asia is characterised by unusually long pods , leading to the common names of yardlong bean , asparagus bean and Chinese long - bean .
+ Common names of Vigna unguiculata unguiculata cultivar groups
Group Common name DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
There is a large morphological diversity found within the crop , and the growth conditions and grower preferences for each variety vary from region to region .
However , as the plant is primarily self pollinating its genetic diversity within varieties is relatively low .
Cowpeas can either be short and bushy ( as short as ) or act like a vine by climbing supports or trailing along the ground ( to a height of ) .
The tap root can penetrate to a depth of after eight weeks .
The size and shape of the leaves varies greatly , making this an important feature for classifying and distinguishing cowpea varieties .
Another distinguishing feature of cowpeas are the long peduncles which hold the flowers and seed pods .
One peduncle can support four or more seed pods .
Flower colour varies through different shades of purple , pink , yellow and white and blue .
Seeds and seed pods from wild cowpeas are very small , while cultivated varieties can have pods between long .
A pod can contain 6–13 seeds that are usually kidney shaped , although the seeds become more spherical the more restricted they are within the pod .
Their texture and colour is very diverse .
They can have a smooth or rough coat , and be speckled , mottled or blotchy .
Colours include white , cream , green , red , brown and black or various combinations .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Compared to most other important crops , little is known about the domestication , dispersal and cultivation history of the cowpea .
Although there is no archaeological evidence for early cowpea cultivation the centre of diversity of the cultivated cowpea is West Africa , leading an early consensus that this is the likely centre of origin and place of early domestication .
New research using molecular markers has suggested that domestication may have instead occurred in East Africa and currently both theories carry equal weight .
While it may be uncertain when cultivation began it is still considered one of the oldest domesticated crops .
Remains of charred cowpeas from rock shelters in Central Ghana have been dated to the second millennium BCE .
In 2300 BC the cowpea is believed to have made its way into South East Asia where secondary domestication events may have occurred .
From there they traveled north to the Mediterranean , where they were used by the Greeks and Romans .
The first written references to the cowpea were in 300 BC and they probably reached Central and North America during the slave trade through the 17th to early 19th centuries .
CULTIVATION Section::::Cultivation .
Cowpeas thrive in poor dry conditions , growing well in soils up to 85 % sand .
This makes them a particularly important crop in arid , semi - desert regions where not many other crops will grow .
As well as an important source of food for humans in poor arid regions
the crop can also be used as feed for livestock .
Its nitrogen fixing ability means that as well as functioning as a sole - crop , the cowpea can be effectively intercropped with sorghum , millet , maize , cassava or cotton .
The optimum temperature for cowpea growth is , making it only available as a summer crop for most of the world .
It grows best in regions with an annual rainfall of between .
The ideal soils are sandy and it has better tolerance for infertile and acid soil than most other crops .
Generally for the erect varieties and for the climbing and trailing varieties .
The grain can be harvested after about 100 days or the whole plant used as forage after approximately 120 days .
Leaves can be picked from 4 weeks after planting .
These characteristics , along with its low fertilisation requirements , make the cowpea an ideal crop for resource poor farmers living in the Sahel region of West Africa .
Early maturing varieties of the crop can thrive in the semi - arid climate , where rainfall is often less than .
The timing of planting is crucial as the plant must mature during the seasonal rains .
The crop is mostly intercroped with pearl millet and plants are selected that provide both grain and fodder value instead of the more specialised varieties .
Storage of the grains can be problematic in Africa due to potential infestation by post - harvest pests .
Traditional methods of protecting stored grain include using the insecticidal properties of Neem extracts , mixing the grain with ash or sand , using vegetable oils , combining ash and oil into a soap solution or treating the cowpea pods with smoke or heat .
More modern methods include storage in airtight containers , using gamma irradiation , or heating or freezing the grain .
Temperatures of kill the weevil larvae , leading to a recent push to develop cheap forms of solar heating that can be used to treat stored grain .
One of the more recent developments is the use a cheap reusable double bagging system ( called PICs )
that asphyxiates the cowpea weevils .
PESTS AND DISEASES Section::::Pests and diseases .
Insects are a major factor in the low yields of African cowpea crops , and they affect each tissue component and developmental stage of the plant .
In bad infestations insect pressure is responsible for over 90 % loss in yield .
The legume pod borer , Maruca vitrata , is the main pre - harvest pest of the cowpea .
Other important pests include pod sucking bugs , thrips and the post - harvest cowpea weevil , Callosobruchus maculatus .
M. vitrata causes the most damage to the growing cowpea due to their large host range and cosmopolitan distribution .
It causes damage to the flower buds , flowers and pods of the plant with infestations resulting in a 20–88 % loss of yield .
While the insect can cause damage through all growth stages , most of the damage occurs during flowering .
Biological control has had limited success , so most preventative methods rely on the use of agrichemicals .
Genetically modified cowpeas are being developed to express the cry protein from Bacillus thuringiensis , which is toxic to lepidopteran species including the Maruca .
Severe C. maculatus , infestations can affect 100 % of the stored peas and cause up to 60 % grain loss within a few months .
The weevil generally enters the cowpea pod through holes pre - harvest and lays eggs on the dry seed .
The larvae burrow their way into the seed , feeding on the endosperm .
The weevil develops into a sexually mature adult within the seed .
An individual bruchid will lay 20–40 eggs , and in optimal conditions each egg can develop into a reproductively active adult in 3 weeks .
The most common methods of protection involve the use of insecticides , the main pesticides used being carbomates , synthetic pyrethoids and organophosphates .
Cowpea is susceptible to nematode , fungal , bacterial and virus diseases , which can result in substantial loss in yield .
Common diseases include blights , root rot , wilt , powdery mildew , root knot , rust and leaf spot .
The plant is susceptible to mosaic viruses , which cause a green mosaic pattern to appear in the leaves .
The cowpea mosaic virus ( CPMV ) , discovered in 1959 , has become a useful research tool .
CPMV is stable and easy to propagate to a high yield , making it useful in vector development and protein expression systems .
One of the plant 's defenses against some insect attacks is the cow pea trypsin inhibitor ( CpTI ) .
CpTI is the only gene obtained outside of B. thuringiensis that has been inserted into a commercially available genetically modified crop .
Besides biotic stresses , cowpea also faces various challenges in different parts of the world like drought , heat and cold .
Drought lowers the growth rate and development and reduces yield ultimately , although cowpea is considered as moderately drought tolerant to most other crops .
Drought at the pre - flowering stage in cowpea can reduces the yield potential by 360 kg / ha .
Crop wild relatives are the prominent source of genetic material , which can be tapped to improve biotic / abiotic tolerance in crops .
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture ( IITA ) , Nigeria and Institut de I'Environment ae de Recherches Agricoles ( INERA ) are working on cowpea crop wild relatives to tap the genetic diversity and transfer that into cultivars to make them more tolerant to different stresses and adaptive to climate change .
CULINARY USE Section::::Culinary use .
Cowpeas are grown mostly for their edible beans , although the leaves , green peas and green pea pods can also be consumed , meaning the cowpea can be used as a food source before the dried peas are harvested .
Like other legumes , cowpeas are cooked to make them edible , usually by boiling .
Cowpeas can be prepared in stews , soups , purees and casseroles , but the most common way to eat them is in curries .
They can also be processed into a paste or flour .
Chinese long beans can be eaten raw or cooked , but as they easily become waterlogged are usually sautéed , stir - fried , or deep - fried .
A common snack in Africa is Koki or Moyin - Moyin , where the cowpeas are mashed into a paste and then wrapped in banana leaves .
They also use the cowpea paste as a supplement in infant formula when weaning babies off milk .
Slaves brought to America and the West Indies cooked cowpeas much the same way as they did in Africa , although many people in the American South considered cowpeas not suitable for human consumption .
A popular dish was Hoppin ' John , which contained black - eyed peas cooked with rice and seasoned with pork .
Over time cowpeas became more universally accepted and now Hoppin '
John is seen as a traditional Southern dish ritually served on New Year 's Day .
NUTRITION AND HEALTH Section::::Nutrition and health .
Cowpeas seeds provide a rich source of proteins and calories , as well as minerals and vitamins .
This complements the mainly cereal diet in countries that grow cowpeas as a major food crop .
A seed can consist of 25 % protein and has very low fat content .
Cowpea starch is digested more slowly than the starch from cereals , which is more beneficial to human health .
The grain is a rich source of folic acid , an important vitamin that helps prevent neural tube defects in unborn babies .
The cowpea has often been referred to as " poor man 's meat " due to the high levels of protein found in the seeds and leaves .
However , it does contain some anti - nutritional elements , notable phytic acid and protease inhibitors , which reduces the nutritional value of the crop .
Although little research has been conducted on the nutritional value of the leaves and immature pods , what is available suggests that the leaves have a similar nutrition value to black nightshade and sweet potato leaves , while the green pods have less anti - nutritional factors than the dried seeds .
PRODUCTION AND CONSUMPTION Section::::Production and consumption .
Most cowpeas are grown on the African continent , particularly in Nigeria and Niger which account for 66 % of world cowpea production .
The Sahel region also contains other major producers such as Burkina Faso , Ghana , Senegal and Mali .
Niger is the main exporter of cowpeas and Nigeria the main importer .
Exact figures for cowpea production are hard to come up with as it is not a major export crop .
It is rather difficult to estimate world cowpea production as it is always grown in mixture with other crops .
But according to 1997 estimate , cowpeas are cultivated on and have a worldwide production of 3 million tonnes .
While they play a key role in subsistence farming and livestock fodder , the cowpea is also seen as a major cash crop by Central and West African farmers , with an estimated 200 million people consuming cowpea on a daily basis .
According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations , as of 2012 , the average cowpea yield in Western Africa was an estimated , which is still 50 % below the estimated potential production yield .
In some tradition cropping methods the yield can be as low as .
Outside Africa , the major production areas are Asia , Central America , and South America .
Brazil is the world 's second - leading producer of cowpea seed , accounting for 17 % of annual cowpea production , although most is consumed within the country .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Cowpea research at the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture ( IITA ) * Network for Genetic Improvement of Cowpea for All ( NGICA ) * Consensus Document on Compositional Considerations for New Varieties of COWPEA ( Vigna unguiculata ) : Key Food and Feed Nutrients , Anti - nutrients and Other Constituents , OECD Series on the Safety of Novel Foods and Feeds No . 30