ALDOL CONDENSATION
An aldol condensation is a condensation reaction in organic chemistry in which an enol or an enolate ion reacts with a carbonyl compound to form a β - hydroxyaldehyde or β - hydroxyketone ( an aldol reaction ) , followed by dehydration to give a conjugated enone .
Aldol condensations are important in organic synthesis , because they provide a good way to form carbon – carbon bonds .
For example , the Robinson annulation reaction sequence features an aldol condensation ; the Wieland – Miescher ketone product is an important starting material for many organic syntheses .
Aldol condensations are also commonly discussed in university level organic chemistry classes as a good bond - forming reaction that demonstrates important reaction mechanisms .
In its usual form , it involves the nucleophilic addition of a ketone enolate to an aldehyde to form a β - hydroxy ketone , or " aldol " ( aldehyde + alcohol ) , a structural unit found in many naturally occurring molecules and pharmaceuticals .
The name aldol condensation is also commonly used , especially in biochemistry , to refer to just the first ( addition ) stage of the process — the aldol reaction itself — as catalyzed by aldolases .
However , the aldol reaction is not formally a condensation reaction because it does not involve the loss of a small molecule .
The reaction between an aldehyde or ketone having an alpha - hydrogen with an aromatic carbonyl compound lacking an alpha hydrogen is called the Claisen – Schmidt condensation .
This reaction is named after two of its pioneering investigators Rainer Ludwig Claisen and J. G. Schmidt , who independently published on this topic in 1880 and 1881 .
An example is the synthesis of dibenzylideneacetone .
Quantitative yields in Claisen –
Schmidt reactions have been reported in the absence of solvent using sodium hydroxide as the base and plus benzaldehydes .
Because the enolizeable nucleophilic carbonyl compound and the electrophilic carbonyl compound are two different chemicals , the Claisen – Schmidt reaction is an example of a crossed aldol process .
MECHANISM Section::::Mechanism .
The first part of this reaction is an aldol reaction , the second part a dehydration — an elimination reaction ( Involves removal of a water molecule or an alcohol molecule ) .
Dehydration may be accompanied by decarboxylation when an activated carboxyl group is present .
The aldol addition product can be dehydrated via two mechanisms ; a strong base like potassium t - butoxide , potassium hydroxide or sodium hydride in an enolate mechanism , or in an acid - catalyzed enol mechanism .
Depending on the nature of the desired product , the aldol condensation may be carried out under two broad types of conditions : kinetic control or thermodynamic control .
CONDENSATION TYPES Section::::Condensation types .
It is important to distinguish the aldol condensation from other addition reactions of carbonyl compounds .
*
When the base is an amine and the active hydrogen compound is sufficiently activated the reaction is called a Knoevenagel condensation .
*
In a Perkin reaction the aldehyde is aromatic and the enolate generated from an anhydride .
* A Claisen condensation involves two ester compounds .
* A Dieckmann condensation involves two ester groups in the same molecule and yields a cyclic molecule
* A Henry reaction involves an aldehyde and an aliphatic nitro compound .
* A Robinson annulation involves a α , β - unsaturated ketone and a carbonyl group , which first engage in a Michael reaction prior to the aldol condensation .
*
In the Guerbet reaction , an aldehyde , formed in situ from an alcohol , self - condenses to the dimerized alcohol .
*
In the Japp – Maitland condensation water is removed not by an elimination reaction but by a nucleophilic displacement ALDOX PROCESS Section::::Aldox process .
In industry the Aldox process developed by Royal Dutch Shell and Exxon , converts propylene and syngas directly to 2-ethylhexanol via hydroformylation to butyraldehyde , aldol condensation to 2-ethylhexenal and finally hydrogenation .
In one study crotonaldehyde is directly converted to 2-ethylhexanal in a palladium / Amberlyst / supercritical carbon dioxide system : SCOPE Section::::Scope .
Ethyl 2-methylacetoacetate and campholenic aldehyde react in an Aldol condensation .
The synthetic procedure is typical for this type of reaction .
In the process , in addition to water , an equivalent of ethanol and carbon dioxide are lost in decarboxylation .
Ethyl glyoxylate 2 and diethyl 2-methylglutaconate 1 react to isoprenetricarboxylic acid 3 ( isoprene skeleton ) with sodium ethoxide .
This reaction product is very unstable with initial loss of carbon dioxide and followed by many secondary reactions .
This is believed to be due to steric strain resulting from the methyl group and the carboxylic group in the cis - dienoid structure .
Occasionally an aldol condensation is buried in a multistep reaction or in catalytic cycle such as the one sketched below :
In this reaction an alkynal 1 is converted into a cycloalkene 7 with a ruthenium catalyst and the actual condensation
takes place with intermediate 3 through 5 .
Support for the reaction mechanism is based on isotope labeling .
The reaction between menthone and anisaldehyde is complicated due to steric shielding of the ketone group .
This obstacle is overcome by using a strong base such as potassium hydroxide and a very polar solvent such as DMSO in the reaction below : Due to epimerization through a common enolate ion ( intermediate A )
the reaction product has ( R , R)-cis - configuration and not ( R , S)-trans - configuration as in the starting material .
Because it is only the cis isomer that precipitates from solution , this product is formed exclusively .
SEE
ALSO * Organic reaction and chemical reaction * The Auwers synthesis
* Organic Chemistry Portal *
Reformatsky reaction REFERENCES