EDDIE
THE EAGLE Michael Edwards ( born 5 December 1963 ) , known as " Eddie the Eagle " , is an English skier who in 1988 became the first competitor since 1928 to represent Great Britain in Olympic ski jumping , finishing last in the 70 m and 90 m events .
He became the British ski jumping record holder , ninth in amateur speed skiing ( ) , and a stunt jumping world record holder for jumping over 6 buses .
In 2016 , he was portrayed by Taron Egerton in the biographical film Eddie the Eagle .
BACKGROUND Section::::Background .
Edwards was born in Cheltenham , Gloucestershire .
His family calls him by his given name , Michael .
" Eddie " is a nickname derived by schoolfriends from his surname .
Having not made the grade as a downhill skier , he decided to switch to ski jumping as there were no other British ski jumpers with whom to compete for a place .
Edwards began jumping under the eye of John Viscome and Chuck Berghorn in Lake Placid , New York , using Berghorn 's equipment , although he had to wear six pairs of socks to make the boots fit .
He was disadvantaged by his weight — at about 82 kg ( 181 lb ) , more than 9 kg ( 20 lb ) heavier than the next heaviest competitor — and by his lack of financial support for training , being totally self - funded .
Another problem was that he was very nearsighted , wearing thick glasses under his goggles , which would mist up at altitude .
Edwards was informed of his qualification for the games while working as a plasterer and residing temporarily in a Finnish mental hospital due to lack of funds for alternative accommodation ( rather than as a patient ) .
He first represented Great Britain at the 1987 World Championships in Oberstdorf in Bavaria , West Germany and was ranked 55th in the world .
This performance qualified him as the sole British applicant for the 1988 Winter Olympics ski jumping competition .
Edwards was one of the best ski jumpers in the United Kingdom , holding the British record of 73.5 m in one of his Calgary jumps in 1988 .
In 1994 his record was overhauled by James Lambert .
1988
WINTER OLYMPICS Section::::1988
Winter Olympics .
During the 1988 Winter Olympics , Edwards competed in and finished last in both the 70 m and 90 m events .
In the 70 m , he scored 69.2 points from two jumps of 61.0 m ; second - last Bernat Solà Pujol of Spain scored 140.4 points from 71 m and 68.5 m jumps ; winner Matti Nykänen of Finland had 229.1 points from 89.5 m jumps .
In the 90 m , Edwards scored 57.5 points from 71 m and 67 m jumps ; second - last Todd Gilman of Canada had 110.8 points from 96 m and 86.5 m ; Nykänen won again , with 224 points from 118.5 m and 107 m. From the beginning , the press version of his story was " embroidered with falsehoods " .
" They said I was afraid of heights .
But I was doing sixty jumps a day then , which is hardly something someone who was afraid of heights would do . "
His lack of success endeared him to people around the globe .
He subsequently became a media celebrity and appeared on talk shows around the world , appearing on The Tonight Show during the Games .
The press nicknamed him " Mr. Magoo " , and one Italian journalist called him a " ski dropper " .
At the closing ceremony , the president of the Organizing Committee , Frank King , singled out Edwards for his contribution .
King said , looking at the competitors , " You have broken world records and you have established personal bests .
Some of you have even soared like an eagle . "
THE EDDIE " THE EAGLE " RULE Section::::The Eddie
" The Eagle " Rule .
The widespread attention that Edwards received in Calgary was embarrassing to some in the ski jumping establishment .
In 1990 , shortly after the Olympics finished , the entry requirements were strengthened in order to make it nearly impossible for anyone to follow his example : the International Olympic Committee ( IOC ) instituted what became known as the Eddie the Eagle Rule , which requires Olympic hopefuls to compete in international events and be placed in the top 30 % or the top 50 competitors
, whichever is fewer .
Edwards failed to qualify for the 1992 Winter Olympics in Albertville , France , and the 1994 Games in Lillehammer , Norway .
He got a five - year sponsorship from Eagle Airlines , a small British charter company , to support his attempt to reach the 1998 Games in Nagano , Japan , but failed to qualify for those as well .
RETURN TO CALGARY AND OTHER MEDIA
APPEARANCES
Section::::Return to Calgary and other media appearances .
On 13 February 2008 , Edwards made a return visit to Calgary to take part in festivities marking the twentieth anniversary of the Games .
During his visit , he rode the zip - line at Canada Olympic Park with a member of the Jamaican bobsled team ( the ride simulates the speed of a ski - jumper ) and led a procession of skiers down the slopes of the park while carrying an Olympic torch .
Edwards was chosen as a torchbearer in the relay for the 2010 Vancouver Olympics .
He ran with the torch on 7 January 2010 in Winnipeg .
Edwards released a book ( and a video ) called On the Piste .
In 1991 he recorded a single in Finnish entitled " Mun nimeni on Eetu " ( " My name is Eetu " ) , B - sided with " Eddien Siivellä " ( " On Eddie 's Wing " )
though he does not speak Finnish .
The songs were written by Finnish singer Irwin Goodman .
Edwards appeared in a number of advertising campaigns , e.g. on television , promoting cars , and commanded fees of £ 10,000 an hour .
Nevertheless , he declared bankruptcy in 1992 , claiming that a trust fund for his earnings was not set up properly .
In 2003 , he graduated from De Montfort University in Leicester with a degree in law .
" I 've been interested in law since taking out a civil action against my trustees 10 years ago , " he said in a 2001 interview .
In 2011 , he returned to Planica in Slovenia and visited one of the biggest ski jumps in the world .
For the first time , he brought his family with him under the ski slopes and made a promotion video , " Eddie ' the Eagle ' Lands in Slovenia " , while visiting places such as Kranjska Gora , Lake Bled , Ljubljana , Postojna Caves , Lipica , Portorož and Piran .
The video was later posted on YouTube and many UK websites .
Edwards described the visit to Slovenia as one of the family 's nicest trips so far .
On 25 February 2012 , he appeared as a competitor on episode 2 of BBC1 's Let 's Dance for Sport Relief , 2012 and got through to the final on most public votes .
His performances were accompanied by the Royal British Legion Band & Corps Of Drums Romford .
In 2013 , he won the first series of the British celebrity diving programme Splash ! , mentored by Tom Daley .
In January 2014 , he commentated on the Channel 4 TV programme
The Jump , where 12 famous people took part in winter sports .
As part of each episode , Edwards jumped off the largest of three ski jumps .
In the same year he appeared as a guest on the ITV2 comedy show Fake Reaction .
In 2017 he returned to the ski jumping facilities at Canada Olympic Park , where he had taken part in the Olympics in 1988 , to make some jumps that were his first in over 15 years .
BIOPIC
Section::::Biopic .
A film chronicling the life story of Edwards had been planned by Irish director Declan Lowney since 2007 .
Comedian Steve Coogan was originally chosen for the title role .
Edwards was said to be pleased with the choice but also joked that Brad Pitt or Tom Cruise would be better suited for the role .
In 2009 , Lowney announced that Rupert Grint would instead play the part .
The film was scheduled to begin production once Grint completed work on Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 and Part 2 , but it did not go ahead .
On 23 December 2014 , it was reported that Gary Barlow was in talks to write the entire soundtrack for the film .
On 23 January 2015 , it was reported that Edwards might perform the stunts in the movie about his life .
Matthew Vaughn produced and Dexter Fletcher directed the biopic , starring Taron Egerton as Edwards , and Hugh Jackman as his trainer .
The film , Eddie the Eagle , was released in early 2016 .
SEE ALSO
* Eric Moussambani : Eric " the Eel " , another famously unlikely Olympian
* Philip Boit * Trevor Misipeka *
Vinko Bogataj *
Steven Bradbury * Elizabeth Swaney BIBLIOGRAPHY REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* BBC Gloucestershire interview with Eddie
" The Eagle " Edwards February 2008 * Eddie ' The Eagle ' Edwards Speaking Profile and Video