WARWICK DAVIS Warwick Ashley Davis ( born 3 February 1970 ) is an English actor , television presenter , writer , director and producer .
He played the title characters in Willow and the Leprechaun film series , the Ewok Wicket in Star Wars Episode VI : Return of the Jedi and Professor Filius Flitwick and Griphook in the Harry Potter films .
Davis also starred as a fictionalised version of himself in the sitcom Life 's Too Short , written and directed by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant .
He has presented ITV game shows Celebrity Squares ( 2014–2015 ) and Tenable ( 2016–present ) .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Davis was born in Epsom , Surrey , the son of Susan and Ashley Davis , an insurance worker .
Davis has a younger sister .
He was educated at Chinthurst School and later the City of London Freemen 's School .
Davis was born with Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita , an extremely rare form of dwarfism .
When Davis was 11 , his grandmother heard a radio advert calling for people who were tall or shorter to be in Return of the Jedi .
To Davis , who was a fan of the Star Wars films , it was a dream come true .
During the filming of Return of the Jedi , Mark Hamill bought Davis every Star Wars figure he did not have .
CAREER Section::::Career .
Davis was originally cast as an extra Ewok , but when Kenny Baker , who was originally going to be Wicket , fell ill , George Lucas picked Davis to be the new Wicket after seeing how he carried himself as an Ewok .
Davis based his Ewok movements on his dog , who would tilt his head from side to side whenever he saw something strange .
During production on the film , Davis was the subject of a short mockumentary film about his experience as Wicket , titled Return of the Ewok , made by Return of the Jedi 's first assistant director , David Tomblin .
The unreleased film was a fictional look at his decision to become an actor and act in the film and his transformation into Wicket the Ewok .
Davis reprised his role as Wicket in the ABC made - for - TV films and .
In 1987 , Davis was called to Elstree Studios near London to meet with Ron Howard and George Lucas to discuss a new film project called Willow , which was written with Davis specifically in mind .
Willow was his first opportunity to act with his face visible .
He co - starred with Val Kilmer in the film , which received a Royal Premiere before the Prince and Princess of Wales .
He then moved to television to be in the BBC Television adaptation of the classic The Chronicles of Narnia , specifically in Prince Caspian , The Voyage of the Dawn Treader ( as Reepicheep ) , and The Silver Chair ( as Glimfeather ) and an episode of Zorro filmed in Madrid .
In 1993 , he played the villainous Irish lead character in Leprechaun , alongside Jennifer Aniston , a role he reprised in five sequels .
He returned to the Star Wars universe , playing three roles in : Weazel , a gambler sitting next to Watto at the Podrace ; Wald , who was Anakin 's Rodian friend ; and Yoda in some scenes where Yoda was seen walking .
Davis played the role of Professor Filius Flitwick in the Harry Potter films .
Davis played a white - moustached Flitwick in the first two films , and then a black - haired unnamed chorus conductor for the third instalment of the series .
In the fourth film , Flitwick is younger looking , with short , brown hair and a trimmed moustache .
In addition to playing Flitwick , Davis played the role of the goblin Griphook in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 , despite the role being played previously by fellow dwarf actor Verne Troyer .
In 2004 , Davis played the character " Plates " in the indie film Skinned Deep , directed by special effects artist Gabriel Bartalos .
In 2006 , Davis appeared , alongside fellow Harry Potter star Daniel Radcliffe , in an episode of BBC 's comedy series Extras as a satirical version of himself .
Davis starred in the film version of The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy , as the " body " of Marvin the Paranoid Android ( the voice was provided by Alan Rickman ) .
In December 2006 , Davis starred in the pantomime Snow White and the Seven Dwarves at the Opera House , Manchester , and again in 2007–08 at the New Wimbledon Theatre .
Davis appeared in , in which he played Nikabrik the Dwarf , adding to his previous involvement in TV adaptations of the Chronicles of Narnia series .
He also appeared as a contestant on the 2007 series of Children in Need reality show Celebrity Scissorhands .
Davis starred as a fictional version of himself in Life 's Too Short , written by Ricky Gervais and Stephen Merchant , who also starred .
In December 2012 , Davis returned to New Wimbledon Theatre to reprise his role in Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs .
In March 2013 , Davis presented an episode of the ITV series Perspectives : Warwick Davis –
The Seven Dwarfs of Auschwitz , in which he explored the story of the Ovitz family , a touring musical troupe which included seven dwarfs who survived the Nazi Auschwitz concentration camp and the experiments of Josef Mengele .
In late 2013 , Davis appeared for one month as Patsy in the musical comedy Spamalot , based on the film Monty Python and the Holy Grail in London , At the same time , Davis hosted a press conference to announce the Monty Python reunion .
In 2014 , Davis hosted a factual series for ITV called Weekend Escapes with Warwick Davis .
The show saw Davis and his family travelling around Britain , enjoying short weekend holiday breaks .
The show returned for a second series in spring 2015 .
From 2014 to 2015 , he hosted the revived version of game show Celebrity Squares on ITV .
The first series was shown in 2014 and a second aired in 2015 .
Davis appeared in the 2015 sequel .
In July 2015 , he became the voice of Gordon the Gopher in a pilot developed for BBC Taster , and the pilot progressed well , becoming one of the highest rated on the BBC 's Taster section .
In November 2016 , Davis began presenting the daytime ITV game show Tenable .
The show will return for three further series in 2017 and 2018 .
In April 2017 , at Star Wars Celebration Orlando , it was announced that Davis would play Grand Admiral Thrawn 's bodyguard Ruhk in the fourth season of Star Wars Rebels .
In December 2017 , Davis appeared as Wodibin , an alien gambler , in .
Davis appeared in the film , released in May 2018 , reuniting with his Willow director Ron Howard .
This was Davis ' eighth appearance in a Star Wars film .
OTHER PROJECTS
Section::::Other projects .
In addition to his acting career , in 1995 , Davis co - founded , with fellow dwarf actor and father - in - law Peter Burroughs , the talent agency Willow Management , that specialises in representing actors under five feet ( 1.52 m ) tall .
Many of Davis 's co - stars and fellow dwarf actors from Star Wars , Willow , Labyrinth and the Harry Potter series are represented by the agency .
In 2004 , the agency also began representing actors over seven feet ( 2.13 m ) tall who had suffered from being confined to " niche " roles .
Over forty members of Willow Management were cast as goblins in Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 .
In April 2010 , Davis published his autobiography , Size Matters Not : The Extraordinary Life and Career of Warwick Davis , with a foreword by George Lucas .
In January 2013 , he appeared in a Comic Relief episode of The Great British Bake Off , winning that episode 's title of " Comic Relief Star Baker " .
Davis is a founder of the Reduced Height Theatre Company , which stages theatrical productions cast exclusively with short actors and using reduced height sets .
Their first production was See How They Run , touring the UK in 2014 .
In February 2015 , the production was the subject of the BBC 's " Warwick Davis ' Big Night " as part of the Modern Times documentary series .
In June 2016 , he was the castaway on the BBC Radio 4 programme Desert Island Discs .
Davis produced a new original musical Eugenius !
by Ben Adams and Chris Wilkins , which premiered as a concert performance on 29 June 2016 at the London Palladium ( which Davis also starred in as Evil Lord Hector )
followed by fully staged runs at The Other Palace in 2018 .
The BBC broadcast an episode of Who
Do You Think You Are ?
genealogy programmes on Warwick Davis in February 2017 .
In the episode Davis learned that in his family tree he had an ancestor that had been married to two women at the same time , another who had died in an asylum from syphilis and another who performed as a minstrel in blackface .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Unlike most dwarfs ( 70.65 % ) who have a condition called achondroplasia , Davis ' dwarfism is caused by an extremely rare genetic condition called spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita ( SED ) .
He has said the only real drawback to being small was the associated health problems .
Of his own dwarfism , Davis has said , " As you get older , you can suffer from painful hips , and our joints wear a lot quicker than for people of average height . "
Davis ' wife , Samantha , has achondroplasia , and their two children also have SED .
Their daughter , Annabelle Davis , stars in the CBBC show The Dumping Ground as Sasha Bellman .
As a result of having different causes of dwarfism , the couple 's first two children , sons Lloyd and George , died shortly after birth , having had a fatal combination of the conditions .
Samantha is the daughter of Davis ' business partner Peter Burroughs and the sister of actress Hayley Burroughs .
Davis met the Burroughs family while filming Willow , where Samantha had a minor role as a Nelwyn villager .
Davis is co - founder of Little Person 's UK , a charity which provides support to people with dwarfism and their families .
FILMOGRAPHY
Section::::Filmography . !
Year !
Title !
Role ! class="unsortable
" Notes Episode : " The Jewelled Sword " Al 's Lads Griphook rowspan=22014–2015
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Willow Management