TERRITORIES OF THE UNITED STATES Territories of the United States are sub - national administrative divisions directly overseen by the United States Federal Government .
Unlike U.S. states and Native American tribes which exercise limited sovereignty alongside the federal government , territories are without sovereignty .
The territories are classified by whether they are incorporated and whether they have an " organized " government through an Organic Act passed by the U.S. Congress .
The U.S. has sixteen territories in the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean .
Five of the territories are permanently inhabited and are classified as unincorporated territories — they are American Samoa , Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands .
The other eleven territories are small islands , atolls , and reefs with no native or permanent population .
Of those eleven , only one is classified as an incorporated territory .
Two territories ( Bajo Nuevo Bank and Serranilla Bank ) are administered by Colombia .
Historically , territories were created to govern newly acquired land .
Most territories eventually attained statehood .
Other territories at some point administered by the U.S. , such as the Philippines , Micronesia , the Marshall Islands and Palau , eventually became independent countries .
Many organized incorporated territories of the United States existed from 1789 to 1959 .
The first were the Northwest and the Southwest territories , and the last were the Alaska Territory and the Hawaii Territory .
Of these , 31 territories applied for and were admitted as states .
In the process of organizing and promoting territories to statehood , some areas of a territory lacking sufficient development and population densities were temporarily orphaned from parts of a larger territory after residents voted on whether to petition Congress for statehood .
For example , when a portion of the Missouri Territory became the state of Missouri , the remaining portion of the territory , consisting of all the states of Iowa , Nebraska , South Dakota , and North Dakota , most of Kansas , Wyoming , and Montana , and parts of Colorado and Minnesota , effectively became an unorganized territory .
U.S. territories tend to have infrastructure and telecommunications inferior to the United States mainland ; for example , American Samoa 's Internet speed was found to be slower than several Eastern European countries .
Poverty rates are also higher in the territories than in the states .
EXISTING TERRITORIES AND THEIR LEGAL STATUS Section::::Existing territories and their legal status .
Territories have always been a part of the United States .
According to federal law , the term " United States " , when used in a geographical sense , means " the continental United States , Alaska , Hawaii , Puerto Rico , Guam , and the United States Virgin Islands " .
Since political union with the Northern Mariana Islands in 1986 , they too are treated as a part of the U.S.
An executive order adopted in 2007 includes American Samoa in the U.S. " geographical extent " as reflected in U.S. Department of State documents .
PERMANENTLY INHABITED TERRITORIES
Section::::Permanently inhabited territories .
The U.S. has five territories that are permanently inhabited : Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands in the Caribbean Sea ; Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands in the Marianas archipelago in the western North Pacific Ocean ; and American Samoa in the South Pacific Ocean .
Approximately 4 million people in these territories are U.S. citizens .
U.S. citizenship at birth is granted in four of the five major territories .
American Samoa has about 32,000 non - citizen U.S. nationals .
Under U.S. law , among the territories , " only persons born in American Samoa and Swains Island are non - citizen U.S. nationals .
" American Samoans are under the protection of the U.S. , with the ability to travel to the rest of the U.S. without a visa .
However , to become U.S. citizens , American Samoans must naturalize as if they were foreigners .
American Samoans do n't have natural - born U.S. citizenship because the U.S. Congress has not passed any legislation giving citizenship to residents of American Samoa ( unlike the other 4 inhabited territories ) .
Each of these territories is an organized , self - governing territory with three branches of government , a locally elected governor , and a territorial legislature .
Each territory also elects a non - voting member ( or a non - voting resident commissioner in the case of Puerto Rico ) to the U.S. House of Representatives .
They " possess the same powers as other members of the House , except that they may not vote when the House is meeting as the House of Representatives .
" They participate in debate , are assigned offices and money for staff , and nominate constituents from their territories to the Army , Navy and Marine Corps , Air Force , and Merchant Marine service academies .
They can vote in committee on all legislation presented to the House of Representatives .
They are included in their party count for each committee , and they are equal to senators on conference committees .
Depending on the congress , they may also vote on the floor in the House Committee of the Whole .
As of January 2017 , the members of Congress from these territories were : Gregorio Sablan for the Northern Mariana Islands , Madeleine Bordallo for Guam , Amata Coleman Radewagen for American Samoa , Jenniffer González for Puerto Rico , and Stacey Plaskett for the U.S. Virgin Islands .
The District of Columbia also has a non - voting delegate .
Like the District of Columbia , territories of the United States do not have voting representation in the US Congress , and they have no representation in the U.S. Senate .
Every four years , U.S. political parties nominate their presidential candidates at conventions , which include delegates from these territories .
However , the U.S. citizens living in territories such as Puerto Rico can not vote in the general election for president of the U.S. Non - citizen nationals in American Samoa also ca n't vote for the president .
The capitals of these territories are Pago Pago in American Samoa ; Hagåtña in Guam ; Saipan in the Northern Mariana Islands ; San Juan in Puerto Rico ; and , Charlotte Amalie in the U.S. Virgin Islands .
The current governors of these territories are the following :
Lolo Matalasi Moliga ( American Samoa ) , Eddie Baza Calvo ( Guam ) , Ralph Torres ( Northern Mariana Islands ) , Ricardo Rosselló ( Puerto Rico ) , and Kenneth Mapp ( U.S. Virgin Islands ) . !
Name !
Abbr . !
Location !
Area !
Population ( 2017 ) !
Capital !
Largest town !
Status !
Date acquired Tafuna NOTES * American Samoa – Territory since 1900 ; after the end of the Second Samoan Civil War , the Samoan Islands were divided into two political regions , with the U.S. controlling the eastern half of the islands .
In 1900 , the Treaty of Cession of Tutuila took effect .
The Manuʻa islands became part of American Samoa in 1904 , and Swains Island became part of American Samoa in 1925 .
The US Congress ratified American Samoa 's treaties in 1929 .
American Samoa is locally self - governing under a constitution last revised in 1967 .
People born in American Samoa are non - citizen nationals .
American Samoa is technically unorganized .
The main island is Tutuila .
* Guam – Territory since 1899 ; Guam was acquired at the end of the Spanish – American War .
Guam is the home of Naval Base Guam and Andersen Air Force Base .
Guam was organized under the Guam Organic Act of 1950 ; this act granted U.S. citizenship to Guamanians , and gave Guam a local government .
In 1968 , the act was amended so that a governor of Guam could be elected .
* Northern Mariana Islands – Commonwealth since 1986 , the Northern Mariana Islands was part of the Spanish Empire until 1899 , then part of the German Empire from 1899 to 1919 ; it was administered by Japan as a League of Nations mandate until the islands were conquered by the United States during World War II .
In 1947 , it became part of the United Nations Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands ( TTPI ) , administered by the United States as U.N. trustee .
The other constituents of the TTPI were Palau , the Federated States of Micronesia , and the Marshall Islands .
A Covenant to Establish the Northern Mariana Islands as a commonwealth in political union with the United States was negotiated by representatives of both political bodies ; it was approved by Northern Mariana Islands voters in 1975 and came into force on March 24 , 1976 .
The Northern Mariana Islands constitution partially took effect on January 9 , 1978 , and fully took effect in November 1986 ( under the Covenant Agreement ) .
The Covenant is one of the two principal documents of the multi - document CNMI Constitution , the second being the local Constitution itself , approved in a 1977 referendum .
In 1986 , the Northern Mariana Islands formally exited U.N. trusteeship .
The abbreviations " CNMI " and " NMI " are both used in the Commonwealth .
Most of the residents of the Northern Mariana Islands live on the main island , Saipan .
* Puerto Rico – Unincorporated territory since 1899 ; Puerto Rico was acquired at the end of the Spanish – American War .
Puerto Rico has been a commonwealth since 1952 .
Puerto Rico was organized under the Puerto Rico Federal Relations Act of 1950 ( Public Law 600 ) .
In November 2008 , a U.S. District Court judge ruled that a sequence of Congressional actions have had the cumulative effect of changing Puerto Rico 's status from " unincorporated " to " incorporated . "
However , the issue has not finished making its way through the court system ; and the U.S. government still refers to Puerto Rico as unincorporated .
A Puerto Rico attorney has called Puerto Rico " semi - sovereign " .
There is a statehood movement in Puerto Rico — its goal is to make Puerto Rico the 51st state .
See also Political status of Puerto Rico .
* U.S. Virgin Islands — Purchased by the U.S. from Denmark in 1917 , and organized under the Revised Organic Act of the Virgin Islands in 1954 .
U.S. Citizenship was granted in 1927 .
The main islands are Saint Thomas , Saint John and Saint Croix .
STATISTICS Section::::Statistics .
Except for Guam , the inhabited territories have had negative population growth between 2010 and 2017 .
The inhabited territories also have high poverty rates , but also high Human Development Index ( HDI ) rankings .
All poverty rates are higher than the mainland United States .
Four of the five territories have an official language other than English .
+
Statistics !
scope="col"Territory !
scope="col"Official
language(s ) !
scope="col"Population growth(2010 to 2017 ) !
scope="col"Poverty rate ( 2009 ) ! scope="col "
Life expectancy ( years ) ! scope="col " HDI ranking !
scope="col"GDP ( dollars ) !
scope="col"Traffic Drives !
scope="col"Time
Zone !
scope="col"Area
Code ( +1 ) align="left "
English and Samoan % On the Right Samoan Time 684 align="left
"
English and Chamorro % On the Right Chamorro Time 671 align="left
"
English , Chamorro , and Carolinian % On the Right Chamorro Time 670 align="left " English and Spanish % On the Right Atlantic Time 787 , 939 align="left
" Virgin Islands ( U.S. ) English % On the Left Atlantic Time 340
The territories do not have counties as administrative divisions .
The U.S. Census Bureau counts the following as county - equivalents : the 78 municipalities of Puerto Rico , the 3 main islands of the U.S. Virgin Islands , all of Guam , the 4 municipalities of the Northern Mariana Islands , and the 3 districts and 2 atolls of American Samoa .
The U.S. Census Bureau also counts each of the islands in the U.S. Minor Outlying Islands as county - equivalents .
UNINHABITED TERRITORIES Section::::Uninhabited territories .
The U.S. has eleven territories with no native or permanent population , called the U.S. Minor Outlying Islands .
They are small islands , atolls , and reefs spread across the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean :
Palmyra Atoll , Baker Island , Howland Island , Jarvis Island , Johnston Atoll , Kingman Reef , the Midway Islands , Bajo Nuevo Bank , Navassa Island , Serranilla Bank , and Wake Island .
Palmyra Atoll ( formally , the United States Territory of Palmyra Island ) is the only incorporated U.S. territory , a status it has maintained since the Territory of Hawaii became a state in 1959 .
The status of several territories is disputed : Navassa Island is disputed by Haiti , Wake Island is disputed by the Marshall Islands , Swains Island ( part of American Samoa ) is disputed by Tokelau , and Serranilla Bank and Bajo Nuevo Bank ( both administered by Colombia ) are disputed by Colombia , Jamaica , Honduras , and Nicaragua . !
Name !
Location !
Area !
Population !
Status !
Note Baker Island INCORPORATED AND UNINCORPORATED
TERRITORIES Section::::Incorporated and unincorporated territories .
The U.S. Congress decides whether a territory is incorporated or unincorporated .
The entire U.S. constitution applies to each incorporated territory , including its local government and all of its inhabitants , in the same manner as it applies to the local governments and residents of a state .
Incorporated territories are considered an integral part of the U.S. , not mere possessions .
From 1901 to 1905 , the U.S. Supreme Court in a series of cases known as the Insular Cases held that the constitution extended by its own force to U.S. territories .
The Court in these cases , however , also established the doctrine of territorial incorporation , under which the constitution applies fully to incorporated territories , such as the territories of Alaska and Hawaii , and applies partially in the unincorporated territories of Puerto Rico , Guam , and the Philippines .
The U.S. had no unincorporated territories ( also called " overseas possessions " or " insular areas " ) until 1856 .
In that year , the U.S. Congress enacted the Guano Islands Act , which authorised the president to take possession of unclaimed islands to mine guano .
Under this law , the U.S. has taken control of and claimed rights in many islands , atolls , etc . , especially in the Caribbean Sea and the Pacific Ocean , most of which have since been abandoned .
The U.S. also has acquired territories since 1856 under other circumstances , such as under the Treaty of Paris ( 1898 ) that ended the Spanish – American War .
The U.S. Supreme Court considered the constitutional position of these unincorporated territories in Balzac v. People of Porto Rico , where the Court said the following about a U.S. court in Puerto Rico :
In Glidden Company v. Zdanok , the U.S. Supreme Court cited the Balzac case and said with regard to courts in unincorporated territories , " Upon like considerations , Article III has been viewed as inapplicable to courts created in unincorporated territories outside the mainland ... and to the consular courts established by concessions from foreign countries ...
"
The courts determined that incorporation involves express declaration , or an implication so strong as to exclude any other view ( raising questions about Puerto Rico 's status ) .
In 1966 , Congress transformed the United States District Court for the District of Puerto Rico into an Article III district court — the only instance in history for a territory that has not yet attained statehood , which sets Puerto Rico apart judicially from the other unincorporated territories .
This has caused at least one U.S. district judge to express the opinion that Puerto Rico is no longer unincorporated : EXPRESS OR IMPLIED ?
Section::::Express or implied ?
In the Balzac case , the Court defined the meaning of " implied " : U.S. SUPREME COURT DECISIONS ABOUT PARTICULAR TERRITORIES Section::::U.S. Supreme Court decisions about particular territories .
The U.S. Supreme Court in Rassmussen v. U.S. first quoted from Article III of the 1867 treaty for the purchase of Alaska and then said , " ' The inhabitants of the ceded territory ... shall be admitted to the enjoyment of all the rights , advantages , and immunities of citizens of the United States ... '
This declaration , although somewhat changed in phraseology , is the equivalent ... of the formula , employed from the beginning to express the purpose to incorporate acquired territory into the United States , especially in the absence of other provisions showing an intention to the contrary . "
Part of the act of incorporation is on the people of the territory , not on the territory per se , by extending the privileges and immunities clause of the constitution to them , such as when it was extended to Puerto Rico in 1947 ( despite this , Puerto Rico remains officially unincorporated ) .
The 2016 Supreme Court case Puerto Rico v. Sanchez Valle ruled that territories do n't have their own sovereignty .
In 2016 , the Supreme Court declined to rule on a lower court ruling that American Samoans do not get citizenship at birth ( Tuana v. United States ) .
ALASKA TERRITORY Section::::Alaska Territory .
The Rassmussen case arose out of a criminal conviction by a six - person jury in Alaska under a federal law allowing this procedure there .
The Court held that Alaska had been incorporated into the U.S. because of the treaty of cession with Russia .
In addition , the Congressional implication was so strong as to exclude any other view :
In his concurring opinion , Justice Henry Brown expressed the same thought : FLORIDA
TERRITORY Section::::Florida Territory .
In Dorr v. U.S. , the U.S. Supreme Court quoted Chief Justice John Marshall from an earlier case as follows :
In Downes v. Bidwell , the Court said , " The same construction was adhered to in the treaty with Spain for the purchase of Florida ...
the 6th article of which provided that the inhabitants should ' be incorporated into the Union of the United States , as soon as may be consistent with the principles of the Federal Constitution . ' " SOUTHWEST TERRITORY Section::::Southwest Territory .
In the Downes case , the first mention of incorporation is made in the following paragraph by Justice Brown :
LOUISIANA TERRITORY Section::::Louisiana Territory .
In the Downes case , the Court said : CURRENT U.S.
TERRITORIES BY GROUP Section::::Current U.S. territories by group .
All U.S. territories are in the Northern Hemisphere with the exception of American Samoa and Jarvis Island .
INCORPORATED ORGANIZED TERRITORIES Section::::Incorporated organized territories .
With the exception of Washington DC , a special type of territory called a federal district , no incorporated organized territory has existed since 1959 , when both Alaska and Hawaii were granted Admission to the Union .
INCORPORATED UNORGANIZED TERRITORIES Section::::Incorporated unorganized territories .
Many incorporated unorganized territories became incorporated organized territories or states .
For example , when the eastern part of the incorporated organized territory called Minnesota became the state of Minnesota in 1858 , the western part became part of an unorganized territory .
Later , that became a part of the Dakota Territory , out of which two states and some parts of other states were created .
California was part of an unorganized territory when it became a state .
Currently , only Palmyra Atoll is incorporated and unorganized .
There are also territories that have the status of being incorporated but that are not organized :
* U.S. coastal waters out to offshore ( except state waters extend a minimum of offshore ) .
UNINCORPORATED ORGANIZED TERRITORIES Section::::Unincorporated organized territories .
There are four unincorporated and organized territories : Guam , Northern Mariana Islands , Puerto Rico , and U.S. Virgin Islands .
UNINCORPORATED UNORGANIZED TERRITORIES Section::::Unincorporated unorganized territories .
American Samoa and all of the U.S.
Minor Outlying Islands are unincorporated and unorganized ( except Palmyra Atoll , which is incorporated and unorganized ) .
* Bajo Nuevo Bank ( administered by Colombia )
* Baker Island * Howland Island * Jarvis Island
* Kingman Reef * ( claimed by Haiti )
* Serranilla Bank ( administered by Colombia ) * ( claimed by Marshall Islands )
INHABITED TERRITORIES Section::::Inhabited territories .
American Samoa , Guam , the Northern Mariana Islands , Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands are inhabited .
UNINHABITED TERRITORIES Section::::Uninhabited territories .
The U.S. Minor Outlying Islands have no permanent human population .
All are unincorporated and unorganized , except for Palmyra Atoll , which is incorporated and unorganized .
There are non - permanent human populations at Palmyra Atoll , Wake Island and Midway Atoll .
* Bajo Nuevo Bank ( administered by Colombia )
* Baker Island * Howland Island * Jarvis Island
* Kingman Reef * ( claimed by Haiti )
* Serranilla Bank ( administered by Colombia ) * ( claimed by Marshall Islands ) EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION Section::::Extraterritorial jurisdiction .
The U.S. exercises some degree of extraterritorial jurisdiction in several overseas areas , such as : * Guantanamo Bay Naval Base ( since 1903 ) : A land area along Guantánamo Bay , Cuba , to which the U.S. claims to hold a perpetual lease .
The Cuban government does not recognize this claim and has refused to accept any payment since 1959 .
The lease amount is US$ 2,000 in gold per year .
* American research stations in Antarctica : Amundsen – Scott South Pole Station , McMurdo Station , and Palmer Station are under U.S. jurisdiction but are held without sovereignty per the Antarctic Treaty .
*
Certain other parcels in foreign countries held by lease , such as military bases , depending on the terms of a lease , treaty , or status of forces agreement with the host country .
ASSOCIATED STATES
Section::::Associated states .
Micronesia , the Marshall Islands , and Palau gained independence under the Compact of Free Association ( COFA ) , which gives the U.S. full authority over aid and defense in exchange for continuing access to U.S. health care , government services such as the Federal Communications Commission and the U.S. Postal Service , and the right for COFA citizens to work freely in the U.S. and vice versa .
The United States exercises a high degree of control in defense , funding , and government services in : * ( since 1986 )
*
( since 1986 )
*
( since 1994 )
ORGANIZED TERRITORY
Section::::Organized territory .
Organized territories are lands under the sovereignty of the federal government ( but not part of any state ) that were given a measure of self - rule by the Congress through an Organic Act subject to the Congress 's plenary powers under the territorial clause of Article IV , sec .
3 , of the U.S. Constitution .
CLASSIFICATION OF FORMER U.S. TERRITORIES AND ADMINISTERED AREAS FORMER INCORPORATED ORGANIZED TERRITORIES OF THE UNITED STATES FORMER UNINCORPORATED TERRITORIES OF THE UNITED STATES ( INCOMPLETE ) *
The Corn Islands ( 1914–1971 ) : leased for 99 years under the Bryan - Chamorro Treaty .
However , returned to Nicaragua upon the abrogation of the treaty in 1970 .
*
The Line Islands ( ? – 1979 ) : disputed claim with the United Kingdom .
U.S. claim to most of the islands was ceded to Kiribati upon its independence in 1979 .
The U.S. retained Kingman Reef , Palmyra Atoll , and Jarvis Island .
* ( 1903–1979 ) : sovereignty returned to Panama under the Torrijos - Carter Treaties of 1978 .
U.S. retained a military base there and control of the canal until December 31 , 1999 .
*
The Philippine Islands ( 1898–1935 ) , the Commonwealth of the Philippines ( 1935–46 ) : granted full independence on July 4 , 1946 .
* Phoenix Islands ( ? – 1979 ) : disputed claim with the United Kingdom .
U.S. claim ceded to Kiribati upon its independence in 1979 .
Baker Island and Howland Island , which could be considered part of this group , are retained by the U.S. * Quita Sueño Bank ( 1869–1981 ) : claimed under Guano Islands Act .
Claim abandoned on September 7 , 1981 , by treaty .
* Roncador Bank ( 1856–1981 ) : claimed under Guano Islands Act .
Ceded to Colombia on September 7 , 1981 , by treaty .
* Serrana Bank ( 1874?–1981 ) : claimed under Guano Islands Act .
Ceded to Colombia on September 7 , 1981 , by treaty .
* Swan Islands ( 1863–1972 ) : claimed under Guano Islands Act .
Ceded to Honduras in 1972 , by treaty .
FORMER UNINCORPORATED TERRITORIES OF THE UNITED STATES UNDER MILITARY GOVERNMENT
* ( April 11 , 1899 – May 1 , 1900 ) : civil government operations began *
( August 14 , 1898 – July 4 , 1901 ) : civil government operations began * ( April 11 , 1899 – July 1 , 1950 ) : civil government operations began AREAS FORMERLY ADMINISTERED BY THE UNITED STATES
* ( April 11 , 1899 – May 20 , 1902 ) : sovereignty recognized as the independent Republic of Cuba .
*
( August 14 , 1898 – July 4 , 1946 ) :
sovereignty recognized as the Republic of the Philippines .
* : occupied by the United States from April 21 , 1914 to November 23 , 1914 , consequential to the Tampico Affair following the Mexican Revolution of 1910–1929 .
* : occupied by the United States from 1915 to 1934 and later under the authority of the United Nations from 1999 to the 2000s .
* occupied by the United States from 1916 to 1924 and again from 1965 to 1966 .
* ( 1947–1986 ) : liberated in World War II , included the " Compact of Free Association " nations ( the Republic of the Marshall Islands , the Federated States of Micronesia , and the Republic of Palau ) and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
* Ryukyu Islands including Okinawa
( U.S. occupation : 1952–1972 , after World War II ) :
returned to Japan under the Agreement Between the United States of America and Japan concerning the Ryukyu Islands and the Daito Islands .
* Nanpo Islands ( 1945–1968 ) : Occupied after World War II , Returned to Japanese control by mutual agreement .
* Marcus Island ( or Minamitorishima ) ( 1945–1968 ) : Occupied during World War II , returned to Japan by mutual agreement .
OTHER ZONES
* United States occupation of Greenland ( 1941–1945 )
* United States occupation of Iceland during World War II ( 1941–1946 ) , retained a military base until 2006 .
* American Occupation Zones in Allied - occupied Austria and Vienna ( 1945–1955 ) * American Occupation Zone in West Berlin ( 1945–1990 ) * American Occupation Zones of the Allied Occupation Zones in Germany ( 1945–1949 ) * Allied Military Government for Occupied Territories in full force in Allied - controlled sections of Italy from Invasion of Sicily in July 1943 until the armistice with Italy in September 1943 .
AMGOT continued in newly liberated areas of Italy until the end of World War II .
Also existed in combat zones of Allied nations such as France .
* Free Territory of Trieste ( 1947–1954 )
The U.S. co - administered a portion of the Free Territory between the Kingdom of Italy and the former Kingdom of Yugoslavia after World War II along with the United Kingdom .
* Occupation of Japan ( 1945–1952 ) after World War II .
* U.S. participation in the Occupation of the Rhineland ( Germany ) ( 1918–1921 )
* South Korea ( U.S. occupation of the south of the 38th parallel north in Korea in 1945–1948 ) .
The region is slightly different from the practical boundary of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) since the ceasefire of the Korean War .
See also Division of Korea .
* Coalition Provisional Authority Iraq ( 2003–2004 )
* Green zone Iraq ( March 20 , 2003 – December 31 , 2008 )
* Clipperton Island ( 1944–1945 ) , occupied territory ; returned to France on October 23 , 1945 .
* Grenada invasion and occupation ( 1983 ) CULTURAL IMAGE Section::::Cultural image .
In his book The Not - Quite States of America ( a book about the U.S. territories ) , author Doug Mack said the following about the U.S. territories : " It seemed that , right around the turn of the twentieth century , the territories were part of the national mythology and the everyday conversation .
[ ... ] A century or so ago , Americans did n't just know about the territories but cared about them , argued about them .
But what changed ?
How and why did they disappear from the national conversation ? "
He also said , " The territories have made us who we are .
They represent the USA 's place in the world .
They 've been a reflection of our national mood in nearly every period of American history . "
In 2018 , regarding a bill to make Puerto Rico the 51st state , representative Stephanie Murphy of Florida said the following : " The hard truth is that Puerto Rico 's lack of political power allows Washington to treat Puerto Rico like an afterthought , as the federal government 's inadequate preparation for and response to Hurricane Maria made crystal clear . "
Similarly , the Governor of Puerto Rico ( Ricardo Rosselló ) said the following about Puerto Rico : " Because we do n't have political power , because we do n't have representatives , [ no ] senators , no vote for president , we are treated as an afterthought .
"
Rosselló also said that Puerto Rico is the " oldest , most populous colony in the world " .
GALLERIES CURRENT TERRITORIAL NON - VOTING MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CURRENT TERRITORIAL GOVERNORS
SATELLITE IMAGES
INHABITED TERRITORIES UNINHABITED TERRITORIES ( U.S. MINOR OUTLYING ISLANDS )
MAPS
SEE ALSO * 51st state
* Enabling act ( United States )
* Extreme points of the United States * Hawaiian Organic Act
* Historic regions of the United States * Legal status of Hawaii * Hawaiian sovereignty movement
* List of museums in the U.S. territories
* List of U.S. National Historic Landmarks in the U.S. territories
* Organic Acts of 1845–46 * Political divisions of the United States * Political status of Puerto Rico * Statehood movement in Puerto Rico
* Territories of the United States on stamps * United States Minor Outlying Islands * United States National Register of Historic Places listings : * in American Samoa * in Guam * in the Northern Mariana Islands * in Puerto Rico * in the U.S.
Virgin Islands
* in the U.S.
Minor Outlying Islands
* United States
territory *
Unorganized territories
NOTES
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* FindLaw :
Downes v. Bidwell , 182 U.S. 244 ( 1901 )
regarding the distinction between incorporated and unincorporated territories * FindLaw : People of Puerto Rico v. Shell Co. , 302 U.S. 253 ( 1937 ) regarding application of U.S. law to organized but unincorporated territories
* FindLaw :
United States v. Standard Oil Company , 404 U.S. 558 ( 1972 ) regarding application of U.S. law to unorganized unincorporated territories
* Office of Insular Affairs
* Application of the U.S. Constitution in U.S. Insular Areas
* Department of the Interior Definitions of Insular Area Political Organizations
* United States District Court decision addressing the distinction between Incorporated vs Unincorporated territories