JAGUAR S - TYPE
The Jaguar S - Type was an executive car that debuted at the 1998 Birmingham Motor Show and was marketed by Jaguar for model years 1999 - 2008 , reviving the nameplate of the company 's 1963 - 68 S - Type as a four - door notchback saloon .
The S - Type received a mild facelift for model year 2005 .
The 2002 S - Type 4.2 Supercharged V8 at the time , was the fastest road production saloon car in the world .
The S - Type was discontinued in late 2007 and replaced by the XF .
OVERVIEW Section::::Overview .
After being privatised in 1984 , Jaguar had been developing a smaller saloon to complement the XJ6 by the early 1990s , but these plans were axed following its takeover by Ford in 1989 , only to resurface within a few years .
The S - Type was produced at Jaguar 's Castle Bromwich facility in Birmingham , England .
The car was styled by Geoff Lawson in 1995 and is based on the Jaguar DEW platform / Ford DEW platform , shared with the Lincoln LS and Ford Thunderbird .
It was unveiled at the Birmingham International Motor Show on 20 October 1998 , and went on sale in January 1999 .
It was aimed at buyers of cars including the BMW 5 Series .
The first S - Types ( " X200 " 1999–2002 ) are distinguished by a U - shaped centre console and optional touch - screen navigation system in the 2003 and later models .
The traditional leaping jaguar hood ornament was optional even though it is approved by the US and EU standards and breaks away in the case of an accident .
Subsequent models ( " X202 " , " X204 " , " X206 " ; the last digit denoting the model year ) have the Jaguar logo incorporated within the radiator grille and a more traditional ' looped ' styling for the centre console .
In Australia , the " jag " bonnet ornament did not become available until 2004 .
The supercharged S - Type R ( Jaguar STR for short ) joined the lineup in 2002 , and the hope was that it would compete with BMW 's M5 and the Mercedes E55 AMG .
The R was powered by the newly revised hand - built 4.2-Litre V8 with an Eaton M112 supercharger , producing and could accelerate from 0 to in 5.3 seconds ( 0 to in 5.6 s ) .
The top speed was limited to 155 mph .
With the electronic limiter removed , the S - Type R could reach 191 mph , and with simple supercharger pulley upgrades and ECU modifications , can be tuned to produce in excess of 500 bhp with a top speed in excess of 200 mph .
It included 18-inch ( 457-millimeter ) alloy wheels , wire - mesh grille , and monochromatic paint .
The R also has a rear apron , side - skirts , and front apron with built - in fog - lamps , a rear spoiler , a brace located near the rear subframe , and R badging on the boot lid and both front fenders ( wings ) .
Later models of the S - Type R featured a revised pulley system for the Eaton M112 supercharger , allowing it to produce an extra .
Also added on the 2003 model was an electronic parking - brake paddle - switch that replaced the conventional manually operated lever for the rear brakes .
For the 2003 model year , the Jaguar S - type was given a six - speed , automatic ZF 6HP26 transmission as well as a revised 3.0-litre V6 engine with ( US spec )
versus for the 1999 to 2002 models .
The 2003 model featured a revised dash , centre console , and a grille with the Jaguar badge to give the vehicle a more Jaguar - like appearance , and a flip - open key was devised for the ignition .
A minor facelift on the 2005 model year featured redesigned front and rear aprons , a slightly modified grille , remodeled rear light clusters , an aluminium bonnet , and a new 2.7-litre V6 diesel engine with .
The windscreen washer jets were incorporated into the windscreen wiper arms .
There were no changes made to the cabin interior .
2006 to 2008 models featured no fog lights .
POWERTRAIN Section::::Powertrain .
The S - Type was powered by a variety of petrol and diesel engines .
At launch , the V8 S - Type was powered by the 4.0L Jaguar AJ - V8 engine , the capacity of which was increased to 4.2L in 2002 .
Variants of this engine are used in Ford , Lincoln , Land Rover / Range Rover and Aston Martin models .
V6 engines used are the Ford Duratec unit which is used extensively throughout the Ford model range ( and in Ford subsidiary companies ) .
The 2.5 L V6 engine was not available for vehicles exported to the United States and Canada .
Diesel engines are the Ford / Peugeot 2.7L HDi Ford AJD - V6 / PSA DT17 which is used in a number of Ford , Peugeot , Citroen , Jaguar and Land Rover models .
From model years 1999 to 2002 , the rear - wheel - drive S - Type was equipped with either a five - speed manual ( Getrag 221 ) or a five - speed J - Gate Ford 5R55N transmission .
From 2003 , the S - Type was produced with either a 5-speed manual transmission or a six - speed J - Gate transmission that allows automatic gear selection or clutchless manual gear selection .
The 2004 diesel saw the introduction of a 6-speed manual transmission ; it was also available with the six - speed J - Gate automatic transmission .
SPECIFICATIONS SAFETY Section::::Safety . !
NHTSA 2008
S - Type!!Rating
Side Driver :
Side Passenger : Rollover 2WD : RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
The car was praised on its release for having a ' luxurious interior ' , ' creamy composure ' and a ' class - leading ' ' cosseting ride ' .
In particular , the 2.7 V6 twin - turbodiesel engine was described as ' a paragon of refinement , quietness , and fuel economy ' by the European automotive press , with enough ' refinement and performance to wean anyone off petrol power ' .
The supercharged ' R ' version was also praised for its speed and for ' proper rear - drive Jag ' handling , however the lack of a limited - slip differential was criticised , along with whine from the Eaton supercharger .
The car was described as the spiritual successor to both the Mark 2 and the Ford Scorpio , inviting unfavourable comparisons to the Scorpio concerning the controversial styling of the S - Type .
However , in general the initial positive reception faded away as time passed , and the car attracted significantly more negative commentary as it aged .
James May elaborated on this , saying in 2004 that ' in 15 or 20 years time we 'll look at the S - Type , and we 'll think '
That 's really awful " , while Jeremy Clarkson replied ' I think the S - type is basically like Beaujolais nouveau - awful when it came out and then just gets steadily worse as time passes ' .
In addition , Jeremy Clarkson also panned the car in 2003 as ' Jaguar 's weakest hour ' , and the ' weakest Jaguar ever ' , and said that he particularly disliked the styling , while James May harshly criticised the car , saying that he believed it was designed to appeal to the American and German markets , and that the styling pandered to common stereotypes of the United Kingdom held in those countries .
Describing the radiator grille as ' goppingly awful ' , he said that the car ' sums up everything that 's wrong with Jaguar ' , and that the vehicle annoyed him and was bettered by its successor .
RETRO STYLE
Section::::Retro style .
The retro styling , ' drawing upon classic Jag styling cues ' , was very controversial on release , inviting more unfavourable comparisons to the Rover 75 .
Described by contemporary reviewers as ' not 100 % successful ' , ' awkward ' , ' badly proportioned ... with a wheel or two in the past ' , ' outdated ' , and ' distinctive ' by pundits , the heavily criticised styling significantly dented the image of the car and may have reduced the Jaguar brand 's appeal among younger buyers .
However , some reviewers defended its ' retro Jaguar lines ' as ' ageing pretty well ' , ' characterful ' , ' classical ' , ' nostalgic ' , and ' typical Jaguar ' , and said that the car " looked like it had just driven off the set of The Sweeney " .
Richard Hammond described the car as ' hideous ' and ' like something washed up on a beach ' , while James May said that it ' looks like a dead cod ' , and Jeremy Clarkson concluded that it was the worst - looking car on sale in 2004 , although he did praise the diesel engine .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS