CAPTAIN ( ICE HOCKEY )
In ice hockey , the captain is the player designated by a team as the only person authorized to speak with the game officials regarding rule interpretations when the captain is on the ice .
At most levels of play each team must designate one captain and a number of alternate captains ( usually two ) who speak to the officials when the captain is on the bench .
Captains wear a " C " on their sweaters , while alternate captains wear an " A " .
Officially captains have no other responsibility or authority , although they may , depending on the league or individual team , have various informal duties , such as participation in pre - game ceremonies or other events outside the game .
As with most team sports that designate captains , the captain is usually a well - respected player and a de facto team leader .
RESPONSIBILITIES AND IMPORTANCE Section::::Responsibilities and importance .
According to International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) and National Hockey League ( NHL ) rules , the only player allowed to speak with referees about rule interpretations is the captain , or , if the captain is not on the ice , an alternate captain .
Although the rules do not specify any other distinction between the captain and his teammates , the captain has numerous responsibilities to the team , particularly in North American professional hockey .
The captain is a dressing room leader , and also represents the players ' concerns to management .
The captain is often considered the primary representative of the team to the public , and sometimes is responsible for organizing the team 's social functions and performing ceremonial on - ice functions , such as award presentations or ceremonial faceoffs .
SELECTION Section::::Selection .
NHL teams need not designate the same player as captain from game to game , though most teams do .
For instance , in the 1985–86 , when Boston Bruins captain Terry O'Reilly retired , Ray Bourque and Rick Middleton were named as co - captains of the team .
Middleton wore the " C " during home games and Bourque for road games during the season 's first half , and the two switched for the second half .
This arrangement continued until Middleton retired in 1988 and Bourque became the sole captain .
Some teams name two ( such as the Buffalo Sabres during the 2005–06 and 2006–07 NHL seasons ) or three ( such as the Vancouver Canucks during the 1990–91 season ) captains for a season .
Some teams rotate captains rather than keep one for an extended period of time ( the Minnesota Wild rotated captaincy every one or two months until the 2009–10 season , when Mikko Koivu was named the first permanent captain since the franchise 's inception ) .
During each NHL game , however , only one player can officially be designated as captain .
Captains are usually veteran players , though on occasion younger players are chosen .
The selection is often seen as an important moment for a team , and one that can affect the team 's ( and newly appointed captain 's ) performance .
Captains are selected by different means : in some instances , teams have held votes among their players to choose a team captain , while on other occasions , the choice was made by team management .
Captains are often chosen due to their seniority in the game and years of service with their current club .
However , franchise players — current or emerging stars — have also been named captains .
Though not required , many captains have previously served as alternate captains of their team .
Some selections or removals of NHL captaincies have been controversial , more so than the other North American professional sports leagues .
For instance , in Canada men 's national ice hockey team , then - General Manager Bobby Clarke selected Eric Lindros for the 1998 Winter Olympics , considered somewhat controversial as Lindros was chosen over longer - tenured NHL captains such as Steve Yzerman , Ray Bourque and Wayne Gretzky , Clarke was also general manager of the Philadelphia Flyers whom Lindros played for professionally .
In 2000 , when the relationship between Clarke and Lindros deteriorated during contentious contract negotiations and the team 's handling of Lindros ' injuries , the team captaincy was issued to Eric Desjardins .
Tampa Bay Lightning head coach John Tortorella stripped the captaincy from Vincent Lecavalier for failing to meet on - ice performance expectations .
In 1980 , Darryl Sittler angrily resigned the captaincy by cutting off the " C " from his jersey with scissors , in protest of Harold Ballard 's trade of his best friend Lanny McDonald , Ballard would liken Sittler 's actions to burning the Canadian flag .
The rules of the IIHF , NHL and Hockey Canada do not permit goaltenders to be designated as on - ice captains , due to the logistical challenge of having the goaltender relay rules discussions between referees and coaches and then return to the crease .
The NHL introduced a rule prohibiting the goaltender from being a captain following the 1947–48 season ( see § Goaltender captains below ) .
In the NCAA , there is no position - based restriction on the team captain .
ALTERNATE CAPTAINS Section::::Alternate captains .
Teams may designate alternate captains , also often erroneously called " assistant captains " .
Alternate captains wear the letter " A " on their jerseys in the same manner that team captains wear the " C " .
In the NHL , teams may appoint a captain and up to two alternate captains , or they may appoint three alternate captains and thus no captain .
A team commonly has three alternate captains when the team has not selected a captain , or when the serving captain is injured and misses a game .
In the National Hockey League , it is common for three alternate captains if no one is assigned captain or the current captain is absent .
International and USA amateur rules do not allow this ; they stipulate that " each team must appoint a captain and not more than two alternate captains " In the Ontario Hockey League ( OHL ) , Quebec Major Junior Hockey League ( QMJHL ) , Western Hockey League ( WHL ) and minor leagues under the jurisdiction of Hockey Canada , teams are allowed to have a captain with up to three alternate captains .
If the team chooses to not appoint a captain , they are not permitted to appoint a fourth alternate captain .
When the captain is off the ice or unavailable for the game , any alternate captain on the ice is responsible for fulfilling the captain 's official role as liaison to the referees .
NHL teams may choose alternate captains from game to game or appoint regular alternate captains for the season .
In North America , alternate captains perform many of the same leadership and team building roles as the captain .
In the 1969–70 season , the Boston Bruins had three alternate captains ( Johnny Bucyk , Phil Esposito and Ed Westfall ) instead of a captain sporting the " C " .
However , as Bucyk was the most senior of the alternate captains , he was first one to be presented the Stanley Cup when the team won the championship in 1970 and 1972 .
In the NCAA , a team can designate a single alternate captain to assume the role of captain , should the captain be unavailable due to injury or penalty .
DESIGNATION
ON UNIFORM Section::::Designation on uniform .
The letter " C " or " A " is attached to the jersey of the team 's captain and alternate captains ( commonly sewn at higher levels of play , though removable insignia exist so the " C " or " A " designation can be easily changed ) .
The designation is traditionally placed on the left side of the sweater , though the IIHF , NHL and NCAA rules specify only that it must be in a " conspicuous location on the front " of the player 's sweater .
Two teams in the NHL have sweaters where the positioning of the crest on the front leaves insufficient space on the left for the letter : the Detroit Red Wings , who place the letter on the right side of the home and road jerseys since the 2007–08 season , and the Arizona Coyotes , who moved their captains ' patches to the right side when they updated their uniforms in 2015–16 .
NHL CAPTAINS RECORDS Section::::NHL captains .
Section::::Records .
Steve Yzerman served as the captain of the Detroit Red Wings for 20 years ( 1986–87 to 2005–06 ) and 1,303 games during that time , the longest term in the history of the NHL by both years and games .
The Boston Bruins ' Ray Bourque was previously the longest - tenured captain in NHL history from 1985–86 to 1999–00 , being co - captain for the first three seasons .
Daniel Alfredsson holds the record as the longest - serving European captain serving for 14 years ( 1999–00 to 2012–13 ) .
Brian Bellows was the youngest captain in NHL history , serving as the interim captain of the Minnesota North Stars from January 1984 until May 1984 .
The youngest permanent NHL captain in history is Connor McDavid , announced as Captain by the Edmonton Oilers on October 5 , 2016 , at the age of 19 years and 266 days .
+ Youngest NHL captains !
Name !
Team !
Birth date !
Captaincy announced !
Age at announcement !
First game as captain !
Age at first game !
Type bgcolor="#cfecec
" Connor McDavid Edmonton Oilers bgcolor="#cfecec " bgcolor="#cfecec " bgcolor="#cfecec " Table Notes : †
An exact date for Brian Bellows ' interim captaincy has not yet been determined .
The North Stars captain , Craig Hartsburg , was injured on January 3 , 1984 , and Bellows became interim captain shortly thereafter in January 1984 .
STANLEY CUP FINALS Section::::Stanley Cup Finals .
Charlie Gardiner was the first NHL captain born in Europe to lead his team to a Stanley Cup title ( 1934 ) .
Derian Hatcher became the first American - born captain to win the Stanley Cup in 1999 .
Daniel Alfredsson was the first European - born and trained captain to lead an NHL team to the Stanley Cup Final ( 2007 ) , while Nicklas Lidstrom was the first captain born and trained in Europe to lead an NHL team to a Stanley Cup title ( 2008 ) , followed by Zdeno Chara ( 2011 ) and Alexander Ovechkin ( 2018 ) .
Mark Messier was the first NHL player to win the Stanley Cup as captain of two different teams : the Edmonton Oilers in 1990 and the New York Rangers in 1994 .
Sidney Crosby became the youngest captain in the NHL to win the Stanley Cup in 2009 at 21 years 10 months .
The youngest captain to lead his team to the Stanley Cup in the history of the trophy is Mike Grant of the 1895 Montreal Victorias , who was 21 years and 2 months at the time .
MINORITY CAPTAINS Section::::Minority captains .
Dirk Graham became the first NHL captain of African descent when he was named captain of the Chicago Blackhawks in March 1989 .
Jarome Iginla , who became captain of the Calgary Flames in 2003 , has been cited by ESPN as the first black captain in NHL history .
GOALTENDER CAPTAINS Section::::Goaltender captains .
In NHL history , there have been six goaltenders who served as official team captains :
* John Ross Roach ( Toronto St. Patricks ) :
1924–25 season * George Hainsworth ( Montreal Canadiens ) :
1932–33 season * Roy Worters ( New York Americans ) :
1932–33 season * Alex Connell ( Ottawa Senators ) :
1932–33 season * Charlie Gardiner ( Chicago Black Hawks ) :
1933–34 season
* Bill Durnan ( Montreal Canadiens ) : latter half of 1947–48 season
The Hockey Hall of Fame displays a picture of Toronto Maple Leafs goaltender Turk Broda wearing the captain 's " C , " but he never actually served in that capacity , and he was actually wearing Toronto team Captain Syl Apps ' sweater .
Prior to the 1948–49 season , the NHL made a change to the rules , prohibiting goaltenders from being captains or alternate captains .
This was in response to complaints from opponents of the Montreal Canadiens , who complained that Durnan left his crease to argue with the referee at strategic points during games , resulting in unscheduled timeouts .
This rule is sometimes referred to as the " Durnan Rule . "
Although the Canucks appointed goaltender Roberto Luongo as its team captain for the 2008–09 and 2009–10 seasons , since he could not be his team 's official captain during games , Willie Mitchell was the on - ice captain , serving as liaison to the officials , and Henrik Sedin and Mattias Ohlund performed ceremonial aspects of the position such as pre - game faceoffs .
Japanese goaltender Yutaka Fukufuji is currently designated an alternate captain of an Asia League Ice Hockey team , the Nikkō Ice Bucks .
SEE ALSO * Captain ( sports ) * List of current NHL captains and alternate captains
* List of current AHL captains * List of current SHL captains and alternate captains
* List of Team Canada captains REFERENCES Notes