BLACK BELT ( MARTIAL ARTS )
In East Asian martial arts , the black belt denotes a high competence in the martial art .
It is often associated with a teaching grade though frequently not the highest grade or the " expert " of public perception .
It is a relatively recent invention ( dating from the late 19th century ) .
ORIGIN Section::::Origin .
The systematic use of belt color to denote the rank was first used in Japan by Jigoro Kano , the founder of judo , who first devised the colored belt system using obi ( sash ) , and awarded the first black belts to denote a Dan rank in the 1880s .
Previously , Japanese Koryu instructors tended to provide certificates .
Initially the wide obi was used ; as practitioners trained in kimono , only white and black obi were used .
It was not until the early 1900s , after the introduction of the judogi , that an expanded colored belt system of awarding rank was created .
Other martial arts later adopted the custom or a variation of it ( e.g. , using colored sashes ) to denote rank .
This includes martial arts that traditionally did not have a formalized rank structure .
This kind of ranking is less common in arts that do not claim a far eastern origin , though it is used in the Marine Corps Martial Arts Program .
RELATIVE RANK Section::::Relative rank .
Rank and belts are not equivalent between arts , styles , or even within some organizations .
In some arts , a black belt is expected in three years , while in others ten years may be common .
Testing for black belt is commonly more rigorous and more centralized than for lower grades .
ABILITY Section::::Ability .
In contrast to the " black belt as master " stereotype , a black belt commonly indicates the wearer is competent in a style 's basic technique and principles .
Since in many styles a black belt takes approximately three to six years of training to achieve , a possible analogy might be a bachelor 's degree : the student has a good understanding of fundamental concepts and ability , but has not yet perfected their skills .
In this analogy a graduate degree would represent advancement past the first degree .
Brazilian jiu - jitsu would be a notable exception to this , as a black belt for a jiu - jitsu practitioner typically takes 7–12 years of training to earn , and a black belt holder is generally viewed as an expert in the art .
Another way to describe this links to the terms used in Japanese arts ; shodan ( for a first degree black belt ) , means literally the first / beginning step , and the next grades , nidan and sandan are each numbered as " ni " is two and " san " is three , meaning second step , third step , etc .
The shodan black belt is not the end of training but rather as a beginning to advanced learning : the individual now " knows how to walk " and may thus begin the " journey " .
As a " black belt " is commonly viewed as conferring some status , achieving one has been used as a marketing " gimmick " , for example a guarantee of being awarded one within a specific period or if a specific amount is paid .
Some schools place profit ahead of ability when using these tactics and are sometimes referred to as McDojos or belt factories .
TEACHING
Section::::Teaching .
In some Japanese schools , after obtaining a black belt the student also begins to instruct , and may be referred to as a senpai ( senior student ) or sensei ( teacher ) .
In others , a black belt student should not be called sensei until they are sandan ( third degree black belt ) , or the titles kyosa or sabom in Korean martial arts as second degree or higher , as this denotes a greater degree of experience and a sensei must have this and grasp of what is involved in teaching a martial art .
HIGHER GRADES
Section::::Higher grades .
In Japanese martial arts the further subdivisions of black belt ranks may be linked to dan grades and indicated by ' stripes ' on the belt .
Yūdansha ( roughly translating from Japanese to " person who holds a dan grade " ) is often used to describe those who hold a black belt rank .
While the belt remains black , stripes or other insignia may be added to denote seniority , in some arts , very senior grades will wear differently colored belts .
In judo and some forms of karate , a sixth dan will wear a red and white belt .
The red and white belt is often reserved only for ceremonial occasions , and a regular black belt is still worn during training .
At 9th or 10th dan some schools award red .
In some schools of Jujutsu , the Shihan rank and higher wear purple belts .
These other colors are often still referred to collectively as " black belts " .
SEE ALSO
* Brazilian jiu - jitsu ranking system
* Kyū * Rank in Judo REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Origins of the Karate Rank System