CODING STRAND
When referring to DNA transcription , the coding strand is the DNA strand whose base sequence corresponds to the base sequence of the RNA transcript produced ( although with thymine replaced by uracil ) .
It is this strand which contains codons , while the non - coding strand contains anticodons .
During transcription , RNA Pol II binds the non - coding strand , reads the anti - codons , and transcribes their sequence to synthesize an RNA transcript with complementary bases .
By convention , the coding strand is the strand used when displaying a DNA sequence .
It is presented in the 5 ' to 3 ' direction .
ALTERNATIVE TERMS FOR STRANDS Section::::Alternative terms for strands .
Wherever a gene exists on a DNA molecule , one strand is the coding strand ( or sense strand ) , and the other is the noncoding strand ( also called the antisense strand , anticoding strand , template strand or transcribed strand ) .
STRANDS IN TRANSCRIPTION BUBBLE Section::::Strands in transcription bubble .
During transcription , RNA polymerase unwinds a short section of the DNA double helix near the start of the gene ( the transcription start site ) .
This unwound section is known as the transcription bubble .
The RNA polymerase , and with it the transcription bubble , travels along the noncoding strand in the opposite , 3 ' to 5 ' , direction , as well as polymerizing a newly synthesized strand in 5 ' to 3 ' or downstream direction .
The DNA double helix is rewound by RNA polymerase at the rear of the transcription bubble .
Like how two adjacent zippers work , when pulled together , they unzip and rezip as they proceed in a particular direction .
Various factors can cause double - stranded DNA to break ; thus , reorder genes or cause cell death .
RNA - DNA HYBRID Section::::RNA - DNA hybrid .
Where the helix is unwound , the coding strand consists of unpaired bases , while the template strand consists of an RNA :
DNA composite , followed by a number of unpaired bases at the rear .
This hybrid consists of the most recently added nucleotides of the RNA transcript , complementary base - paired to the template strand .
The number of base - pairs in the hybrid is under investigation , but it has been suggested that the hybrid is formed from the last 10 nucleotides added .
SEE ALSO
* Sense strand
* Sense ( molecular biology ) REFERENCES BIBLIOGRAPHY