DAZED AND CONFUSED ( FILM ) Dazed and Confused is a 1993 American coming - of - age comedy film written and directed by Richard Linklater .
The film features a large ensemble cast of actors who would later become stars , including Jason London , Ben Affleck , Milla Jovovich , Cole Hauser , Parker Posey , Adam Goldberg , Joey Lauren Adams , Matthew McConaughey , Nicky Katt , and Rory Cochrane .
The plot follows various groups of Texas teenagers during the last day of school in 1976 .
The film grossed less than $ 8 million at the U.S. box office .
In 2002 , Quentin Tarantino listed it as the 10th best film of all time in a Sight and Sound poll .
It ranked third on Entertainment Weekly magazine 's list of the 50 Best High School Movies .
The magazine also ranked it 10th on their " Funniest Movies of the Past 25 Years " list .
The title of the film is derived from Led Zeppelin 's song of the same name .
Linklater approached the surviving members of Led Zeppelin for permission to use their song " Rock and Roll " in the film , but while Jimmy Page and John Paul Jones agreed , Robert Plant refused .
The film 's score was composed and conducted by Alan Silvestri .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
It 's May 28 , 1976 , the last day of school at Lee High School in the suburbs of Austin , Texas .
The next year 's group of seniors are preparing for the annual hazing of incoming freshmen .
Randall " Pink " Floyd , the school 's star football player , is asked to sign a pledge promising not to take drugs during the summer or do anything that would " jeopardize the goal of a championship season " .
When classes end , the incoming freshman boys are hunted down by the seniors and paddled .
The incoming freshman girls are also hazed ; they are rounded up in the school parking lot by senior girls , covered in mustard , ketchup , flour and raw eggs and forced to propose to senior boys .
Freshman Mitch Kramer escapes the initial hazing with his best friend Carl Burnett but is later cornered after a baseball game and violently paddled .
Fred O'Bannion , a senior participating in the hazing tradition for a second year after failing to graduate , delights in punishing Mitch .
Pink gives the injured Mitch a ride home and offers to take him cruising with friends that night .
Plans for the evening are ruined when Kevin Pickford 's parents discover his intention to host a keg party .
Elsewhere , the intellectual trio of Cynthia Dunn , Tony Olson and Mike Newhouse decide to participate in the evening 's festivities .
Pink and his friend David Wooderson , a man in his early 20s who still socializes with high school students , pick up Mitch and head for the Emporium , a pool hall frequented by teenagers .
As the night progresses , students loiter around the Emporium , listen to rock music , cruise the neighborhood and stop at the hamburger drive - in .
Mitch is introduced to sophomore Julie Simms , with whom he shares a mutual attraction .
While cruising again with Pink , Pickford and Don Dawson , Mitch drinks beer and smokes marijuana for the first time .
After a game of mailbox baseball , a neighborhood resident brandishing a gun threatens to call the police .
They barely escape after the resident fires at their car .
After returning to the Emporium , Mitch runs into his middle school friends .
They hatch a plan to get revenge on O'Bannion .
It culminates with them dumping paint on O'Bannion , who leaves in a fit of rage .
After the Emporium closes , an impromptu keg party is planned in a field under a moonlight tower .
Cynthia , Tony and Mike arrive at their first keg party , where Mike is threatened by tough guy Clint Bruno .
Tony runs into freshman Sabrina Davis , whom he met earlier during the hazing and they begin hanging out together .
Cynthia likes Wooderson and exchanges phone numbers with him .
Mike , suffering from the humiliation of his confrontation with Clint , decides to make a stand , punches him and gets tackled .
The fight is broken up by Pink and Wooderson .
Football player Benny O'Donnell confronts Pink about his refusal to sign the pledge .
Pink , the only player not to have signed , believes it violates his individuality and beliefs .
Mitch leaves the keg party with Julie .
They drive to a nearby hill overlooking town to make out .
Tony gives Sabrina a ride home
and they kiss goodnight .
As night turns to dawn , Pink , Wooderson , Don , Ron Slater and several other friends decide to smoke marijuana on the 50-yard line of the football field .
The police arrive so they ditch the drugs .
Recognizing Pink , the police call Coach Conrad , his football coach .
Conrad lectures Pink about hanging out with " losers " and insists that he sign the pledge .
Pink says that he might play football but he is not going to sign it .
Pink leaves with his friends to get tickets to an Aerosmith concert .
Mitch arrives home after sunrise to find his mother has waited up for him .
She decides against punishment but warns him about coming home late again .
Mitch goes to his bedroom , puts on headphones and listens to " Slow Ride " by Foghat as Pink , Wooderson , Slater and Simone Kerr travel down a highway to purchase their tickets .
CAST
* Jason London as Randall " Pink " Floyd * Wiley Wiggins as Mitch Kramer * Sasha Jenson as Don Dawson
* Michelle Burke as Jodi Kramer
* Christine Harnos as Kaye Faulkner * Rory Cochrane as Ron Slater
* Ben Affleck as Fred O'Bannion
* Adam Goldberg as Mike Newhouse
* Anthony Rapp as Tony Olson * Marissa Ribisi as Cynthia Dunn
* Catherine Avril Morris as Julie Simms * Matthew McConaughey as David Wooderson * Shawn Andrews as Kevin Pickford * Cole Hauser as Benny O'Donnell * Milla Jovovich as Michelle Burroughs * Joey Lauren Adams as Simone Kerr * Christin Hinojosa as Sabrina Davis
* Parker Posey as Darla Marks * Deena Martin as Shavonne Wright * Nicky Katt as Clint Bruno * Esteban Powell as Carl Burnett
* Jason O. Smith as Melvin Spivey * Mark Vandermeulen as Tommy Houston
* Jeremy Fox as Hirschfelder * Renée Zellweger as Nesi White PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production .
Section::::Development .
When asked in an interview what he wanted to do after Slacker , Richard Linklater said " ' I want to make this teenage rock'n'roll spree . '
I knew I wanted the story to take place on one day in the spring of 1976 , but at one point it was much more experimental .
The whole movie took place in a car with the characters driving around listening to ZZ Top . "
Lee Daniel , the director of photography , described the concept : " It would have been two shots — one of a guy putting in an eight - track of ZZ Top 's Fandango !
and one of two guys driving around talking .
The film would be the length of the actual album , and you 'd hear each track in the background as a source . "
CASTING
Section::::Casting .
Vince Vaughn was almost cast as the bully O'Bannion before Ben Affleck was chosen .
As Linklater put it , " Ben was smart and full of life .
You do n't cast the unappealing person , you cast the appealing person .
" Other young actors considered for roles include Elizabeth Berkley , Mira Sorvino , Ron Livingston , and Claire Danes .
Casting director Don Phillips said , " We wanted Claire Danes for the girl , but she was too young .
She could n't leave school . "
Renee Zellweger has a nonspeaking role in the film , but was originally considered for the part of Darla , that went to Parker Posey instead .
Linklater said , " Parker was just crazier . "
Some roles which were intended to be larger were reduced .
The Kevin Pickford character , played by Shawn Andrews , was meant to be a larger role , but due to his behavior with other cast members , Pickford 's screen time was cut in favor of Matthew McConaughey 's character , Wooderson .
Linklater recalled " There was another actor [ Shawn Andrews ] who was kind of the opposite [ of McConaughey ] .
He was n't really getting along with everybody .
I could tell the actors were n't responding to him . "
Linklater had to break up a fight between Andrews and London at one point .
On screen , the two characters barely speak to each other during the film .
Milla Jovovich , who played Michelle , Pickford 's girlfriend , had her role reduced because , in Linklater 's words , " it did n't really gel . "
McConaughey was not originally cast in the film .
He approached casting director Phillips in the bar of the Radisson in Austin where the cast was staying .
Phillips recalls , " The bartender says to him , ' See that guy down there ?
That 's Don Phillips .
He cast Sean Penn in Fast Times . '
And Matthew goes , ' I 'm gon na go down and talk to this guy . ' "
Phillips also recalls that Linklater did n't like McConaughey at first " because he was too handsome .
" Much of the Wooderson role was improvised or written on the spot , giving McConaughey more screen time .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Dazed and Confused was released on September 24 , 1993 in 183 theaters , grossing $ 918,127 on its opening weekend .
It went on to make $ 7.9 million in North America .
The film received positive reviews from critics .
On review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , it garnered a 91 % approval rating from 56 critics , with a weighted average rating of 7.8/10 .
The website 's critical consensus reads : " Featuring an excellent ensemble cast , a precise feel for the 1970s , and a killer soundtrack , Dazed and Confused is a funny , affectionate , and clear - eyed look at high school life . "
Metacritic provides a score of 78 out of 100 from 18 critics , indicating " generally favorable " reviews .
Film critic Roger Ebert awarded the film three stars out of four , praising the film as " art crossed with anthropology " with a " painful underside " .
Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote , " Dazed and Confused has an enjoyably playful spirit , one that amply compensates for its lack of structure " .
Desson Howe of The Washington Post , wrote , " Dazed succeeds on its own terms and reflects American culture so well , it becomes part of it " .
In her review for The Austin Chronicle , Marjorie Baumgarten gave particular praise to Matthew McConaughey 's performance : "
He is a character we 're all too familiar with in the movies
but McConaughey nails this guy without a hint of condescension or whimsy , claiming this character for all time as his own " .
Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers gave the film four stars out of four , and praised Linklater as a " sly and formidable talent , bringing an anthropologist 's eye to this spectacularly funny celebration of the rites of stupidity .
His shitfaced American Graffiti is the ultimate party movie – loud , crude , socially irresponsible and totally irresistible " .
In his review for Time , Richard Corliss wrote , " Linklater is surely no ham - fisted moralist , and his film has lots of attitude to shake a finger at .
But it also has enough buoyant ' 70s music to shake anybody 's tail feather , and a kind of easy jubilance of narrative and character " .
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film an " A " rating , and wrote , "
Yet if Linklater captures the comic goofiness of the time , he also evokes its liberating spirit .
The film finds its meaning in the subtle clash between the older , sadistic macho - jock ethos and the follow - your - impulse hedonism that was the lingering legacy of the ' 60s " .
LEGACY Section::::Legacy .
Quentin Tarantino included it on his list of the 10 greatest films of all time in the 2002 Sight and Sound poll .
In 2003 , Entertainment Weekly ranked the film # 17 on their list of " The Top 50 Cult Films " , third on their list of the 50 Best High School Movies , 10th on their " Funniest Movies of the Past 25 Years " list , and ranked it # 6 on their " The Cult 25 : The Essential Left - Field Movie Hits Since ' 83 " list .
In October 2004 , three of Linklater 's former classmates from Huntsville High School , whose surnames are Wooderson , Slater , and Floyd , filed a defamation lawsuit against Linklater , claiming to be the basis for the similarly named characters on the film .
The lawsuit was filed in New Mexico rather than Texas because New Mexico has a longer statute of limitations .
The suit was subsequently dismissed .
In 2012 , McConaughey reprised his role as Wooderson in the Butch Walker and The Black Widows music video " Synthesizers " .
To celebrate the film 's 20th anniversary in 2013 , the film received the Star of Texas award from the Texas Film Hall of Fame .
Linklater accepted the award after being introduced by Tarantino , who reiterated his appreciation of the film as his favorite of the 1990s .
The event featured a reunion of several cast members including Joey Lauren Adams , Wiley Wiggins , Christin Hinojosa , Nicky Katt , Mona Lee , Catherine Avril Morris , Anthony Rapp , Marissa Ribisi , Michelle Burke Thomas , and Mark Vandermeulen .
At the event , Linklater described his intent to create an inverse John Hughes film : " The drama is so low - key in [ Dazed & Confused ] .
I do n't remember teenage being that dramatic .
I remember just trying to go with the flow , socialize , fit in and be cool .
The stakes were really low .
To get Aerosmith tickets or not ?
That 's a big thing .
It was really rare when the star - crossed lovers from the opposite side of the tracks and the girl gets pregnant and there 's a car crash and somebody dies .
That did n't really happen much .
But riding around and trying to look for something to do with the music cranked up , now that happened a lot ! "
After Boyhood was released Linklater announced that his next film , Everybody Wants Some ! ! , would be a " spiritual sequel " to Dazed and Confused .
The newer film takes place in a Texas college in 1980 .
The line " alright , alright , alright " became a catchphrase for Matthew McConaughey .
HOME VIDEO Section::::Home video .
MCA / Universal released Dazed and Confused on laserdisc in January 1994 , followed by a VHS release two months later .
The film was released on HD DVD in 2006 .
The Criterion Collection released a two - disc boxed - set edition of the film on June 6 , 2006 in the U.S. and Canada .
Features included an audio commentary by Richard Linklater , deleted scenes , the original trailer , the 50 minute " Making Dazed " documentary that aired on the American Movie Classics channel on September 18 , 2005 , on - set interviews , behind - the - scenes footage , cast auditions and footage from the ten - year anniversary celebration .
Also included is a 72-page book featuring new essays by Kent Jones , Jim DeRogatis , and Chuck Klosterman as well as memories from the cast and crew , character profiles and a mini reproduction of the original film poster designed by Frank Kozik .
Entertainment Weekly gave it an " A " rating and stated that it " grants this enduring cult classic the DVD treatment it deserves " .
Universal Studios released Dazed and Confused on Blu - ray in August 2011 , in a 1080p / AVC MPEG-4 transfer , with a DTS - HD Master Audio 5.1 soundtrack .
The Blunt Truth is a four - minute and twenty second long 1970s anti - cannabis hoax educational film .
It appeared as a bonus feature on 2004 's Dazed and Confused : Flashback Party Edition .
SOUNDTRACKS Section::::Soundtracks .
The soundtrack for the film was released on September 28 , 1993 by The Medicine Label .
The songs " Hurricane " by Bob Dylan , " Hey Baby " by Ted Nugent , and " Sweet Emotion " by Aerosmith were also included in the film , but not on the commercial soundtracks . "
The Alien Song ( For Those Who Listen ) " by Milla Jovovich was briefly performed by the character Michelle Burroughs , but was not included in the soundtrack either .
The film 's score was composed by Alan Silvestri .
BOOK Section::::Book .
In September 1993 , St. Martin 's Press published a 127-page , softcover book ( ) inspired by Richard Linklater 's screenplay .
It was compiled by Linklater , Denise Montgomery , and others , and designed by Erik Josowitz .
It was presented as a kind of yearbook , with character profiles , essays by characters , a time - line focusing on the years 1973 to 1977 , and various 1970s pop culture charts and quizzes .
It also featured dozens of black - and - white photos from the film .
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Dazed and Confused
: Dream On . . .
an essay by Kent Jones at the Criterion Collection