CHILDREN 'S DAY
International Children 's Day is a day recognized to celebrate children .
The day is celebrated on various dates in different countries .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Children 's Day began on the second Sunday of June in 1857 by Reverend Dr. Charles Leonard , pastor of the Universalist Church of the Redeemer in Chelsea , Massachusetts : Leonard held a special service dedicated to , and for the children .
Leonard named the day Rose Day , though it was later named Flower Sunday , and then Children 's Day .
Children 's Day was first officially declared a national holiday by the Republic of Turkey in 1929 with the set date of 23 April .
Children 's Day has been celebrated nationally since 1923 with the government and the newspapers of the time declaring it a day for the children .
However , it was decided that an official declaration was needed to clarify and justify this celebration and the official declaration was made nationally in 1931 by the founder and the President of the Republic of Turkey , Mustafa Kemal Atatürk .
The International Day for Protection of Children is observed in many countries as Children 's Day on 1 June since 1950 .
It was established by the Women 's International Democratic Federation on its congress in Moscow ( 4 November 1949 ) .
Major global variants include a Universal Children 's Holiday on 20 November , by United Nations recommendation .
Even though Children 's Day is celebrated globally by most of the countries in the world ( almost 50 countries ) on 1 June , Universal Children 's Day takes place annually on 20 November .
First proclaimed by the United Kingdom in 1954 , it was established to encourage all countries to institute a day , firstly to promote mutual exchange and understanding among children and secondly to initiate action to benefit and promote the welfare of the world 's children .
That is observed to promote the objectives outlined in the Charter and for the welfare of children .
On 20 November 1959 the United Nations adopted the Declaration of the Rights of the Child .
The United Nations adopted the Convention on the Rights of the Child on 20 November 1989 and can be found on the Council of Europe website .
In 2000 , the Millennium Development Goals outlined by world leaders in order to stop the spread of HIV / AIDS by 2015 .
Albeit this applies to all people , the main objective is with regard to children .
UNICEF is dedicated to meeting the six of eight goals that apply to the needs of children so that they are all entitled to basic rights written in the 1989 international human rights treaty .
UNICEF delivers vaccines , works with policymakers for good health care and education and works exclusively to help children and protect their rights .
In September 2012 , the Secretary - General Ban Ki - moon of the United Nations led the initiative for the education of children .
He firstly wants every child to be able to attend school , a goal by 2015 .
Secondly , to improve the skill set acquired in these schools .
Finally , implementing policies regarding education to promote peace , respect and environmental concern .
Universal Children 's Day is not just a day to celebrate children for who they are , but to bring awareness to children around the globe that have experienced violence in forms of abuse , exploitation and discrimination .
Children are used as labourers in some countries , immersed in armed conflict , living on the streets , suffering by differences be it religion , minority issues , or disabilities .
Children feeling the effects of war can be displaced because of the armed conflict and may suffer physical and psychological trauma .
The following violations are described in the term " children and armed conflict " : recruitment and child soldiers , killing / maiming of children , abduction of children , attacks on schools / hospitals and not allowing humanitarian access to children .
Currently there are about 153 million children between the ages of 5 and 14 who are forced into child labour .
The International Labour Organization in 1999 adopted the Prohibition and Elimination of the Worst Forms of Child Labour including slavery , child prostitution and child pornography .
A summary of the rights under the Convention on the Rights of the Child can be found on the UNICEF website .
Canada co - chaired the World Summit for children in 1990 and in 2002 the United Nations reaffirmed the commitment to complete the agenda of the 1990 World Summit .
This added to the UN Secretary - General 's report We the Children : End - of Decade review of the follow - up to the World Summit for Children .
The United Nations children 's agency released a study referencing the population increase of children will make up 90 per cent of the next billion people .
DATES
AROUND
THE WORLD 13
February
First Sunday of March March , 2018 March , 2019 March , 2020
17 March 4
April 5
April
12 April Last Saturday of April Apr , 2018 Apr , 2019 Apr , 2020 23 April National Sovereignty and Children 's Day 30
April 5
May 5 May Second Sunday of May May , 2018 May , 2019 May , 2020 10
May 17
May 27
May Last Sunday of May May , 2018 May , 2019 May , 2020 Ascension Day 1 June Second Sunday of June Jun , 2018 Jun , 2019 Jun , 2020 25 June 25 Jun 2012 20 Oct 2013 19
Oct 2014 19
Oct 15~17
Syrian Arab Republic 1
July
Third Sunday of July Jul , 2018 Jul , 2019 Jul , 2020 23
July 29
July Aug , 2018 Aug , 2019 Aug , 2020 16
August
Third Sunday of August Aug , 2018 Aug , 2019 Aug , 2020 9
September 10
September
Bhadra 29 14 Sept15 Sept(leap year )
20 September 25
September 1 October
First Friday of October
Oct , 2018
Oct , 2019 Oct , 2020
First Wednesday of October ( Children 's Day recognition and assignation )
Second Sunday of August ( Children 's Day observance )
Oct , 2018
Oct , 2019 Oct , 2020 8 October 12 October Fourth Saturday of October
Oct , 2018
Oct , 2019 Oct , 2020 Fourth Wednesday of October
Oct - Oct , 2018
Oct - Oct , 2019 Oct - Oct , 2020 Celebrated as National Children 's Week
First Saturday of November
Nov , 2018
Nov , 2019 Nov , 2020 11
November 14 November
20 November
5
December 23
December 25 December LIST BY COUNTRY ALBANIA Section::::List by country .
Section::::Albania .
In Albania , Children 's Day ( Festa e femijeve ) is celebrated on 1 June .
ARGENTINA Section::::Argentina .
In Argentina , Children 's Day ( Día del Niño ) is celebrated on the third Sunday of August .
ARMENIA
Section::::Armenia .
In Armenia , Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
Children 's Week is an annual event celebrated in Australia during the fourth week in October , from the Saturday before Universal Children 's Day to the following Sunday .
It was established as a holiday in 1954 .
Until 1977 Child Care Week was held in various Australian states and territories focusing on children in care or those in institutions .
It was held at different times .
In 1984 it was decided to coordinate a national week to include all children .
BANGLADESH Section::::Bangladesh .
Since 2009 JAAGO Foundation has been celebrating this day throughout Bangladesh by engaging youth and creating awareness about children 's right on 20 November which is the declared Universal Children 's Day by United Nation .
After this movement gained a lot of attraction , Bangladesh started celebrating , Children 's Day on 17 March on the birthday of the Father of the Nation Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujibur Rahman .
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA Section::::Bosnia & Herzegovina .
In Bosnia & Herzegovina , Children 's Day was established as a holiday in 1993 .
BRAZIL
Section::::Brazil .
In Brazil , Children 's Day ( In Portuguese : Dia das Crianças ) is celebrated on 12 October , coinciding with Our Lady of Aparecida 's day , the country 's Patron Saint holiday .
It is also the day of the discovery of America ( Columbus Day ) , in reference to the " New Continent " .
In Brazil Children 's day is celebrated by kids receiving presents from their parents .
BULGARIA Section::::Bulgaria .
In Bulgaria , Children 's day ( Ден на детето ) is celebrated on 1 June .
Traditionally kids receive very special attention from their family , including Birthday - like presents .
In the past all drivers were expected to drive with their lights on all day long to demonstrate extra vigilance over children 's safety .
Now it is compulsory to drive with the lights on every day of the year .
CAMEROON Section::::Cameroon .
In Cameroon , Children 's Day was established as a holiday in 1990 .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
National Child Day has been proclaimed across Canada since 1993 to commemorate the United Nations ' adoption of two documents centered on children 's rights : the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child on 20 November 1959 , and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child on 20 November 1989 .
The " Child Day Act " outlines human rights to which children , under the age of 18 , are entitled by law .
This Act promotes awareness and teaches children that they have rights , like adults do , under the law .
The date of celebration is 20 November .
CENTRAL AFRICA Section::::Central Africa .
In Congo , Congo DR , Cameroon , Equatorial Guinea , Gabon , Chad , Central African Republic , Children 's Day is celebrated on 25 December to honor all the children there .
CHILE Section::::Chile .
In Chile , Children 's Day is officially recognized , and assigned to the first Wednesday of October .
However , it is observed on the second Sunday of August .
It retains none of the international flavor as a day to recognize the needs of or rights of children , but is observed merely as a commercial holiday dedicated to buying toys for children .
CHINA Section::::China .
In the People 's Republic of China , Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June and is formally known as " the June 1 International Children 's Day " ( ) .
When the People 's Republic of China was first established in 1949 , the State Council ( Cabinet ) designated a half - day holiday for all primary schools on 1 June .
This was later made into a full day 's break in 1956 with The Announcement by the State Council to make 1 June Children 's Day a One - Day Holiday .
Schools usually hold activities such as children 's performances , camping trips , or free movies on Children 's Day or the day before to allow students to have fun .
Children of civil servants might also receive small gifts from the government until they are fourteen , and Civil servants who have children sometimes have a half - day holiday on 1 June to spend more time with their children .
Entrance and set out ceremonies of the Young Pioneers of China are usually held on 1 June as well .
Entrance of children under 14 into the Forbidden City is free on 1 June , while each accompanying adult gets 50 % off .
COLOMBIA Section::::Colombia .
In Colombia , Children 's Day is celebrated in the last Saturday of April .
It was established as a holiday in 2001 .
COSTA RICA Section::::Costa Rica .
In Costa Rica , Children 's Day is celebrated on 9 September .
CROATIA Section::::Croatia .
In Croatia , Children 's Day is celebrated on 11 November .
CUBA Section::::Cuba .
In Cuba , Children 's Day is celebrated on the third Sunday of July .
CZECH REPUBLIC Section::::Czech Republic .
In Czech Republic , Children 's Day ( Mezinárodní den dětí ) is celebrated on 1 June .
ECUADOR Section::::Ecuador .
In Ecuador , Children 's Day ( Día del Niño ) is celebrated on 1 June .
Generally , kids up to 12 years old receive presents .
EGYPT
Section::::Egypt .
In Egypt , Children 's Day is celebrated every 20 November with festivals and games for children .
ERITREA Section::::Eritrea .
In Eritrea , Children 's Day is celebrated on the 8th of December .
FINLAND Section::::Finland .
In Finland , Children 's Day is known as Day of Children 's Rights and is celebrated on 20 November .
FORMER AND CURRENT COMMUNIST AND SOCIALIST COUNTRIES Section::::Former and current Communist and Socialist countries .
In Russia , as well as other former Soviet Union states , including Armenia , Azerbaijan , Belarus , Estonia , Georgia , Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Latvia , Lithuania , Moldova , Tajikistan , Turkmenistan , Ukraine , Uzbekistan , other former or current communist states , Albania , Angola , Benin , Bosnia and Herzegovina , Bulgaria , Cambodia , Croatia , Cuba , Czech Republic , Slovakia , Ethiopia , East Germany , Kosovo , Laos , Republic of Macedonia , Mongolia , Montenegro , Mozambique , Poland , Romania , Serbia , Slovenia , Tanzania and Yemen , Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June .
This list includes 25 countries which regained independence from USSR , seceded from Yugoslavia Federation , as well as Czechoslovakia and Ethiopia after their respective splits .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
In Germany , during the Cold War , Children 's Day ( Kindertag ) was handled quite differently in West Germany and East Germany .
While East Germany ( GDR ) celebrated International Children 's Day ( ) on 1 June , West Germany ( FRG ) celebrated Universal Children 's Day ( ) on 20 September .
The customs of Children 's Day were also significantly different in West and East Germany .
In East Germany , the holiday was introduced in 1950 , and was from then held on a yearly basis for the children .
On this day of the year , children would typically be congratulated and would receive presents from their parents and did special activities in school , such as field trips and the like .
In West Germany , Children 's Day Universal Children 's Day laid its emphasis not on games and presents , but more on political efforts to strengthen children 's rights .
( See Jugendamt . )
After the reunification of East and West Germany occurred in 1990 , Universal Children 's Day has become official for whole Germany .
This , however , was not accepted by large parts of the East German population .
Most parents still celebrate Children 's Day on the former date of 1 June , and public events pertaining to Children 's Day take place on 20 September ( Weltkindertag ) .
GREECE Section::::Greece .
In Greece , Children 's Day was established as a holiday in 1989 .
GUATEMALA Section::::Guatemala .
In Guatemala , Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 October .
It was established as a holiday around 1990 .
HONDURAS
Section::::Honduras .
In Honduras , Children 's Day is celebrated on 10 September .
HUNGARY Section::::Hungary .
Children 's Week began in Hungary in 1931 .
Since 1950 it has been reduced to Children 's Day , taking place on the last Sunday in May. HAITI Section::::Haiti .
In Haiti , Children 's Day is celebrated on 12 June .
HONG KONG Section::::Hong Kong .
Children 's Day ( ) is celebrated on 4 April .
INDONESIA
Section::::Indonesia .
In Indonesia , Children 's Day is celebrated on 23 July .
It was established as a holiday in 1984 .
INDIA Section::::India .
In India , Children 's Day is celebrated on 14 November , on the birthday of the first Prime Minister of independent India , who was fondly called Chacha Nehru ( Uncle Nehru ) or Chachaji ( Uncle ) , and who emphasized the importance of giving love and affection to children , to give him tribute .
After the death of Jawaharlal Nehru in 27 May 1964 , it was unanimously decided to celebrate his birthday as Bal Diwas or Children 's Day in India .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
In Ireland , Universal Children 's Day is celebrated on 20 November .
JAPAN Section::::Japan .
Japan 's is celebrated on 5 May , a National Holiday since 1948 , to celebrate the happiness of all children and to express gratitude toward mothers .
There is a long tradition , from the 8th century , to celebrate children 's day twice a year ; 3 March for girls and on 5 May for boys .
On 3 March , also known as the Doll Festival , Japanese people decorate their households with traditional Heian Period doll sets and plum blossom , and drink Amazake .
On 5 May , also known as 端午の節句 ( tango - no sekku ) , they fly carp streamers outside , display Samurai dolls , and eat chimaki .
There were some who argued in 1948 that 3 March should also be a National Holiday .
KAZAKHSTAN Section::::Kazakhstan .
The International Children 's Day is celebrated annually on 1 June and is established as a national holiday for children .
Over 3 million children across Kazakhstan celebrate the holiday with special children 's events .
NORTH KOREA Section::::North Korea .
North Korean Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June as the International Children 's Day ( 국제 아동절 ) .
Before 1945 , it was celebrated on
1 May. There is also a day called 조선소년단창립절 ( Festival for establishment of Young Pioneer Corps ) on 6 June .
SOUTH KOREA Section::::South Korea .
In South Korea , 5 May is officially recognized as Children 's Day ( 어린이날 ) .
Parents often give presents to their children , as well as spend time with them .
The children are taken on excursions to zoos , museums , and various venues of children - oriented entertainment .
Children 's Day was first conceived by innovative Korean students and social leaders on the basis of the March 1st Movement to achieve Korean independence from Japanese colonialism .
From Jinju , many people gathered to promote and improve the social status of children and encourage adults to teach awareness of their deprived sovereignty .
In 1923 , several groups of students studying in Tokyo agreed to designate 1 May as Children 's Day .
A predominant intellectual figure , Bang Jeong - hwan , greatly contributed to the popularization of the holiday .
Because it overlapped with Laborer 's Day , Children 's Day was moved to
5 May. Bang Jeong - hwan first coined the modern Korean word for children , eorini ( 어린이 ) , replacing the previous words aenom ( 애놈 ) and esaekki ( 애새끼 ) .
Until 1939 , Japanese authorities based in Seoul oppressed the movement to stop Korean social activists congregating for the festival .
After independence in 1945 , the movement to respect children was revived .
The children 's welfare law written in the constitution officially designated 5 May as Children 's Day in 1961 .
And by ' the law of holiday of government office ' , Children 's day became a holiday in Korea in 1970 .
LIBERIA Section::::Liberia .
In Liberia , Children 's day was established as a holiday in 1991 .
LAOS Section::::Laos .
In Laos , Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June .
MALDIVES Section::::Maldives .
In Maldives , Children 's Day is celebrated on
10 May. On this day all the school children go to school to the event to celebrate Children 's Day .
The schools that are involved would also organize numerous activities for their pupils .
MAURITIUS Section::::Mauritius .
In Mauritius , Children 's Day was established in 1991 , as the International Day of the African Child .
MYANMAR Section::::Myanmar .
In Myanmar , Children 's Day is celebrated on 13th February .
MEXICO Section::::Mexico .
In Mexico , Children 's Day ( " Día Del Niño " ) is celebrated 30 April .
On this day teachers in schools organize the day for their children .
In some schools , lessons are suspended for the day .
They organize games , music , and the children bring in their favorite foods to share with others .
Some families also have a day out with their children .
There are special activities for the children in parks and sports centers .
Sometimes , also , the children will be given presents by their families .
This is the day when children are honored in Mexico .
As it is spring , children wear many bright colors to celebrate their youth and the coming of Spring .
Children 's Day in Mexico started in 1925 .
This celebrarion had its origins during Álvaro Obregón 's presidential period after the country joined the Geneva Conventions and looking after the wellness of the vulnerable children affected by
World War I. Later , the Geneva Declaration of the Rights of the Child was adopted on 26 November 1924 by the League of Nations recognizing that children are the most affected by war events .
United Nations recommended 20 November to celebrate Children 's Day throughout the world , but that day coincides with Revolution Day ( Mexico ) .
Also , 30 April was selected in order to avoid 1 May ( Labor Day ) and the celebrations of Cinco de Mayo ( The Day of the Battle of Puebla ) .
MALAYSIA Section::::Malaysia .
It is held traditionally on 1 October .
Nowadays it is also celebrated on 20 November ( following International Children 's Day ) .
MOLDOVA Section::::Moldova .
In Moldova , International Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June .
From 2016 , the day has been declared a public holiday .
MONGOLIA Section::::Mongolia .
In Mongolia , the International Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June .
It is also known as " Эх үрсийн баяр " .
MOZAMBIQUE Section::::Mozambique .
In Mozambique , the International Children 's Day is also celebrated on 1 June .
NEPAL Section::::Nepal .
In Nepal , Children 's Day ( बाल दिवस ) is celebrated on Bhadra 29 according to the Nepali Calendar ( August – September)after signing the child rights agreement with UN .
Earlier during the Shah Rule , Nepal used to observe Children 's day on Bhadra 4 on the birthday of H.M. Queen Mother Ratna Rajya Laxmi Devi Shah .
It is celebrated by conducting various programme on various institutions around Nepal .
It was established as a holiday in 1990 .
NEW ZEALAND Section::::New Zealand .
In New Zealand , Children 's Day is typically celebrated on the first Sunday in March .
It honours children as a taonga ( Maori for treasure ) , and is a day families can relax and share in activities to honour their children .
In 2012 , the focus was on peace and aroha
( Maori for ' love ' ) .
New Zealand has high rates of child abuse and family violence .
The Government of New Zealand has recognised this as one of the most important issues for New Zealanders , with an event such as Children 's Day helping to focus on the practice of sharing , loving and caring as well as honouring tamariki ( Maori for ' children ' ) .
NIGERIA
Section::::Nigeria .
Children 's Day is celebrated on 27 May in Nigeria .
It was established as a holiday in 1964 .
It is a public holiday for Primary and Secondary school children .
Due to the large size of the country , only few group of children ( schools or any other organization ) are selected to march past in a parade .
The children are usually given treats such as an outing or doing jobs that adults would normally do .
In some situations , primary and secondary school children compete in military parades format for a prize which will be given at the end of the competition .
Religious groups in Nigeria also celebrate children 's day in grand style .
Many private and public organizations usually put together children 's party for privileged and less privileged children in a bid to give them a sense of belonging .
It is also a day media organizations analyze the plight of children in the society and efforts government and non government agencies make to better the lot of children .
NICARAGUA
Section::::Nicaragua .
In Nicaragua the International Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June .
NORWAY Section::::Norway .
Children 's Day in Norway is held on 17 May , the same day as Norwegian Constitution Day , with many children 's parades simultaneously celebrating both events and thereby emphasizing the importance of children in Norwegian society .
PAKISTAN Section::::Pakistan .
In Pakistan , the National Assembly on 16 December 2015 passed a unanimous resolution expressing grief and sadness over the martyrdom of more than 150 students and teachers of Army Public School Peshawar on 16 December 2014 .
The NA recommended that 16 December should be observed as Pakistan Children Day in memory of the martyrs .
Earlier Children 's Day was celebrated on 1 July .
In Punjab the Child Rights Cell of Department of Social Welfare Punjab collaborates with UNICEF to celebrate this day .
Whereas , The NGO , Voice of Children Islamabad , also celebrates Children 's day and arranges activities for children and parents on that day .
The EPO and SFB also celebrate Children 's day and arrange fun and interactive sessions for children and parents .
For Children 's Day , there are many festivals and events organised by schools and organisations , that focus on having fun and lively activities that kids and their families can enjoy .
Most charitable organisations also partake in the festivities , by holding functions or partnering with bigger organisations .
Thus , everyone joins in to make this day a memorable event each year in Pakistan .
PALESTINIAN TERRITORIES Section::::Palestinian territories .
Children day is celebrated in the Palestinian territories on 5 April .
PANAMA Section::::Panama .
In Panama , Children 's Day or Kid 's Day was formerly held on 1 November , but was changed by Vivian Fernandez de Torrijos , the wife of President Martin Torrijos ( 2004–2009 ) , to the third Sunday of July .
PARAGUAY Section::::Paraguay .
In Paraguay , Children 's Day is celebrated on 16 August , day of the Battle of Acosta Ñu , where it is said that 20,000 men from the Triple Alliance were awaited by a Paraguayan force made up of 3,500 children ages six to fifteen , ordered to hold the Alliance forces while the president Solano Lopez could escape .
Even though Paraguay had been already completely defeated , it is said that Lopez forced them to stay and face the enemy , others sources claim that the children volunteered to fight against the Allied forces after their families had been killed by the advancing allied forces ( see more in Paraguayan War ) .
Children 's Day is a national holiday , used to remember the event , which happened during the five - year war .
PERU Section::::Peru .
According to Peruvian law in Peru , Children 's Day ( Día del Niño Peruano ( Ley Nº 27666 ) , literally Peruvian Child 's Day ( Law Nº 27666 ) ) is celebrated every second Sunday of April .
There is a second celebration every third Sunday of August promoted as the " International Children 's Day " .
On this day of the year , Peruvian children would typically be congratulated and would receive presents from their parents .
Since it is celebrated on Sunday , all special activities in school , such as field trips and the like are done the previous Friday .
All major stores offer special discounts on toys , appliances , electronics , clothes , etc .
PHILIPPINES
Section::::Philippines .
In the Philippines , Children 's Day was established on 20 November as a holiday in 1992 .
POLAND Section::::Poland .
In Poland , Children 's Day ( Dzień Dziecka ) is celebrated on 1 June .
The International Children 's Day was introduced in Poland in 1952 .
It coincides with the beginning of meteorological summer and it is usually treated as a special day , free from lessons , as it takes place near the end of the school year .
Schools usually organize special activities for the pupils to celebrate the day , and during the first week of June , is a time of festivities organized in parks and entertainment centres for children .
PORTUGAL AND SOME FORMER COLONIES Section::::Portugal and some former colonies .
In Portugal ( and also at some of its former Asiatic and African colonies such as Guinea - Bissau , Macau , Cape Verde , East Timor , Angola , Mozambique and São Tomé and Príncipe ) , Children 's Day ( Dia da Criança ) is celebrated on 1 June .
ROMANIA Section::::Romania .
In Romania , Children 's Day ( Romanian : " Ziua Copilului " ) is celebrated on 1 June .
Children often receive presents from parents and other family members .
Various events are also organized .
On 1 June 2012 , International Children 's Day was celebrated by the Romanian Government at the Ministry of Labour , Family and Social Protection .
Almost 100 children in attendance received a Minister of Children diploma celebrating with parents and grandparents .
According to the Law 220/2016 , starting with 2017 , Children 's Day is officially a public holiday .
RUSSIAN FEDERATION Section::::Russian Federation .
In Russia , Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June .
It was established as a holiday in 1949 .
SERBIA Section::::Serbia .
In Serbia Children 's Day is celebrated on 20 November , since 1989 .
SINGAPORE
Section::::Singapore .
Traditionally , 1 October is the day which Singapore officially celebrates Children 's Day .
A similar event celebrated every year is Youth Day , which is celebrated on the first Sunday of July every year .
Kindergarten and primary school children in Singapore do not have to attend school on this day .
From 2011 , Children 's Day was celebrated on the first Friday of October .
SOUTH AFRICA Section::::South Africa .
In South Africa , Children 's Day is on the first Saturday of November but not really celebrated in any significant way .
SOUTH SUDAN Section::::South Sudan .
In South Sudan , Children 's Day is celebrated on 23 December , the birthday of South Sudan 's " greatest child " according to tribal mythology .
SLOVAKIA
Section::::Slovakia .
In Slovakia , the day is called International Children 's Day ( Medzinárodný deň detí ) and is celebrated on 1 June .
Children get free entrance to some attractions like zoos .
SPAIN
Section::::Spain .
In Spain , this date is celebrated on the 2nd Sunday of May , and it is called " Día del niño " .
SRI LANKA Section::::Sri Lanka .
In Sri Lanka , Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 October .
SUDAN Section::::Sudan .
In Sudan , Children 's Day is celebrated on 23 December , the birthday of North Sudan 's " greatest child " according to tribal mythology .
SURINAME Section::::Suriname .
In Suriname , Children 's Day or is celebrated on 5 December .
Generally , children up to 12 years old receive presents from their parents .
SWEDEN Section::::Sweden .
In Sweden , Children 's Day is celebrated on the first Monday of October .
It was Gustav Rosén who is credited with starting a Children 's Day in Umeå in northern Sweden in 1905 .
SWITZERLAND
Section::::Switzerland .
In Switzerland , Children 's day was established as a holiday in 1925 .
TAIWAN Section::::Taiwan .
The Republic of China on Taiwan designated 4 April as Children 's Day ( ) , pursuant to Article 5 of the Order to Implement Commemoration Days and Holidays .
The holiday dates back to 1931 and since then schools often hold special activities in order to celebrate the occasion .
Because of pressure from parents demanding to accompany their children in the celebration , Taiwan celebrated Women 's Day together with Children 's Day on 4 April 1991 .
Since then , 4 April has been known as " The Combined Holidays of Women 's Day and Children 's Day " ( ) .
It has been a public holiday of Taiwan , ROC since 2011 .
In 1931 , Kong Xiangxi initiated the establishment of the China Association for Charity and Children 's Association to propose 4 April as Children 's Day .
The Executive Yuan stipulated in Article 5 of the " Memorial Day and Festival Implementation Measures " that on 4 April , Children 's Day , relevant organs , groups , and schools held celebration activities [ 2 ] .
A one - day holiday was merged with Women 's Day from 1991 to 1997 ( formally known as " Women 's Day , Children 's Day Merger Holiday " ) .
After 1998 , the holiday was cancelled and it was incorporated into the week off holiday .
In 1998 , two days before the rest of the week , the children of elementary and junior high school students had a day off .
Since 2011 , it has returned to the national holiday and the country has a holiday for one day .
In 2012 , if the law is revised again , if it meets the same day as the Ching Ming Festival , it will be on 3 April of the previous day , and if it is on Thursday , it will be on the following day .
THAILAND
Section::::Thailand .
Thailand National Children 's Day ( ) is celebrated on the second Saturday in January .
Known as " Wan Dek " in Thailand , Children 's Day is celebrated to give children the opportunity to have fun and to create awareness about their significant role towards the development of the country .
It was established as a holiday in 1955 .
Usually , His Majesty the King gives advice addressing the children while the Supreme Monarch Patriarch of Thailand gives a moral teaching .
The Prime Minister also usually gives each Children 's Day a theme and a slogan .
Many Government offices are open to children and their family ; this includes the Government House , the Parliament House Complex and various Military installations .
These events may include a guided tour and an exhibition .
A notable example is the guided tour at the Government House , where children have an opportunity to view the Prime Minister 's office and sit at the bureau .
The Royal Thai Air Force usually invites children to go and explore the aircraft and the Bangkok Bank distributes stationery , such as pens , pencils and books to every child that enters the bank as a community service .
Many organizations from both government and commercial sectors have celebration activities for children .
Children can enter zoos or ride buses for free .
There is a Thai saying that states , " Children are the future of the nation , if the children are intelligent , the country will be prosperous . "
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO Section::::Trinidad and Tobago .
International Men 's Day on 19 November and celebrates Children 's Day on November 20th in Trinidad and Tobago .
TUNISIA Section::::Tunisia .
Children 's Day in Tunisia is celebrated on 11 January every year .
It was established as a holiday in 1995 .
It is a day in which Tunisians observe the rights of children and remind themselves that children are the future builders and developers of the country and the world .
TURKEY Section::::Turkey .
The Grand National Assembly of Turkey was established on 1920 , 23 April , and to commemorate the event , 23 April was proclaimed a national holiday in 1921 .
Since 1927 it has also become Children 's Day ( , literally " The Holiday of National Sovereignty and Children " ) , an official holiday dedicated to the children of Turkey and ( from 1979 on ) the world .
In addition to holding many domestic celebratory events such as stadium performances , Turkey also houses TRT International April 23 Children 's Festival , where groups of children from other countries are invited to participate in the festivities while staying at Turkish families ' homes .
TUVALU Section::::Tuvalu .
The first Monday in August is National Children 's Day in Tuvalu .
This public holiday is called in Tuvalu Aso Tamaliki .
UKRAINE Section::::Ukraine .
Day of Children 's Protection ( Children 's Day )
( , Den zakhystu ditey , literally " day of children 's protection " ) is celebrated on 1 June .
In Ukraine Children 's Day is set in accordance with the presidential decree of Ukraine from 30 May 1998
№ 568/98 .
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
Section::::United Arab Emirates .
UAE marked its first Emirati Children 's day on 15th March 2018 & it coincides with the date on which the Wudeema law ( Child protection law ) was issued .
The UAE also celebrates Universal Children 's day on 20th November .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Children 's Day was established in the United Kingdom in 1954 by the United Nations General Assembly , so as to create " a day of worldwide fraternity and understanding between children , " although it is not widely celebrated .
According to the National Children 's Day UK website , Children 's Day in the UK is not celebrated on the United Nation 's nominated date of 20 November , so as to allow children the chance to go outside during summer on the day they are celebrated .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Children 's Day observations in the United States predate both Mother 's and Father 's Day , though a permanent annual single Children 's Day observation is not made at the national level .
In 1856 , Rev. Charles H. Leonard , D.D. , then pastor of the First Universalist Church of Chelsea , Mass. , set apart a Sunday for the dedication of children to the Christian life , and for the re - dedication of parents and guardians to bringing - up their children in Christian nurture .
This service was first observed the second Sunday in June .
The Universalist Convention at Baltimore in September 1867 , passed a resolution commending churches to set apart one Sunday in each year as Children 's Day .
The Methodist Episcopal Church at the Methodist Conference of 1868 recommended that second Sunday in June be annually observed as Children 's Day .
The General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church in 1883 designated " the second Sabbath in June as Children 's Day . "
Also in 1883 , the National Council of Congregational Churches and nearly all the state bodies of that denomination in the United States passed resolutions commending the observance of the day .
About this time many other denominations adopted similar recommendations .
Chase 's Calendar of Events cites Children 's Sunday and notes that The Commonwealth of Massachusetts issues an annual proclamation for the second Sunday in June .
Numerous churches and denominations currently observe the second Sunday in June including the African Methodist Episcopal Church , African Methodist Episcopal Zion Church , and the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church .
Children & Youth Day in Hawaii started in 1994 when the Hawaii Legislature became the first to pass a law to recognize the first Sunday in October as " Children 's Day " .
In 1997 , the Legislature passed another landmark law designating the entire month of October as " Children and Youth Month " .
In 1996 , author Pat Mora , after learning about the annual Mexican tradition of celebrating 30 April as El día del niño , the Day of the Child , proposed an annual celebration in the U.S. of El día de los niños , El día de los libros / Children 's Day , Book Day , thus honoring children and connecting them to literacy , essential in a democracy .
Assistance starting this community - based , family literacy initiative was provided by REFORMA , the National Association to Promote Library & Information Services to Latinos and the Spanish Speaking .
Often known as Día , because it is both a daily commitment and an annual April celebration , Children 's Day , Book Day , has grown to link all children to books , languages and cultures .
A major partner is the Association for Library Services to Children ( ALSC ) , a division of the American Library Association ( ALA ) .
Every year , across the country , hundreds of libraries , schools , and community organizations , etc .
hold culminating April Children 's Day , Book Day celebrations that unite communities , creating an annual tradition much like Mother 's Day and Father 's Day .
" National Children 's Day " was proclaimed by President Bill Clinton to be held on 8 October 2000 , in response to a letter dated October 1 , 1999 , written by a ten - year - old boy , David A. Weisz , inquiring if he would make a Children 's Day to celebrate youth .
It was later designated by President George W. Bush as 3 June 2001 , and in subsequent years on the first Sunday in June .
Since 2009 , Illinois Governor Pat Quinn has issued proclamations proclaiming the second Sunday in June as Children 's Day as had the previous governor in 2007 and 2008 .
The mayors of Aurora and Batavia , Illinois , also have issued proclamations .
On 23 April 2011 , Executive of King County , WA declared 23 April as the International Children 's Day .
Children 's Day celebrations of Turkish Community in California lead to State of California recognizing the last Saturday of April as the Children 's Day .
DATES Section::::Dates .
2015
: 2 August 2016
: 15 August 2017 :
30 June 2018 : 26 June 2019 : 11 June 2020 : 16 September URUGUAY Section::::Uruguay .
Children 's Day in Uruguay is the second Sunday in August .
6 January is Epiphany ( Reyes ) , also celebrated as Children 's day .
VANUATU Section::::Vanuatu .
In Vanuatu , Children 's Day is celebrated on 24 July .
The two main themes of the holiday are " Stop violence against children " and " Give a child the chance to express their opinion today " .
After the march there are speeches and activities organized by schools , including a dance .
Then , after midday , children return home to spend time with their parents for the rest of the day .
Children 's Day is a public holiday , set up following a recommendation of the Committee on the Rights of the Child .
A group of people in the United Nations monitor and protect children 's rights .
A committee , with both adult and child members , organizes activities .
In the past , a committee of adults has chosen the theme – but in the future children may help choose it .
Children 's Day originally took place only in the capital of Vanuatu , but it has now been extended to all 6 provinces .
Schools , churches , local governments of the provinces and other local organizations all organize activities .
Save the Children supports one Children 's Day activity in each province , selecting it from the many requests they receive for support .
In 2008 , one of the activities supported by Save the Children was a sports day between many different schools .
Parents and caretakers have been supportive of Children 's Day activities .
Many parents come to activities with children .
In one province , children and parents from five different schools came together for a shared lunch .
Some parents give their children presents for Children 's Day – however , Save the Children try to spread the message that it does n't matter if a parent ca n't afford to buy their child a present , as the real aim of Children 's Day is for parents and children to spend the day together , and work together to reconcile their problems .
VENEZUELA Section::::Venezuela .
In Venezuela , Children 's Day is celebrated the third Sunday of July .
VIETNAM Section::::Vietnam .
In Vietnam , Children 's Day is celebrated on 1 June as ICD and on the full moon of the 8th lunar month during the Mid - Autumn Festival .
ZIMBABWE Section::::Zimbabwe .
Children 's Day was established as a holiday in Zimbabwe in 1991 ( Day of the African Child ) .
SEE ALSO
* Children 's Day Festival
* Convention on the Rights of the Child
* World Youth Day
* Street children
REFERENCES
SOURCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Universal Children 's Day on United Nations website