SAWED - OFF
SHOTGUN
A sawed - off shotgun ( US , CAN ) also called a sawn - off shotgun ( UK , IRL , AU , NZ ) and a short - barreled shotgun ( SBS ) ( U.S. legislative terminology ) , is a type of shotgun with a shorter gun barrel — typically under 18 inches — and often a shortened or absent stock .
Despite the colloquial term , barrels do not , strictly speaking , have to be shortened with a saw .
Barrels can be manufactured at shorter lengths as an alternative to traditional , longer barrels .
This makes them easier to transport due to their smaller profile and lighter weight .
The design also makes the weapon easy to maneuver in cramped spaces , a feature sought by military close quarters combat units , law enforcement SWAT team users , and home defense purposes .
As a result of the shorter barrel length , any sawed - off shotgun with a magazine tube will have its capacity reduced .
In the 1930s , the United States , Britain and Canada mandated that a proper permit be required to own these firearms .
They are subject to legal restrictions depending upon jurisdiction .
They are used by military forces and police agencies worldwide .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
Compared to a standard shotgun , the sawn - off shotgun has a shorter effective range , due to a lower muzzle velocity ; however , its reduced length makes it easier to maneuver and conceal .
Powerful and compact , the weapon is especially suitable for use in small spaces , such as close quarters combat in a military context .
Military vehicle crews use short - barreled combat shotguns as ancillary weapons .
In urban combat zones , military entry teams often use entry shotguns when breaching and entering doorways .
To make shotguns less concealable , many jurisdictions have a minimum legal length for shotgun barrels to make concealable shotguns unavailable for criminal purposes .
Many gun makers in the U.S. have not offered sawed - off shotguns to the public since 1934 , when shotguns with barrel lengths of under 18 " were restricted , although they had previously been sold .
To abide by NFA regulations , anyone may complete a Form 1 " making " form , and purchase and have approved the US$ 200 tax stamp for the shotgun in question , in order to legally reduce its barrel length to less than 18 " by cutting the barrel or replacing it with a shorter one .
A sawed - off shotgun is often an unofficial modification of a standard shotgun .
In countries where handguns are more costly or difficult to obtain , criminals can convert legally purchased or stolen shotguns into concealable weapons .
The term is often applied to illegal weapons that are created by cutting off the barrel of a standard shotgun .
The barrel of a shotgun without a tube magazine can be cut to any length ; pump - action or semi - automatic shotguns usually have a tube magazine attached to the underside of the barrel which limits the practical minimum barrel length to about the length of the magazine tube , unless it also is modified , technically much more challenging than shortening the barrel .
Repeating - fire shotguns with box magazines do not lose shell capacity when sawed off , but they are far less common than those with tubular magazines .
Shotguns manufactured with barrels under the legal minimum length frequently fall into special categories .
LEGAL RESTRICTIONS Section::::Legal restrictions .
Many nations have placed legal restrictions on sawed - off shotguns .
The following are the restrictions for specific nations .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In the state of Victoria a shotgun may not have its barrel shortened so as to change the category under which that shotgun would be classified .
In some states , any alteration to the length of the barrel requires permission from the Chief Commissioner of Police .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
Short - barreled , manually operated shotguns ( non - semi - automatics ) are non - restricted as long as the barrel remains unmodified from the original factory length .
There is no legal minimum for shotgun barrels as long as they are not handguns ; shotguns with barrels as short as
8.5 inches are available in Canada .
The act of reducing the barrel of a shotgun with a greater than 470 mm ( 18.5 inch ) barrel below this length by sawing , cutting , or " otherwise " , by anyone other than a recognized gun manufacturer , is prohibited .
CZECH REPUBLIC Section::::Czech Republic .
Short barreled shotguns are universally category B weapons and therefore require a shall issue permit and Gun license ( zbrojní průkaz ) , including the self defense category .
GERMANY
Section::::Germany .
In Germany , the possession of a sawed - off shotgun is legal with a firearms license ( Waffenbesitzkarte ) , just like any other firearm .
Restrictions only apply to pump - action shotguns , which require a minimum barrel length of 45 cm and a minimum overall length of 90 cm to be legal .
Other shotguns may be of any length .
If the barrel length is less than 30 cm or the overall length is less than 60 cm , the firearm is considered a handgun , and treated accordingly under the law .
IRELAND Section::::Ireland .
Shortening the barrel of a shotgun or rifle results in a presumptive five year minimum sentence of imprisonment upon conviction for a first offence , and a mandatory five - year sentence for second or subsequent offences .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Within the United Kingdom , side - by - side , over - under , bolt action and lever action shotguns are required to conform to the specification of a 24 " minimum barrel length if held on a shotgun certificate .
If held on a firearms certificate , the applicant having demonstrated ' good reason ' for possession , they must comply with the standard configuration of 12 " minimum barrel length , 24 " minimum overall length , in common with other Section 1 firearms .
Shotguns held on a shotgun certificate must either have no magazine , or a non - removable magazine capable of holding no more than two rounds .
Shotguns held on firearms certificates are not subject to any magazine restrictions .
Semi - automatic and pump action shotguns , whether held on shotgun or firearms certificates , are always required to comply with the specification of 24 " minimum barrel length , 40 " minimum overall length .
Muzzleloading firearms held on firearms certificates are exempt from any restrictions on barrel and overall length .
A smoothbore muzzleloader held on a shotgun certificate would be subject to the standard 24 " minimum barrel length specification .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Under the National Firearms Act ( NFA ) , it is illegal for a private citizen to possess a sawed - off modern smokeless powder shotgun ( a shotgun with a barrel length shorter than or an overall length shorter than ) ( under U.S.C. Title II ) , without a tax - paid registration from the Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms and Explosives , requiring a background check and either a $ 200 or $ 5 tax for every transfer , depending upon the specific manufacturing circumstances of the particular sawed - off modern shotgun being transferred .
Gun trusts have become an increasingly popular means of registering SBS ' with the BATFE .
Short - barreled muzzleloading blackpowder shotguns are not illegal under federal law , and require no tax - stamped permit , although they may be illegal under state law .
As with all NFA regulated firearms , a new tax stamp must be purchased before every transfer .
Inter - state transfers must be facilitated through a Federal Firearms Licensee ( FFL ) while intrastate transfers may be between two persons .
In the US , shotguns originally manufactured without shoulder stocks ( and thus not legally shotguns ) , with a total length under 26 inches , are classified as an " Any Other Weapon " by the BATFE and have a $ 5 transfer tax , if they are manufactured by a maker possessing the appropriate Class 2 Special Occupational Taxpayer Federal Firearms License .
In order to convert an existing shoulder - stocked shotgun to a short - barreled shotgun or an existing pistol - grip - only shotgun to an " Any Other Weapon " , a private citizen must pay the standard $ 200 NFA tax .
OTHER Section::::Other .
Additional restrictions might apply in many other jurisdictions .
State and local laws might entirely prohibit civilian possession of short - barrelled shotguns .
In addition , some firearm types that would normally be considered to fall into the Short Barrel Shotgun ( SBS ) category might not legally be considered to be a SBS .
A shotgun is legally defined as a shoulder - mounted firearm that fires shot .
Shotguns and shotgun receivers that have never had a buttstock of any type installed are not shotguns , as they can not be shoulder mounted .
Therefore , cutting one of these below the 18 " barrel and/or 26 " overall length can not produce a SBS as the firearm was never a shotgun .
The Bureau of Alcohol , Tobacco , Firearms & Explosives recognizes these firearms as being a smooth bore handgun which is an Any Other Weapon ( AOW ) .
Unlike an SBS , an AOW only carries a $ 5.00 tax and can be moved interstate without Federal approval .
To maintain its AOW status , it must not have a buttstock ( making it a SBS ) or a rifled slug barrel ( making it a Destructive Device ( DD ) if the bore is over 0.5 " ) .
Firearms of this type are typically over 100 years old .
These weapons produced with a barrel length under 18 " are not considered sawed - off shotguns because they were not produced with a shoulder buttstock .
Weapons with these specifications fall under the category of smooth bore handguns produced in heavy rifle calibers and 12/20 gauge shotgun calibers , contrary to illegal sawn - off shotguns and are not considered destructive devices .
Any firearms capable of shooting shotgun style cartridges produced after the 18 " minimum barrel restrictions were set into place are considered illegal sawed - off shotguns .
POLICE AND MILITARY USE Section::::Police and military use .
Historical military use of sawed - off shotguns includes use as a primary weapon for Confederate cavalry during the American Civil War .
These muzzle - loaded weapons were used primarily for close - range combat and to supplement the availability of more traditional short ranged weapons such as the saber or carbine .
The availability of the source weapons and the ability to use single ball , shot , or a mix of both as the situation required were reasons why they were initially desired by those establishing Confederate cavalry units .
They were replaced over time as more conventional arms became available and as the tactical use of cavalry shifted towards use as mounted infantry .
In modern usage , minimum length and barrel length restrictions only apply to civilian use ; military and police departments may issue short - barreled shotguns , and major manufacturers offer special models with barrels in the range of as riot shotguns or combat shotguns for use in areas with restricted space .
These are generally referred to as " entry shotguns " , because they are often used for forcing entry into buildings , where the short easy handling is more important than the increased ammunition capacity of a longer shotgun .
Breaching rounds provide another use for very short shotguns .
These rounds are usually made of sintered powdered metal , but a normal buckshot or bird shot round will also work .
A shotgun is used for breaching by placing the gun next to a door lock ( 0 to 2 inches away , 0 to 5 cm ) , and firing at a 45 degrees downward angle through the door between the lock or latch and the door frame .
The impact of the projectile(s ) opens a hole through the door , removing the latch or locking bolt .
When through the door , the shot or sintered metal disperses quickly , and because it was aimed downwards , the risk of harming occupants on the other side of the breached door is minimized .
Breaching guns used by police and the military may have barrels as short as , and they often have only a pistol grip rather than a full butt stock .
Some models use a special cup - like muzzle extension to further minimize the risk of debris injuring the shooter .
Because few rounds are fired , any sporting shotgun with a 3-round capacity could be shortened and used as a capable breaching shotgun .
BARREL LENGTH AND SHOT SPREAD
Section::::Barrel length and shot spread .
It is a common misconception that shortening the length of a shotgun barrel itself significantly affects the pattern or spread of the pellets ; this is not true until barrel length is decreased to under 50 % of a typical barrel length .
A standard length barrel ( e.g. , 28 " ) is this long to move the center of gravity of the weapon away from the body and give it an ergonomic heft , and in order for the barrel to extend out into the shooter 's field of vision right up to the target , as well as to make the weapon safer , as it is difficult to inadvertently point a long gun at one 's own body .
The pattern is primarily affected by the type of cartridge fired and the choke , or constriction normally found at the muzzle of a shotgun barrel .
The primary reason that the pattern is altered is because cutting off the end of the barrel removes the choke , which generally only extends about two inches ( 5 cm ) inward from the muzzle .
This results in a cylinder bore , which causes the widest spread generally found in shotgun barrels .
( See choke for more information on the impact of chokes .
See shotgun shell for information on spreader loads . )
See details on shot patterning .
However , many qualified gunsmiths can re - tap and reinstall the choke in the shortened barrel .
CIVILIAN USAGE Section::::Civilian usage .
In the United Kingdom , Australia , Canada and New Zealand , where handguns are not easily obtainable , the sawn - off shotgun was a common weapon in armed robberies during and shortly after the 1960s , and it is this use that most people associate with the weapon .
A sawn - off shotgun with exposed , manually - cocked hammers and dual triggers is known as a lupara ( " wolf - shot " ) in Italy and , while associated with organized crime , was originally used by Sicilian farmers and shepherds to protect their vineyards and flocks of animals .
In rural areas of North India , where it is seen as a weapon of authority and prestige , it is known as a dunali , literally meaning " two pipes " .
It is especially common in Bihar , Purvanchal , Uttar Pradesh , Haryana and Punjab .
The bank robber Clyde Barrow modified his Browning A-5 shotgun by cutting the barrel down to the same length as the magazine tube , and shortening the stock by 5 to 6 inches ( 125 to 150 mm ) to make it more concealable .
A small , strap was attached to both ends of the butt of the gun , and was looped around his shoulder , concealing the gun between his arm and chest under his jacket in the manner of a shoulder holster .
The gun was drawn up quickly and fired from the shoulder under which it was carried .
Barrow dubbed it the " Whippit " , as he was able to " whip it " out easily .
The light weight of short - barreled shotguns , particularly in configurations that lack substantial stocks , leads some users to use short ' minishells ' with lower shot and powder loading for comfortable casual use .
DERIVED USES
* Familiarity with descriptions and images of sawed - off shotguns via crime reports in the public media has led to " sawed - off " or " sawn - off " being used sometimes colloquially as " small or stripped version of " ; such as the Sawn - Off Daimler ( SOD ) .
SEE ALSO
* Coach Gun
* KAC Masterkey
* M26 Modular Accessory Shotgun System
* Marble Game Getter
* Serbu Super - Shorty * Short - barreled rifle
*
Title II weapons NOTES