TEXAS STATE CAPITOL
The Texas State Capitol is the capitol building and seat of government of the American state of Texas .
Located in downtown Austin , Texas , the structure houses the offices and chambers of the Texas Legislature and of the Governor of Texas .
Designed in 1881 by architect Elijah E. Myers , it was constructed from 1882 to 1888 under the direction of civil engineer Reuben Lindsay Walker .
A $ 75 million underground extension was completed in 1993 .
The building was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1970 and recognized as a National Historic Landmark in 1986 .
The Texas State Capitol is tall , making it the sixth tallest state capitol and one of several taller than the United States Capitol in Washington ,
D.C. The capitol was ranked ninety - second in the 2007 " America 's Favorite Architecture " poll commissioned by the American Institute of Architects .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The current Texas State Capitol is the third building to serve that purpose .
The second Texas capitol was built in 1853 , on the same site as the present capitol in Austin ; it was destroyed in the great capitol fire of 1881 , but plans had already been made to replace it with a new , much larger structure .
CONSTRUCTION
Section::::Construction .
Construction of the Italian Renaissance Revival – style capitol was funded by an article of the state constitution , adopted on February 15 , 1876 , which authorized the sale of public lands for the purpose .
In one of the largest barter transactions of recorded history , the builders of the capitol ( John V. Farwell and Charles B. Farwell ) , known as the Capitol Syndicate , were paid with more than three million acres ( 12,000 km² ) of public land in the " Panhandle " region of Texas ; this tract later became the largest cattle ranch in the world , the XIT Ranch .
The value of the land , combined with expenses , added to a total cost of $ 3.7 million for the original building .
It was constructed largely by convicts or migrant workers , as many as a thousand at a time .
The building has been renovated several times , with central air conditioning installed in 1955 and the most recent refurbishments completed in 1997 .
The designers originally planned for the building to be clad entirely with hill country limestone quarried in Oatmanville ( present - day Oak Hill ) , about to the southwest .
However , the high iron content of the limestone led it to discolor rapidly with rust stains when exposed to the elements .
Learning of the problem , the owners of Granite Mountain near Marble Falls offered to donate to the state , free of charge , the necessary amount of sunset red granite as an alternative .
To transport the red granite , the Austin and Northwestern Railroad was extended 2.3 miles ( 3.7 km ) to accommodate the transportation from Granite Mountain .
Due to a bend in the tracks , trains would occasionally derail , accidentally dumping some of the pink granite .
Many of the fallen rocks remain in place and are a local point of interest .
While the building is mostly built of the Oak Hill limestone , most of this is hidden behind the walls and on the foundations .
Red granite was subsequently used for many state government buildings in the Austin area .
The project 's 900 workers included 86 granite cutters brought from Scotland .
The cornerstone for the building was laid on March 2 , 1885 , Texas Independence Day , and the building was opened to the public on April 21 , 1888 , San Jacinto Day , before its completion .
The building was officially dedicated by Texas State Senator Temple Houston on May 18 , 1888 .
The dedication ceremony was marked by a weeklong celebration from May 14–19 , 1888 , that attracted nearly 20,000 visitors and included events such as military drill demonstrations , cattle roping , baseball games , German choral singing , and fireworks .
Guests were able to purchase souvenirs such as pieces of red granite and copies of a song written by composer and pianist Leonora Rives - Diaz called the " State Capitol Grand Waltz " .
CAPITOL VIEW CORRIDORS Section::::Capitol View Corridors .
In 1931 , the City of Austin enacted a local ordinance limiting the height of new buildings to a maximum of , aiming to preserve the visual preeminence of the capitol .
From that time until the early 1960s , only the University of Texas Main Building Tower was built higher than the limit , but in 1962 developers announced a new high - rise residential building to be built adjacent to the capitol , called the Westgate Tower .
Governor Price Daniel voiced his opposition to the proposed tower , and State Representative Henry Grover of Houston introducing a bill to condemn the property , which was defeated in the Texas House of Representatives by only two votes .
The Westgate was eventually completed in 1966 , but the controversy over the preservation of the capitol 's visual presence that dogged its construction continued to grow .
The Westgate was followed by even taller structures : first the Dobie Center ( designed in 1968 ) , and then a series of ever larger downtown bank towers , culminating in the One American Center ( designed in 1982 ) .
In early 1983 , inspired by the Westgate and these other structures , State Senator Lloyd Doggett and State Representative Gerald Hill advanced a bill proposing a list of protected " Capitol View Corridors " along which construction would not be permitted , so as to protect the capitol 's visibility from a series of points around Austin .
The bill was signed into law on May 3 , 1983 , defining thirty state - protected viewing corridors and prohibiting any construction that would intersect one of them .
The City of Austin has adopted similar rules , so that the majority of the corridors are also protected under municipal zoning code , as well as under state law .
CAPITOL EXTENSION AND RESTORATIONS Section::::Capitol extension and restorations .
On February 6 , 1983 , a fire began in the apartment of William P. Hobby Jr. , then the state lieutenant governor .
A guest of Hobby 's was killed , and four firemen and a policeman were injured by the subsequent blaze .
The capitol was crowded with accumulated archives , and the fire was intense and came dangerously close to destroying the structure .
It caused severe damage to the east wing and compromised much of the framing , which was largely composed of exposed cast iron posts and beams .
Following the fire , the state took advantage of the extensive rebuilding to update the mechanical and structural systems to modern standards .
In November 1985 , the original Goddess of Liberty statue on top of the dome was removed by helicopter .
A new statue , cast of aluminum in molds made from the original zinc statue , was placed on the dome in June 1986 .
The original statue was restored and displayed on the Capitol grounds in a special structure built for it in 1995 ; it was later moved to the Bullock Texas State History Museum in 2001 .
The Old Texas Land Office , on the Capitol grounds , was rebuilt and updated between 1988 and 1990 , after which the Capitol Visitors Center was moved there , freeing space in the Capitol .
Previously , the building had housed the Texas Confederate Museum , which began in a ground floor room of the Capitol ( 1903–1920 ) , before moving to the Land Office building .
Additionally , the state sought to address the intensifying shortage of space in the old building , deciding that a new office wing should be added .
The logical place for an addition was the plaza immediately to the north ; however , a large building there would have eliminated the historic north façade and covered what had traditionally been seen as an important public space .
Instead , an expansion to the capitol was built beneath the north plaza , connecting to the existing capitol underground .
In 1993 , the $ 75 million , four - story , underground capitol extension was completed to the north , doubling the square footage available to capitol occupants and providing much - improved functionality .
Though the extension encompasses ( nearly twice the floor space of the original building ) , there is little evidence of such a large structure at ground level , except for extensive skylights camouflaged as planter rows , and the four - story open - air inverted rotunda .
In 1995 , a comprehensive interior and exterior restoration of the original building was completed at a cost of approximately $ 98 million .
In 1997 , the park - like grounds surrounding the capitol received an $ 8 million renovation and restoration .
DESIGN AND FEATURES Section::::Design and features .
The Texas State Capitol and grounds are located on a hilltop overlooking downtown Austin , with the main entrance facing onto the Congress Avenue Historic District to the south , for which it forms a terminating vista .
The northern edge of the capitol grounds lies four blocks south of the University of Texas at Austin .
BUILDING Section::::Building .
The capitol is a roughly rectangular building with a four - story central block , symmetrical three - story wings extending to the east and west , and a dome rising from the center .
It is built in an Italian Renaissance Revival style and modeled on the design of the United States Capitol , but with its exterior clad with local red granite .
It contains of floor space ( not including the Capitol Extension ) , more than any other state capitol building , and rests on a footprint .
The building has nearly four hundred rooms and more than nine hundred windows .
The interior of the central portion forms an open rotunda beneath the dome .
Massive cast - iron staircases flanking the rotunda connect the various levels of the building .
The two chambers of the Texas Legislature ( the Texas Senate and Texas House of Representatives ) meet in large double - height spaces in the centers of the two wings on the second floor , overlooked by public galleries on the third floor .
The remainder of the building is filled with office space , courts , and archives ; additional offices fill the underground extension .
PUBLIC ART AND MUSEUMS Section::::Public art and museums .
The central rotunda is hung with portraits of all the past presidents of the Republic of Texas and governors of the State of Texas ; the rotunda is also a whispering gallery .
The south foyer features a large portrait of David Crockett , a painting depicting the surrender of General Santa Anna at the Battle of San Jacinto , and sculptures of Sam Houston and Stephen F. Austin made by Elisabet Ney .
The Texas Confederate Museum was held in a room on the first floor from its opening in 1903 until 1920 , when it was moved into the General Land Office Building ( today the Capitol Visitors Center ) .
GROUNDS Section::::Grounds .
The Capitol building is surrounded by of grounds scattered with statues and monuments .
William Munro Johnson , civil engineer , was hired in 1888 to improve the appearance of the grounds .
By the time the first monument , commemorating the Heroes of the Alamo , was installed in 1891 , the major components of Johnson 's plan were in place .
These included a " Great Walk " of black and white diamond - patterned pavement shaded by trees .
The four oldest monuments are the Heroes of the Alamo Monument ( 1891 ) , Volunteer Firemen Monument ( 1896 ) , Confederate Soldiers Monument ( 1903 )
and Terry 's Texas Rangers Monument ( 1907 ) , and these flank the tree - lined Great Walk .
In the spring of 2013 , ground was broken for the Texas Capitol Vietnam Veterans Monument ; dedication took place on March 29 , 2014 .
A granite monument of the Ten Commandments on the grounds of the Texas State Capitol was the topic of a 2005 U.S. Supreme Court case , Van Orden v. Perry , in which the display was challenged as unconstitutional .
In late June 2005 , the Court ruled that the display was not unconstitutional .
GALLERY
EXTERIOR INTERIOR
GROUNDS
SEE ALSO * List of National Historic Landmarks in Texas * List of Recorded Texas Historic Landmarks ( Sabine - Travis ) * National Register of Historic Places listings in Travis County , Texas REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Texas State Preservation Board - Maintainers of the Capitol
* Capitol Grounds Monuments
* Library of Congress : architectural drawings and photographs of the Texas State capitol * Capitol Dedication Ceremony - Excerpts from Senator Temple Houston 's acceptance ( of the capitol building ) speech May 16 , 1888TexasBob.com
* America 's Favorite Architecture
* Film footage about the building 's Goddess of Liberty From local Austin TV program Progress Report Austin , 1962 , Texas Archive of the Moving Image