ISOSCELES TRAPEZOID
In Euclidean geometry , an isosceles trapezoid ( isosceles trapezium in British English ) is a convex quadrilateral with a line of symmetry bisecting one pair of opposite sides .
It is a special case of a trapezoid .
Alternatively , it can be defined as a trapezoid in which both legs and both base angles are of the same measure .
Note that a non - rectangular parallelogram is not an isosceles trapezoid because of the second condition , or because it has no line of symmetry .
In any isosceles trapezoid two opposite sides ( the bases ) are parallel , and the two other sides ( the legs ) are of equal length ( properties shared with the parallelogram ) .
The diagonals are also of equal length .
The base angles of an isosceles trapezoid are equal in measure ( there are in fact two pairs of equal base angles , where one base angle is the supplementary angle of a base angle at the other base ) .
SPECIAL CASES Section::::Special cases .
Rectangles and squares are usually considered to be special cases of isosceles trapezoids though some sources would exclude them .
Another special case is a 3-equal side trapezoid , sometimes known as a trilateral trapezoid or a trisosceles trapezoid .
They can also be seen dissected from regular polygons of 5 sides or more as a truncation of 4 sequential vertices .
SELF - INTERSECTIONS Section::::Self - intersections .
Any non - self - crossing quadrilateral with exactly one axis of symmetry must be either an isosceles trapezoid or a kite .
However , if crossings are allowed , the set of symmetric quadrilaterals must be expanded to include also the crossed isosceles trapezoids , crossed quadrilaterals in which the crossed sides are of equal length and the other sides are parallel , and the antiparallelograms , crossed quadrilaterals in which opposite sides have equal length .
Every antiparallelogram has an isosceles trapezoid as its convex hull , and may be formed from the diagonals and non - parallel sides of an isosceles trapezoid . !
Convex isoscelestrapezoid !
Crossed isoscelestrapezoid !
antiparallelogram CHARACTERIZATIONS Section::::Characterizations .
If a quadrilateral is known to be a trapezoid , it is not necessary to check that the legs have the same length in order to know that it is an isosceles trapezoid ( nor , under the definitions given in Wikipedia , is it sufficient , since a rhombus is a special case of a trapezoid with legs of equal length , but is not an isosceles trapezoid as it lacks a line of symmetry through the midpoints of opposite sides ) ; any of the following properties also distinguishes an isosceles trapezoid from other trapezoids :
* The diagonals have the same length .
*
The base angles have the same measure .
* The segment that joins the midpoints of the parallel sides is perpendicular to them .
*
Opposite angles are supplementary , which in turn implies that isosceles trapezoids are cyclic quadrilaterals .
*
The diagonals divide each other into segments with lengths that are pairwise equal ; in terms of the picture below , , ( and if one wishes to exclude rectangles ) .
If rectangles are included in the class of trapezoids then one may concisely define an isosceles trapezoid as " a cyclic quadrilateral with equal diagonals " or as " a cyclic quadrilateral with a pair of parallel sides " or as " a convex quadrilateral with a line of symmetry through the mid - points of opposite sides " .
ANGLES Section::::Angles .
In an isosceles trapezoid , the base angles have the same measure pairwise .
In the picture below , angles ∠ABC and ∠DCB are obtuse angles of the same measure , while angles ∠BAD and ∠CDA are acute angles , also of the same measure .
Since the lines AD and BC are parallel , angles adjacent to opposite bases are supplementary , that is , angles DIAGONALS AND HEIGHT Section::::Diagonals and height .
The diagonals of an isosceles trapezoid have the same length ; that is , every isosceles trapezoid is an equidiagonal quadrilateral .
Moreover , the diagonals divide each other in the same proportions .
As pictured , the diagonals AC and BD have the same length ( ) and divide each other into segments of the same length ( and ) .
The ratio in which each diagonal is divided is equal to the ratio of the lengths of the parallel sides that they intersect , that is , The length of each diagonal is , according to Ptolemy 's theorem , given by where a and b are the lengths of the parallel sides AD and BC , and c is the length of each leg AB and CD .
The height is , according to the Pythagorean theorem , given by
The distance from point E to base AD is given by where a and b are the lengths of the parallel sides AD and BC , and h is the height of the trapezoid .
AREA Section::::Area .
The area of an isosceles ( or any ) trapezoid is equal to the average of the lengths of the base and top ( the parallel sides ) times the height .
In the adjacent diagram , if we write , and , and the height h is the length of a line segment between AD and BC that is perpendicular to them , then the area K is given as follows : If instead of the height of the trapezoid , the common length of the legs AB = CD = c is known , then the area can be computed using Brahmagupta 's formula for the area of a cyclic quadrilateral , which with two sides equal simplifies to -where formula_7 is the semi - perimeter of the trapezoid .
This formula is analogous to Heron 's formula to compute the area of a triangle .
The previous formula for area can also be written as CIRCUMRADIUS Section::::Circumradius .
The radius in the circumscribed circle is given by
In a rectangle where a = b this is simplified to formula_10 .
SEE ALSO
* Isosceles tangential trapezoid
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Some engineering formulas involving isosceles trapezoids