AUSTRALIAN SHEPHERD
The Australian Shepherd , often known simply as the " Aussie " , is a medium - sized breed of dog that was , despite its name , developed on ranches in the Western United States during the 19th century .
There is disagreement regarding the exact history of the breed prior to its arrival in the United States , and thus no official consensus on the origin of its name or association with Australia .
They are similar in appearance to the popular English Shepherd and Border Collie breeds , and research has found that Australian Shepherds and Border Collies are closely related to each other ; both the Border Collie and Australian Shepherd are slightly more distantly related to other kinds of Collies and to Shetland Sheepdogs .
Australian Shepherds rose in popularity with a boom in Western riding after World War II .
They became known to the general public through rodeos , horse shows , and Disney movies made for television .
For many years , Aussies have been valued by stockmen for their versatility and trainability .
While they continue to work as stock dogs and compete in herding trials , they have earned recognition in other roles due to their trainability and eagerness to please and are highly regarded for their skills in obedience .
Like all working breeds , Aussies have considerable energy and drive and usually need a job to keep them occupied .
They often excel at dog sports such as dog agility and frisbee and are also highly successful as search and rescue dogs , disaster dogs , detection dogs , guide dogs , service dogs , and therapy dogs .
They are considered the 17th - most popular dog breed in the United States .
PHYSICAL TRAITS SIZE Section::::Physical traits .
Section::::Size .
The Australian Shepherd is traditionally a medium - sized breed of solid build .
They can weigh from and stand from in height .
The Australian Shepherd Club of America ( ASCA ) standard calls for the Australian shepherd to stand between at the withers , females being and males measuring ; however , quality is not to be sacrificed in favor of size .
COLOR
Section::::Color .
Recognized Aussie colors are solid black , solid red ( liver ) , blue merle , and red / liver merle ; each of these colors may also have copper ( tan ) points or white markings in various combinations on the face , chest , and legs .
A black or red dog with copper and white trim is called ' tricolor ' or ' tri ' , while a black or red dog with white trim but no copper is called ' bicolor ' or ' bi ' .
White , rather than pigment , on or around the ears is an indicator of increased risk for white - related deafness .
Excessive white on the face and ears can place an individual dog at greater risk for sunburn and subsequent skin cancer .
The wide variety of color combinations comes from the interaction between the color allele , which is either black ( B ) dominant or red ( b ) recessive , and the dominant merle allele ( M ) .
Together , these provide four coat - color aspects that can appear in any combination :
* Black , with copper points , white markings , or both on the face , collar , legs , chest , underbelly - solid black dogs are equally desirable as ones with copper or white .
* Red ( liver ) with or without copper points or white markings on the face , collar , legs , chest , underbelly - either white or copper points are required .
Solid red dogs are equally desirable as ones with copper or white .
* Blue merle ( a mottled patchwork of gray and black ) with or without copper points or white markings on the face , collar , legs , chest , underbelly - neither white nor copper points are required .
Solid merle dogs are equally desirable as ones with copper or white .
* Red merle ( a mottled patchwork of cream and red / liver ) with or without copper points or white markings on the face , collar , legs , chest , underbelly - neither white nor copper points are required .
Solid merle dogs are equally desirable as ones with copper or white .
The merle allele , which produces a mingled or patchwork combination of dark and light areas , is the coat pattern most commonly associated with the breed .
This merle ( M ) is dominant , so heterozygous dogs ( Mm ) show the pigmentation pattern ; however , when two merles are bred , the statistical risk is 25 % of the offspring will end up with the two copies of the merle gene ( homozygous ) .
These dogs usually have a mostly white coat and blue irises , and are often deaf , blind , or both .
In this case , the deafness and blindness are linked to having two copies of the merle gene , which disrupts pigmentation and produces these health defects .
All black and blue merle dogs have black noses , eye rims , and lips .
All red and red merle dogs have liver or brown noses , eye rims , and lips .
Also , great variety is seen in the Aussie 's eye color , and they are often heterochromatic .
An early nickname for the breed was " ghost - eye dog " .
Aussie eyes may be any shade of brown , or blue ; they may have two differently colored eyes , or even have bicolored or " split eyes " ( for example , a half - brown , half - blue eye ) , which appear to be linked to the merle coloration .
Merled eyes occur , as well , where one color is mixed in and swirled with another .
Any combination of eye color is acceptable in the breed standard , so long as the eyes are healthy .
In general , however , black Aussies ( self , bi - color , or tri - color ) tend to have brown eyes , while red ( self , bi - color , or tri - color )
Aussies tend to have amber eyes , though these Aussies may also carry the blue - eyed gene .
The merle phenotype in Australian Shepherds is very similar to the coat color in Mitf mouse mutants .
TAIL Section::::Tail .
Although some Aussies are born with naturally bobbed or partially bobbed ( stubby ) tails , the majority are born with full , long tails .
Breeders have historically docked the tails when the puppies are born .
Docking working dogs ' tails has become a tradition with the goal of preventing injury .
It can also be seen as a way to increase speed and improve hygiene ( the Aussie 's long - haired tail can become easily matted and soiled ) .
In the United States and Canada , the standard calls for a natural bob or docked tail not to exceed four inches as a defining characteristic ; however , some long - tailed examples have been successfully shown and been given recognition .
Any natural tail length is permitted when showing in Europe , where docking has been banned in most countries , including the United Kingdom .
TEMPERAMENT Section::::Temperament .
The breed is typically highly energetic , requiring a great deal of exercise and attention .
An Australian Shepherd enjoys working , whether it is learning and practicing tricks , competing in dog agility , or engaging in any other physically and mentally involving activity .
Dogs may show reserved and cautious guarding behaviors .
They are kind , loving , and devoted to those they know .
They are very loyal to their owners , and are rewarding dogs if treated well .
Because the breed was developed to serve on the ranch , a job which includes being protective of its property , it is inclined to bark warnings about neighborhood activity .
It is not inclined toward obsessive barking .
The Aussie is intelligent , learns quickly , and loves to play .
This means that a bored , neglected , unexercised Aussie may invent its own games , activities , and jobs , which to a busy owner might appear to be hyperactivity : for example , an Aussie may go from being at rest to running at top speed for several " laps " around the house before returning to rest .
Without something to amuse them , Aussies can become destructive .
Aussies also do best with plenty of human companionship : they are often called " Velcro dogs " for their strong desire to always be near their owners and for their tendency to form intense , devoted bonds with select people .
The Australian Shepherd has a reputation as a highly intelligent and versatile stock dog with a range of working styles .
A good working Aussie is quick , thoughtful , and easy with its stock : there are working lines in the American West that still herd sheep , smaller cattle , and goats .
They are fast runners with a loose eye style of working livestock .
The ability for the breed to adapt to the situation and to think for itself makes it an excellent all - around worker .
For this reason , the Aussie is often chosen to work unusual livestock such as ducks , geese , and commercially raised rabbits .
These dogs require a minimum of two to three hours a day of play , exercise , and attention .
They thrive in rural , ranch - like conditions , and need space to run and play in an urban setting .
The Australian Shepherd is a high - spirited dog , that requires much attention and work .
Teaching them tricks keeps them focused and happy , which also keeps their minds working .
The breed also has great stamina and can live in a variety of terrain .
Because of this , they are popularly used as trail and working dogs .
Australian Shepherds need roughly 30 - 60 minutes of exercise each day .
They do not adapt well to apartment living .
HEALTH
Section::::Health .
Australian Shepherds can have several health problems .
Vision problems are common , and epilepsy is also a concern .
In merle - to - merle breeding , the puppies that have inherited two copies of the merle gene have an increased risk of being born blind or deaf .
Australian Shepherds are the most common dog breed to acquire Epilepsy .
FEEDING
Section::::Feeding .
The recommended amount of food an Australian Shepherd should eat is 1 - 1/2 to 2 cups of dry food a day , But size , exercise level , and age should be considered .
With proper diet and exercise , the Australian Shepherd can stay in good shape .
GROOMING
Section::::Grooming .
Australian Shepherds have a medium - length , water - resistant coat .
With the coat being somewhat long and wavy or curly , this breed does shed , mostly in the spring to get rid of the winter coat .
The shepherd should be brushed weekly to maintain a healthy and clean coat and also to prevent matting .
Being a " working dog " , this breed should be outside to get its needed exercise .
If a dog is dirty , a basic bath can be given , but not frequently , for it can dry out the skin and coat .
MORTALITY Section::::Mortality .
The median lifespans for breeds similar in size to Australian Shepherds are mostly between 11 and 13 years , so , assuming the results of the UK study are not representative of the population there , Aussies appear to have a typical lifespan for a breed their size .
Results of a 1998 internet survey with a sample size of 614 Australian Shepherds indicated a median longevity around 12.5 years , but that longevity may be declining .
MORBIDITY Section::::Morbidity .
Based on a sample of 48 still - living dogs , the most common health concerns noted by owners were eye problems ( red eye , epiphora , conjunctivitis , and cataracts ) .
Dermatological and respiratory problems also ranked high .
Collie eye anomaly ( CEA ) is rare in the breed , but it and cataracts are a concern in Aussies .
Other conditions of note include iris coloboma , canine hip dysplasia , Pelger - Huet anomaly , hypothyroidism , and nasal solar dermatitis .
Prior to breeding , the Aussie should be checked for hip and elbow dysplasia and DNA tests performed to show the dog to be free of the MDR1 mutation , cataract mutation , and CEA .
Tests should also include those for thyroidism and clearances for other known eye diseases like colobomas , progressive retinal atrophy , and retinal folds .
Some Australian Shepherds ( as well as Collies , German Shepherds , and many other herding dogs ) are susceptible to a genetic mutation of the MDR1 gene .
Dogs with the mutation can suffer toxicity from antiparasitics such as ivermectin in high doses , and other drugs .
A test is available to determine if a particular dog carries the mutated gene .
HIP DYSPLASIA Section::::Hip dysplasia .
Hip dysplasia is a heritable condition where the femur does not fit securely in the pelvic socket of the hip joint .
This problem can exist with or without clinical signs , meaning some dogs feel pain in one or both rear legs .
DOUBLE MERLE Section::::Double merle .
Double merle or homozygous merle occurs when the offspring of two merled parents inherit two copies of the dominant merle gene .
The odds of this are 25 % for each pup born from such a litter .
Double merles often have excessive white and can have hearing and vision problems as a result of having two copies of the merle gene .
Homozygous merles can be deaf or blind , or express iris colobomas and microphthalmia .
Not all homozygous merles are affected , but most are , making the breeding of two merles a very touchy subject .
Some breeders euthanize mostly white pups , while others may attempt to sell them as " rare " white Aussies without disclosing the potential for health defects .
A large percentage of homozygous merles sold eventually end up in rescue and shelters , as the average family is ill - prepared to take on a deaf or blind pet .
However , deaf or blind Australian shepherds can make wonderful pets given a home prepared for their special needs .
They are an intelligent breed , which generally learn hand signals with ease .
The term " lethal white " originated from horses born with lethal white syndrome , and has since evolved to often describe dogs born with the double merle trait .
This trait is found in many breeds , but most commonly found in Australian Shepherds .
The name " lethal white " is a misnomer , as this genetic condition is not lethal to the dogs ; it is often the breeder who is lethal to the pups by culling them immediately after birth .
Many consider the term " lethal white " to be derogatory .
AVAILABLE HEALTH
TESTS Section::::Available health tests .
Many diagnostic tests are available for concerned Aussie owners to check the overall health of a dog .
Also , the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals ( OFA ) has an extensive database to track results and provide statistics for these concerns : hips , elbows , heart , patellar luxation ( knees ) , and thyroid ( autoimmune ) disease .
The OFA database also includes the results for eye exams performed by a Canine Eye Registration Foundation veterinarian , but only if the owner of the Aussie submits the results .
This database is a great resource to investigate the lineage and related health of the progenitors of some dogs , at least regarding hip ratings .
Many tests have been developed by , or are processed at , laboratories to check for the 11 health concerns that plague the Australian Shepherd breed .
Some of those labs are Optigen , Animal Health Trust , Endocrine Diagnostic Center , Animal Health Laboratory , Washington State University Veterinary Clinic , Vet DNA Center , and HealthGene .
These labs might perform one or many of the tests that have been developed .
Tests or evaluations have been developed for : *
Hip and elbow dysplasia * Patellar luxation ( knees ) *
Eyes
* Collie eye anomaly
* Progressive retinal atrophy *
Thyroid ( autoimmune )
– multiple labs perform this test - check OFA application for list * Congenital Cardiac ( heart ) * Multidrug resistance gene * Hereditary cataracts *
Pelger Huet anomaly Other areas that are currently not health concerns , but tests have been developed for , are : *
Coat color ( red carrier / red factored ) –
Vet DNA Center and HealthGene process this sample
* Dilute gene carrier –
Vet DNA Center and HealthGene process this sample DNA testing to either certify parentage or to verify parentage ) for Australian Shepherds can be performed , and as of January 2010 , all adults producing a litter will be required to be DNA tested to allow a breeder to register a litter with the Australian Shepherd Club of America ( ASCA ) .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The Australian Shepherd 's history is vague , as is the reason for its misleading name .
The breed was initially called by many names , including Spanish Shepherd , Pastor Dog , Bob - Tail , New Mexican Shepherd , California Shepherd , and Austrian Shepherd .
It is believed by some that the breed has Basque origins in Spain and was used there by shepherds .
Those shepherds might then have emigrated to the West Coast of the United States via Australia .
What is known is that it developed in western North America in the 19th and early 20th centuries .
The Australian Shepherd was a particularly tireless sheep herder in the Rocky Mountains because it is relatively unaffected by altitude .
Ranchers in Boulder , Colorado , began breeding the dogs which would attract purchasers from as far west as California for their legendary sheep - herding abilities .
A theory suggests that they were named for the imported sheep that they herded .
It is also possible that many of the dogs coming from Australia were blue merle and the adjective " Australian " became associated with any dogs of that coat color .
Breeds as we know them today did not exist before Victorian times , but local variations of the ancestors of current breeds came into America along with their owners and livestock .
Included are some that are now extinct or that have merged into other breeds .
These may have included some British herding dogs , native dogs from North America ( originating in Asia / Siberia ) , as well as dogs from Germany and Spain including the Carea Leonés .
For many centuries , shepherds were more interested in dogs ' working abilities than their appearance .
As a result , over time , shepherds interbred dogs that they believed would produce better workers for the given climate and landscape .
In the eastern U.S. , terrain and weather conditions were similar to that of Europe , so the existing imported breeds and their offspring worked well there .
In the American West , conditions were quite different .
Spanish flocks were introduced for food and fiber which was mainly the Churra .
The Spanish dogs that accompanied them to American West proved well - suited for their job in the wild and dangerous territory .
They were highly valued for their ability to herd and protect their charges from predators on the open range .
In the arid and semiarid areas inhabited by early Spanish settlers , temperatures reached extremes of hot and cold and fields varied in altitude from sea level to the higher , rougher Sierra Nevada and similar mountain ranges .
The ranchers in these areas often pastured livestock on remote ranges .
They preferred more aggressive herding dogs that served in the capacity of herder and guardian .
RECENT HISTORY Section::::Recent history .
Development of the breed began in the American West .
The breed 's foundation bloodlines are depicted in the Australian Shepherd Genealogy Chart showing the relationship between the early families of dogs .
The American Kennel Club ( AKC ) ranked the Australian Shepherd as the 17th - most popular breed in the United States in 2016 .
Selective breeding for many generations focused on aspects of the dog that enabled it to function as an effective stockdog in the American West .
It had to handle severe weather ; have plenty of speed , athleticism , energy , and endurance ; and be intelligent , flexible , and independent ; while remaining obedient .
The actual foundation for the Australian Shepherd was established between the 1940s and the early 1970s , when the Australian Shepherd Club of America was formed and the registry was started .
Their stunts and skills earned them places in several Disney films , including Run Appaloosa Run and Stub : The Greatest Cowdog in the West .
An Australian shepherd was featured in the film Flight of the Navigator ( 1986 ) and the TV series Flash Forward ( 1996 )
.
More recently , an Australian Shepherd starred in the film
Famous Five ( 2012 ) and its sequels .
In June 2017 , U.S. Vice President Mike Pence and his family adopted a Blue Merle Australian Shepherd named Harley .
ACTIVITIES Section::::Activities .
Like other herding breeds , these dogs excel at many dog sports , especially herding , dog agility , frisbee , and flyball .
Herding instincts and trainability can be measured at noncompetitive instinct tests .
Aussies that exhibit basic herding instincts can be trained to compete in ASCA stock dog trials or AKC herding events .
The dog has a stride in which its front and back legs cross over , making for an appearance of " on the edge " speed .
The dogs instinctively use a " pounce " position to deal with cattle trying to kick them .
They also have strong hips and legs , allowing for fast acceleration and high jumping , sometimes as high as 4 ft ( 1.3 m ) .
An Australian shepherd named Pockets is credited as being the oldest dog to earn a title in AKC history , having earned the Rally Novice title at the age of 15 years , 5 weeks .
MISCELLANEOUS Section::::Miscellaneous .
The Australian Shepherd Club of America ( ASCA ) was founded in 1957 to promote the breed .
The National Stock Dog Registry became its official breed registry , which continued until ASCA took over in 1972 .
In 1975 , ASCA created a breed standard , describing exactly how an Australian shepherd should look and be constructed ( its conformation to the Standard ) .
It developed more uniformity in the breed and standardized the type .
In the United States , the American Kennel Club ( AKC ) is the primary registry for purebred dogs , and first recognized the Australian Shepherd in 1991 as a member of the Herding group .
However , many Aussie breeders felt the AKC put too much emphasis on breed conformity and not enough on performance , so the ASCA declined to join the AKC .
Those breeders who felt that AKC membership had its advantages split off from ASCA to form their own Australian Shepherd club , the United States Australian Shepherd Association , created their own breed standard , and joined the AKC in 1993 .
The decision about affiliation with the AKC remains controversial , as it does with many performance breeds .
The Fédération Cynologique Internationale ( FCI - World Canine Organization ) recognized the Australian Shepherd for international competition in 2007 , in Group 1 Sheepdogs and Cattle Dogs as breed number 342 .
The Miniature Australian Shepherd was developed by breeders looking for smaller dogs ranging in size from 14 inches to the Aussie standard .
In 2010 , NAMASCUSA renamed the breed Miniature American Shepherds and subsequently changed their name to MASCUSA , The Miniature American Shepherd Club of the USA .
This new breed gained acceptance into the AKC Miscellaneous class in June 2012 with the sizes written in the standard as females from 13–17 inches and males from 14–18 inches .
In addition , an emergence of an even smaller version occurred , referred to as the Toy Australian Shepherd , with adult males weighing 12–15 pounds ( 5.5–7 kg ) and all dogs falling under a 14-inch height at the withers .
Many breeders and owners of Australian Shepherds consider the Mini and Toy to be separate breeds ; others consider them to be down - sized versions of the same breed .
While the Mini size can be attained through selective breeding of small Australian Shepherds , the Toy size is typically a result of cross breeding with other toy breeds .
ASCA and AKC consider both variants to be separate breeds .
SEE ALSO
* Australian Cattle Dog
* Australian Kelpie * Border Collie
REFERENCES
FURTHER READING
EXTERNAL LINKS
* – An active listing of Australian Shepherd links .