EJECTION FRACTION
An ejection fraction ( EF ) is the volumetric fraction ( or portion of the total ) of fluid ( usually blood ) ejected from a chamber ( usually the heart ) with each contraction ( or heartbeat ) .
It can refer to the cardiac atrium , ventricle , gall bladder , or leg veins , although if unspecified it usually refers to the left ventricle of the heart .
EF is widely used as a measure of the pumping efficiency of the heart and is used to classify heart failure types .
It is also used as an indicator of the severity of heart failure , although it has recognized limitations .
The EF of the left heart , known as the left ventricular ejection fraction ( LVEF ) , is calculated by dividing the volume of blood pumped from the left ventricle per beat ( stroke volume ) by the volume of blood collected in the left ventricle at the end of diastolic filling ( end - diastolic volume ) .
LVEF is an indicator of the effectiveness of pumping into the systemic circulation .
The EF of the right heart , or right ventricular ejection fraction ( RVEF ) , is a measure of the efficiency of pumping into the pulmonary circulation .
A heart which can not pump sufficient blood to meet the body 's requirements ( i.e. , heart failure ) will often , but not invariably , have a reduced ventricular ejection fraction .
MEASUREMENT Section::::Measurement .
Ejection fraction is commonly measured by echocardiography , although cardiac magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) , cardiac computed tomography , ventriculography and nuclear medicine ( gated SPECT and radionuclide angiography )
scans may also be used .
Measurements by different modalities are not interchangeable .
Historically , the gold standard for measurement of the ejection fraction was ventriculography , but cardiac MRI is now considered the best method .
PHYSIOLOGY NORMAL VALUES Section::::Physiology .
Section::::Normal values .
In a healthy man , the stroke volume is approximately 70 mL and the left ventricular end - diastolic volume ( EDV ) is approximately 120 mL , giving an estimated ejection fraction of , or 0.58 ( 58 % ) .
Healthy individuals typically have ejection fractions between 50 % and 65 % , although the lower limits of normality are difficult to establish with confidence .
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY HEART FAILURE CATEGORIES Section::::Pathophysiology .
Section::::Heart failure categories .
Damage to heart muscle ( myocardium ) , such as occurring following myocardial infarction or cardiomyopathy , compromises the heart 's performance as an efficient pump and may reduce ejection fraction .
Such reduction in the EF can manifest itself as heart failure .
The 2016 European Society of Cardiology Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure subdivided heart failure into 3 categories on the basis of LVEF : * normal or preserved LVEF [ ≥50 % ] ( HFpEF ) * * moderately reduced LVEF [ in the range of 40–49 % ]
( HFmrEF ) * * reduced LVEF [ < 40 % ]
( HFrEF ) ]
* A chronically low ejection fraction less than 30 % is an important threshold in qualification for disability benefits in the USA .
CALCULATION Section::::Calculation .
By definition , the volume of blood within a ventricle at the end of diastole is the end - diastolic volume ( EDV ) .
Likewise , the volume of blood left in a ventricle at the end of systole ( contraction ) is the end - systolic volume ( ESV ) .
The difference between EDV and ESV is the stroke volume ( SV ) .
The ejection fraction is the fraction of the end - diastolic volume that is ejected with each beat ; that is , it is stroke volume ( SV ) divided by end - diastolic volume ( EDV ) : formula_1 Where the stroke volume is given by : formula_2
EF is inherently a relative measurement — as is any fraction , ratio , or percentage , whereas the stroke volume , end - diastolic volume or end - systolic volume are absolute measurements .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The origin of the term ejection fraction is somewhat obscure .
After William Harvey 's description of the basic mechanism of the circulation in 1628 , it was initially assumed that the heart emptied completely during systole .
However , in 1856 Chauveau and Faivre observed that some fluid remained in the heart after contraction .
This was confirmed by Roy and Adami in 1888 .
in 1906 Henderson estimated the ratio of the volume discharged in systole to the total volume of the left ventricle to be approximately 2/3 .
In 1933 , Gustav Nylin proposed that the ratio of the heart volume / stroke volume ( the inverse of ejection fraction ) could be used as a measure of cardiac function .
in 1952 Bing and colleagues used a minor modification of Nylin 's suggestion ( EDV / SV ) to assess right ventricular function using a dye dilution technique .
Exactly when the relationship between end diastolic volume and stroke volume was inverted into its current form is unclear .
Holt calculated the ratio SV / EDV and noted that ' ...
The ventricle empties itself in a " fractional " manner , approximately 46 per cent of its end - diastolic volume being ejected with each stroke and 54 per cent remaining in the ventricle at the end of systole ' .
Folse and Braunwald in 1962 used the ratio of forward stroke volume / EDV and observed that ' estimations of the fraction of the left ventricular end - diastolic volume that is ejected into the aorta during each cardiac cycle , as well as of the ventricular end - diastolic and residual volumes , provide information that is fundamental to a hemodynamic analysis of left ventricular function ' .
In 1965 Bartle et al .
used the term ejected fraction for the ratio SV / EDV , and the term ejection fraction was used in two review articles in 1968 suggesting a wide currency by that time .
REFERENCES