COIN FLIPPING Coin flipping , coin tossing , or heads or tails is the practice of throwing a coin in the air and checking which side is showing when it lands , in order to choose between two alternatives , sometimes used to resolve a dispute between two parties .
It is a form of sortition which inherently has only two possible and equally likely outcomes .
The party who calls the side wins .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The historical origin of coin flipping is the interpretation of a chance outcome as the expression of divine will .
Coin flipping was known to the ancient Chinese as 撒大苏打 ( " ship or head " ) , as some coins had a ship on one side and the head of the emperor on the other .
In England , this was referred to as cross and pile .
The expression Heads or Tails results from heads and tails being considered complementary body parts .
PROCESS
Section::::Process .
During a coin toss , the coin is thrown into the air such that it rotates edge - over - edge several times .
Either beforehand or when the coin is in the air , an interested party calls " heads " or " tails " , indicating which side of the coin that party is choosing .
The other party is assigned the opposite side .
Depending on custom , the coin may be caught ; caught and inverted ; or allowed to land on the ground .
When the coin comes to rest , the toss is complete and the party who called correctly or was assigned the upper side is declared the winner .
It is possible for a coin to land on its edge , usually by landing up against an object ( such as a shoe ) or by getting stuck in the ground .
However , even on a flat surface it is possible for a coin to land on its edge , with a chance of about 1 in 6000 for an American nickel .
Angular momentum typically prevents most coins from landing on their edges unsupported if flipped .
Such cases in which a coin does land on its edge are exceptionally rare and in most cases the coin is simply re - flipped .
The coin may be any type as long as it has two distinct sides ; it need not be a circulating coin as such .
Larger coins tend to be more popular than smaller ones .
Some high - profile coin tosses , such as the Cricket World Cup and the Super Bowl , use custom - made ceremonial medallions .
THREE - WAY Section::::Three - way .
Three - way coin flips are also possible , by a different process – this can be done either to choose two out of three , or to choose one out of three .
To choose two out of three , three coins are flipped , and if two coins come up the same and one different , the different one loses ( is out ) , leaving two players .
To choose one out of three , either reverse this ( the odd coin out is the winner ) , or add a regular two - way coin flip between the remaining players as a second step .
Note that the three - way flip is 75 % likely to work each time it is tried ( if all coins are heads or all are tails , each of which occur 1/8 of the time due to the chances being 0.5 by 0.5 by 0.5 , the flip is repeated until the results differ ) , and does not require that " heads " or " tails " be called .
A famous example of such a three - way coin flip ( choose two out of three ) is dramatized in Friday Night Lights ( originally a , subsequently film and TV series ) , where three high school football teams with identical records use a three - way coin flip – at a truck stop – to determine which two will advance to the playoffs .
A legacy of this coin flip was to reduce the use of coin flips to break ties in Texas sports , instead using point - systems to reduce the frequency of ties .
USE IN DISPUTE RESOLUTION Section::::Use in dispute resolution .
Coin tossing is a simple and unbiased way of settling a dispute or deciding between two or more arbitrary options .
In a game theoretic analysis it provides even odds to both sides involved , requiring little effort and preventing the dispute from escalating into a struggle .
It is used widely in sports and other games to decide arbitrary factors such as which side of the field a team will play from , or which side will attack or defend initially ; these decisions may tend to favor one side , or may be neutral .
Factors such as wind direction , the position of the sun , and other conditions may affect the decision .
In team sports it is often the captain who makes the call , while the umpire or referee usually oversees such proceedings .
A competitive method may be used instead of a toss in some situations , for example in basketball the jump ball is employed , while the face - off plays a similar role in ice hockey .
Coin flipping is used to decide which end of the field the teams will play to and/or which team gets first use of the ball , or similar questions in football matches , American football games , Australian rules football , volleyball , and other sports requiring such decisions .
In the U.S. a specially minted coin is flipped in National Football League games ; the coin is then sent to the Pro Football Hall of Fame , and other coins of the special series minted at the same time are sold to collectors .
The XFL , a short - lived American football league , attempted to avoid coin tosses by implementing a face - off style " opening scramble , " in which one player from each team tried to recover a loose football ; the team whose player recovered the ball got first choice .
Because of the high rate of injury in these events , it has not achieved mainstream popularity in any football league ( a modified version was adopted by X - League Indoor Football , in which each player pursued his own ball ) , and coin tossing remains the method of choice in American football .
In an association football match , the team winning the coin toss chooses which goal to attack in the first half ; the opposing team kicks off for the first half .
For the second half , the teams switch ends , and the team that won the coin toss kicks off .
Coin tosses are also used to decide which team has the pick of going first or second in a penalty shoot - out .
Before the early-1970s introduction of the penalty shootout , coin tosses were occasionally needed to decide the outcome of tied matches .
The most famous instance of this was the semifinal game of the 1968 European Championship in Italy between Italy and the Soviet Union , which finished 0 - 0 after extra time .
Italy won , and went on to become European champions .
In cricket the toss is often significant , as the decision whether to bat or bowl first can influence the outcome of the game .
Similarly , in tennis a coin toss is used in professional matches to determine which player serves first .
The player who wins the toss decides whether to serve first or return , while the loser of the toss decides which end of the court each player plays on first .
In duels a coin toss was sometimes used to determine which combatant had the sun at his back .
In some other sports , the result of the toss is less crucial and merely a way to fairly choose between two more or less equal options .
The National Football League also has a coin toss for tie - breaking among teams for playoff berths and seeding , but the rules make the need for coin toss , which is random rather than competitive , very unlikely .
A similar procedure breaks ties for the purposes of seeding in the NFL Draft ; these coin tosses are more common , since the tie - breaking procedure for the draft is much less elaborate than the one used for playoff seeding .
Major League Baseball once conducted a series of coin flips as a contingency on the last month of its regular season to determine home teams for any potential one - game playoff games that might need to be added to the regular season .
Most of these cases did not occur .
From the 2009 season , the method to determine home - field advantage was changed .
Fédération Internationale d'Escrime rules use a coin toss to determine the winner of a fencing match that remains tied at the end of a " sudden death " extra minute of competition .
Although in most international matches this is now done electronically by the scoring apparatus .
In the United States Asa Lovejoy and Francis W. Pettygrove , who each owned the claim to the land that would later become Portland , Oregon , wanted to name the new town after their respective hometowns of Boston , Massachusetts and Portland , Maine ; Pettygrove won the coin flip .
Scientists sometimes use coin flipping to determine the order in which they appear on the list of authors of scholarly papers .
POLITICS AUSTRALIA Section::::Politics .
Section::::Australia .
In December 2006 , Australian television networks Seven and Ten , which shared the broadcasting of the 2007 AFL Season , decided who would broadcast the Grand Final with the toss of a coin .
Network Ten won .
CANADA Section::::Canada .
In some jurisdictions , a coin is flipped to decide between two candidates who poll equal number of votes in an election , or two companies tendering equal prices for a project .
For example , a coin toss decided a City of Toronto tender in 2003 for painting lines on 1,605 km of city streets : the bids were $ 161,110.00 ( $ 100.3800623 per km ) , $ 146,584.65 ( $ 91.33 per km , exactly ) , and two equal bids of $ 111,242.55 ( $ 69.31 per km , exactly ) .
PHILIPPINES
Section::::Philippines .
" Drawing of lots " is one of the methods to break ties to determine a winner in an election ; the coin flip is considered an acceptable variant .
Each candidate will be given five chances to flip a coin ; the candidate with the most number of " heads " wins .
The 2013 mayoral election in San Teodoro , Oriental Mindoro was decided on a coin flip , with a winner being proclaimed after the second round when both candidates remained tied in the first round .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
In the United Kingdom , if a local or national election has resulted in a tie where candidates receive exactly the same number of votes , then the winner can be decided either by drawing straws / lots , coin flip , or drawing a high card in pack of cards .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
In the United States , a coin toss determines the class of the senators of a state being added to the Union , with the new state 's senators due to be entering the US Senate .
A number of states provide for " drawing lots " in the event an election ends in a tie - this is usually resolved by a coin toss or picking names from a hat .
A 2017 election to the 94th District of the Virginia House of Delegates resulted in both Republican incumbent David Yancey and Democratic challenger Shelly Simmonds tied with exactly 11,608 votes .
Under state law , the election was to be decided by drawing a name from a bowl , although a coin toss would also have been an acceptable option .
The chair of the Board of Elections drew the film canister with Yancey 's name , and he was declared the winner .
Additionally , the outcome of the draw determined control of the entire House , as Republicans won 50 of the other 99 seats and Democrats 49 .
A Yancey win extended the Republican advantage to 51 - 49 , whereas a Simmonds win would have resulted in a 50 - 50 tie .
As there is no provision for breaking ties in the House as a whole , this would have forced a power sharing agreement between the two parties .
PHYSICS Section::::Physics .
The outcome of coin flipping has been studied by Persi Diaconis and his collaborators .
They have demonstrated that a mechanical coin flipper which imparts the same initial conditions for every toss has a highly predictable outcomethe phase space is fairly regular .
Further , in actual flipping , people exhibit slight bias – " coin tossing is fair to two decimals but not to three .
That is , typical flips show biases such as .495 or .503 .
"
In studying coin flipping , to observe the rotation speed of coin flips , Diaconis first used a strobe light and a coin with one side painted black , the other white , so that when the speed of the strobe flash equaled the rotation rate of the coin , it would appear to always show the same side .
This proved difficult to use , and rotation rate was more accurately computed by attaching floss to a coin , such that it would wind around the coin – after a flip , one could count rotations by unwinding the floss , and then compute rotation rate as flips over air time .
Moreover , their theoretical analysis of the physics of coin tosses predicts a slight bias for a caught coin to be caught the same way up as it was thrown , with a probability of around 0.51 , though a subsequent attempt to verify this experimentally gave ambiguous results .
Stage magicians and gamblers , with practice , are able to greatly increase this bias , whilst still making throws which are visually indistinguishable from normal throws .
Since the images on the two sides of actual coins are made of raised metal , the toss is likely to slightly favor one face or the other if the coin is allowed to roll on one edge upon landing .
Coin spinning is much more likely to be biased than flipping , and conjurers trim the edges of coins so that when spun they usually land on a particular face .
COUNTERINTUITIVE PROPERTIES
Section::::Counterintuitive properties .
Human intuition about conditional probability is often very poor and can give rise to some seemingly surprising observations .
For example , if the successive tosses of a coin are recorded as a string of " H " and " T " , then for any trial of tosses , it is twice as likely that the triplet TTH will occur before THT than after it .
It is three times as likely that THH will precede HHT , than that THH will follow HHT .
( See Penney 's game ) MATHEMATICS Section::::Mathematics .
The mathematical abstraction of the statistics of coin flipping is described by means of the Bernoulli process ; a single flip of a coin is a Bernoulli trial .
In the study of statistics , coin - flipping plays the role of being an introductory example of the complexities of statistics .
A commonly treated textbook topic is that of checking if a coin is fair .
TELECOMMUNICATIONS Section::::Telecommunications .
There is no reliable way to use a true coin flip to settle a dispute between two parties if they can not both see the coin — for example , over the phone .
The flipping party could easily lie about the outcome of the toss .
In telecommunications and cryptography , the following algorithm can be used : * Alice and Bob each choose a random string , " ljngjkrjgnfdudiudd " and " gfdgdfjkherfsfsd " respectively .
*
* Alice chooses an outcome for an imaginary coin flip , such as " tail "
* * Bob sends Alice his random string " gfdgdfjkherfsfsd " *
* Alice immediately computes a cryptographic hash of the string " tail ljngjkrjgnfdudiudd gfdgdfjkherfsfsd " , which is 59dea408d43183a3937957e71a4bcacc616d9cbc and sends it to Bob
* * Alice asks Bob : " heads or tails " ?
*
*
Bob says , for instance , " heads " .
*
* Alice tells him she 's just won , and proves it by showing the string " tail ljngjkrjgnfdudiudd gfdgdfjkherfsfsd " .
*
* Bob can check that Alice did n't lie by computing the SHA-1 of the string himself
* *
Furthermore , Bob by providing his own randomly generated string guarantees that Alice was n't able to precompute an image pair of " tail / random string " or " head / random string " .
* LOTTERIES Section::::Lotteries .
The New Zealand lottery game Big Wednesday uses a coin toss .
If a player matches all 6 of their numbers , the coin toss will decide whether they win a cash jackpot ( minimum of NZ$25,000 ) or a bigger jackpot with luxury prizes ( minimum of NZ$2 million cash , plus value of luxury prizes . )
The coin toss is also used in determining the Second Chance winner 's prize .
CLARIFYING FEELINGS
Section::::Clarifying feelings .
A technique attributed to Sigmund Freud to help in making difficult decisions is to toss a coin not actually to determine the decision , but to clarify the decision - maker 's feelings .
He explained : " I did not say you should follow blindly what the coin tells you .
What I want you to do is to note what the coin indicates .
Then look into your own reactions .
Ask yourself : Am I pleased ?
Am I disappointed ?
That will help you to recognize how you really feel about the matter , deep down inside .
With that as a basis , you 'll then be ready to make up your mind and come to the right decision . "
Danish poet Piet Hein 's book Grooks includes a poem on a similar theme : Whenever you 're called on to make up your mind , And you 're hampered by not having any , The best way to solve the dilemma , you 'll find ,
Is simply by spinning a penny .
No — not so that chance shall decide the affair While you 're passively standing there moping ;
But the moment the penny is up in the air , You suddenly know what you 're hoping .
SEE ALSO
* Bernoulli process *
Toss ( cricket )
* Checking whether a coin is fair
* Flipism
* Penney 's game
* Gambler 's fallacy * Rock - paper - scissors
* Two - up * Two - Face FOOTNOTES REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS