HUGH GLASS Hugh Glass ( 1783 – 1833 ) was an American frontiersman , fur trapper , trader , hunter , and explorer .
He is best known for his story of survival and retribution , after being left for dead by companions when he was mauled by a grizzly bear .
Born in Pennsylvania to Irish parents , Glass became an explorer of the watershed of the Upper Missouri River , in present - day Montana , the Dakotas , and the Platte River area of Nebraska .
His life story has been adapted into two feature - length films : Man in the Wilderness ( 1971 ) and The Revenant ( 2015 ) .
They both portray the survival struggle of Glass , who ( in the best historical accounts ) crawled and stumbled to Fort Kiowa , South Dakota after being abandoned without supplies or weapons by fellow explorers and fur traders during General Ashley 's expedition of 1823 .
Despite the story 's popularity , its accuracy has been disputed .
It was first recorded in 1825 in The Port Folio , a Philadelphia literary journal , as a literary piece and later picked up by various newspapers .
Although originally published anonymously , it was later revealed to be the work of James Hall , brother of The Port Folios editor .
There is no writing from Hugh Glass himself to corroborate the veracity of it .
Also , it is likely to have been embellished over the years as a legend .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Glass was born in Scranton , Pennsylvania .
His life before the famous bear attack is largely unverifiable , and his frontier story contained numerous embellishments .
He was reported to have been captured by pirates under the command of Gulf of Mexico chief Jean Lafitte off the coast of Texas in 1816 , and was forced to become a pirate for up to two years .
Glass allegedly escaped by swimming to shore near what is present - day Galveston , Texas .
He was later rumored to have been captured by the Pawnee tribe , with whom he lived for several years .
Glass traveled to St. Louis , Missouri in 1821 , accompanying several Pawnee delegates invited to meet with U.S. authorities .
GENERAL ASHLEY 'S 1823 EXPEDITION Section::::General Ashley 's 1823 expedition .
In 1822 , many men responded to an advertisement in the Missouri Gazette and Public Advertiser placed by General William Henry Ashley , which called for a corps of 100 men to " ascend the river Missouri " as part of a fur - trading venture .
Many of them , who later earned reputations as famous mountain men , also joined the enterprise , including James Beckwourth , John S. Fitzgerald , David Jackson , William Sublette , Jim Bridger , Thomas Fitzpatrick , and Jedediah Smith .
These men and others would later be known as " Ashley 's Hundred " .
Glass , however , did not join Ashley 's company until the next year , when he ascended the Missouri River with Ashley .
In June 1823 they met up with many of the men that had joined in 1822 , and were attacked by Arikara warriors .
Glass was apparently shot in the leg and the survivors retreated downstream and sent for help .
Glass wrote a letter to the parents of John S. Gardner , killed on June 2 , 1823 : GRIZZLY BEAR MAULING
Section::::Grizzly bear mauling .
Glass and the rest of the Ashley Party eventually returned to Fort Kiowa to regroup for the trip west .
Andrew Henry , Ashley 's partner , had joined the group , and he along with Glass and several others set out overland to the Yellowstone River .
Near the forks of the Grand River , near present - day Shadehill Reservoir , Perkins County , South Dakota , while scouting for game for the expedition larder , Glass surprised and disturbed a grizzly bear with two cubs .
The bear charged , picked him up , bit and lacerated his flesh , severely wounded him , and forced him to the ground .
Glass nevertheless managed to kill the bear with help from his trapping party , but was left badly mauled .
The men were convinced Glass would not survive his injuries ; nevertheless , they carried Glass on a litter for two days , but doing so greatly slowed the pace of the group 's travel .
Henry asked for two volunteers to stay with Glass until he died and then bury him .
John S. Fitzgerald ( not to be confused with Thomas Fitzpatrick , who had separated from the Henry party with Jedediah Smith to find an overland trail to the Green River country ) and a man later identified as " Bridges " stepped forward , and as the rest of the party moved on , began digging his grave .
Later , claiming that they were interrupted by attacking Arikara , the pair grabbed the rifle , knife , and other equipment belonging to Glass and took flight .
Fitzgerald and " Bridges " later caught up with the party and incorrectly reported to Ashley that Glass had died .
There is a debate whether Bridges was actually famed mountain man Jim Bridger .
Despite his injuries , Glass regained consciousness , but found himself abandoned , without weapons or equipment .
He had festering wounds , a broken leg , and deep cuts on his back that exposed his bare ribs .
Glass lay mutilated and alone , more than 200 miles ( 320 km ) from the nearest American settlement , at Fort Kiowa , on the Missouri River .
Glass set the bone of his own leg , wrapped himself in the bear hide his companions had placed over him as a shroud , and began crawling back to Fort Kiowa .
To prevent gangrene , Glass allowed maggots to eat the dead , infected flesh in his wounds .
Using Thunder Butte as a navigational landmark , Glass crawled overland south toward the Cheyenne River where he fashioned a crude raft and floated downstream to Fort Kiowa .
The journey took him six weeks .
He survived mostly on wild berries and roots .
PURSUIT OF FITZGERALD AND BRIDGES Section::::Pursuit of Fitzgerald and Bridges .
After recovering from his wounds , Glass set out again to find Fitzgerald and " Bridges " .
He eventually traveled to Fort Henry on the Yellowstone River but found it deserted .
A note indicated that Andrew Henry and company had relocated to a new camp at the mouth of the Bighorn River .
Arriving there , Glass found " Bridges " , but apparently forgave him because of his youth , and then re - enlisted with Ashley 's company .
Glass later learned that Fitzgerald had joined the army and was stationed at Fort Atkinson in present - day Nebraska .
Glass reportedly spared Fitzgerald 's life because he would be killed by the army captain for killing a soldier of the United States Army .
However , the captain asked Fitzgerald to return the stolen rifle to Glass , and before departing Glass warned Fitzgerald never to leave the army , or he would still kill him .
According to Yount 's story , Glass also obtained $ 300 as compensation .
FURTHER EXPLORATIONS FOR GENERAL ASHLEY IN 1824 Section::::Further explorations for General Ashley in 1824 .
In the period intervening , between finding " Bridges " and finding Fitzgerald , Glass and four others were dispatched in February 1824 with mail for Fort Atkinson .
They traveled up the Powder River , then across to the Platte River .
There they constructed skin boats and traveled down the Platte River to the lower end of the Black Hills .
Glass and his party discovered a settlement of 38 lodges of Arikara .
Their leader , who was known by Glass , declared the tribe to be friendly and invited them in so the men went ashore .
While smoking with him in his lodge , Glass noticed their equipment being taken by the residents and realized it was a trap .
The men quickly fled but two were killed by the pursuing war party .
Glass managed to hide behind some rocks until the Arikara gave up their search , but was separated from the two other survivors .
He was relieved to find his knife and flint in his shot pouch and traveled to Fort Kiowa , surviving off the land .
Glass returned to the frontier as a trapper and fur trader .
He was later employed as a hunter for the U.S. Army garrison at Fort Union , near Williston , North Dakota .
DEATH
Section::::Death .
Glass was killed along with two of his fellow trappers in early spring of 1833 on the Yellowstone River in an attack by the Arikara .
A monument to Glass now stands near the site of his mauling on the southern shore of the present - day Shadehill Reservoir in Perkins County , South Dakota , at the forks of the Grand River .
Nearby , the Hugh Glass Lakeside Use Area is a free Forest Service campground and picnic area .
IN THE MEDIA Section::::In the media .
Glass ' life has been recounted in numerous books and dramas .
*
" The Song of Hugh Glass " ( 1915 ) is the second part of the sequence of epic poems , Cycle of the West , by John G. Neihardt .
* Western writer Frederick Manfred penned Lord Grizzly ( 1954 ) , an account of Glass ' ordeal nominated for a National Book Award .
*
In the 1966 episode " Hugh Glass Meets the Bear " of the syndicated television series , Death Valley Days , the British actor John Alderson played the part of Glass .
Morgan Woodward was cast as trapper Thomas Fitzpatrick , Victor French as Louis Baptiste , and Tris Coffin as Major Andrew Henry .
*
The film Man in the Wilderness ( 1971 ) is loosely based on Glass .
It stars Richard Harris as Zachary Bass and John Huston as Captain Henry .
*
Dewitt Lee played Sam Glass in a film called Apache Blood ( 1975 ) , a story loosely based on that of Glass .
*
Author John Myers Myers wrote The Saga of Hugh Glass : Pirate , Pawnee , and Mountain Man , an historical account published by the University of Nebraska Press in 1976 .
* Roger Zelazny and Gerald Hausman meshed the stories of John Colter and Glass in the 1994 novel Wilderness .
* Hugh Glass , Jim Bridger and Tom Fitzpatrick appear in The Wandering Hill :
Volume 2 of the Berrybender Narratives by Larry McMurtry ( New York , Simon & Schuster , 2003 ) .
The novel begins with the return of Glass from his bear mauling and his attempt to settle the score with Fitzpatrick and Bridger .
*
The song " Six Weeks " by Of Monsters and Men is " inspired by the true tale of American frontiersman Hugh Glass , seemingly left for dead after killing a bear that attacked him . "
* Michael Punke 's 2002 novel , The Revenant , is a fictional retelling of Glass 's encounter with the bear and search for revenge .
* A 2014 episode of podcast The Dollop features Glass as its main subject of discussion .
* The May 27 , 2015 , episode of the History Channel 's Monument Guys , " Tesla and the Unbreakable Glass , " features the construction of a Glass sculpture .
* Sculptor John Lopez unveils a life - size welded sculpture of Hugh Glass being attacked by a Grizzly at the inaugural " Hugh Glass Rendezvous " held on the site that the actual mauling took place in 1823 .
The sculpture is permanently on display at the Grand River Museum in Lemmon , SD .
* Leonardo DiCaprio played a largely fictionalized version of Glass in the 2015 film The Revenant , directed by Alejandro González Iñárritu .
The film is based in part on Punke 's novel and was met with critical acclaim .
It earned 12 Academy Award nominations and won three .
For his portrayal of Glass , DiCaprio won the Academy Award for Best Actor .
* Hugh Glass appears in World of Warcraft as a merchant in Grizzly Hills alongside his " pet " bear Griselda .
REFERENCES Section::::References .
The Saga of Hugh Glass , Pirate , Pawnee , and Mountain Man , a book by John Myers Myers , University of Nebraska Press , 1976
FURTHER READING * Jon T. Coleman .
Here Lies Hugh Glass :
A Mountain Man , a Bear , and the Rise of the American Nation ( 2013 ) * " Hugh Glass " , Bruce Bradley ( 1999 ) * " Lord Grizzly " , Fredrick Manfred ( 1954 ) *
" Saga of Hugh Glass : Pirate , Pawnee and Mountain Man " , John Myers Myers ( 1976 )
* " Hugh Glass , Mountain Man " , Robert M. McClung ( 1990 ) *
" The Song of Hugh Glass " ( part of " A Cycle of the West " ) , John G. Neihardt ( 1915 )
EXTERNAL LINKS *
" Hugh Glass : The Irishman who inspired the Revenant " , Irish Examiner newspaper
* Map covering the area of the Hugh Glass monument in Perkins County , SD .
Take Forest Service Road 5622 , marked by the road sign as " Hugh Glass Road . "