TOMBSTONE ( FILM )
Tombstone is a 1993 American Western film directed by George P. Cosmatos , written by Kevin Jarre ( who was also the original director , but was replaced early in production ) , and starring Kurt Russell and Val Kilmer , with Sam Elliott , Bill Paxton , Powers Boothe , Michael Biehn , and Dana Delany in supporting roles , as well as narration by Robert Mitchum .
The film is based on events in Tombstone , Arizona , including the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral and the Earp Vendetta Ride , during the 1880s .
It depicts a number of Western outlaws and lawmen , such as Wyatt Earp , William Brocius , Johnny Ringo , and Doc Holliday .
Tombstone was released by Hollywood Pictures in theatrical wide release in the United States on December 25 , 1993 , grossing $ 56.5 million in domestic ticket sales .
The film was a financial success , and for the Western genre , it ranks number 16 in the list of highest - grossing films since 1979 .
Critical reception was generally positive .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1879 , members of the outlaw gang known as the Cowboys , led by " Curly Bill " Brocius , ride into a Mexican town and interrupt a local police officer 's wedding .
They then proceed to massacre the assembled policemen in retribution for killing two of their fellow gang members .
Shortly before being shot , a local priest warns them that their acts of murder and savagery will be avenged , referencing the biblical fourth horseman .
Wyatt Earp , a retired peace officer with a notable reputation , reunites with his brothers Virgil and Morgan in Tucson , Arizona , where they venture on toward Tombstone to settle down .
There they encounter Wyatt 's long - time friend Doc Holliday , who is seeking relief from his worsening tuberculosis .
Josephine Marcus and Mr. Fabian are also newly arrived with a traveling theater troupe .
Meanwhile , Wyatt 's common - law wife , Mattie Blaylock , is becoming dependent on laudanum .
Wyatt and his brothers begin to profit from a stake in a gambling emporium and saloon when they have their first encounter with the Cowboys .
The Cowboys are identifiable by the red sashes worn around their waists .
As tensions rise , Wyatt is pressured to help rid the town of the Cowboys , though he is no longer a lawman .
Curly Bill begins shooting at the sky after a visit to an opium den and is told by Marshal Fred White to relinquish his firearms .
Curly Bill instead shoots the marshal dead , and is forcibly taken into custody by Wyatt .
The arrest infuriates Ike Clanton and the other Cowboys .
Curly Bill stands trial , but is found not guilty due to a lack of witnesses .
Virgil , unable to tolerate lawlessness , becomes the new marshal and imposes a weapons ban within the city limits .
This leads to a gunfight at the O.K. Corral , in which Billy Clanton , Tom McLaury , and Frank McLaury are killed .
Virgil and Morgan are wounded , and the allegiance of county sheriff Johnny Behan with the Cowboys is made clear .
As retribution for the Cowboy deaths , Wyatt 's brothers are ambushed ; Morgan is killed , while Virgil is left handicapped .
A despondent Wyatt and his family leave Tombstone and board a train , with Ike Clanton and Frank Stilwell close behind , preparing to ambush them .
Wyatt sees that his family leaves safely , and then surprises the assassins .
He kills Stilwell , but lets Clanton live to send a message :
Wyatt announces that he is a U.S. marshal , and that he intends to kill any man he sees wearing a red sash .
Wyatt , Doc , a reformed Cowboy named Sherman McMasters , Texas Jack Vermillion , and Turkey Creek Jack Johnson , form a posse to seek revenge .
Wyatt and his posse are ambushed in a riverside forest by the Cowboys .
Wyatt walks into the creek , miraculously surviving the enemy fire , and kills Curly Bill along with many of his men .
Curly Bill 's second - in - command , Johnny Ringo , becomes the new head of the Cowboys .
When Doc 's health worsens , the group is accommodated by Henry Hooker at his ranch .
Ringo sends a messenger ( dragging McMasters ' corpse ) to tell Wyatt that he wants a showdown to end the hostilities ; Wyatt agrees .
Wyatt sets off for the showdown , not knowing that Doc had already arrived at the scene .
Doc confronts a surprised Ringo and kills him in a duel .
Wyatt runs when he hears the gunshot , only to encounter Doc .
They then press on to complete their task of eliminating the Cowboys , although Clanton escapes their vengeance by renouncing his red sash .
Doc is sent to a sanatorium in Colorado , where he later dies of his illness .
At Doc 's urging , Wyatt pursues Josephine to begin a new life .
CAST * Kurt Russell as Wyatt Earp
* Val Kilmer as Doc Holliday * Sam Elliott as Virgil Earp
* Bill Paxton as Morgan Earp
* Powers Boothe as " Curly Bill "
Brocius * Michael Biehn as Johnny Ringo * Charlton Heston as Henry Hooker * Jason Priestley as Billy Breakenridge * Jon Tenney as Sheriff Johnny Behan
* Stephen Lang as Ike Clanton * Thomas Haden Church as Billy Clanton * Dana Delany as Josephine Marcus
* Paula Malcomson as Allie Earp
* Lisa Collins as Louisa Earp
* John Philbin as Tom McLaury
* Dana Wheeler - Nicholson as Mattie Blaylock * Joanna Pacuła as Big Nose Kate * Michael Rooker as Sherman McMaster
* Harry Carey , Jr. as Marshal Fred White * Billy Bob Thornton as Johnny Tyler
* Tomas Arana as Frank Stilwell
* Paul Ben - Victor as " Indian Charlie " Cruz * Robert John Burke as Frank McLaury
* Billy Zane as Mr. Fabian * John Corbett as Johnny Barnes
* Buck Taylor as " Turkey Creek " Jack Johnson * Terry O'Quinn as Mayor John Clum
* Peter Sherayko as John
" Texas Jack " Vermillion PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
The film was shot primarily on location in Arizona .
Shooting began in May 1993 .
The film was supposed to be screenwriter Kevin Jarre 's first job as director , but he was quickly overwhelmed by the job – failing to get needed shots and falling behind the shooting schedule .
A month into filming , he was fired by producer Andrew Vajna and replaced with George P. Cosmatos .
Michael Biehn , a close friend of Jarre , considered quitting .
By the time of Cosmatos ' arrival , though , all actors stayed on board .
The new director brought a demanding , hard - nosed sensibility to the set , which led to conflicts with some of the crew members ( most famously with cinematographer William Fraker ) .
Meanwhile , Kurt Russell worked quickly with producer James Jacks to pare down Jarre 's sprawling script , deleting subplots and emphasizing the relationship between Wyatt and Doc .
Director Cosmatos was highly focused on accurate historical detail , including the costumes , props , customs , and scenery , to give them authenticity .
All the mustaches in the movie were real .
Val Kilmer practiced for a long time on his quick - draw speed , and gave his character a Southern Aristocrat accent .
Two locations were used to make the town of Tombstone look bigger .
The scene in which Wyatt throws an abusive card dealer ( Billy Bob Thornton ) out of a saloon was to show that Wyatt was a man who used psychology to intimidate .
Thornton 's lines in the scene were ad - libbed , as he was only told to " be a bully " .
The center of the film to Cosmatos was the loyalty and friendship between Wyatt and Doc .
The scene where Morgan Earp ( Paxton ) talks about God and death was originally much longer .
Actor Stephen Lang told the director he was drunk for most of filming , as Cosmatos recalled with a laugh .
Cosmatos said , " The emotion is the most important thing in a movie .
If you care about your people , you have a movie .
"
The gunfight at the O.K. Corral was over in seconds , he said , and he choreographed the scene exactly as it happened .
Cosmatos liked that , in the script , the gunfight at the O.K. Corral was not the end of something , but rather the beginning of something – the beginning of the true conflict of the film .
Cosmatos ' Western film influences included Red River , High Noon , My Darling Clementine , The Magnificent Seven , The Wild Bunch , and Rio Bravo .
He knew Sergio Leone personally , a friend of his in Italy whom he called " a lovely man " .
He admired European directors of American films like himself , half - Italian and half - Greek , such as Michael Curtiz , and other outsiders such as Alfred Hitchcock , because they had a different and unique point of view .
The heat and the number of scorpions were a surprise to the director .
He liked to treat actors as friends who were all in the same boat , and listened to ideas the actors brought to the film .
Cosmatos loved to shoot in real locations more than sets , which made filming fun .
He preferred the forest setting for the final shoot - out between Doc Holliday and Johnny Ringo , as it was not the usual dusty street of many Westerns .
He liked how he had never seen two men shaking hands on horseback before now .
In the scene where Doc says , " That 's funny " while looking at his feet and then dying , Cosmatos explained that it was because he thought he would get killed in a gunfight , not die in bed .
It was quite an achievement in those days , to die without your boots on .
He found it touching that his childhood hero , Tom Mix , wept at Wyatt Earp 's death .
" When you have heart in a movie , that 's what counts , " Cosmatos said .
" And all the machine guns and helicopters do n't mean anything .
" It takes research , hard work , and watching old movies .
The film was dedicated to his wife , who died after it was shot .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The original motion picture soundtrack for Tombstone was originally released by Intrada Records on December 25 , 1993 .
On March 16 , 2006 , an expanded two - disc version of the film score was also released by Intrada Records .
The score was composed and produced by Bruce Broughton , and performed by the Sinfonia of London .
David Snell conducted most of the score ( although Broughton normally conducts his own scores , union problems mandated another conductor here ) , while Patricia Carlin edited the film 's music .
The score contains strong echoes of Max Steiner 's music for John Ford 's The Searchers ( 1956 ) with variations on the ' Indian Traders ' theme used midway through the Ford movie .
The album begins with the Cinergi logo , composed by Jerry Goldsmith and conducted by Broughton .
MARKETING
NOVEL
Section::::Marketing . Section::::Novel .
A paperback novel adapted from Kevin Jarre 's screenplay , written by Giles Tippette and published by Berkley Publishers titled Tombstone , was released on January 1 , 1994 .
The book dramatizes the real - life events of the Gunfight at the O.K. Corral and Earp Vendetta , as depicted in the film .
It expands on Western genre ideas in Jarre 's screenplay .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Tombstone premiered in movie theaters six months before Costner and Kasdan 's version , Wyatt Earp , on December 24 , 1993 , in wide release throughout the United States .
During its opening weekend , the film opened in third place , grossing $ 6,454,752 in business showing at 1,504 locations .
The film 's revenue increased by 35 % in its second week of release , earning $ 8,720,255 .
For that particular weekend , the film stayed in third place , screening in 1,955 theaters .
The film went on to earn $ 56,505,065 in total ticket sales in the North American market .
It ranks 20th out of all films released in 1993 .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Rotten Tomatoes reported that 73 % of 45 sampled critics gave the film a positive review , with an average score of 6.3 out of 10 .
Following its cinematic release in 1993 , Tombstone was named " one of the 5 greatest Westerns ever made " by True West Magazine .
The film was also called " One of the year 's 10 best ! " by KCOP - TV in Los Angeles , California .
Gene Siskel and Roger Ebert of Siskel & Ebert originally thought they would have to miss reviewing the film , as they could not get a screening , but as Ebert explained , " ... a strange thing started to happen .
People started telling me they really liked Val Kilmer 's performance in Tombstone , and I heard this every where I went .
When you hear this once or twice , it 's interesting , when you hear it a couple of dozen times , it 's a trend .
And when you read that Bill Clinton loved the performance , you figured you better catch up with the movie . "
Ultimately , Ebert recommended the movie while Siskel did not .
Ebert was later to refer to Tombstone in future reviews , comparing it favorably to Kevin Costner 's Wyatt Earp ( " It forced the comparison upon me . " ) and , in his review of Wild Bill , singling out Val Kilmer 's portrayal as " the definitive saloon cowboy of our time . "
In his review of Kurt Russell 's Dark BlueDeseret News said , " aside from Russell and Val Kilmer 's scene - stealing , sickly , alcoholic Doc Holliday , there are so many characters coming and going , with none of them receiving adequate screen time , that it becomes difficult to keep track of them all . "
But he did comment , " some very entertaining moments here , with Russell spouting memorable tough - guy lines " .
Overall , he felt , " Taken on its own terms , with some lowered expectations , Western fans will have fun . "
Emanuel Levy of the Variety staff believed the film was a " tough - talking but soft - hearted tale " which was " entertaining in a sprawling , old - fashioned manner . "
Regarding screenwriter Jarre 's dialogue , he noted , " Despite the lack of emotional center and narrative focus , his script contains enough subplots and colorful characters to enliven the film and ultimately make it a fun , if not totally engaging , experience . "
He also singled out Val Kilmer as the standout performance .
The film , however , was not without its detractors .
James Berardinelli writing for ReelViews offered an almost entirely negative review , recalling how he thought , " Not only is the last hour anticlimactic , but it 's dull .
Too many scenes feature lengthy segments of poorly scripted dialogue , and , in some cases , character motivation becomes unclear .
The gunplay is more repetitious than exciting .
The result — a cobbled - together morass of silly lines and shoot - outs — does n't work well . "
Stephen Holden writing in The New York Times saw the film as being a " capacious Western with many modern touches , the Arizona boom town and site of the legendary O.K. Corral has a seedy , vaudevillian grandeur that makes it a direct forerunner of Las Vegas . "
He expressed his satisfaction with the supporting acting , saying , " [ the ] most modern psychological touch is its depiction of Josephine ( Dana Delany ) , the itinerant actress with whom Wyatt falls in love at first sight , as the most casually and comfortably liberated woman ever to set foot in 1880 's Arizona . "
Critic Louis Black , writing for The Austin Chronicle , viewed Tombstone as a " mess " and that there were " two or three pre - climaxes but no climax .
Its values are capitalist rather than renegade , which is okay if it 's metaphoric rather than literal .
Worse , as much as these actors heroically struggle to focus the film , the director more successfully hacks it apart . "
Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly gave the film a C – rating , calling it " preposterously inflated " at " 135 minutes long " .
He observed the film as being a " three - hour rough cut that 's been trimmed down to a slightly shorter rough cut " with " all that holds the film together is Kurt Russell 's droll machismo . "
Author Geoff Andrew of Time
Out commented , " Kilmer makes a surprisingly effective and effete Holliday " .
He negatively acknowledged that there was " a misguided romantic subplot and the ending rather sprawls " but ultimately exclaimed the film was " ' rootin ' , tootin ' entertainment with lots of authentic facial hair . "
Richard Harrington of The Washington Post highlighted the film 's shortcomings by declaring , " too much of Tombstone rings hollow .
In retrospect , not much happens and little that does seems warranted .
There are so many unrealized relationships you almost hope for redemption in a longer video version .
This one is unsatisfying and unfulfilling . "
Alternately though , columnist Bob Bloom of the Journal & Courier openly remarked that the film " May not be historically accurate , but offers a lot of punch for the buck . "
He concluded by saying it was " A tough , guilty - pleasure Western . " HOME MEDIA Section::::Home media .
Following its cinematic release in theaters , the film was released on VHS video format on November 11 , 1994 .
The Region 1 Code widescreen edition of the film was released on DVD in the United States on December 2 , 1997 .
Special features for the DVD only include original theatrical trailers .
A director 's cut of Tombstone was also officially released on DVD on January 15 , 2002 .
The DVD version includes a two - disc set and features " The Making of Tombstone " featurette in three parts ; " An Ensemble Cast " ; " Making an Authentic Western " ; and " The Gunfight at the O.K. Corral " .
Other features include an audio commentary by director George P. Cosmatos , an interactive Tombstone timeline , the director 's original storyboards for the O.K. Corral sequence , the Tombstone " Epitaph " – an actual newspaper account , the DVD - ROM feature " Faro at the Oriental : Game of Chance " , and a collectible Tombstone map .
The widescreen high - definition Blu - ray Disc edition of the theatrical cut was released on April 27 , 2010 , featuring the making of Tombstone , director 's original storyboards , trailers , and TV spots .
A supplemental viewing option for the film in the media format of video - on - demand is available , as well .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Tombstone at the Movie Review Query Engine
* TOMBSTONE , an original screenplay by Kevin Jarre , Fourth draft , March 15 , 1993