CHILD 'S PLAY 3 Child 's Play 3 is a 1991 American slasher film and the third installment in the Child 's Play film series .
The film is written by Don Mancini , and directed by Jack Bender , with Brad Dourif returning as the voice of Chucky .
Although released only nine months later , the story takes place eight years following the events of 1990 's Child 's Play 2 and one month before the events of its following installment ( which was made seven years later ) .
It was executive produced by David Kirschner , who produced the first two Child 's Play films .
The film became notorious in the United Kingdom when it was suggested it might have inspired the real - life murder of British child James Bulger and the murder of Suzanne Capper , suggestions rejected by officers investigating both cases .
The film was followed by Bride of Chucky , Seed of Chucky , Curse of Chucky and Cult of Chucky .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In September 1998 , Eight years after Chucky 's second demise , the Play Pals company has recovered from bad publicity brought along by Chucky 's ( voiced by Brad Dourif ) murder spree and resumes manufacturing of the Good Guy dolls .
The company revives the abandoned factory ( where Chucky 's mutilated body still remains ) and starts releasing a new line of Good Guy dolls .
However , in the process , the workers accidentally mix Chucky 's blood into a vat of plastic .
Since the soul of serial killer Charles Lee Ray still inhabits the remains , the mixture of the plastic and his cursed blood causes Chucky to revive .
Chucky is unwittingly given to Play Pals ' CEO Mr. Sullivan , whom he kills with a variety of toys .
He then uses computer records to locate Andy .
Meanwhile , 16-year - old Andy Barclay ( Justin Whalin ) , still troubled by his past encounters with Chucky , has been sent to Kent Military Academy after having failed to cope in several foster homes .
Colonel Cochran ( Dakin Matthews ) , the school 's commandant , begrudgingly enrolls Andy but advises him to forget his " fantasies " about the doll .
Andy befriends cadets Harold Aubrey Whitehurst ( Dean Jacobson ) , Ronald Tyler ( Jeremy Sylvers ) , and Kristin DeSilva ( Perrey Reeves ) , for whom he develops romantic feelings .
He also meets Brett C. Shelton ( Travis Fine ) , a lieutenant colonel who routinely bullies the cadets .
Shortly after Andy arrives , Tyler is asked to deliver a package to his room .
Tyler realizes that the package contains a Good Guy doll and , excited , takes it to the cellar to open it , only to have Chucky burst free from the package .
Remembering the rule that he can possess the first person who learns his true nature and that he has a new body , Chucky tells Tyler his secret , but just as Chucky is about to possess him , they are interrupted by Cochran who takes the doll away .
Cochran throws Chucky into a garbage truck , but Chucky escapes by luring the driver into the truck 's compactor and crushing him .
That night , Chucky attacks Andy and tells him his plans for taking over Tyler 's soul .
Before Andy can attack Chucky , Shelton comes in and takes the doll from him .
Andy tries to get the doll back by sneaking into Shelton 's room , but Shelton catches him in the act .
Upon realizing the doll has vanished , Shelton suspects it stolen and forces all the cadets to do exercises in the courtyard as punishment .
Andy unsuccessfully tries to warn Tyler about Chucky .
At one point , Chucky lures Tyler into playing hide - and - seek in Cochran 's office , where he attempts to possess Tyler again .
However , they are interrupted by DeSilva and , moments later , Cochran himself .
When the cadets leave , Cochran is suddenly confronted by a knife - wielding Chucky .
The resulting shock causes Cochran to suffer a fatal heart attack , much to Chucky 's own bewilderment .
Later , Chucky kills the camp barber Sergeant Botnick ( Andrew Robinson ) by slashing his throat with a razor .
Despite Cochran 's death , Sgt .
Clark declares that the school 's annual war games will proceed as planned , with Andy and Shelton on the same team .
However , Chucky secretly replaces the blank paint bullets of the Red team with live ammunition .
When the simulation begins , Chucky accosts Tyler .
Tyler stabs Chucky with a pocket knife and flees , trying to find Andy .
Chucky then attacks Kristin and holds her hostage , attempting to lure the teams into fighting each other to save her .
Chucky forces Andy to exchange Kristin for Tyler .
Suddenly , the Red team descends upon the area and obliviously opens fire with their live rounds , with Shelton being killed in the crossfire .
Amidst the chaos , Tyler makes a quick getaway , but before giving chase , Chucky tosses a live grenade at the quarreling cadets .
Recognizing the danger , Whitehurst bravely leaps on top of the grenade and sacrifices himself to save the others .
With no time to mourn his friend , Andy heads off in pursuit of Chucky , with Kristin close behind .
Eventually , the chase leads the group into a fake haunted house at a nearby carnival .
Tyler tries to get a security guard to help him , but Chucky kills the guard offscreen and kidnaps Tyler .
In the ensuing melee , Chucky shoots Kristin in the leg , leaving Andy to fight Chucky alone .
When Tyler is inadvertently knocked out , Chucky seizes the opportunity to possess him , but Andy intervenes , shooting him several times .
Enraged , Chucky attempts to strangle Andy , but Andy uses Tyler 's knife to cut off Chucky 's hand , dropping him into a giant fan which mutilates him .
Afterwards , Andy is taken into custody by the police for questioning , Kristin is rushed to the nearby hospital , and it 's unknown about Tyler who was not seen anymore or talked about as Andy and Kristin are being taken away .
CAST
* Justin Whalin as Andy Barclay
* Jeremy Sylvers as Ronald Tyler * Perrey Reeves as Kristin De Silva * Brad Dourif as Chucky * Dean Jacobson as Harold Aubrey Whitehurst * Travis Fine as Cadet Lt . Col .
Brett C. Shelton
* Donna Eskra as Jackie Ivers * Andrew Robinson as Sgt .
Botnick * Dakin Matthews as Col .
Cochrane * Burke Byrnes as Sgt .
Clark * Matthew Walker as Maj .
Ellis * Peter Haskell as Mr. Sullivan DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Child 's Play 3 immediately went to production after the success of its predecessor .
It was released exactly 9 months after the second movie , which caused pressure to Don Mancini to draft a storyline on such a tight schedule .
He initially wanted to introduce the concept of " multiple Chuckys " in the movie but due to budget constrains , the idea was eventually scrapped .
Mancini later used this concept for the 2017 sequel Cult of Chucky .
NOVELIZATION Section::::Novelization .
A tie - in novel was later written by Matthew J. Costello .
Just like Child 's Play 2 , this novel had some of the author 's own parts .
In the beginning ( unlike the film 's ) , in the Play Pals factory , a rat scours for food and chews on Chucky 's remains .
Blood then leaks out of the remains and somehow leaks into another doll .
Chucky 's death in this book is also different .
In the novel , Andy shoots Chucky in the chest and causes his body to fall to the floor , and watches his head shatter to blood , metal and plastic .
RELEASE
Section::::Release .
Child 's Play 3 opened in second place behind Dead Again to $ 5.7 million over the 4-day 1991 Labor Day weekend , which the Los Angeles Times called " slow numbers " .
It finished its theatrical run with $ 15 million in the US , and a total of $ 20.5 million worldwide .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Rotten Tomatoes , a review aggregator , reports that 23 % of 13 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review ; the average rating is 3.9/10 .
Chris Hicks of the Deseret News called it " perverse " and criticized the film 's plot .
Caryn James of The New York Times called the Chucky doll " an impressive technological achievement " but said the film " misses the sharpness and dark humor " of the original film .
Variety called it a " noisy , mindless sequel " with good acting .
Richard Harrington of The Washington Post wrote , " Chucky himself is an animatronic delight , but one suspects the film 's energies and budget have all been devoted to what is essentially a one - trick pony . "
Stephen Wigle of The Baltimore Sun called it " fun for any fan of the slasher genre " .
Series creator Don Mancini said that this was his least favorite entry in the series , adding that he ran out of ideas after the second film .
He elaborated further in 2013 stating that he was not pleased with the casting , in particularly with Jeremy Sylvers and Dakin Matthews as Tyler and Colonel Cochrane respectively ; he felt that the former was too old for the role and the latter was not the " R. Lee Ermy " archetype he was hoping for .
Mancini would not make another entry in the Chucky series until seven years later , with Bride of Chucky .
AWARDS Section::::Awards .
+ List of awards and nominations !
Award ! !
Category ! !
Winner / Nominee ! !
Result rowspan=2 Saturn Award Fangoria Chainsaw Award HOME VIDEO RELEASES Section::::Home video releases .
Child 's Play 3 was originally released on home video in North America on March 12 , 1992 and on DVD in 2003 .
It was also released in multiple collections , including The Chucky Collection ( alongside Child 's Play 2 and Bride of Chucky ) , released on October 7 , 2003 ; Chucky - The Killer DVD Collection ( alongside Child 's Play 2 , Bride and Seed of Chucky ) , released on September 19 , 2006 ;
Chucky : The Complete Collection ( alongside Child 's Play 1 and 2 , Bride , Seed and Curse of Chucky ) , released on October 8 , 2013 ; and Chucky : Complete 7-Movie Collection ( alongside Child 's Play 1 and 2 , Bride , Seed , Curse and Cult of Chucky ) , released on October 3 , 2017 .
JAMES BULGER CONTROVERSY
Section::::James Bulger controversy .
The film also had some controversy because it has been indirectly linked to the brutal United Kingdom murder of James Bulger .
The killers , who were 10 years old at the time , were said to have imitated a scene in which one of Chucky 's victims is splashed with blue paint .
Although these allegations against the film have never been proven , the case has led to some new legislation for video films .
Psychologist Guy Cumberbatch has stated , " The link with a video was that the father of one of the boys – Jon Venables – had rented Child 's Play 3 :
Look Who 's Stalking some months earlier . "
However , the police officer who directed the investigation , Albert Kirby , found that the son , Jon , was not living with his father at the time and was unlikely to have seen the film .
Moreover , the boy disliked horror films — a point later confirmed by psychiatric reports .
Thus the police investigation , which had specifically looked for a video link , concluded there was none .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
The film was followed by Bride of Chucky in 1998 , Seed of Chucky in 2004 , Curse of Chucky in 2013 and Cult of Chucky in 2017 .
HALLOWEEN HORROR NIGHTS Section::::Halloween Horror Nights .
In 2009 , the climax of Child 's Play 3 received its own maze at Universal Studios Halloween Horror Nights , entitled Chucky 's Fun House .
This is not the first time Chucky has been featured in Halloween Horror Nights .
Curse of Chucky has been slated to receive its own scarezone in the 2013 lineup .
Since 1992 , Chucky has starred in his own shows , Chucky 's In - Your - Face Insults and Chucky 's Insult Emporium .
SEE ALSO
* Dolly Dearest , another 1991 horror movie about a killer doll released two months after Child 's Play 3 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS