JOINT VENTURE
A joint Venture ( JV ) is a business entity created by two or more parties , generally characterized by shared ownership , shared returns and risks , and shared governance .
Companies typically pursue joint ventures for one of four reasons : to access a new market , particularly emerging markets ; to gain scale efficiencies by combining assets and operations ; to share risk for major investments or projects ; or to access skills and capabilities .
According to Gerard Baynham of Water Street Partners , there has been a lot of negative press about joint ventures , but objective data indicate that they may actually outperform wholly owned and controlled affiliates .
He writes , " A different narrative emerged from our recent analysis of U.S. Department of Commerce ( DOC ) data , collected from more than 20,000 entities .
According to the DOC data , foreign joint ventures of U.S. companies realized a 5.5 percent average return on assets ( ROA ) , while those companies ' wholly owned and controlled affiliates ( the vast majority of which are wholly owned ) realized a slightly lower 5.2 percent ROA .
The same story holds true for investments by foreign companies in the U.S. , but the difference is more pronounced .
U.S.-based joint ventures realized a 2.2 percent average ROA , while wholly owned and controlled affiliates in the U.S. only realized a 0.7 percent ROA . "
Most joint ventures are incorporated , although some , as in the oil and gas industry , are " unincorporated " joint ventures that mimic a corporate entity .
With individuals , when two or more persons come together to form a temporary partnership for the purpose of carrying out a particular project , such partnership can also be called a joint venture where the parties are " co - venturers " .
The venture can be a business JV ( for example , Dow Corning ) , a project / asset JV intended to pursue one specific project only , or a JV aimed at defining standards or serving as an " industry utility " that provides a narrow set of services to industry participants .
Some major joint ventures include MillerCoors , Sony Ericsson , Vevo , Hulu , Penske Truck Leasing , and Owens - Corning - and in the past , Dow Corning .
LEGAL DEFINITION
Section::::Legal definition .
In European law , the term " joint venture " ( or joint undertaking ) is an elusive legal concept , better defined under the rules of company law .
In France , the term " joint venture " is variously translated " association d'entreprises " , " entreprise conjointe " , " coentreprise " or " entreprise commune " .
COMPANY INCORPORATION
Section::::Company incorporation .
A JV can be brought about in the following major ways : * Foreign investor buying an interest in a local company * Local firm acquiring an interest in an existing foreign firm * Both the foreign and local entrepreneurs jointly forming a new enterprise * Together with public capital and/or bank debt
In the UK , India , and in many Common Law countries a joint - venture ( or else a company formed by a group of individuals ) must file with the appropriate authority the Memorandum of Association .
It is a statutory document which informs the outside public of its existence .
It may be viewed by the public at the office in which it is filed .
A sample can be seen at wikimedia.org .
Together with the Articles of Association , it forms the " constitution " of a company in these countries .
The Articles of Association regulate the interaction between shareholders and the directors of a company and can be a lengthy document of up to 700,000 + pages .
It deals with the powers relegated by the stockholders to the directors and those withheld by them , requiring the passing of ordinary resolutions , special resolutions and the holding of Extraordinary General Meetings to bring the directors ' decision to bear .
A Certificate of Incorporation or the Articles of Incorporation is a document required to form a corporation in the U.S. ( in actuality , the state where it is incorporated ) and in countries following the practice .
In the US , the " constitution " is a single document .
The Articles of Incorporation is again a regulation of the directors by the stock - holders in a company .
By its formation the JV becomes a new entity with the implication : * that it is officially separate from its Founders , who might otherwise be giant corporations , even amongst the emerging countries
* the JV can contract in its own name , acquire rights ( such as the right to buy new companies ) , and *
it has a separate liability from that of its founders , except for invested capital *
it can sue ( and be sued ) in courts in defense or its pursuance of its objectives .
On the receipt of the Certificate of Incorporation a company can commence its business .
SHAREHOLDERS ' AGREEMENT
Section::::Shareholders ' agreement .
This is a legal area and is fraught with difficulty as the laws of countries differ , particularly on the enforceability of " heads of " or shareholder agreements .
For some legal reasons it may be called a Memorandum of Understanding .
It is done in parallel with other activities in forming a JV .
Though dealt with briefly for a shareholders ' agreement , some issues must be dealt with here as a preamble to the discussion that follows .
There are also many issues which are not in the Articles when a company starts up or never ever present .
Also , a JV may elect to stay as a JV alone in a " quasi partnership " to avoid any nonessential disclosure to the government or the public .
Some of the issues in a shareholders ' agreement are : * Valuation of intellectual rights , say , the valuations of the IPR of one partner and , say , the real estate of the other * the control of the company either by the number of directors or its " funding " *
The number of directors and the rights of the founders to their appoint directors which shows as to whether a shareholder dominates or shares equality .
* management decisions - whether the board manages or a founder * transferability of shares - assignment rights of the founders to other members of the company * dividend policy - percentage of profits to be declared when there is profit
* winding up - the conditions , notice to members
* confidentiality of know - how and founders ' agreement and penalties for disclosure *
first right of refusal - purchase rights and counter - bid by a founder .
There are many features which have to be incorporated into the shareholders ' agreement which is quite private to the parties as they start off .
Normally , it requires no submission to any authority .
The other basic document which must be articulated is the Articles , which is a published document and known to members .
This repeats the shareholders agreement as to the number of directors each founder can appoint to the board of directors ; whether the board controls or the founders ; the taking of decisions by simple majority ( 50%+1 ) of those present or a 51 % or 75 % majority with all directors present ( their alternates / proxy ) ; the deployment of funds of the firm ; extent of debt ; the proportion of profit that can be declared as dividends ; etc .
Also significant is what will happen if the firm is dissolved , if one of the partners dies , or if the firm is sold .
Often the most successful JVs are those with 50:50 partnership with each party having the same number of directors but rotating control over the firm , or rights to appoint the Chairperson and Vice - chair of the company .
Sometimes a party may give a separate trusted person to vote in its place proxy vote of the Founder at board meetings .
Recently , in a major case the Indian Supreme Court has held that Memorandums of Understanding ( whose details are not in the Articles of Association ) are " unconstitutional " giving more transparency to undertakings .
DISSOLUTION
Section::::Dissolution .
The JV is not a permanent structure .
It can be dissolved when :
* Aims of original venture met
* Aims of original venture not met *
Either or both parties develop new goals *
Either or both parties no longer agree with
joint venture aims
* Time agreed for joint venture has expired * Legal or financial issues
* Evolving market conditions mean that joint venture is no longer appropriate or relevant *
One party acquires the other JOINT VENTURES IN DIFFERENT JURISDICTIONS
CHINA Section::::Joint ventures in different jurisdictions .
Section::::China .
According to a report of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development 2003 , China was the recipient of US$ 53.5 billion in direct foreign investment , making it the world 's largest recipient of direct foreign investment for the first time , to exceed the USA .
Also , it approved the establishment of nearly 500,000 foreign - investment enterprises .
The US had 45,000 projects ( by 2004 ) with an in - place investment of over 48 billion .
Chinese requited Joint Ventures
are a mechanism for forced technology transfer .
In many cases , technology transfers are effectively required by China 's Foreign Direct Investment ( FDI ) regime , which closes off important sectors of the economy to foreign firms .
In order to gain access to these sectors , China forces foreign firms to enter into joint ventures with Chinese entities they do not have any connection .
Until recently , no guidelines existed on how foreign investment was to be handled due to the restrictive nature of China toward foreign investors .
Following the death of Mao Zedong in 1976 , initiatives in foreign trade began to be applied , and law applicable to foreign direct investment was made clear in 1979 , while the first Sino - foreign equity venture took place in 2001 .
The corpus of the law has improved since then .
Companies with foreign partners can carry out manufacturing and sales operations in China and can sell through their own sales network .
Foreign - Sino companies have export rights which are not available to wholly Chinese companies , as China desires to import foreign technology by encouraging JVs and the latest technologies .
Under Chinese law , foreign enterprises are divided into several basic categories .
Of these , five will be described or mentioned here : three relate to industry and services and two as vehicles for foreign investment .
Those five categories of Chinese foreign enterprises are : the Sino - Foreign Equity Joint Ventures ( EJVs ) , Sino - Foreign Co - operative Joint Ventures ( CJVs ) , Wholly Foreign - Owned Enterprises ( WFOE ) , although they do not strictly belong to Joint Ventures , plus foreign investment companies limited by shares ( FICLBS ) , and Investment Companies through Foreign Investors ( ICFI ) .
Each category is described below .
EQUITY JOINT VENTURES Section::::Equity joint ventures .
The EJV Law is between a Chinese partner and a foreign company .
It is incorporated in both Chinese ( official ) and in English ( with equal validity ) , with limited liability .
Prior to China 's entry into WTO – and thus the WFOEs – EJVs predominated .
In the EJV mode , the partners share profits , losses and risk in equal proportion to their respective contributions to the venture 's registered capital .
These escalate upwardly in the same proportion as the increase in registered capital .
The JV contract accompanied by the Articles of Association for the EJV are the two most fundamental legal documents of the project .
The Articles mirror many of the provisions of the JV contract .
In case of conflict the JV document has precedence .
These documents are prepared at the same time as the feasibility report .
There are also the ancillary documents ( termed " offsets " in the US ) covering know - how and trademarks and supply - of - equipment agreements .
The minimum equity is prescribed for investment ( truncated ) , where the foreign equity and debt levels are : * less than US$ 3 million , equity must constitute 70 % of the investment ; * between US$ 3 million and US$ 10 million , minimum equity must be US$ 2.1 million and at least 50 % of the investment ; * between US$ 10 million and US$ 30 million , minimum equity must be US$ 5 million and at least 40 % of the investment ; * more than US$ 30 million , minimum equity must be US$ 12 million and at least 1/3 of the investment .
There are also intermediary levels .
The foreign investment in the total project must be at least 25 % .
No minimum investment is set for the Chinese partner .
The timing of investments must be mentioned in the Agreement and failure to invest in the indicated time , draws a penalty .
COOPERATIVE JOINT VENTURES Section::::Cooperative joint ventures .
Co - operative Joint Ventures ( CJVs ) are permitted under the Sino - Foreign Co - operative Joint Ventures .
Co - operative enterprises are also called Contractual Operative Enterprises .
The CJVs may have a limited structure or unlimited – therefore , there are two versions .
The limited - liability version is similar to the EJVs in status of permissions - the foreign investor provides the majority of funds and technology and the Chinese party provides land , buildings , equipment , etc .
However , there are no minimum limits on the foreign partner which allows him to be a minority shareholder .
The other format of the CJV is similar to a partnership where the parties jointly incur unlimited liability for the debts of the enterprise with no separate legal person being created .
In both the cases , the status of the formed enterprise is that of a legal Chinese person which can hire labor directly as , for example , a Chinese national contactor .
The minimum of the capital is registered at various levels of investment .
Other differences from the EJV are to be noted : * A Co - operative JV does not have to be a legal entity .
*
The partners in a CJV are allowed to share profit on an agreed basis , not necessarily in proportion to capital contribution .
This proportion also determines the control and the risks of the enterprise in the same proportion .
*
It may be possible to operate in a CJV in a restricted area
* A CJV could allow negotiated levels of management and financial control , as well as methods of recourse associated with equipment leases and service contracts .
In an EJV management control is through allocation of Board seats .
*
During the term of the venture , the foreign participant can recover his investment , provided the contract prescribes that and all fixed assets will become the property of the Chinese participant on termination of the JV .
* Foreign partners can often obtain the desired level of control by negotiating management , voting , and staffing rights into a CJV 's articles ; since control does not have to be allocated according to equity stakes .
Convenience and flexibility are the characteristics of this type of investment .
It is therefore easier to find co - operative partners and to reach an agreement .
With changes in the law , it becomes possible to merge with a Chinese company for a quick start .
A foreign investor does not need to set up a new corporation in China .
Instead , the investor uses the Chinese partner 's business license , under a contractual arrangement .
Under the CJV , however , the land stays in the possession of the Chinese partner .
There is another advantage : the percentage of the CJV owned by each partner can change throughout the JV 's life , giving the option to the foreign investor , by holding higher equity , obtains a faster rate of return with the concurrent wish of the Chinese partner of a later larger role of maintaining long - term control .
The parties in any of the ventures , EJV , CJV or WFOE prepare a feasibility study outlined above .
It is a non - binding document - the parties are still free to choose not to proceed with the project .
The feasibility study must cover the fundamental technical and commercial aspects of the project , before the parties can proceed to formalize the necessary legal documentation .
The study should contain details referred to earlier under Feasibility Study ( submissions by the Chinese partner ) .
WHOLLY FOREIGN OWNED ENTERPRISES ( WFOES )
Section::::Wholly Foreign Owned Enterprises ( WFOEs ) .
There is basic law of the PRC concerning enterprises with sole foreign investment controls , WFOEs .
China 's entry into the World Trade Organization ( WTO ) around 2001 has had profound effects on foreign investment .
Not being a JV , they are considered here only in comparison or contrast .
To implement WTO commitments , China publishes from time to time updated versions of its " Catalogs Investments " ( affecting ventures ) prohibited , restricted .
The WFOE is a Chinese legal person and has to obey all Chinese laws .
As such , it is allowed to enter into contracts with appropriate government authorities to acquire land use rights , rent buildings , and receive utility services .
In this it is more similar to a CJV than an EJV .
WFOEs are expected by PRC to use the most modern technologies and to export at least 50 % of their production , with all of the investment is to be wholly provided by the foreign investor and the enterprise is within his total control .
WFOEs are typically limited liability enterprises ( like with EJVs ) but the liability of the Directors , Managers , Advisers , and Suppliers depends on the rules which govern the Departments or Ministries which control product liability , worker safety or environmental protection .
An advantage the WFOE enjoys over its alternates is enhanced protection of its know - how but a principal disadvantage is absence of an interested and influential Chinese party .
As of the 3rd Quarter 2004
WFOEs had replaced EJVs and CJVs as follows : + Distribution Analysis of JV in Industry - PRC !
2000 !
2001 !
2002 !
2003 !
2004
( 3Qr )
WFOE 46.9 50.3 60.2 62.4 66.8
EJV,% 35.8 34.7 20.4 29.6 26.9
CJV,% 15.9
12.9 Misc JV * CJVs ( No . )
*
* 1735 1589 1595 1547
( * ) = Financial Ventures by EJVs / CJVs
( * * ) =
Approved JVs FOREIGN INVESTMENT COMPANIES
LIMITED BY SHARES ( FICLBS ) Section::::Foreign Investment Companies
Limited By Shares ( FICLBS ) .
These enterprises are formed under the Sino - Foreign Investment Act .
The capital is composed of value of stock in exchange for the value of the property given to the enterprise .
The liability of the shareholders , including debt , is equal to the number of shares purchased by each partner .
The registered capital of the company the share of the paid - in capital .
The minimum amount of the registered capital of the company should be RMB 30 million .
These companies can be listed on the only two PRC Stock Exchanges – the Shanghai and Shenzhen Stock Exchanges .
Shares of two types are permitted on these Exchanges – Types " A " and Type " B " shares .
Type A are only to be used by Chinese nationals and can be traded only in RMB .
Type " B " shares are denominated in Remembi but can be traded in foreign exchange and by Chinese nationals having foreign exchange .
Further , State enterprises which have been approved for corporatization can trade in Hong Kong in " H " share and in NYSE exchanges .
" A " shares are issued to and traded by Chinese nationals .
They are issued and traded in Renminbi .
" B " shares are denominated in Renminbi but are traded in foreign currency .
From March 2001 , in addition to foreign investors , Chinese nationals with foreign currency can also trade " B " shares .
INVESTMENT COMPANIES BY FOREIGN INVESTORS ( ICFI ) Section::::Investment Companies by Foreign Investors ( ICFI ) .
Investment Companies are those established in China by sole foreign - funded business or jointly with Chinese partners who engage in direct investment .
It has to be incorporated as a company with limited liability .
The total amount of the investor 's assets during the year preceding the application to do business in China has to be no less than US $ 400 million within the territory of China .
The paid - in capital contribution has to exceed $ 10 million .
Furthermore , more than 3 project proposals of the investor 's intended investment projects must have been approved .
The shares subscribed and held by foreign Investment Companies by Foreign Investors ( ICFI ) should be 25 % .
The investment firm can be established as an EJV LIST OF PROMINENT JOINT VENTURES IN CHINA
* AMD - Chinese * Huawei - Symantec * Shanghai Automotive Industry Corporation(上海汽车集团股份有限公司 ) , also known as SAIC ( 上汽 ) and SAIC - GM ( 上汽通用 ) , is a Chinese state - owned automotive manufacturing company headquartered in Shanghaioperating in joint venture with US owned General Motors .
Products produced by SAIC joint venture companies are sold under marques including Baojun , Buick , Chevrolet , Iveco , Škoda , and Volkswagen * General Motors with SAIC Motor , formerly known as
Shanghai General Motors Company Ltd. Makes numerous cars in China in four factories , especially Buick , but also some Chevrolet and Cadillac models .
In November 2018 , the company announced new Chevrolet models for the Chinese market , including an extended - wheelbase Malibu XL , a new Chevy SUV concept a new Monza .
* Volkswagen Group ChinaThe numerous VW and Audi cars manufactured in China are made under two joint - venture partnerships : FAW - Volkswagenand SAIC Volkswagen .
* Beijing Benz Automotive Co. , Ltdis a joint venture between BAIC Motor and Daimler AG .
As of 22 November 2018 , a full two million Mercedes - Benz vehicles had been built in China by this alliance .
* Dongfeng Motor Corporation(东风汽车公司 , abbreviated to 东风 ) is a Chinese state - owned automobile manufacturer headquartered in Wuhan .
The company was the second - largest Chinese vehicle maker in 2017 , by production volume , manufacturing over 4.1 million vehicles that year .
Its own brands are Dongfeng , Venuciaand Dongfen Fengshen .
Joint ventures include Cummins , Dana , Honda , Nissan , Infiniti , PSA Peugeot Citroën , Renault , Kiaand Yulon .
FAW Group Corporation(第一汽车集团 , abbreviated to 一汽 ) is a Chinese state - owned automotive manufacturing company headquartered in Changchun .
In 2017 , the company ranked third in terms of output making 3.3 million vehicles .
FAW sells products under at least ten different brands including its own and Besturn / Bēnténg , Dario , Haima , Hongqi , Jiaxing , Jie Fang , Jilin , Oley , Jie Fang and Yuan Zheng , and Tianjin Xiali .
FAW joint ventures sell Audi , General Motors , Mazda , Toyotaand Volkswagen .
* GAC(Guangzhou Automobile Group ) , ia a Chinese state - owned automobile manufacturer headquartered in Guangzhou .
They were the sixth biggest manufacturer in 2017 , manufacturing over 2 million vehicles in 2017 .
GAC sells passenger cars under the Trumpchi brand .
In China , they are more known for their foreign joint - venture with Fiat , Honda , Isuzu , Mitsubishi , and Toyota .
* Chang'an Automobile Group(重庆长安汽车股份有限公司 , abbreviated to 长安 ) is an automobile manufacturer headquartered in Chongqing , and is a state - owned enterprise .
In 2017 , the company ranked fourth in terms of output making 2.8 million vehicles in 2017 .
Changan designs , develops , manufactures and sells passenger cars sold under the Changan brand and commercial vehicles sold under the Chana brand .
Foreign joint venture companies include Suzuki , Ford , Mazdaand PSA Peugeot Citroën .
* Chery , a Chinese state - owned automobile manufacturer based in Anhui .
They were the tenth biggest manufacturer in 2017 .
They have a foreign joint venture with Jaguar Land Rover for the production of Jaguarand Land Rovercars in China .
* Brilliance Auto , is a Chinese state - owned automobile manufacturer based in Shenyang .
They were the ninth biggest manufacturer in 2017 .
They have a foreign joint venture with BMW and also sells passenger vehicles under their own brand Brilliance and are expected to make 520,000 cars in China during 2019 .
* Honda Motor Cohas a joint venture with Guangzhou Automobile Group ( GAC Group ) * Greely - Volvo ,
Geely , is the biggest privately - owned automobile manufacturer and seventh biggest manufacturer overall in China .
Their flagship brand Geely Auto became the top Chinese car brand in 2017 .
Currently one of the fastest growing automotive groups in the world , Geely is known for their ownership of Swedish luxury car brand , Volvo .
In China , their passenger car brands include Geely Auto , Volvo Cars , and Lynk &
Co. The entire VolvoCars company has been owned by the Chinese company Geely since 2010 and manufactures most of the XC60 vehicles in China for export INDIA Section::::India .
JV companies are the preferred form of corporate investment but there are no separate laws for joint ventures .
Companies which are incorporated in India are treated on par as domestic companies .
* The above two parties subscribe to the shares of the JV company in agreed proportion , in cash , and start a new business .
* Two parties , ( individuals or companies ) , incorporate a company in India .
Business of one party is transferred to the company and as consideration for such transfer , shares are issued by the company and subscribed by that party .
The other party subscribes for the shares in cash .
* Promoter shareholder of an existing Indian company and a third party , who / which may be individual / company , one of them non - resident or both residents , collaborate to jointly carry on the business of that company and its shares are taken by the said third party through payment in cash .
Private companies ( only about $ 2500 is the lower limit of capital , no upper limit ) are allowed in India together with and public companies , limited or not , likewise with partnerships .
sole proprietorship too are allowed .
However , the latter are reserved for NRIs .
Through capital market operations foreign companies can transact on the two exchanges without prior permission of RBI but they can not own more than 10 percent equity in paid - up capital of Indian enterprises , while aggregate foreign institutional investment ( FII ) in an enterprise is capped at 24 percent .
The establishment of wholly owned subsidiaries ( WOS ) and project offices and branch offices , incorporated in India or not .
Sometimes , it is understood , that branches are started to test the market and get its flavor .
Equity transfer from residents to non - residents in mergers and acquisitions ( M&A ) is usually permitted under the automatic route .
However , if the M&As are in sectors and activities requiring prior government permission ( Appendix 1 of the Policy ) then transfer can proceed only after permission .
Joint ventures with trading companies are allowed together with imports of secondhand plants and machinery .
It is expected that in a JV , the foreign partner supplies technical collaboration and the pricing includes the foreign exchange component , while the Indian partner makes available the factory or building site and locally made machinery and product parts .
Many JVs are formed as public limited companies ( LLCs ) because of the advantages of limited liability .
UKRAINE Section::::Ukraine .
In Ukraine most of joint ventures are operated in the form of Limited liability company , as there is no legal entity form as Joint venture .
Protection of the rights of foreign investors is guaranteed by Law of Ukraine " On Foreign Investment " .
In Ukraine , JV can be established without legal entity formation and act under so called Cooperation Agreement ( Dogovir pro spilnu diyalnist ; Ukr .
Договір про спільну діяльність ) .
Under Ukraine civil code , CA can be established by two or more parties ; rights and obligations of the parties are regulated by the agreement .
Cooperation agreement has been widely spread in Ukraine , mainly in the field of oil and gas production .
SEE ALSO
* Common purpose , also known as a " joint enterprise " ( criminal law )
* Division ( business ) * Institute * International joint venture * Joint venture broker
* Partnership * Subsidiary REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS * Cornell Law School 's Joint Venture Info Page Contains legal information and relevant definitions regarding joint venture partnerships
* Joint Ventures Staged a Quiet Comeback Article written by Gerard Baynham , published in Chief Executive , evaluating joint venture performance .