MOON RIVER
" Moon River " is a song composed by Henry Mancini with lyrics by Johnny Mercer .
It was originally performed by Audrey Hepburn in the 1961 movie Breakfast at Tiffany 's , winning an Academy Award for Best Original Song .
The song also won the 1962 Grammy Awards for Record of the Year and Song of the Year .
The song has been covered by many other artists .
It became the theme song for Andy Williams , who first recorded it in 1962 ( and performed it at the Academy Awards ceremony that year ) .
He sang the first eight bars of the song at the beginning of each episode of his eponymous television show and named his production company and venue in Branson , Missouri , after it ; his autobiography is called " Moon River " and Me .
Williams ' version was never released as a single , but it charted as an LP track that he recorded for Columbia on a hit album of 1962 , Moon River and Other Great Movie Themes .
The song 's success was responsible for relaunching Mercer 's career as a songwriter , which had stalled in the mid-1950s because rock and roll had replaced jazz standards as the popular music of the time .
The song 's popularity is such that it has been used as a test sample in a study on people 's memories of popular songs .
Comments about the lyrics have noted that they are particularly reminiscent of Mercer 's youth in the Southern United States and his longing to expand his horizons .
Robert Wright wrote in The Atlantic Monthly , " This is a love sung to wanderlust .
Or a romantic song in which the romantic partner is the idea of romance . "
An inlet near Savannah , Georgia , Johnny Mercer 's hometown , was named Moon River in honor of him and this song .
VERSIONS ORIGINAL Section::::Versions .
Section::::Original .
Mercer and Mancini wrote the song for Audrey Hepburn to sing in the film Breakfast at Tiffany 's .
The lyrics , written by Mercer , are reminiscent of his childhood in Savannah , Georgia , including its waterways .
As a child , he had picked huckleberries in summer , and connected them with a carefree childhood and Mark Twain 's Huckleberry Finn .
Although an instrumental version is played over the film 's opening titles , the lyrics are first heard in a scene where Paul " Fred " Varjak ( George Peppard ) discovers Holly Golightly ( Hepburn ) singing the song , and accompanying herself on the guitar , while sitting on the fire escape outside their apartments .
There was an eruption of behind - the - scenes consternation when a Paramount Pictures executive , Martin Rackin , suggested removing the song from the film after a tepid Los Angeles preview .
Hepburn 's reaction was described by Mancini and others in degrees varying from her saying , " Over my dead body ! "
to her using more colorful language to make the same point .
An was recorded by Mancini and his orchestra and chorus ( without Hepburn 's vocal ) on December 8 , 1960 .
It was released as a single in 1961 and became a number 11 hit in December of that year .
Due to unpublished charts in Billboard , Joel Whitburn 's Top Adult ( Contemporary ) Songs variously reported the song as a # 3 or # 1 easy listening hit .
Mancini 's original version was also featured in the film Born on the Fourth of July ( 1989 ) .
In 1993 , following Hepburn 's death , her version was released on an album titled Music from the Films of Audrey Hepburn .
In 2004 , Hepburn 's version finished at # 4 on AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Songs survey of top tunes in American cinema .
RECORDINGS Section::::Recordings .
" Moon River " was a hit single for Jerry Butler in late 1961 ; it reached number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in December , two weeks before Mancini 's recording reached the same chart ranking .
Danny Williams had a hit version of the song that reached number one in the UK in the final week of 1961 .
Although Andy Williams never released the song as a single , his LP Moon River and Other Great Movie Themes ( 1962 ) , was certified gold in 1963 for selling one million units .
The album reached number 3 on the Billboard Top 200 , eventually selling more than two million copies by 1967 .
Cadence Records ' president Archie Bleyer disliked Williams ' version , believing that it had little or no appeal to teenagers .
In 2002 , a 74-year - old Williams sang the song at the conclusion of the live NBC special telecast celebrating the network 's 75th anniversary .
Hundreds of versions of the song have been recorded , and it has been featured in numerous media .
Mercer recorded the song in 1974 for his album My Huckleberry Friend .
In 2007 , saxophonist Dave Koz recorded a version from his standards music album , At the Movies , sung by Barry Manilow .
In 2013 , Neil Finn and Paul Kelly performed the song on their Goin'
Your Way Tour , during which their performance at the Sydney Opera House Concert Hall was recorded for the live album , Goin'
Your Way , released the same year .
The title of the album comes from a phrase in the song 's chorus : " Wherever you 're goin' , I 'm goin' your way " .
Lawrence Welk 's 1961 instrumental version was featured in Mad Men season 6 , episode 13 , " In Care Of " ( 2013 ) .
A version of the song was featured in Asif Kapadia 's documentary film , Amy ( 2015 ) , about Amy Winehouse .
Winehouse 's version , sung at age 16 with the National Youth Jazz Orchestra in 2000 , is the opening song in the film .
The Telegraph listed among prominent covers of the song those by Frank Sinatra , Judy Garland , Sarah Vaughan , Louis Armstrong , Sarah Brightman and Chevy Chase .
Other stars who have covered the song include Rod Stewart in Fly Me to the Moon ...
The Great American Songbook Volume V ( 2010 ) , which charted at No . 4 on the Billboard 200 , and Barbra Streisand in The Movie Album ( 2003 ) , a Grammy - nominated gold album .
Diffuser.fm named these the " Top 5 Alt - Rock " versions of the song :
The Killers , Glasvegas , R.E.M. , Morrissey and Josh Ritter .
SEE ALSO
* " Charade " ( 1963 song )
*
The Sweetheart Tree * " Days of Wine and Roses " ( song )
* Moon River radio program
* List of UK Singles Chart number ones of the 1960s REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS