CABBIT
A cabbit is a fictional hybrid between a cat and a rabbit .
They have appeared in fiction and fantasy stories including Japanese anime and manga , and have also been dubiously purported to have been observed in the wild .
Most if not all observations are attributable to either misidentified Manx cats or outright hoaxes .
A cat - rabbit hybrid creature was first incorrectly documented by Joseph Train of Castle Douglas , Galloway , Scotland , in his " An Historical and Statistical Account of the Isle of Man " , where he opined that the local Manx cat was such a hybrid :
" My observations on the structure and habits of the specimen in my possession , leave little doubt on my mind of its being a mule , or cross between the female cat and the buck rabbit .
"
Train also refers to the tufty tail on the posterior of the " Manks " cat as being a fud ( ) , " or brush like that of a rabbit .
" Scientific study has determined that such a hybrid is genetically impossible .
The portmanteau term " cabbit " is used for such imagined hybrids .
The exact year of coinage is uncertain .
The term was used in 1977 to describe a specimen found in New Mexico and exhibited in Los Angeles .
The specimen was showcased on The Tonight Show and was later determined to be a cat with a deformed pelvis .
CAT MUTATIONS Section::::Cat mutations .
Manx cats and other cats with tailless or bobtailed mutations account for many alleged cabbit sightings .
The mutation that causes taillessness can also cause skeletal and/or nerve abnormalities that result in the cat 's using a hopping motion .
This was once accepted by breeders as a feature of the Manx 's look , but is now considered a serious fault in the show - ring and does not form part of the modern Manx standard of points .
Modern breeders of the Manx are careful to breed only from cats that have normal locomotion .
The relatively long hind legs of the Manx , combined with taillessness or a very short tail , give the impression of a rabbit .
In 1947 , Grace Cox - Ife wrote : " There are several points about a Manx that make it anything but ordinary .
The chief one is , of course , its taillessness ; but this is not quite the whole story .
Not only must a Manx have no tail but it should really be a further joint or more short on the spinal column ; that is to say there should be a hollow where the tail would normally begin .
Then there is the gait – a rabbity hop rather than a walk- which is caused by the height of the hindquarters :
according to the Manx Cat Club these " can not be too high , and the back can not be too short , while there must be great depth of flank .
The head should be round and large , but not of the snubby or Persian type .
Rose Tenent wrote : " No cat is more fascinating than the tailless Manx , with its rabbit - like hoppity gait [ ... ] .
The hind legs are considerably longer than the front ones , thus giving the cat its peculiar hopping gait ; incidentally , also the reason for the reasonable theory held in some quarters that the Manx cat is the result of a cross - mating between a cat and a rabbit . "
Occasionally the flap of loose skin from the belly to the haunches is absent , enhancing the visual similarity to a rabbit .
Cats with radial hypoplasia ( abnormal short forelegs ) may also adopt a rabbit - like gait .
SEE ALSO
* Jackalope REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
* Cabbits - What Are They Historically Documented Cases and Genetic Information .
* Soderbergh , P M ; " Your Cat " ( 1951 ) ( using 3rd edition ; 1959 )
* Soderbergh , P M ; " Pedigree Cats , Their Varieties , Breeding and Exhibition " ( 1958 )