MAN ON FIRE ( 2004 FILM )
Man on Fire is a 2004 British - American action drama film directed by Tony Scott from a screenplay by Brian Helgeland , and based on the 1980 novel of the same name by A. J. Quinnell .
The novel had previously been adapted into a feature film in 1987 .
In this film , Denzel Washington portrays John Creasy , a despondent , alcoholic former Special Activities Division operative / U.S. Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance officer - turned bodyguard , who goes on a revenge rampage after his charge , nine - year - old Lupita " Pita " Ramos ( Dakota Fanning ) , is abducted in Mexico City .
The supporting cast includes Christopher Walken , Radha Mitchell , Giancarlo Giannini , Marc Anthony , Rachel Ticotin and Mickey Rourke .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 2003 , former U.S. Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance officer John Creasy visits his old comrade Paul Rayburn , who runs a security firm in Mexico .
Wealthy Mexico City businessman Samuel Ramos , and his American wife Lisa , hire Creasy to guard their nine - year - old daughter " Pita " .
Samuel only hires Creasy to satisfy the requirements for kidnap and ransom insurance ( K&R ) .
Creasy is a burnt - out alcoholic , and tries to commit suicide one night , but the cartridge fails to fire .
He distances himself from Pita , but soon begins to bond with the kind and astute girl , working to control his drinking , having found renewed purpose in life .
When Creasy waits for Pita outside her piano lesson , a group of thugs and two uniformed Policía Judicial Federal ( PJF ) officers kidnap her .
Creasy kills four of the kidnappers , including the PJF officers , but collapses from multiple gunshot wounds as the abductors escape with Pita .
Hospitalized , Creasy is charged for murdering the policemen and is suspected in Pita 's kidnapping .
Miguel Manzano , the honest Director of the Agencia Federal de Investigación ( AFI ) , fears Creasy will be killed by the PJF , and has Rayburn move him to a veterinary hospital .
The head of the kidnapping ring , dubbed " The Voice " from his many ransom calls , contacts Samuel with instructions to deliver a US$ 10 million ransom .
Samuel 's attorney Jordan Kalfus and PJF Lieutenant Fuentes gather the ransom through the K&R policy , then deliver it to the kidnappers .
The delivery is ambushed by members of " La Hermandad " , a crime syndicate composed of PJF officers , who steal the money and kill The Voice 's nephew .
The Voice notifies the Ramoses that Pita will now be lost to them forever .
When Creasy wakes in the veterinary hospital , and learns from Rayburn about Pita 's death , he leaves to start his own investigation .
Looking through her notebook for a suspicious license plate she once recorded , Lisa appears and approves of his intention to kill everyone involved .
Rayburn helps Creasy purchase weapons and explosives .
Journalist Mariana Guerrero , Manzano 's girlfriend , convinces Manzano that they should provide logistical support .
The license plate leads Creasy to Jorge Gonzalez , the thug he saw dragging Pita away .
Gonzalez proves to also be PJF , revealing ( when tortured by Creasy ) that he is a member of La Hermandad .
He gives Creasy information on the operatives involved in the next stage of the kidnapping .
Creasy tortures and kills his way up La Hermandad 's chain of command until he reaches its " president " , Lt . Fuentes .
Fuentes confirms that his men stole the money , but that the bags were missing $ 7.5 million of the ransom , which was last handled by lawyer Kalfus .
Creasy then kills Fuentes .
Creasy finds Kalfus dead at home , and also finds evidence linking Kalfus and Samuel to the kidnapping .
When he confronts the Ramoses , Samuel confesses that he agreed to Kalfus ' plan to work with The Voice to stage Pita 's kidnapping .
He took $ 5 million to pay off gambling debts inherited from his father , splitting the rest between Kalfus and The Voice .
Samuel killed Kalfus , holding him responsible for bringing Fuentes in and causing Pita 's death .
An enraged Lisa demands that Creasy kill Samuel ; Creasy instead leaves Samuel with a pistol and the misfired round , which Samuel uses to commit suicide .
Using information provided by Creasy , Manzano is able to identify " The Voice " as Daniel Sanchez , who Mariana then exposes on the front page of her newspaper .
Creasy sneaks into the home of Daniel 's brother , Aurelio , finding Daniel 's pregnant wife and three of his children .
Aurelio shoots Creasy , but Creasy tortures him and has the wife phone Daniel .
Creasy threatens to kill all of Daniel 's family unless he gives himself up , but Daniel surprisingly offers to exchange Pita for Creasy himself .
After Daniel is able to provide confirmation that Pita is alive , Creasy agrees to the demands .
Creasy has Lisa meet him at the exchange , having her hold a shotgun to Aurelio 's head .
Creasy and Pita embrace and briefly talk , then he makes her runs to Lisa , who releases Aurelio while Creasy surrenders to the kidnappers .
As Lisa and Pita drive away , Creasy dies from his many gunshot wounds .
Manzano , knowing Pita is free and Creasy is dead , kills Daniel during his " arrest " .
CAST * Denzel Washington as John W. Creasy , mercenary , former CIA operative and Force
Recon Marine officer
* Dakota Fanning as Lupita ( Pita )
Ramos
* Radha Mitchell as Lisa Ramos .
Lisa originates from Houston , Texas .
Eric Harrison of the Houston Chronicle described Lisa as an " American trophy wife with a Southern accent that seems to come and go . "
* Christopher Walken as Paul Rayburn , who runs a security firm in Mexico
* Marc Anthony as Samuel Ramos * Giancarlo Giannini as Miguel Manzano , director of the AFI .
Tony Scott stated " Giancarlo loves women , as did this character . "
* Mickey Rourke as Jordan Kalfus , Samuel Ramos ' lawyer .
Kalfus and Samuel Ramos 's father were best friends , and therefore Kalfus has a close relationship with Samuel .
Mickey Rourke stated that Kalfus has " a responsibility to his father , to him , to look out for his well - being . "
Therefore , Kalfus " [ wants ] to be there for him " when Ramos " gets his head underwater a little bit " .
* Rachel Ticotin as Mariana Garcia Guerrero , a reporter for the Diario Reforma
* Roberto Sosa as Daniel Sanchez , " The Voice " .
He is based on a real kidnapper , Daniel Arizmendi López .
* Jesús Ochoa as Victor Fuentes , a lieutenant in the Anti - Kidnapping Division of the Federal Judicial Police and the head of the criminal " La Hermandad " syndicate * Gero Camilo as Aurelio Sanchez .
Based on Aurelio Arizmendi López , the brother of Daniel Arizmendi López .
* Mario Zaragoza as Jorge Gonzalez , a Federal Judicial policeman and member of the criminal " La Hermandad " syndicate , who physically kidnaps Pita off the street PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
Tony Scott , the film 's director , had tried to adapt the 1980 source novel , by A. J. Quinnell , into a film in 1983 .
Journalist Paul Davies theorized that movie producers likely believed that Scott , whose only directorial work was 1983 's The Hunger , lacked the experience to direct this as his second film .
The novel was first adapted into the 1987 film Man on Fire , starring Scott Glenn as Creasy .
This movie , like the novel , was set in Italy , then a major center of kidnapping .
When a remake was first under consideration , producer Arnon Milchan ( who also produced the 1987 version ) looked at Michael Bay and Antoine Fuqua to direct , before asking Scott if he was still interested .
20th Century Fox wanted the film to still be set in Italy .
An early draft of the script was set in Naples , with early reporting suggesting that the Mexico City filming was an odd stand in for Naples .
Scott argued that if the setting would be Italy , then the film would have to be a period piece , since by the 2000s kidnappings became a rare occurrence in Italy .
Mexico City became the setting of the 2004 film because Mexico City had a high kidnapping rate , and due to other reasons .
As a result , the character Rika Balletto was renamed Lisa Martin Ramos , and Pinta Balletto was renamed Lupita " Pita " Ramos .
Ettore Balletto became Samuel Ramos .
Robert De Niro was originally offered the role of Creasy .
Prior to his death , Marlon Brando was the original choice to play Rayburn .
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
Man On Fire opened in the U.S. on April 23 , 2004 in 2,980 theaters and grossed $ 22,751,490 with an average of $ 7,634 and ranking # 1 at the box office .
The film 's widest release was 2,986 theaters and it ended up earning $ 77,911,774 in North America and $ 52,381,940 internationally for a total of $ 130,293,714 worldwide , above its $ 70 million production budget .
The film was successful in the U.S. home video market , grossing more than $ 123 million in DVD and VHS rentals and sales in U.S.
The film received mixed reviews from critics and has a rating of 39 % on Rotten Tomatoes based on 161 reviews with an average rating of 5.2 out of 10 .
The consensus states " Man on Fire starts out well , but goes over the top in the violent second half .
"
The film also has a score of 47 out of 100 on Metacritic based on 36 reviews .
Paul Davies , a journal article author , said that the critical reception to Man on Fire in the United States was " somewhat less than kind " because critics did not like the vigilantism that Creasy uses .
Davies argues that " most critics missed " Creasy not taking " sadistic pleasure " in the killings since he kills to get information to get to all of the people involved in the kidnapping of Pita Ramos , and does not like harming innocent parties .
A. J. Quinnell had a favorable reception to this adaptation , mainly because the film used many of the book 's lines .
Quinnell said that usually screenwriters " like to leave their mark on the product . "
Quinnell added that even though he usually dislikes film adaptations of books , the writers " did a good job with Man On Fire
and I loved the chemistry between Creasy and the girl " and " When I first heard Denzel was playing the part of Creasy I missed a couple of heartbeats but he played the part brilliantly .
The film is violent and if the anger is not portrayed properly , the result can be awful . "
Kevin Freese of the Foreign Military Studies Office stated that " it appears that the allusion " of the fictional Sánchez brothers with the real Arizmendi brothers " escaped the comprehension of much of the audience . "
REMAKE Section::::Remake .
In 2005 , a Hindi remake of the film by director Apoorva Lakhia , called Ek Ajnabee , was released .
It starred Amitabh Bachchan as John W. Creasy ( renamed Suryaveer " Surya " Singh ) .
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
The cut " Smiling " , from the soundtrack composed by Harry Gregson - Williams , has been adopted as the theme of a number of television commercials for Omega Watches in 2012 to 2013 .
The soundtrack contains 20 tracks , was composed by Harry Gregson - Williams , and was released on July 27 , 2004 .
SEE ALSO
* Cinema of the United States * List of American films of 2004
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
Man on Fire official website ( Archive )