LUXOTTICA Luxottica Group S.p . A. is an Italian eyewear company and the world 's largest company in the eyewear industry .
It is based in Milan , Italy .
As a vertically integrated company , Luxottica designs , manufactures , distributes and retails its eyewear brands , including LensCrafters , Sunglass Hut , Apex by Sunglass Hut , Pearle Vision , Sears Optical , Target Optical , Eyemed vision care plan , and Glasses.com .
Its best known brands are Ray - Ban , Persol , and Oakley .
Luxottica also makes sunglasses and prescription frames for designer brands such as Chanel , Prada , Giorgio Armani , Burberry , Versace , Dolce and Gabbana , Miu Miu , DKNY , and Tory Burch .
In January 2017 , Luxottica announced a merger with Essilor
The combined entity will command more than one quarter of global value sales of eyewear .
In March 2018 , the European Commission unconditionally approved the merger of Essilor and Luxottica .
On October 1 , 2018 the new holding company EssilorLuxottica was born , resulting in combined market capitalization of approximately € 57 billion .
HISTORY Section::::History .
Leonardo Del Vecchio started the company in 1961 , in Agordo north of Belluno , Italy ; today the company is headquartered in Milan .
Del Vecchio began his career as the apprentice to a tool and die maker in Milan , but decided to turn his metalworking skills to making spectacle parts .
So in 1961 , he moved to Agordo in the province of Belluno , which is home to most of the Italian eyewear industry .
The new company was Luxottica s.a.s . , a limited partnership with Del Vecchio as one of the founding partners .
In 1967 , he started selling complete eyeglass frames under the Luxottica brand , which proved successful enough that by 1971 he ended the contract manufacturing business .
Convinced of the need for vertical integration , in 1974 , he acquired Scarrone , a distribution company .
In 1981 , the company set up its first international subsidiary , in Germany , the first in a rapid period of international expansion .
The first of many licensing deals with a designer was struck with Armani , in 1988 .
The company listed in New York in 1990 , and in Milan in December 2000 , joining the MIB-30 ( now FTSE MIB ) index in September 2003 .
The listing raised money for the company and allowed it to use its shares to acquire other brands , starting with Italian brand Vogue Eyewear in 1990 , Persol and the United States Shoe Corporation ( LensCrafters ) in 1995 , Ray - Ban in 1999 and Sunglass Hut , Inc. in 2001 .
Luxottica later increased its presence in the retail sector by acquiring Sydney - based OPSM in 2003 , Pearle Vision and Cole National in 2004 .
Luxottica acquired Oakley in November 2007 for US$ 2.1 billion .
Oakley had tried to dispute their prices because of Luxottica 's large marketshare , and Luxottica responded by dropping Oakley from their stores , causing their stock price to drop , followed by Luxottica 's hostile take over of the company .
In August 2011 , Luxottica acquired Erroca for € 20 million .
In March 2014 , it was announced that Luxottica would partner with Google on the development of Google Glass and its integration into Luxottica 's eyewear .
On 1 September 2014 , a new organizational structure was announced , composed of two co - CEOs , one focusing on market development and the other overseeing corporate functions .
After the exit of former CEO Andrea Guerra , Enrico Cavatorta was appointed CEO of Corporate Function and Interim CEO of Market ( until new and permanent appointment to this role ) .
Cavatorta left the company 40 days after being appointed CEO .
In 2016 , it was reported that Luxottica had lost its third chief executive in a year and a half as Adil Mehboob - Khan stepped down a year after he replaced Cavatorta .
In January 2017 , the company agreed on a merger with Essilor .
The deal will also help to offer a succession plan for Leonardo Del Vecchio , the company 's founder .
On October 1 , 2018 the new holding company EssilorLuxottica was founded , resulting in combined market capitalization of approximately € 57 billion .
In August 2018 , Luxottica restored Accademia Bridge in Venice .
EYEWEAR BRANDS
Section::::Eyewear Brands .
Luxottica 's two main product offerings are sunglasses and prescription frames .
The company operates in two sectors : manufacturing & wholesale distribution , and retail distribution .
The house brands include the following : The company also makes eyewear under license for the following designer labels : These brands are sold in the company 's own shops , as well as to independent distributors such as department stores , duty - free shops , and opticians .
RETAIL Section::::Retail .
Luxottica Retail has approximately 9,000 retail locations in the United States , Latin America , Canada , China , Australia , New Zealand , South Africa , the United Kingdom , and United Arab Emirates .
The headquarters of the retail division is in Mason , Ohio , United States ( North America ) .
Their retail banners include the following : Luxottica is the largest optical retailer in the United States , with 7.3 % of US retail sales in 2015 ..
With its merger with Essilor in 2018 the company owns Coastal /
Clearly , an online contacts and glasses retail giant bought in 2014 that ships to over 200 countries beside its original North American market .
MEDICAL MANAGED CARE
Section::::Medical managed care .
Luxottica also owns EyeMed Vision Care , a managed vision care organization in the United States .
As of 2014 , it is the second largest vision benefits company in the United States .
CRITICISM MONOPOLISTIC PRICING PRACTICES Section::::Criticism .
Section::::Monopolistic pricing practices .
The company has been criticised for the high price of its brand - name glasses , such as Ray - Ban , Oakley , and several others .
A 2012 60 Minutes segment focused on whether the company 's extensive holdings in the industry were used to keep prices high .
Luxottica owns not only a large portfolio of brands ( over a dozen ) such as Ray - Ban and Oakley but also retailers such as Sunglass Hut and Oliver Peoples , the optical departments at Target and Sears , as well as key eye insurance groups including the second largest glasses insurance firm in the US .
It has been accused of operating a complete monopoly on the optical industry and overcharging for its products — for example , temporarily dropping competitor Oakley from its frame design list , then , when the company stock crashed , purchasing the company , then increasing the prices of its Ray - Ban sunglasses .
In addition , it has been argued that , by owning the vision insurance company EyeMed , it also controls part of the buyers ' market as well .
The company says that the market is highly competitive , and their frames account for ~10 % of sales worldwide and ~20 % in the United States .
Euromonitor International estimates that Luxottica 's market share is 14 % worldwide , and the second - largest company in the industry , Essilor , has a 13 % market share .
The third - largest player is Johnson & Johnson , with a 3.9 % market share .
As of October 2018 , Luxottica and Essilor have merged into a single company , EssilorLuxottica , representing almost a billion pairs of lenses and frames sold annually .
The HBO series
Last Week
Tonight with John Oliver has also criticized the company in the show 's feature on corporate consolidation .
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE Section::::Financial performance . !
Year !
Net sales ( € /000 ) !
Operating income ( € /000 ) !
Net income ( € /000 ) – Net Income attributable to Luxottica
Group Stockholders TRANSFER PRICING ISSUES
Section::::Transfer pricing issues .
In December 2013 , Luxottica Group paid € 33 million to the Italian Agency of Revenue to settle transfer pricing issues that arose in 2007 .
MAJOR SHAREHOLDERS Section::::Major shareholders .
The list of Luxottica shareholders with more than 2 % of holdings , represented by voting shares at 23 December 2014 .
* Delfin S.a.r.l .
66.485 % * Deutsche Bank Trust Company Americas ( as ADR depository ) 7.466 % * Giorgio Armani 4.955 %
In September 2012 , Delfin S.a.r.l .
reduced its share of Luxottica from 66 % to 62.1 % , but later increased its share to 66 % again .
SEE ALSO
* Safilo REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS