BUSINESS CASUAL Business casual is an ambiguously defined dress code adopted by some white - collar workplaces in Western countries , comprising more casual wear than informal wear ( " dress clothes " ) , but less casual than smart casual .
Widespread acceptance of business casual attire was preceded by Casual Fridays which originated California , United States , in the 1990s , in turn inspired by the Hawaiian 1960s casual custom of Aloha Friday .
DEFINITION Section::::Definition .
There is no generally agreed definition of " business casual " .
One definition of business casual states that it includes khaki pants , slacks , and skirts , as well as short - sleeved polo shirts and long - sleeved shirts , but excludes jeans , tennis shoes , tight or short skirts , T - shirts , and sweatshirts .
Another source , an American university careers service , states that business casual consists of neutral colors more towards the dark shades of black , gray , navy , but can include white and off white , and reminds that the clothing should be pressed and have clean , crisp seams .
The " Dress for Success " advice from the University of Toronto sums up business casual as " a classic , clean cut , and put together look where a full suit is not required , " which means slacks , khakis , or skirts ; blouses , polo shirts , or shirts with collar but no necktie ; some sweaters ; and closed - toe shoes .
The Canadian university ends with the warning that " it is not clothing you would wear to a club or for athletic purposes ...
Do n't let the word casual mislead you .
You still need to look professional . "
Another author wrote in the Financial Times that " Ordinarily business casual for guys seems fairly clear .
It is a pair of chinos , a blazer and a good shirt , no tie . "
A BBC article suggested that a " safe global standard " consists of " a button down shirt , " " jackets or blazers , khaki or gray slacks , and leather shoes .
" It warned , however , that great variation exists between countries and regions within countries .
A U.S. menswear retailer advises men to wear a collared shirt , chinos , navy blazer , and brown shoes , while making sure to look " clean and well - groomed . "
A contributor to Forbes asked her Facebook friends to define business casual , and found a slightly more casual apparent consensus not forcibly including a jacket : " For men : trousers / khakis and a shirt with a collar .
For women : trousers / knee - length skirt and a blouse or shirt with a collar .
No jeans .
No athletic wear .
"
A response to that was " I disagree .
No khakis .
"
She states that " there 's a lack of consensus in what actually defines a business casual wardrobe .
All most people know is they do n't want to see too much of a colleague 's body , including feet . "
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Building your career wardrobe