SHOULDER ( ROAD )
A shoulder , or hard shoulder is an emergency stopping lane by the verge of a road or motorway , on the right in countries which drive on the right , or on the left side in India , Japan , the UK , Australia , and other left - side driving countries .
Many wider US and Swedish freeways have shoulders on both sides of each directional carriageway , in the median as well as at the outer edges of the road , for additional safety .
Shoulders are not intended for use by through traffic , although there are exceptions ( see below ) .
PURPOSE
Section::::Purpose .
Shoulders have multiple uses , including : *
In the event of an emergency or breakdown , a motorist can pull into the shoulder to get out of the flow of traffic and obtain a greater degree of safety .
* Emergency vehicles such as ambulances , fire trucks & police cars may use the shoulder to bypass traffic congestion .
* Active traffic management , used on busy multi - lane roads , may allow ' hard shoulder running ' by general traffic at reduced speeds during periods of high traffic volumes .
*
In some places a " bus bypass shoulder " may be provided which allows bus services to pass stationary traffic .
* Paved shoulders provide additional space should a motorist need to take evasive action ( such as avoiding a wrong - way driver ) or need to recover control of their vehicle before a run - off - road collision occurs .
*
In some urban areas , shoulders are used as travel lanes during peak commuting hours .
*
In some rural areas without sidewalks , pedestrians and cyclists may be allowed to walk or ride on the shoulders .
*
On curbed roadways , shoulders move the gutter away from the travel lanes which reduces the risk of hydroplaning , and reduces splash and spray of stormwater onto pedestrians using any adjacent sidewalk .
* Paved shoulders move water away from the roadway before it can infiltrate into the road 's subbase , increasing the life expectancy of the road surface .
* Shoulders help provide extra structural support of the roadway .
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS Section::::General characteristics .
The shoulder is usually slightly narrower than a full traffic lane .
In some cases , particularly on older rural roadways , shoulders that initially existed were hardened with gravel rather than being paved with asphalt or concrete .
In Britain , motorway shoulders are now paved , but are still known as ' hard shoulders . '
Older , gravel shoulders have sometimes been termed soft shoulders by comparison .
Because the paved surface ends at that point , they are less safe if they need to be used for emergency maneuvers .
Notably , the section of Ontario Highway 401 between Windsor and London had soft shoulders with a sharp slope which was blamed for facilitating vehicle rollovers , if drivers accidentally drifted off the paved section of the road and then overreacted after hitting the gravel .
Modern practice is to build a continuous paved shoulder whenever possible .
The US Federal Highway Administration encourages the placement of a Safety Edge — a 30 ° compacted taper on the end of the pavement dropoff — to ensure that any driver running off the edge of the roadway is better able to maintain control while trying to steer back onto the roadway .
The Safety Edge is effective on roads where the shoulder is narrow or nonexistent .
To save money , the shoulder was often not paved to the same thickness as the through lanes , so if vehicles were to attempt to use it as a through lane regularly , it would rapidly deteriorate .
In Britain , shoulder running can occur during roadworks , and full depth construction is now standard .
In some metro areas , road authorities also allow shoulders to be used as lanes at peak periods .
However , rural shoulders often collects various bits of road debris that can make driving there less safe .
Drivers will sometimes drift into the shoulder when being overtaken by passing vehicles , particularly on two - lane roads .
However , it is extremely unsafe , as well as illegal , to abuse the shoulder by ' undertaking ' passing vehicles that are nearer the center of the road .
On older roads , the shoulder may disappear for short periods , near exits or when going across or under bridges or tunnels where the cost savings were thought to outweigh the safety benefits of the shoulder .
Some roads have a narrow shoulder for significant distances .
This makes it difficult for large vehicles to pull into the hard shoulder altogether .
The Jingjintang Expressway in northeastern China is an example of this phenomenon .
Its shoulder is only wide , which is not wide enough for some automobiles ( A standard lane in the US and UK is ) .
As a result , some motorists are unable to fully exit the mainline when they need to pull over , so they end up in a position that is halfway in the rightmost lane and only partly on the shoulder .
The end result is often a traffic jam and occasionally a collision .
BUS BYPASS SHOULDER Section::::Bus bypass shoulder .
In some jurisdictions in the United States and Canada , buses are allowed to drive on the shoulder to pass traffic jams , which is called a bus - only shoulder or bus - bypass shoulder ( BBS ) ; the term " bus - only shoulder lane " is incorrect from a technical and legal standpoint .
In Ontario , Highway 403 had its shoulders between Hurontario Street and Erin Mills Parkway widened in 2003 so they serve a dual - purpose as bus lanes and accident lanes .
In the Minneapolis - St .
Paul region of Minnesota , over 270 miles of shoulder have been designated for use by buses .
The Route 9 BBS in Central New Jersey which runs along two stretches of shoulders are dedicated for exclusive bus use during peak hours .
The bus lanes , which run for approximately 3 miles ( 4.83 km ) are the first component of a planned BBS corridor .
In the Seattle area , Community Transit and Sound Transit Express commuter buses are authorized to use the shoulders of Interstate 5 and Interstate 405 on small segments in Snohomish County as part of a pilot project that aims to reduce delayed bus trips .
PEAK PERIOD USE BY ALL
TRAFFIC
Section::::Peak period use by all traffic .
On specially signed sections of highway in the Boston metro area , cars are allowed to use the shoulder as they would a normal lane during morning and evening rush hours .
The same scheme is employed elsewhere , such as on Interstate 580 in California on the Richmond - San Rafael Bridge and on Interstate 66 in Virginia between the Capital Beltway and US-50 .
In the UK , usage of the hard shoulder is known as " hard shoulder running " .
A pilot project on an 11-mile stretch of the M42 motorway , near Birmingham began in September 2006 .
Special signage , new turnouts ( laybys ) and a variable speed limit have been put in place to improve safety .
This has proved very successful , with journey times decreasing by 26 % northbound and 9 % southbound .
Drivers can also better predict their journey times as the variability decreased by 27 % .
The average accident rate dropped from 5.2 to 1.5 per month .
It has also proved popular with motorists , 60 % of whom want to see it expanded to other English motorways .
The system has been expanded to the M6 , M1 and M25 , and have now also been implemented to parts of the M60 and M62 .
EMERGENCY USE BY
ALL TRAFFIC Section::::Emergency use by all traffic .
Florida has developed a plan for the use of shoulders by moving traffic during hurricane evacuations on portions Interstate 4 , Interstate 10 , Interstate 75 , and Interstate 95 .
The shoulder - use plan was implemented in place of labor- and resource - intensive contraflow lane reversal , in which both sides of an interstate highway are used for one direction of traffic .
The first implementation of the plan occurred on 8 - 9 September 2017 before the arrival of Hurricane Irma .
Texas has also considered emergency shoulder use for hurricane evacuations .
INCREASED CYCLIST
SAFETY Section::::Increased cyclist safety .
Although direct rear impacts only make up 3 % of motorist - on - cyclist collisions , they are a more prominent collision type in arterial / rural road type situations .
When they occur in such circumstances , they are also associated with significantly increased risk of fatality .
Data collated by the OECD indicates that rural locations account for 35 % or more of cycling fatalities in Denmark , Finland , France , Great Britain , Japan , the Netherlands , and Spain .
The use of appropriately designed segregated space on arterial or interurban routes appears to be associated with reductions in overall risk .
In Ireland , the provision of hard shoulders on interurban routes in the 1970s reportedly resulted in a 50 % decrease in accidents .
It is reported that the Danes have also found that separate cycle tracks lead to a reduction in rural collisions .
In some countries , the use of shoulders is optional for cyclists , who may choose not to use it for reasons such as : it being too narrow , inviting dangerously close passes at high speed by motorists ; it having a road surface unsuitable for cycling or putting the path of the cyclist in direct conflict with the paths of other road users , such as those turning across the shoulder .
Generally , the usable width of the road begins where one can ride without increased danger of falls , jolts or blowouts .
A road may have a gravel shoulder , its edge may be covered with sand or trash and the pavement may be broken .
CHARACTERISTICS IN VARIOUS COUNTRIES REPUBLIC OF IRELAND Section::::Characteristics in various countries .
Section::::Republic of Ireland .
Full - width hard shoulders are provided on most new , upgraded ( from the 1980s onwards ) , and major national roads in the Republic of Ireland , especially on wide two - lane and dual - carriageway roads ( the shoulders on most 2 + 1 roads are narrow however ) .
They are defined within the official document the Rules of the Road as a part of the road that should normally only be used by cyclists and pedestrians .
Their provision of on interurban routes in the 1970s reportedly resulted in a 50 % decrease in accidents involving pedal cyclists .
The hard shoulder is usually demarcated by road markings in the form of a single dashed yellow line with the addition of yellow cat 's eyes .
On motorways , and at critical points on other routes ( e.g. between junctions or interchanges , or beneath overpasses ) a solid yellow line is used , denoting additional restrictions on usage of the hard shoulder .
At junctions and on - ramps and off - ramps , the yellow line peels away into the turn , with a dashed white line ( with green cats ' eyes ) denoting a lane division following the main route ( i.e. in most cases the road remains the same width , and a turn lane takes the place of the hard shoulder ) .
In the 2000s , Bus Éireann coaches were allowed to use the hard shoulders on national roads into Dublin .
However , dedicated bus lanes are now present on sections of some routes , such as the N7 Naas Road , and such use of actual hard shoulder is not universal .
CANADA & UNITED STATES Section::::Canada & United States .
The right - hand shoulder is separated by a solid white line , and the left - hand shoulder ( if the road is one - way , such as part of a divided highway ) is separated from the leftmost through lane by a solid yellow line .
On many roads , the lines are supplemented by reflective raised pavement markers or rumble strips placed every few feet in order to provide additional visual and tactile feedback to drivers crossing the lines .
Normally , driving in the shoulder lane is forbidden , but in the case of traffic blockage in some jurisdictions , use of the shoulder may be allowed for the purpose of reaching an exit if the exit is within .
On freeways in foggy areas of California , there is an obvious break in the line of the shoulder before every exit ; this is to help drivers find their exits in heavy fog ( especially the dangerous tule fog ) .
UNITED KINGDOM Section::::United Kingdom .
Full width hard shoulders are usually provided only on motorways and are usually wide , but there are exceptions .
Some motorways do not have hard shoulders at all ( for example the A57(M ) )
and there are a small number of dual carriageway A - roads which do possess hard shoulders ( for example , parts of the A1 , A2 and A27 ) .
Hard shoulders are always marked with a reflectorized solid white line which is wide and is provided with a rumble strip .
A line of red cats ' eyes is also used , and is placed to the side of the line .
On many modern non - motorway roads , a hard strip is provided .
These are usually wide , and are bounded by thinner solid white lines , and often without a rumble strip .
ITALY Section::::Italy .
The shoulder located on the side of Italy 's highway is normally used as emergency lane in case of breakdown or is used by emergency vehicles in case of queues .
According to the regulation in force , it is mandatory wear a high visibility jacket when dismounting from the vehicle stopped on emergency lane .
Normally one is not allowed to drive on the shoulder but in case of traffic block , use of the shoulder is allowed to reach an exit if the exit is within 500 meters .
FRANCE Section::::France .
In France , roadway shoulders are usually wide , or wide when the roadway carries more than 2000 vehicles / day .
The main difference from other European countries is that the white line is dashed , typically long with gaps long .
The design is intended to provide a guide for drivers to maintain a safe distance between vehicles .
Road signs can be found along motorways , to indicate the safe distance ( 1 line = too close , 2 lines = safe distance ) .
At some points ( tunnel , bridge , narrow road with no shoulder , tight curve )
the edge line becomes solid .
AUSTRALIA Section::::Australia .
In a similar manner to Canada , Italy and the United States , as described above , the shoulders located on the side of Australia 's highways are normally used as an emergency lane in the case of a breakdown or by emergency vehicles in the case of road congestion .
However , no mandatory regulations exist to wear a high visibility jacket when dismounting from the vehicle stopped in an emergency lane .
A recent study conducted by the National Coroners Information System ( NCIS ) in Australia has revealed 29 closed case fatalities ( and at least a dozen case fatalities still under coronial investigation ) that had been reported to Australian coroners where a person was " struck in an emergency lane after their vehicle had stopped " between July 2000 and November 2010 .
SEE ALSO * Bus lane * Rumble strip * Wide outside lane REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Traffic Signs about Shoulders
* Deaths in Emergency Lanes - National Coroners Information System ( NCIS )
Fact - Sheet , January 2011