FORD EXPLORER
The Ford Explorer is a range of SUVs manufactured by Ford Motor Company .
Introduced in 1990 for the 1991 model year , it is currently in its fifth generation .
Variants have also been marketed through the Lincoln - Mercury Division as the Mercury Mountaineer ( 1996 - 2010 ) and Lincoln Aviator ( 2002 - 2005 ) .
As with the Ford Ranger , it derives its name from a trim package used on the Ford F - Series ( 1968 to 1986 ) .
Alongside it , Ford also markets the Ford Police Interceptor Utility , a replacement for the Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor .
A specially modified Special Service Vehicle version is also available from Ford Fleet for law enforcement agencies , fire departments , and EMS agencies .
Intended as the replacement for the Ford Bronco II , the Ford Explorer was introduced in both two - door ( the Ford Explorer Sport , also sold as the 1991 - 1994 Mazda Navajo ) and four - door body styles , with the latter being the first four - door Ford SUV .
Following the 2001 introduction of the third - generation Explorer , the Ford Explorer Sport was discontinued after the 2003 model year .
The Ford Explorer Sport Trac is a mid - size pickup truck based upon two generations of the four - door style from 2001 to 2010 .
It was sold with several powertrain configurations .
Along with two - wheel drive ( rear - wheel drive 1991 - 2010 ; front - wheel drive 2011-present ) , part - time four - wheel drive , and all - wheel drive are options .
Since 1995 , part - time four - wheel drive has been a ' shift on the fly ' system with full protection against being engaged at high speed .
As with its Ford Bronco II predecessor , the initial versions of the Ford Explorer derived its chassis and powertrain from the Ford Ranger , sharing a common chassis through 2001 for the four - door ( the Explorer Sport was shared this commonality through its 2003 discontinuation and the Explorer Sport Trac would do so through 2005 ) .
For the 2001 launch of the third - generation Explorer , the model was given a body - on - frame chassis distinct from the Ranger .
For the fifth - generation 2011 Explorer , the model range was shifted to unibody construction and into the full - size segment .
Though sharing a similar chassis as the Ford Flex and Ford Taurus , Ford officially markets the current Ford Explorer as an SUV , slotted between the unibody - chassis Ford Escape and body - on - frame Ford Expedition .
FIRST GENERATION ( 1991–1994 )
Section::::First generation ( 1991–1994 ) .
The Ford Explorer was introduced in March 1990 for the 1991 model year .
To better compete against the Chevrolet S-10 Blazer and Jeep Cherokee mid - size sport - utility vehicles , Ford sought to replace the Ford Bronco II with a vehicle sized closer to its competitors .
In an effort to attract family buyers , a four - door version was developed alongside the two - door ( launched the same month as the four - door S-10 Blazer ) .
As with the Ford Bronco II , the first - generation Ford Explorer shares its chassis and underpinnings with the first - generation ( 1983 - 1992 )
Ford Ranger .
In comparison to the Bronco II , the Explorer is far larger , with the two - door Explorer Sport gaining 12.6 inches in length and 2.1 inches of width ; a four - door is 22.5 inches longer and heavier .
As with its predecessor , the Ford Explorer has a large degree of commonality with the Ford Ranger , sharing its front bumper , fenders ( modified ) , headlights , grille , and wheels ; with the exception of its steering wheel hub , the Explorer shares its entire dashboard with the 1989 - 1992 Ford Ranger .
In a major change from the Bronco II , the Explorer was given its own front door stampings .
In addition for creating a four - door layout , the lack of commonality with the Ranger allowed for two major aerodynamic improvements ; along with the elimination of exterior drip rails ( by wrapping the doors into the roof ) , the sideview mirrors were integrated onto the doors ( rather than bolted on ) .
CHASSIS Section::::Chassis .
Sharing its engine with the Ranger and four - wheel drive Ford Aerostar , the Explorer was fitted with a German - produced 4.0 L Cologne V6 as the sole engine offering , replacing the previous 2.9 L V6 .
A Mazda M5OD 5-speed manual was the standard transmission offering , with the option of the Ford 4-speed A4LD overdrive automatic transmission .
For 1993 , the engine output was increased to .
Along with the standard rear - wheel drive powertrain , at its launch , the Explorer was also offered with various configurations of part - time four - wheel drive , powered by a Borg Warner 13–54 transfer case .
In addition to a manually shifted transfer case , Ford offered " Touch Drive " electronic push - button shifting ; both were " shift - on - the - fly " designs that allowed the vehicle to be shifted from two - wheel drive to " four - high " at any speed and into " four - low " when the vehicle was stopped .
All Explorers were equipped with the Ford 8.8 axle in either a limited slip differential , or open version with a variety of available gear ratios .
Four - wheel - drive front axles were the TTB ( " Twin Traction Beam " )
Dana 35 with some Dana 44-spec components .
TRIM Section::::Trim .
At its launch , the Ford Explorer followed the Aerostar , Bronco , Econoline , F - Series , and Ranger in model trim .
The XL was sold as the base trim , with XLT as the upper range , with the outdoors - themed Eddie Bauer trim as the top trim .
The XL was distinguished by a black grille ( chrome optional ) with steel wheels , while the XLT offered a chrome grille and alloy wheels ; the Eddie Bauer offered alloy wheels and two - tone paintwork .
The Ford Explorer Sport was offered solely on the two - door body style .
Offering black lower bodywork and grille and alloy wheels , the Sport was intended as a replacement for the Bronco II .
From 1990 to 1994 , Mazda marketed the two - door Ford Explorer as the Mazda Navajo ; the model was awarded the 1991 Motor Trend Truck of the Year award .
The Ford Explorer Limited was introduced for 1993 as a luxury - trim model slotted above the Eddie Bauer .
Largely introduced as a competitor to the Oldsmobile Bravada , the Explorer Limited was offered only as a four - door with an automatic transmission .
Distinguished by its color - matched grille , headlight trim , and model - specific bodywork and wheels , the Limited was offered with several model - specific features , including automatic headlights , an auto - dimming rearview mirror , foglamps , and center roof console ( with compass and outside thermometer ) .
The Limited edition , added for the 1993 model year , was available only in the 5-door body style and was positioned at the top of the lineup above the Eddie Bauer edition .
It featured automatic headlights , an auto - dimming rear - view mirror , foglamps , a center roof console with compass and outside thermometer , unique wheels and grille , and an automatic transmission as standard equipment .
The grill and headlight trims on the Limited edition were paint - matched to the body color , unlike the chrome ( XLT ) or black plastic ( XL ) versions on other trim levels .
SECOND GENERATION ( 1995–2003 ) Section::::Second generation ( 1995–2003 ) .
The second - generation Ford Explorer made its debut in late 1994 as a 1995 model .
Retaining the same footprint as its predecessor , the 1995 Ford Explorer underwent extensive modifications to its chassis to improve its road manners .
In an effort to better differentiate the model line from the Ford Ranger , Ford stylists redesigned the vehicle , giving the Explorer a model - specific exterior .
As with its predecessor , the second generation was sold in both three - door and five - door configurations .
Rear - wheel drive was standard , with four - wheel drive offered as an option .
Following the 2001 introduction of the third - generation five - door Ford Explorer , the three - door Explorer became a stand - alone model on the second - generation design ; the Explorer Sport was produced through the 2003 model year .
This generation of the Ford Explorer marks the debut of the 1997 Mercury Mountaineer , introduced in 1996 by Mercury .
In early 2000 , the Ford Explorer Sport Trac was introduced , which was a mid - size pickup truck ; offered with a crew cab with a short pickup bed , the Sport Trac was based on the five - door Explorer .
The Explorer Sport Trac was produced through the 2005 model year ( until it was redesigned for 2007 ) .
Outside of North America , this generation of the Explorer was marketed in right - hand drive configurations As of 2018 , RHD countries ( such as Japan ) export used examples of the Explorer to other countries ( such as Australia and New Zealand ) where there is demand for right - hand drive SUVs .
Due to Japan 's strict Shaken Laws , used vehicles tend to have low mileage with detailed repair histories .
In the United States , the second - generation Ford Explorer has the ( dubious ) distinction of being two of the top five vehicles traded in under the 2009 " Cash for Clunkers " program , with the 4WD model topping the list and the 2WD model coming in at number 4 .
CHASSIS Section::::Chassis .
The second - generation Ford Explorer is based upon the Ford U1 platform shared with its predecessor , adopting the UN105 / UN150 model codes .
Alongside similar changes in development for the 1998 Ford Ranger , the long - running Twin I - Beam / Twin Traction Beam front suspension was retired in favor of a short / long - arm ( SLA ) wishbone front suspension configuration .
Along with more compact packaging of front suspension components , the design allowed for improved on - road handling / feel .
POWERTRAIN Section::::Powertrain .
The optional engine of the Ford Ranger and Ford Aerostar , the 160 hp 4.0
L V6 was carried over from the first - generation Ford Explorer .
To match the V8 engine of the similar - sized Jeep Grand Cherokee , for the 1996 model year , Ford introduced a 5.0 L V8 as an option .
Initially available on rear - wheel drive XLT models , the availability of the V8 was expanded to many versions of the five - door Explorer .
For 1997 , revised cylinder heads increased output of the 5.0 L V8 to .
Following the January 1996 introduction of the 4.6 L SOHC V8 by the Ford F - Series and E - Series , the Explorer became the final vehicle sold by Ford Motor Company sold with a gasoline - fuel pushrod V8 .
For 1997 , the Ford Explorer gained a third engine , as Ford introduced an overhead - cam version of the 4.0 L Cologne V6 .
Using a common displacement with the pushrod 4.0 L V6 , the SOHC V6 rivaled the V8 in engine output .
Offered as standard equipment on the top - trim Eddie Bauer and Limited trims , the engine became an option on all other versions of the Explorer and Explorer Sport .
For 2001 , the pushrod V6 was discontinued , with the SOHC becoming the standard engine in all versions of the Explorer ( and the sole engine of the 3-door Explorer Sport ) .
For 2000 , Ford added flex - fuel capability to the Explorer for the first time . !
Engine !
Production !
Configuration !
Power !
Torque !
Transmission Ford Cologne V6 1995 - 2000 5-speed manual ( Mazda M5OD - R1 )
4-speed automatic ( Ford 4R55E ) ;
1995 - 1996 5-speed automatic ( Ford 5R55E ) ; 1997 - 2000 Ford Cologne V6 1997 - 2003 5-speed manual ( Mazda M5OD - R1HD ) ; 2001 - 2003 Explorer Sport 5-speed automatic ( Ford 5R55E ) Ford Windsor 5.0 L V8 1996 - 2001 4-speed automatic ( Ford 4R70W )
A Mazda - produced 5-speed manual was standard with both V6 engines ; all V8 examples were equipped with a 4-speed heavy - duty automatic ( shared with the F-150 , Mustang , and Crown Victoria ) .
On four - wheel drive versions , the four - wheel drive system was redesigned for the 1995 Explorer .
In place of Touch Drive from the previous generation , ControlTrac was an electronically controlled full - time four - wheel drive system with a two - speed transfer case , with software controlling a multi - disc clutch ( in place of a center differential ) .
Along with traditional two - wheel drive and high and low - range four - wheel drive , " Auto " mode allowed software to maintain the amount of torque sent to the front wheels ; if the front axle begins to spin faster , torque is shifted from the rear wheels to the front wheels until traction is achieved .
Similar to TouchDrive , ControlTrac is dash - controlled , with a rotary selector for two - wheel drive ( 1995 - 1996 ) , auto , high range , and low range .
BODY
Section::::Body .
While visibly similar to its predecessor , many exterior panels from the 1995 Ford Explorer were changed , with only the roofline and the side doors carrying over .
As part of the changes related to the redesigned front suspension , the entire front fascia was redesigned , with the Explorer gaining model - distinct styling .
In a styling theme that would be used in several other Ford small trucks , the 1995 Explorer was given an oval grille ; the headlamps were changed from rectangular to oval as well , wrapping into the fenders .
Depending on trim , the grille and bumpers were painted gray ( XLT ) , body color ( Limited / Sport ) , or chromed .
In contrast to the front fascia , the rear fascia saw relatively few changes , with the rear bumper nearly unchanged .
Along with slightly reshaped taillamps ( with amber turn signals ) , the 1995 Ford Explorer marked the debut of a neon CHMSL ( center brake light ) .
Alongside the redesigned exterior , the interior of the second - generation Ford Explorer was given a redesign .
Maintaining commonality with the Ranger , the Explorer was given a new dashboard ( marking the debut of dual airbags in an American - produced SUV ) , a new instrument panel ; to improve user ergonomics , the Ford Explorer introduced a double - DIN radio panel and rotary - style climate controls .
For 1997 , a third - row seat was introduced as an option ; expanding seating to seven passengers , the design was only offered in export markets .
For 1998 , the exterior of the Ford Explorer was given a mid - cycle update .
Distinguished by the addition of fender flares , the rear fascia was restyled , with larger taillamps ( deleting the amber turn signals ) ; to better accommodate export , the license plate was shifted from the bumper to the liftgate ; the neon CHMSL was replaced by an LED version .
16-inch wheels replaced 15-inch wheels ( shared with the Ranger ) .
For 1999 , the front bumper was redesigned , allowing for larger lower grille and fog lights .
The interior was given redesigned front and rear seats , along with second - generation airbags ; side airbags were introduced ( as an option ) .
Other options included load - leveling air suspension ( on Eddie Bauer and Limited ) and a reverse - sensing warning system .
TRIM Section::::Trim .
At its launch , the second - generation Ford Explorer retained the use of the previous trim nomenclature ; the standard trim was the XL , with the XLT serving as the primary model upgrade .
Along with the two - tone Eddie Bauer trim , the highest trim Explorer was the monochromatic Ford Explorer Limited .
For 2000 , XLS replaced XL as the base trim ( introduced as an appearance package for 1999 ) .
In contrast to five - door Explorers , second - generation three - door Ford Explorers shifted to a separate trim nomenclature .
While the XL remained the base model ( largely for fleets ) , most examples were produced under a single Sport trim level .
In 1995 , the Expedition trim was introduced ; roughly the 3-door equivalent of the Eddie Bauer , the trim was discontinued at the end of the model year as Ford reserved the name for the Ford Expedition full - size SUV ( which entered production in mid-1996 ) .
For 1998 , the Explorer Sport became the sole version of the three - door ; following the introduction of the third - generation Explorer , the Explorer Sport became a distinct model through the 2003 model year .
THIRD GENERATION ( 2002–2005 )
Section::::Third generation ( 2002–2005 ) .
The third - generation Ford Explorer went on sale in January 2001 ( as an early 2002 model ) .
The U152 program began in 1995 , with the final design being chosen in 1997 and frozen for production in February 1998 , with development ending in 2000 .
The primary objective behind the third - generation Ford Explorer was to make the vehicle line more competitive in both domestic and export markets .
Along with tuning the Explorer for higher - speed European driving , the Explorer was benchmarked to lead against the Lexus RX300 and the then - in - development Volkswagen Touareg .
To make the Explorer more competitive , Ford shifted away from typical SUV design , abandoning the use of the Ford Ranger chassis architecture in favor of designing a purpose - built platform .
As part of the change , the Explorer became only the second rear - wheel drive American Ford platform fitted with four - wheel independent suspension ( behind the MN12 platform ) .
In another major change , the third - generation Explorer was developed solely as a five - door vehicle .
Retaining the previous - generation chassis architecture , the three - door Explorer Sport continued production through the 2003 model year ; the Explorer Sport Trac four - door pickup truck continued through 2005 .
The third - generation Ford Explorer was marketed by all three divisions of Ford Motor Company : by Mercury as the second - generation Mercury Mountaineer ; Lincoln marketed the third - generation Explorer from 2002 to 2005 as the Lincoln Aviator .
CHASSIS Section::::Chassis .
The third - generation is based on the body - on - frame Ford UN152 platform .
No longer derived from the Ford Ranger , the UN152 chassis was designed specifically for the five - door Explorer and its Lincoln - Mercury counterparts .
In a major shift from its predecessors , the third - generation Explorer adopted a four - wheel independent suspension configuration , never before used on a Ford truck ( on American - produced SUVs , fully independent suspension was previously exclusive to the Hummer H1 ) .
Similar to the layout used on the Ford MN12-chassis cars ( 1989 - 1998 Thunderbird / Cougar and Lincoln Mark VIII ) , each rear wheel was connected to the rear - axle differential with two half - shafts .
While the third - generation Ford Explorer was in development during the late 1990s controversy involving the Explorer and Firestone tires , the increased stability of the configuration was designed in part to reduce rollover risk .
In another change , Firestone tires ( which had caused the rollovers and crashes of the Ford Explorers ) were not made available on any version of the third - generation Explorer .
Ford 's AdvanceTrac RSC ( Roll Stability Control ) system became available as a standard feature on the Explorer for the 2005 model year .
Along with rear - wheel drive , the third - generation Explorer was offered with both four - wheel drive and permanent all - wheel drive ; the latter was offered on the Explorer for the first time .
Carried over from the previous generation , the base engine for the third - generation Explorer was a 4.0 L V6 .
Becoming the final V8-powered American Ford to adopt to the Modular V8 , the third - generation Explorer offered a 4.6 L SOHC V8 ( shared with the Crown Victoria / Grand Marquis ) as its optional engine .
A five - speed manual transmission was offered for 2002 before its discontinuation ; as of 2018 , it is the final year a Ford Explorer was available with a manual transmission .
As an option for both the 4.0L and 4.6L V8 engines , the Ford 5R55 transmission was offered , becoming standard from 2003 to 2005 . !
Engine !
Production !
Configuration !
Power !
Torque !
Transmission Ford Cologne V6 2002 - 2005
Mazda M5OD - R1HD 5-speed manual ( 2002 only ) Ford 5R55
5-speed automatic Ford Modular V8 2002 - 2005 Ford 5R55
5-speed automatic BODY
Section::::Body .
In contrast with the second - generation ( a major revision of the 1991 - 1994 generation ) , the exterior and interior of the third - generation Ford Explorer were completely new designs .
While sharing a number of design elements with the 1997 F - Series and Ford Expedition , the Ford Explorer also served as the introduction of a new design theme for several Ford vehicles ; the 2003 Ford Expedition , the Ford Freestar , Ford Freestyle , and Ford Five Hundred would share various elements of the 2002 Ford Explorer design .
Retaining nearly the same proportions as the first two generations , the third - generation Explorer was an inch shorter in length and two inches wider , gaining two inches in wheelbase .
With the addition of independent rear suspension , several functional changes were brought as part of the redesign .
The cargo floor was lowered several inches , adding nearly 10 cubic feet of total cargo room .
Coinciding with the lower cargo floor , on nearly all models , a folding third - row seat was either standard or an option , bringing seating capacity to seven .
The rear liftgate was redesigned , with the upper hatch enlarged .
TRIM Section::::Trim .
Carried over from the previous generation , Ford produced the Explorer in four trim levels , XLS , XLT , Eddie Bauer , and Limited .
Slotted below the XLS were two major trim packages , Sport Value , Sport Choice , with Sport Premium between XLS and XLT .
The outdoors - themed Eddie Bauer continued production with a two - tone exterior ( with a tan lower body ) ; the Limited wore a monochromatic body .
FOURTH GENERATION ( 2006–2010 )
Section::::Fourth generation ( 2006–2010 ) .
The Ford Explorer and the Mercury Mountaineer were both updated for the 2006 model year on a new frame , produced by Magna International rather than Tower Automotive .
Along with this new , stronger chassis , Ford updated the interior , redesigned the rear suspension and added power - folding third - row seats .
Also , a tire pressure monitoring system and electronic stability control became standard equipment .
Power running boards , like the ones from the Lincoln Navigator , were also made available on the Explorer and Mountaineer ; the running boards lower to allow easier access when entering the vehicle , then retract upon door closure .
Unlike previous generations , there was no right - hand drive option available for order , causing Ford to market Explorers in Japan in left - hand drive configuration .
The LHD Explorers were desirable there because LHD vehicles are considered prestigious in Japan .
Moreover , Ford switched to a one - piece rear liftgate design due to the problems associated with the previous generation 's design .
The 4.0L 12-valve SOHC V-6 was once again the standard engine .
A more powerful 4.6L 24-valve SOHC V-8 , similar to the Fifth - generation Ford Mustang 's engine , was available as an option .
The 6-speed 6R automatic transmission , built by Ford and based on a ZF design , was made standard equipment with the V-8 engine as well .
The five - speed 5R55W automatic transmission was advanced .
It was the only transmission available for the V-6 engine , because the Mazda five - speed manual transmission was dropped in the previous generation .
The 2006 Ford Explorer was nominated for the North American Truck of the Year award for 2006 .
MODEL YEAR CHANGES Section::::Model year changes .
For 2007 , The Explorer received a few minor updates including standard AUX input on all stereos and optional power running boards , heated windshield , Ironman Package , XLT Appearance Package , and heated leather seat package .
For 2008 , Ford added side curtain airbags across the Explorer range .
Also , the optional satellite navigation system was also upgraded with voice control .
For 2009 , the Explorer received a trailer sway control system as standard equipment , and the navigation system received traffic flow monitoring with updated gas prices from nearby stations .
For the 2010 model year , Ford 's MyKey became standard on all Explorers equipped with the Sync system .
ENGINE
SPECIFICATIONS Section::::Engine specifications . !
colspan=2Ford
Cologne 4.0 L SOHC V-6 !
colspan=2Ford
Modular 4.6 L SOHC V-8
FORD
EXPLORER SPORT TRAC Section::::Ford Explorer Sport Trac .
The second generation Sport Trac came out in early 2006 for the 2007 model year .
Unlike its predecessor sold through 2005 , it featured the V-8 engine as an option and was based on this generation Explorer 's platform .
AdvanceTrac with Roll Stability Control was made standard on the Sport Trac .
SPORT TRAC ADRENALIN Section::::Sport Trac Adrenalin .
For the 2007 model year , the Ford Special Vehicle Team built the Sport Trac Adrenalin concept with a supercharged version of the 4.6 L Modular V-8 , with , and featuring wheels .
Ford SVT said then it was the successor to the F-150 Lightning sports pickup truck .
However , the SVT version of the Adrenalin was cancelled in a cost - cutting move as part of The Way Forward .
The Adrenalin was sold as an appearance package though from 2007 - 2010 .
It had blacked out headlights , black grill , mono color interior , different front and rear bumpers , vents in the front fenders and molded in running boards .
It also came standard with 20 " polished aluminum wheels , and the fender flares that came on the Explorer and standard Sport Trac were deleted .
EXPLORER AMERICA CONCEPT Section::::Explorer America concept .
Ford unveiled an Explorer America concept vehicle at the 2008 North American International Auto Show .
The Explorer America concept is built on a unibody platform to reduce weight and improve driveability , migrating from the body - on - frame platform of the fourth generation Explorer .
It is designed for up to six passengers while improving fuel economy by 20 to 30 percent relative to the current V6 Explorer .
The powertrain packages in the concept vehicle include a two - liter four - cylinder turbocharged direct injection EcoBoost gas engine with and of torque , and a 3.5L V6 version EcoBoost with and up to of torque .
FIFTH GENERATION ( 2011–2019 )
Section::::Fifth generation ( 2011–2019 ) .
The 5th generation 2011 Explorer bore similarity to the Explorer America concept 's construction , and includes a unibody structure based on the D4 platform , a modified version of the D3 platform .
The move from traditional SUV to crossover effectively vacated the midsize SUV segment for Ford until the revived Ford Bronco goes on sale in 2020 .
The fifth generation Explorer features blacked - out A , B , and D - pillars to produce a floating roof effect similar to Land Rover 's floating roof design used on its sport utility vehicles ; a design which Ford previously used on the Ford Flex .
The fifth generation Explorer features sculpted body work with stepped style headlamps similar to the Flex , Edge , Escape , Expedition and F-150 , as well as new stepped style tail lamps .
The grille features Ford 's corporate three - bar design with upper and lower perforated mesh work , similar to that of the sixth - generation Ford Taurus .
The development of the fifth generation Explorer was led by chief engineer Jim Holland from February 2008 to October 2010 , who was also a chief engineer for Land Rover ; heading development of the Land Rover Range Rover ( L322 ) 2005 facelift from December 2001 to December 2004 .
Holland also worked on the Ford Expedition ( U324 ) during its initial development .
The fifth generation Explorer made its debut online on July 26 , 2010 .
Ford had set up a Ford Explorer Facebook page ahead of its debut .
Assembly of the fifth - generation Explorer moved to Ford 's Chicago Assembly plant commencing December 1 , 2010 , where it is built alongside the Ford Taurus and Lincoln MKS .
The Louisville plant , where the previous generation was built , was converted to produce cars based on Ford 's global C platform ( potentially including the Ford Focus , Ford C - Max , and Ford Kuga ) .
Like the Escape , the Explorer will continue to be marketed as an " SUV " rather than a " crossover SUV " .
It went on sale in December 2010 , after pre - launch sales had by the end of November 2010 totaled around 15,000 .
The EPA rated fuel economy of 20/28 mpg city / highway for the four - cylinder EcoBoost engine option .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Available features on the fifth generation
Explorer include intelligent access with push button start , remote engine start , power liftgate , power adjustable pedals with memory , premium leather trimmed seating , heated and cooled front seats , dual headrest DVD entertainment system , adaptive cruise control , active park assist , SIRIUS Travel Link , MyFord Touch , Ford SYNC by Microsoft , Sony audio system with HD radio and Apple iTunes tagging , in - dash advanced navigation system , SoundScreen laminated acoustic and solar tinted windshield with rain - sensing wipers , 20-inch polished V - spoke aluminium wheels , and High - intensity discharge headlamps ( HID ) and LED tail lamps .
Unlike the Explorer America concept vehicle which only seats five occupants , the production Explorer holds two rows of seating with available PowerFold fold flat third row seating ( like the previous generation ) and accommodates up to seven occupants .
CAPABILITY Section::::Capability .
The Explorer is available in either front - wheel drive or full - time all - wheel drive .
At first only one engine was available : the ( of torque ) 3.5 liter
TiVCT
( Twin independent Variable Camshaft Timing ) V-6 attached to either the 6-speed 6F automatic or 6-speed 6F SelectShift automatic .
Soon thereafter , Ford offered the economical ( of torque ) 2 liter
EcoBoost turbocharged , direct - injected I-4 mated to the 6-speed 6F automatic .
The I-4 engine is not available with the optional 6-speed 6F SelectShift automatic , and will only be available in front - wheel drive .
The Explorer is available with an automatic intelligent all - wheel drive system inspired by Land Rover , featuring a variable center multi - disc differential with computer controlled lock .
Conventional front and rear differentials are used with 3.39:1 gearing .
The center multi - disc differential controls the front - to - rear torque split , biasing as much as 100 percent of torque to either the front or rear wheels .
Depending on the Terrain Management mode selected , the center multi - disc differential 's intelligent lock will allow for a 50:50 torque split in off - road conditions .
The power take off ( PTO ) unit includes a heavy - duty dedicated cooling system to allow the four - wheel drive system to supply continuous non - stop torque delivery to all four wheels indefinitely , without overheating .
A " 4WD " badge is advertised on the rear liftgate on the all - wheel drive models .
Explorer 's overall off - road crawl ratio is 15.19:1 with high range – no low range – gearing only .
Off - road electronics include Hill Descent Control ( HDC ) , Hill Ascent Assist ( HAA ) , four - wheel electronic traction control and Terrain Management .
Four - wheel electronic traction control ( ABS braking ) is employed to simulate front and rear differential locks via aggressively " brake locking " the front or rear differentials , transferring up to 100 percent of torque from side - to - side .
In the right conditions , the Explorer can keep moving even if only one wheel has traction , regardless of which wheel it is .
Terrain Management includes four selectable modes .
Each mode is selected via a rotary control dial on the center console , aft of the transmission shifter . !
colspan=2Terrain Management System !
colspan=2Subsequent modes are selected by turning the control dial clockwise .
Depending on the mode selected , Terrain Management will control , adjust , and fine tune the engine , transmission , center multi - disc differential lock , throttle response , four - wheel electronic traction control and electronic stability control ( ESC ) to adapt the SUV for optimal performance on the corresponding terrain .
Off - road geometry figures for approach , departure and ramp
brakeover angles are 21 ° , 21 ° and 16 ° respectively .
Minimum running ground clearance is .
Standard running ground clearance is .
Low hanging running boards are no longer offered from the factory to help increase side obstacle clearance .
Moving to a monocoque body usually has a negative impact on towing capacity .
The new Explorer will be available with an optional trailer tow package .
The package includes a Class III trailer hitch , engine oil cooler , trailer electrics connector , trailer sway control ( TSC ) , wiring harness and a rear - view camera with trailer alignment assistance to help in backing up to a trailer .
If equipped with the trailer tow package the new 2011 Explorer will be able to tow up to of braked trailer .
That is greater than the towing capacity stated for the Explorer America concept and less than the outgoing Explorer 's towing capacity , although that was only available with the 4.6 L V8 engine .
SAFETY AND SECURITY Section::::Safety and security .
Safety features include : Dual front adaptive SRS air bags , dual front seat side impact air bags , dual rear safety belt air bags ( available first quarter , 2011 ) and side curtain head , torso and rollover protection air bags .
Other optional safety features include BLIS blind spot information system with rear cross traffic alert , forward collision warning with brake support precrash system , Auto high - beam , Roll Stability Control ( RSC ) , Electronic stability control ( ESC ) and Curve Control .
The fifth - generation Explorer was the first - ever vehicle to be equipped with dual rear inflatable safety belts .
Air bags are sewn into the inside of the seat belts , and inflate with cold air to prevent burns .
Ford claims it will be released as an option and to introduce inflatable seat belts on other Ford models eventually .
NHTSA Section::::NHTSA .
+
NHTSA Ford Explorer :
Overall
Overall Frontal Driver Frontal Passenger Frontal Passenger
Side Driver Side Passenger
Side Pole Driver
Rollover FWD
Rollover AWD +
Ford Explorer IIHS scores
Moderate overlap frontal offsetGood Small overlap frontal offset (
passenger side)Poor
Small overlap frontal offset ( driver side)Marginal * Side impactGood Roof strengthGood AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
The fifth generation Ford Explorer earned the 2011 North American Truck of the Year award .
The rear inflatable seat belts won the 2011 Best New Technology Award from the Automobile Journalists Association of Canada .
2013
FORD EXPLORER SPORT
Section::::2013 Ford Explorer Sport .
The Ford Explorer Sport was announced March 28 , 2012 as an option for the 2013 model year and went on sale in June 2012 .
The " Sport " trim level comprises blackened exterior treatments , stiffened chassis and suspension , larger brakes and the installation of the EcoBoost 3.5L Twin Turbo V6 rated at and of torque .
It is the only version to feature a combined 4WD
/ EcoBoost option ( a FWD version is not being offered for the Sport trim ) , allowing its MPG to average between 16 / city and 22 / highway .
This version will be slotted above the Limited trim and is expected to compete in this segment against Jeep Grand Cherokee 's SRT trim and Dodge Durango 's R / T trims and a newly updated 2013 Chevrolet Traverse , the latter of which unveiled their new look on the same day as the Explorer Sport as their response to Ford 's news .
2016
FACELIFT Section::::2016 facelift .
The refreshed 2016 model year Ford Explorer debuted at the 2014 Los Angeles Auto Show , with a redesigned front fascia , hood and lower bumper , standard LED low - beam headlights , and fog lamps that were inspired by the thirteenth generation Ford F-150 .
The rear of the Explorer was also refreshed with restyled LED tail lamps and dual exhaust outlets .
The 2016 refresh bumped the I4 engine to a 2.3 Liter EcoBoost four - cylinder engine from the 2015 Ford Mustang .
A newly introduced Platinum trim now tops out the range , slotting above the Sport and Limited trims .
Similar to the Platinum editions of the F150 and Ford Super Duty trucks , the Platinum trim features front and rear cameras , enhanced active park assist with perpendicular park assist , park - out assist and semi - automatic parallel parking , hands - free liftgate from the Ford Escape , an exclusive 500-watt Sony surround sound system , and a heated steering - wheel .
The Platinum trim is paired with a 3.5 Liter EcoBoost Twin - turbo V6 with which was previously only available with the Sport trim .
The 2016 Explorer went on sale at dealerships in the Summer of 2015 .
Other than the addition of the top - of - the - line Platinum trim , as well as standard eighteen - inch alloy wheels on the base
Explorer trim , the changes are mainly in styling , exterior and interior color combinations , technology , and power .
2018 FACELIFT Section::::2018 facelift .
The Ford Explorer will receive a second facelift which will include a refreshed front end with revised LED headlights and redesigned LED fog lights plus new exterior colors , new interior colors , and new wheel designs .
ENGINES Section::::Engines . !
Type!!Model
Years!!Power!!Torque SIXTH GENERATION ( 2020 ) Section::::Sixth generation ( 2020 ) .
An all - new , sixth - generation Ford Explorer will debut in 2019 for the 2020 model year , and is slated to return to a front - engine , rear - wheel - drive layout ( FR Setup ) utilizing Rear Wheel Drive ( RWD ) , as utilized by all Ford Explorers prior to 2011 .
Ford showed a prototype 2020 Explorer under wraps on display at the 2018 Beijing Auto Show in China .
A high - performance Explorer ST is also planned , joining the Ford Edge ST as Ford 's second SUV from their " ST " performance lineup .
The former is expected to be powered by a twin - turbocharged 3.0 L EcoBoost V6 gasoline engine similar to the Lincoln Aviator .
Among the engine lineup , the EcoBoost 2.3L Inline-4 remains while a new Duratec 3.3 L V6 naturally aspirated and Hybrid variant producing a combined is added .
EXPLORER SPORT
VARIATION Section::::Explorer Sport variation .
The Ford Explorer Sport was a 3-door version of the Ford Explorer , designed to take the place of the Bronco II in Ford 's model line , and was produced from 1990 to 2003 .
The Sport began as a trim level of the Ford Explorer , but it eventually became its own model .
It rode on a 10 " shorter wheelbase .
There was only one Sport , but there were several other trim levels of the Explorer that were available with 2-doors , such as the XL ( 1991–1997 ) , the Eddie Bauer ( 1991–1994 ) , and the Expedition ( 1995 ) .
In 1997 , the 1998 Explorer Sport became the only 3-door trim level of the Explorer , and in 2001 it became its own model , as the second generation Explorer moved on to a 5-door - only 3rd generation in January 2001 .
Production ceased in July 2003 .
FIFTH GENERATION
EXPLORER SPORT Section::::Fifth generation Explorer Sport .
The Explorer Sport returned to the Fifth generation Explorer however the Fifth generation Explorer Sport has 4 doors instead of the 2 doors of the old Explorer sport but has a unique engine and styling compared to the regular Explorer MAZDA NAVAJO Section::::Mazda Navajo .
The Mazda Navajo is a rebadged version of the first - generation Ford Explorer Sport that was sold from 1990 to 1994 during the 1991 to 1994 model years .
It was Mazda 's first sport - utility vehicle in North America and was sold exclusively in the United States ( Mazda 's Canadian division declined to market the vehicle ) .
At its launch , the Navajo was sold in a single configuration , a three - door body with four - wheel drive .
As with the Explorer , it was assembled at the Louisville Assembly Plant .
The Navajo was Motor Trend magazine 's Truck of the Year for 1991 .
The Navajo was not offered in Japan .
The Navajo and Explorer Sport largely differed in exterior trim , with unique taillights , grille , front bumper , and wheels .
Inside , the two were nearly impossible to distinguish from one another , except for minor changes to seat fabrics , the typeface on the instrument cluster , and the Navajo was given a different design for its steering wheel hub .
Similar to the 3-door Explorer , the Navajo came in two trim levels : base ( renamed DX for 1992 ) and LX .
In contrast to the Explorer , the base version of the Navajo offered power windows , power locks and power mirrors as standard .
The LX added features such as extra interior illumination and a leather - wrapped steering wheel .
An optional premium package loaded up the Navajo with luxuries including air conditioning , a stereo system with cassette deck , cruise control , sport seats with power lumbar adjustment and a pop - up / removable moonroof .
For 1992 , the Navajo became available with rear - wheel drive , geared towards buyers who liked the sporty image of an SUV , but did not need four - wheel drive .
Aside from the nomenclature change of the base model to DX ( to fit Mazda 's naming scheme ) , the Navajo changed so little that the company reused much of the photography from its 1990 - 91 promotional materials for another model year .
For 1993 , the Navajo received mechanical upgrades alongside the Explorer , such as increased power for the V6 engine and four - wheel anti - lock brakes .
Unlike the Explorer , however , the only other change was an optional CD player .
For 1994 , the LX model was given 5-spoke alloy wheels .
In comparison to the Explorer , sales of the Navajo were relatively poor and it was discontinued after the 1994 model year .
Mazda would not market another sport utility vehicle in North America until the Tribute ( based on the Ford Escape ) launched for the 2001 model year .
FORD POLICE INTERCEPTOR
UTILITY Section::::Ford Police Interceptor Utility .
Following the end of production of the Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptor in 2011 , Ford began development of a police - service variant of the Ford Explorer .
For the 2013 model year , Ford introduced the Police Interceptor Utility ; as with the related Police Interceptor Sedan variant of the Ford Taurus , the Utility is referred to as a Ford Police Interceptor in lieu of being a Ford Explorer .
As with the Police Interceptor Sedan and the Ford Expedition SSV , the Utility is not sold for retail sale and is specifically designed for use by law enforcement or use by other emergency service agencies .
Along with fleet - specific options such as steel wheels and provisions for user - specific paint schemes ( such as contrasting doors ) , the Utility comes with provisions for the fitment of emergency equipment such as radios , lightbars and sirens .
To free up interior space on the center console for equipment , the transmission is fitted with a column - mounted shifter .
The Police Interceptor Utility comes with an all - wheel drive powertrain standard .
Over a standard Explorer , the Utility is fitted with larger brake rotors , more advanced ABS and traction control systems , a more efficient cooling system and other standard police equipment .
At its launch , the initial engine fitted was a 3.7 L version of the Ti - VCT V6 , shared with the Ford Mustang and F-150 .
For 2014 , Ford added the 3.5 L EcoBoost V6 ( shared with the Police Interceptor Sedan and Ford Taurus SHO ) .
The California Highway Patrol now uses the Police Interceptor Utility because the current Ford Taurus , Chevrolet Caprice and Dodge Charger patrol cars did not meet the payload the CHP requires for a universal patrol car .
In May 2014 , statisticians R.L. Polk declared the PI Utility the most popular police vehicle , based on 2013 U.S. sales figures .
EXPORT SALES UK MODELS Section::::Export sales .
Section::::UK models .
In the UK , the Ford Explorer was initially available as just one model , with the 4.0-litre engine and with a high specification – the only dealer options being leather interior .
Second and third - generation Explorers for the UK and other RHD markets utilised a center console - mounted shifter and hand parking brake instead of the steering column - mounted shifter and parking brake pedal used in the North American models .
In 1998 , a facelifted Explorer was available with minor cosmetic interior changes and a revised rear tail lift which centered the rear number plate .
In 1999 the model range was revamped slightly , the base model becoming the XLT and a special edition North Face version marketed with a tie in to North Face outdoor clothing .
The North Face version was available in a dark green or a silver , with body - colored bumpers , heated leather seats and a CD multichanger as standard .
In 2000 , the North Face was also available in black .
MIDDLE EAST AND ASIA Section::::Middle East and Asia .
In the Middle East , Taiwan , and China , the 2012 Ford Explorer is currently available in several trims , all of which have a 3.5-liter V6 engine and an automatic gearbox .
Some GCC markets offer the front - wheel - drive version as a base model , while most of the trims have standard all - wheel - drive .
The latest generation Explorer was made available in Japan the Fall of 2015 .
CURRENT EXPORTS
Section::::Current exports .
As of 2009 , American - made Explorer is exported to Bolivia , Chile , Canada , Mexico , Panama , Dominican Republic , People 's Republic of China , Japan , South Korea , Israel , Republic of China ( Taiwan ) , The Philippines , Turkey , Russia , Iceland , the Middle East , and certain countries in South America and Africa .
As of 2014 , the Explorer is available in Ukraine and Belarus .
OTHER USAGE
Section::::Other usage .
Gothic black Ford Explorer vehicles are also used by federal agencies , such as Secret Service for example .
CRITICISM AND CONTROVERSIES ROLLOVER AND FIRESTONE TIRE
CONTROVERSY Section::::Criticism and controversies .
Section::::Rollover and Firestone Tire controversy .
240 deaths and 3,000 catastrophic injuries resulted from the combination of early generation Explorers and Firestone tires .
The tire tread separated and the vehicle had an unusually high rate of rollover crash as a result .
Both companies ' reputations were tarnished .
This event led to a disruption in the 90-year - old Ford / Firestone partnership .
Rollover risk is inherently higher in truck - based vehicles , like the Explorer , than in ordinary passenger cars , as modification for bulky 4-wheel - drive hardware requires increases in height to avoid compromising ground clearance ( raising the center of gravity ) , while a short wheelbase further reduces stability .
The previous Bronco II had already been cited by Consumer Reports for rollover tendencies in turns .
The Explorer was cleared by the NHTSA as no more dangerous than any other truck when driven unsafely .
It used the same tires as the Ford Ranger with a relatively low rating for high temperatures .
Lowering tire pressure recommendations softened the ride further and improved emergency stability through increased traction , but increased the chances of overheating tires .
A 1995 redesign with a new suspension slightly raised the Explorer 's center of gravity , but it was called inconsequential by a Ford spokesman .
Memos by Ford engineers suggested lowering the engine height , but it would have increased the cost of the new design .
Explorer rollover rates , at the time of the controversy , were higher than any of its competitors .
While Firestone turned out millions of sub - standard and potentially defective tires , and was the initial cause of loss of control many Ford Explorer Firestone tire tread separation rollovers , the blame shifted towards Ford for a defectively designed and unstable vehicle .
In May 2000 , the US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) contacted Ford and Firestone about a higher than normal incidence of tire failures on Ford Explorers , Mercury Mountaineers , and Mazda Navajos fitted with Firestone tires ( later including Ford Ranger and Mazda B - Series pickup trucks ) .
The failures all involved tread separation , in which the outer tread carcass would delaminate and cause a rapid loss of tire pressure .
Ford investigated and found that several models of Firestone tires ( ATX , ATX II , and Wilderness AT ) had higher failure rates , especially those made at Firestone 's Decatur , Illinois plant .
Ford recommended a tire inflation of only likely contributing to the tread separation problem by causing the tires to operate at higher than normal temperatures .
Ford argued that Firestone was at fault , noting that the tires made by Firestone were very defective .
Nevertheless , Ford subsequently recommended that front and rear tires should be inflated to on all Explorer models and mailed a replacement tire pressure door sticker indicating the same to all registered owners .
Some have argued that poor driver reaction to tire blowout was a contributing factor .
When a tire blew , the vehicle would experience a sudden sharp jerk , and many drivers reacted by counter - steering in an attempt to regain control .
This action would cause a shift of the vehicle 's weight , resulting in a rollover especially at higher speeds ( many reports of rollovers were of vehicles being driven at speeds of and above ) .
In a test simulating dozens of tire blowouts , Larry Webster , a test - driver for Car & Driver magazine , was repeatedly able to bring a 1994 Explorer to a stop without incident from speeds of .
According to Forbes magazine , car experts and NHTSA claim that the vast majority of crash accidents and deaths are caused not by the vehicle , but by the driver , by road conditions or some combination of the two .
Many vehicle injury attorneys dissent from this view .
In response to Firestone 's allegations of the Explorer 's design defects , NHTSA undertook a preliminary investigation and reported that further action was not required .
Its conclusion was that the Explorer was no more prone to rollover than other SUVs given their high center of gravity .
The subsequent introduction and proliferation of electronic stability control systems have essentially addressed and mitigated this shortcoming .
In May 2001 , Ford announced it would replace 13 million Firestone tires fitted to Explorer vehicles .
U - HAUL TRAILERS Section::::U - Haul trailers .
On December 22 , 2003 , U - Haul , the largest American equipment rental company , announced it would prohibit its outlets from renting trailers to persons planning to tow behind Ford Explorers due to liability concerns , with no published data to substantiate the claim .
Unofficial reports from employees indicated that it was due to the rear bumper separating from the vehicle , including the tow hook assembly .
U - Haul did not alter its policies regarding the renting of trailers to persons planning to tow behind the Mercury Mountaineer , Mazda Navajo or earlier versions of the Lincoln Aviator , which are all mechanically identical to the Ford Explorer .
In mid-2013 , U - Haul began allowing Ford Explorers of model year 2011 and newer to tow their trailers .
All other Ford Motor Company vehicles are allowed to tow U - Haul trailers .
SALES Section::::Sales . !
Calendar Year !
Explorer ( US ) !
Police InterceptorUtility ( US ) 2016
Total 7,216,214 98,621 SEE ALSO * Ford Explorer Sport Trac * Mercury Mountaineer
* Lincoln Aviator * Saleen XP6
* Saleen XP8 * Firestone and Ford tire controversy REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ford Explorer official website * Ford Explorer America Concept SUV at Ford Auto Shows
* Ford Explorer America Concept SUV On Ford and the Environment SMPR
* History of the 1st Ford Explorer
* Serious Explorations – Ford Explorer Enthusiast Website * Vehicle Specs for the Ford Explorer models and variants from Where Can I Buy A Car Online