MICKEY ROURKE
Philip Andre " Mickey " Rourke Jr. (; born September 16 , 1952 ) , is an American actor and screenwriter ( and less notably , a retired boxer ) who has appeared primarily as a leading man in drama , action , and thriller films .
During the 1980s , Rourke starred in the comedy - drama Diner ( 1982 ) , the drama Rumble Fish ( 1983 ) , the crime - black comedy film The Pope of Greenwich Village ( 1984 ) , and the erotic drama 9½ Weeks ( 1986 ) .
He received critical praise for his work in the Charles Bukowski biopic Barfly and the horror mystery Angel Heart ( both 1987 ) .
In 1991 , Rourke teamed up with Don Johnson and Tom Sizemore in the cult classic action film Harley Davidson and the Marlboro Man ; also in 1991 , Rourke — who had trained as a boxer in his early years — left acting and became a professional boxer for a time .
After retiring from boxing in 1994 , Rourke returned to acting and had supporting roles in several films , including the drama
The Rainmaker ( 1997 ) , the comedy - drama Buffalo ' 66 ( 1998 ) , the thriller - remake of Get Carter ( 2000 ) , the mystery film The Pledge ( 2001 ) , the crime dark comedy - drama Spun ( 2002 ) , the action film Once Upon a Time in Mexico ( 2003 ) and the action thriller Man on Fire ( 2004 )
, playing the role of a corrupt lawyer .
In 2005 , Rourke made his comeback in mainstream Hollywood circles with a lead role in the neo - noir action thriller Sin City , for which he won awards from the Chicago Film Critics Association , the Irish Film and Television Awards , and the Online Film Critics Society .
In the 2008 film The Wrestler , Rourke portrayed a past - his - prime wrestler ; for his work in the film , Rourke received a 2009 Golden Globe award , a BAFTA award , and an Academy Award nomination .
Since then , Rourke has appeared in several commercially successful films , including the 2010 films Iron Man 2 and The Expendables and the 2011 film Immortals .
EARLY LIFE
Section::::Early life .
Philip Andre Rourke Jr. was born in Schenectady , New York , the son of Annette ( née Cameron ) and Philip Andre Rourke , Sr .
His father was of Irish and German descent , and his mother had Scottish , French , English , and German ancestry .
He was raised Roman Catholic and still practices his faith .
His father , an amateur body builder , left the family when Mickey was six years old .
After his parents divorced , his mother married Eugene Addis , a Miami Beach police officer with five sons , and moved Rourke , his younger brother ( Joey ) , and their sister ( Patricia ) to South Florida .
There , he graduated from Miami Beach Senior High School in 1971 .
CAREER
AMATEUR
BOXING
Section::::Career .
Section::::Amateur boxing .
During his teenage years , Rourke focused his attention mainly on sports .
He took up self - defense training at the Boys Club of Miami .
It was there that he learned boxing skills and decided on an amateur career .
At age 12 , Rourke won his first boxing match as a flyweight , fighting some of his early matches under the name Phil Rourke .
He continued his boxing training at the famed 5th Street Gym , in Miami Beach , Florida .
In 1969 , Rourke , then weighing 140 pounds ( 63.5 kg ) , sparred with former World Welterweight Champion Luis Rodríguez .
Rodriguez was the number one – rated middleweight boxer in the world and was training for his match with world champion Nino Benvenuti .
Rourke claims to have received a concussion from his sparring match with Rodriguez .
At the 1971 Florida Golden Gloves , Rourke suffered another concussion in a boxing match .
After being told by doctors to take a year off and rest , Rourke temporarily retired from the ring .
From 1964 to 1973 , Rourke compiled an amateur boxing record of 27 wins ( 17 by knockout ) and three defeats , which included first - round knockout wins over John Carver and Ronald Robinson , and decision victories over Ronnie Carter , Charles Gathers , Joe Riles , and Javier Villanueva .
AMATEUR BOXING RECORD Section::::Amateur boxing record .
Rourke 's amateur boxing record was 27 wins and 3 losses . !
Amateur boxing record
Win 12–0–0 align =
left Sherman Bergman KO 1 August 20 , 1973 align = leftMiami , Florida align =
leftRourke climbs off canvas to win in 31 seconds .
Win 11–0–0 align = left
John " Two Dice " Carver KO 1 May 7 , 1972 align = left Miami , Florida align =
leftRourke scores 39 second knockout .
Win 10–0–0 align = left Ron " 22nd Street
" Robinson KO 1 February 15 , 1972 align = leftMiami , Florida align =
leftRourke wins in 18 seconds .
Win 9–0–0 align = left Leroy Harrington KO 1 July 4 , 1971 align = leftMiami , Florida align =
leftRourke wins in 15 seconds .
Win 8–0–0 align = left Paul Malsoh KO 1 June 22 , 1970 align = leftMiami , Florida align =
leftRourke scores 29 second knockout .
Win 7–0–0 align = left Kenny Jacobs KO 1 June 15 , 1970 align =
leftMiami Beach , Florida align =
leftRourke wins in 14 seconds .
Win
6–0–0 align = left Joe Riles PTS 3 August 26 , 1964 align = leftMiami , Florida Win 5–0–0
align = left Charles Gathers PTS 3 August 12 , 1964 align = leftMiami , Florida Win
4–0–0 align = left Ronnie Carter PTS 3 June 16 , 1965 align = leftMiami ,
Florida align =
left Win
3–0–0 align = left Javier Villanueva PTS 3 1964 align = leftMiami , Florida Win
2–0–0 align = left Jesus " KoKo " Carranza PTS 3 align =
leftMiami , Florida align = left Win
1–0–0 align = left Roger Hough PTS 3 July 1964
align
= leftMiami , Florida
EARLY ACTING ROLES
Section::::Early acting roles .
In 1971 , as a senior at Miami Beach Senior High School , Rourke had a small acting role in the Jay W. Jensen – directed school play The Serpent .
However , Rourke 's interests were geared to boxing , and he never appeared in any other school productions .
Soon after he temporarily gave up boxing , a friend at the University of Miami told Rourke about a play he was directing , Deathwatch , and how the man playing the role of Green Eyes had quit .
Rourke got the part and immediately became enamored with acting .
Borrowing $ 400 from his sister , he moved to New York , working an assortment of odd jobs while studying with Actors Studio alumni Walter Lott and Sandra Seacat .
It was under the latter 's tutelage , Rourke later recalled , that " everything started to click . "
Seacat motivated Rourke to find his father , from whom he had been separated for more than twenty years .
During his appearance on Inside the Actors Studio , after the release of The Wrestler , host James Lipton disclosed that Rourke had been selected to the Actors Studio in his first audition , which Elia Kazan is reported to have said was the " best audition in thirty years " .
Appearing primarily in television films during the late 1970s , Rourke made his feature film debut with a small role in Steven Spielberg 's 1941 .
He played Ritchie , Dennis Christopher 's bullying and ill - fated co - worker in the 1980 slasher film Fade to Black .
However , it was in 1981 , with his portrayal of an arsonist in Body Heat , that Rourke first received significant attention , despite his modest time on screen .
The following year , he drew further critical accolades for his portrayal as the suave compulsive gambler " Boogie " Sheftell in Barry Levinson 's Diner , in which Rourke co - starred , alongside Paul Reiser , Daniel Stern , Steve Guttenberg , Tim Daly and Kevin Bacon ; the National Society of Film Critics named him Best Supporting Actor that year .
Soon thereafter , Rourke starred in Rumble Fish , Francis Ford Coppola 's follow - up to The Outsiders .
Rourke 's performance in the film The Pope of Greenwich Village alongside Daryl Hannah and Eric Roberts also caught the attention of critics , although the film was not financially successful .
In the mid-1980s , Rourke earned himself additional leading roles .
His role alongside Kim Basinger in the erotic drama 9½ Weeks helped him gain sex symbol status .
He received critical praise for his work in Barfly as the alcoholic writer Henry Chinaski ( the literary alter ego of Charles Bukowski ) and in Year of the Dragon .
In 1987 , Rourke appeared in Angel Heart .
The film was nominated for several awards .
It was seen as controversial by some , owing to a sex scene involving Cosby Show cast member Lisa Bonet , who won an award for her part in the film .
Although some of Rourke 's work was viewed as controversial in the US , he was well received by European , and especially French , audiences , who loved the " rumpled , slightly dirty , sordid ... rebel persona " that he projected in Year of the Dragon , 9½ Weeks , Angel Heart , and Desperate Hours .
Director Adrian Lyne said that had Mickey died after the release of Angel Heart , he would have become a bigger phenomenon than James Dean .
In the late 1980s , Rourke performed with David Bowie on the Never Let Me Down album .
Around the same time he also wrote his first screenplay , Homeboy , a boxing tale in which he starred .
In 1989 Rourke starred in the docudrama Francesco , portraying St. Francis of Assisi .
This was followed by Wild Orchid , another critically panned film , which gained him a nomination for a Razzie award ( also for Desperate Hours ) .
In 1991 he starred in the box office bomb Harley Davidson and the Marlboro Man as Harley Davidson , a biker whose best friend , Marlboro , was played by Don Johnson .
In his last role before departing for the boxing ring , Rourke played an arms dealer chased by Willem Dafoe and Samuel L. Jackson in White Sands , a film noir that reviewers found stylish but incoherent .
Rourke 's acting career eventually became overshadowed by his personal life and career decisions .
Directors such as Alan Parker found it difficult to work with him .
Parker stated that " working with Mickey is a nightmare .
He is very dangerous on the set because you never know what he is going to do . "
In a documentary on the special edition DVD of Tombstone , actor Michael Biehn , who plays the part of Johnny Ringo , mentions that his role was first offered to Rourke .
Rourke has allegedly turned down several roles in high - profile films , including 48 Hrs . , Platoon , Top Gun , Beverly Hills Cop , Rain Man , The Silence of the Lambs , and Pulp Fiction .
PROFESSIONAL BOXING CAREER Section::::Professional boxing career .
In 1991 , Rourke decided that he " had to go back to boxing " because he felt that he " was self - destructing ...
[ and ] had no respect for [ himself as ] an actor " .
Rourke was undefeated in eight fights , with six wins ( four by knockout ) and two draws .
He fought internationally in countries including Spain , Japan , and Germany .
During his boxing career , Rourke suffered a number of injuries , including a broken nose , toe , and ribs , a split tongue , and a compressed cheekbone .
He also suffered from short term memory loss .
His trainer during most of his boxing career was Hells Angels member , actor , and celebrity bodyguard Chuck Zito .
Freddie Roach also trained Rourke for seven fights .
Rourke 's entrance song into the ring was often Guns ' N ' Roses ' " Sweet Child o ' Mine " ( to which reference is made in his film The Wrestler , in which Rourke 's character enters his final match of the film to the song playing over the loudspeakers ) .
Boxing promoters said that Rourke was too old to succeed against top - level fighters .
Indeed , Rourke himself admits that entering the ring was a sort of personal test : "
[ I ] just wanted to give it a shot , test myself that way physically , while I still had time . "
Rourke 's boxing career resulted in a notable physical change in the 1990s , as his face needed reconstructive surgery to mend his injuries .
His face was later called " appallingly disfigured " .
In a 2009 interview , Rourke said that he had gone to " the wrong guy " for his surgery , and that his plastic surgeon had left his features " a mess " .
RETURN TO BOXING IN 2014
Section::::Return to boxing in 2014 .
On Friday , November 28 , 2014 , Rourke briefly returned to the boxing ring and fought 29-year - old Elliot Seymour in Moscow , Russia .
It was Rourke 's first boxing match in over 20 years .
Talks of him being involved in four more matches were released by Rourke himself after the match .
He won the exhibition fight in the second round by TKO .
The fight is not counted in his professional record since it was an exhibition match .
The opponent later stated that he threw the fight , having been promised payment to take a dive in the second round .
RECORD 1990S :
RETURN TO ACTING Section::::1990s : Return to acting .
In the early 1990s , Rourke was offered and declined the role of Butch Coolidge , which later became Bruce Willis 's role in Pulp Fiction .
After his retirement from boxing , Rourke did accept supporting roles in several 1990s films , including Francis Ford Coppola 's adaptation of John Grisham 's The Rainmaker , Vincent Gallo 's Buffalo ' 66 , Steve Buscemi 's Animal Factory , Sean Penn 's The Pledge , and Sylvester Stallone 's remake of Get Carter .
Rourke also has written several films under the name Sir Eddie Cook , including Bullet , in which he co - starred with Tupac Shakur .
While Rourke was also selected for a significant role in Terrence Malick 's The Thin Red Line , his part ended up on the cutting room floor .
Rourke also played a small part in the film Thursday , in which he plays a crooked cop .
He also had a lead role in 1997 's Double Team , which co - starred martial arts actor Jean - Claude Van Damme and former NBA player Dennis Rodman .
It was Rourke 's first over - the - top action film role , in which he played the lead villain .
During that same year , he filmed Another 9½ Weeks , a sequel to 9½ Weeks , which received only limited distribution .
He ended the 1990s with the direct - to - video films Out in Fifty , Shades and television film Shergar , about the kidnapping of Epsom Derby - winning thoroughbred racehorse Shergar .
Rourke has expressed his bitterness over that period of his career , stating that he came to consider himself a " has - been " and lived for a time in " a state of shame " .
2000 - 2009 Section::::2000 - 2009 .
In 2001 , Rourke appeared as the villain in Enrique Iglesias 's music video for " Hero " , which also featured Jennifer Love Hewitt .
In 2002 he took the role of The Cook in Jonas Åkerlund 's Spun , teaming up once again with Eric Roberts .
His first collaborations with directors Robert Rodriguez and Tony Scott , in Once Upon a Time in Mexico and Man on Fire , respectively , were in smaller roles .
Nonetheless , these directors subsequently decided to cast Rourke in lead roles in their next films .
In 2005 , Rourke made his comeback in mainstream Hollywood circles with a lead role in Robert Rodriguez 's adaptation of Frank Miller 's Sin City .
Rourke received awards from the Chicago Film Critics Association , the IFTA , and the Online Film Critics Society , as well as Man of the Year from Total Film magazine that year .
Rourke followed Sin City with a supporting role in Tony Scott 's Domino alongside Keira Knightley , in which he played a bounty hunter .
Rourke played the role of " The Blackbird " in an adaptation of Elmore Leonard 's Killshot , and appeared as Darrius Sayle in the adaptation of the Alex Rider novel Stormbreaker .
In addition , in 2004 , Rourke provided the voice for " Jericho " in the third installment of the Driver video game series .
Rourke also appeared in a 40-page story by photographer Bryan Adams for Berlin 's Zoo Magazine .
In an article about Rourke 's return to steady acting roles , entitled " Mickey Rourke Rising " , Christopher Heard stated that actors / musicians Johnny Depp , Sean Penn , and Brad Pitt have " animated praise for Rourke and his work " .
During a roundtable session of Oscar - nominated actors held by Newsweek , Brad Pitt cited Rourke as one of his early acting heroes along with Sean Penn and Gary Oldman .
Despite having withdrawn from acting at various points , and having made films that he now sees as a creative " sellout " ( the action film Harley Davidson and the Marlboro Man ) , Rourke has stated that " all that I have been through ... [ has ] made me a better , more interesting actor " .
Rourke 's renewed interest in pursuing acting can be seen in his statement that " my best work is still ahead of me " .
Rourke had a role in the film version of The Informers , playing Peter , an amoral former studio security guard who plots to kidnap a small child .
In 2008 , Rourke played the lead in Darren Aronofsky 's The Wrestler , winner of the Golden Lion Award for Best Film at the Venice Film Festival , about washed - up professional wrestler Randy " The Ram " Robinson .
Regarding first reading the screenplay , he stated that he originally " did n't care for it " .
He also spoke on personal concern and hesitance of being in a film about wrestling , for he perceived it as being " pre - arranged and pre - choreographed " .
As he trained for the film , he developed an appreciation and respect for what real - life pro wrestlers do to prepare for the ring :
He trained under former WWE wrestler Afa the Wild Samoan for the part , and has received a British Academy ( BAFTA ) award , a Golden Globe award , an Independent Spirit Award , and an Oscar nomination as Best Actor .
Rourke was pessimistic about his chances to win the Oscar , as he had burned many bridges in Hollywood as a result of his past behavior .
Rourke lost the Oscar to Sean Penn , while Penn did acknowledge Rourke in his acceptance speech .
Rourke has written or co - written six scripts : Homeboy , The Last Ride , Bullet , Killer Moon , Penance and the latest , Pain .
Of these , the first three were produced as films between 1988 and 1996 .
2010-PRESENT
Section::::2010-present .
In 2010 , Rourke played the role of the main villain Whiplash in the film Iron Man 2 .
In an interview with Rip It Up magazine he revealed that he prepared for the role by visiting Russian jail inmates .
In 2011 , he portrayed the villainous King Hyperion in Immortals and received praise for his performance , while the film received mixed - to - positive reviews and became a box office success .
He also had a minor role as Tool in Sylvester Stallone 's The Expendables .
Though he had little screen time , his performance was met with rave reviews and cited as one of the film 's highlights .
Just before the end of the year , he confirmed on a British TV talk show that he would play Gareth Thomas in an upcoming film about the Welsh rugby star who came out as gay the previous year .
As of February 2011 , he had begun research on the film , but noted , " We 're not going to make this movie until we 've done all the proper research .
We need to do our homework
and I need to train for from nine to eleven months .
" In 2011 Rourke was cast in the film Java Heat as an American citizen shadowing terrorist groups in Java , Indonesia .
The film was released in 2013 .
PERSONAL LIFE Section::::Personal life .
Rourke has dated several celebrities , including Terry Farrell and Sasha Volkova .
He has been married twice .
In 1981 he married Debra Feuer , whom he met on the set of Hardcase ( 1981 ) and who co - starred with him in Homeboy ( 1988 ) as his love interest .
The marriage ended in 1989 , with Rourke subsequently commenting that making the film 9½ Weeks " was not particularly considerate to my wife 's needs .
" The two have remained good friends , according to an interview Feuer gave in 2009 .
Wild Orchid co - star Carré Otis was briefly a cause célèbre following the release of the film owing to rumors that she and then - lover Rourke filmed an unsimulated sex scene .
Otis married Rourke on June 26 , 1992 .
In 1994 , Rourke was arrested on suspicion of spousal abuse .
The charges were later dropped .
The couple reconciled and also starred together in Exit in Red , but their marriage ended in December 1998 .
Otis and writer Hugo Schwyzer co - wrote , an autobiography that detailed Otis ' marriage to Rourke that was published in October 2011 by HarperCollins .
In November 2007 , Rourke was arrested again , this time on DUI charges in Miami Beach .
In numerous TV and print interviews , he attributes his comeback after 14 years to his agent David A. Unger , weekly meetings with a psychiatrist , " Steve " , and a Catholic priest , Father Peter Colapietro .
Rourke has been described as a " real good Catholic " by friend Tom Sizemore .
Since 2009 , Rourke has been in a relationship with Russian model Anastassija Makarenko .
POLITICAL VIEWS
Section::::Political views .
In May 1989 , Rourke revealed that he had donated most of his £ 1.5 million earnings from the film Francesco to support Joe Doherty in his campaign for political asylum in the United States .
Doherty , a Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) member , was wanted by UK authorities for his part in an ambush using an M60 machine gun which killed a member of Britain 's elite Special Air Service in Belfast , Northern Ireland in 1980 .
Doherty was later arrested and charged for his part in the attack but escaped with seven other prisoners after holding a prison officer hostage and engaging in a shoot - out with members of the Royal Ulster Constabulary .
Doherty was eventually imprisoned in the UK , but was later released under the terms of the Good Friday Agreement .
In June 2006 , Rourke publicly gave his support to US President George W. Bush and the Iraq War .
In January 2009 , Rourke expressed admiration for Bush in an interview with GQ magazine .
He also expressed his astonishment that Islamic fundamentalists were allowed to continue their activities in the UK after the 7 July 2005 London bombings .
In August 2014 , Rourke came under scrutiny for purchasing and wearing a T - shirt bearing the likeness of Russian President Vladimir Putin at a time when most of the Western world was criticizing and sanctioning Russia for its violations of Ukrainian sovereignty .
When questioned by the press , Rourke explained : " If I did n't like him , I would n't buy the T - shirt , believe me .
I met him a couple of times and he was a real gentleman .
A very cool , regular guy .
Looked me right in the eye .
Good guy .
" In an appearance on the August 12 , 2014 , episode of The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon , Rourke said he had purchased the T - shirt because the proceeds were going to benefit an ill Ukrainian boy in need of an operation .
In 2015 , Rourke expressed his support for Ben Carson for the Republican presidential nomination .
He also denounced Republican frontrunner Donald Trump as a " bully " .
DOGS Section::::Dogs .
In addition to his faith , Rourke has publicly attributed his comeback to his dogs .
He is well known as a pet lover , particularly fond of small - breed dogs .
A spay / neuter advocate , Rourke participated in a protest outside a pet shop in 2007 and has done a public service announcement for PETA .
His first little dog was reportedly a gift from his second wife .
Though Rourke 's dogs are generally referred to as " chihuahuas " , some are not purebred .
Loki , his most - publicized dog whom he described as " the love of my life " , was a chihuahua - terrier mix .
So reliant was Rourke on Loki 's companionship , he spent US$ 5,400 to have her flown to England while he was on the set of the film Stormbreaker .
Rourke gave his dogs credit during his Golden Globe Best Actor acceptance speech January 11 , 2009 :
" I 'd like to thank all my dogs .
The ones that are here , the ones that are n't here anymore because sometimes when a man 's alone , that 's all you got is your dog .
And they 've meant the world to me .
"
The day of the 2009 Golden Globes show , he told Barbara Walters that " I sort of self - destructed and everything came out about 14 years ago or so ...
the wife had left , the career was over , the money was not an ounce .
The dogs were there when no one else was there . "
Asked by Walters if he had considered suicide , he responded : Beau Jack sired two of Rourke 's later pets , Loki and her littermate Chocolate .
Beau Jack died in 2002 , although Rourke reportedly gave him 45 minutes of mouth - to - mouth resuscitation .
Chocolate was the subject of a children 's book , Chocolate at the Four Seasons , about his temporary stay with producer Bonnie Timmerman .
Chocolate returned to Rourke and died in 2006 .
In addition to those dogs and several other past pets , Rourke currently owns a chihuahua named Jaws who appeared with him in his 2009 PETA ad , as well as in the film Once Upon a Time in Mexico .
He has had as many as seven dogs at one time , back in 2005 .
At the time of his Golden Globes tribute to his pets , Rourke owned five chihuahuas :
Loki , Jaws , Ruby Baby , La Negra and Bella Loca .
About a month later , on February 16 , 2009 , Loki died in Rourke 's arms at the age of 18 .
FILMOGRAPHY
CAREER AWARDS Section::::Career awards .
+ List of awards !
Year !
Award !
Nomination !
Film !
Result
PREVIOUS COLLABORATIONS
Section::::Previous collaborations .
Christopher Walken stated to the Film Comment on August , 1992 that it was destiny to make Homeboy with Mickey Rourke : OTHER WORKS
Section::::Other works .
Rourke made his stage debut in a revival of Arthur Miller 's A View From the Bridge .
He lent his voice to the video games
Driv3r ( 2004 ) as Jericho and ( 2005 ) as Terrence " Terry " Higgins , which was his fifth and last work with actor Christopher Walken .
He also appeared in a Japanese TV commercial for Suntory Reserve ( early ' 90s ) and a commercial for Daihatsu and Lark cigarettes .
In 2009 , Rourke voiced the character of Dick Marcinko for the biographical video game Rogue Warrior , which was released on December 1 , 2009 .
Rourke 's portrayal of Marcinko was a source of humorous praise from a few critics ( although many others criticized Rourke 's role to the same degree that they did every other aspect of the game ) .
In 2010 , he appeared in a Dutch TV Commercial for Bavaria Beer .
Rourke appeared as a gangster in the music video for " Hero " by Enrique Iglesias .
Actress Jennifer Love Hewitt also made an appearance in the clip .
Rourke also provided the mid - song rap on the David Bowie song " Shining Star ( Makin ' My Love ) " on his album Never Let Me Down ( 1987 ) .
Rourke has been the subject of two extensive biographies on his life and career Stand Alone :
The Films of Mickey Rourke and Hollywood Outlaw : The Life of Mickey Rourke both were written by British author Saurav Dutt .
In 2014 Dutt announced he was producing and writing a novelization inspired by an undeveloped script for a movie that Rourke wrote entitled Wild Horses which was eventually released in Fall 2015 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Keri Walsh , " Why Does Mickey Rourke Give Pleasure ? " , Critical Inquiry , Vol 37 , no . 1 , Autumn 2010 ; accessed December 2 , 2014 .
* Profile on BoxRec