LAWN DARTS
Lawn darts ( also known as Javelin darts , jarts or yard darts ) is a lawn game for two players or teams .
A lawn dart set usually includes four large darts and two targets .
The game play and objective are similar to both horseshoes and darts .
The darts are similar to the ancient Roman plumbata .
They are typically 12 inches ( 30 cm )
long with a weighted metal or plastic tip on one end and three plastic fins on a rod at the other end .
The darts are intended to be tossed underhand toward a horizontal ground target , where the weighted end hits first and sticks into the ground .
The target is typically a plastic ring , and landing anywhere within the ring scores a point .
After many injuries and deaths caused by lawn darts , they have been banned by the United States and Canada .
RULES Section::::Rules .
There are a number of variations of lawn darts , including Traditional and Handly Cup Style .
Either variation can be played one - on - one or in teams of two .
In the team version the players stand with one member from each team at each end ( when throwing , they should be sure to stand well back when the other side is throwing ) and toss the darts to a target about away ( with variation based on the players ' skill and the venue in which the game is being played ) .
In Traditional Lawn Darts , points are scored when a dart lands in the target area .
Usually if a player from each team lands a dart in the target , the scores cancel each other ( so if Team A got 2 darts into the target , and Team B got 1 in , Team A would get 1 point and Team B would get 0 ) .
Also , some versions of Lawn darts include a smaller " bulls - eye " ring for additional points .
In Handly Cup Style Lawn Darts , scores are based on darts in the ring plus darts closer to the ring than any of the opposing team 's darts .
Darts landing inside the ring , or " ringers " , are worth 3 points each , and can be cancelled by an opponent also throwing a dart into the ring .
Additionally , any dart that is closer to the ring ( but outside ) than any other dart by the opposing team is worth one point .
This means that if neither team managed to place a dart into the ring , but Team A had two darts closer than any of Team B 's darts , Team A would score 2 points .
If Team A had one dart in the ring , and one dart closer than any of Team B 's darts , they would score 4 points .
If both teams have darts in the ring it is impossible for a dart outside the ring to score any points ( as it is farther from the ring than the opposing team 's dart that is inside ) .
If Team A and Team B each had a dart inside the ring , and Team A also had a dart outside the ring but closer to the ring than Team B 's other dart , neither team would score any points for that round .
Handly Cup Style matches typically are played in teams of two , with the pairs alternating , until one team 's total score is 21 or more .
In addition , for a point to count the dart must stick into the ground .
SAFETY AND BANS IN THE U.S. AND CANADA Section::::Safety and bans in the U.S. and Canada .
Lawn darts had been banned from being sold in the United States for many years .
The ban was challenged in court in the late 1970s , prompting the Consumer Product Safety Commission to make a compromise ruling allowing their sale provided they were not marketed as toys .
However , in April 1987 , seven - year - old Michelle Snow was killed by a lawn dart thrown by one of her brothers ' playmates in the backyard of their home in Riverside , California .
The darts had been purchased , unintentionally , as part of a set of several different lawn games and were stored in the garage , never before having been played .
Michelle 's father , David , began a crusade to get lawn darts banned , claiming that there was no way to keep children from getting their hands on lawn darts short of a full ban .
Due in part to Snow 's lobbying , on December 19 , 1988 , the CPSC reinstated the outright ban on lawn darts in the U.S.
In the previous eight years , 6,100 people had been sent to the emergency room due to lawn darts in the U.S.
Out of that total , 81 % were 15 or younger , and half of them were 10 or younger .
On the week the commission voted to ban the product , an 11-year - old girl in Tennessee was hit by a lawn dart and sent into a coma .
In Canada , lawn darts resulted in at least 55 serious injuries .
They were banned for sale in the country from July 1989 .
The sale of second - hand lawn darts is also illegal under the Hazardous Products Act .
Since then , alternatives have surfaced that are available for sale in Canada and are made of plastic .
It is possible to import parts of a lawn dart – plastic flights , metal bodies , and steel spigots – as well as a complete set of replacement parts to repair damaged lawn darts , into the U.S. and Canada .
However , fully assembled individual darts , sets , and kits are banned from entry by American and Canadian customs authorities .
As of 2017 , a modified version of lawn darts can be purchased in the United States .
Current lawn darts are furnished with a modified blunt tip design as a safety measure .
SIMILAR GAMES
* Crown darts is a variation using the same equipment in which the darts are tossed towards a target dart instead of a plastic ring target .
*
Kubb is a similar throwing game involving wooden batons instead of darts .
SEE ALSO
*
Lawn dart effect
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL
LINKS
*
TossingGames.com
* Zarts