UNIVERSITY OF MARYLAND UNIVERSITY COLLEGE
The University of Maryland University College ( UMUC ) is an American public not - for - profit university located in Adelphi in Prince George 's County , Maryland , in the United States .
UMUC offers classes and programs on campus in its Academic Center in Largo , and at satellite campuses across the Baltimore - Washington Metropolitan Area , throughout Maryland , as well as in Europe , the Middle East , and Asia .
UMUC serves over 90,000 students worldwide and is one of the largest distance - learning institutions in the world .
UMUC is open to all applicants , with a 100 percent acceptance rate for undergraduate programs .
The university offers 120 academic programs in instructor - led and online classes , including bachelor 's , master 's , and doctoral degrees , as well as undergraduate and graduate certificates .
UMUC is a member of the University System of Maryland , which includes eleven separate public universities in Maryland .
University of Maryland University College ( UMUC ) is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education .
HISTORY Section::::History .
UMUC is an outgrowth of the evening program for adults at the University of Maryland , which began in the 1920s .
In 1947 , the College of Special and Continuation Studies ( CSCS ) was established .
In 1959 , The CSCS became the University of Maryland University College ( UMUC ) .
In 1970 , UMUC became an independent institution , and it became a member of the University System of Maryland in 1988 .
UMUC formerly had an international campus in Schwäbisch Gmünd , Germany , ( near Stuttgart ) , until 2002 .
It also ran a two - year residential campus in Munich , Germany , from 1950 to 1992 , which then moved to Augsburg , Germany , from 1993 to 1994 , and then to Mannheim , Germany , in 1995 until it finally closed in 2005 .
The residential campus offered a two - year associate degree and mainly served high school graduate children of U.S. military and government personnel stationed in Europe .
UMUC offers courses on over 130 military installations at locations throughout Europe and the Middle East , as well as in Asia .
In 2004 , UMUC shared the ICDE Prize of Excellence from the International Council for Open and Distance Education .
In FY 2007 , UMUC offered onsite classes in 22 countries throughout the world , enrolling 16,908 and 21,554 individual students , respectively , through its Asia and Europe divisions , including the Middle East .
UNIVERSITY NAME
Section::::University name .
UMUC is a college in the traditional American sense of the word , albeit one associated with a university — hence , " University College .
"
The " University of Maryland " prefix indicates the historical entity to which the college belonged originally .
In the university 's name , " University College " represents " the specialized concentration on professional development , " while " University of Maryland " represents the affiliation of the university with the University System of Maryland .
To American ears , the words university and college may seem synonymous , and " University College " would be redundant in its name .
Among the collegiate universities of Europe , however , the practice of giving one college in the university the name " University College " is not uncommon .
In England , for example , one of the 39 colleges of the University of Oxford is called University College , Oxford as well as University College London ( UCL ) , part of the University of London .
When UMUC first opened in 1947 , the school was named College of Special and Continuation Studies to distinguish it as an institution independent from the University of Maryland , College Park .
In 1953 , Raymond Ehrensberger , chancellor of the institution at that time , wanted to change the name to something more meaningful and less cumbersome for people to say and remember .
Early suggestions for the name included College of General Studies , College of Adult Education and University College .
In 1959 , Chancellor Ehrensberger persuaded the University System of Maryland 's Board of Regents to change the name to University of Maryland University College .
The name " University College " was adopted from the British university system to depict an educational institution offering " courses and programs from all academic departments outside the university 's walls and normal class times . "
Therefore , UMUC is not a division of the University of Maryland , College Park , but rather a separate institution within the University System of Maryland .
ACADEMIC AND DEGREE PROGRAMS Section::::Academic and degree programs .
UMUC is one of the largest providers of distance education in the United States .
Courses are delivered in traditional classroom settings , as well as online .
Even before the advent of online education by way of the World Wide Web , UMUC was a distance education pioneer and offered distance learning using its WebTycho interface by way of dial - up access .
UMUC later adopted the use of the Web for connectivity to its online classrooms , as well as using television and correspondence courses to deliver course content .
COLLEGES AND SCHOOLS
* Undergraduate School
* Graduate School UNDERGRADUATE Section::::Colleges and schools .
Section::::Undergraduate .
The Undergraduate School offers 32 bachelor 's degree programs and 48 undergraduate certificates , awarded in business management , computers / information technology , communications , criminal justice / legal studies , and social sciences .
Undergraduate students can earn credit through classroom - based and online courses or through the Cooperative Education and Prior Learning programs .
The Undergraduate program serves as a continuation of the Community Colleges of Maryland and elsewhere .
The Cooperative Education and Prior Learning programs offer an escalated degree option for education and training completed in the workplace or military .
This program provides general education credits that can be applied towards a degree at UMUC .
GRADUATE
Section::::Graduate .
The Graduate School offers 18 master 's degree programs , 38 graduate certificates , and a Doctor of Management .
Most graduate programs are available in both classroom and online formats .
Several master 's degrees are available in an accelerated Executive format or executive online format only .
DEPLOYED LOCATIONS
Section::::Deployed locations .
UMUC offers face - to - face courses and support in Afghanistan and Djibouti , Africa .
UMUC deploys both faculty members and staff members to bases throughout Afghanistan and at Camp Lemonnier in Djibouti to support military personnel on those bases .
UMUC has accompanied military personnel in downrange locations since the Army gave them clearance in 2005 .
AFGHANISTAN Section::::Afghanistan .
Currently , UMUC offers courses and services at the four main Army Education Centers , located in Bagram Air Field , Kabul ( Camp Phoenix ) , Salerno and Kandahar .
Bagram Air Field is the largest site in Afghanistan , with about 275 active enrollments each session , and up to twenty face - to - face courses .
All four sites have collegiate professors and Field Representatives stationed on them to assist soldiers , airmen , Marines , and sailors with UMUC 's programs and courses .
Field Representatives , commonly referred to as Field Reps , deploy with faculty members to help promote and facilitate UMUC 's program at each site .
Field Reps assist students with enrollment , tuition assistance , and textbook sales , as well as guidance and assistance with academic goals and careers .
The Field Rep is also responsible for the local program , to include marketing and maintaining relationships with military personnel .
Faculty members assigned to a downrange location teach service members wherever they may be .
Classroom space is limited in Afghanistan , and faculty members teach their classes anywhere they can , including hangars , unit conference rooms , dining facilities , even chapels and picnic benches .
Faculty members , known and referred to as instructors , also assist the Field Rep located where they are in assisting students and promoting classes and programs .
DJIBOUTI Section::::Djibouti .
Classes are held at Camp Lemonnier on the Naval base in Djibouti City .
Classes are taught by on site faculty members and can also be taught by military personnel who hold Master 's or Doctoral degrees and have prior teaching experience .
A full - time UMUC faculty member also serves as a counselor for students already enrolled in UMUC programs , and to those military members who would like to take classes .
Most students at Lemonnier receive tuition assistance through military programs to support higher education for its members .
CAMPUS AND FACILITIES HEADQUARTERS /
MAIN CAMPUS Section::::Campus and facilities .
Section::::Headquarters / main campus .
The headquarters for UMUC is located in Adelphi , Maryland near the campus of the University of Maryland , College Park .
Until late 2000 , the UMUC headquarters was listed in College Park , Maryland .
In an attempt to establish its own identity as an independent university , UMUC changed its postal address to Adelphi , an unincorporated community that borders College Park .
The address change with the U.S. Postal Service involved no physical move of people and facilities .
The marketing decision to change its postal address was one of many undertaken by UMUC to distinguish the university as one of the largest distance - education centers , with over 90,000 students enrolled worldwide .
ACADEMIC BUILDINGS
* Academic Center at Largo * Student & Faculty Services Center ( SFSC ) ( Headquarters )
* College Park Marriott Section::::Academic buildings .
UMUC purchased for $ 38 million its new headquarters building in Largo , Maryland , which was once the headquarters site for Hechinger and corporate offices of Raytheon .
UMUC retrofitted its new headquarters to meet " green " building requirements for LEED certification .
UMUC followed the same process as it did to achieve LEED certification in 2005 for its Inn & Conference Center , which became the first hotel complex in the United States to achieve certification as a green building .
UMUC began relocating its academic departments and offices to its new Academic Center at Largo in September 2009 , and completed the process in 2010 .
UMUC began offering on campus classes at its new Academic Center in the Spring 2010 semester .
SATELLITE CAMPUSES Section::::Satellite campuses .
UMUC operates satellite campuses across the Baltimore - Washington Metropolitan Area , throughout Maryland , as well as in Europe , the Middle East , and Asia .
BALTIMORE - WASHINGTON METROPOLITAN AREA Section::::Baltimore - Washington metropolitan area .
In the greater Baltimore - Washington Metropolitan Area , daytime , evening and weekend classes are held at 21 locations , including holding many of its classes at the University of Maryland , College Park campus .
The satellite campuses offer varying academic services , including advising , computing , and library facilities ( extensive library services are available to distance education students via the University 's Information and Library Services department ) .
UMUC operates a facility in Dorsey , Maryland adjacent to the Dorsey MARC Train Station .
In partnership with Maryland community colleges and other University System of Maryland institutions , UMUC offers courses and degree programs at several higher education centers throughout the state .
In conjunction with the College of Southern Maryland , it operates the Waldorf Center for Higher Education in Waldorf , Maryland .
A consortium of universities led by Anne Arundel Community College , including UMUC , operates a higher education center adjacent to Arundel Mills mall in Hanover , Maryland .
In addition , the University offers courses at the Universities at Shady Grove and University System of Maryland at Hagerstown , which are part of the University System of Maryland .
GLOBAL LOCATIONS Section::::Global locations .
In Europe , the Middle East , and Asia , UMUC offers courses on military bases for service members , contractors , Federal employees , and their families .
In addition to distance learning via the Web , the university offers on - site , instructor - led classes at 130 overseas US military bases in 22 countries throughout the world .
Overseas instruction is coordinated through its European Division , which covers USCENTCOM installations in the Middle East , and Asian Divisions .
UMUC divisional headquarters are located in Kaiserslautern , Germany ( following the closure of United States Army Garrison Heidelberg ) and on Yokota Air Base , Tokyo , Japan , respectively .
STUDENT PROFILE
Section::::Student profile .
UMUC specializes in distance learning for adult , non - traditional students in Maryland , across the country , and around the world by operating satellite campuses and offering online instruction .
The university educates 50,000 active - duty service members at over 130 military installations .
In FY 2009 , more than 30,000 Marylanders attended UMUC .
The USM Board of Regents predicts UMUC 's enrollment will increase 48 % by 2018 .
About three - quarters of the undergraduate students attend part - time .
Over ninety - two percent of UMUC students are employed full - time .
The majority of undergraduate students are female .
The median age of stateside undergraduate students is 31 .
Almost two - thirds of the graduate MBA students are married , half are female , and over a third are minorities .
Over a third of UMUC 's stateside students were African - American , and this minority group earned over a third of the degrees awarded by the university .
AWARDS
Section::::Awards .
UMUC was ranked # 1 in The Military Times " Best for Vets :
Colleges 2015 " list of top online and nontraditional schools .
Military Times " Best for Vets " is one of the most respected and comprehensive rankings for veterans who are considering higher education .
The publication looked at U.S. Department of Education statistics on student success and academic quality , as well as areas such as university culture , student support , and academic policies in evaluating hundreds of schools .
In 2011 , UMUC received the Institution Award from the Council of College and Military Educators ( CCME ) , a not - for - profit organization founded to promote , encourage and deliver quality education to servicemembers and their families in all branches of the U.S. armed services .
The Institution Award is given to a college or university that supplies quality education programs to the armed services .
CCME selected UMUC due to its dedication , leadership and numerous accomplishments in providing quality , voluntary off - duty education programs .
NOTABLE ALUMNI
ACADEMIA Section::::Notable alumni .
Section::::Academia .
ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS Section::::Business .
GOVERNMENT AND PUBLIC
POLICY
LITERATURE
SPORTS NOTABLE
STUDENTS NOTABLE FACULTY Section::::Notable faculty .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS