HOME INSURANCE BUILDING
The Home Insurance Building was a skyscraper in Chicago , United States , designed by William Le Baron Jenney in 1884 , for the Home Insurance Company in New York .
Completed a year later , the building is generally noted as the first tall building to be supported both inside and outside by a fireproof structural steel and metal frame , which included reinforced concrete .
The building opened in 1885 and was demolished 47 years later in 1931 .
HISTORY Section::::History .
The building was completed in 1885 in Chicago , Illinois , and was the first tall building to use structural steel in its frame , but the majority of its structure was composed of cast and wrought iron .
While the Ditherington Flax Mill was an earlier fireproof - metal - framed building and is sometimes considered to be the first skyscraper , it was only five stories tall .
Because of the building 's unique architecture and weight - bearing frame , it is considered the one of the world 's first skyscrapers .
It had 10 stories and rose to a height of In 1891 , two floors were added .
The architect was William Le Baron Jenney .
The building weighed only one - third as much as a masonry building would have ; city officials were so concerned , they halted construction while they investigated its safety .
The Home Insurance Building is an example of the Chicago School of Architecture .
The building set precedents in skyscraper construction .
Minneapolis architect Leroy Buffington patented the concept of the skeletal - frame tall building in 1888 and proposed " a 28-story ' stratosphere - scraper'—a notion mocked by the architectural press of the time as impractical and ludicrous . "
His proposal nonetheless attracted the attention of the national architectural and building communities to the possibilities of iron skeletal framing , " which in primitive form had been around for decades . "
LOCATION Section::::Location .
The Field Building , now known as the Private Bank Building , built in 1931 , stands on the site .
In 1932 , owners placed a plaque in the southwest section of the lobby reading :
SEE ALSO
* Chicago architecture
REFERENCES
OTHER REFERENCES * 1885
First Skyscraper , Chicago Public Library ( )
* Theodore Turak , William Le Baron Jenney : A Pioneer in Modern Architecture , Ann Arbor , Michigan :
UMI Research Press , 1986
* Carl Condit , The Chicago School of Architecture , The University of Chicago Press , Chicago and London , 1964
EXTERNAL LINKS * Information and Pictures at Emporis ( English )
* Information and Drawings at SkyscraperPage ( English )