FASHION INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
The Fashion Institute of Technology ( FIT ) is a public college in Manhattan , New York .
It is part of the State University of New York ( SUNY ) and focuses on art , business , design , mass communication , and technology connected to the fashion industry .
It was founded in 1944 .
In 1967 , FIT faculty and staff won the first higher education union contract in New York State .
ACADEMICS Section::::Academics .
Seventeen majors are offered through the School of Art and Design , and ten through the Jay and Patty Baker School of Business and Technology leading to the A.A.S. , B.F.A. , or B.S. degrees .
The School of Liberal Arts offers a BS degree in art history and museum professions and a BS degree in film and media .
The School of Graduate Studies offers seven programs leading to the Master of Arts , Master of Fine Arts or Master of Professional Studies degree .
In addition to the degree programs , FIT offers a wide selection of non - credit courses through the Center for Professional Studies .
One of the most popular programs is the " Sew Like a Pro " series , which teaches basic through advanced sewing skills .
FIT is an accredited institutional member of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools , the National Association of Schools of Art and Design , and the Council for Interior Design Accreditation .
FIT publishes research on store branding and store positioning .
CAMPUS Section::::Campus .
The nine - building campus includes classrooms , television and radio studios , labs , design workshops , and multiple exhibition galleries .
The campus has a Barnes & Noble College Bookstore .
The Conference Center at FIT features the John E. Reeves Great Hall , a space suitable for conferences , fashion shows , lectures , and other events .
The campus also has two large theatres : the Haft Auditorium and the Katie Murphy Amphitheatre .
FIT serves over 7,578 full - time and 2,186 part - time students .
ACADEMIC FACILITIES Section::::Academic facilities .
The Fred P. Pomerantz Art and Design Center offers facilities for design studies : photography studios with black - and - white darkrooms , painting rooms , a sculpture studio , a printmaking room , a graphics laboratory , display and exhibit design rooms , life - sketching rooms , and a model - making workshop .
The Shirley Goodman Resource Center houses the Museum at FIT and the Library / Media Services , with references for history , sociology , technology , art , and literature ; international journals and periodicals ; sketchbooks and records donated by designers , manufacturers , and merchants ; slides , tapes , and periodicals ; and a clipping file .
The Gladys Marcus Library provides access to books , periodicals , DVDs and non - print materials , and houses Fashion Institute of Technology Special Collections and College Archives .
FIT also has many computer labs for student use .
The Instructional Media Services Department provides audiovisual and TV support and an in - house TV studio .
Student work is also displayed throughout the campus .
Fashion shows featuring the work of graduating B.F.A. students occur each academic year .
The Design / Research Lighting Laboratory , a development facility for interior design and other academic disciplines , features 400 commercially available lighting fixtures controlled by a computer .
The Annette Green / Fragrance Foundation Laboratory is an environment for the study of fragrance development .
ALUMNI Section::::Alumni .
Well - known alumni of the school include the fashion designers Norma Kamali , Calvin Klein , Michael Kors ( who did not complete his studies there ) , interior designer Scott Salvator and the film director Joel Schumacher .
THE MUSEUM AT FIT Section::::The Museum at FIT .
The Museum at FIT , founded in 1969 as the Design Laboratory , includes collections of clothing , textiles , and accessories .
It began presenting exhibitions in the 1970s , utilizing a collection on long - term loan from the Brooklyn Museum of Art , and then over time acquiring its own collection as well as thousands of textiles and other fashion - related material .
In 1993 , the Board of Trustees of FIT , noting the significance of the Design Laboratory 's collections and exhibitions , changed the institution 's name to The Museum at FIT .
In 2012 , the Museum was awarded accreditation by the American Alliance of Museums .
The Museum 's permanent collection now includes more than 50,000 garments and accessories from the 18th century to the present .
Important designers such as Adrian , Balenciaga , Chanel , and Dior are represented .
The collecting policy of the Museum focuses on aesthetically and historically significant clothing , accessories , textiles and visual materials , with emphasis on contemporary avant - garde fashion .
There are three galleries in the Museum .
The lower level gallery is devoted to special exhibitions .
The Fashion and Textile History Gallery on the main floor features a rotating selection of approximately 200 historically and artistically significant objects from the Museum 's permanent collection .
Gallery FIT , also located on the main floor , is dedicated to student and faculty exhibitions .
Past exhibitions include : London Fashion , which received the first Richard Martin Award for Excellence in Costume Exhibitions from The Costume Society of America ,
The Corset :
Fashioning the Body , and Gothic : Dark Glamour .
Other special exhibitions have included Isabel Toledo : Fashion From the Inside Out , in which the inauguration day ensemble Isabel Toledo designed for Michelle Obama in 2008 was on display , and a look at sustainable fashion with Eco - Fashion : Going Green , an exhibition from 2010 examining the past two centuries of fashion 's good — and bad — environmental and ethical practices .
More than 100,000 people visit The Museum at FIT each year , attending exhibitions , lectures , and other events .
Admission is free to the public .
Fashion historian Valerie Steele became Director of the Museum in 2003 , and has also been named chief curator .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS * Official website