ODE TO BILLIE JOE " Ode to Billie Joe " is a song written and recorded by Bobbie Gentry , a singer - songwriter from Chickasaw County , Mississippi .
The single , released on July 10 , 1967 , was a number - one hit in the US and a big international seller .
Billboard ranked the record as the No . 3 song of the year .
It generated eight Grammy nominations , resulting in three wins for Gentry and one for arranger Jimmie Haskell .
" Ode to Billie Joe " has since made Rolling Stone 's lists of the " 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " and the " 100 Greatest Country Songs of All Time " and Pitchfork 's " 200 Best Songs of the 1960s " .
The song takes the form of a first - person narrative performed over sparse acoustic accompaniment .
It tells of a rural Mississippi family 's reaction to the news of the suicide of Billie Joe McAllister , a local boy to whom the daughter ( and narrator ) is connected .
Hearsay around the " Tallahatchie Bridge " forms the narrative and musical hook .
The song concludes with the demise of the father and the lingering , singular effects of the two deaths on the family .
According to Gentry the song is about indifference and unshared grief .
NARRATIVE
Section::::Narrative .
Gentry 's song takes the form of first - person narrative by the young daughter of a Mississippi Delta family .
It offers fragments of the dinnertime conversation on the day that a local boy , and acquaintance of the narrator , jumped to his death from a nearby bridge , the account interspersed between everyday , polite conversation .
The song 's final verse conveys the passage of events over the following year .
The song begins on June 3 with the narrator , her brother and her father returning from farming chores to the family house for dinner .
After cautioning them about tracking in dirt , Mama says that she " got some news this mornin ' from Choctaw Ridge " that " Billie Joe McAllister jumped off the Tallahatchie Bridge " .
At the dinner table , the father seems unmoved , commenting , " Billie Joe never had a lick o ' sense " , before asking for the biscuits and adding that there 's " five more acres in the lower forty " left to plow .
Her brother is intrigued ( " I saw him at the sawmill yesterday ...
And now you tell me Billie Joe has jumped off the Tallahatchie Bridge " ) , but not enough to be distracted from the midday victuals .
He recalls a prank that he , " Tom " , and Billie Joe played on the narrator .
The only person affected is the narrator : her mother notices her change of mood following the news ( " Child , what 's happened to your appetite ?
I 've been cookin ' all mornin ' and you have n't touched a single bite " ) .
The mother shares the news that a local preacher visited earlier and , as an aside , adds that he mentioned seeing someone looking much like the narrator and Billie Joe " throwin '
somethin' off the Tallahatchie Bridge " .
In the song 's final verse , a year has passed .
The narrator 's brother has married Becky Thompson and has moved to another town ( " bought a store in Tupelo " ) .
The father died from a viral infection and the mother is despondent ( " Mama does n't seem to want to do much of anything " ) .
The narrator likewise remains privately affected : she often visits Choctaw Ridge collecting flowers to " drop them into the muddy water off the Tallahatchie Bridge " .
COMPOSER 'S VIEW
Section::::Composer 's view .
Questions arose among listeners : what did Billie Joe and his girlfriend throw off the Tallahatchie Bridge , and why did Billie Joe commit suicide ?
Speculation ran rampant after the song hit the airwaves .
Gentry said in a November 1967 interview that it was the question most asked of her by everyone she met .
She named flowers , an engagement ring , a draft card , a bottle of LSD pills , and an aborted baby as the most often guessed items .
Although she knew what the item was , she would not reveal it , saying only " Suppose it was a wedding ring .
"
" It 's in there for two reasons , " she said .
" First , it locks up a definite relationship between Billie Joe and the girl telling the story , the girl at the table .
Second , the fact that Billie Joe was seen throwing something off the bridge – no matter what it was – provides a possible motivation as to why he jumped off the bridge the next day . "
When Herman Raucher met Gentry in preparation for writing a novel and screenplay based on the song , she said that she had no idea why Billie Joe killed himself .
Gentry has , however , commented elsewhere on the song , saying that it is about indifference :
The bridge supposedly mentioned in this song collapsed in June 1972 .
It crossed the Tallahatchie River at Money , about ten miles ( 16 km ) north of Greenwood , Mississippi , and has since been rebuilt .
The November 10 , 1967 , issue of Life Magazine contained a photo of Gentry crossing the original bridge .
RECORDING
Section::::Recording .
" Ode to Billie Joe " was originally intended as the B - side of Gentry 's first single recording , a blues number called " Mississippi Delta " , on Capitol Records .
The original recording , with no other musicians backing Gentry 's guitar , had eleven verses lasting seven minutes , telling more of Billie Joe 's story .
The executives realized that this song was a better option for a single , so they cut the length by almost half and re - recorded it with a string orchestra .
The only surviving draft of the seven - minute version of " Ode to Billie Joe " , which consists of two handwritten pages , is located in the archive of the University of Mississippi .
Gentry donated the draft to the University 's Faulkner room in 1973 .
In addition to the iconic lyrics that made the final cut , the unused lyrics may showcase Bobbie Gentry 's mindset and possible answer to mystery of what was thrown from the bridge ; as well as the relationship of the narrator to Billie Joe .
The shorter version left more of the story to the listener 's imagination , and made the single more suitable for radio airplay .
In an interview with Bob Harris broadcast by BBC Radio 2 in Bob Harris Country on April 16 , 2009 , singer Rachel Harrington claimed that Gentry originally wrote 11 verses , but deleted six because a record producer thought the song was too long .
The song is noted for its long descending scale by the strings at the conclusion , suggesting the flowers falling after being dropped off the Tallahatchie Bridge and ending up in the river water below .
ADAPTATIONS Section::::Adaptations .
The song 's popularity proved so enduring that in 1976 , nine years after its release , Warner Bros. commissioned author Herman Raucher to expand and adapt the story as a novel and screenplay , Ode to Billy Joe .
The poster 's tagline , which treats the film as being based on a true story and gives a date of death for Billy ( June 3 , 1953 ) , led many to believe that the song was based on actual events .
In Raucher 's novel and screenplay , Billy Joe kills himself after a drunken homosexual experience , and the object thrown from the bridge is the narrator 's ragdoll .
The film was released in 1976 , directed and produced by Max Baer , Jr , and starring Robby Benson and Glynnis O'Connor .
Only the first , second , and fifth verses were sung by Bobbie Gentry in the film , omitting the third and fourth verses .
In the novel , the ragdoll is the central character 's confidant and advisor .
Tossing it off the bridge symbolizes throwing away her childhood , becoming a self - contained adult .
Billy Joe 's story is analyzed in Professor John Howard 's history of gay Mississippi entitled Men Like That : A Queer Southern History as an archetype of what Howard calls the " gay suicide myth " .
CULTURAL IMPACT Section::::Cultural impact .
Soon after the song 's chart success , the Tallahatchie Bridge was visited by more individuals who wanted to jump off it .
Since the bridge height was only , death or injury was unlikely .
To curb the trend , the Leflore County Board enacted a law fining jumpers $ 100 .
TRANSLATIONS Section::::Translations .
In 1967 American / French singer - songwriter Joe Dassin had much success with a French translation of the song titled " Marie - Jeanne " .
It tells exactly the same story nearly word for word , but the lead characters are reversed .
The narrator is one of the sons of the household , and the character who committed suicide is a girl named Marie - Jeanne Guillaume .
A quick overview of the translated names and places : Bobbie Gentry Joe Dassin June 3 June 4 Billie
Joe McAllister Marie - Jeanne Guillaume Tallahatchie Bridge Pont de la Garonne Choctaw Ridge Bourg - les - Essonnes
Brother Taylor unnamed : just " the sister of that young priest "
Tom
Le Grand Nicolas Becky Thompson
unnamed
Tupelo unnamed Besides the change in character names and locations , the translator adapted mentions of food and crops to be associated with rural France .
For instance , the narrator worked in a vineyard .
The setting is a fictitious small town in southwest France .
The River Garonne is real .
In 1967 , a Swedish translation by Olle Adolphson titled " Jon Andreas visa " was recorded by Siw Malmkvist .
It is faithful to the story in " Ode to Billie Joe " , but has changed the setting to rural Sweden .
The name of Billie Joe was changed to the Swedish name Jon Andreas .
A German translation titled " Billy Joe McAllister " was released in 1978 by Wencke Myhre .
CHART PERFORMANCE
WEEKLY CHARTS
BOBBIE GENTRY Section::::Chart performance .
Section::::Weekly charts .
Section::::Bobbie Gentry . !
Chart ( 1967 ) !
Peakposition Australia ( Go - Set )
Canada RPM Top Singles 1 New Zealand ( Listener ) South Africa ( Springbok Radio )
align="center"11 UK Singles Chart 13 U.S.
Billboard Hot
100 1
U.S. Billboard Easy Listening
7
U.S. Billboard R&B Singles 8
U.S. Billboard Country Singles 17 MARGIE SINGLETON Section::::Margie Singleton . !
Chart ( 1967 ) !
Peakposition
U.S. Billboard Country Singles 39 YEAR - END CHARTS OTHER VERSIONS
Section::::Other versions .
A number of jazz versions have been recorded , including Willis Jackson , Howard Roberts , Cal Tjader , Mel Brown , Jimmy Smith , Buddy Rich , King Curtis , Jaco Pastorius , Dave Bartholomew , Patricia Barber and Jaki Byard .
In a 1967 appearance on , Ella Fitzgerald sang one full verse of the song .
Nancy Wilson covered the song on her 1967 album Welcome to My Love .
The British Rock Band , " Life n Soul " released " Ode to Billy Joe"on Decca , as their first single in 1967 .
It got to number 17 in the British Top Twenty Charts before Bobbie Gentry 's version overtook it .
Lou Donaldson released a version of the song on his 1967 album Mr. Shing - A - Ling on Blue Note Records .
The Detroit Emeralds released a version of the song as the B - side to their 1968 single , " Shades Down " .
A version of the song appears on Tammy Wynette 's 1968 album Take Me to Your World /
I Do n't Wanna Play House , and later on her 1970 Greatest Hits album .
The song was covered by Margret Roadknight , on her 1980 album Out of Fashion ...
Not out of Style .
In 1985 , the new wave band Torch Song released a version of the song on I.R.S. Records .
Danish rock band Sort Sol released a version of the song on their 1987 album Everything That Rises Must Converge Sinéad O'Connor released a version of this song in 1995 .
Patty Smyth covered the song on the Tom Scott ( musician ) and the L. A. Express album " Smoking ' Section " ( 1999 ) .
Melinda Schneider and Beccy Cole covered the song on their album Great Women of Country ( 2014 ) .
The British Rock Band , " Life n Soul " Released " Ode to Billy Joe " as their first single in 1967 .
Though the song was not included on her 2014 album " The River and The Thread , " Rosanne Cash and husband / producer John Leventhal frequently performed the song live on the tour promoting that album , as the album cover featured a photo of Roseanne ( taken by Leventhal ) standing atop the Tallahatchie Bridge looking at the Tallahatchie River .
Lorrie Morgan covered the song at a slower pace for her 2016 album Letting Go ...
Slow .
Morgan says of recording the song with producer Richard Landis , " Richard purposely slowed the record down to make the musical passages through there really feel kind of spooky and eerie .
Everything just felt so swampy and scary .
Everybody has their own interpretation of that song and just what they threw off of the Tallahatchie Bridge . "
In 2017 , Lydia Lunch & Cypress Grove covered the song on their album Under The Covers .
Paula Cole recorded a version on her 2017 Ballads album .
Kathy Mattea covered the song on her 2018 Pretty Bird album .
PARODIES AND ADAPTATIONS Section::::Parodies and adaptations .
Bob Dylan 's " Clothes Line Saga " ( recorded in 1967 ; released on the 1975 album The Basement Tapes ) is a parody of the song .
It mimics the conversational style of " Ode to Billie Joe " with lyrics concentrating on routine household chores .
The shocking event buried in all the mundane details is the revelation that " The Vice - President 's gone mad ! " .
Dylan 's song was originally titled " Answer to ' Ode ' " .
A comedy group named " Slap Happy " recorded " Ode to Billy Joel " in the 1980s , which was featured on the Dr. Demento show .
In this version , the singer is alleged to have jumped from the Verrazano - Narrows Bridge .
Jill Sobule 's album California Years features " Where is Bobbie Gentry ? " which uses the same melody in a lyrical sequel .
The narrator , seeking the reclusive Gentry , claims to be the abandoned lovechild of Gentry and Billie Joe , i.e. , the object thrown off of the bridge .
Sobule would later write the introduction to a book on Gentry .
BIBLIOGRAPHY
REFERENCES
EXTERNAL LINKS
*
The Mystery of Billy Joe
* Included in the Billboard Book of Number One Hits