.357
MAGNUM
The .357 S&W Magnum ( 9×33mmR ) , or simply .357 Magnum , is a revolver cartridge with a .357-inch ( 9.07 mm ) bullet diameter .
It was created by Elmer Keith , Phillip B. Sharpe , and D. B. Wesson of firearms manufacturers Smith & Wesson and Winchester .
It is based upon Smith & Wesson 's earlier .38
Special cartridge .
The .357 Magnum cartridge was introduced in 1934 , and its use has since become widespread .
This cartridge started the " Magnum era " of handgun ammunition .
The .357 Magnum cartridge is notable for its highly effective terminal ballistics when used for hunting or defense .
DESIGN Section::::Design .
The .357 Magnum was collaboratively developed over a period in the early to mid-1930s by a group of individuals in a direct response to Colt 's .38 Super Automatic .
At the time , the .38 Super was the only American pistol cartridge capable of defeating automobile cover and the early ballistic vests that were just beginning to emerge in the post - World War
I " Gangster Era .
" Tests at the time revealed that those vests defeated any handgun bullet traveling less than about .
Colt 's .38 Super Automatic just edged over that velocity and was able to penetrate car doors and vests that bootleggers and gangsters were employing as cover .
Though .38 and .357 would seem to be different diameter chamberings , they are in fact identical , as is the bullet diameter of the .38 Special cartridge .
The .38 Special nomenclature relates to the previous use of heeled bullets ( such as the .38 Short Colt ) , which were the same diameter as the case .
The only external dimensional difference between .38 Special and .357 magnum is the difference in case length ; this was done to prevent accidentally loading a .357 magnum cartridge in to a .38 Special revolver that is n't designed for the .357 magnum 's higher chamber pressure .
Case volume was not a factor in the increase in case length as the .38 Special cartridge was originally a black powder cartridge , and the .357 magnum was developed using only much denser smokeless powder .
Much credit for the .357 's early development is given to hunter and experimenter Elmer Keith .
Keith 's early work in loading the .38 Special to increasingly higher - pressure levels was made possible by the availability of heavy , target - shooting - oriented revolvers like the Smith & Wesson .38 - 44
" Heavy Duty " and " Outdoorsman " ,
.38-caliber revolvers built on .44-caliber frames .
The .38 - 44 HV load used the .38-Special cartridge loaded to a much higher velocity than standard .38-Special ammunition .
The .38 - 44 revolvers were made by using a .44 Special size gun with the barrel bored to accept .357-caliber bullets ( the true bullet diameter of the .38 Special ) and the cylinder bored to accept cartridges ( where the name " 38 Special " originated ) .
Since the frame , cylinder , and barrel were much stronger than the standard .38 Special components , it was capable of withstanding much higher pressures .
The .38 - 44 HV round , while no longer available , was in most cases the equal of the later .357 Magnum , which works at more than double the pressure of standard .38 Special .
The .357 Magnum addresses the safety issues which earlier cartridges had by lengthening the cartridge by approximately , preventing the high - pressure .357 cartridge from chambering ( fitting ) in a firearm designed for the shorter , lower - pressure
.38
Special .
Elmer Keith also contributed the Keith - style bullet , which increased the mass of bullet located outside the cartridge case , while leaving more room inside the case for powder .
The Keith bullet also employed a large , flat meplat , thus enabling rapid energy transfer for greater wounding properties .
At the same time , this bullet design does not deform like a hollow point , and as a result achieves greater penetration .
These characteristics of the Keith bullet make it very suitable for hunting applications as well as for target shooting .
In order to reassert itself as the leading law - enforcement armament provider , Smith & Wesson developed the .357 Magnum , with D. B. Wesson leading the effort within Smith & Wesson , along with considerable technical assistance from Phillip B. Sharpe , a member of the technical division staff of the National Rifle Association .
The new round was developed from Smith & Wesson 's existing .38
Special round .
It used a different powder load , and ultimately the case was extended by .
The case extension was more a matter of safety than of necessity .
Because the .38 Special and the early experimental .357 Magnum cartridges loaded by Keith were identical in physical attributes , it was possible to load an experimental .357 Magnum cartridge into a .38 Special revolver , with potentially disastrous results .
Smith & Wesson 's solution , of extending the case slightly , made it impossible to chamber the magnum - power round in a gun not designed for the additional pressure .
However , although both .38 Special and .357 Magnum will chamber in Colt New Army revolvers in .38 Long Colt , due to the straight - walled chambers , this creates dangerous pressure levels , up to three times what the New Army is designed to withstand .
The choice of bullet for the .357 Magnum cartridge varied during its development .
During the development at Smith & Wesson , the original Keith bullet was modified slightly , to the form of the Sharpe bullet , which itself was based upon the Keith bullet , but which had 5/6 of the bearing surface of the Keith bullet , Keith bullets typically being made oversized and sized down .
Winchester , however , upon experimenting further during the cartridge development , modified the Sharpe - bullet shape slightly , while keeping the Sharpe contour of the bullet .
The final choice of bullet was hence based upon the earlier Keith and Sharpe bullets , while additionally having slight differences from both .
CARTRIDGE DIMENSIONS Section::::Cartridge dimensions .
The .357 Magnum has 1.66 milliliter ( 25.6 grain ) cartridge case capacity .
.357
Magnum maximum C.I.P. cartridge dimensions .
All sizes in millimeters ( mm ) .
The cartridge headspaces on the rim of the case .
The common rifling twist rate for this cartridge is 476 mm ( 1 in 18.74 in ) , six grooves , ø lands = 8.79 mm , ø grooves = 9.02 mm , land width = 2.69 mm and the primer type is small pistol magnum .
According to the C.I.P. rulings , the .357 Magnum cartridge case can handle up to P piezo pressure .
In C.I.P.-regulated countries every pistol cartridge combination has to be proofed at 130 % of this maximum C.I.P. pressure to certify for sale to consumers .
This means that .357 Magnum chambered arms in C.I.P. regulated countries are currently ( 2018 ) proof tested at PE piezo pressure .
PERFORMANCE Section::::Performance .
This cartridge is regarded by many as an excellent hunting , metallic silhouette and self - defense round .
With proper loadings it can also be effective against large or dangerous game , such as bear and ungulates , however many consider the larger magnum calibers to be more appropriate such as the .500 Smith & Wesson , .50 Action Express , .44 Magnum , .454 Casull , .41 Magnum as well as other larger magnum rounds .
Comparatively , the .357 Magnum has less energy than the larger magnum revolver loadings but is smaller in diameter with high velocity allowing for excellent penetration properties .
It is a fine small- and medium - game round and is sufficient to hunt deer at reasonable ranges if suitable loadings are used by a competent marksman .
For further comparison , the .357 Magnum has a higher velocity at than its parent .38
Special has at the muzzle .
The 357 Magnum 's effectiveness on game is similar to that of the .45 Colt , but with a much flatter trajectory due to its higher velocity .
It is a very versatile cartridge , and can be used with success for self - defence , plinking , hunting , or target shooting .
The original 357 load was a 158 grain bullet with an advertised muzzle velocity of 1510 fps .
( Muzzle velocity was taken using a revolver with a fairly long barrel . )
Most of today 's loads are fairly mild when compared to the original load .
Revolvers chambered in .357
Magnum have the significant advantage of also being able to chamber and fire the shorter and less - powerful .38 Special cartridge .
Compared to the .357 Magnum , .38 Special is also lower in cost , recoil , noise , and muzzle flash .
The ability to also fire the .38 Special makes .357 revolvers ideal for novice shooters who are not yet used to firing full - strength .357 loads but do not want the expense of buying a second lower - powered gun to train with .
However , .38 Special ammunition should not generally be used with any .357 semiautomatic handgun or rifle , since such firearms require the larger recoil produced by firing a .357 Magnum round to cycle properly .
It has also become popular as a " dual - use " cartridge in short , light rifles like the American Old West lever - actions .
In a rifle , the bullet will exit the barrel at about , making it far more versatile than the .30 Carbine or the .32 - 20 Winchester .
In the 1930s , it was found to be very effective against steel car doors and ballistic vests , and metal - penetrating rounds were once popular in the United States among highway patrol and other police organizations .
The .357 revolver has been largely replaced by modern , high - capacity semi - automatic pistols for police use , but it is still very popular for backup gun use and among outdoorsmen , security guards , and civilians for hunting , metallic silhouette , target shooting and self - defense .
The 9 mm Winchester Magnum , which is also known as the 9×29 mm , was developed to duplicate the performance of the .357 Magnum in a semi - automatic pistol , as was the 357 SIG cartridge .
Some common performance parameters are shown in the table below for several .357 Magnum loads .
Bullet weights ranging from are common .
The jacketed hollow point loads are popular for self - defence , whereas the heavier loads are commonly used for hunting .
Loads are available with energies from about 400 - 700 foot pounds of muzzle energy and can be selected for various applications based on desired use and risk assessments . !
Manufacturer !
Load !
Mass !
Velocity !
Energy !
Expansion !
Penetration !
PC !
TSC
" Key : Expansion –
expanded bullet diameter ( ballistic gelatin ) Penetration – penetration depth ( ballistic gelatin ) PC – permanent cavity volume ( ballistic gelatin , FBI method )
TSC – temporary stretch cavity volume ( ballistic gelatin )
COMPARISON Section::::Comparison .
The .357 Magnum was a direct competitor with the .38 Super .
In terms of accuracy , the .357 Magnum has at least the same potential for precision shooting as the benchmark .38 Special wadcutter round — indeed , a good .357 Magnum revolver will shoot .38 Special wadcutter ammunition with good results .
It is this accuracy and power , and the versatility of also being capable of using less - expensive , milder .38 Special ammunition , that makes a .357 Magnum revolver an excellent gun for many different disciplines , from 20 yards ' ( 18 m ) precision shooting to long - range falling - plate events .
It is an excellent round for those considering handloading ammunition , as it is economical and consistently performs well .
The .357 Magnum was developed from the earlier .38 Special .
This was possible because the .38 Special was originally designed to use black powder , which requires two to five times as much powder by volume to produce the same velocity with the same bullet as does the much - more - efficient smokeless powder .
Thus the .38 Special has a relatively large bullet case .
The 9×19 mm Parabellum was introduced the same year ( 1902 ) but was originally designed for smokeless powder , and for higher pressures ( ~ ) .
It therefore produces considerably more energy than the .38 , despite its case having less than half the powder capacity .
Many .38 Special loads use the same powders , in similar charge weights , but because the case is so much larger , light - target loads with fast - burning powders may only fill the case perhaps 1/8 full .
Filling the case with slower - burning powders produces much more power , but also much more pressure ; far too much pressure for older , smaller - frame revolvers chambered in .38 Special .
It was to accommodate these high - pressure , high - power loads that the longer .357 Magnum , together with the stronger revolvers designed to handle it , were developed .
The .357 SIG that was developed in 1994 was named " 357 " to highlight its purpose : to duplicate the performance of .357 Magnum loads fired from revolvers , in a cartridge designed to be used in a semi - automatic pistol .
SYNONYMS
* .357
Mag
* .357
S&W Magnum * 9×33mmR ( Europe ) SEE ALSO
* .357 Remington Maximum
* .357
SuperMag
* Smith & Wesson Model 27 , the first revolver chambered for the .357 Magnum * Smith & Wesson .38/44
Outdoorsman , the immediate predecessor to the .357 Magnum , firing high - pressure .38
Special rounds
* Table of handgun and rifle cartridges REFERENCES Section::::References .
Notes
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Ballistics By The Inch .357 magnum results .
* Handloads .
Com – .357
Magnum Stopping Power