STEWIE
GRIFFIN Stewart Gilligan " Stewie " Griffin is a fictional character from the animated television series Family Guy .
He is voiced by series creator Seth MacFarlane and first appeared on television , along with the rest of the Griffin family , in a 15-minute short on December 20 , 1998 .
Stewie was created and designed by MacFarlane himself , who was asked to pitch a pilot to the Fox Broadcasting Company , based on The Life of Larry and Larry & Steve , two shorts made by MacFarlane featuring a middle - aged man named Larry and an intellectual dog , Steve .
After the pilot was given the greenlight , the Griffin family appeared in the episode
" Death Has a Shadow " .
An infant who acts in an adult way , Stewie was initially obsessed with violence and matricide .
He is the youngest child of Peter and Lois Griffin , and the youngest brother of Meg and Chris .
Over the duration of the series , the violent aspects of Stewie 's personality have been toned down , and he has evolved into an eccentric , friendly and flamboyant character .
He has also come to have a very close friendship with the family 's anthropomorphic dog , Brian .
Stewie is considered to be the show 's breakout character .
Wizard magazine rated him the 95th greatest villain of all time .
ROLE IN FAMILY GUY Section::::Role in Family Guy .
Stewie is a one - year - old prodigy who has a very sophisticated psyche and is able to speak very fluently in an upper - class English accent with quite advanced vocabulary .
He reaches his first birthday in the season 1 episode " Chitty Chitty Death Bang " , and has not been referred to as being more than a year old since , despite being seen in many episodes attending pre - school .
Highly literate and able to cite pop culture references that long predate his birth , Stewie is also entranced by Raffi and Teletubbies .
Stewie succumbs to other childish tendencies ; he believes Peter has truly disappeared in a game of Peekaboo , talks to his teddy bear Rupert as if he were alive , is overcome with laughter when Lois blows on his stomach ; and has no idea how to use a toilet .
Stewie also has an extreme dislike for Matthew McConaughey .
MacFarlane has stated that Stewie is meant to represent the general helplessness of an infant through the eyes of an adult .
Per cartoon physics , his ability to move objects of greater weight than himself is not surprising to other characters , nor is his ability to retrieve firearms from hammerspace , neither is his ability to talk .
According to " Do n't Be a Dickens at Christmas " , he understands German ( but can not speak it ) , as his mother is of German descent and the Pewterschmidts ( except Lois ) speak it .
Stewie 's mastery of physics and mechanical engineering are at a level of science fiction .
He has constructed advanced fighter - jets , mind control devices , a weather control device , a teleportation device , robots , clones , a working Transporter device from Star Trek , time machines , a Multiverse Transporter , a shrinking pod , as well as an assortment of guns including lasers , rocket launchers , and crossbows .
Stewie employs these to cope with the stresses of infant life ( such as teething pain , and eating broccoli ) and to murder his mother , Lois , with mixed success at best depending on the objective .
As made clear in the pilot episode , Stewie 's matricidal tendencies are a result of Lois constantly ( and unwittingly ) thwarting his schemes , and so he desires to kill her to carry out his plans without her interference .
In other , later episodes , Stewie engages in other violent or criminal acts , including robbery , aggravated assault , carjacking , loan sharking , forgery , and killing off many minor characters ( with a tank , guns , and other assorted weaponry ) .
Stewie eventually realizes his dreams of matricide and world domination in the sixth season two - part episode " Stewie Kills Lois " and " Lois Kills Stewie " .
The events are reverted in a deus ex machina ending , where most of the story turns out to be a computer simulation .
Because of the rather disastrous ending for himself in the simulation , being shot and killed by Peter , he decides to put aside his plans of matricide and world domination for the time being .
Stewie shows a complete disdain for most people , but does show affection and even rare instances of kindness to his family .
Such moments include his support for Meg ( whom he traditionally calls " Megan " ) as when he chided Brian 's coke - induced hostility to her ( " The Thin White Line " ) , retracted his joke , " I hate you too , bitch " when Meg said " I hate you all " to the family ( " Untitled Griffin Family History " ) , and wiped her tears during a weepy moment .
On a more frequent basis though , Stewie constantly disrespects Meg , as he does with most elders , often being rude to her and subjecting her to the malice of his misbehavior , once even tricking her outside to be attacked by bees on steroids .
He generally thinks of Peter as an inferior regarding him simply as " the fat man " and , at one point , harboring doubts that Peter could possibly be his father ( " " ) but does bond with him over a shared love of practical jokes made at Lois ' expense .
While Stewie generally regards Chris as a stooge , he considers him his only friend aside from Brian , and even helped Chris to dress when he felt too shy to date ( " Extra Large Medium " ) and assists him in dealing with bullies ( " Secondhand Spoke " ) .
In a few episodes , such as " Stewie Loves Lois " , it is shown that Stewie can love his mother .
In that episode , after Lois recovers and repairs a lost Rupert and serves Stewie a meal he likes , he rethinks Lois and accepts her as a loving mother .
When he becomes too dependent on her , she deliberately takes no notice of him ; when he hurts himself , she tries to show notice of him again , he returns to hating her .
However , at the end of the season nine premiere , " And Then There Were Fewer " , when Diane Simmons is about to murder Lois for uncovering her murderous revenge scheme , Stewie secretly saves Lois by killing Diane with a sniper rifle , stating to himself : " If anyone 's going to take that bitch [ Lois ] down , it 's going to be me " , revealing that Stewie continues dreaming about killing Lois .
In the more recent seasons , Stewie has a larger amount of freedom from his parents , usually spending much of his time with Brian .
This extends to the point of him being able to keep pigs from parallel universes ( " Road to the Multiverse " ) or take part in the television series Jolly Farm ( " Go Stewie Go " ) , as compared to the first season , in which his plans were constantly hindered by Lois .
In " The Hand That Rocks the Wheelchair " , Stewie inadvertently clones an evil twin of himself after trying to increase his evil nature .
By the end of the episode , it is suggested that the original Stewie may have been unknowingly killed by Brian ( as he can not tell them apart ) and Stewie turns to the camera with glowing yellow eyes ( reminiscent of Michael Jackson 's " Thriller " ) .
But so far , the Stewie recently seen in " Trading Places " , the follow - up episode , he still seems to have his mostly harmless eccentricity , shown when he asks Brian if he wants to trade places with him for fun .
He also starts to interact with more people despite still having hatred towards many of them , as shown in cutaways in later episodes , and more flamboyant .
Stewie is shown in more recent episodes to be a superfan of Taylor Swift , and even sets her up with Chris as a Prom date .
Stewie has had a few rare interactions with his apparent pedophile neighbor Herbert .
Stewie intensely dislikes him and is one of the few characters fully aware of Herbert 's nature , even calling him a pervert to his face .
All this does , however , is move Herbert into thinking Stewie as " feisty " .
In " Dog Bites Bear " , Stewie ranks the films in The Fast and the Furious franchise as follows .
* Fast & Furious 6 *
*
Fast Five *
* Furious 7 * * ( which he says is controversial )
*
* The Fast and the Furious * *
Fast and Furious
*
* 2
Fast 2
Furious *
This is exactly how writer Cherry Chevapravatdumrong ranks the franchise .
In the season 16 episode " Send in Stewie , Please " , it is revealed that Stewie 's English accent is fake and that he actually has an American Boston accent .
DEVELOPMENT Section::::Development .
Stewie 's voice is provided by Family Guy creator Seth MacFarlane , who also provides the voices of Brian Griffin , Peter Griffin , and Glenn Quagmire as well as numerous other characters .
MacFarlane based Stewie 's accent on the voice of English actor Rex Harrison , particularly on Harrison 's performance in the 1964 musical drama film My Fair Lady .
MacFarlane has stated that his inspiration for the Stewie name was a car owned by Stan Lee .
MacFarlane has also linked Stewie with David Hyde Pierce on more than one occasion , saying he wants Pierce to play Stewie if a live action version of the show would ever be created .
Stewie 's head has the shape of a rugby ball .
In the episode " Stuck Together , Torn Apart " , a cutaway shows Stewie 's head to be normally shaped , until he hits it on the ceiling while bouncing on the bed , and it is elongated into the familiar shape .
Flashbacks in " Chitty Chitty Death Bang " , however , show his head was already shaped like a football when he was born .
AMBIGUOUS SEXUALITY Section::::Ambiguous sexuality .
Stewie 's sexuality , even though he is a one - year - old , is ambiguous .
When the writers began to flesh out Stewie 's character beyond being a generic supervillain in season two , MacFarlane and the writers began to explore the infant 's sexuality with a series of one - off gags , which hinted in " Chick Cancer " and " We Love You , Conrad " that Stewie could be gay .
One example is in the episode , " Brian and Stewie , " where Stewie 's cellphone screensaver is of a muscular man .
Another is where he has a picture of Chris Noth in his wallet and he expresses his wishes to have sexual relations with Brian 's son , Dylan .
When he plays with a baby girl , husband and wife living in a little house in the garden , he discovers she has a boyfriend .
He then burns the house and kills them , then asks Brian why he could n't do the same things with a friend he must with women saying , " Why does n't that exist ? ,
" Brian answers , " That does exist , it 's called ' being gay . '
" Stewie then says , " That 's what gay is ?
Oh yeah , I can totally get into that .
"
In " McStroke " Stewie asks Brian what it is like at Anal Point ; Brian explains , " if you imagine it like a parking space , that you think , ' Gosh , there 's no way I 'm gon na be able to fit in there . '
But then you fold in the side - view mirrors and , sure enough , well , look at that . " to which Stewie responds , " Well , in that scenario , it sounds like I 'd rather be the parking space than the car .
" It is also shown in " Road to the Multiverse " , it shows a part of the multiverse where there are many homosexuals , and Stewie says " Love it . "
Then Brian says " Hate it , " and they leave to another part of the multiverse .
In " Something , Something , Something , Dark Side " , Stewie ( who plays the role of Darth Vader ) threatens to " choke " the person in charge of the tractor beam .
It turns out this person is a muscular man , whom Stewie does " choke " , but not by neck .
The muscular man states " I can breathe just fine ...
You're choking my- , " and is interrupted by Stewie who replies , " I know .
" It is implied that Stewie is " choking " the man 's penis as a means of grasping , suggesting homosexual action on his behalf .
On other occasions , such as when Stewie falls in love with a girl , Janet , in " Dammit Janet !
" , he has been shown to be straight .
In the commentary for , the writers describe how they were going to make Stewie discover
he was gay , but decided to scrap this idea in order to retain Stewie 's sexual ambiguity for writing purposes .
MacFarlane planned for the series ' third season to end with Stewie coming out of the closet after a near - death experience .
The show 's abrupt cancellation caused MacFarlane to abort these plans , and the episode " Queer Is Stewie ? " was actually produced , but never shown .
Since that point , MacFarlane has opted to have Stewie portrayed as sexually ambiguous , as , in his eyes , the flexibility of Stewie 's sexuality allows for much more freedom in terms of writing for the character .
MacFarlane later elaborated : When asked why he made the decision " to take Stewie from homicidal maniac to gay little song boy ?
, " MacFarlane answered : " It was n't a conscious decision .
Characters evolve in certain ways and we found that doing the take - over - the - world thing every week was getting played out and was starting to feel a little dated .
It was weirdly feeling a little ' 90s and believe me , if we were still doing that , the show would be on its last legs .
I only half - jokingly go by the guideline that , if it 's something that might possibly ruin the show , it 's a story we should probably do . "
MacFarlane told Playboy " We had an episode that went all the way to the script phase in which Stewie does come out .
It had to do with the harassment he took from other kids at school .
He ends up going back in time to prevent a passage in Leviticus from being written : ' Thou shalt not lie with mankind as with womankind .
It is an abomination . '
But we decided it 's better to keep it vague , which makes more sense because he 's a one - year - old .
Ultimately , Stewie will be gay or a very unhappy repressed heterosexual .
It also explains why he 's so hellbent on killing his mother , Lois and taking over the world : he has a lot of aggression , which comes from confusion and uncertainty about his orientation . "
RECEPTION Section::::Reception .
MacFarlane has been nominated for two awards for voicing Stewie Griffin .
In 1999 , he won a Primetime Emmy Award in the category Outstanding Voice - Over Performance .
In 2006 , he received an Annie Award in the Best Voice Acting in an Animated Television , Production category , for his voice work in the episode
" Brian the Bachelor " .
In addition , Wizard magazine rated Stewie the 95th greatest villain of all time .
Stewie was also named the best Family Guy character on a list of " Top 25 Family Guy Characters " compiled by IGN .
In 2010 , Entertainment Weekly placed him 45th on its list of the " Top 100 Characters of the Past Twenty Years .
" Gay.com ranked Stewie as the fifteenth gayest cartoon character .
Hal Boedeker , a critic for The Orlando Sentinel , called Stewie " a brilliant creation " .
Stewie ( and Brian ) usually form the center - plot for the show 's highest rated and most critically acclaimed episodes , these being the Road to ... episodes .
In a list of Stewie and Brian 's greatest adventures , five of the Road to ... episodes occupied the top five places .
In 2018 , Watchmojo.com ranked him # 1 on their " Top 10 Family Guy Characters " list .
ALLEGATIONS OF PLAGIARIZED DESIGN Section::::Allegations of plagiarized design .
Several commentators , including its author Chris Ware , have noticed similarities between the title character of the graphic novel Jimmy Corrigan , the Smartest Kid on Earth ( first published in 1995 ) and Stewie .
Ware has remarked that the similarities are " a little too coincidental to be simply , well , coincidental . "
He further stated , " I do n't want a book of seven years ' worth of my stuff to become available and then be accused of being a rip - off of Family Guy . "
20th Century Fox insists that Stewie is an entirely original character .
In a 2003 interview , MacFarlane said that he had never seen the comic strip before , described the similarities as " pretty shocking " and said that he could see how Ware would reach that conclusion . " MERCHANDISE AND APPEARANCES IN OTHER MEDIA Section::::Merchandise and appearances in other media .
Stewie is one of the show 's biggest merchandising icons , and he has been included on Family Guy T - shirts , baseball caps , bumper stickers , cardboard standups , refrigerator magnets , posters , and several other items .
Stewie appears in the Family Guy Video Game ! , where Stewie discovers Bertram attempting to outdo him in taking over the world .
Desperate to stop him , Stewie shrinks himself and makes his way to Bertram 's lair within Peter 's testicles to discover his plan , destroys his henchman cloning lab , and rescues a kidnapped Rupert from a rocket .
He finally confronts Bertram in the park , where Bertram turns himself into a giant .
Stewie Griffin : The Untold Story is a DVD movie about Stewie 's secret and what can possibly be his future .
Stewie is also a playable character ( along with Brian ) in the show 's second video game , , where the pair travel through the multiverse again , in order to defeat Bertram .
Stewie appeared in Bones , eventually revealed to be the result of FBI Special Agent Seeley Booth 's ( David Boreanaz ) brain tumor .
Seth MacFarlane wrote all of Stewie 's dialog for the episode .
The character appeared in a Coca - Cola commercial during Super Bowl XLII , he and Brian appeared in a commercial for Wheat Thins , he presented a musical number at the 59th Primetime Emmy Awards with Brian , and he appeared at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards .
He was on the Late Show with David Letterman to present " Top Ten Things You Do n't Want To Hear From Your Child . "
UNDERSTANDING STEWIE Section::::Understanding Stewie .
There is much debate over which characters in Family Guy can understand Stewie .
In an interview , MacFarlane said that everyone can basically understand him , but they ignore him or just think to themselves "
oh how cute " when he talks .
However at the 2011 ComicCon panel , he compared this to Wile E. Coyote in the old Merrie Melodies cartoons .
MacFarlane went on to say that Brian always hears Stewie , and more recently so does Chris , but the writers usually strive for Peter , Lois , and Meg not to hear him .
Once Stewie leaves the house , the question of who can hear him depends very much on the story .
MacFarlane also states that these rules can be broken for the sake of comedy , so this could change from one episode to another .
In " Inside Family Guy " , Peter apologizes to the family , to which Stewie comments : " Oh that 's nice of you to say " .
Peter replies : " Thank you , Stewie , who I can understand " , referring to the ongoing discussion whether or not family members , other than Brian , are able to understand him .
However , Peter 's response seems to be a part of the episode 's offset setting , where everyone is out of character .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* Stewie Griffin at Fox.com