BUMPER ( CAR )
A bumper is a structure attached to or integrated with the front and rear ends of a motor vehicle , to absorb impact in a minor collision , ideally minimizing repair costs .
Stiff metal bumpers appeared on automobiles as early as 1904 that had a mainly ornamental function .
Numerous developments , improvements in materials and technologies , as well as greater focus on functionality for protecting vehicle components and improving safety have changed bumpers over the years .
Bumpers ideally minimize height mismatches between vehicles and protect pedestrians from injury .
Regulatory measures have been enacted to reduce vehicle repair costs , and more recently impact on pedestrians .
CONSTRUCTION Section::::Construction .
Bumpers were at first just rigid metal bars .
The first bumper appeared on a vehicle in 1897 , and it was installed by Nesselsdorfer Wagenbau - Fabriksgesellschaft , a Czech carmaker .
The construction of these bumpers was not reliable as they featured only a cosmetic function ..
Early car owners had the front spring hanger bolt replaced with ones long enough to be able to attach a metal bar .
G.D. Fisher patented a bumper bracket to simplify the attachment of the accessory .
The first bumper designed to absorb impacts appeared in 1901 .
It was made of rubber and Frederick Simms gained patent for this invention in 1905 .
Bumpers were added by automakers in the mid-1910s , but consisted a strip of steel across the front and back .
Often treated as an optional accessory , bumpers became more and more common in the 1920s as automobile designers made them more complex and substantial .
Over the next decades , chrome plated bumpers became heavy , elaborative , and increasingly decorative until the 1950s when US automakers began establishing new bumper trends and brand specific designs .
The 1960s saw the use of lighter chrome plated blade - like bumpers with a painted metal valance filling the space below it .
Multi - piece construction became the norm as automakers incorporated grilles , lighting , and even rear exhaust into the bumpers .
On the 1968 Pontiac GTO , General Motors incorporated an " Endura " body - colored plastic front bumper designed to absorb low - speed impact without permanent deformation .
It was featured in a TV advertisement with John DeLorean hitting the bumper with a sledgehammer and no damage resulted .
Similar elastomeric bumpers were available on the front and rear of the 1970 - 71 Plymouth Barracuda .
In 1971 , Renault introduced a plastic bumper ( sheet moulding compound ) on the Renault 5 .
Current design practice is for the bumper structure on modern automobiles to consist of a plastic cover over a reinforcement bar made of steel , aluminum , fiberglass composite , or plastic .
Bumpers of most modern automobiles have been made of a combination of polycarbonate ( PC ) and Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene ( ABS ) called PC / ABS .
PHYSICS Section::::Physics .
Bumpers offer protection to other vehicle components by dissipating the kinetic energy generated by an impact .
This energy is a function of vehicle mass and velocity squared .
The kinetic energy is equal to 1/2 the product of the mass and the square of the speed .
In formula form : A bumper that protects vehicle components from damage at 5 miles per hour must be four times stronger than a bumper that protects at 2.5 miles per hour , with the collision energy dissipation concentrated at the extreme front and rear of the vehicle .
Small increases in bumper protection can lead to weight gain and loss of fuel efficiency .
Until 1959 , such rigidity was seen as beneficial to occupant safety among automotive engineers .
Modern theories of vehicle crashworthiness point in the opposite direction , towards vehicles that crumple progressively .
A completely rigid vehicle might have excellent bumper protection for vehicle components , but would offer poor occupant safety .
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY Section::::Pedestrian safety .
Bumpers are increasingly being designed to mitigate injury to pedestrians struck by cars , such as through the use of bumper covers made of flexible materials .
Front bumpers , especially , have been lowered and made of softer materials , such as foams and crushable plastics , to reduce the severity of impact on legs .
HEIGHT MISMATCHES
Section::::Height mismatches .
For passenger cars , the height and placement of bumpers is legally specified under both US and EU regulations .
Bumpers do not protect against moderate speed collisions , because during emergency braking , suspension changes the pitch of each vehicle , so bumpers can bypass each other when the vehicles collide .
Preventing override and underride can be accomplished by extremely tall bumper surfaces .
Active suspension is another solution to keeping the vehicle level .
Bumper height from the roadway surface is important in engaging other protective systems .
Airbag deployment sensors typically do not trigger until contact with an obstruction , and it is important that front bumpers be the first parts of a vehicle to make contact in the event of a frontal collision , to leave sufficient time to inflate the protective cushions .
Energy - absorbing crush zones are completely ineffective if they are physically bypassed ; an extreme example of this occurs when the elevated platform of a tractor - trailer completely misses the front bumper of a passenger car , and first contact is with the glass windshield of the passenger compartment .
TRUCK VS .
CAR Section::::Truck vs. car .
Underride collisions , in which a smaller vehicle such as a passenger sedan slides under a larger vehicle such as a tractor - trailer often result in severe injuries or fatalities .
The platform bed of a typical tractor - trailer is at the head height of seated adults in a typical passenger car , and can cause severe head trauma in even a moderate - speed collision .
Around 500 people are killed this way in the United States annually .
Following the 1967 death of actress Jayne Mansfield in an auto / truck accident , the US government agency NHTSA recommended requiring a rear underride guard , also known as a " Mansfield bar " , an " ICC bar " , or a " DOT ( Department of Transportation ) bumper " .
They are required to be not more than from the road .
The trucking industry has been slow to upgrade this safety feature , and there are no requirements to repair ICC bars damaged in service .
However , in 1996 NHTSA upgraded the requirements for the rear underride prevention structure on truck trailers , and Transport Canada went further with an even more stringent requirement for energy - absorbing rear underride guards , and in July 2015 NHTSA issued a proposal to upgrade the US performance requirements for underride guards .
Many European nations have also required side underride guards , to mitigate against lethal collisions where the car impacts the truck from the side .
A variety of different types of side underride guards of this nature are in use in Japan , the US , and Canada .
However , they are not required in the United States .
SUV VS .
CAR Section::::SUV vs. car .
Modest mismatches between SUV bumper heights and passenger car side door protection have allowed serious injuries at relatively low speeds .
Unlike trucks , SUVs with bumpers more than from the road are legal in the United States , as are vehicles with the fuel tank located behind the rear axle ( see Ford Pinto ) .
In the United States , NHTSA is studying how to address this issue .
Beyond lethal interactions , repair costs of passenger car / SUV collisions can also be significant due to the height mismatch .
This mismatch can result in vehicles being so severely damaged that they are inoperable after low speed collisions .
REGULATION Section::::Regulation .
In most jurisdictions , bumpers are legally required on all vehicles .
Regulations for automobile bumpers have been implemented for two reasons – to allow the car to sustain a low - speed impact without damage to the vehicle 's safety systems , and to protect pedestrians from injury .
These requirements are in conflict : bumpers that withstand impact well and minimize repair costs tend to injure pedestrians more , while pedestrian - friendly bumpers tend to have higher repair costs .
Although a vehicle 's bumper systems are designed to absorb the energy of low - speed collisions and help protect the car 's safety and other expensive components located nearby , most bumpers are designed to meet only the minimum regulatory standards .
INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS Section::::International standards .
International safety regulations , originally devised as European standards under the auspices of the United Nations , have now been adopted by most countries outside North America .
These specify that a car 's safety systems must still function normally after a straight - on pendulum or moving - barrier impact of to the front and the rear , and to the front and rear corners of at above the ground with the vehicle loaded or unloaded .
PEDESTRIAN SAFETY Section::::Pedestrian safety .
European countries have implemented regulations to address the issue of 270,000 deaths annually in worldwide pedestrian / auto accidents .
BULL BARS Section::::Bull bars .
Specialized bumpers , known as " bull bars " or " roo bars " , protect vehicles in rural environments from collisions with large animals .
However , studies have shown that such bars increase the threat of death and serious injury to pedestrians in urban environments , because the bull bar is rigid and transmits all force of a collision to the pedestrian , unlike a bumper which absorbs some force and crumples .
In the European Union , the sale of rigid metal bull bars which do not comply with the relevant pedestrian - protection safety standards has been banned .
OFF - ROAD BUMPERS Section::::Off - road bumpers .
Off - road vehicles often utilize aftermarket off - road bumpers made of heavy gauge metal to improve clearance ( height above terrain ) , maximize departure angles , clear larger tires , and ensure additional protection .
Similar or identical to bull bars , off - road bumpers feature a rigid construction and do not absorb ( by plastic deformation )
any energy in a collision , which is more dangerous for pedestrians than factory plastic bumpers .
The legality of the aftermarket off - road bumpers varies significantly from country to country ( from state to state in the USA ) .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
The United States has focused on protecting consumers from repair costs , using government legislation .
FIRST STANDARDS 1971 Section::::First standards 1971 .
colspan="2"Front and rear bumpers on Chrysler A platform cars before ( left , 1971 ) and after ( right , 1974 )
the US 5-mph bumper standard took effect .
The 1974 bumpers are larger , heavier , and mounted farther away from the body , and they no longer contain the taillamps .
In 1971 , the US National Highway Traffic Safety Administration ( NHTSA ) issued the country 's first regulation applicable to passenger car bumpers .
Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No . 215 ( FMVSS 215 ) , " Exterior Protection , " took effect on 1 September 1972—when most automakers would begin producing their model year 1973 vehicles .
The standard prohibited functional damage to specified safety - related components such as headlamps and fuel system components when the vehicle is subjected to barrier crash tests at for front and for rear bumper systems .
The requirements effectively eliminated automobile bumpers designs that featured integral automotive lighting components such as tail lamps .
In October 1972 , the US Congress enacted the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Saving Act ( MVICS ) , which required NHTSA to issue a bumper standard that yields the " maximum feasible reduction of cost to the public and to the consumer " .
Factors considered included the costs and benefits of implementation , the standard 's effect on insurance costs and legal fees , savings in consumer time and inconvenience , as well as health and safety considerations .
The 1973 model year passenger cars sold in the US used a variety designs .
They ranged from non - dynamic versions with solid rubber guards , to " recoverable " designs with oil and nitrogen filled telescoping shock - absorbers .
The standards were further tightened for the 1974 model year passenger cars , with standardized height front and rear bumpers that could take angle impacts at with no damage to the car 's lights , safety equipment , and engine .
There was no provision in the law for consumers to ' opt - out ' of this protection .
REGULATORY EFFECT ON DESIGN
Section::::Regulatory effect on design .
Cars for the US market were equipped with bulky , massive , heavy , protruding bumpers to comply with the 5-mile - per - hour bumper standard in effect from 1973 to 1982 .
This often meant additional overall vehicle length , as well as new front and rear designs to incorporate the stronger energy absorbing bumpers .
Passenger cars featured gap - concealing flexible filler panels between the bumpers and the car 's bodywork causing them to have a " massive , blockish look " .
A notable exception that year was the new AMC Matador coupe that featured " free standing " bumpers with rubber gaiters alone to conceal the retractable shock absorbers .
colspan="2"US ( left ) and rest - of - world ( right ) colspan="2"Front bumpers on Mercedes - Benz W116 ( top ) , BMW E28 5 Series ( middle ) , Lamborghini Countach ( bottom ) :
The US bumpers are more massive and protrude farther from the bodywork .
All ' domestic ' cars had this feature , and imported vehicles were also required to comply .
With very few exceptions , such as Volvo 240 and Rolls - Royce Silver Shadow , foreign manufacturers only sold this feature in markets that mandated it , the U.S. and Canada , so ' rest - of - the - world ' models had a notably distinct appearance .
US bumper height requirements effectively made some models , such as the Citroën SM , suddenly ineligible for importation to the United States .
Unlike international safety regulations , U.S. regulations were written without provision for hydropneumatic suspension .
ZERO - DAMAGE STANDARDS 1976 Section::::Zero - damage standards 1976 .
The requirements promulgated under MVICS were consolidated with the requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 215 ( FMVSS 215 , " Exterior Protection of Vehicles " ) and promulgated in March 1976 .
This new bumper standard was placed in the United States Code of Federal Regulations at 49 CFR 581 , separate from the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards at 49CFR571 .
The new requirements , applicable to 1979-model year passenger cars , were called the " Phase I " standard .
At the same time , a zero - damage requirement , " Phase II " , was enacted for bumper systems on 1980 and newer cars .
The most rigorous requirements applied to 1980 through 1982 model vehicles ; front and rear barrier and pendulum crash tests were required , and no damage was allowed to the bumper beyond a dent and displacement from the bumper 's original position .
All - wheel - drive " cross - over " cars such as the AMC Eagle were classified as multi - purpose vehicle or trucks , and thus exempt from the passenger car bumper standards .
STRINGENCY REDUCED IN 1982
Section::::Stringency reduced in 1982 .
The recently elected Reagan administration had pledged to use cost – benefit analysis to reduce regulatory burdens on industry , which impacted this standard .
As discussed in detail under Physics , prior to 1959 , people believed the stronger the structure , including the bumpers , the safer the car .
Later analysis led to the understanding of crumple zones , rather than rigid construction that proved deadly to passengers , because the force from impact went straight inside the vehicle and onto the passenger .
NHTSA amended the bumper standard in May 1982 , halving the front and rear crash test speeds for 1983 and newer car bumpers from to , and the corner crash test speeds from to .
In addition , the zero - damage Phase II requirement was rolled back to the damage allowances of Phase I. At the same time , a passenger car bumper height requirements of was established for passenger cars .
NHTSA evaluated the results of its change in 1987 , noting it resulted in lower weight and manufacturing costs , offset by higher repair costs .
Despite these findings , consumer and insurance groups both decried the weakened bumper standard .
They presented the argument that the 1982 standard increased overall consumer costs without any attendant benefits except to automakers .
In 1986 , Consumers Union petitioned NHTSA to return to the Phase II standard and disclose bumper strength information to consumers .
In 1990 , NHTSA rejected that petition .
A market failure is created when consumers do not have the information to choose autos based on better / worse repair costs .
In the United States , this gap is helped by the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety , which subjects vehicles to low speed barrier tests ( ) and publicizes the repair costs .
Car makers that do well in these tests will publicize them .
As an example , in 1990 the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety conducted four crash tests on three different - year examples of the Plymouth Horizon .
The results illustrated the effect of the changes to the US bumper regulations ( repair costs quoted in 1990 United States dollars ) : * 1983 Horizon with Phase - II 5-mph bumpers : $ 287
* 1983 Horizon with Phase -
I 2.5-mph bumpers : $ 918 * 1990 Horizon : $ 1,476 CANADA Section::::Canada .
Canada 's bumper standard , first enacted at the same time as that of the United States , was generally similar to the US regulation .
Canada mirrored U.S. design legislation in this area , but did not revise it to based on the 1982 Cost Benefit Analysis .
Some automakers chose to provide stronger Canadian - specification bumpers throughout the North American market , while others chose to provide weaker bumpers in the US market , another hindrance to private importation of vehicles between the US and Canada .
In early 2009 , Canada 's regulation shifted to harmonize with US Federal standards and international ECE regulations .
As in the U.S. , consumer protection groups were upset with the change , while Canadian regulators maintained that the test speed is used worldwide and is more compatible with improved pedestrian protection in vehicle - pedestrian crashes .
SEE ALSO * Automobile safety
* Bumper sticker * Cost – benefit analysis
* Crashworthiness
* Dashpot * Government failure
* Headstock * Market failure
REFERENCES FURTHER READING