TAG ( GAME )
Tag is a playground game that involves two or more players chasing other players in an attempt to " tag " or touch them , usually with their hands .
There are many variations ; most forms have no teams , scores , or equipment .
Usually when a person is tagged , the tagger says , " Tag , you 're ' it ' ! " .
BASIC RULES
Section::::Basic rules .
A group of players ( two or more ) decide who is going to be " it " , often using a counting - out game such as eeny , meeny , miny , moe .
The player selected to be " it " then chases the others , attempting to get close enough to " tag " one of them ( touching them with a hand ) while the others try to escape .
A tag makes the tagged player " it " .
In some variations , the previous " it " is no longer " it " and the game can continue indefinitely , while in others , both players remain " it " and the game ends when all players have become " it " .
There are many variants which modify the rules for team play , or place restrictions on tagged players ' behavior .
A simple variation makes tag an elimination game , so those tagged drop out of play .
Some variants have a rule preventing a player from tagging the person who has just tagged them ( known as " no tag - backs " , " no returns " , or " ca n't tag your master " ) .
BASE AND TRUCE
TERMS Section::::Base and truce terms .
Players may be safe from being tagged under certain circumstances : if they are within a pre - determined area , off the ground , or when touching a particular structure .
Traditional variants are Wood tag , Iron tag , and Stone tag , when a player is safe when touching the named material .
This safe zone has been called a " gool " , " ghoul " , or " Dell " , probably a corruption of " goal " .
The term " gool " was first recorded in print in Massachusetts in the 1870s , and is common in the northern states of the US .
Variants include gould , goul , and ghoul , and alternatives include base and home .
In the United Kingdom , the base is frequently known as " den " .
In much of Canada and parts of the northern United States , the state or home base of being immune from tagging is known as " times " or " T. "
Players may also make themselves safe from being tagged by the use of a truce term .
When playing the game tag , some may cross fingers as to let others know that they , the player , can not be it .
Yet , this rule may only come into play if the crossing of fingers is shown , if the fingers are not shown to the person that is it , then the crossing does not count .
BANS AND RESTRICTIONS Section::::Bans and restrictions .
Tag and other chasing games have been banned in some schools in the United States due to concerns about injuries , complaints from children that it can lead to harassment and bullying , and that there is an aspect to the game that possesses an unhealthily predatory element to its nature .
In 2008 , a 10-year - old boy in Omaha , Nebraska died from brain injuries suffered from falling onto a metal pole while playing tag .
A school dinner lady in Dorset was left partially paralyzed after a boy playing tag ran into her in 2004 ; her claim for damage was rejected by three Court of Appeal judges , who ruled that the boy had not broken any school rules by playing the game .
A principal who banned tag in her school criticized the game for creating a " self - esteem issue " in nominating one child as a victim , and noted that the oldest and biggest children usually dominated the game .
A dislike of elimination games is another reason for banning tag .
In some schools only supervised tag is allowed , sometimes with a type of tagging called butterfly tagging — a light tap on the shoulders , arms or upper back .
The president of the US National Association for Sport and Physical Education said that " Tag games are not inherently bad ...
teachers must modify rules , select appropriate boundaries and equipment , and make sure pupils are safe .
Teachers should emphasize tag games that develop self - improvement , participation , fair play , and cooperation . "
VARIANTS BRITISH BULLDOGS Section::::Variants .
Section::::British bulldogs .
The game " British bulldogs " ( sometimes also called Bullrush , Cat and Mouse , Red Rover , Cats and Mice , Sharks and Minnows , Spiders and Flies , or Octopus ) is mainly played in the United Kingdom , Australia , New Zealand , Canada , and other Commonwealth countries .
It is banned from many schools .
One or two players start as the " bulldogs " , who stand in the middle of the play area , while the other players stand at one end of the area .
The aim is to run from one end of the area to the other without being caught by the bulldogs .
When a player is caught , they become a bulldog themselves .
The winner is the last player " free " .
CHAIN TAG Section::::Chain tag .
This is a variant of Build Ups in which each person to be caught joins hands with " it , " and the chain thus formed must chase the others as a pair .
As more people are caught they too join hands with the " it " players , forming a lengthening chain .
This variation is also called Blob , or in some places , Gargon .
Only those at the ends of the chain are able to catch someone , as they are the only ones with a free hand .
A variant has chains of four splitting in two .
DUCK , DUCK , GOOSE Section::::Duck , duck , goose .
In this game , usually played by young children , the players sit in a circle facing inward .
One player , the " picker " or " fox " , walks around tapping or pointing to each player in turn , calling each of them a " duck " , until finally announcing one of his choosing to be the " goose " .
The goose then rises and runs around the circle in the same direction as the picker , attempting to return to their seat before the " picker " can sit back down in the vacated spot .
In Minnesota , this game is referred to as " Duck , duck , gray duck " .
FREEZE TAG Section::::Freeze tag .
Also known as Stuck in the Mud , Scarecrow , Sticky - Glue , Zombie Tag , Ice - and - Water ( in Asia ) or Ice - and - Fire ( in Malaysia ) , players who are tagged are " stuck in the mud " or " frozen " and must stand in place with their arms stretched out until they are unfrozen .
An unstuck player can perform an action to unfreeze them , such as tagging them , crawling between their legs , or " flushing " them by hitting their outstretched hand .
The last person standing , for most games , is usually the next person who will be it .
KISS CHASE Section::::Kiss chase .
Kiss chase , also referred to as Catch and Kiss , is a tag variant in which tagging is performed by kissing .
All members of one gender are " it " at once and chase players of the opposite sex until everyone is caught , then the roles are reversed .
A variant is that the player chosen to be " it " will , with assistance from players of the same gender , chase all members of the opposite sex and kiss one of them , who is then " it " on behalf of the other gender .
LAST TAG Section::::Last tag .
Last tag was played in the early 20th century , when it was a way to say goodbye when leaving school for home .
A player tags another and makes them " it " before leaving on their way home .
There is no tagging back .
It was a point of honor not to be left with the last tag .
If a player is unable to tag anyone by the end of the game , they became " it " the next day .
OCTOPUS
TAG Section::::Octopus tag .
Octopus tag is a mix between Red Rover and tag .
"
It , " or " octopus , " attempts to tag the other players .
The playing field is known as the ocean .
The players , or " fish , " line up along one side of the ocean .
When the Octopus calls out , " Come fishies come !
" , they try to run to the other side without getting tagged .
In a variation , once the fish run to the other side without getting tagged , the game pauses until the octopus starts it again .
Upon getting tagged the fish become " seaweed " and must freeze or sit where they were tagged , but they can wave their arms around and assist the Octopus in tagging other fish within their reach .
The last fish to be tagged becomes the next Octopus .
This game can also be played in the water and then it is called Sharks and Minnows .
TEAM TAG COPS AND ROBBERS Section::::Team tag . Section::::Cops and robbers .
Cops and robbers , sometimes called " jail " , " jail tag " , " team tag " , " chase " , " police and thief " , " prisoner 's base " " jailbreak " , " releaseo " or " manhunt " , has players split into two teams : cops and robbers .
A. M. Burrage calls this version of the game " Smee " in his 1931 ghost story of the same name .
The cops , who are in pursuit of robbers ( the team being chased ) , arrest the robbers by tagging and putting them in jail .
Robbers can stage a jailbreak by tagging one of the prisoners without getting tagged themselves .
The game ends if all the robbers are in jail .
In a variant , the robbers have five minutes to hide before being hunted , and only one jailbreak may be allowed per robber .
ZOMBIE TAG Section::::Zombie tag .
Humans vs. Zombies is a survival game of tag , where " human " players fight off increasingly large numbers of " zombies " ; if a human is " turned " ( i.e. tagged ) , then that player becomes a zombie in turn .
At the game 's beginning , there are only one or two zombies ; the zombies multiply by tagging humans , turning them into zombies after a period of one hour .
Humans can defend themselves from zombies by using socks , marshmallows , Nerf Blasters or any other toys deemed safe and appropriate ; if a zombie is hit by one of these methods of defense , they are stunned ( not allowed to interact with the game in any way ) for 15 seconds .
The goal of the zombies is to turn all the humans ; the humans , meanwhile , must outlast all the zombies .
MANHUNT
Section::::Manhunt .
Manhunt is a mixture of hide and seek and tag , often played during the night .
One person is " it " , while the other players have to hide .
Then , the person who is " it " tries to find and tag them .
The game is over when all players are out .
Manhunt is sometimes played in teams .
In one variant there is a home base in which a player is safe .
That version ends when all players who are not safe are out .
PRISONER 'S BASE Section::::Prisoner 's Base .
In Prisoner 's Base , each team starts in a chain , holding hands , with one end of the chain touching the base .
The end two players on each team break from the chain and try to tag each other , taking them to their base if they do .
The end pair progressively break from the chain and join the tagging .
As with Cops and Robbers , prisoners can be freed by tagging them in the base .
The game is thought to date back to the Renaissance period , and may be inspired by the act of bride kidnapping .
A game of Prisoner 's Base was played by members of Lewis & Clark 's Corps of Discovery against a group of Nez Perce .
WHAT 'S THE TIME , MR WOLF ?
Section::::What 's the time , Mr Wolf ?
One player is chosen to be Mr Wolf and stands facing away from the other players at the opposite end of the playing field .
All players except Mr Wolf chant in unison " What 's the time , Mr Wolf ?
" , and Mr Wolf will answer in one of two ways :
Mr Wolf may call a time - usually an hour ending in " o'clock " .
The other players take that many steps towards Mr Wolf .
They then ask the question again .
Alternatively Mr Wolf may call " Dinner time ! " , and turn and chase the other players back to their starting point .
If Mr Wolf tags a player , that player becomes Mr Wolf for the next round .
RINGOLEVIO Section::::Ringolevio .
In Ringolevio , there are two teams .
In one version , one team goes off and hides .
The other team counts to a number such as 30 and then goes looking for them .
In another version , each team has its own " jail " , a park bench or other defendable area .
The game goes on until all of one team is in jail .
In many ways , Ringolevio is similar to Prisoner 's Base .
VARIANTS REQUIRING EQUIPMENT
Section::::Variants requiring equipment .
Some variants of tag use equipment such as balls , paintball guns , or even flashlights to replace tagging by hand .
BLIND MAN 'S BLUFF Section::::Blind man 's bluff .
Blind man 's bluff , also known as Mr. Blind Man , is a version of tag in which one player , designated as " it " , is blindfolded and attempts to tag the other players , while the other players try to avoid them .
COMPUTER
TAG Section::::Computer tag .
Research students developed a version of tag played using handheld WiFi - enabled computers with GPS .
FLASHLIGHT TAG Section::::Flashlight tag .
Flashlight tag , also called " Army tag " , " Spotlight " , and " German Spotlight " , is played at night .
Rather than physically tagging , the " it " player tags by shining a flashlight beam on other players .
FOX AND GEESE Section::::Fox and geese .
A traditional type of line tag , sometimes played in snow , is Fox and geese .
The fox starts at the centre of a spoked wheel , and the geese flee from the fox along the spokes and around the wheel .
Geese that are tagged become foxes .
The intersections of the spokes with the wheel are safe zones .
KICK
THE CAN Section::::Kick the can .
One person is " it " and a can is placed in an open space .
The other players run off and hide , then it tries to find and tag each of them .
Tagged players are sent to jail .
Any player who has not been caught can kick the can , setting the other players free from jail .
LASER TAG Section::::Laser tag .
Laser tag is similar to flashlight tag , but using special equipment to avoid the inevitable arguments that arise about whether one was actually tagged .
Players carry guns that emit beams of light and wear electronic equipment that can detect the beams and register being hit .
The equipment often has built - in scoring systems and various penalties for taking hits .
Pay - per - game laser tag facilities are common in North America .
MARCO POLO Section::::Marco Polo .
An aquatic American variant of blind man 's bluff , most commonly played in a swimming pool , although it may also be played while swimming in shallow natural bodies of water ( typically the areas near the shores of oceans , seas , and lakes ) .
The players may be swimming , treading water , or walking on the bottom of the pool or body of water .
The person designated " it " is required to close their eyes , and shouts " Marco ! "
at regular intervals ; the other players must shout " Polo ! "
in response .
" It " must use sound localization to find one of the other players and tag them .
The tagged player then generally becomes " it , " and the process repeats .
MUCKLE Section::::Muckle .
Muckle ( sometimes called " muckle the man with the ball " , " kill - the - guy - with - the - ball " , " kill the carrier " , among other names ) is the reverse of regular tag ; all of the other players chase " it " .
This player is denoted by carrying a ball ( usually a football ) .
When they are caught , they are tackled , or " muckled " .
Whoever retrieves the ball first or whoever attacks the one who is it then becomes it .
Sometimes the last player arriving to tackle the former ball carrier is the next person to be it ; in other variations the player with the ball throws the ball up in the air , where it is caught by another player who becomes it .
PAINTBALL Section::::Paintball .
Paintball is a sport in which players use compressed air guns ( called paintball markers ) to tag other players with paint - filled pellets .
Games are usually played on commercial fields with a strict set of safety and gameplay rules .
SOCK TAG Section::::Sock tag .
A tube sock is filled with a small amount of flour in the toe of the sock ; the sock is then gripped by the leg hole and wielded as a flail .
Striking a player with any part of the sock counts as a tag . SPUD Section::::Spud .
Spud is a tag variant that is best played in large , open areas .
Players begin each round in a central location .
" it " then throws a ball high into the air .
The other players run but must stop as soon as " it " catches the ball and shouts " Spud ! "
It may then take three large steps toward the player of his choosing before throwing the ball at that player .
If the ball hits the target , that player becomes it , and the game starts over .
TEAM
TAG SPORTS Section::::Team tag sports .
In South Asia , two sports are variants of tag , played at the team level , sometimes internationally .
In Kabaddi , raiders cross a dividing line to try to tag defenders , while continuously chanting " kabbadi " on one breath while over the line .
It is included in the Asian Games and even has a world championship , being played throughout India , Pakistan , Bangladesh , Sri Lanka , and Iran , as well as in Indian communities in Canada , Great Britain , the U.S. , Australia , New Zealand , and the Netherlands .
It was also demonstrated in 1936 Berlin Olympics .
The other tag sport is called Kho Kho .
Tag or flag rugby is a non - contact variation in which each player wears a belt that has two velcro tags attached to it , or shorts with velcro patches .
The mode of play is also similar to rugby league with attacking players attempting to dodge , evade and pass a rugby ball while defenders attempt to prevent them scoring by tagging - pulling a velcro attached tag from the ball carrier .
However , the " tag " in " tag rugby " is derived from the " tags " that the players wear and the children 's game of tag more closely resembles touch rugby whereby a touch replaces a tackle .
SEE ALSO * Assassin ( game )
* Flag football REFERENCES