CHARD Chard or Swiss chard ( Beta vulgaris subsp .
vulgaris , Cicla - Group and Flavescens - Group ) ( ) is a green leafy vegetable .
In the cultivars of the Flavescens - Group , the leaf stalks are large and often prepared separately from the leaf blade .
The leaf blade can be green or reddish in color ; the leaf stalks are usually white , yellow , or red .
Chard , like other green leafy vegetables , has highly nutritious leaves , making it a popular component of healthy diets .
Chard has been used in cooking for centuries , but because of its similarity to beets and vegetables like cardoon , the common names that cooks and cultures have used for chard may be confusing .
CLASSIFICATION Section::::Classification .
Chard was first described in 1753 by Carl von Linné as Beta vulgaris var .
cicla .
Its taxonomic rank has changed many times , so it was treated as a subspecies , convariety or variety of Beta vulgaris .
( Some of the numerous synonyms are Beta vulgaris subsp .
cicla ( Cicla Group ) ,
B. vulgaris subsp .
cicla var .
cicla , B. vulgaris var .
cycla , B. vulgaris subsp .
vulgaris ( Leaf Beet Group ) ,
B. vulgaris subsp .
vulgaris ( Spinach Beet Group ) ,
B. vulgaris subsp .
cicla
( ( Flavescens Group ) , B. vulgaris subsp .
cicla var .
flavescens , B. vulgaris subsp .
vulgaris ( Leaf Beet Group ) ,
B. vulgaris subsp .
vulgaris ( Swiss Chard Group ) ) .
The accepted name for all beet cultivars , like chard , sugar beet and beetroot , is Beta vulgaris subsp .
vulgaris .
They are cultivated descendants of the sea beet , Beta vulgaris subsp .
maritima .
Chard belongs to the chenopods , which are now mostly included in the family Amaranthaceae ( sensu lato ) .
There are two rankless cultivar groups for chard : the Cicla - Group for the leafy spinach beet , and the Flavescens - Group for the stalky Swiss chard .
Chard is also known by many common names , such as Swiss chard , silver beet , perpetual spinach , beet spinach , seakale beet , or leaf beet .
ETYMOLOGY Section::::Etymology .
The word " chard " descends from the fourteenth - century French carde , from Latin carduus meaning artichoke thistle ( or cardoon , including the artichoke ) .
The origin of the adjective " Swiss " is unclear , since the Mediterranean plant is not native to Switzerland .
Some attribute the name to it having been first described by a Swiss botanist , either Gaspard Bauhin or Karl Heinrich Emil Koch ( although the latter was German , not Swiss ) .
Chard is used in traditional Swiss cuisine , however , namely in a dish called Capuns from the Canton of Grisons .
GROWTH AND HARVESTING Section::::Growth and harvesting .
Chard is a biennial .
Clusters of chard seeds are usually sown , in the Northern Hemisphere , between June and October , depending on the desired harvesting period .
Chard can be harvested while the leaves are young and tender , or after maturity when they are larger and have slightly tougher stems .
Harvesting is a continuous process , as most species of chard produce three or more crops .
Raw chard is extremely perishable .
CULTIVARS Section::::Cultivars .
Cultivars of chard include green forms , such as ' Lucullus ' and ' Fordhook Giant ' , as well as red - ribbed forms such as ' Ruby Chard ' and ' Rhubarb Chard ' .
The red - ribbed forms are attractive in the garden , but as a general rule , the older green forms tend to outproduce the colorful hybrids . '
Rainbow Chard ' is a mix of other colored varieties that is often mistaken for a variety unto itself .
Chard has shiny , green , ribbed leaves , with petioles that range from white to yellow to red , depending on the cultivar .
Chard is a spring harvest plant .
In the Northern Hemisphere , chard is typically ready to harvest as early as April and lasts through May. Chard is one of the hardier leafy greens , with a harvest season typically lasting longer than kale , spinach or baby greens .
When daytime temperatures start to regularly hit , the harvest season is coming to an end .
CULINARY USE Section::::Culinary use .
Fresh young chard can be used raw in salads .
Mature chard leaves and stalks are typically cooked ( like in pizzoccheri ) or sautéed ; the bitterness fades with cooking , leaving a refined flavor which is more delicate than that of cooked spinach .
In Egyptian cuisine , chard is commonly cooked with taro root and coriander in a light broth .
In Turkish cuisine , chard is cooked as soup , sarma or börek .
NUTRITIONAL CONTENT
Section::::Nutritional content .
In a 100-gram serving , raw Swiss chard provides of food energy and has rich content ( > 19 % of the Daily Value , DV ) of vitamins A , K , and C , with 122 % , 1038 % , and 50 % , respectively , of the DV .
Also having significant content in raw chard are vitamin E and the dietary minerals , magnesium , manganese , iron and potassium .
Carbohydrates , protein , fat and dietary fiber have low content .
When chard is cooked by boiling , vitamin and mineral contents are reduced compared to raw chard , but still supply significant proportions of the DV ( table ) .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS