CHILD 'S PLAY 2 Child 's Play 2 is a 1990 American slasher film and the direct sequel to Child 's Play , written by Don Mancini and directed by John Lafia , one of the co - writers in the first film .
It is the second film in the Child 's Play franchise and set two years after the first film ; the plot follows Charles Lee Ray ( better known as Chucky ) continuing his pursuit for Andy Barclay , who was placed in foster care , and transferring his soul into him after being resurrected .
The film stars Alex Vincent , who returns as Andy Barclay ; Gerrit Graham and Jenny Agutter as Andy 's foster parents ; Christine Elise as Kyle ; and Brad Dourif as the voice of Chucky .
It is the debut appearance of Adam Wylie .
In noteworthy contrast to the original , Child 's Play 2 is the first in the series to incorporate a more campy , comedic approach .
Child 's Play 2 was released on November 9 , 1990 , exactly two years after the first film was released .
The film took in an estimated $ 10.8 million in 1,996 screens and grossed an estimated $ 28.5 million in the United States .
It holds a 40 % approval rating at Rotten Tomatoes based on 15 reviews .
It was followed by Child 's Play 3 PLOT Section::::Plot .
In June 1990 , two years after the murderous doll was destroyed by the Barclays and the Detective Norris , Chucky ( voiced by Brad Dourif ) is resurrected by the PlayPals company to prove there is no fault with the dolls .
As a result of Andy Barclay ( Alex Vincent ) blaming Chucky for the murders committed , the company has suffered .
One of the men working on Chucky is killed by electrocution .
As a result , the CEO of the company , Mr. Sullivan ( Peter Haskell ) , orders his assistant Mattson ( Greg Germann ) to cover the accident and get rid of Chucky .
Meanwhile , Andy is trying to move on from the past to a new life since the traumatizing murders .
He is now in foster care , due to his mother being in a mental hospital for supporting his story about Chucky .
Andy is adopted by Phil ( Gerrit Graham ) and Joanne Simpson ( Jenny Agutter ) .
In his new home , Andy meets his new foster sister Kyle ( Christine Elise ) who is mean - spirited , but soon develops a bonding relationship with Andy .
After work , Mattson drops by the corner store .
While he leaves his car , Chucky uses the car phone to call Grace Poole ( Grace Zabriskie ) , the manager of Andy 's foster center .
He claims to be a relative of Andy 's in order to get his new address .
He then hijacks the car and orders Mattson to drive outside the Simpson household at gunpoint .
Chucky then kills him by suffocating him with a plastic bag before rushing towards the Simpson residence .
In the house , Chucky accidentally activates another Good Guys doll called " Tommy " .
Chucky then destroys him with Joanne 's ornament .
Chucky then buries the doll in the garden and takes his place as " Tommy " .
Phil punishes Andy and Kyle , believing one of them broke the ornament .
After Andy spends the rest of the day with Kyle , he is attacked by Chucky until interrupted by Kyle .
After Andy claimed Chucky tied him up , Phil throws Chucky in the basement .
Alone , Chucky discovers a nosebleed , meaning he 's going human again .
Therefore , he realizes that if he does n't get in Andy 's body in time , he will remain as a doll .
The next day , Chucky hitches a ride on the bus to Andy 's new school .
Andy 's teacher Miss Kettlewell ( Beth Grant ) discovers an obscenity Chucky wrote on his worksheet .
Believing Andy was responsible , she forces Andy to stay in the classroom as punishment and locks Chucky in the closet , thinking Andy brought him along which is against the rules .
Andy manages to escape , and Chucky beats Miss Kettlewell to death with a yardstick .
After Andy insisted Chucky got him in trouble , Phil considers taking him back to the foster center .
Later that night , Andy tries to kill Chucky with an electric knife in the basement , but Chucky emerges to attack him .
Phil goes to investigate the commotion but Chucky trips and neck - snaps him , killing him .
Joanne , convinced that Andy murdered Phil , sends him back to the foster center immediately .
Kyle discovers the buried " Tommy " doll in the garden and realizes Andy was being truthful .
She rushes in to warn Joanne only to find her dead at her desk .
Chucky suddenly arises , and forces her to drive him to the center to find Andy .
Chucky then pulls a fire alarm to get everyone out of the building .
During the false fire alarm , Chucky fatally stabs Grace to her death and orders Andy to take him to the PlayPals Good Guys factory for the transfer .
Kyle follows Chucky and Andy to the factory .
Successfully making it , Chucky knocks Andy unconscious and attempts the ritual to transfer his soul into Andy .
However , Chucky is able to finish the chant until suddenly , his nose starts to bleed .
The transfer failed since he spent too much time within the doll 's body and is now trapped inside the doll 's form .
Enraged , Chucky blames Andy and begins going after both Andy and Kyle .
Andy and Kyle crawl their way up a conveyor .
Chucky gets on to attack them but Andy and Kyle flee , Kyle closes the gate , slamming it shut on Chucky 's hand .
Chucky rips off his hand free , sticks his arm in a dagger as replacement and continues to go after Kyle and Andy .
After murdering a factory worker , Kyle and Andy then manage to put Chucky into a machine and activate an emergency assembly , and the machine starts mutilating him , causing various arms and legs to go into his torso .
Unfortunately Chucky escapes by cutting off his own mixed waist .
Kyle is hit by the worker 's corpse swinging on a crane , knocking her unconscious .
Chucky then lunges at Andy , attempting to stab him but the knife gets stuck in a radiator , and Andy then pours molten plastic all over him .
Andy then saves Kyle by pulling her off of the conveyor belt , stopping at a melted Chucky .
He suddenly jolts up and struggles with Kyle , until she shoves a high pressure air hose in his mouth , resulting in his head swelling and exploding leaving the doll dead for good .
After the two escape the factory , Kyle tells Andy
they 're going home .
Andy asks where is home , to which Kyle replies she has no idea .
CAST
* Alex Vincent as Andy Barclay
* Christine Elise as Kyle * Brad Dourif as Chucky * Jenny Agutter as Joanne Simpson * Gerrit Graham as Phil Simpson
* Grace Zabriskie as Grace Poole
* Peter Haskell as Mr. Sullivan
* Beth Grant as Miss Kettlewell * Greg Germann as Mattson * Adam Wylie as Sammy PRODUCTION Section::::Production .
United Artists released the original Child 's Play in 1988 and greenlit the second film .
The sequel was in pre - production when an UA executive told producer David Kirschner that the film was put on hold as the studio was about to be acquired by the Australian group Qintex , which decided it was not in their best interest to make horror films .
After offers with Paramount Pictures , Warner Bros. , Columbia Pictures , 20th Century Fox , The Price Company , Carolco ( who during this time had a distribution deal with Columbia 's sister studio , TriStar Pictures ) , New Line Cinema ( now a label of Warner Bros. ) , and Disney 's Touchstone Pictures label to buy the film were rejected , Kirschner produced it independently with Universal Pictures distributing .
NOVELIZATION Section::::Novelization .
A tie - in novelization to the film was later written by Matthew J. Costello .
The author added in some of his own plot scenes exclusive to the novel , such as going deeper into Andy Barclay and Chucky 's past .
Chucky is characterized to have an absent father and his abusive mother being a dwarf .
Chucky got teased a lot because of this and later strangled his mother to death .
Also , Chucky was put in special classes when he was younger .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
Its opening weekend earned an estimated $ 10,718,520 on 1,996 screens in the US .
The film grossed an estimated $ 28,501,605 in the US and was # 1 at the box office .
It grossed an additional $ 7.2 million internationally .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film an approval rating of 40 % based on 15 reviews .
Evan Dickson of Bloody Disgusting , in describing how it surpasses the origin film , wrote , " Child 's Play 2 manages to strip away all artifice and still manage to be an effective slasher .
"
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A- " on an A+ to F scale .
Variety wrote , " Child 's Play 2 is another case of rehashing the few novel elements of an original to the point of utter numbness . "
Gene Siskel gave the film zero stars out of four , calling it " A vicious , ugly little thriller . "
Kevin Thomas of the Los Angeles Times thought the original was " a terrific one - of - a - kind thriller , " but " Not so the sequel .
It 's an all - out horror film — handsomely produced but morbid and not in the least amusing to watch . "
Richard Harrington of The Washington Post called it " an inevitable sequel that 's not as good as its progenitor , but better than most movies with the numbers 2 through 8 in their titles . "
HOME VIDEO RELEASES Section::::Home video releases .
Child 's Play 2 was first released on VHS in North America on April 11 , 1991 .
The film was later released on DVD in 1999 and bundled with the fourth film Bride of Chucky .
It was released in multiple collections , such as : * The Chucky Collection ( alongside Child 's Play 3 and Bride of Chucky ) , released on October 7 , 2003 .
* Chucky - The Killer DVD Collection ( alongside Child 's Play 3 , Bride and Seed of Chucky ) , released on September 19 , 2006 .
* Chucky : The Complete Collection ( alongside Child 's Play 1 and 3 , Bride , Seed and Curse of Chucky ) , released on October 8 , 2013 .
* Chucky : Complete
7-Movie Collection ( alongside Child 's Play 1 and 3 , Bride , Seed , Curse and Cult of Chucky ) , released on October 3 , 2017 .
SEQUELS Section::::Sequels .
The film was followed by Child 's Play 3 in 1991 , Bride of Chucky in 1998 , Seed of Chucky in 2004 , Curse of Chucky in 2013 and Cult of Chucky in 2017 .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS