35-HOUR WORKWEEK
The 35-hour working week is a measure adopted first in France , in February 2000 , under Prime Minister Lionel Jospin 's Plural Left government .
It was pushed by Minister of Labour Martine Aubry .
The previous legal duration of the working week was 39 hours , which had been established by François Mitterrand , also a member of the Socialist Party .
The 35-hour working week was in the Socialist Party 's 1981 electoral program , titled 110 Propositions for France .
The 35 hours was the legal standard limit , after which further working time was to be considered overtime .
RATIONALE Section::::Rationale .
The main stated objectives of the law were twofold : * To reduce unemployment and yield a better division of labor , in a context where some people work long hours while some others are unemployed .
A 10.2 % decrease in the hours extracted from each worker would , theoretically , require firms to hire correspondingly more workers , a remedy for unemployment .
* To take advantage of improvements in productivity of modern society to give workers some more personal time to enhance quality of life .
Another reason was that the Jospin government took advantage of the changes introduced with the 35-hour working week to relax other workforce legislation .
CRITICISM Section::::Criticism .
The 35-hour working week is controversial in France .
Generally speaking , left wing parties and trade unions support it , while conservative parties and the MEDEF employers ' union oppose it .
Critics of the 35-hour working week have argued that it has failed to serve its purpose because an increase in recruitment has not occurred .
In their view , the reluctance of firms to take on new workers has instead simply increased per - hour production quotas .
According to right - wing parties and economic commentators , the main reason why French firms avoid hiring new workers is that French employment regulations around labour flexibility make it difficult to lay off workers during a poor economic period .
AMENDMENTS TO THE LAW
Section::::Amendments to the law .
The Raffarin government , some members of which were vocal critics of the law , gradually pushed for further relaxation of the legal working time requirements .
On 22 December 2004 , the French Parliament extended the maximum number of overtime hours per year from 180 to 220 ; on 31 March 2005 , another law extended the possibilities of overtime hours .
In August 2016 , the El Khomri law reduced the overtime payments .
SEE ALSO * Fair Labor Standards Act ( United States )
* New Employment Contract ( France )
* First Employment Contract ( France ) REFERENCES
* Workforce code EXTERNAL LINKS * Official governmental site on the 35-hour workweek * Evaluation of the 35-hour workweek by INSEE