COLLARD GREENS
Collard greens ( collards ) describes certain loose - leafed cultivars of Brassica oleracea , the same species as many common vegetables , including cabbage ( Capitata Group ) and broccoli ( Botrytis Group ) .
Collard greens are part of the Acephala Group of the species , which includes kale and spring greens .
They are in the same cultivar group owing to their genetic similarity .
The name " collard " comes from the word " colewort " ( the wild cabbage plant ) .
The plants are grown for their large , dark - colored , edible leaves and as a garden ornamental , mainly in Brazil , Portugal , the southern United States , many parts of Africa , the Balkans , northern Spain , and Kashmir .
DESCRIPTION Section::::Description .
The cultivar group name
Acephala ( " without a head " in Greek ) refers to the fact that this variety of B. oleracea does not have the close - knit core of leaves ( a " head " ) like cabbage does .
The plant is a biennial where winter frost occurs , and a perennial in colder regions .
It is also moderately sensitive to salinity .
It has an upright stalk , often growing up to two feet tall .
The plant is very similar to kale .
Popular cultivars of collard greens include ' Georgia Southern ' , ' Morris Heading ' , ' Butter Collard ' ( couve manteiga ) , couve tronchuda , and Groninger Blauw .
CULTIVATION AND STORAGE Section::::Cultivation and storage .
The plant is commercially cultivated for its thick , slightly bitter , edible leaves .
They are available year - round , but are tastier and more nutritious in the cold months , after the first frost .
For best texture , the leaves are picked before they reach their maximum size , at which stage they are thicker and are cooked differently from the new leaves .
Age does not affect flavor .
Flavor and texture also depend on the cultivar ; the couve manteiga and couve tronchuda are especially appreciated in Brazil and Portugal .
Fresh collard leaves can be stored for up to 10 days if refrigerated to just above freezing ( 1 ° C ) at high humidity ( > 95 % ) .
In domestic refrigerators , fresh collard leaves can be stored for about three days .
Once cooked , they can be frozen and stored for greater lengths of time .
Collard leaves and stem are pickled and consumed as a cuisine along with rice .
These pickles may be made out of the leaves alone , in which case the leaves are first aired and boiled .
NUTRITIONAL INFORMATION
Section::::Nutritional information .
Raw collard greens are 90 % water , 6 % carbohydrates , 3 % protein , and contain negligible fat ( table ) .
Like kale , collard greens contain substantial amounts of vitamin K ( 388 % of the Daily Value , DV ) in a 100 gram serving .
Collard greens are rich sources ( 20 % or more of DV ) of vitamin A , vitamin C , and manganese , and moderate sources of calcium and vitamin B6 .
A 100 gram serving of cooked collard greens provides 33 calories .
CULINARY USE Section::::Culinary use .
Collard greens have been eaten for at least 2000 years , with evidence showing that the ancient Greeks cultivated several types of collard greens , as well as kale .
SOUTHERN UNITED STATES Section::::Southern United States .
Collard greens are a staple vegetable in Southern U.S. cuisine .
They are often prepared with other similar green leaf vegetables , such as kale , turnip greens , spinach , and mustard greens in the dish called " mixed greens " .
Typical seasonings when cooking collards are smoked and salted meats ( ham hocks , smoked turkey drumsticks , smoked turkey necks , pork neckbones , fatback or other fatty meat ) , diced onions , vinegar , salt , and black pepper , white pepper , or crushed red pepper , and some cooks add a small amount of sugar .
Traditionally , collards are eaten on New Year 's Day , along with black - eyed peas or field peas and cornbread , to ensure wealth in the coming year .
Cornbread is used to soak up the " pot liquor " , a nutrient - rich collard broth .
Collard greens may also be thinly sliced and fermented to make a collard sauerkraut that is often cooked with flat dumplings .
EAST AFRICA Section::::East Africa .
Collard greens are known as sukuma wiki in Tanzania and Kenya .
Sukuma wiki is mainly lightly sauteed in oil until tender , flavoured with onions and seasoned with salt , and served either as the main accompaniment or as a side dish with the preferred meat ( fish , chicken , beef , or pork ) .
In Congo , Tanzania and Kenya ( East Africa ) , thinly sliced collard greens are the main accompaniments of a popular dish known as sima or ugali ( a maize flour cake ) .
ZIMBABWE Section::::Zimbabwe .
In Zimbabwe collard greens are known as mbida .
Due to the climate , mbida thrives under almost all conditions , with most people growing it in their gardens .
It is commonly eaten with Sadza ( ugali in West & East Africa , pap in South Africa and polenta in Italy ) as part of the staple food .
Mbida is normally wilted in boiling water before being fried and combined with sautéd onions and/or tomato .
Some ( more traditionally , the Shona people ) add beef , pork and other meat to the mbida mix for a type of stew .
Most people eat mbida on a regular basis in Zimbabwe as it is economical and as previously mentioned , can be grown with little to no effort in ones own garden .
UK Section::::UK .
In the UK these leaves are sold as Spring Greens and used just like cabbage .
The UK market is not large , as most British prefer to buy a cabbage and pull leaves off as required and prefer the light bright leaves in the cabbage heart .
, BRAZIL AND PORTUGAL Section::::Brazil and Portugal .
In Portuguese and Brazilian cuisine , collard greens ( or couve ) is a common accompaniment to fish and meat dishes .
They make up a standard side dish for feijoada , a popular pork and beans - style stew .
Thinly sliced collard greens are also a main part of the popular Portuguese soup , caldo verde ( " green broth " ) .
For this broth , the leaves are sliced into strips , wide ( sometimes by a grocer or market vendor using a special hand - cranked slicer ) and added to the other ingredients 15 minutes before it is served .
KASHMIR Section::::Kashmir .
In Kashmir Valley , collard greens ( haakh ) are included in most of the meals , and both the leaves and roots are consumed .
Leaves in the bud are harvested by pinching in early spring when the dormant buds sprout and give out tender leaves .
Also , seedlings after , as well as mature plants , are pulled out along with roots from thickly sown beds .
When the extending stem bears alternate leaves in quick succession during the growing season , older leaves are harvested periodically .
Before autumn , the apical portion of the stem is removed along with the whorled leaves .
The tastiest variety and most favorite in Kashmir is Khanyari haakh .
The small collard green leaves of spring are known as kaanyil haakh .
In winter the frost ridden fresh leaves are known to taste better .
A common dish within the Kashmiri Hindu community is haak rus , a soup of whole collard leaves cooked in water , salt and oil along with many other spices , and usually eaten with rice .
Collard leaves are also cooked with meat ( maaz ti haakh ) , fish ( haakh gaade ) or cheese ( tsaaman ti haakh ) .
PESTS
Section::::Pests .
The sting nematode Belonolaimus gracilis and the awl nematode , Dolichodorus spp .
are both ectoparasites that can injure collard .
Root symptoms include , stubby or coarse roots that are dark at the tips .
Shoot symptoms include , stunted growth , premature wilting and chlorosis ( Nguyen and Smart , 1975 ) .
Another species of the sting worm : Belonolaimus longicaudatus is a pest of collards in Georgia and North Carolina ( Robbins and Barker , 1973 ) .
B. longicaudatus is devastating to seedlings and transplants .
As few as three nematodes per 100 g of soil when transplanting can cause significant yield losses on susceptible plants .
They are most common in sandy soils ( Noling , 2012 ) .
The stubby root nematodes Trichodorus and Paratrichodorus attach and feed near the tip of the tap roots of collard greens .
The damage caused prevents proper root elongation leading to tight mats that could appear swollen , therefore resulting in a " stubby root " ( Noling , 2012 ) .
Several species of the root knot nematode Meloidogyne spp . are hosted by collards these include : ( M. javanica , M. incognita and M. arenaria .
Second stage juveniles attack the plant and settle in the roots .
However , infestation seems to occur at lower populations compared to other cruciferous plants .
Root symptoms include deformation ( galls ) and injury that prevent proper water and nutrient uptake .
This could eventually lead to stunting , wilting and chlorosis of the shoots ( Crow and Dunn , 2012 ) .
The false root knot nematode Nacobbus aberrans has a wide host range of up to 84 species including many weeds .
On Brassicas it has been reported in several states including Nebraska , Wyoming , Utah , Colorado , Montana , South Dakota , Kansas ( Manzanilla-
López et al . , 2002 ) .
As a pest of collards , the degree of damage is dependent upon the nematode population in the soil .
SEE ALSO
* Collard liquor REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS