BURJ AL ARAB
The Burj Al Arab ( , Tower of the Arabs ) is a luxury hotel located in Dubai , United Arab Emirates .
It is the fifth tallest hotel in the world ( although 39 % of its total height is made up of non - occupiable space ) .
Burj Al Arab stands on an artificial island from Jumeirah Beach and is connected to the mainland by a private curving bridge .
The shape of the structure is designed to resemble the sail of a ship .
It has a helipad near the roof at a height of above ground .
SITE Section::::Site .
The beachfront area where Burj Al Arab and Jumeirah Beach Hotel are located was previously called Miami Beach .
The hotel is located on an island of reclaimed land 280 meters offshore of the beach of the former Chicago Beach Hotel .
The locale 's name had its origins in the Chicago Bridge & Iron Company which at one time welded giant floating oil storage tanks , known locally as Kazzans on the site .
The old name persisted after the old hotel was demolished in 1997 .
Dubai Chicago Beach Hotel remained as the Public Project Name for the construction phase of Burj Al Arab Hotel until Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum announced the new name .
DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION Section::::Design and construction .
Burj Al Arab was designed by multidisciplinary consultancy Atkins led by architect Tom Wright , who has since become co - founder of WKK Architects .
The design and construction were managed by Canadian engineer Rick Gregory also of WS Atkins .
It is very similar to the Vasco da Gama Tower located in Lisbon , Portugal .
Construction of the island began in 1994 and involved up to 2,000 construction workers during peak construction .
It was built to resemble the billowing spinnaker sail of a J - class yacht .
Two " wings " spread in a V to form a vast " mast " , while the space between them is enclosed in a massive atrium .
The architect Tom Wright said " The client wanted a building that would become an iconic or symbolic statement for Dubai ; this is very similar to Sydney with its Opera House , London with Big Ben , or Paris with the Eiffel Tower .
It needed to be a building that would become synonymous with the name of the country . "
Fletcher Construction from New Zealand was the lead joint venture partner in the initial stages of pre - construction and construction .
The hotel was built by South African construction contractor Murray & Roberts and Al Habtoor Engineering and the interior works were delivered by UAE based Depa .
The building opened in December 1999 .
The hotel 's helipad , one of the buildings most visible contributions was designed by Irish architect Rebecca Gernon who worked as a part of the Atkins team and later went onto founding her own architecture and interior design company ( Serendipity By Design ) .
Headquartered in Dubai with offices in Manila and Dublin .
FEATURES Section::::Features .
Several features of the hotel required complex engineering feats to achieve .
The hotel rests on an artificial island constructed offshore .
To secure a foundation , the builders drove 230 forty - meter - long ( 130 ft ) concrete piles into the sand .
Engineers created a ground / surface layer of large rocks , which is circled with a concrete honeycomb pattern , which serves to protect the foundation from erosion .
It took three years to reclaim the land from the sea , while it took fewer than three years to construct the building itself .
The building contains over of concrete and 9,000 tons of steel .
Inside the building , the atrium is tall .
Burj Al Arab is the world 's third tallest hotel ( not including buildings with mixed use ) .
The structure of the Rose Rayhaan , also in Dubai , is taller than Burj Al Arab .
ROOMS AND SUITES Section::::Rooms and suites .
The hotel is managed by the Jumeirah Group .
Despite its size , Burj Al Arab holds only 28 double - story floors which accommodate 202 bedroom suites .
The smallest suite occupies an area of , the largest covers .
Suites feature design details that juxtapose east and west .
White columns show great influence .
Bathrooms are accented by mosaic tile patterns .
The Royal Suite , billed at per night , is listed at number 12 on World 's 15 most expensive hotel suites compiled by CNN Go in 2012 .
The Burj Al Arab is very popular with the Chinese market , which made up 25 percent of all bookings at the hotel in 2011 and 2012 .
RESTAURANTS Section::::Restaurants .
Al Muntaha ( " The Ultimate " ) , is located above the Persian Gulf , offering a view of Dubai .
It is supported by a full cantilever that extends from either side of the mast , and is accessed by a panoramic elevator .
Al Mahara ( " Oyster " ) , which is accessed via a simulated submarine voyage , features a large seawater aquarium , holding roughly of water .
The wall of the tank , made of acrylic glass in order to withstand the water pressure , is about thick .
RATING
Section::::Rating .
The Burj Al Arab is a five - star hotel , the highest official ranking .
While the hotel is sometimes erroneously described as " the world 's only seven - star hotel " , the hotel management claims never to have done that themselves .
In the words of a Jumeirah Group spokesperson : " There 's not a lot we can do to stop it .
We 're not encouraging the use of the term .
We 've never used it in our advertising . "
RECEPTION
REVIEWS BY ARCHITECTURE CRITICS Section::::Reception .
Section::::Reviews by architecture critics .
Burj Al Arab has attracted criticism as well " a contradiction of sorts , considering how well - designed and impressive the construction ultimately proves to be .
" The contradiction here seems to be related to the hotel 's decor .
"
This extraordinary investment in state - of - the - art construction technology stretches the limits of the ambitious urban imagination in an exercise that is largely due to the power of excessive wealth . "
Another critic includes negative critiques for the city of Dubai as well : " both the hotel and the city , after all , are monuments to the triumph of money over practicality .
Both elevate style over substance . "
Yet another : " Emulating the quality of palatial interiors , in an expression of wealth for the mainstream , a theater of opulence is created in Burj Al Arab …
The result is a baroque effect " .
NOTABLE EVENTS Section::::Notable events .
Several events have taken place on the helipad 210 m ( 689 ft ) above ground to attract media attention .
These include : * 2004 : Tiger Woods teeing off * 2005 : Andre Agassi and Roger Federer
playing tennis * 2006 : Ronan Keating shot the Music Video for his single " Iris " at the Helipad of Burj Al Arab .
* 2007 :
The Today Show broadcast from the Helipad a segment of Where in the World is Matt Lauer ?
* 2011 : Golfer Rory McIlroy performing a bunker shot .
* 2013 : Heli - lift of Aston Martin Vanquish .
* 2013 : David Coulthard performing donuts in a Formula 1 racecar .
* 2017 : Nick Jacobsen kiteboards down to the sea .
IN
POPULAR CULTURE Section::::In
popular culture .
The last chapter of the espionage novel Performance Anomaliestakes place at the top of the Burj Al Arab , where the spy protagonist Cono 7Q discovers that through deadly betrayal his spy nemesis Katerina has maneuvered herself into the top echelon of the government of Kazakhstan .
The Hotel can also be seen in Syriana , and also some Bollywood movies .
Richard Hammond included the building in his television series , Richard Hammond 's Engineering Connections .
The Burj Al Arab serves as the cover image for the 2009 album Ocean Eyes by Owl City .
SEE ALSO * W Barcelona ( Hotel Vela ) – skyscraper of similar appearance in Barcelona , Spain ( sail )
* Elite Plaza – a similar - shaped skyscraper in Yerevan , Armenia
*
Trump Ocean Club International Hotel and Tower ( Panama City ) – similar structure
* Spinnaker Tower , Portsmouth – similar structure in Portsmouth , UK * List of tallest buildings in the United Arab Emirates
* List of buildings in Dubai
* List of tallest buildings in Dubai REFERENCES FURTHER READING *
Rose , Steve . "
Sand and Freedom " , The Guardian , November 28 , 2005 , retrieved October 27 , 2006 .
* National Geographic :
Megastructures
EXTERNAL LINKS
* Burj Al Arab official website * Burj Al Arab Hotel on CTBUH Skyscraper Center
* Atkins , the designers and engineers behind Burj Al Arab
*
Tom Wright Burj al Arab architect 's official website * Seven Stars Award Burj al Arab Seven Stars Award