A LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN A League of Their Own is a 1992 American sports comedy - drama film that tells a fictionalized account of the real - life All - American Girls Professional Baseball League ( AAGPBL ) .
Directed by Penny Marshall , the film stars Geena Davis , Tom Hanks , Madonna , Rosie O'Donnell , and Lori Petty .
The screenplay was written by Lowell Ganz and Babaloo Mandel from a story by Kelly Candaele and Kim Wilson .
In 2012 , A League of Their Own was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " .
PLOT Section::::Plot .
In 1988 , Dottie Hinson ( Lynn Cartwright ) attends the opening of the new All - American Girls Professional Baseball League ( AAGPBL ) exhibit at the Baseball Hall of Fame .
She sees many of her former teammates and friends , prompting a flashback to 1943 .
When World War II threatens to shut down Major League Baseball , candy magnate and Cubs owner Walter Harvey ( Garry Marshall ) persuades his fellow owners to bankroll a women 's league .
Ira Lowenstein ( David Strathairn ) is put in charge , and Ernie Capadino ( Jon Lovitz ) is sent out to recruit players .
Capadino attends an industrial - league softball game in rural Oregon and likes what he sees in Dottie ( Geena Davis ) , the catcher for a local dairy 's team .
Dottie turns down Capadino 's offer , happy with her simple farm life while waiting for her husband Bob ( Bill Pullman ) to come back from the war .
Her sister and teammate , Kit ( Lori Petty ) , however , is desperate to get away and make something of herself .
Capadino is not impressed by Kit 's hitting performance , but agrees to take her along if she can change Dottie 's mind .
Dottie agrees , but only for her sister 's sake .
Dottie and Kit head out to Harvey Field in Chicago for the tryout .
There they meet a pair of New Yorkers , taxi dancer "
All the Way " Mae Mordabito ( Madonna ) and her best friend , bouncer Doris Murphy ( Rosie O'Donnell ) ; along with soft - spoken right fielder Evelyn Gardner ( Bitty Schram ) ; illiterate , shy left fielder Shirley Baker ( Ann Cusack ) ; pitcher / shortstop and former Miss Georgia beauty queen Ellen Sue Gotlander ( Freddie Simpson ) ; gentle left field / relief pitcher
Betty " Spaghetti " Horn ( Tracy Reiner ) ; homely second baseman Marla Hooch ( Megan Cavanagh ) , who was scouted by Ernie , Dottie and Kit in Fort Collins , Colorado ; first baseman Helen Haley ( Anne Ramsay ) ; and Saskatchewan native Alice " Skeeter " Gaspers ( Renée Coleman ) .
They and eight others are selected to form the Rockford Peaches , while 48 others are split among the Racine Belles , Kenosha Comets , and South Bend Blue Sox .
The Peaches are managed by Jimmy Dugan ( Tom Hanks ) , a former marquee Cubs slugger who initially treats the whole thing as a joke .
The league attracts little interest at first .
With a Life magazine photographer in the stands , Lowenstein begs the players to do something spectacular .
Dottie obliges when a ball is popped up behind home plate , catching it while doing a split .
The resulting photograph makes the magazine cover .
A publicity campaign draws more people to the ballgames , but the owners remain unconvinced .
Due to Kit 's and Dottie 's sibling rivalry , Kit is traded to the Peaches ' rival , the Racine Belles .
The Peaches end the season qualifying for the league 's World Series .
In the locker room , Jimmy gives Betty a telegram that informs her her husband was killed in action in the Pacific Theater .
The grief - stricken Betty leaves the team .
Later that evening , Dottie receives a surprise when Bob , who was serving in Italy , shows up , having been discharged from the Army .
The following morning , Jimmy discovers that Dottie is going home with Bob .
Unable to persuade her to at least play in the World Series , he tells her she will regret her decision .
The Peaches and Belles meet in the World Series , which reaches a seventh and deciding game .
Dottie , having reconsidered during the drive back to Oregon , is the catcher for the Peaches , while Kit is the starting pitcher for the Belles .
With the Belles leading by a run in the top of the ninth , Dottie drives in the go - ahead run .
Kit is the final batter .
Under immense pressure , she gets a hit and , ignoring the third base coach 's sign to stop , scores the winning run by knocking her sister over at the plate and dislodging the ball from Dottie 's hand .
The sellout crowd convinces Harvey to give Lowenstein the owners ' support .
After the game , the sisters reconcile before Dottie leaves with Bob .
Back in the present , Dottie is reunited with several other players , including Kit .
The fates of several of the characters are revealed : Jimmy , Bob , and Evelyn have died , while Marla has been married to Nelson ( Alan Wilder ) , the man she met in the bar in an earlier scene , for over 40 years .
The original Peaches sing a team song composed by Evelyn and pose for a group photo .
CAST ROCKFORD
PEACHES
* Geena Davis as Dorothy " Dottie " Hinson ( # 8 , catcher / assistant manager ) * Lynn Cartwright as Older Dottie
* Tom Hanks as Jimmy Dugan ( manager )
* Madonna as " All the Way " Mae Mordabito ( # 5 , center field ) * Eunice Anderson as Older Mae * Lori Petty as Kit Keller ( # 23 , pitcher ) * Kathleen Butler as Older Kit * Rosie O'Donnell as Doris Murphy ( # 22 , third base )
* Vera Johnson as Older Doris * Anne Ramsay as Helen Haley ( # 15 , first base ) * Barbara Pilavin as Older Helen * Megan Cavanagh as Marla Hooch ( # 32 , second base )
* Patricia Wilson as Older Marla * Freddie Simpson as Ellen Sue Gotlander ( # 1 , shortstop / pitcher ) * Eugenia McLin as Older Ellen Sue * Tracy Reiner as Betty " Spaghetti " Horn ( # 7 , left field / relief pitcher )
* Betty Miller as Older Betty * Bitty Schram as Evelyn Gardner ( # 17 , right field )
* Renée Coleman ( credited as Renee Coleman ) – Alice " Skeeter " Gaspers ( # 18 , left field / center field / catcher )
* Shirley Burkovich as Older Alice * Ann Cusack as Shirley Baker ( # 11 , left field )
* Barbara Erwin as Older Shirley * Robin Knight as Linda " Beans " Babbitt ( shortstop ) * Patti Pelton as Marbleann Wilkinson ( second base ) * Kelli Simpkins as Beverly Dixon ( # 4 , outfield ) * Connie Pounds - Taylor as Connie Calhoun ( Outfield ) On MLB Network 's Costas at the Movies in 2013 , director Penny Marshall talked about her initial interest in Demi Moore for the part of Dottie Hinson , saying : " Demi Moore , I liked , but by the time we came around , she was pregnant . "
OTHERS * Jon Lovitz as Ernie Capadino , AAGPBL scout
* David Strathairn as Ira Lowenstein , AAGPBL general manager
* Marvin Einhorn as Older Ira * Garry Marshall as Walter Harvey , candy bar mogul and AAGPBL founder
* Julie Croteau as Helen Haley ( baseball double for Anne Ramsay )
* Bill Pullman as Bob Hinson , Dottie 's husband * Janet Jones as Racine pitcher
* Téa Leoni as Racine first baseman
* Don S. Davis as Charlie Collins , Racine coach * Eddie Jones as Dave Hooch , Marla 's father * Justin Scheller as Stillwell Gardner , Evelyn 's son * Mark Holton as Older Stillwell .
He attends the Peaches ' reunion at the Baseball Hall of Fame on behalf of his mother who had died .
* Pauline Brailsford as Miss Cuthburt , Rockford chaperone PRODUCTION DEVELOPMENT Section::::Production . Section::::Development .
Director Penny Marshall was inspired to make the film after viewing the 1987 documentary about the AAGPBL titled " A League of their Own " on television .
She had never heard of the league before , and contacted the film 's creators Kelly Candaele and Kim Wilson to collaborate with the scriptwriters Babaloo Mandel and Lowell Ganz on producing a screenplay for 20th Century Fox .
Fox eventually passed on the script and Marshall signed with Sony Pictures , who were eager to produce the film .
FILMING
Section::::Filming .
Filming the game scenes involved many physical mishaps :
Anne Ramsay ( Helen Haley ) broke her nose with a baseball mitt while trying to catch a ball and the huge bruise seen in the film on actress Renée Coleman 's thigh was real .
Discussing the skirts they wore playing baseball in the film , Geena Davis said on MLB Network 's Costas at the Movies in 2013 , " Some of our real cast , from sliding into home , had ripped the skin off their legs .
It was nutty . "
SOUNDTRACK Section::::Soundtrack .
A League of Their Own soundtrack was released on CD and cassette tape by Columbia Records on June 30 , 1992 .
The album peaked at # 159 on the US Billboard 200 albums chart on July 25 , 1992 .
Although Madonna contributed " This Used to Be My Playground " to the film , featured over the closing credits , her recording was not included on the soundtrack album for contractual reasons .
RECEPTION BOX OFFICE Section::::Reception .
Section::::Box office .
The film was released on July 1 , 1992 , and grossed $ 13.2 million in its first weekend , finishing second at the box office behind Batman Returns .
In its second weekend it dropped just 15 % , making $ 11.5 million and finishing first .
It ended up being a commercial success , making $ 107.5 million in the United States , and $ 24.9 million in other territories , for a worldwide total of $ 132.4 million , against a production budget of $ 40 million .
CRITICAL RESPONSE
Section::::Critical response .
The film was well received by critics , who praised the cast and their performances .
On review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 78 % based on 63 reviews , with an average rating of 6.8/10 .
The site 's critical consensus reads , " Sentimental and light , but still thoroughly charming , A League of Their Own is buoyed by solid performances from a wonderful cast . "
On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating to reviews , the film has a weighted average score 67 out of 100 , based 20 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " .
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of " A – " on an A+ to F scale .
On December 19 , 2012 , it was announced that the film would be preserved as part of the United States National Film Registry .
AFI LISTS Section::::AFI lists .
The film is recognized by American Film Institute in these lists :
* 2005 :
AFI 's 100 Years ...
100 Movie Quotes : * Jimmy Dugan : " There 's no crying in baseball ! " – # 54 20TH ANNIVERSARY Section::::20th anniversary .
With 2012 marking the 20th year since the film 's release , A League of Their Own was released as a 20th Anniversary Edition Blu - ray on October 16 , 2012 .
Forty - seven former players of the AAGPBL reunited in New York to celebrate the film and the real women who inspired it .
Events included a trip to Cooperstown for a special program at the National Baseball Hall of Fame , reminiscent of the film 's final scene depicting members of the AAGPBL and family coming together to witness the honoring of the Women 's Professional Baseball League .
The reunion wrapped up with a game of softball held at Alliance Bank Stadium in nearby Syracuse .
Former players also made an appearance at Bosse Field in Evansville , Indiana , on June 6 , 2012 , where many of the film 's game scenes were filmed .
Bosse Field still retains many of the " Racine Belles " themes from the movie .
The event included an outdoor screening of the film as well as a scene - setting display of cars featured in the film .
In addition to Bosse Field , the production used Huntingburg , Indiana 's League Stadium , another Southwestern Indiana field older than Bosse that was renovated for the film .
SPIN - OFFS Section::::Spin - offs .
A short - lived series of the same title based on the film aired on CBS in April 1993 , with Garry Marshall , Megan Cavanagh , Tracy Reiner , and Jon Lovitz reprising their roles .
Only five of the six episodes made were broadcast .
REFERENCES EXTERNAL LINKS
* ESPN.com – Page 2 –
Reel Life : ' A League of Their Own ' * Movie stills