CREAM CHEESE Cream cheese is a soft , mild - tasting fresh cheese made from milk and cream .
Stabilizers such as carob bean gum and carrageenan are typically added in industrial production .
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration defines cream cheese as containing at least 33 % milk fat with a moisture content of not more than 55 % , and a pH range of 4.4 to 4.9 .
Similarly , under Canadian Food and Drug Regulations cream cheese must contain at least 30 % milk fat and a maximum of 55 % moisture .
In other countries , it is defined differently and may need a considerably higher fat content .
Cream cheese is not naturally matured and is meant to be consumed fresh , so it differs from other soft cheeses such as Brie and Neufchâtel .
It is more comparable in taste , texture , and production methods to Boursin and Mascarpone .
ORIGIN EUROPE Section::::Origin .
Section::::Europe .
Early prototypes of cream cheese are mentioned in England as early as 1583 and in France as early as 1651 .
Recipes are recorded soon after 1754 , particularly from Lincolnshire and the southwest of England .
UNITED STATES Section::::United States .
Recipes for cream cheese can be found in U.S. cookbooks and newspapers beginning in the mid-18th century .
By the 1820s the dairy farms in and around
Philadelphia and New York City had gained a reputation for producing the best examples of this cheese .
Cream cheese was produced on family farms throughout the country , so quantities made and distributed were typically small .
Around 1873 William A. Lawrence , a dairyman in Chester , New York , was the first to mass - produce cream cheese .
In 1872 he purchased a Neufchâtel factory .
By adding cream to the process , he developed a richer cheese that he called " cream cheese " .
In 1877 Lawrence created the first brand of cream cheese : its logo was a silhouette of a cow followed by the words " Neufchatel & Cream Cheese " .
In 1879 , to build a larger factory , Lawrence entered into an arrangement with Samuel S. Durland , another Chester merchant .
In 1880 , Alvah Reynolds , a New York cheese distributor , began to sell the cheese of Lawrence & Durland and called it " Philadelphia Cream Cheese " .
By the end of 1880 , faced with increasing demand for his Philadelphia - brand cheese , Reynolds turned to Charles Green , a second Chester dairyman , who by 1880 had been manufacturing cream cheese as well .
Some of Green 's cheese was also sold under the Philadelphia label .
In 1892 Reynolds bought the Empire Cheese Co. of South Edmeston , New York , to produce cheese under his " Philadelphia " label .
When the Empire factory burned down in 1900 , he asked the newly formed Phenix Cheese Company to produce his cheese , instead .
In 1903 Reynolds sold rights to the " Philadelphia " brand name to Phenix Cheese Company , which was under the direction of Jason F. Whitney , Sr .
( It merged with Kraft in 1928 ) .
By the early 1880s Star cream cheese had emerged as Lawrence & Durland 's brand , and Green made World and Globe brands of the cheese .
At the turn of the 20th century , New York dairymen were producing cream cheese sold under a number of other brands , as well : Triple Cream ( C. Percival ) , Eagle ( F.X. Baumert ) , Empire ( Phenix Cheese Co. ) , Mohican ( International Cheese Co. ) , Monroe Cheese Co. ( Gross & Hoffman ) , and Nabob ( F.H. Legget ) .
Cream cheese became popular in the Jewish cuisine of New York City , where it is commonly known as a " schmear " .
It is used on bagels , and is the basis of bagel and cream cheese , a common open - faced sandwich .
Lox , capers , and other ingredients are often added to this dish .
The basic bagel and cream cheese has become a ubiquitous breakfast and brunch food throughout the United States .
MANUFACTURE
Section::::Manufacture .
Cream cheese is easy to make at home , and many methods and recipes are used .
Consistent , reliable , commercial manufacture is more difficult .
Normally , protein molecules in milk have a negative surface charge , which keeps milk in a liquid state ; the molecules act as surfactants , forming micelles around the particles of fat and keeping them in emulsion .
Lactic acid bacteria are added to pasteurized and homogenized milk .
During the fermentation around , the pH of the milk decreases ( it becomes more acidic ) .
Amino acids at the surface of the proteins begin losing charge and become neutral , turning the fat micelles from hydrophilic to hydrophobic state and causing the liquid to coagulate .
If the bacteria are left in the milk too long , the pH lowers further , the micelles attain a positive charge , and the mixture returns to liquid form .
The key , then , is to kill the bacteria by heating the mixture to at the moment the cheese is at the isoelectric point , meaning the state at which half the ionizable surface amino acids of the proteins are positively charged and half are negative .
Inaccurate timing of the heating can produce inferior or unsalable cheese due to variations in flavor and texture .
Cream cheese has a higher fat content than other cheeses , and fat repels water , which tends to separate from the cheese ; this can be avoided in commercial production by adding stabilizers such as guar or carob gums to prolong its shelf life .
In Canada , the regulations for cream cheese stipulate that it is made by coagulating cream with the help of bacteria , forming a curd which is then formed into a mass after removing the whey .
Some of its ingredients include cream ( to adjust milk fat content ) , salt , nitrogen ( to improve spreadability ) and several gelling , thickening , stabilizing and emulsifying ingredients such as xanthan gum or gelatin , to a maximum of 0.5 percent .
Regulations on preservatives used are that either sorbic acid , or propionic acid may be used independently or combined , but only to a maximum of 3,000 parts per million when used together .
The only acceptable enzymes that can be used in manufacturing of cream cheese to be sold in Canada are chymosin A and B , pepsin and rennet .
In Spain and Mexico , cream cheese is sometimes called by the generic name queso filadelfia , following the marketing of Philadelphia branded cream cheese by Kraft Foods .
USES Section::::Uses .
Cream cheese is often spread on bread , bagels , crackers , etc . , and used as a dip for potato chips and similar snack items , and in salads .
It can be mixed with other ingredients , such as yogurt or pepper jelly , to make spreads .
Cream cheese can be used for many purposes in sweet and savoury cookery , and is in the same family of ingredients as other milk products , such as cream , milk , butter , and yogurt .
It can be used in cooking to make cheesecake and to thicken sauces and make them creamy .
Cream cheese is sometimes used in place of or with butter ( typically two parts cream cheese to one part butter )
when making cakes or cookies , and cream cheese frosting .
It is the main ingredient in the filling of crab rangoon , an appetizer commonly served at U.S. Chinese restaurants .
It can also be used instead of or with butter or olive oil in mashed potatoes , and in some westernized sushi rolls .
It can also be used for ants on a log .
American cream cheese tends to have lower fat content than elsewhere , but " Philadelphia " branded cheese is sometimes suggested as a substitute for petit suisse .
SEE ALSO
* Bagel and cream cheese
* List of spreads REFERENCES